Mysterium Magnum, OR An EXPOSITION of the First Book of Moses CALLED GENESIS.

CONCERNING ^he Manifestation or Revelation of the Divine Word through the
Three Principles of the Divine Essence; also of the Original of the World and
the Creation.

Wherein The kingdom of Nature* and The kingdom of Grace, are Expounded* For*
the better understanding Of the Old and New Testament and what Adam and Christ
are.

Also, How Man should consider and may know himself in the Light of Nature,
where he is, and where his Temporal, and Eternal Life, Consist; also, where
his Eternal Blessedness, and Damnation, Consist.

And is an Exposition of the Essence of all Essences for the further
Consideration of the Lovers, in the Divine Gift.

Comprised in Three Parts: Written Anno 1623.

BY Jacob Behm.

To which is added, The Life of the Author. And his Four Tables of Divine
Revelation.

LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by (...)next (...)

THE PREFACE Of the Author JACOB BEME, To his COMMENTARY upon GENESIS, Called
the The Great Mystery.
MYSTERIVM MAGNVM.
1. WHen we consider the visible world with its Essence; and consider the life
of the creatures, then we find therein the likeness of the invisible
spiritual world, which is hidden in the visible world, as the Soul in the
body; and see thereby that the hidden God is nigh unto all, and through all;
and yet wholly hidden to the visible Essence.

2. We have an example hereof in the mind of man, which is an invisible fire;
that is inclined to light, and darkness; viz. to Joy, and Sorrow; and yet in
it self is none of these; but only a Cause thereto; an invisible,
incomprehensive Sourcive fire; and yet as to its own Essence is included in
nothing, save only in the Will of life.

3. The body cannot comprehend the mind; but the mind comprehends the body;
and brings it to Love, or Or sufferance and Sorrow.
dislike; this likewise is to be understood of the word, and Power of God;
which is hidden to the visible Sensible Elements: and yet dwells through, and
in the Elements; and works through the Sensible life, and Essence, as the
mind in the body.

4. For the visible sensible things, are an essence of the invisible: from the
invisible, and incomprehensible, the visible, and comprehensible is proceeded:
the visible Essence is come to Be from the expression, or Spiration of the
invisible Power: the invisible Spiritual Word of divine Power works with and
through the Visible Essence, as the Soul In.
with and through the body.

5. The inward Spiritual soul of man was breathed in to the visible Image by
the in-Speaking, or inspiration of the invisible Word of the divine Power; (for
an understanding to the Created Image) wherein man's Science, and knowledge of
the invisible, and vissible Essence consists.

6. Thus man has now received Ability from the invisible Word of God to the
re-expression: that he again expresses the hidden word of the divine Science
into formation, and severation: in manner and form of the Temporal Creatures;
and forms this spiritual Word according to Animals, and Vegetables; whereby
the invisible wisdom of God is pourtraied, and modelized into several
distinct forms: as we plainly see, that the understanding of man expresses
all powers in their property, and gives names unto all things; according to
each things property; by which the hidden wisdom is known, and understood in
its power: and the hidden God is made manifest In.
with the visible things; for the Delight, and play of the divine Power: so
that the invisible might play with the visible; and therein introduce it self
into the sight, and Sense of it self.

7. As the mind does introduce it self with the body, and by the body into
Senses, and thoughts; whereby it works, and Acts Sensibly to it self; so
also the invisible world (works) through the visible, and with the visible
world: we are not in any wise to conceit that a man cannot search out what the
hidden divine world is, and what its Operation, and essence is, for on the
visible Essence of the Creation we see a figure of the internal Spiritual
operation of the powerful world.

8. And we ought not to think otherwise of God; but that he is the most
internal ground of all Essences; and yet so, as that he cannot be comprehended
of any thing by the own-peculiar power of the thing; but as the Sun does
introduce it self with its light, and Power into the sensible living things;
and works with [or in] all things: and introduces it self also into an
essence; the same likewise is to be understood concerning the divine Word with
the life of the Creatures.

9. Seeing then this visible world is the expressed, Formed word, according to
Gods Love, and anger: viz. according to the Grand Mystery of the Eternal
Spiritual nature, which spiritual world is hidden in the visible; and yet the
humane Soul is a spark out of the Eternal Speaking Word of the Divine
Science, and Power: and the Body an Ens of the Stars, and Elements; and also as
to the internal ground an Ens of Heaven, viz. of the hidden world; therefore
he has Might, and Ability to speak of the Grand Mystery whence all Essences
do Originally arise.

10. Since then the great Mysteries, the Beginning of and Original of all
things do befall us by divine Grace; that we are able (as through the ground
of the Soul) to understand the same in real knowledge with the inspired word
of the divine Science; We will write down its ground, (so far as its permitted
to us,) in this Book: for a Memorial to our self, and for the exercise of
divine knowledge to the Reader.

11. And I. we will signify, and declare what the Center and ground of all
Essences is. II. What the Divine Manifestation (through the speaking of the
word of God,) is. III. How Evil and Good have their Original from one only
ground; viz. light and darkness: Life, and Death: Joy, and Sorrow; and how it
is in its ground; also whereunto every Essence and Source is profitable, and
Text unavoidable.
necessary. IV. How all things have their ground from the Grand Mystery, viz.
from the spiration of the Eternal one. V. How the Eternal one introduces it
self into sensation, perception, and Severation, to the Science of it self,
and the play of the divine Power. VI. How man may attain to the true knowledge
of God, and to the knowledge of the Eternal and Temporal nature. VII. Also
how man may come unto the Real Contemplation of the Being of all Beeings.
VIII. Also of the Creation of the world and of all creatures. IX. And then of
the Original, fall, and Restoration of man; what he is according to the first
Adamicall man in the Kingdom of nature: and what he is in the new Regeneration
in the kingdom of Grace, and how the new birth comes to pass. X. Also what
the old and new Testament are each in its understanding.


12. And we will enlarge this exposition through, all the chapters of the first
Book of Moses; and signify how the Old Testament is a Figure of the New: what
is to be understood by the De^ds of the holy Patriarchs: wherefore the Spirit
of God did give them to be set down in Moses: and at what the figures of these
written Histories do look, and aim; and how the Spirit of God in his
children before the times of Christ did allude with them in the figure,
concerning the Kingdom of Christ; whereby then God has always represented
this Mercy-Seat [or throne of grace] Christ: by whom he would blot out his
Anger, and manifest his Grace.

13. And how the whole time of this world is pourtrayed, and modelized, as in a
watch-work: how afterward it should go in time: and what the inward spiritual
world; and also the outward material world is: also what the inward,
Spiritual man, and then the external man of the Essence of this world is: how
time and Eternity are in one another, and how a man may understand all this:

14. Now if it should so fall out, that when these our writings are read, the
Reader might not presently apprehend, and understand the same (seeing this
ground which yet has its full foundation, and pregnant Concordance, as well
with the Scripture, as through the light of nature; has for a long time been
very dark, and yet by divine Grace is given to plain simplicity) let him not
despise, and reject the same according to the course, and custom of the wicked
world; but look upon the ground of practice which is therein intimated; and
give himself up thereunto; and pray God for light and understanding: and at
last he will rightly understand our ground, and it will find very great Love
and acceptance with him.

15. But we have written nothing for the proud, and haughty wiselings, who know
enough already; and yet indeed know nothing at all; whose Belly is their God,
who only adhere unto the Beast of the Babylonicall Whore, and drink of her
poison; and wilfully will be in blindness, and the Devils Snare: but we have
laid (with the spirit of our knowledge,) a strong bolt before the understanding
of folly, not to apprehend our meaning; being they wilfully, and willingly
serve Satan, and are not the children of God.

16. But we desire to be clearly, and fundamentally understood by the children
of God: and do heartily, and readily communicate our knowledge given to us of
God; Seeing the time of such Revelation is borne: therefore let every one see,
and take heed, what Sentence and Censure he passes: Every one shall
accordingly receive his reward, and we commend him into the Grace of the meek
and Tender Love of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sept. 11. Anno 1623.
DE Mysterio Magno. OF THE GRAND MYSTERY. THAT IS, Of the Manifestation of the
Divine Word, through the Three Principles of the Divine Essence.
The first Chapter. What God Manifested is: and of the Trinity.
1. IF we would understand what the new birth is; and how it is Wrought, or
effected.
brought to pass: then we must first know what man is; and how he is the Image
of God: and what the divine Or how God dwells in man, and fills all things
with his presence.
inhabitation is: also what the Revealed God is; of whom man is an Image.

2. When I consider what God is, then I say, He is the One; in reference to the
Creature, as an Eternal Nothing: he has neither foundation, beginning, or
Abode: he possesses nothing, save only himself: He is the will of the
Abyss: he is in himself only one: he needs neither Space, or Place: He
begets himself in himself; from Eternity to Eternity: He is neither like
or resembles any thing: and has no peculiar place where he Or no Sundry
habitation above the Stars in an Emperean Heaven, as Reason phancieth.
dwells: the Eternal wisdom or understanding is his delight: He is the will
of the Wisdom: the wisdom is his manifestation.

3. In this Eternal Generation we are to understand three things: viz. 1. An
Eternal will. 2. An Eternal mind of the will. 3. The Efflux. effluence the
proceeding-forth.
Egresse from the will and mind, which is a Spirit of the will and mind.

4. The will is the Father: the mind is the Comprehension, or Receptacle.
Conceived of the will: viz. the Seat, or habitation of the will: or the Center
to Something: and it is the Wills Heart: and the Egresse of the will and mind,
is the Power and Spirit.

5. This Or Tri-Une.
threefold Spirit is one only Essence; and yet it is no Essence, but the
Eternal understanding: an Original of the Something: and yet it is the
Eternal Or mystical Mystery.
hiddennesse (as the understanding of man is not confined in time, and place,
but it is its own comprehension, and Seat) and the Egresse of the Spirit, is
the Eternal Original Contemplation, viz. a Lubet of the Spirit.

6. The That which is flown forth from the One Eternal Will.
Egressed is called the Lubet of the Deity, or the Eternal wisdom, which is
the Eternal Original of all Powers, Colors, and Virtues; by which the
threefold Spirit in this Lubet comes to a Desiring; namely; of the Powers,
Colors, and Virtue: and its desireing is an Impressing: a conceiving it self:
the Will conceives the wisdom in the mind; and the conceived in the
understanding is the Eternal Word of all Colors, Powers, and Virtue: which
the Eternal Will Or Speaks forth.
expresses by the Spirit from the understanding of the mind.

7. And this Speaking is the Motion, or life of the Deity; an Eye of the
Eternal Seeing, where one power, color, and virtue, does distinctly know each
other: and yet they all stand in Equal Text Property.
proportion or Analogy devoid of weight, limit, or Measure, also undivided one
from another; all the Powers, Colors, and Virtue, lie in One; and it is a
distinct Mutual well-tuned Pregnant Harmony: or, as I might say, a Speaking
Word: in which Word, or Speaking, all Speeches, Powers, Colors and Virtues are
contained, and with the Pronouncing, or Speaking, they do unfold themselves,
and bring themselves into sight, and ken.

8. This is now the Eye of the Abyss, the Eternal Chaos; wherein all,
whatsoever Eternity and time has, is contained: and it is called Counsel;
Power: Wonder, and Virtue; its peculiar and proper name is called GOD or JEOVA
or JEHOVAH: who is without all Nature, without all beginnings of any Essence: a
Working in himself: Generating, finding, or Perceiving himself; without any
kind of Source from any thing, or by any thing: He has neither beginning, nor
End; (he is immense: no number can express his largeness, and Greatness) he
is deeper then any thought can reach: he is no where far from any thing, or
nigh unto any thing: he is through All, and in all: his birth is every where:
and without and besides him there is nothing else; he is time and Eternity,
Bysse and Abyss, and yet nothing comprehends him save the True understanding;
which is God himself.

CHAP. II. Of the Word, or Heart of God.
THis is now what Saint John says; Chap. 1. In the beginning was the word: and
the word was with God: and God was the word: the same was in the beginning with
God: the word Im signifies in the.
( In) is the will of the Abyss: ( A^fang. beginning.
beginning) is the Conception [or apprehension] of the will; where it
conceives, and brings it self into an Eternal Beginning; the Wort
signifies the word.

Which words in the High Dutch he expounds according to the Language of Nature.


( Word) is now the Conceived, which in the will is a Nothing, and with the
Conception there is a generation: this was in the beginning with the will, and
in the will: but with the Lubet of the will it receives its beginning in the
Conception of the will: therefore it is called [a] Heart; viz. a Center, or
Life-Circle; wherein the Original of the Eternal Life is.

2. And John says further: By the same were all things made: and without it
was not any thing made that was made: In it was the life, and the life was the
light of men: here O man take now this light of life, which was in the Word
and is Eternal: and behold the Being of all Beings, and especially thy Self;
seeing thou art an Image, life, and being of the unsearchable God; and a
Likeness as to him: here consider time, and Eternity; Heaven, Hell: the
world: light, and darkness: pain, and Source: life, and death: Something and
Nothing: Here examine thy self, whether thou have the light and life of the
Word in thee, so that thou art able to see, and understand all things: for thy
life was in the Word; and was made manifest in the Image which God Created; it
was breathed into it from the Spirit of the word: now lift up thy understanding
in the light of thy life; and behold the Formed Word: Consider its inward
Generation; for all is manifest in the light of life.

3. Say thou, I cannot; I am corrupt, and depraved? hear me! thou art not as
yet borne again of God: otherwise, if thou had again that same light, then
thou could: Go to then! we all indeed come far short of the Glory, which we
ought to have in God: but I will show thee somewhat: have a care; and conceive
it aright: be not a Mocker, as the Confused Babel is. Lo! when we would speak
of the Being of all Beings; then we say, that from God, and through God are all
things: for Saint John says also, that without him was not any thing made,
that was made.

4. Now says Reason, whence or how has God made Good, and Evil, Pain, and
Joy, Life and Death: is there any such will in God which makes the evil?
Here Reason begins to Speculate; and will apprehend it; but it goes only
about the outside of the Circle, and cannot enter in: for it is without* and
not in the word of the Life-Circle.

5. Now then behold thy self, and consider what thou art: view what the
outward World is with its Dominion; and thou shall find, that thou with thy
outward Spirit and Being, art the outward would: thou art a little world out
of the Great world: thy outward light is a Chaos of the Sun and Stars: else
thou could not see Or receive light from the Sun.
by the light of the Sun: the Stars give the Essence of distinction in the
intellective Sight: thy body is fire, air, water, earth: therein also lies
the Metaline property, for of whatsoever the Sun with the Stars is a Spirit, of
that the Earth with the other Elements is a Essence Substance, or body.
Being, a Coagulated Power: what the Superior [Being] is that is also the
inferior: and all the creatures of this world are the same.

6. When I take up a stone or clod of earth and look upon it; then I see that
which is above, and that which is below, yea, the whole world therein; only
that in each thing one property happens to be the chiefest and manifest;
according to which it is named: all the other properties are jointly therein;
only in distinct degrees and centres, and yet all the degrees and centres are
but one only center; There is but one only root whence ^ll things proceed: it
only severizeth it self in the Compaction, where it is Coagulated: Its
original is as a Smoke or vaprous breath from the Great Mystery of the
Expressed Word; which stands in all places in the re-expressing that is, in
the Re-breathing (or ecchoing forth) a likeness according to it self: an
Essence according to the Spirit.

7. But now we cannot say, that the outward World is God, or the speaking word,
which in it self is devoid of such essence; or likewise that the outward man;
is God: but it is all only the expressed Word: which has so coagulated it
self in its re-conception to its own expression; and does still continually
coagulate it self with the 4 Elements, through the Spirit of the desire ( viz.
of the Stars) and brings it self into such a motion and life; in the mode
and manner as the Eternal Speaking word makes a Mystery, which is Spiritual,
in it self; which Mystery I call the Center of the Eternal Nature; where the
Eternal Speaking Word brings it self into a Generation, and also makes
such a Spiritual World in it self; as we have materially in the Expressed
Word.

8. For I say, the inward world is the Heaven wherein God dwells; and the
outward world is expressed out of the inward: and has only another beginning
then the inward; but yet out of the inward; it is expressed from the inward
(through the motion of the Eternal Speaking Word) and closed into a beginning,
and End.

9. And the inward world stands in the Eternal Speaking Word: the Eternal
Word has spoken it (through the wisdom) out of its own Powers, Colors, and
Virtue, into an Essence, as a Great Mystery. from Eternity; which Essence also
is only as a Spiration from the Word in the wisdom, which has its
re-conception to Generation in it self; and with the Conception does likewise
Coagulate it self, and introduces it self into forms, after the manner of
the Generation of the Eternal Word: as the Powers, Colors, and Virtue do
generate themselves in the word through the wisdom; or as I might say, out of
the wisdom in the Word.

10. Therefore there is nothing nigh unto, or a far off from God: one world is
in the other: and all are only one: but one is Spiritual, the other
Corporeal: as soul, and body are in each other; and also time and Eternity are
but one thing; yet in distinct beginnings: the spiritual world in the
internal [ Principle] has an Eternal beginning, and the outward a temporal:
each has its birth in it self: but the Eternal Speaking Word rules through
and over all: yet it can neither be apprehended or Conceived, either by the
Spiritual or external world, that it should stand still; but it works from
Eternity to Eternity, and its Or operate.
Work is Conceived; for it is the Formed Word; and the working Word is its
life, and incomprehensible: for it is without all Essence; as a bare
understanding only, or a Power that Or works it self out in the Essence.
brings it self into Essence.

11. In the inward Spiritual world, the Word conceives it self into a
Spiritual Essence as one only Element, wherein the four lie hid: but when
God, viz. the Word moved this one Element: then the hidden Properties did
manifest themselves; as there are four Elements.

CHAP. III. How out of the Eternal Good, an Evil is come to be; which in the
Good Or (...)
had no beginning to the Evil: and of the Original of the Dark World, or
Hell, wherein the Devils dwell.
1. NOw then, being Light and darkness; moreover Pain and Source, are seen in
the outward world: and yet all Originally proceed from the Eternal Mystery:
viz. from the inward Spiritual world: and the inward Spiritual world
proceeds out of the Eternal Generating and Speaking Word; thereupon we are
to consider, how out of the Eternal Good, an Evil is come to be? which in the
Good has no beginning to the Evil; whence Darkness, Pain, and Source arise?
and then from whence a luster or light arises in the Darkness?

2. For we cannot say that the Eternal Light, or the Eternal Darkness, is
created; otherwise they should be in a Time and a Comprehensive beginning; and
of this they are devoid: for they are concomitant in the Generation; yet not in
the Note.
wisdom, or Generation of the Word of the Deity; but they take their Original
in the Desire of the Speaking Word.

3. For in the Eternal Speaking Word (which is (...) without.
devoid of all nature, or beginning) is only the Divine understanding or
Sound: there is neither Darkness nor Light, neither thick nor thin: neither
Joy nor Sorrow: moreover no Sensibility, or Finding (...) apprehensio^
Perceivancy; but it is barely a Power of the understanding in one Source,
Will, and Dominion: there is neither friend nor foe unto it: for it is the
only Good, and nothing else.

4. Seeing then this Eternal good cannot be an unsensible Essence, (for so it
were not manifest to it self) it introduces it self in it self into a Lubet,
to behold, and see what it self is: in which Lubet is the wisdom: and then
the Lubet thus Seeing what it self is; it brings it self into a desire to
find out, and feel what it self is: viz. to a Sensible Perceivance of the
Smell, and Taste of the Colors, Powers, and Virtue: and yet no perceivancy
could arise in the free spiritual Lubet, if it brought not it self into a
desire, like a Hunger.

5. For the Nothing hungreth after the Something, and the hunger is a desire:
viz. the First Verbum Fiat: or Creating Power: for the Desire has nothing that
it is able to make or Conceive: it conceives it self; and impresseth it
self: it Coagulateth it self: it draws it self into it self: and
comprehends it self: and brings it self from Abyss into Bysse: and
overshadoweth it self with its Magneticall attraction: so that the Nothing is
filled, and yet remains as a Nothing: it is only a Property: viz. a
darkness: this is the Eternal Original of the darkness: for where there is
a Property; there is already Something; and the Something is not as the
Nothing: it Or causes Darkness.
yields obscurity unless something else, viz. a Luster, does fill it; and
then it is Light, and yet it remains a Darkness in the Property.

6. In this Coagulation, or Impression, or Desire, or Hunger, by any of which I
might express it to the understanding; I say, in this Compaction or
Comprehensive Complication, we are to understand two things: 1. The free Lubet,
which is the Wisdom, Power, and Virtue, of the Colors: and 2. The Desire of
the free Lubet in it self: for the free Lubet viz. the wisdom, is no
Property; but it is free from all inclination; and is one with God; but the
Desire is a Property: now the desire arises from the Lubet; therefore the
desire does conceive and comprehend the free Lubet all along in the Compaction,
in the Impression; and brings it also into feeling, and finding.

7. And understand us aright, and punctually here: the desire arises out of
the Will to the free Lubet, and makes it self out of the free Lubet, and
brings it self into a desire: for the desire is the Fathers Property; and
the free Lubet, viz. the wisdom, is the Sons Property: albeit God being he is
Or One.
a Spirit, is not called Father, or Son in this place: until the manifestation
through the Fire in the Light: and there he is called Father and Son, but I set
it down by reason of the birth of nature, for a better understanding of the
true Ground, that man might understand: to what Person in the Deity, Nature,
and to what, the Power in nature, is to be ascribed.

The Center of the Eternal Nature; how the will of the Abyss brings it
self into Nature, and Form.
8. THe Desire proceeding from the will of the Abyss is the first Form: and
it is the Fiat, or let there Be: and the Power of the free Lubet is God, who
Governs the Fiat: and both together are named Verbum Fiat, that is, the
Eternal Word, which Creates where Nothing is; and [is] the Original of
Nature and all Beeings.

9. Saturnus.
The first Property of the Desire is Astringent, Harsh Eargerly-impressing,
Conceiving it self, Overshadowing it self; and it makes, first, the Great
Darkness of the Abyss: Secondly, it makes it self Substantial in a
Spiritual manner* wholly rough harsh hard and thick, and it is a Cause of
coldness, and all keenesse, and sharpness: also of all whatsoever is called
Essence: and it is the beginning of Perceivancy, wherein the free Lubet does
find and perceive it self, and introduces the Contemplation of it self; but
the desire in it self brings it self thereby into Pain and Source: Yet the
free Lubet does only so receive finding [or Perceivancy.]

10. Mercurius.
The Second Form or Property is the Constringency [or attraction] of the
Desire; that is a Compunction, Stirring, or Motion, for each desire is
attractive and constringent; and it is the beginning of Motion, Stirring, and
Life, and the true Original of the Mercuriall life of the Painful [or
tormenting] Source: for here arises the first enmity between the Astringency,
or hardness, and the Compunction or Sting of Stirring: for the Desire makes
hard, thick, and congealeth, as the cold stiffneth and freezeth the water* thus
the Astringency is a mere raw coldness, and the Compunction, viz. the
Attraction, is yet brought forth with the impression [or close constringent
Desire.]

11. It is even here as Father and Son; the Father would be still, and hard:
and the Compunction, viz. his Son, stirs in the Father, and causes
unquietness: and this the Father, viz. the Astringency cannot endure; and
therefore he attracteth the more eagerly, and earnestly in the Desire, to hold
refrain, and keep under, the disobedient Son; whereby the Son grows only
more strong in the Or Sting.
Compunction: and this is the true ground and cause of Sense: which in the Free
Lubet is the Eternal beginning of the or Manifestation.
motion of the Powers, Colors, and Virtue; and of the Divine Kingdom of Joy:
and in the dark Desire it is the Original of enmity, Pain, and Torment: and
the Eternal Original of Gods Anger, and all unquietness and Contrariety [or
Antipathy.]

12. Mars.
The third Property is the Contrition or distress.
Anguish, or Source, or rising Spring, which the two first Properties make:
when the Compunction, viz. the Stirring striveth, and moves with rage in the
hardness. or Impression; and bruiseth the hardness; then in the Brokennesse.
Contrition of the hardness, the first sense of feeling does arise, and is the
beginning of the Essences: for first it is the Severation, whereby each Power
becomes Feeling o^ distinct.
Sensible and Severable in it self in the free Lubet, in the word of the
Powers: it is the Original of Distinction: [or different variety] whereby the
Powers are mutually manifest; each in it self; also the Original of the
Thoughts, and Mind.

13. For the Eternal Mind is the All-Essentiall Power of the Deity: but the
Senses arise through Nature with the motion in the division of the Powers:
where each Power does perceive, and feel it self in it self: it is also the
Original of Taste, and Smell: when the Perceivance of the Powers in the
distinction has mutual intercourse, and entrance into each other: then they
feel, taste, smell, hear, and see one another; and herein arises the Source
of life: which could not be in the Liberty in the Stillnesse of the Power of
God: therefore the Divine Understanding brings it self into Spiritual
Properties, that it might be manifest to it self: and be a Working life.

14. Now we are to consider of the Anguish in its own Generation and Peculiar
Property: for like as there is a mind, viz. an understanding in the Liberty,
in the Word of the Power of God; So likewise the first will to the Desire
brings it self in the Desire of the darkness into a mind: which mind is
the Anguish Sourc^: viz. a Sulphrous Source: and yet here [the] Spirit is
only to be understood.

15. The Anguish-Source is thus to be understood: the Astringent Desire
conceives it self, and Contracteth.
draws it self into it self; and makes it self full, hard, and rough: now
the attraction is an Enemy of the hardness: the hardness is retentive: the
Attraction is fugitive: the one will into it self; and the other will out of
it self: but being they cannot Sever, and part asunder one from the other:
they remain in each other as a Rouling Wheel: the one will ascend, the other
descend.

16. For the Hardness causes Substance and weight: and the Compunction gives
Spirit and the (...) flying.
Active Life: these both mutually Circulate in themselves and out of
themselves, and yet cannot go any whither [parted,] what the Desire: viz. the
Magnet makes Hard, that the attraction does again break in pieces: and it is
the Greatest unquietness in it self; like a Raging madness: and its in it
self an horrible Anguish: and yet no right feeling is Or to be understood.
perceived until the Fire: [or the enkindling of the fire in nature, which is
the fourth Form, wherein the manifestation of each life Appears,] and I
leave it to the Consideration of the true understanding Searcher of Nature:
what this is, or means; let him search and bethink himself: he shall find
it in his own Natural, and Paternall Knowledge.

17. The Anguish makes the Sulphrous Spirit, and the Compunction makes the
Mercury; viz. the Worke-Master of Nature: he is the life of Nature: and the
Astringent desire makes the keen Salt-Spirit: and yet all three are only one:
but they divide themselves into three Forms, which are called Sulphur,
Mercurius, Sal: these three Properties do impresse the Free Lubet into them;
that it also gives a material essentiality; which is the oil of these three
Forms (viz. their Life and Joy) which does mollify, meeken, and allay their
wrathfulnesse: and this no rational man can deny; there is a Salt, brimstone,
and oil in all things; and Mercurius, viz: the Or poyson-Life.
vital venom makes the Essence in all things; and so the Abyss brings it
self into Bysse, and Nature.

18. Sol.
The fourth Form of Nature is the Enkindling of the Fire: where the Feeling
and Understanding.
Sensitive and intellective life does first arise: and the hidden God
manifests himself: for without Nature he is hid unto all Creatures: but in
the Eternal and Temporal Nature, he is perceived and manifest.

19. And this manifestation is first Or brought to pass.
effected by the Awakening of the Powers, viz. by the three abovementioned
Properties: Sulphur Mercurius, and Sal, and therein the oil, in which the life
has its vital being and beauty Text, burns and shines.
life and luster: The true life is first manifest in the fourth Form: viz. in
the Fire and Light; in the fire the Natural, and in the light the Oily
Spiritual: and in the Power of the light the divine intellectual [or
understanding life is manifest.]

20. Reader attend, and mark aright: I understand here with the Description of
Nature, the Eternal nor the Temporal Nature: I only show thee the temporal
Nature thereby; for it is expressed, or spoken forth out of the Eternal, and
therefore do not foist in or allege Calves, Cowes, or Oxen, as it is the
Course of irrational Reason in Babell to do.

21. First know this: that the Divine understanding does therefore introduce it
self into fire, that its Eternal Lubet might be Majestaticall and Or a light.
lustrous: for the Divine understanding receives no Source into it self: it
also needs none to its own Being: Note.
for the All needs not the Something: the Something is only the Play of the
All, wherewith the All, does melodize and play: and that the TOTAL, or All
might be manifest unto it self, it introduces its will into Properties: Thus
we as a Creature will write of the Properties: viz. of the manifested God; how
the All, viz. the Immense, Abyssall Eternal understanding, manifests it self.

22. Secondly, the Abyssall and divine understanding, does therefore introduce
it self into an Anxious Fire-will, and Life, that its great Love and Joy,
which is called God, might be manifest: for if all were only One, then the One
would not be manifest unto it self; but by the Manifestation, the Eternal
Good is known, and makes a Kingdom of Joy: else if there were no anguish,
then Joy were not manifest unto it self; and there would be but one only
will, which would do continually one and the same thing: but if it introduces
it self into Contrariety; then in the Contest, the Lubet of joy becomes a
Desire, and a love play to it self; in that it has to work and Act; to
speak according to our humane Capacity.

23. The Original of the Eternal Spiritual and Natural fire is effected by
an Eternal Conjunction or Copulation, not each Severally, but both jointly:
viz. the Divine fire, which is a Love-flame: and the Natural fire which is a
Torment, and Consuming Source: understand it thus, as it is.

24. One part: viz. the will of the Father or of the Abyss introduces it
self into the Greatest sharpness of the Astringency: where it is a cold fire:
a cold painful Source: and it is sharpened by the Astringent Compunctive
Anguish: and in this Anguish it comes to desire the Liberty, viz. the free
Lubet, or meekness: and the other part is the Free Lubet, which desires to be
manifest; it longs after the will of the Father, which has generated it
without Nature; and uses it for its Play: this here does again desire the
will: and the will has here re-conceived it self to go again out of the
Anguish into the Liberty: viz. the Lubet.

25. Undestand; that it is the re-conceived will which desires the Free Lubet
of God: but now it has taken into it self, the horrible Astringent hard
Compunctive sharpness: and the free Lubet is a great Meekness, in reference
to the wrathful Nature, as a Nothing and yet it is: now both these dash
together in one another: the sharp will Eagerly and mightily desires the
Fire-Lubet, and the Lubet desires the Austere will, and in that they enter
into and feel each other, a Great Flagrat is made, like a flash of Lightning:
in manner as the fire, or celestial Lightning or etheriall blaze, is enkindled
in the Firmament.

26. And in this Flagrat the Fire is Enkindled: for the Astringent harsh
darkness which is cold, is dismayed at the light and great Meekness of the
Free Lubet, and becomes in it self a Flagrat of Death, where the
wrathfulnesse, and cold Property retireth back into it self, and closes up it
self as a Death: for in the Flagrat the Dark mind becomes essential; it
sadly betakes it self into it Self; as As being afraid* or dismayed at the
light.
a great Fear before the light; or as an Enmity of the light: and this is the
true Original of the dark world, viz. of the Abyss, into which the Devils
are thrust, which we call Hell.

CHAP. IV. Of the Two Principles: viz. Gods Love, and Anger: of Darkness, and
Light, very necessary for the Reader to consider of.
1. IN this Flagrat, or Enkindling of the Fire, two Kingdoms Sever themselves;
and yet are only one; but they divide in the Essence, Source and will; and are
invisible to one another: the one comprehends not the other in its own Source;
and yet they proceed from one Original; and are dependant on one another; and
the one without the other were a nothing; and yet both receive their Source
from One Original: understand it thus.

2. When the blaze, or Flagrat arises, then it is in the Punctum, and and
makes in the Twinck a Tri-Angle, or a Cross: and this is the true meaning of
the Character: First it is the Keenness of all things; and God manifested in
Trinity: The Triangle betokens the hidden God: viz. The Word or Divine
understanding; which is threefold in its Eternal un-inchoative birth: and yet
only one, in its Manifestation: In the fire and light world this Trinity does
manifest it self in the Birth; not as if there were any place, where such a
figure did stand, no; but the whole Birth is so; where ever the Divine Fire
manifests it self in any thing, it makes in its inflammation a Tri-angle,
which the children of men ought seriously to observe, and how likewise the life
does enkindle it self in a Tri-angle: which betokens the Holy Trinity: and
being the light of life was in the Word of the Deity; which [ word] was
breathed into man; (as John says in his first Chapter) and yet did disappeare
in Paradise* in relation to God; therefore it must be borne again on the.

The Exposition of the foregoing Charecters.
3. THe upper Cross betokenneth the unformed Word in Trinity wholly without
Nature, and the Charecter is thus set; and this Character betokens the Formed
Word, Viz. the Angelical World.

4. But that the Tri-angle with the three strait Cusps has changed it self
into such a. on which death was slain, does point and betoken unto us the
Great Love of God which has freely given it self again into our humanity out
of the Tri-angle, when we were departed from the Tri-angle in the light of life.

5. Therefore the Great Angle waveth downwards, betokening the great humility,
and also that we have lost the fiery Angle which ascends on High; in which we
were the Image and likeness of God: therefore the Angle in the Regeneration in
the. has turned it self downward; and ascends not upward any more with its
Cusp: betokening now unto us the true Resignation under the. where we in the
Spirit of Christ, shall be borne agine through the great humility of God, in
the light.

6. Now the will Severs it self in the Fires Flagrat into two Kingdoms, where
each dwells in it self: viz. The Flagrat in the darkness is Gods Anger: and
the Flagrat in the re-conceivement to the free Lubet, becomes the Highly
Triumphant Divine Kingdom of Joy in the Free Lubet: for thus the free Lubet is
Elevated and brought into a wrestling Love-play, and so it becomes Springing
and working.

7. Not that we mean, that God thus receives a beginning: but it is the
Eternal beginning of God manifested: viz. how the Divine understanding does
manifest it self with Power in distinct variety, and works it self forth
into a Kingdom; which is an Eternal Generation: we only speak here how the
unvisible, unperceivable God does introduce himself into Perception for his
own Manifestation.

8. Now we are to understand by the inflammation of the fire, a twofold fire, a
twofold Spirit, and a twofold Essence: viz. a Love-fire in the free Lubet which
is made Essential with impression or Desire: and in the fire the Spirit and
Essence do severize; and yet they are mutually in one another; as Soul, and
body are one: and now as the Spirit is, so is the Essence: and as there is an
holy sweet Essence, and an holy sweet Spirit, in the impression of the free
Lubet: so likewise in the dark impression, there is an Astringent harsh raw
and bitter Essence and Spirit: as the Essence is, so is also the Mind of the
Understanding and will in the Essence.

9. Albeit the Eternal [ Essence] in reference to the Temporal, is
Spiritual; yet the true Spirit is much more Subtle, then that which it makes
to a Substance in the conception: for out of the Substance, the true
intellective Spirit primely proceeds, which before the Substance, is only a
Will, and not manifest to it self: for the will does therefore introduce it
self into Substance and Essence that it might be manifest to it self.

10. Now we are to consider of the Severation in the fire: when the fire is
enkindled, then is the fire-blaze or Flagrat Salnitrall, where the powers do
mutually unfold, and display themselves, and come into division, where the
Eternal only power of God, does manifest it self, and in the distinction,
does Sunder it self into Properties both Spiritually and Substantially: as is
to be seen in this World: whence also the manifold Salts do arise: which with
the Creation came to be such Matter, which in the Eternity was only a
Spiritual Essence, but in the beginning of Time became Gross and hard.

11. Also the manifold Spirits both good and evil, do originally spring from
this Eternal root; and likewise the manifold Stars with the four Elements,
and all whatsoever lives and moves; but the Separation in it self is thus to
be understood: when the blaze arises, then out of the fire proceeds the
Severation: the Fire-Flagrat is Consuming, it apprehends the Conceived
Essence, both in the free Lubet, and in the Austere impression, and consumes it
in a twinkling of an Eye, for here, the Eternal Will which is an Abyss
becomes manifest in the fire: no Essence can subsist before it; it devoureth
all into its Nothing.

12. And here is the Original of the Eternal Death, or devoration; and in
this Devoration is the highest Arcanum, or Secret: for the true essential
lively Spirit and understanding proceeds out of this devoration, and makes
another Beginning; for the first beginning is Gods, who introduces himself
from the Abyss into Bysse to his own Contemplation: but this Beginning, which
proceeds again out of the devoration, is a Spiritual Beginning, and makes
three worlds: namely; 1. The dark fire-world in heat, and cold; a Rawnesse
wholly Austere devoid of Essence: 2. The other world is the Spiritual light,
or Angelical world: 3 And the third began with the beginning of time: when God
moved both the inward worlds: he thence brought forth and created this outward
visible world into a form of time.

13. Now the Separation in the fire of devoration is thus to be understood: the
Powers, which the first impression made essential; are in the fire reduced
into a Spirituallnesse: viz: 1. From the free Lubet proceeds forth a
Spiritual Mysterium: which is, as to the Deity, ( viz. the Eternal
understanding) Spiritual: and it is the angelical light, and Life; and also
the real humane [Life;] and so of all whatsoever is like unto them: for they
are Powers of God: therefore the Angels bear in them the Great Name of God:
and likewise all true men who have the divine Power.

14. From the Essence of the free Lubet there proceeds forth in the fire an
oily Power, which is the body or Essence of the understanding; therein the fire
burns; and thence the shining Luster or Glance arises. Thirdly, from the
Understanding and Spiritual Oil there proceeds forth a moving Lubet like an
Element: and it is also the Divine Element.

15. Fourthly, out of the Element there proceeds forth a watery Property; and
yet it i^ only to be understood Spiritually: this is the water of which Christ
said; he would give us to drink: and whosoever should drink thereof it should
spring up in him to a fountain of Eternal Life: it is the water above the
Firmament of which Moses speaks; that God has separated from the external
waters under the Firmament: This watery and Elementall Property proceeds from
the Essence of the Free Lubet, which is con^umed in the Fire and the Word of
the understanding (which has now manifested it self in the fire) does
express these Powers from it self, as a living and moving Essence, and
herein the Angelical world is understood.

16. In the Separation which is from the dark Property, there proceeds forth,
through the Speaking Word in the Separation out of the fire: viz. out of the
Astringent harsh Impression, 1. An hellish thirsty wrathful Source, being as
another Principle, or beginning of another Property; which Source is wholly
Rough like the cold or hard stones; a mind which is horrible like to the
fire-blaze: 2ly. There proceeds forth from this fi^ry Spirit, from the
darkness, an Oil which is of a poysonfull Property: for it is the Evil
Mercurius arising from the Compunction in the anxious Astringency.

17. 3ly. The Anguish likewise makes a moving mind like the Element: but
altogether in an exceeding wrathful very piercing Property: in which the great
fires might and will in the Anger of God, or the wrath of God, arises, which
Lucifer desired to be, and to rule therein; and therefore he is a Devil, that
is, one spewed out of the Love-fire into the Dark fire: 4ly. There proceeds
forth also from the wrathful Property through the Devoration in the fire, viz.
from the first dark impression, a watery Property: but it is much rather a
poysonfull Source, in which the Text, the da^k life burns.
life of darkness consists.

18. But my writing here of the Oil and water is thus to be understood: in
the enkindling of the fire in the Flagrat; (both in the Flagrat of Joy in the
Ens of the free Lubet and in the Flagrat of the wrathfullnesse in the
impression of the dark Spiritual Ens) the Essence, which the first desire
has Coagulated or amassed, is Consumed in the fire-Flagrat; that is, it does
as it were dye to it selfe-good; and is taken into the Only Spirit; which here
has manifested it self in the fire of the wrathfulnesse, and in the
light-fire of the Kingdom of Joy: which [Spirit] does now re-expresse it, or
breath it forth again out of it self as two Spiritual worlds.

19. Understand it aright; there proceeds forth out of the fiery Property in
the Spiration the vital Source; which according to the Free Lubet is holy and
joyful; and according to the darkness painful and wrathful: the
wrathfullnesse and painful Source is the root of joy, and the joy is the root
of the enmity of the dark wrathfullnesse: so that there is a contrarium
whereby the good is made manifest and known that it is good.

20. And the Mortifyed Essence in the fire (which the first desire in the free
Lubet has Coagulated and made dark) proceeds forth through the
Fires-mortification as a Spiritual Oil: which is the Property of the fire and
light; and from the mortification there proceeds a water, viz. a mortified
Senseless Essence, being a house of the oil; wherein the fire-Source or
Spirit has its vital Region: which oil is the food of the fire Source which
it draws again into it self, and devoureth, and thereby allayeth the
fire-Source and introduces it into the greatest meekness, in which the life
of the great Love arises: viz. the good taste: so that the fire-Source
becomes an humility, or meekness in the oil through the mortification in the
water-Source.

21. For no fire-Spirit can be meek without the mortification of its own
natural Propriety or peculiar Essence: but the water which before was an
Essence, amassed out of the free Lubet, and yet mortified in the fire; that can
change the Essence of the fire into a meek desire.

CHAP. V. Of the five Senses.
Love-fire
Venus.
1. THe fifth Form or Property, is the Love-desire; viz. the holy life; or the
displayed light-fire; which is awakened or raised up in the wrathful Consuming
fire: that is; it receives its luster, and shine from the fire; a similitude
whereof we have in all outward fires: where we see that the light arises in
the fire; but yet has far another Source then the fire: for the fire is
painful, but the light is meek, pleasant, Lovely, and yields Essence.

2. The Fire causes light, and air; and out of the air comes the water by
reason of the meekness of the light; for the Lubet to the fire is mortified in
the fire-blaze: and so, that which is mortified in the fire is a meek Essence,
yet its only a Spirit: but when it proceeds from the fire in the light, it
Coagulateth, and is the death of the fire: whereby the fire goes out: but if
it be of a spiritual nature it is the food, and refreshment of the fire: and
we see plainly, that every burning fire puts forth an air, and out of the
air a water: which air and watery Spirit the fire draws again into it
self, for its own life and luster: else if it cannot have it; it is soon
extinct, and goes out: that is; it smothers: for the air is its life; and yet
it begets the air.

3. Thus likewise we are to consider of the divine Being: how the Eternal
Understanding of the Abyss introduces it self into the Bysse and Essence:
viz. into an Eternal Generation and Devoration, wherein the manifestation of
the Abyss consists; and is an Eternal Love-play; that the Abyss does so
wrestle sport and play with it self in its own conceived [or amassed] Bysse:
it gives it self into the something; and again takes the something into it
self: and thence brings or gives forth another thing: it introduces it self
into a Lubet, and desire; moreover into Power Strength, and Virtue, and
mutually produces one degree from the other, and through the other, that so it
might be an Eternal Play, and Melody in it self.

4. And this we are to consider of in the fifth Form of Nature: when the
Powers of the Eternal Word or understanding, are made manifest through the
Eternal spiritual fire, in the Eternal light of the Majesty, (that each
Power or property is manifest in it self, and enters into a Feeling, Tasting,
Smelling, Hearing, Seeing Essence; which is effected through the fire, where
all things become Spritfull, quick and full of life:) even then one Property
enters mutually into another* for they are all proceeded out of one: viz. out
of the free Lubet: therefore also this free Lubet is yet in all, and they all
jointly desire to enter again into this free Lubet; viz. into the One; and
there, when one tastes smells feels hears and sees the other in the
Essence, they do embrace each other in their holy Conjunction: wherein then
the real divine Kindome of joy consists; so likewise the growing and
flourishing life of this world: as may be understood by way of Similitude in
the Seven Properties, and the light and power of the Sun.

5. The divine Kingdom of joy in the Heaven of God ( viz. in God manifested in
his Expressed or Spirated Essence, as I might speak it to the understanding)
consists in the Love-desire: viz. in the Power which has manifested it self
through the fire in the light: for the fire gives unto the meek free Lubet
Essence and Source; that it is Severized, and moved, and becomes a Kingdom of
joy.

6. And thus we are to consider of the darkness; whatsoever is a desiring Love
in the light, wherein all things rejoice and melodize in Love: that in the
darkness is an enmity: for the fire is cold and burning hot in the darkness:
moreover bitter astringent Compunctive; the Properties are wholly rigorous and
full of enmity and opposition: they seek not the One: but only the
advancement of their own might: and the greater their Elevation, and
inflammation is; the Greater is the The Kingdom of joy.
joy in the light.

7. That which is good and holy in the Or light of power.
powerful light that in the darkness is anxious and adverse; the darkness is
the greatest enmity of the light and yet it is the cause that the light is
manifest: for if there were no Black, then white could not be manifest to it
self: and if there were no Sorrow, then joy were also not manifest to it self.

8. Thus the joy does triumph in it self, that it is not as the Sorrow: and
the Sorrow triumphs in it self, that it is a Might and strength of the fire,
and light: hence arise Pride, and Self-will; because the dark fires Might
gives the Essence and motive Source to the light: which did so affect, and
move King Lucifer, that he exalted himself in the root of the fire, to rule
and domineere over the fire, and light, and therefore was cast out of the light
into darkness: and the light withdrew from him.

9. Therefore understand us well here, what Hell and the dark world or the
Anger of God, is: of which the holy Scripture speaks plainly that there is an
hell, that is, a Gulf of Desperation, or pit devoid of the hope of God and
all good: now we are not to understand it to be any local Place apart, but it
is the first ground to the Eternal Nature: the place is between the Kingdom
of God and this world, and makes a peculiar Principle, dwelling in it self,
and has neither place, nor local abode, and is every where, but inhabiting it
self only, and yet it gives Essence to the light-and outward-world; that is,
it is the Cause to the Source, viz. the Fire: and is the whole Being of all
Gods Beeings.

10. In the darkness he is an Angry zealous God, and in the fire-Spirit a
Consuming fire: and in the light he is a merciful Loving God: and in the Power
of the light, he is especially, above all other Properties, called God: and yet
it is all but God manifested; who manifests himself through the Eternal
Nature in ingredient Properties: else, if I would say what God is in his Depth:
then I must say: that he is wholly without Nature, and Properties: being an
understanding, and Original, of all Beeings; the Beeings are his
manifestation, and thereof we have only Ability to write; and not of the
unmanifested God, who also were not known to himself without his manifestation.

The Original of Life
. Jupiter.
11. THe sixth Property of Nature and of all beeings, arises also out of all
the rest, and is manifest in the fire through the light in the Love-desire; it
is Natures understanding, voice, Sound, speech; and all whatsoever sounds,
both in things with life and without life: its true Original is from the
Astringent desire or impression of the first, second, and third Form, whence
the motion, and hardness arises: the Essence of the Coagulation is Consumed
in the fire, and from the Devoration there proceeds such a spirit, both
according to the property of the light, in the Love; and according the annoying
hateful Source, and anxious Property, in the darkness: and this we are thus
to understand.

12. Each Spirit desires Essence after its likeness: now there proceeds
forth no more save one Spirit from the fire (which is a Spiritual
understanding, that is, the manifestation of the Understanding of the Abyss or
God) which does re-conceive it self in the Love-desire: and forms it self
in the properties of the Powers: and this mutual enter-course, Consent, and
intimate entire assimulation, one with another, is the pleasant taste of Love.

13. But the Conceived in the Love-desire; where the desire does again
Coagulate the Powers and introduce them into Forms, viz. into a substantial
Spirit, where the powers are able manifestly to move and Act; that (I say) is
now the natural and creaturall understanding which was in the word (as John
1.) in him was the life, and that life was the light of men.

14. This harmony of hearing seeing feeling tasting and smelling, is the true
intellective life; for when one power enters into another then they embrace
each other in the Sound, and when they penetrate each other, they mutually
awaken and know each other; and in this knowledge consists the true
understanding which is innumerable, immense, and Abyssall, according to the
nature of the Eternal Wisdom, viz. of the ONE, which is ALL.

15. Therefore one only will, if it has divine light in it, may draw out of
this fountain, and behold the infiniteness, from which Contemplation this Pen
has written.

16. Now there belong unto the manifest life or Sound of the Powers, hardness
and softness, thickness, and thinness, and a motion: for without motion all
is Still: and yet there can be no clear Sound without the fires Essence, for
the fire first makes the Sound in the hardness and softness.

17. Also there could be no Sound without a Conception, and therefore all
forms belong unto the Sound: 1. The desire makes hardness. 2. The
Compunction moves. 3. the Anguish does amasse it into an Essence, for
distinction. 4. The fire changes in its Devoration, the grossness of the
first amassed Essence, into a Spirit or Sound. 5. Which the desire does again
receive in its Softness and meekness and forms it to a voice, tone, or
express, according to the Powers. 6. And the Conceived or formed is the vital
Sound, or distinct understanding [or the articulate knowledge of all Sounds
voices, powers colors and virtues in Nature and Creature.]

18. This is now the Manifested Word, which in it self is only One Power,
wherein all Powers are Contained: but thus it manifests it self through the
Eternal and Temporal Nature, and puts forth it self in Forms, for its
expression, for the formed word has the like Might in it as to re-produce its
likeness: viz. such a being as the birth of the Spirit is.

19. In the light of God which is called the Kingdom of Heaven, the Sound is
wholly soft, pleasant Lovely pure and thin; yea as a stillnesse in reference to
our outward gross shrillnesse in our pronouncing Speaking Sounding Singing and
chanting; as if the mind did play and melodize in a Kingdom of joy within it
self, and did hear in a most entire inward manner, such a sweet pleasing
Melody and tune; and yet outwardly did neither hear or understand it: for in
the Essence of the light all is Subtle, in manner as the Thoughts do play and
make mutual melody in one another: and yet there is a real, intelligible,
distinct, Sound and Speech used, and heard by the Angels in the Kingdom of
glory: but according to their worlds Property: for where the Sound is gross
harsh, and shrill, there it is strong in the dark impression; and there the
fire is vehement and burning: as we men after the Fall of Adam, have so awaked
and enkindled the fire of the dark world, in our Vital Essence; that our
vital Sound is gross and Beast-like, resembling the Abyss: and the like is
to be understood of the Sound in the darkness; for as the generation of the
word, is, in its manifestation in the light, in the holy Power: so also in the
darkness: but altogether rigorous harsh, hard and gross: that which gives a
pleasing Sound, and lovely tune in the light that makes in the darkness a
dulsome harsh Hideous noise, devoid of any true sound: and this proceeds from
the Essence of the Astringent hard, Compunctive Anxious Generation: viz. from
the Original of the coldness, or cold fires Source.

CHAP. VI. Of the Essence of Corporallity.
The Seventh Form of Nature.
Luna and Saturnus. Beginning -- End.
1. WE acknowledge that God in his own Essence is no Essence; but only the
Alone Power or the Or Original.
understanding to the Essence: viz. an unsearchable Eternal will wherein all
things are couched: and the same is ALL, and yet is only ONE; but yet desires
to manifest it self, and introduce it self into a spiritual Essence, which
is effected in the Power of the light, through the fire in the Love-desire.

2. But yet the true divine Essence, (understand Essence, and not the Spirit of
God,) is nothing else but the understanding manifested, or the formation of the
Powers, and it consists in the desire, that is in the Love-desire, where one
power does experimentally and knowingly taste smell feel see hear another, in
the Essence and Source of the Property: whence the great ardent Longing desire
arises: in these Properties the manifested God is understood, as in a fiery
flame of Love-desire, wherein there is a mere pleasing taste, sweet-breathing
smell ravishing melody, Lovely and delightful Seeing, Smiling and friendly
Aspect, a gracious delight pleasure or feeling: and yet it is only a
spiritual Essence, where the Powers only, (which have introduced themselves
through the Impression, into property, and manifested themselves through the
fire in the light,) do mutually as in a Love-play wrestle with, and in one
another, like a pleasant Song, or pregnant harmony, or Kingdom of joy: this is
now the Spiritual Essence of God manifested; [and] how the Powerful
All-essentiall word, does manifest it self in its own Peculiar generation,
wherein the melodious Play of the divine wisdom, is understood.

3. But if we would speak of the heavenly or divine Essentiality, wherein the
divine powers, do introduce themselves again into formings more externally,
then we must say, that the powers of the formed, and manifested Word, do
again in their Love-desire introduce themselves into an External Essence,
according to the property of all the Powers; wherein they, as in a mansion, may
Act their Love-play, and so have somewhat, wherewith and wherein, mutually to
play and melodize one with another, in their wrestling sport of Love: and this
is thus to be understood.

4. As a Mineral Power lies in the earth, and is enkindled by the Sun:
whereby it begins to stir and spring, and becomes desirous of the powers of
the Sun, and attracts them into it: but in this longing desire it does amasse
it self and form it self to a body, viz. a root, or the like: from which
root, there grows forth in this hungry desire, such a body, or herb as the
first Power was; thus likewise the manifested Powers of God do form
themselves into an external Degree: viz. into an Essence, or Corporallity; to
speak in reference to the Spirit, whereas we must only understand a
Spiritual Essence, but yet Corporeal or Essential, in reference to the
Spirit of the Powers: as the water is a thicker substance then the Air: for
the air penetrates the water: the like is to be understood concerning the
divine Powers and Essence.

5. The Powers stand manifest in an oily Property; but the oily is manifest in
a watery Property: therefore the Essence of the divine Powers consists in a
Spiritual water, viz. in the holy Element whence this world with the four
Elements, (as a degree more external,) was brought forth and created into a
Substantial Form.

6. And in this holy Element, or Spiritual water we do understand holy
Paradise in which the manifested Powers of God, do work: which holy Element in
the beginning of this outward world did Penetrate, and pullulate through the
four Elements: in which Power there grew such fruit, wherein the vanity of the
wrath was not manifest; which man negligently lost: so that the lively buddings
of the holy Element, through the four Elements and the Earth, did cease: for
the Curse of vanity was manifest, and did effectually work and spring forth
out of the earth.

7. Thus by the seventh Form of the Eternal Nature we understand the Eternal
Kingdom of Heaven wherein the Power of God is Essential; which Essence is
tinctured by the Luster and Power of the fire and light; for the Luster of the
Spiritual fire, and light, is the working life in the Spiritual water: viz.
in the holy Element: for this water (being the amassed or congealed Essence of
the divine Powers) is moving: but yet it is as an Essence void of
understanding in reference to the divine Powers; for it is a degree more
external, as every Substance or body is inferior to the Spirit; the oily
Essence is the Spirit of the water: viz. of the watery Spirit: and the
manifested Powers of God, are the Spirit of the oil or oily Spirit; and the
Eternal Understanding of the Word, is the beginning of the manifested Powers:
and one degree goes forth mutually from another: and All Or Beeings; or all
the Universal created Substance, is only God revealed, God manifested, God
expressed.
Essence is nothing else, but the manifested God.

8. When we consider, what kind of life Motion and Dominion was before the
times of this outward world, in the place of this world: and what Eternity is:
then we find; that it was, and is unto Eternity, such a life motion and
Dominion, as is above mentioned.

9. The outward world with the four Elements and Stars, is a Figure of the
internal Powers of the Spiritual world, and was expressed or breathed forth
by the motion of God, (when he moved the internal Spiritual world,) and
amassed by the divine desire of the inward Powers; and introduced into a
creaturall Being, both out of the internal spiritual dark-world, and also
out of the holy light-world.

10. This outward world is as a smoke, or vaprous steame of the fire-Spirit
and water-Spirit, breathed forth, both out of the holy and then also out of the
dark world; and therefore it is evil and good; and consists in Love and anger;
and is only as a smoke or misty exhalation, in reference and respect to the
spiritual world: and has again introduced it self with its Properties, into
forms of the Powers, to a Pregnatresse; as is to be seen in the Stars Elements
and creatures; and likewise in the growing Trees and herbs; it makes in it
self with its birth, another Principle or beginning; for the Pregnatresse of
time, is a Model or plat-forme of the Eternal Pregnatresse; and time coucheth
in Eternity: and it is nothing else, but that the Eternity in its wonderful
birth and manifestation in its Powers and strength, does thus behold it self,
in a form or Time.

11. And now as we do acknowledge, that in the Spiritual holy world there is
an Essence: viz. a comprehensive Essence: which consists in the Spiritual
Sulphur, Mercurius, and Sal in an oily, and watery Bysse: wherein the divine
Powers play, and work: so likewise in the dark world there is such a
Property: but altogether adverse odious opposite spiteful envious bitter and
compunctive: it has also Essence Or, of.
according to its desire: but altogether of a fell raw indigested watery Nature,
wholly sharp and harsh, like to the Property of the rough hard stones or wild
earth; of a cold and scorching, dark and fiery Property: all which is a
contrarium to Love: that so it might be known what Love or Sorrow is.

12. That the fullness of joy might know it self in it self, the Keen
Tartness of the Source must be a cause of the joy; and the darkness a
manifestation of the light; that so the light might be manifestly known, which
could not be in the ONE.

13. But to answer the Readers desire briefly and fully, concerning the seven
Properties of the Eternal nature which make three Principles, or worlds, I
will (out of Love, for the sake of the simple,) yet once more set down the
forms in brief, as an A. B. C. for his further Consideration and meditation.

I. Form; Astringent; Desire.
14. LO! the Desire of the Eternal Word, which is good: is the beginning of
the Eternal Nature, and is the Congealing of the Eternal Nothing into
Something; it is the Cause of Essences; also of cold and heat; so likewise of
the water and air; and the formation of the Powers: and a cause of the taste,
a mother of all Salts.

II. Form, bitter; Compunctive.
15. THe motion of the Desire viz. the attraction is the other Form of Nature,
a cause of all life and Stirring; so also of the Senses; and distinction.

III. Form; Anguish, Perceivance.
16. THe Anguish viz. the Sensibility is the the third Form, a Cause of the
Mind, wherein the Senses are moved and acted.

IV. Fire, Spirit; Reason; Desire.
17. THe fire is a cause of the true Spiritual life, wherein the holy Powers
of the free Lubet are delivered from the Astringent undigested roughness; for
the fire in its Essence devoureth the dark Substance of the Impression; and
works it forth out of it self, out of the light, into Spiritual Powers.

V. Form; Light, Love.
18. THe holy Spiritual Love-desire, where the holy will of God has exacuated
it self in the harsh impression; and manifested it self through the fire with
the Power of the Omnipotence; that now brings it self forth through the fire
in the light; and so in the Powers it is introduced into life and motion, in
the desire; and herein the Holy Generation, and the Triumphant Kingdom of the
great Love of God, does consist, and is manifest.

VI. Form, Sound, Voice, Word.
19. THe sixth is the Sound of the divine Word proceeding from the divine
Powers; which is formed in the Love-desire; and introduced into a manifest word
of all Powers; wherein the manifestation of the divine Kingdom of joy, in the
free Lubet of Gods wisdom, consists.

VII. Form; Essence, Being, Mansion.
20. THe seventh is the formed Essence of the Powers, viz. a manifestation of
the Powers: what the first six are in the Spirit, that the Seventh is in a
Comprehensible Essence, as a mansion and house of all the rest or as a body of
the Spirit wherein the Spirit works, and plays with it self: also it is a
food of the fire, whence the fire draws Essence for its Sustenance, wherein
it burns; and the Seventh is the Kingdom of the divine glory: and the Seven
are thus named or expressed,

21. The Out-Birth or Manifestation is this.

The Seven Spirits of God, or powers of Nature; as they show and manifest
themselves in Love and Anger; both in the Heavenly and Hellish Kingdom, and
also in the Kingdom of this world Anger Love 1 Astringent, Desire. Hellish.
Heavenly. Hardness Cold Covetosnes. World. Earthly Kingdom 1 Cold, Hardness,
Bone, Salt. 2 Attractio^ or Compunctio^ of Sense Compunction Envy 2 Poison Life
Growth Senses. 3 Anguish or Mind. Enmity. 3 Sulphur, Perceivance, Pain. 4
Fire or Spirit. Pride, Anger 4 Spirit, Reason, Desire. Love Fire 5 Light or
Love-Desire. Meekness 5 Venus-Sport Lifes-Light 6 Sound or Understanding.
Divine Joy. 6 Speaking, Crying, Distinguishing 7 Body or Essence. Heaven. 7
Body. Wood. Stone. Earth. Metal, Herb. This was received from the Author in
such a form by Abraham von Somerveldt

22. Courteous Reader, understand the sense aright and well; the meaning is not
to be understood so, as if the Seven Properties were divided, and one were
near by another, or sooner manifest then another: all Seven are but as one:
and none is the first second, or last: for the last is again the first; as the
first introduces it self into a Spiritual Essence; even so the last into a
Corporeal Essence: the last is the body of the first: we must speak thus
apart, to write it down and decipher it to the Consideration of the Reader:
they are altogether only the Manifestation of God; according to Love and
Anger; Eternity and Time.

23. But this we are to mark; that each Property is also essential: and this
essence is jointly as one Essence in the Kingdom of heaven: and its a
Mysterium, whence heavenly plants spring forth out of each, Powers property: as
the earth is a Mysterium of all trees, and herbs so also of the grass and
worms: and the four Elements are a Mysterium of all Animalls: and the Astrum
a Mysterium of all operations in Animalls and Vegetables.

24. Each property is to it self essential, and has also in its Essence the
Essence of all the other six forms; and makes the essence of the other six
forms also essential in its essence; as we see in the Earth and stones,
especially in Metalls, where oftentimes in One Compaction, all seven metalls
are couched together: and only one property is principal, which does
Coagulate, and captivate all the rest in it self: and always one is more
manifest then the rest: according as each property has its powerful
predominancy in a thing: the like is also to be understood in vegetables; where
ofttimes in an herb or piece of wood, there is an Astringent sour harsh
bitter anxious or Sulphrous property, also a fiery sweet or luscious flashy or
watery quality.

CHAP. VII. Of the Holy Trinity, and divine Essence.
1. THe Eternal, and Temporal nature is especially understood in the dark
and fire world, viz. in the four first forms: as 1. in the astringent desire:
2. in the bitter Compunction: 3. in the Anguish, or Sensation. 4. In the fire;
where the Severation proceeds forth in the Enkindling [of the fire] in the
Flagrat; but the powers both in the internal and external world, are all
understood in the light, or love-fire viz. in the love-desire.

2. For their first ground is the Eternal Word viz. the One; wherein all
things are coucht: the Second ground is the free Lubet of the word; viz. the
wisdom; wherein all the Colors of the only Power are manifest in the will of
the Deity: the third ground is the Love-desire: wherein the free Lubet with its
colors and virtues of the powers has exacuated it self through nature; and
introduced it self through the fires inflammation into a Spiritual Dominion;
which [ Lubet] displayeth it self with the powers in the light in an Eternal
Kingdom of Joy.

3. The fourth ground is the oily Spirit; in that the free Lubet does amasse it
self in the fiery Love-desire in the meekness: as in its own peculiar form:
and co-amasseth the Luster, and essence of the fire and light, and introduces
it into the first Essence; which power of the fire and light in the meekness of
the free Lubet in the oily property, is the true and holy Tincture.

4. The fifth ground is the watery Spirit, arising from the mortification in the
fire, where the first Spiritual Essence in the Astringent harsh dark desire
was consumed in the fire: now out of the Devoration of the fire there
proceeds forth a Spiritual Essence; which is the oily ground; and a watery
Essence from the mortification, which depriveth the fire-spirit of its wrath;
so that it is not able to set its wrathful properties on fire in the oily
ground: so that the fire must burn through death, and be only a light: else
the oily ground would be enflamed: thus the fire in its Devoration, must beget
the water, viz. its death; and yet must again have it for its life: else
neither the fire nor the light could subsist: and thus there is an Eternal
Generation, devoration, receiving, and again Consuming; and yet also its thus
an Eternal Giving: and has no beginning nor End.

5. Thus we now understand what God and his Essence is: we Christians say, that
God is threefold, but only one in Essence: but that we generally say and hold
that God is threefold in person, the same is very wrongly apprehended and
understood by the ignorant, yea by a great part of the learned: for God is no
person save only in Christ: but he is the Eternal Begetting Power, and the
Kingdom, with all Beeings; all things receive their Original from him.

6. But that we say of God; he is Father, Son, and holy Spirit; that is very
rightly said: only we must explain it: else the un-illuminated mind
apprehends it not, the Father is first the will of the Abyss: he is without
all Nature or beginnings: the will to Something; which does conceive it self
into a Lubet to its own Manifestation.

7. And the Lubet is the Conceived Power of the will, or of the Father: and it
is his Son, heart, and Seat: the first Eternal Beginning in the will: and he
is therefore called a Son, because he receives an Eteernall beginning in the
will, with the wills own Conception.

8. Now the will speaks forth it self by the Conception out of it self, as
a Spiration, or manifestation: and this Egresse from the will in the Speaking
or Spiration is the Spirit of the Deity; or the third Person as the ancients
have called it.

9. And the Spirate is the wisdom; viz. the Power of the Colors, and the
Virtue of the will, which it Eternally conceives to a Lifes-Center, or Heart
for its habitation; and does again Eternally speak it forth out of the
Conception; as from its own Eternal form; and yet eternally conceives [or
Comprehends] it for his Hearts Center.

10. Thus the Conception of the will viz. of the Father is from Eternity to
Eternity, which conceives his Speaking Word from Eternity, and speaks it forth
from Eternity to Eternity; the Speaking is the mouth of the wills
manifestation: and the Egress from the Speaking or Generation, is the Spirit of
the Formed Word; and that which is spoken forth, is the Power, Colors, and
Virtue of the Deity: viz. the Wisdom.

11. Here we cannot say with any ground: that God is three Persons: but he is
threefold in his Eternal Generation: he begets himself in Trinity; and yet
there is but only one Essence and Generation to be understood in this Eternal
Generation; neither Father, Son, nor Spirit, but the only Eternal Life, or
Good.

12. The Trinity is first rightly understood in his Eternal Manifestation;
where he manifests himself through the Eternal Nature, through the Fire in
the light.

13. Where we understand three properties in one only Essence: viz. the Father
with the fire-world: and the Son with the Love-desire in the light, viz. with
the light-world, or with the great Meekness in the fire; and the holy Spirit
with the moving life in the Tincture; in the oily, and watery life: and
Dominion; who is manifest in the fire, and light: viz. according to the
Property of the free Lubet, that is, the Divine property, he is manifest in a
great fiery flame of light, and Love: and then according to the property of the
dark fire-world, in a wrathful, painful, Sourcive property: and yet he is
the only one; in the light he is the Love-fire-flame: and in the enkindled
fire in nature he is a Consuming fire, according to which God is called a
Consuming fire; and in the dark wrathful Source he is an angry zealous
avenger, in which property the Spirits of the dark world consist.

14. The Father is only called an holy God in the Son, that is, in the power
of the light in the divine Kingdom of joy; viz. in the great meekness and
Love: for that is his proper manifestation wherein he is called God: in the
fire he is called an angry God: but in the light, or Love-fire he is called the
holy God: and in the dark nature he is not called God.

15. We must make distinction; each world has its Principle, and Dominion:
indeed All is from one Eternal Original: but it severizeth it self into a
twofold Source: a Similitude whereof we have in the fire, and light: where the
fire is painful, and Consuming, and the light meek and Giving: and yet the
one were a nothing without the other.

16. The fire receives its Original in nature but the light has its
Original from the free Lubet; viz. from the Powers of the Deity: the will of
God does therefore introduce it self into a fire, that he might manifest the
light and the powers, and introduce them into Essence.

17. Albeit I have written here of the forms of nature (understand the
etetnall nature) yet it must not be understood as if the Deity were
circumscribed, or limited: his wisdom, and Power in divine property is devoid
of limit or measure, innumerable, infinite, and unspeakable; I write only of
the properties; how God has manifested himself through the internal, and
external nature; which are the chiefest forms of his manifestation.

18. These seven Properties are to be found in all things; and he is void of
understanding that denies it: these seven properties, make, in the internal
world, the holy Element; viz. the holy natural life, and motion: but this
only Element severizeth it self in this external world, into four manifest
properties: viz. into four Elements: and yet it is but one only; but divides
it self into four head-Springs: viz. into fire, air, water, and earth.

19. From the fire arises the air: and from the air the water; and from the
water the earth, or a Substance which is earthly: and they are only the
manifestation of the one internal Element, and are, in Or before.
respect to the internal, as an enkindled smoke, or vaprous steame: so also
the whole Or Constellations.
Astrum is nothing else, but Powers breathed forth from the inward fiery dark
and light world; from the Great Mind of Divine Manifestation; and is only a
formed Model or Platform, wherein the great mind of divine Manifestation,
beholds it self in a time, and plays with it self.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Creation of Angels, and their Dominion.
1. THe Creation of Angels had a beginning, but the Powers out of which they
are created never had any beginning; but were concomitant in the birth of the
Eternal beginning; not that Viz. The Powers.
they are the holy Trinity, or in the same; but they were conceived of the
desire of divine manifestation, out of the Eternal dark fiery, and
light-nature; out of the Manifested Word, and introduced into creaturely forms
and shapes.

2. God who is a Spirit, has by and through his manifestation, introduced
himself into distinct Spirits, which are the voices of his Eternal pregnant
harmony in the Manifested Word of his Great Kingdom of joy; they are Gods
Instrument, in which the Spirit of God melodizeth in his Kingdom of joy: they
are the flames of fire and light, but in a living understanding Dominion.

3. For the Powers of the Deity are in them, in like manner, as they are in
men, as John says Chap. 1. the life of men was in the word; so also the life
of the angels was in the word from Eternity: for Matthew. 22. ver. 30. its
written; in the Resurrection they (understand men) are as the Angels of God in
Heaven.

4. And as we understand principall-formes in the divine manifestation through
the Eternal nature: so likewise we are to understand Arch-angells, or
Angelical Principalities, with many legions: but especially in three
Hierarchies according to the property of the holy Trinity, and also the three
Principles, as cannot be denied.

5. As 1. One Hierarchy is to be understood according to the dark world with
the Kingdom of Lucifer, who has plunged himself thereinto; and the other is
understood with the light fiery, and dark world: and the third is understood
with the Mystery of the outward world; wherewith the internal has made it
self manifest.

6. Each Hierarchy has its princely dominion and Order: viz. they in the dark
world, in Gods wrath; and those in the holy world, in Gods Love; and they which
are in the outward world, in Gods great wonders, both according to Love, and
Anger.

7. They which are in the dark world bear the Name (or the names) of the
great Anger of God according to the Properties of the Eternal nature in the
wrath: and they, which are in the light bear the names of the holy God, viz.
of the divine Powers: and they which are in the creation of the wonders of the
outward world, bear the names of the manifested powers of the outward world;
viz: of the Planets, Stars, and four Elements.

8. They which are in the dark world, domineere in the nature of the
manifested wrath: viz. in the properties of Gods Anger, and have their Princely
Dominions therein: and they which are in the holy world rule in the Powers of
the Triumphant world: viz. in the great holy Kingdom of joy in the wonders of
the holy wisdom: and they which are in the outward world reign over the
Powers of the Stars, and four Elements, and have also their Princely Dominion
over the world; and their Kingdoms and Principalities, for defense against the
destroyer in the wrath.

9. Each Country has its Princely Angel-Protectour with its Legions: also
there are Angels over the four Elements, over the fire, and over the air,
over the water, and over the Earth; and they are altogether only ministering
Spirits of the Great God, sent forth for the Service of those which shall
obtain Salvation; as its written, the Angel of the Lord encampeth about them
that fear him: they are the officers, and Servants of God in his Dominion, who
are active and full of motion.

10. For God never moves himself save only in himself: but seeing his
manifestation of the Eternal and External Nature is in Combat: thereupon the
Spirits of the dark world are against the Spirits of the holy world but
especially against man, who is manifest both in good and evil: God has set
the one against the other, that his Glory might be manifest both in his Love,
and in his Anger.

11. For as we men have Dominions upon the Earth: so likewise the Superior
Hosts under the Or Starry Sky.
Astrum have their Dominions: so also the oily Spirits in the Element Air: the
whole Deep between the Stars and the earth, is inhabited and not void and
empty. Each Dominion has its own Principle: which seems somewhat ridiculous
to us men; because we see them not with our Eyes; not considering that our eyes
are not of their Essence and property; so that we are neither able to see nor
perceive them; for we live not in their Principle, therefore we cannot see them.

12. As in the Divine Manifestation of the Divine Powers, one Degree orderly
proceeds forth from another, even unto the most external manifestation: the
like also is to be understood of the Angels or Spirits: they are not all holy
which dwell in the Elements; for as the wrath of the Eternal Nature is
manifest in the dark world; so likewise, in the outward world, in its property.

13. Also the Spirits of the external world are not all Eternal, but some are
only Having a beginning, and an end. Temporal.
inchoative, which take their Original naturally in the Spirit of the
external world, and pass away through nature, and only their shadow
remains, as of all other Beasts upon the Earth.

14. Whatsoever reaches not the holy Element and the Eternal fire-world, that
is devoid of an Eternal life; for it arises out of time: and that which
proceeds out of Time, is consumed and eaten up of Time; except it has an
Eternal being, essence, property, life or Principle.
Eternal in its Temporal: that the Eternal does uphold the Temporal.

15. For the Eternal dwells not in time: and albeit it be clothed with the
Essence of time; yet the Eternal dwells in the Eternal in it self, and the
Temporal in the Temporal: as it is to be understood with the Soul and Body
of man; where the Soul is from the Eternal, and the external body from time;
and yet there is an Eternal in the Temporal body; which verily disappeared in
Adam as to the Eternal light; which must be borne again through Christ.

16. And we are not to understand, that the holy Angels dwell only above the
Stars without the place of this world, as reason which understands nothing of
God, phancieth: indeed they dwell without the Dominion and Source of this
world; but in the place of this world: albeit there is no place in the
Eternity: the place of this world, and also the place without this world is all
one unto them.

17. For the beginning of the Source, viz. of the four Elements, together with
the Or Planetick Orb.
Astrum makes only one place: there is no place in the internal; but All
wholly entire: whatsoever is above the Stars without this world, that is
likewise internally without the four Elements in the place of this world; else
God were divided.

18. The Angelical world is in the lieu or place of this world internally; and
this same worlds Abyss is the Great darkness, where the Devils have their
Dominion; which also is not confined or shut up in any place; for the Eternity
is also their place, where there is no Bysse: only the Essence, and property
of their world is the Bysse of their habitation; as the four Elements are the
habitation of our external humanity: they have also in the darkness an
Element, according to the dark worlds property, else God were divided in his
wrath; for where ever I can say, here is God in his Love: even there I can also
say; that God is in his Anger, only a Principle Severs it.

19. Like as we men see not the Angels and Devils with our eyes; and yet they
are about us, and among us: the reason is, because they dwell not in the Source
and Dominion of our world; neither have they the property of the external
world on them: but each Spirit is clothed with his own worlds Property
wherein it dwells.

20. The beginning of each worlds Source, is that limit, which divides one
world from the view and ken of the other: for the Devils are a nothing in the
heavenly Source: for they have not its Source in them; and albeit they have it,
yet it is unto them as if it were shut up in death; like as an iron that is red
hot; so long as the fire pierces it, its fire: and when the fire goes out,
its a dark iron: the like is to be understood concerning the Spirits.

21. So likewise the Angels are a nothing in the darkness; they are verily in
it: but they neither see nor feel it: that which is a pain to the Devils,
that same is a joy to the Angels in their Source: and so, what is pleasing,
and delightful to the Devils, that the Angels cannot abide: there is a great
Gulf between them; that is, a whole birth.

22. For what else is able to sever the light from the darkness, save only a
birth of Sight, or light: the light dwells in the darkness and the
darkness comprehends it not, John 1. As the external Sunshine dwells
and shines in the darkness of this world; and the darkness comprehends it
not: but when the light of the Sun withdraws, then the darkness is manifest:
Here is no other Gulf between them, save only a birth.

23. Thus we are likewise to conceive of the Eternal light of God, and the
Eternal darkness of Gods Anger: there is but one only ground of All; and
that is the Manifested God: but it is severed into sundry Principles and
properties: for the Scripture says, that the holy, is unto God a good Savor
to life, understand to the holy divine life: viz. in the Power of the light,
and the wicked is unto God a good savor to death: that is in his wrath: viz.
in the Essence Source, and Dominion of the dark world.

24. For the God of the holy world, and the God of the dark world, are not two
Gods: there is but one only God: he himself is the whole Being* he is In his
wrath, Plagues* and Hell Torment.
Evil and Good, heaven and hell, light* and darkness, Eternity and time,
Beginning and End: where his love is hid in any Being Essence or Substance.
thing, there his Anger is manifest: in many a thing Love and Anger are in
equal measure and weight; as is to be understood in this outward worlds
Essence.

25. But now he is only called a God according to his light in his Love, and
not according to the darkness, also not according to this Outward world:
Albeit he himself be ALL, yet we must consider the Degrees; how one thing
mutually proceeds from another: for I can neither say of heaven, nor of
darkness, or of this outward world; that they are God: none of them are God:
but the expressed and formed Word of God; a Mirror of the Spirit which is
called God: wherewith the Spirit manifests it self: and plays in its Lubet
to its self with this manifestation as with its own Essence, which it has
made: and yet the Essence is not sundred from the Spirit of God: and yet also
the Essence comprehends not the Deity.

26. As body and Soul are one; and yet the one is not the other; or as the fire
and the water: or the air and the earth are from one Original, and yet they
are particularly distinct; but yet they are mutually bound to each other: and
the one were a nothing without the other: and thus we are to conceive and
consider likewise of the Divine Essence; and also of the divine Power.

27. The Power in the light is Gods Love-fire; and the Power in the darkness
is the fire of Gods anger: and yet it is but one only fire: but divided into
two Principles, that the one might be manifest in the other: for the flame of
anger is the manifestation of the great Love: and in the darkness the light is
made known, else it were not manifest to it self.

28. Thus we are to understand; that the evil, and good Angels dwell near
one another: and yet there is the greatest immense distance [betweene them]:
for the heaven is in hell; and the hell is in heaven: and yet the one is not
manifest to the other: and although the Devil should go many millions of
miles desiring to enter into heaven, and to see it; yet he would be still in
hell, and not see it: also the Angels see not the darkness, for their Sight
is mere light of divine Power; and the Devils sight is mere darkness of
Gods Anger: the like is also to be understood of the Saints, and again of the
wicked: Therefore in that we in Adam have lost the Divine Sight; in which Adam
saw by the divine Power: Christ says: you must be borne anew; else you cannot
see the Kingdom of God.

29. In the fire-Spirit we are to understand the angelical Creation: where the
will of the Abyss introduces it self into Bysse: and manifests the
Eternal Speaking Word or life with the fiery birth; viz. with the first
Principle, where the spiritual Dominion is manifest by the fire-birth: In this
Spiritual fire, all Angels do take their Original; viz. out of the forms
to the fire-Source; for no creature can be created out of the fire: for it is
no Essence; but out of the properties to the fire a Creature may be apprehended
in the desire viz. in the verbum Fiat; and introduced into a creaturall form
and Property.

30. And therefore there are many, and diverse sorts of Angels: also in many
distinct Offices: and as there are three forms to the fire-Source; so there
are also three Hierarchies; and therein their Princely Dominions: and likewise
three worlds in one another as one; which make three Principles or Beginnings:
for each Property of the Eternal Nature has its Degrees; for they do
explicate and mutually unfold themselves in the fire-blaze, and out of those
degrees, the different distinction of Spirits, is created.

31. And we are to understand nothing else by the Creation of the Angels and
of all other Spirits; but that the Abyssall God has introduced himself into
his manifested Properties and out of those Properties into living Creatures: by
which he possesses the Degrees, and therewith plays in the properties: they
are his Strings in the All-Essentiall Speaking: and are all of them tuned for
the Great Harmony of his Eternal Speaking Word: so that in all degrees and
Properties the voice of the unsearchable God is manifest and made known: they
are all created for the Praise of God.

32. For, All whatsoever has life, lives in the Speaking Word: the Angels in
the Eternal Speaking; and the Temporal Spirits in the re-expression or
Ecchoing forth of the Formings of Time, out of the Sound, or breath of time;
and the Angels out of the Sound of Eternity: viz. out of the voice of the
manifested word of God.

33. And therefore they bear the names of the several degrees in the
manifested voice of God; and one degree is more holy in the Power then another;
Therefore the Angels also in their Quires are differenced in the Power of the
Divine Might: and one has a more holy Function to discharge then another; an
example whereof we have by the Priests in the old Testament in their
Ordinances; which were instituted after an angelical manner.

34. Albeit earthly; yet there was even such an angelical understanding and
meaning coucht therein; which God did represent upon Jesus which was to come
into the humane Property; and so alluded with Israel in the Type, at the
Eternal which was to come, which, Jesus out of Jehova did restore, and
introduce into the humane, property; which the Earthly Reason has neither
apprehended or understood: but seeing the time is Manifest or come about.
borne, and the beginning has again found the End, it shall be manifest, for
a witness unto all Nations: shows the Spirit of Wonders.

CHAP. IX. Of the Fall of Lucifer with his Legions.
1. ALbeit selfe-Reason might here cavil at us, and say, we were not by, when
this was done: yet we say that we in a Magical manner according to the Right
of Eternity, were really there, and saw this: but not I, who am I, have seen
it; for I was not as yet a Creature; but we have seen it in the Essence of the
Soul which God breathed into Adam.

2. Now then, if God dwells in this same Essence; and has from all Eternity
dwelt therein: and manifests himself in his own mirror; and looks back
through the Essence of the Soul, into the beginning of all Beeings; what then
has Reason to do, to taunt, and cavil at me about that, wherein it self is
blind? I must warn Reason; that it would once behold it self in the
Looking-glass of the understanding, and consider what it self is; and leave
off from the Building of mad Babel; it will be time.

3. The Fall of Lucifer came not to pass from Gods purpose or Appointment;
indeed it was known in the wrath of God, according to the property of the dark
world, how it could or would come to pass; but in Gods holiness, viz. in the
light, there was no such desire manifest in any such property; otherwise the
holy God must have a devilish or hellish wrathful desire in his Love; which
is nothing so; but in the Center of the Eternal nature, viz. in the forms to
fire, there is verily such a property, in the Dark impression.

4. Every good Angel has the Center in him; and is manifest in a creaturall
Property in one degree or other in the Center; what property is Chiefest, most
predominant. or manifest.
greatest in the Creature, according to that, it has its office, and Dominion.

5. Yet the Angels, which were created out of the degrees of the Center, were
created for and to the light; the light was manifest in All; and they had Free
will from the Manifested will of Gods will.

6. Lucifer had still been an Angel, if his own will had not introduced him
into the fires-Might, desiring to domineere in the strong fiery-Might, above
and in all things as an absolute sole God in darkness and light; had he but
continued in the Harmony wherein God had created him; [what would have cast him
out of the light?]

7. Now Reason says, he could not: then tell me who compelled him? was he not
I preethee the most glorious Prince in heaven: had he introduced his will into
the Divine Meekness, then he could [have been able to stand;] but if he In his
own will, which was from the Eternal will, was both the possibility and
Ability.
would not then he could not; for his own desire went into the Center: he
would himself be God; He entered with his will into Self Selfe-hood, or
Selfenesse.
; and in Self is the Center of Nature; viz. those properties wherein his will
would be Lord and Master, in the house.

8. But God created him for his Harmony, to play with his Love-Spirit in him,
as upon the musical Instrument of his manifested and formed Word: and this the
self-will would not.

9. Now says reason; how came it, that he would not? did not he know the
Judgment of God and the fall? yea, he knew it well enough: but he had no
Sensible Perceivance of the fall; but only as a bare Or Noticnall Theory, in
the Mystery of his mind.
knowledge; the fiery Lubet which was potent in him: did egg him on; for it
would feign be manifest in the Essence of the wrath; viz. in the root of fire:
the darkness also eagerly desired to be creaturall, which drew Lucifer, its
crafts-Master, in the great Potency of fire; indeed it drew him not Outwardly.
from without; but in the Property and will of his own fiery and dark
Essence: the Original of the Fall was within the Creature and not without the
Creature: and so it was in Adam also: Self-will was the beginning of Pride.

10. Thou ask; what was that which did cause it in himself? Answer: his
great beauty, and glory; because the will beheld what it self was in the fiery
mirror: this Lustrous glance did move and affect him so that he did eagerly
reach after the Properties of the Center; which forthwith began effectually to
work: for the Astringent Austere Desire, viz. the first form or property, did
impresse it self, and awakened the compunction, and the Anxious desire: thus
this beautiful Star did overshadow its light; and made its Essence wholly
Astringent, rigorous, and harsh, and its meekness and true Angelical
Property, was turned into an Essence wholly Austere, harsh, rigorous and Dark:
and then this bright Morning Star was undone; and as he did, so did his
Legions: and this was his fall.

11. He should have been wholly resigned in the holy Power of God; and hear
what the Lord would speak and play by his own Spirit in him; this, Self-will
would not do; and therefore he must now play in the dark: yea his will is yet
opposite; albeit now after the fall he cannot will [viz. to resign to the
divine will of the light] for his meekness, whence the Love-will arises, is
shut up and Entered again into a Nothing: viz. it is retired into its own
Original.

12. Now the Creature still remains, but wholly out of the Center viz. out of
the Eternal Nature: the free Lubet of Gods wisdom is departed from him; that
is, it has hid it self in it self; and lets the wrathful fire-will,
stand: as happened to Adam also, when he imagined after Evil and good, then the
free Lubet of the holy worlds-Essence did disappeare in his Essence.

13. This was the very death, of which God told him, that if he did eat of the
tree of the knowledge of good, and evil; he should dye the very same day: thus
it was in Lucifer, he dyed to the holy divine world, and arose to the wrathful
world of Gods Anger.

14. Thou say; wherefore did not God uphold him, and draw him from the evil
inclination? I preethee tell me wherewith? should he have poured in more Love
and meekness into this fire-Source? then had his Stately light been more
manifest in him; and the Looking-glass of his own knowledge, had been the
greater, and his own fiery Self-will the Stronger: I pray was not his High
light, and his own-selfe-knowledge, the Cause of his fall.

15. Should he then have drawn him with Rebuke? was it not his purpose
aforehand to rule the magical ground as an Arstist: his Aim and endeavor was
for the Art, that he would play with the Center of the Transmutation of the
Properties; and would be and do, all whatsoever he alone pleased; had he not
known this, he had still remained an Angel in humility.

16. Therefore the children of darkness, and the children of this world also,
are wiser then the children of the light as the Scripture says. Thou ask,
why? they have the Magical root of the Original of Essences manifest in
them: and this was even the desire of Adam: however the Devil persuaded them
that they should be wiser; their eyes should be opened, and they should be as
God himself.

17. This folly caused King Lucifer to aspire, desiring to be an Artist, and
absolute Lord, like the Creator. The water of meekness had been good for his
fire will; but he would none of that: hence it is, that the children of God
must be the most plain, sincere and Simple; as Esaias prophesied of Christ;
who is so simple as my servant the righteous one who turns many unto
righteousness: viz. Or to.
upon the way of humility.

18. All Angels live in humility and are resigned to the Spirit of God, and
are in the Eternal Speaking Word of God as a well-tuned pure-Sounding
Instrument, in the harmony of the Kingdom of heaven; of which the Holy Ghost
is chief Master, and Ruler.

19. But the Devil has forged to himself a strange fooles-play; where he can
act his gulleries with his sundry Enterludes, and disguizments; and demean
himself like an Apish fool; and transform himself into monstrous strange,
and hideous shapes and figures: and mock at the Image of Angelical Simplicity,
and Obedience; and this was his aim and intent, for which he departed from the
harmony of the Angelical Quires: for the Scripture says, tthat he was a
murderer and liar from the beginning; his juggling feats, and fictions, are
mere strange figures and lies; which God never formed in him; but he brings
them to forms and shapes in himself: and being that they are contrary to his
Creation, they are lies and abominations.

20. He was an Angel, and has belyed his Angelical form and obedience; and
is entered into the Abomination of fictions, lies, and mockeries: he has
awakened the envious hateful forms and properties of the dark world, in his
Center, whence wrath and iniquity springs: he sat in heavenly Pomp and
glory; and introduced his hateful desire, and malicious will, into the
Essence, viz. into the water-Source; and cast forth his streams of Enmity and
malignity.

21. His Properties were as the venomous stings of Serpents, which he put forth
out of himself: when the Love of God was withdrawn from him, he figured his
Image, according to the Property of the wrathful forms; (wherein there are
also evil Beasts, and worms in the Serpentine shape,) and infected, or
awakened the Sal-niter of the Center of nature in the Expressed Essence, in the
Generation of the Eternal nature; whence the Combat arose, that the Great
Prince Michael fought with him, and would no longer endure him in Heaven among
the fellowship of the holy Angels.

22. For which Cause the will of the Abyss: viz. of the Eternal Father moved
it self, and swallowed him down, as a treacherous perjured wretch, into the
Gulf and Sinck of Eternal darkness: viz. into an other Principle: the Heaven
spewed him out of it self; he fell into the darkness as lightning, and he
lost the mansion of God in the Kingdom of Heaven, in the holy Power; and all
his servants with him: There he has the Mother for his enchanting delusions;
there he may play them juggling feats, and Antic tricks.

23. Moreover we are to know, that he had his Royal Seat in the Place of this
world: therefore Christ calls him a Prince of this world: viz. in the
Kingdom of darkness in the wrath in the place of this world.

24. His Kingly Throne is taken from him; and another has possession of it in
the heavenly worlds Property, in the place of this world: he shall not obtain
it again.

25. Also (at the instant of the Creation of the Stars and four Elements)
another King was established over him, in this place in the Elements; which
albeit we could mention; yet at present it remains in Silence by reason of
the false Magic; also by reason of other Superstitions and Idolatries we will
not speak any thing of it here: and yet hint enough unto our School-fellowes.

CHAP. X. Of the Creation of Heaven and the Outward World.
1. IT seems strange, and wonderful to Reason, to consider how God has
Created the Stars, and four Elements; especially when it does contemplate, and
consider of the Earth with its hard Stones, and very rough indigested harsh,
substance; and sees, that there are great stones rocks and cliffes created,
which are in part useless, and very hindersome, to the employment of the
Creatures in this world: then it thinks, whence may this Compaction arise in so
many forms, and properties: for there are diverse sorts of stones, diverse
mettalls, and diverse kinds of Earth whence manifold herbs and Trees do grow.

2. Now when it does thus muse and contemplate, it finds nothing, save only
that it does acknowledge, that there must be an hidden Power and Might, which
is Abyssall, and unsearchable; which has Created all things so; and there it
sticks; and runs to and fro in the Creation, as a bird that flies up and down
in the air; and looks upon all things, as an Ox upon a new door of his
Stall, and never so much as considers what it self is; and seldom reaches so
far as to know, that man is an Image extracted out of this whole Being: it
runs up and down as a Beast void of understanding: which desires only to
eat and procreate; and when it comes to its highest degree as to search out and
learn Something; then it searches in the outward fiction, and artifice of the
Stars; or else in some carved work of outward nature: it will by no means
simply and sincerely learn to know its Creator; and when it comes to pass
that one attaineth so far, as to teach the knowledge of him; yet then it
calls him a fool, and fantastic; and forbids him the precious
understanding of God, and imputes it to him for sin, and revileth him therein.

3. Such mere Animalls we are, since the Fall of Adam; that we do not so much
as once consider that we were created in the Image of God; and endued with the
right natural and genuine understanding, both of the Eternal, and Temporal
nature; so as to mind and bethink our selves by Great Earnestness, to
re-obtaine that which we have lost: whereas we have yet that very first soul,
wherein the true understanding lies: if we did but seriously labor to have
that light which we have lost, to shine again in us; which yet is offered unto
us out of Grace.

4. Therefore there will be no excuse at the great day of the Lord, when God
shall judge the Secret and hidden things of mankind, because we would not
learn to know him, and obey his voice; which daily has knocked amongst us,
and in us; and resign up our selves unto him; that so our understanding might
be opened: and a very Severe Sentence shall he receive who will undertake to be
called Master* and Sir.
Rabbi; and yet neither knows the way of God, or walks therein, and that
which is yet more heinous Or hinders.
forbids those that desire to know, and walk therein.

5. The Creation of the outward world, is a manifestation of the inward
Spiritual Mystery: viz. of the Center of the Eternal Nature, with the holy
Element: and was brought forth by the Eternal Speaking Word through the motion
of the inward world as a Spiration; which Eternal Speaking Word has expressed
the Essence out of the inward Spiritual world; and yet there was no such
Essence in the Speaking, but was only as a breath or vaprous exhalation in
reference to the internal, breathed forth, both from the property of the dark
world, and also of the light world: and therefore the outward Essence of this
world is good and Evil.

6. And we are with very entire and punctual exactness to consider of this
Motion of the Eternal Mystery of the Spiritual world. 1. How it came to pass
that such a wrathful rough gross and very Compunctive Essence and Dominion,
was brought forth and made manifest, as we see in the outward forms of nature,
as well in the moving things, as in the stones and Earth. 2. Whence such a
wrath did arise, which has compacted and introduced the Powers of the
Properties into such a harsh nature, [or rude quality] as we see in the earth
and stones.

7. For we are not to think, that there is the like in Heaven, viz. in the
Spiritual world; in the Spiritual world there are only the properties of
Possibility; but not at all manifest in such a harsh property; but are as it
were swallowed up; as the light swalloweth up the darkness, and yet the
darkness does really dwell in the light, but not apprehended.

8. Now we are yet to search out, how the desire of the darkness became
manifest in the Power of the light; that they both came mutually into the
Compaction, or Coagulation: and yet it affords us a far greater and more
profound consideration; that when man could not stand in the Spiritual Mystery
of the Paradisicall, property, [and estate] that God cursed this Compaction,
viz. the Earth; and appointed an Earnest judgment to sever the good in this
Compaction again from the Evil: so that the good must thus stand in the Curse,
that is, in death; he that does here see nothing is indeed blind; why would
God curse his good Essence; if something were not come into it, which was
opposite to the Good; or is God at odds with himself, as reason would be ready
to fancy: for it is written in Moses; that God looked upon all that he had
made, and behold it was very good.

9. Now Man for whose sake the earth was accursed; had not introduced any thing
into the earth, whereby it was now made so Evil, as to cause God to curse it,
save only the false and faithless Imagination of his desire to eat of the
evil and good: so as to awaken the vanity; viz. the Center of nature in him,
and to know Evil and Good* from which desire the hunger entered into the earth;
whence the outward body was extracted as a Mass; which set the hunger of its
desire again upon its mother; and araised the root of vanity out of the dark
Impression of the Center of nature, whence the Tree of Temptation viz. Evil
and good, grew manifest to him; and when he did eat thereof the Earth was
accursed for his sake.

10. Now if man by his Powerful Desire, did awaken the wrath in the Earth;
what might then Lucifer be able to do, who was likewise an enthroned Prince,
and moreover had many Legions? Lucifer had the will of the Strong Might and
Power of the Center of all Beeings in himself, as well as Adam, Adam was only
one Creature, but Lucifer was a King, and had a Kingdom in possession: viz. an
Hierarchy, in the Spiritual world, viz. in the heavenly Sal-niter in the
Generation of the Manifested Word: he was an enthroned Prince in the manifested
Power of God: therefore Christ calls him a Prince of this world: for he sat
in the Essence, understand in the Spiritual Essence, whence this world was
breathed forth as a Spiration.

11. He it is that by his false desire, which he introduced into the Essence,
did awaken the wrath in the internal; as Adam araised the Curse; he raised the
Center of nature with his dark wrathful Property in the like wrathful
properties: for he had first awakened the wrath of God in himself; and then
this awakened wrath entered into its mother, viz. into the Magical generation;
out of which Lucifer was created to a Creature: whereupon the Generation was
made proud and aspiring contrary to the Right [or law] of Eternity.

12. Also he sat in his Angelical form in the good holy Essence, as to the
Generation of the divine meekness; and therein exalted himself to domineere
in the will of his wrath above the meekness, as an absolute peculiar God
contrary to the Right of Eternity.

13. But when the Speaking Eternal Word in Love and Anger, for his malicious
iniquity sake, did move it self in the Properties; viz. in the Essence wherein
Lucifer sat; to cast this wicked Guest out of his habitation into Eternal
darkness; then the Essence was compacted: for God would not beteem that he
should any longer have these manifested Powers, wherein he was a Prince; but
created them into a Coagulation, and spewed him out of them.

14. And in this Impression, or Conjunction, the Powers, viz. the watery and
oily Properties, were compacted; not that Lucifer did compact, or Create them;
but the Speaking Word of God, which dwelt in the manifested Powers, and
properties: the same took away the disobedient child's Patrimony, and cast him
out as a perjured wretch out of his inheritance into an Eternal Prison, into
the house of darkness, and Anger; wherein he desired to be Master over the
Essence of Gods Love; and rule therein as a jugler, and Inchanter, and mix the
holy with unholy, to act his juggling feats and proud pranks thereby.

15. And we see very clearly with quick-sighted eyes, that it is thus: for
there is nothing in this world so evil, but it has a good in it: the Good
has its rise Originally out of the good or heavenly Property, and the Evil
has its descent from the property of the dark world; for both worlds, viz.
light, and darkness, are in each other as one.

16. And therefore they also went along together into the Compaction or
Coagulation; and that from the Degrees of the Eternal nature: viz. from the
properties to the fire-life; and also from the properties in the oily, and
Spiritual watery lights Essence.

17. For the Metalls are in themselves nothing else but a water and oil; which
are held by the wrathful properties; viz. by the Astringent Austere desire;
that is; by a Saturnine Martial, fiery property; in the Compaction of Sulphur
and Mercury, to be one body: [or congealed bulke] but if I wholly destroy this
body, and severize each into its own property; then I clearly find therein the
first Creation.

I. Saturnus: Sal.
18. AS first according to the Property of the dark world; according to the
Astringent Desire of the Fiat: viz. of the first form to nature, I find a
hardness and coldness; and further according to this Astringent Property, a
deadly banefull stinking water, from the Astringent Impression: and thirdly in
this stinking water, a dead Earth; and fourthly a sharpness like to Salt; from
the native right and quality of the Astringency: this is now the Coagulated
Essence of the first form of nature, according to the dark world; and it is
the Stony substance (understand the grosseness of the Stones) and of all
metalls, so likewise of the Earth, wherein the mortal part (or the
close-binding death) is understood.

II. Mercurius.
19. SEcondly I find according to the Second form and property of the dark
nature and worlds Essence; in the Compaction of the Metalls and Stones, a
bitter Compunctive, raging Essence; viz. a Poison; which makes a strong harsh
noisome taste in the Earth and Stinking water: and it is the cause of growth:
viz. the stirring life: its Property is called Mercurius; and in the first
Form according to the Astringency its called Sal.

III. Sulphur.
20. THirdly I find the third Property: viz. the Anguish; which is the
Sulphrous Source in which consists the various dividing of the Properties;
viz. of the Essence.

IV. Sal-niter.
21. FOurthly I find the fire, or heat, which does awaken the Salniter in the
Sulphrous Source, which Severizeth the Compaction; and that is the Flagrat;
this is the Original Raiser of the Salniter out of the brimstony, watery, and
Earthly Property: for it is the awaker of death: viz. in the mortal Property:
and the first Original of the life in the fire: and even to the fire the
property of the dark world reaches, and no further.

V. Oil.
22. Fifthly we find in the Compaction of the Metalls and Stones, an Oil which
is Sweeter then any Sugar can be; so far as it may be separated from the other
Properties: it is the first heavenly holy Essence: which has taken its
Original from the free Lubet: it is pure, and transparent; but if the
fire-Source be severed from it (albeit it is impossible wholly to Separate it,
for the band of the great Triumphant joy consists therein) then it is whiter
then any thing can be in nature: but by reason of the fire it continues of a Or
Crimson purple-red.
Rosie-red; which the light changes into yellow according to the mixture of
red and white; by reason of the earthly property, and predominant influence of
the Sun.

23. But if the Artist can unloose it, and free it from the fire of the wrath
and other properties; then he has the Pearl of the whole world, understand
the Tincture: for Virgin Venus has her Cabinet of treasure lying there: it is
the Virgin with her fair Attire: [or Crown of Pearl.]

24. O thou earthly man had thou it yet! here Lucifer and Adam have
negligently lost it! O man! did but thou know what lay here, how would
thou seek after it? but it belongs only unto those, whom God has chosen
thereto: O precious Pearl, how sweet art thou in the new birth: how fair, and
surpassing excellent is thy Luster.

VI. The living Mercury; Sound.
25. Sixthly we find in this Oily Property a Sovereign Power from the Original
of the manifested Powerful Divine Word, which dwells in the heavenly
property, in which Power, the Sound or tone of metalls is distinguished; and
therein their growth consists: for here it is the holy Mercurius: that which
in the Second form of nature in the darkness is Compunctive, harsh, rigid,
and a Poison; that is here in the free Lubets property, (when the fire in the
Salnitrall Flagrat has divided Love and Anger) a pleasant merry Mercury,
wherein the joyfullnesse of the Creature consists.

26. And here ye Philosophers lies the effectual virtue and Powerful
operation of your Noble Stone, here it is called Tincture: this operation can
Tincture the disappeared water in Luna: for here your Jupiter is a Prince: and
Sol a King; and Virgin Venus the Kings sweetest Spouse; but Mars must first lay
down his Scepter: also the Devil must first go into Hell; for Christ must
bind him, and Tincture Simple Luna which he has defiled, with the Oil of his
heavenly blood: that the Anger may be changed into joy: thus the Artists Art is
borne: understood here, by the children of the Mystery.

[ VII. Essence, Body.]
27. SEventhly we find in the Separation of the Compaction of the Metalls, a
white cristalline water, that is; the heavenly water: viz. the water above the
Firmament of heaven: which is severed from the oil, as a body of the Oily
Property: it gives a white chrystalline Luster in the Metalls; and Venus with
her Property makes it wholly white; and that is Silver: and Venus in Sol, Gold;
and Mars in Venus, Copper; and again Venus in Mars, Iron; Jupiter in Venus,
Tin; Saturn in Venus, lead: Mercurius in Venus, Quicksilver; and without
Venus there is no metal, neither fined, nor Mineral.

28. Thus understand by Venus, heavenly Essentiality, which consists in an
oil and Crystalline water, which gives body unto all metalls; the spiritual
body; its own peculiar Essence, without the influences of the other
properties, is the great Meekness, and Sweetness: its real Peculiar Essence
is a sweet Pure water; but the Power of the Manifested Word does separate the
holiest through the fire into an Oil; for in the Oil the fire gives a shine
and Luster: when the fire tastes the water in it self; then out of the Taste
it gives an Oil: thus the Oil is Spiritual, and the water corporeal: the
Oil is a Text Corpus.
body of the Power; and the water a body of the Properties, which are living in
the oil; and do make or use the water for a Mansion: in the water the
Elementall life consists; and in the oil the Or life of the Spirit.
Spiritual life; and in the Power of oil the divine life, viz. the life of
the expressed word, as a manifestation of the Deity.

29. Now we see here, how in the Compaction of the Verbum Fiat, the holy
Entered along with the unholy into a Coagulation; for in all things there is a
deadly and also a living water: a mortal poysonfull virtue, and a good vital
virtue: a gross, and a Subtle Power; an evil and a good quality: all which,
is according to the nature of Gods Love and Anger.

30. the Grossness of the Stones, Metalls, and Earth proceed from the
property of the dark world, all which, are in a Mortal [property] understand
the Substance and not the Spirit: the Spirit of the Grossness is in the
poysonfull life, in which, Lucifer is a Prince of this World.

31. But the heavenly part holds the grossness and poysonfull Source captive;
so that the Devil is the poorest Creature in the Essence of this world; and
has nothing in this world for his own possession, save what he can cheat from
the living Creatures which have an Eternal being; that they enter with the
desire into the wrath of the Eternal; viz. consent unto his juggling
Incantations.

32. If we would rightly consider the Creation; then we need no more then a
divine light, and Contemplation: it is very easy unto the illuminated mind,
and may very well be searched out: let a man but consider the degrees of nature
and he sees it very clearly in the Sun Stars, and Elements: the Stars are
nothing else but a crystalline water-spirit; yet not a material water, but
Powers of the Salnitrall Flagrat in the fire.

33. For their Orb, wherein they stand, is fiery; that is a Salnitrall fire; a
Property of the Matter of the Earth, metalls, trees, herbs and the three
Elements, fire air and water; what the Superior is, that is also the
inferior; and that which I find in the Compaction of the Earth, that is
likewise in the Or Constellation.
Astrum; and they belong both together as body and Soul.

34. The Or Constellation.
Astrum betokens the Spirit; and the Earth the Body; before the Creation, all
was mutually in each other in the Eternal Generation; but in no Coagulation,
or Creature; but as a Powerful wrestling Love-play without any such Material
Substance.

35. But it was enkindled in the Motion of the word, viz. the Verbum Fiat: and
therewith the inflammation in the Sal-nitrall Flagrat, each Property did divide
it self in it self; and was amassed by the awakened Astringent impression (
viz. the first form of Nature, which is called the Fiat) and so each became
Coagulated in its Property; the Subtle in its Property, and the gross in its
Property; all according to the Degrees; as the Eternal Generation of Nature
derives it self from the unity into an infinite multiplicity.

36. Good, and Evil is manifest in the Or Constellation.
Astrum: for, the wrathful fiery Power of the Eternal nature, so also, the
power of the holy Spiritual world, is manifest in the Stars, as an essential
Spiration: and therefore there are many obscure Stars all which, we see not, and
many light Stars, which we see.

37. We have a likeness of this in the matter of the Earrh, which is so
manifold, whence diverse sorts of fruit grow, viz. according to the Properties
of the Superior Spears: for so is the Earth likewise; (being the grossest
Substance) where the mortal water is Coagulated.

38. The Earth was Coagulated in the Seventh form of Nature; viz. in the
Essence; for it is that same Essence which the other six Properties do make in
their desire: it chiefly consists in seven Properties, as is above mentioned;
but the unfoldment or various explication of the Properties, is effected in the
Salnitrall fire, where each Property does again explicate it self into seven;
where the Infiniteness and great Or Potency.
possibility arises, that of one thing, another can be made, which it was not,
in the beginning.

39. The Being of all Beeings is only a Magical birth, [deriving it selfe]
out of one only, into an infiniteness; the one is God, the infinite is time
and Eternity, and a manifestation of the One; where each thing may be reduced
out of one into many, and again out of many into one.

40. The Fire is the chief workmaster thereunto, which puts forth from a
small Power a little Sprout out of the earth, and displayeth it into a great
Tree with many boughs, branches, and fruits; and does again consume it, and
reduces it again to one thing: viz. to ashes and Earth, whence it first
proceeded: and so also all things of this world do enter again into the One
whence they came.

41. The Essence of this world may easily be searched out, but the Center or
Point of motion, will remain dark unto reason, unless there be another light
in it: it supposes that it has it in the Or Mathematically describe and
demonstrate it.
Circle, and can measure it; but it has it not in the understanding.

42. When we consider the Hierarchy, and the Kingly Dominion, in all the Three
Principles in the place of this world: so far as the Verbum Fiat reached forth
it self to the Creation of the outward world, with the Stars, and Elements:
then we have the ground of the Centrall fire or radical heat; the Point of
motion, the virtue of the light.
Punctum, and the Royal Throne, of which the whole Creation is but a Member.

43. For the Stars and four Elements, and all whatever is bred and Engendered
out of them, and live therein, does hang, [or appertaine] unto one punctum;
where the divine Power has manifested it self from it self in a form: and
this Punctum stands in three Principles, viz. in three worlds: nothing can
live in this world without this Punctum, it is the only Cause of the life and
motion of all the Powers; and without it all would be in the Or Eternal
Silence.
Stillnesse without motion.

44. For if there were no light; then the Elements would be unmovable: all
would be an Astringent harsh Property, wholly raw and cold: the fire would
remain coucht in the cold: and the water would be only a keen Spirit like to
the property of the Stars: and the air would be hid in the water-Source, in
the Sulphur: and be a still unmoving Essence.

45. We see in very deed; that the light is the only Cause of all Stirring,
Motion and life: for every life desires the power of the light: viz. the
disclosed Punctum: and yet the life is not the Punctum; but the form of
Nature: and if this Punctum did not stand open; then the Kingdom of darkness
would be manifest in the place of this world; in which [place of wrath] Lucifer
is a Prince, and possesses the Princely throne in the wrath of the Eternal
Nature in the place of this world.

46. Therefore oh man consider with thy self, where thou art at home: viz. on
one Viz. As to thy body and outward carcass of clay, thou art a guest for a
while in this outward world, traveling in the vanity of time.
part in the Stars, and four Elements; and on the other Viz. As to thy soul
in its own self and creaturall being, without the divine light, or
re-generation, in the Abyss of Hell.
part in the dark world among the Devils; and as to the third As to thy
divine Image, and Spirit of Love, in the Eternal light.
part in the Divine power in heaven: that Property which is master in thee, its
Servant thou art: pranck and vapor as stately and gloriously in the Suns light
as thou will, have thou not the Eternal [light], yet thy fountain shall be
made manifest to thee.

47. By the two words ( Heaven Himmell and und Earth Erden) we understand the
whole ground of the Creation; for the understanding is coucht in the language
of Nature in those two words: for by the word ( Heaven Himmell) is understood
the Spiration of the Verbum Fiat; which created that Essence (wherein Lucifer
was enthroned) with the Creative word out of it self; that is, out of the
Spiritual holy world, into a time or Beginning: and by the word ( Earth Erde)
is understood the wrath in the Essence; that the Essence was amassed in the
wrath: and reduced out of the Properties of the dark Sulphur, Mercury, and
Salt; viz. out of the powers of the Original of Nature; and introduced into a
Compaction, or Coagulation.

48. This Coagulation is the Syllable (z Er) the other Syllable (de or den, is
the Element: for the Earth is not the Element; but the [Element is] the moving,
viz. the Power, whence it was Coagulated, this is that Element which is
spiritual, and takes its true Original in the fire; where the nature which
is a Senseless life dies in the fire: from which dying, or mortification
then, there proceeds forth a living motion; and from that which is mortified
[in the fire], a dead matter viz. Earth: and a dead water: and also a deadly
fire; and venomous air; which makes a dying Source in the Earthly bodies.

49. When nature was enkindled, the Element did unfold [and display] it self
into Four Properties: which yet in it self is only one: the real Element
dwells in the Essence which is mortified in the fire: otherwise the Earth
could bring forth no fruit: those which now are called the four Elements, are
not Elements; but only Properties of the true Element: The Element is neither
hot nor cold, neither dry, nor moist: it is the motion or life of the inward
heaven, viz. the true angelical life as to the Creature: it is the first
divine manifestation out of the fire, through nature: when the Properties of
the Eternal nature work therein; its called Paradise.

50. By the word Himmel.
( Heaven Himmell) is understood how the water, viz. the Grosnesse in the
mortal part, was Coagulated, and Separated from the holy Crystalline water,
which is Spiritual; where with the material, time began; as an Essence
expressed [or spirated] out of the Spiritual water.

51. The Spiritual water is living, and the Spirated is livelesse, Senseless,
void of understanding, and is dead in reference to the living water, of which
Moses says God has Separated it from the water above the firmament.

52. The Firmament is another Principle viz. another beginning [or inchoation]
of motion: the water above the Firmament is the Spiritual water, in which the
Spirit of God rules and works: for Moses says also, the Spirit of God
moves upon the water: for the Spiritual Element moves in the four Elements;
and in the Spiritual Element the Spirit of God moves on the Spiritual water:
they are mutually in each other.

53. The Heaven wherein God dwells is the holy Element: and the firmament, or
Gulf between God and the four Elements is the death; for the inward heaven
has another birth, (that is, another life) then the external Elementary life
has: indeed they are in one another, but the one does not apprehend the other:
as Tin, and Silver never mix aright together: for each is from another [or
sundry] Principle, albeit they resemble each other; and have very near
Affinity to each other; yet they are as the inward and outward water to one
another; wherein also they are to be understood: for the inward and outward
Venus are Step-Sisters; they come indeed from one father, but they have two
mothers: the one whereof is a Virgin, the other defloured; and therefore they
are Separated till the judgment of God, who will purge away her reproach and
shame, through the fire.

54. Moses writes, that God created the Heaven out of the midst of the waters;
it is very right; the Understand by the word Astrum, the whole Starry Heaven,
with all its powers, properties, Influences, and Constellations, internal and
external.
Astrum is an external water-Spirit, viz. Powers of the outward water: and the
material water is the body wherein the powers work: now the fiery, airy and
also Earthly Source is in the Astrum: the like is also in the material water:
the Superior [ Astrum] is the life and Dominion of the inferior, it
enkindleth the inferior, whereby the inferior does act move and work; the
inferior is the body or wife, of the Superior: indeed the Superior is coucht
in the inferior but as weak, and impotent.

55. And the Superior were likewise as weak and impotent as the inferior, if
it were not enkindled by the light of the Sun: the same is the heart of all
external Powers; and it is the Open Punctum even to the Tenth Number; if we
were not so blind as to contemn all that we see not with our Calves-eyes, it
were right and requisite to reveal it; but seeing God has hidden the Pearl,
and also himself, from the sight of the wicked; therefore we will let it alone,
yet hint enough to our School-fellowes: we will not give our Pearl unto Beasts.

56. Thus we understand what the outward heaven is, namely the Powers or
Conception of the water: the word or Power Fiat, which began with the beginning
of the world is yet still Or in the creating.
a Creating; it yet continually creates the heaven out of the water: and the
Spirit of God still moves upon the water: and the holy water is yet
continually Separated from the water under the firmament.

57. This holy water is that, of which Christ told us, that he would give us it
to drink: that should spring up in Us to a fountain of Eternal life: the
holy heavenly Corporallity does consist therein; it is the body of Christ which
he brought from heaven; and by the same, introduced heavenly Paradisicall
Essentiality, into our dead or decayed body; and quickened ours in his;
understand in the Mark or limit.
Aim of the Covenant in the Essence of Mary; as shall be mentioned hereafter.

58. In this heavenly Essence the Baptism* and the Supper.
Testaments of Christ do consist: and this holy Essence of the heavenly holy
Virginity, with the holy Tincture, has destroyed death, and bruised the head
of the Serpents Might, in the wrath of God; for the Divine power is the highest
life therein.

59. Thus we understand how the holy heaven, wherein God dwells, moves in
the Fiat or the Created [ heaven], and that God is really present in all
places; and inhabiteth all things: but he is comprended of Nothing. He is
manifest in Power in the inward heaven of the holy Essentiality; viz. in the
Element. This holy Element (in the beginning or inchoation of the four
Elements) did Penetrate through the Earth; and sprang [or budded] forth in the
holy Powers Property, and bare fruits, of which man should have eaten in a
heavenly manner: but when it did disappeare in man; the Curse entered into the
Earth; and so Paradise was quasht in the four Elements; and continued retired
in it self in the inward Element; there it stands yet open unto man, if any
will depart from this worlds Essence, and enter into it upon the Path which
Christ has made open.

60. The Punctum of the whole created Earth belonged Ad Centrum Solis, to the
Center of the Sun.
unto the Center of Sol, but not any more at present: he is fallen who was a
King: the Earth is in the Curse, and become a Peculiar Center; whereunto all
whatsoever is engendered in the vanity, in the four Elements, does tend and
fall: all things fall unto the Earth; for the Or Creation.
Fiat is yet in the deep, and Or draws or Concreteth.
creates all earthly Essence together unto the judgment of God for Separation.

61. We mean not, that the Earth came Or only.
wholly from the Place of the Sun; but from the whole Sphere, out of both the
internal Spiritual worlds; but it has another A. B. C. in that the Earth
belongs unto the judgment of God for Separation; even then it shall be
manifest wherefore it is said: it belongs unto the Punctum of Sol.

62. For the worst must be a cause of the best: the Eternal joy consists in
this, that we are delivered from Pain; God has not Eternally rejected his
holy Essence; but only the iniquity, which mixed it self therein: but when
the Crystalline Earth shall Appear; then will be fulfilled, this Saying, it
Appertains to the Punctum of Sol; here we have hinted enough to the
understanding of our school-fellowes; but further we must here be Silent.

CHAP. XI. Of the Mystery of the Creation.
1. THe Reason of the outward man says; whence is it, that God has not
revealed the Creation of the world unto man; that Moses, and the children of
God have written so little thereof, seeing it is the Greatest and most
principal work, whereon the Maine depends.

2. Yes! dear Reason smell into thy own bosom; of what does it Savor:
contemplate thine own Mind; after what does it long; likely, after the
cunning delusions of the Devil: had not he known this ground, very like he
had been yet an Angel; had he not seen the Magical birth in his high light,
then he had not desired to be a selfish Lord and maker in the Essence.

3. Wherefore does God hide his children, which now receive the Spirit of
knowledge with the Cross; and cast them into tribulation, and mire of vanity?
for certain, Therefore, that they might play the Tune of miserere; and
continue in humility; and not sport in this Text, Time.
life with the light of nature; else if they should epsy, and apprehend what
the Divine Magic is: then they might also desire to imitate the Devil, as
Lucifer did, for which cause it is hid from them: and neither Moses, or any
other, dare write clearer thereof, until the beginning of the Creation
beholds the End of the world in it self: and then it must stand open.

4. And therefore let none blame us: for the time is come about: that Moses
puts away his veil from his Eyes, which he hung before his face when he
spoke with Israel: after the Lord had spoken with him: Moses desired to see it:
in that he said, Lord if I have found grace in thy sight: let me see thy face;
but the Lord would not; and said, thou shall see my back part: for none can see
my face.

5. Now the Eye of God was in Moses, and in the Saints, they have seen and
spoken in the Spirit of God, and yet had not the through-vision of the
Spiritual birth in them, save at times only: when God would work wonders; as
by Moses, when he did the wonders in Egypt: then the Divine Magic was open
unto him: in manner and wise as in the Creation.

6. And this was even the fall of Lucifer; that he would be a God of nature;
and live in the transmutation: and this was even the Idolatry of the heathens,
in that they understood the Magical birth they fell from the only God unto
the magical birth of nature, and chose unto themselves Idols out of the
Powers of nature.

7. For which cause the creation has remained so obscure; and God has covered
his children in whom the true light shone, with tribulation; that they have not
been manifest unto themselves, Seeing Adam also according to the same lust, did
imagine to know and prove the Magic, and would be as God; so that God
permitted him, that he defiled his heavenly Image with the vanity of nature;
and made it wholly dark, and Earthly, as Lucifer also did with the Center of
nature; when he of an Angel became a Devil.

8. Therefore I will seriously warn the Reader, that he use the Magic aright:
viz. in true faith and humility toward God: and not meddle with Turba Magna in
a Magical manner: unless it conduces to the honor of God, and Salvation of
mankind.

9 For we can say with truth: that the Verbum Fiat is yet a Creating: albeit it
does not create Stones, and earth; yet it Coagulateth forms and works still
in the same Property: All things are possible to nature; as it was possible for
it in the beginning, to generate stones and Earth, also the Stars, and four
Elements, and did produce them, or work them forth out of one only ground; so
it is, still, unto this day: by the strong Desire (which is the Magical
ground) All things may be effected, if man use nature aright, in its order to
the work.

10. All Essences consist in the Seven Properties: now he that knows the
Essence; he is able by the same Spirit of that Essence, whence it is come to be
an Essence, to change it into another form, and likewise to introduce it into
another Essence; and so make of a Good thing an Evil, and of an Evil thing a
Good.

11. The Transmutation of all things must be effected by Assimulation or
likeness.
Simility: viz. by its own native Propriety: for the Alienate is its Enemy:
like as man must be regenerated again by the divine Essentiality in the
Simility; by the simility in his holiness of the divine Essentiality, which he
lost.

12. And as the false Magus or Magician.
Magist wounds man through Enchantment with the Assimulate, and through the
desire introduces Evil into his Evil viz. into the Assimulate; and as the
upright holy faith or divine desire also enters into the Assimulate, and
forfendeth man, so that the false desire takes no place.

13. Thus all things consist in the Assimulate; Every thing may be introduced
into its Assimulate, and if it comes into its Assimulate, it rejoices in its
Property be it Good or Evil, and begins effectually to work: as is to be
seen both in Good and Evil.

14. As for example: let a man take down a little poison: it will presently
receive with great desire the poison in the body, which before rested; and
therein strengthen it self, and begin to work powerfully; and corrupt and
destroy the Contrary: viz. the Good: and that now which the Evil is able to
do in its property; that likewise the Good can do in its property: when it is
freed from the wrath, it may also introduce its Assimulate into the real true
joy.

15. The Essence of this world consists in Evil and good: and the one cannot
be without the other: but this is the greatest iniquity of this world; that the
Evil overpowreth the Good; that the Anger is stronger therein then the Love;
and this by reason of the Sin of the devil, and men; who have disturbed nature
by the false desire, that it mightily and effectually works in the wrath as a
poison in the Body.

16. Otherwise if nature in its forms did stand in the Property in Equal
weight, and in equal Concord, and Harmony, then one property were not manifest
above the other: heat and cold would be equally poyzed in the operation, and
qualification: and then Paradise would be still upon the Earth: and though it
were not without man; yet it would be in man: if his properties were in equal
weight [number and measure, if they did yet stand in the Temperature] then he
were incorruptible and immortal.

17. This is the Death, and misery of man and all creatures that the Properties
are divided, and each aspiring in it self, and powerfully working, and acting
in its own will: whence sickness and pain arises: and all this is hence
arisen; when the one Element did manifest and put forth it self into four
properties: then each property desired the Assimulate viz. an Essence out of
and according to its self; which the Astringent Fiat did impresse, and
Coagulate; so that Earth and Stones were produced in the properties.

18. But now we are to consider of the greatest Mystery of the outward world
between the Elements and the Astrum: the Elementall Spirit is severized from
the Astrall Spirit, and yet not parted asunder, they dwell in each other as
body and Soul: but the one is not the other: the Astrall Spirit make thits
bodies as well as the Elementall, and that in all Creatures; in Animalls, and
Vegetables.

19. All things of this world have a twofold body viz. an Elementall from the
fire air water and Earth; and a Spiritual body from the Astrum: and likewise
a twofold Spirit: viz. one Astrall the other Elementall.

20. Man only (among all the Earthly Creatures) has a threefold body, and
Spirit: for he has also the internal Spiritual world in him; which is
likewise twofold: viz. light, and darkness; and also corporally, and
Spiritually: this Spirit is the Soul; but this body is from the water of the
holy Element, which dyed in Adam, that is, disappeared as to his life, when the
divine Power departed from him, and would not dwell in the awaked vanity.

21. Which holy body must be regenerated, if his Spirit will see God; otherwise
he cannot see him; except he be again borne anew of the water of the holy
Element in the Spirit of God (who has manifested himself in Christ with this
same water-Source: that his disappeared body may be made alive in the holy
water and Spirit: else he has no sense, nor sight in the holy life of God.

22. This twofold outward body is now punctually to be pondered, and considered
of, if we would understand nature: and without this understanding let none call
himself a master [or Learned] for in these (bodies) the dominion of all
external creatures, and Essences is couched: they oftentimes are contrary one
unto another; whence Sickness, Corruption, and death arises in the body; that
one severeth from the other.

23. The Sydereall body is the highest excepting the divine in man: the
Elementall body is only its Servant or dwelling house, as the four Elements
are only a body or habitation of the dominion of the Stars.

24. The Elementall Spirit, and body; is inanimate and void of understanding:
it has only Lust and desire in it: vegetation is its right life: for the air
has no understanding without the Astrum; the Astrum gives the distinct
understanding of the knowledge of all Essences in the Elements.

25. But the inward light, and power of the light, gives in man the right
divine understanding; but there is no right divine apprehension in the
Sydereall Spirit: for the Astrum has another Principle: the Sydereall body
dwells in the Elementall; as the light-world in the darkness: it is the true
rational life of all Creatures.

26. The whole Astrum is nothing else but the external expressed Word in the
Sound: it is the instrument whereby the holy Eternal Speaking Word Speaks
and forms externally: it is as a Great Harmony of unsearchable manifold
Voices and Tunes, of all manner of instruments: which play, and melodize before
the holy God.

27. For they are mere Powers which enter into and mutually embrace each
other, whence arises the Sound in the Essence: and the desire viz. the Fiat
receives this Sound, and makes it Substantial: this Substance is a Spirit of
the Stars: which the Elements receive into them: and Coagulate it in them, and
hatch it, as an Hen her Eggs: whence the true rational life is in the
Elements: and thus also the Sydereall Spirit is hatched, and Coagulated in all
Creatures.

28. For the Male and Female, do mutually cast a Seed into one another; which
is only a Sulphur of the Astrum and four Elements, afterward it is hatched in
the Matrix, and Coagulated to a living Spirit.

29. And when the fire is enkindled in the Seed which is sown in the Matrix:
the Spirit severs it self again from the body, as a Propriate; as the light
from the fire according to the right of the Eternal nature: and two become
manifest in one, viz. a Spiritual body from the Astrum, and a fleshly body
from the four Elements.

30. And this Sydereall Spirit is the Soul of the great world which depends on
Punctum Solis; and receives its light and life from it: as all the Stars do
take light, and power from the Sun; so likewise their Spirit.

31. The Sun is the Center of the Astrum: and the Earth the Center of the four
Elements: they are to one another as spirit, and body: or as man and wife:
albeit the Astrum has another wife, where it hatcheth its Essence, viz. the
Moon, which is the wife of all the Stars; but especilly of the Sun; I mean it
in the Essence of operation.

32. Not that we mean, that the Astrum is wholly arisen from the Punctum of
Sol, in that I call it the Center of the Stars; it is the Center of the Powers:
the Cause that the Powers of the Stars do Act in the Essence: it opens their
Powers, and gives its Power into them; as a heart of the Powers, and they
mutually rejoice in its Essence, that they are moved to act or desire, in its
Essence.

33. And even here lies the great Mystery of the Creation, viz. that the
internal ( viz. God.) has thus manifested himself with his Eternal Speaking
Word (which he is himself) the external is a Type of the internal: God is
not alienate: in him all things live and move, each in its Principle, and
degree.

34. The outward Properties dwell in themselves in the external, viz. in the
expressed Word, and are wholly external: they cannot in their own strength
reach the Powers of the holy world: only the holy world penetrates them: it
dwells also in it self: but in the Punctum of Sol the eighth Number is open:
viz. the Eternal Nature: the Eternal Magical fire: and in the fire the
Eternal Tincture: which is the ninth Number: and in the Tincture the Cross,
where the Deity manifests it self: which is the tenth Number: and Or fr^
beyond this manifestation is the Eternal understanding: viz. the ONE (that is
God JEHOVAH) viz. the ABYSS.

35. Not That God is divided [or a far off] only we speak of his
manifestation: from what Ability and Power the Sun has its shining Luster:
that the same is immutable, so long as time endures; namely from the Luster of
the fiery Tincture of the Eternal Spiritual Magical fire.

36. For its Luster or shining light, has a degree of a more deep Original
then the external world has manifest in it self, this the wise heathen have
observed, and Adored it for God, seeing the True God, who dwells without all
Nature in himself, was not konwn unto them.

CHAP. XII. Of the six days Works of the Creation.
1. THat God has created Heaven and earth, and all things in six days, as
Moses says; is the greatest Mystery, wholly hidden to the external Reason:
there is neither night, Morning or Evening in the Deep above the Moon; but a
Continual Day from the beginning out of the outward world even to the End of
the same.

2. And albeit the Creation was finished in such a time as in the length of six
days: yet the dayes-workes have a far more Subtle [or abstruce] meaning: for
the Seven Properties are also understood therewith; Six whereof belong to the
Active Dominion to good and Evil; and the Seventh (viz. the Essence) is the
rest: wherein the other properties rest, which God has expressed, and made
visible.

3. We have in the Dominion of the Planetick Orb the figure, how the six
properties of the Active life (which rest in the Seventh) have in six days
introduced and manifested themselves out of the inward Spiritual world in an
external visible world of four Elements: for the Planetick Orb has its rise
from the Punctum of Sol: for there was the Royal Place of the Hierarchies; of
which the whole Circle (between the Stars in the internal and external) is a
Member or Corpus.

4. But seeing the Prince of the Hierarchies (when he sat in the Heavenly
Essence in the rest) did fall, and Aspired for the Center of the Eternal
nature; he was cast into the darkness: and God by his motion created him
another Prince out of this Place (but without divine understanding) for a Ruler
of the Essence; and that is the Sun.

5. From this Place proceeded in the Divine Motion the Seven Properties of
nature: (understand the Planets) which govern the Essential Being in Good
and Evil (in which [Essence] Lucifer sat, and whence he was cast) and lost
his Dominion in the Essence; and as the Seven Properties have their Dominion in
the beginning of Each day in the week: even so were the six dayes-workes of
the Creation.

6. For Lucifer forsook the Rest of his Hierarchies, and entered into the
Eternal disquietnesse: now God has created all things of this world in six
days and rested on the Seventh day from the Creation, which is Dies Saturni
vel Sabbathi.
Saturday according to the Scripture, that is, from the day of Rest, understand
from the Eternal day of Rest he has moved himself to the Creation; and in
the first form of nature he began the first day: that is; he has brought it
forth out of the Impression; and moved himself with his Word: this was the most
inward motion according to the Speaking Word of Power.

7. Then began in the expressed Word Sunday, that is the Paradisicall Day,
where the Powers did mutually work in each other in great holiness and glory;
for on Sunday the Enkindled Sulphur, and Salniter of the Earthly Property was
created out of the great deep of the whole Hierarchy, out of the Spiritual
worlds into a Or Lump.
Mass (which is the Terrestrial Globe) and put forth out of the Austere
Property of the first form of Nature.

8. Even then began the first hour of the first day: and the Power of Nature
did mutually rule in great joy in the expressed Word; out of which Power of joy
the Sun was created on the fourth day in the Princely Place: so that this Power
whereout the Sun was created, ruled the first hour of the beginning of the
world; and so it began its Dominion, which continues even unto the End of the
world: and therefore the Sun rules the first hour on Sunday; and the day is
rightly so called.

9. The words of Moses concerning the Creation are exceeding clear; yet
unapprehensive to reason: for he writes thus: In the beginning God created
Heaven and Earth, Genesis 1. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and the Earth was desolate and void: and it was dark upon the deep; and the
Spirit of God moved upon the water, and God said let there be light, and there
was light: and God saw that the light was good: and God Severed the light from
the darkness; and called the light Day; and the Darkness Night: and The
Evening and Morning were the first day.
out of the Evening and morning was the first Day.

10. The whole Understanding is coucht in these words: for the beginning is the
first motion: which came to pass when Prince Michael fought with the Dragon;
when he was spewed out with the Creation of the Earth: for even then the
Enkindled Essence (which with the Enkindling did Coagulate it self into Earth
and stones) was cast out of the internal into the external.

11. And he, viz. the Dragon fell from Heaven (viz. out of the holy world) upon
the wrath of the Earth as lightning: as it is written: I Saw Satan fall from
Heaven as lightning says Christ: moreover it was wholly dark in the deep
above the Earth: and the Austere enkindled wrath was manifest: for Hell was
prepared for him, whereinto he fell viz. into the Great darkness of the first
Principle, wherein he lives.

12. Here now lies the veil before Reason, that it cannot look into the eyes
of Moses for he says: and the Earth was desolate and void: yea Desolate
indeed; had not the Spirit of God moved upon the internal water (which was
amassed with the Fiat in the Heaven) and had not God said, let there be light:
the Earth should have been yet Desolate, and void.

The first Day.
13. WIth the Word, when God said, Let it be light; the Essence of the Ens did
powerfully move it self in the lights Property, not only in the Earth but
also in the whole Deep: Out of which Power or virtue in the lights Property.
whence on the fourth day the Sun was created, that is, enkindled in its Place;
and in this word Germ. Schuff.
Fiat the Earths Mass, and also the very Power which is called heaven, Amassed
it self in the Essence all which before was only a Spirit, a Spiritual
Essence.

14. And with the Speaking, as God spoke; let it be light: the holy Power,
which was amassed in the wrath; moved it self: and became light in the same
Essence, in the Power; and with this coming to be light: the devils might and
strength was wholly withdrawn from him in the Essence, for here the light
shone in the now anew awakened Power, in the darkness; Light.
which the Prince of wrath could not Receive or perceive.
comprehend; it was also of no benefit to him, for it was the light of nature,
which is useless to him.

15. And Moses said: God severed the light from the darkness; which is thus to
be understood; the darkness remained in the wrathful Property, not only in
the Earth but also in the whole Deep: but in the lights Essence the light of
nature did arise [or spring forth] from heaven, viz. from the quintessence,
whence the Astrum was created; which Essence is Every where in the Earth, and
above the Earth.

16. Thus the darkness remained in the wraths Property in the Essence of the
Earth, and also in the whole deep of this world, and the natural [light]
remained in the lights essence, as a working life; through which, the holy
Element did operate, and work; in which Operation, Paradise Sprang.
budded through the Earth, and bear fruit until the Curse of God, and then
the holy bloomings or growth, ceased, and the holy Element remained as an
inward heaven steadfast, retired in it self; and yet it does diffuse its Power
through the light of nature, yet not so powerfully as in the beginning, for the
Curse is the cause of its withdrawing; indeed there is no total departing; but
yet it is nothing so now as before the Sin of the Second created Prince, Adam.

17. Thus in the first motion of the Verbum Fiat, the Heaven (that is, the
Circle, so far as the Verbum Fiat reached it self forth to the Creation) was
Amassed, or enclosed; and the Earth was amassed with the Verbum Fiat, and
created to the Planetick Orb; Thus by the Separation, viz. of the light and
darkness; and by the expelling of Prince Lucifer, we are to understand the
Creation of the first day.

18. Now the first day with the manifested word did convey it self through the
other five dayes-workes even into the day of Rest; where the beginning enters
again into the End; and the End again into the beginning; for the first
motion of the word (where the light of nature has enkindled it self in the
Essence) is the joy of the Creation, or Creature; which did open it self with
the other days through all the Properties of nature; where each Property may
be called a heaven: for it has and brings also its Peculiar operation and
efficacy along in it self into the Understand into the rest of the Properties
or days.
rest, and each day one Property did move and manifest it self; wherein a
Peculiar Sundry work was manifested, and revealed.

Of the Second Day.
19. THe Second day we call Monday, and therefore, because the Moon rules the
first hour of the day: and it is very likely that the ancient Philosophers.
wise men have understood somewhat thereof in the light of nature, which they
have kept Secret and mystical, rather deciphering it by figures then clearly
explaining it: and it is to be seen in the Names of the seven Planets, that
they have for certain understood the same: in that they have given them names
according to the Seven Properties of Nature; which do so wholly agree and
accord, as well with the Creation as Nature, that me thinks they have in part
understood the ground of the Creation aright, seeing the names of the Planets
have their rise and derivation so fully, and punctually out of the language of
Nature: but the reason why it has not been made clear plain, and manifest is
(as before mentioned) because of the false Magic that it might remain hidden
unto the Artists of juggling and Collusion in nature, by reason of the Great
Abuse; wherefore we also shall still let it so remain, and yet hint enough to
the understanding of our school-fellowes.

20. Now of the Second day Moses writes thus: and God said let there be a
firmament between the waters: Verse. 6, 7, 8.
and let it divide between the waters: then God made the firmament; and
divided the water under the firmament from the water above the firmament; and
it was so; and God called the firmament heaven, and out of the Evening and
morning was the Second day.

21. Moses says; that out of the Evening and morning was the Second day; that
is; out of the manifestation of the first, the Second manifestation proceeded
and brake forth; and says further; that on the Second day God created the
firmament of Heaven: and Separated the waters; the water under the firmament
from the water above the firmament; here now lies the hidden veil, wherein
we have hitherto been pointed and directed unto, a heaven Situate a far off
above the Stars without the place of this world: so very blind is Reason as to
God that it understands nothing of him; and does not consider, that the
Scripture says of God: am not I he, which fills all things: and that time
and place cannot divide him: much less is it understood what the water above
the firmament is which they will flatly hold to be a place afar distant, viz.
above the Stars, whither also, we have been shown into heaven.

22. But seeing that God out of Grace does bestow upon us the understanding;
therefore we will set it down for our fellow-schollars who are able to
apprehend it; and yet herein we shall write nothing for the Selfish wiselings
of outward Reason: for they have it already in the eyes of their reason, and
they cannot miss: they can judge all things: what the Spirit of God reveals,
that must be a Heresy unto them, albeit they do not understand it: so that
they remain without, and do not so much as once know God.

23. The Firmament is the Gulf between time and Eternity: but that God
calls it heaven and makes a division of the waters; gives us to understand,
that the heaven is in the world and the world is not in heaven.

24. The water above the firmament is in heaven and the water under the
firmament is the external Material water.

25. Here we must understand the difference between the holy and the outward
water: the water above the firmament is Spiritual in the birth of the holy
Element; and the water under the firmament is mortal, for it is apprehended in
the Dark Impression, the Curse and the Awaked vanity is therein, and yet one
water is not without the other.

26. When I look upon the external water then I must also say, here is also
the water above the firmament in the water under the firmament: but the
firmament is the middle, and the gulf therein between time and Eternity; so
that they are distinct; and I see with the external eyes of this world only
the water under the firmament: but the water above the firmament, is that,
which God has appointed in Christ to the Baptism of Regeneration, after that
the word of the divine Power had moved it self therein.

27. Now the outward water is the instrument of, the inward; and the inward
water is understood [therein]; for the moving Spirit in the word is he which
rules the inward water in the Baptism: dear Christians; let this be spoken
to you: it is the real ground.

28. But that Moses says, God created the firmament, and called it heaven; is
the most intimate Secret, of which the earthly man is not able to understand
any thing: the understanding is barely in the Power of the water above the
firmament, viz. in the Heaven, or (as I might set it down) in the Spirit of
God; if he be awaked in man in the water above the firmament, which disappeared
in Adam, as to his life; that [man] sees through all; otherwise there is no
understanding here; but all is dumb, and dead.

29. The creating of the heaven is understood, first how the Speaking Word has
Conceived or formed.
amassed the manifested Powers of the Spiritual world, wherein it is manifest,
works, and also rules: secondly, it is understood of the manifested Powers
of the external world, which the Spirit has amassed into the Essence of four
Elements, and closed into the external firmament: that the Devil, viz. the
Prince of Anger cannot reach them; by which he would work with the internal
water: so that the Powers of Eternity do work through the Powers of time, as
the Sun illustrates the water, and the water comprehends it not, but feels it
only; or as a fire does through-heat an iron, and the iron remains iron: so
likewise the outward heaven is passive, and the inward works through it, and
draws forth an external fruit out of the outward; whereas yet the inward
heaven lies hidden therein in the Firmament: as God is hidden in the Time.

30. And we are to understand with the Second days work the manifestation of
the internal heavenly and the external heavenly Essence, viz. the
manifestation of the water-Source, understand the Essence of the Seven
Properties, viz. the Corporallity, or the Operate or worke-house.
Laboratory of the other six; wherein the Soul or Spirit of the outward world
works and rules in the external: this Or operation.
working is in the most external, or inferior heaven next the earth, ascribed
unto the Moon, for it is the manifestation of the Lunar Property, not of the
Star, or Planet called the Moon.
Star which was first created into the external on the fourth day to be a
Governor therein, but this same Property [is] in the inanimate outward life,
viz. in the vegetative life: the vegetative life was opened on the third day.

31. And when God had ordained the water into Sundry places upon the Earth,
then he moved the external expressed word in the vegetative life: now Moses
says, God spoke, Let the Earth put forth herbs, and grass yielding Seed,
Verse 11, 12.
and fruitful trees; each bearing fruit according to his kind; and let each
have its seed in it self: and when it came to pass, out of the Evening and
morning was the third day.

Of the third day of the Creation.
32. IN the Original of the Eternal nature, which is an Eternal Original,
the manifestation of the six days works is very clearly to be found; how the
Eternal Word has unfolded them out of the invisible spiritual [Property] and
brought them into the visible: also the form thereof is to be found in the
Planetick Orb, if any has skill to apprehend it.

33. For in the Eternal natures birth there is an Eternal day; whatsoever God
has manifested, and made visible in six Or distinctions.
diversalls, which are called dayes-workes, that stands in the Eternal
nature in six distinct degrees in the Essence, viz. in the Seventh Property, in
which the six degrees of nature work, and yet also do eternally Rest from
working, they are themselves the working, which they give in, to the Seventh,
as into their own Peculiar Rest, wherein their perfection, and manifestation
consists.

34. And we are to understand nothing else by the Creation; save that the
Verbum Fiat has amassed the Spiritual birth, and introduced it into a visible
external dominion, and Essence: for we see it very clearly in the writings of
Moses; albeit we have a glass besides to see: that when God the first day had
created the Gross part into a Lump or Chaos.
mass, that he extracted the fine part out of the same first days work, and
Severed, and amassed the waters, viz. the Spiritual Essence, and produced it
out of the first day, viz. out of the holy Power into a time: that is, out of
the Eternal Day into an inchoative day.

35. Now the third accomplishment of the third days work, is the moving
growing life, in which on the first day the light of nature did shine in the
Essence of the Ens after an external manner: it shone likewise now through the
Second day, viz. through the water and the heaven: and in this shining light
the expressed Word did move it self in the Essence, and wrought effectually;
and even then the power of the expressed Word from the light of the inward
nature did pullulate, and spring forth, through the external nature out of the
heaven through the earth: [and so] now the Potentate who was a King and great
Prince has lost his Domination; for the Essence of the wrath was captivated in
the light of nature and he with it: and so he lies between time and Eternity,
imprisoned in the darkness, until the judgment of God.

36. In the third days work the Sulphurous, Mercuriall, and Saltish life out
of the Center, was opened out of the Anguish in the outward worlds Property;
and yet there is no anguish to be understood until the fire, but only a
senseless forth-driving life, viz. a growth: for the fire-blaze arises out of
the anguish, viz. out of the third form of nature: and this is the Salnitrall
Flagrat, which Severizeth the Powers in the Properties, which was moved in the
third days work, where the Properties opened themselves, and were mutually
unfolded in the Salnitrall Flagrat, each out of it self; which the Impression
did again receive into it self, and made them Corporeal in the water; and
thence arose and proceeded trees, herbs and grass: each Property became Or
putting or budding forth.
excressive in the Salniter, and did manifest it self with fruit: as we see
plainly, how the Property of the dark world did mightily force it self along
in the outward Power: whereupon some herbs and plants are so venomous and
malignant; for the Earth proceeded out of both the inward worlds into a
Compaction.

37. Now Mars on Tuesday has the first hour of the day, in * dominion: which
day is the third in the Creation: and this Salnitrall fire- flagrat is even the
Property of Mars: as he is wrathful and fiery: so is likewise this Property in
the Sulphur: where we then do understand the Salnitrall flagrat for the
poysonfull Mars; which is the Cause of motion and Stirring and the Compunction
in the first Impression in the Eternal nature, viz. in the dark world.

38. In the third days work, God moved the third Property of nature, viz. the
Sulphrous Source, in which the fire Enkindled, and in the fire Flagrat is the
division of the powers; where each Property became manifest in it self: now
when God said, Let the Earth bring forth grass herb, and trees: that is
nothing else, but that when he moved the expressed Word of the Powers in the
properties, the properties found and felt the light of nature in them;
whereupon they became hungry, and were impressed, that is, amassed and
Compacted or Coagulated: now when as the light of nature found it self in a
Perceivance, and the nature did feel it self in the sweet light; thereby
arose in the Coagulation the dominion of joy, viz. the pullulation and growth:
for all growth consists in the light, and water, when the light penetrateth
the Sulphur and water-Source; then Mars springs up for great joy in the
Sulphur.

39. This Opening began on the third day, and continues unto the End of the
world: on the first day the Earth was desolate and void: for the Or Ability.
Possibility to the growth was not yet opened: here the earth was moved and
the Properties opened, and not only the Earth, but the whole deep, in the
Center of the outward nature; the inward nature made it self external and yet
remained also internal.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Creation of the fourth Day.
1. THe fourth day Mercurius has the first hour of the day, who causes the
Sensitive life: here we understand very fully and exactly the ground of the
manifestation of the inward nature into the external: for on the fourth day
the Sun and Stars were created, which are the right Mercuriall life: here the
fires property opened it self in the Sulphrous Source through the water, and
the fifth Essence became manifest through the light of nature, which is a
Mercurius Salnitri, an incentive Mercurius, a quick perceptive Mercurius.

2. In the third form of nature there is a Senseless life in Sulphur and
Mercurius, but in the fourth there is a feeling life: for the Properties are
made painful in the fire: and in the oleous [life] they become meek pleasant
and full of joy: therefore now the motion in the oily is feeling from the
painefullnesse.

3. Here we now understand very fundamentally how the Separation in the fire
of the Eternal nature has manifested it self in the Essence of the outward
world, with form, and shape: for in the Enkindling of the fire in the
Salnitrall Flagrat, two Essences do Severize, viz. one watery from the
Devoration in the fire: where the fire devoureth the rough harsh Source of the
Impression in it self; then out of the Consuming there proceeds a great
Meekness, which is mortified to the fire, and is unsensible, and gives the
water-Source.

4. Secondly the fire-Source does sever it self likewise into its Principle,
viz. the properties to the fire-Source, (which now with the Enkindling of the
fire are full of pain and sense); this fire-Source could not subsist, unless
it did again devour [or take] the water into it self, whereby it does
strengthen it self: whence also the Salnitrall Flagrat arises, where the
wrath is dismayed at the Essence of the waters meekness; whence the feeling,
so also the Luster of the fire arises.

5. For that water which is devoured in the fire is dissolved into a Spiritual
oil, in which the fire shines; and out of the oil proceeds the Air, viz.
the moving Spirit of the fire which is motive in the fire.

6. The Air is nothing else, but the moving life, where the Speaking Word does
diffuse it self in the water-Source through nature, through the powers of
nature, through the fire, in the oil of the nature of the light: it is the
fires life: but it is mortified to the fire, and yet it is made manifest by the
fire; it is the life of nature according to the property of meekness.

7. Thus Or by, or with.
in the enkindling of the fire in the light of the fire, which is the light of
nature, four Properties are to be understood, viz. a fiery, an airy, and an
oily wherein the light is manifest, and a watery; all which, do originally
spring forth out of the first desire to nature; in that the free Lubet
introduces it self into a desire, and nature: and they all display themselves
through the fire into a moving life; and yet there is no intellective life, but
only Properties to the true life: the intellectual life is the Spirated Word
which manifests it self through the properties: these properties are
impressed in the CreaT; that is, in the Verbum Fiat, and brought into an
Essentiality; wherefrom is come a Sulphur Salnitri, that is; a Magical Astrum,
in manner and mode as the Mind of man is; which also has thence its Real
Original.

8. This Salnitrall and Sulphurous property, was brought forth out of the
third days work, viz. out of the fire- flagrat; and thence the fourth motion
is arisen, viz. the Mercuriall, which the Fiat has amassed, and impressed it
into it, and made it visible, which are the Stars; which are nothing else but
properties of the powers of nature* whatsoever narure is in a little Spark in
it self, that the whole Astrum is in its Circle; and what nature is in its
hiddennesse, and Secretnesse, the same the Astrum is, in an open working life:
understand it thus.

9. Each Star has the property of all Stars in it but hidden in nature, and it
is manifest only in one sole Property: else, if the whole nature were manifest
in each thing, then all things, and Essences would be but one thing and
Essence: and therefore God has by his Speaking Word moved the Sulphur Salnitri
according to the properties, that the distinct Severation might be manifest:
and this manifestation is a Mercurius; for the the Eternal Speaking Word,
which is called God, has manifested his voice or will, through nature.

10. Therefore the whole Astrum is a pronounced voice (or breathed tone) of the
Powers, an expressed Word, which does again give forth from it self its
spiration and speaking out of the Properties; it is an Echo out of Gods Love
and Anger; out of the dark and light world.

11. Next the Stars.
After the Astrum are the four Elements, which also have their Original out
of this fountain: which also, have their mutual Spiration [or outbreathing]:
they also speak forth their properties out of themselves, and they are as a
Body of the Stars: for they speak, or breath forth from themselves, a
corporeal Essence; and the Stars do breath forth a Spiritual Essence: and
this twofold Essence rules mutually in the visible world, as body, and Soul.

12. And we give you this rightly to understand, in each Element there lies a
whole Astrum, the fire has a whole Astrum in it, and also the air, wrter, and
earth: but it is not manifest in them: therefore God has enclosed [or
encircled] the Place of this world with a manifest Astrum: that it might
enkindle the other Astrum in the four Elements, that the manifest Astrum might
work in the hidden Mystesterie, viz. in the Astrum of the four Elements, and
procreate wonders; for so a wonderful figure and Property may be produced out
of a thing, which otherwise is impossible for nature to do, in its own
[naked] Self.

13. Also we are to know that there is an Astrum in the divine Magic; which is
the fountain of the Eternal Mind of the Abyss, whence nature, and all
Essences are arisen: likewise there is an Astrum in the manifest heavenly
world, and also an Astrum in the dark hellish world: and these Or
Constellations.
Astrums are but one only Astrum, but they are Severized into distinct degrees
and Principles; that which is in the outward world open and manifest in the
Figure; the same is manifest in Power in the Spiritual world, and not in
forms.

14. And we understand; that the Verbum Fiat on the fourth day moved the fourth
Property of nature, viz. the fifth Essence, and opened it out of the Sulphurous
property out of the fire- flagrat, viz. out of the third Property: and thus an
Astrum became manifest in the Air which are the visible Stars: and an Astrum
in the fire, which is the rational life of all Creatures: and an Astrum in the
water, which is the vegetative life: and an Astrum in the Earth, which is the
wrathful Earthly life.

15. The Fiery, [ viz. Astrum,] gives Soul; and the aerie, Spirit; the watery,
affords the mansion of the soul and the Spirit, viz. blood; wherein the
Tincture of the fire and light dwells; and the Earthly, gives flesh: and
every of the four Astrums, gives a Spirit, and body according to its
Property: only God has thus associated one unto another, that the one might
be manifest in the other, and be jointly together one body: like as all the
four Elements are only one Element but they divide themselves into four
Properties according to the Center of nature.

16. These four Constellations.
Astrums do procreate out of themselves their Officer, viz. the outward
nature, that is, the Soul of the outward world, as a constantly enduring
Mind; wherein lies the Omnipotency, as a manifest great Mystery: in this
Officer God has awakened and raised a King, or as I might set it down by way
of Similitude a nature-God with six Counselors, which are his assistants: that
is, the Sun with the other six Planetick Stars, which were spoken forth out of
the seven Properties out of the place of Sol; and in the Speaking were
introduced into a rouling Sphere according to the Property of the Eternal
Generation in the Center of nature: and this was opened in seven degrees out of
the birth; where the first degree of the motion in the light of nature, (from
the inward Spiritual fire and light world) was the Sun, which receives its
Luster from the Tincture of the inward fire and light world: it stands as an
opened Punctum to the fire-world.

17. And with the Spiration, the sixfold life of the six degrees of the
dayes-workes and forms of the Center, came forth externally and Severized it
self, after the kind and nature of the eternal birth: as first, Venus which
is the water-Source out of the meekness out of the mortification in the fire,
which is a desire of meekness By reason of.
from the fire, for the fire enkindleth the meekness whence is desirous, this
is now the love-desire according to the Spirit, and according to its Essence,
it is water, which water in the metalls affords the noble Corpus Solis.

18. This Venus, being she (as to her own natural right) is mortified to the
fire, is submissive, and gives the holy water; understand as to her own
peculiar Property: Water.
which is holy in the Spirit, and yet in the Essence it is captivated in the
wrath, where it gives the material water according to the deadly property: it
gives body unto all the Seven Metalls, and Essence to all the six Planets;
which we see in the metalls, for each Planet makes its Essence in its Property
according to it self: as the Sun, in gold; the Moon in Silver; Jupiter in
tin; Saturn in Lead; Mercurius in quicksilver; Mars in Iron; and yet it is the
Essence of the only Venus Property: but they give their Power and Spirit into
it, and hold the body for their own, being they rule the same.

19. This Venus Property in the place of Sol sunck downwards in the first
Egresse: and the fire-Source above it, is Mars; and out of Venus Property
beneath, the heavy Sound, and that is Mercurius out of the Sulphur Salnitri
through the water: and upwards out of Mars, the power of the fire and light,
that is Jupiter: and beneath from Mercurius, the Essence of the desire, where
Venus comprehends the Essence in her fiery desire, as a body of the Powers,
that is, Luna: and above Jupiter, Saturnus, viz. the expressed Impression of
the first form of nature.

20. These Properties were spherated in the Spiration, in manner as the birth
of nature is in the Essence, which the Verbum Fiat received and amassed into a
body, and ordained it for dominion unto the four Astrums, over which he has
appointed Angelical Rulers as a Supreme Counsel: which we give only a hint
of here, being we have spoken thereof at large in another place.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Creation of the fifth Day.
1. NOw when God had Opened the Astrum, and four Elements as a moving life,
wherein the Superior Astrum gave the distinction in the moving life and
actuated the four Astrums in the four Elements; then he Educed out of the
Essence of all the Astrums, and Elements (through the motion of his Speaking
Word in the Verbum Fiat, the Impresse, or express; as the Power of that same
life, which was free from the pain, and amassed it through the Verbum Fiat,
and spoke forth that same life (by the holy Eternal Speaking Word through the
Fiat) into forms and shapes, according to the properties of the Astrums in the
Spiritual Corpus, in which the Fiat, or the desire attracted the Elements
according to the outward Essence unto it self, as a body.

2. And thence were creatures produced in all the four Elements; in each
Astrum according to its Property: as birds in the Astrum of the Air: fishes in
the Astrum of the water: cattle and foure-footed beasts out of the Astrum of
the earth, and four Elements: so likewise Spirits in the fire- Astrum, which
also is in the other Elements: and we see very exactly in the difference of the
creatures that the degrees of the Astrum [or constellations] are so distinct,
and various: for the worms of the Earth live in the third degree, viz. in the
fire-flagrat, in the Sulphur, Mars, and Mercury, in the life devoid of
understanding; and whereas they have an understanding [or instinct] by the
enkindling of the Superior Astrum, in which third degree in the property, also
grass, herbs, and trees do stand, and yet they receive assisting influence
from the Superior [Astrum] in the Enkindling, by which they are otherwise
qualifyed.

3. And we see, that each kind has a Spirit and body according to the Degree
of its Astrum; for we understand, that out of one Constellation [or Astrum]
many kinds of creatures do proceed: the cause whereof is, that each Astrum
has again its degrees in it: for there is in each Astrum, whatsoever all the
Astra have; but yet in sundry distinct degrees in the manifestation; and
therefore the Properties in each Astrum are manifold: so also diverse sorts of
creatures are proceeded from each Astrum, the Spirit of each kind is from the
Astrum, but all kinds must use the four Elements; for they arise out of that
fountain whence all the Astra do originally proceed:

4. On the fifth day Jupiter has the dominion the first hour of the day among
the Planets: and that, because he has his Original in the Creation of the
Astrum out of the fifth Degree of nature, viz. out of the power of the
Sulphurous and Salnitrall oil, and that on the fifth day, this joviall
property was opened and educed, out of the fourth days property* as a pleasant
powerful life, out of all the Constellations: unto which life God created all
Creatures (except man) each out of the property of his Constellation; out of
his Degree; so that they might all live in the Soul of the outward nature, and
be under the Government of one Officer; which is the outward Constellation
wherein the Sun is chief Regent.

5. Each Constellation has its Compaction of Sulphur and Mercury: the Sulphur
gives Essence, and Mercurius give Spirit into the Essence: and from both these
Sal is generated, viz. out of the sharp Fiat according to the property of
Sulphur and Mercury: and out of these three properties, viz. out of Sulphur
Mercurius and Sal all creatures entered into a life and creaturall being: and
now such as the Sulphur was on each place in every Punctum in the property, as
was taken or conceived in the Fiat, in the motion of the fifth Property, in all
the Elements; even such a creature was opened or brought forth, as the
Compaction was Coagulated in each Punctum: and so each Kind had its Spirit and
Seed in it, to generate, and bring forth again.

6. The two Sexes, viz. the male and its female arise from the Separation of
the watery and fiery Tincture in Sulphur: for the Separation was in the Verbum
Fiat: where, out of one Sulphur in one only Punctum two Sexes came forth out
of one Essence, viz. the fiery property in it self to a male, and the lights
or waters property, to a female, where then both tinctures severed.

7. And as we see, that the fire cannot burn without the water, and the water
were a nothing without the fire, and they mutually beget one another, and also
do again vehemently desire each other; and their right life consists in
their conjunction in that they have produced each other and afterward do
enter into, and mutually embrace, each other as one; where also they are again
changed in the fire into one: and yet do again proceed forth from the fire in
one Essence, viz. in an oleous Property, in which they stand in the bond of the
highest Love-desire; for their light shines in the oil: and as the fire-world
desires the light-world and the light world the fire-world, as Father and Son:
the like also is to be understood of the two Sexes.

8. The Female is from the male; as the tincture of the light and water is from
the fire: and they jointly belong together in nature as one: thus the one may
not be without the other, and they have a very Ardent Longing after each other
for the Tincture of the light, viz. Venus Tincture desires the fires- tincture
and the fire the lights, as its Meekning.
pleasing delight.

9. For Venus gives Essence, and the fire takes the Essence to its life, and
yields out of the received Essence the light; and in the fiery light the
oil, and out of the oil again the water and Essence; and hence it is that
all creatures do desire copulation each with its own kind; and so they do
generate a third, viz. an Assimulate according to two in one: every Ens brings
forth a Similitude according to it self.

10. And we see very clearly that each Kind is created out of a sundry Ens,
each out of a different degree: and how each kind lives in its mother whence
it has taken its Original; and that it cannot live in another Degree: as the
Beasts upon the earth; which are a limus of the earth and air: therein they
live; and thence they take their food and nourishment; for the Fiat extracted
them out of the Earths Property and amassed them in the fifth manifestation of
the Essence as a Sulphur of the fifth Ens; whereon the four depend.

11. The Birds were created in the Sulphur of the air, therefore they fly in
their mother: also the fishes in the Sulphur of the water: and the worms in
the Sulphur of the Earth: thus each thing lives in its mother whence it was
taken in the beginning, and the contrary is its death.

12. And the Essence, and life of this time is nothing else, but a
Contemplation of the inward Spiritual world; what the possibility of Eternity
has in it, and what kind of spiritual play is in the Ens of the inward
spiritual world, accordingly it came forth into a creaturall being, out of
good and evil, into a Time, and that through the Divine Motion.

13. And hereby the Kingdom and Dominion of the Prince of the place of this
world was taken from him, for the Ens has introduced it self into another
Principle, wherein he cannot be; for he was not made a creature in this
Principle, and he has no life therein, save only in the property of the
awakened wrath in the Vanity.

CHAP. XV. Of the Sixth days work of the Creation.
1. THe Sixth day in the Creation is Friday, on which Venus rules the first
hour of the day; which does rightly signify unto us the order of the degrees,
how the Eterall-speaking Word has manifested it self with nature, through the
time; how the Spirit has brought forth the six Properties of nature into six
degrees or days, into a working life, and yet has introduced them all again
into the Seventh, viz. into the Rest, or into the mansion, wherein they should
work; denoting, that all whatsoever they should work manifest and produce out
of the wonders of the Eternal wisdom, should reenter into the one, viz. into
the Rest; which is the Seventh Property; viz. a house of the working life,
wherein it should stand as a figure to the Contemplation of the Great Glory of
God.

2. Now when God had educed the five days of nature through five properties or
degrees, into five Constellations, (all which are not indeed Constellations,
but a fountain of an Astrall Property) viz. into a Sundry Peculiar heaven; as
it might be given and expressed to the understanding: then he did on the Sixth
day educe out of the Joviall property, viz. out of the fifth Constellation, the
sixth, viz. he produced out of the Joviall Power, the fiery Love-desire;
wherewith the rules through all the Constellations: whence it is, that each
life does long after its likeness; that is, it again desires such a creature
as each life has in it.

3. Each life desires, in this Venus Property, to generate again, such a
creature as it is in it self: hence arises the strong ardent imagination and
fiery desire, that the properties do again desire into one, viz. into the
fountain whence they proceeded; for in the same they may generate the
Assimulate of themselves.

4. Now when God had educed this fiery Love-desire out of the Center through
all the properties, then nature was now desirous (in this Love-property) of the
likeness of God, viz. a Similitude according to, and in the Generation of the
holy Love-desire; that so this holy Constellation of the Love-desire, might
also be creaturized, and figurized.

5. And being this Love-desire was Educed out of all the properties of nature
and the heavens, viz. out of the Verbum Fiat: wherein all the Creatures lay
from Eternity in a Mystery; and introduced into a Separation, viz. into a
sundry distinct Degree: therefore now the Property longed to be an Image of all
degrees and properties: viz. a living rational and understanding Image,
according to the manifestation of this manifested property.

6. Now said the Speaking Word in the Verbum Fiat; Let us make man: that is out
of the Mass or Mixture.
Mesh of all Essences; out of the Property of all Powers and Constellations;
the Love-desire desired a Limus out of all Essences for a living Image: An
Image that may be like and resemble Us: and let them have dominion over the
fish of the Sea and over the foul of the air; over the Cattle and over all
the Earth, and over every worm (or creeping thing) that creeps upon the
Earth.

7. Understand this thus: the sixth Property of nature ( viz. the Love-desire)
was produced expressed or breathed forth out of all the properties, and was the
desirous life in the joy, viz. in the light of nature: this was not it self a
Limus; but it was the desire to the limus: for the Speaking Word which God
expressed, moved therein: viz. the intellectual life; God was therein manifest.

8. This manifested word of God, desired in this Love-desire a limus out of the
earth, and all the created Essences, out of all the Constellations and degrees,
for a Corpus.
Body, unto it self: therefore God said, an Image that may rule over fish,
foul, beasts, worms, and over the Earth, and all the Essences of the
Constellations: now if it must have dominion therein, then it must be thereout,
for each Spirit rules in its mother whence it is arisen and proceeded; and
eats of its mother.

9. But here we must rightly understand this Love-desire in the expressed
Word; the expressed Word had in this Venus-desire the desire of all heavens,
that is of all entities and properties in it self, viz. the properties of the
inward Spiritual holy heaven, which is the mansion of the power of God; and of
the outward created heaven with the heavens of all constellations and Elements;
yet not essentially [or in substance] but as a Spiritual desire: and these
properties, desired in the Spiritual desire to be essential.

10. Now the Text in Moses speaks very clearly and fully: where it says; and
God created man in his own Image; in the Image of God created he him: by the
creating is understood the body, which is twofold, viz. a Spiritual body and a
Corporeal; for the Venus-desire is a spiritual body, and that which it has
attracted unto it self in the Fiat into the desire of the spiritual body, that
is a fleshly body: the Verbum Fiat it self did figurize and form it into a
Spiritual man, out of all the three Principles, viz. according to the inward
divine world, both according to the fiery-light-world and the outward world.

11. And the Spiritual body is the Image of God: which the Fiat clothed with
the Essence out of all the Essences, viz. it clothed it with the heavenly holy
Essence, the heavenly holy Corporality of the inward holy Love-desire: and from
the outward Love-desire it was clothed with the limus of the Earth and the
other Elements, together with the visible Constellation of the third Principle.

12. The inward holy man was in the heaven of God, and the outward man was in
the outward heaven a limus of the outward heaven: and the inward man a limus of
the holy Spiritual heaven: therefore says Moses very right; God created man
in IN his Image, TO ZVM the Image of God: for, IN (betokens that) he was
known by the Spirit of God in this Essence from Eternity in the mystery of
wisdom as a Constellation of Magical Power: Into this knowledge God
introduced the Essence and created the Essence TO the ZVM Image of the Magical
Image of God.

13. Thus understand by the inward creating, the true heavenly Image, viz. an
holy Spiritual man out of all the properties of the Angelical divine world:
understand the inward body for the one only Element, whence the four were
expressed: and understand the outward man for the outward world with the Stars,
and four Elements viz. fire, air, water, and Earth, and also for the outward
Tincture, which is lincked with the inward in the holy expressed Word, and is
only Severed by a Principle: where also the inward puts forth an external
life: the inward is holy and the outward [life or Principle] in the Tincture,
were likewise holy, if the Curse were not come into it by reason of the awaked
vanity: yet if the vanity be Severed Or from.
by the Tincture: then it is holy and a Paradise, which shall open it self at
the End of this world.

14. And Moses says further: God breathed into man the breath of life, and he
became a living Soul: this signifies the living, Speaking, understanding
Spirit, out of all the three Principles, viz. out of the inward fire-world;
which is manifest through the dark world: and out of the holy light-world, and
out of the outward Aeriall world; this is the Soul.

15. The inward fire-breath is the true Eternal Creaturall Soul, and the
Lights-breath is the true understanding Spirit of the soul: wherein it is an
Angel: and the outward air-breath is the rational Soul in the vegetative
bestiall life, wherewith man rules over all the Creatures of this world.

16. As the only understanding of the Abyssall unsearchable Deity, has
manifested it self with three Principles; so likewise he has breathed in the
true life out of all the three Principles into the Created Image: the body is a
limus of all beeings, and the Soul is the expressed Word, viz. the Power and
understanding of all Essences, viz. the manifestation of the divine
Understanding.

17. The Spirit of God has inspired or given in it self, from the properties
of all the three Principles, into the Created Image: viz. the Father of all
Essences has breathed or spoken forth the Spirit out of all the three
Principles through his Eternal Speaking Word out of the whole Essence of the
Powers; or as I might set it down, he has inspoken it, viz. the Egressed Sound
or expressed voice of the understanding; which through the motion of God did
Educe and manifest it self, through the Eternal and Temporal nature; the same
[Spirit] God did again in* Speak or as the Text in Moses has it, breath in to
this only Image, for a Ruler of the body and all other Creatures.

18. And the Soul in its real life and understanding, consists in three
Kingdoms: the first is the Eternal nature, viz. the Potent might of Eternity,
the dark and fire-world, according to which God calls himself a strong
zealous Angry God and a consuming fire, in which the Devil has wholly plunged
and diabolized himself.

19. The Second is the holy light-world, where the Eternal understanding has
displayed it self through the fires-sharpness, in the light of the great fiery
Love-desire, and turned the wrathfu^l dark and fiery property, to a Kingdom of
joy; which is the true manifestation of the Deity; and its called the holy
heaven of the Angelical delight, and bliss.

20. The third Kingdom or world, is the outward Astrall and Elementall
Kingdom, viz. the air, with its domineering Constellation, wherein all the
five outward Constellations rule, viz. the Superior, and the inferior of the
four Elements: out of which [constellation] the five Senses take their
Original: wherein the vegetable and reasonable life consists: this is the
animal [or bestiall] Soul; which rules over all the creatures of this world;
so also over all the outward heavens or Constellations; and over all the Earth,
or Essences of the outward world.

21. Understand it thus: the fire-breath out of the first Principle rules in
its Original, viz. in its own mother, whence the Spirit of God amassed (or
molded) it, viz. in the Center of the Eternal nature; in the Might of the
darke-and fire-world: and it is the Cause of the light life: and also of the
air-fire: if that were not, none of the other would be neither.

22. And the lights-breath rules in the Second Principle, viz. in the holy
Kingdom of the manifested Power of God, which is the Mansion of the holy
Spirit of God, the Temple of God, viz. in the heavenly holy Essence; understand
in the holy Spiritual body of the holy Pure Element, which with its properties
stands in equal weight and measure; as a fit prepared Instrument of the
Spirit; wherein he manifests Gods wonders out of the Eternal wisdom, and
introduces them into the melody of joy, viz. into the holy harmony of the
Eternal Speaking Word of God, into the divine Kingdom of joy, viz. into the
manifestation of the divine Powers; in which the holy Spirit is the true
Musician.

23. And the air-Spirit has dominion also in its mother whence it rules over
the outward world over the figure and Similitude of the inward world, viz. over
the outward Mystery of time, and manifests its mother, which is brought forth
out of Eternity into a time, to the Contemplation of the Wonders of the wisdom
of God.

24. And yet they are not three Souls, but only one; yet it stands in three
Principles; viz. in the Kingdom of Gods Anger, and in the Kingdom of Gods
Love, and in the Kingdom of this world; and if this were not, then it could
not be said, the soul went into heaven or hell, if Heaven or Hell.
they were not in it; when the Air, viz. the outward Kingdom of time does
leave it, then is the Soul manifest either in the dark fire-Kingdome of God,
or in the holy Kingdom of light, in the Love-fire of the Power of God;
whereunto it has given up it self in this lifetime, therein it stands,
when it foregoeth the outward life.

25. And we are in no wise to think, that the soul is God himself, (who is
neither nature nor Creature, also dwelling in nothing save only in himself,
and yet dwells through all things, and is neither f^r off or nigh unto any
thing): but The soul.
it is the expressed Word; the Formed Word; it is the Spirit and the life of
the three Principles of divine manifestation; but if it were God, then it were
immovable, uncontrouleable, and no judgment could pass upon it.

26. But a judgment may pass upon it, if it departs out of that Order
wherein God introduced it in the beginning; if it goes out of the divine
harmony, out of the Order of the manifested word of Gods Power: if it does
manifest or produce another will in it self, viz. other properties, out of the
Strong Might of the Eternal nature.

27. The whole man with body and Soul, is threefold; and yet but one only man:
the body is out of a threefold Essence: and the Soul is out of a threefold
property of the Spirit: an example thereof you have in the fire light and air:
the fire has another property then the light and air have; the fiery body is
the Eternal Constellation, viz. the Magical Constellation, the Great Mystery,
out of which the outward Constellation was produced, and brought into a
creaturall Being.

28. The fire-Spirit, viz. the fiery Soul dwells in the fiery Spiritual
body: And in the lights body (which is from the holy Element, viz. from the
true heavenly Image, which consists in a Spiritual Sulphur Mercurius and
Sal) dwells the holy Soul, viz. the true Spirit of the soul which is of a
Temple of God: and in the outward Body (which is a limus of the Earth and the
other Elements) viz. in the outward Constellation of the five Senses, the
outward Soul, viz. the real Spirit of the outward world; does dwell.

29. Each Property of the Soul has a Corporeal property in it self, which
may be called an heaven, viz. a Sundry Special Magical Astrum: As the fiery
Property of the soul has a body from the inward Constellation of the dark and
fire-world, which is a Spiritual Body.

30. And the Or light.
Lucid Property of the Soul, has a spiritual oleous, and watery Body, wherein
the two properties, of the highest Tincture of the fire and light does open the
Luster and beauty of the Colors wonders and virtue of the divine wisdom: this
water is the water above the Firmament, of which Moses speaks; and this oil
is the holy Oil of the divine Powers, and this was a usual Type in the old
Testament, in that the real oily body of the heavenly property, did disappeare
in Adam in the awaked vanity, God ordained the Type of the new Regeneration
with an unction of Oil, wherein he powerfully wrought, through the promised
Covenant, as in a Type.

31. The Third outward Property of the Soul, has likewise every way, such a
body of many Constellations in it, as the inward properties; all which
multiplicity of properties, may be called heavens: for each property of the
outward body has a Magical Constellation: as there is a body of the
Sulphurean Constellation of the Earth: also a Body or Constellation of the
Mercuriall poysonfull life: also a body of the Salt-Powers of Bodies: also a
body of the soul of the outward world, viz. of the upper Created Constellation;
all according as the outward Powers of the outward soul are: thus each Power
has a Corporeal property in it: and thus also the inward Powers of the
Spiritual Property, are to be understood with the inward body.

CHAP. XVI. Of the difference of the Heavenly and Earthly Man.
1. WHen we consider the Image of God which God created in Paradise unto the
Eternal uncorruptible life, then we can in no wise say of the gross fleshy
Image, that the gross property of the earthlinesse is the Image of God, which
can possess the holy world: for it is not of the same Essence and Ens; whereof
also Christ speaks John 6. The Spirit is life; the flesh profits nothing:
also flesh, and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: and yet verily
the true Body is coucht in this bestiall gross property; as the Gold in the
Oar.

2. All that is Earthly on man, that is bestiall and corruptible, and not man;
Albeit God created Man an external body out of the limus of the Earth: yet it
is not to be considered of us, as now it is; for the true humane Body according
to the inward world, is a Spiritual Sulphur, a Spiritual Mercurius, and a
Spiritual Sal: each property of the Soul has a Coporeall or Essential
quality on it.

3. God created such a Body, as the Soul was in its Essence, viz. in the
Spirated Word of the understanding; and breathed the Soul thereinto for the
Understanding; also the outward Sulphurean body, is in no wise the Gross
Beast, which passes away and returns not again; the true real body which
is hidden in the Grosseness, is a spiritual body, in comparison to the
Grossness: it is created in deed in flesh and blood; but in a fixed steadfast
[uncorruptible flesh and blood.]

4. By the Lust and Imagination of Adam, the Grosseness was manifest; the True
outward body is a Sulphurous, Mercuriall, and Saltish Property; a pure
Essential Power according to the nature of the Soul: That which the Soul is
in the Spirit, the same is the true humane body in the Essence, as a mansion of
the Soul.

5. All the Properties of the inward holy Body, together with the outward, were
(in the first man) composed in an equal harmony, none lived in selfe-desire,
but they all gave up their desire unto the Soul, in which, the divine light was
manifest, as in the holy heaven: the light shone through all the Properties and
made an equal Temperature in the properties: all the properties gave their
desire into the light, viz. into the manifested sweetness of God, which
penetrated all the properties; in which Penetration they were all Tinctured
with the Sweet Love: so that there was nothing but mere pleasing relish
Love-desire and delight betwixt them.

6. The inward holy Corporallity Of.
from the pure Element penetrated through the four Elements, and held the
limus of the Earth ( viz. the outward Sulphurous body) as it were swallowed up
in it self; and it was really there, but in manner as the darkness dwells in
the light, and yet its darkness cannot be manifest for the light, but if the
light extinguisheth, then the darkness is manifest.

7. Thus the inward man held the Outward captive in it self, and penetrated
it, as a fire through-heats an Iron, that it seems as if it were all fire: but
when the fire goes out, then the dark swart Iron is manifest.

8. Thus likewise was the first man when he stood in Paradise, in his fixed
condition, in manner, as time is before God, and God in the time; and they are
distinct, but not parted asunder: as the time is a play before God, so also the
outward life of man was a play Before.
unto the inward holy man, which was the real Image of God.

9. The outward Spirit, and Body, was unto the inward as a wonder of divine
manifestation, according to the fire-darke-and light world, a mirror of the
Great Omnipotence and Omniscience of God: and the inward was given unto it for
a Ruler, and Guide.

10. As God plays with the time of this outward world, so likewise the inward
divine man should play with the outward in the manifested wonders of God in
this world, and open the divine wisdom in all Creatures (each according to his
Property) so likewise in the Earth in stones and metalls, in which also there
is a twofold Essence, viz. one from the original of the fire-dark-world, and
one of the Original of the holy-light-world.

11. All this was given him for his play: he had the knowledge of all
Tinctures: all was subject to him, he ruled in heaven and earth and over all
the Elements, so also over all the Constellations; and that because the divine
Power was manifest in him: no heat nor cold did annoy him; as a Tincture
penetrates a body and preserves it from sickness, and as the warmth of the Sun
defends the body from cold; so likewise the highest Tincture of the fire and
light, viz. the holy Power of the inward spiritual Body, penetrated the
outward Body of flesh and blood, and took every outward Elementall properry, as
also the limus of the Earth, into its preservation or protection.

12. For as there was a Temperature in the body of the inward and outward man:
so likewise there was nothing without the Body that could either destroy, or
annoy this Temperature: as Gold indures in the fire, and as a Tincture
penetrates all things, and yields or gives way unto nothing; so likewise, man
was not subject unto any thing, save only and alone to the only God, who
dwelt through him, and was manifest in him with the Power of the holy Essence;
and this was an Image and likeness of God, in whom the Spirit of God inhabited.

13. Reason will understand us amiss, and say, I speak of a twofold man: but I
say no! I speak only of one only man, which is a likeness according to God,
viz. according to the manifested God; according to the expressed Formed word of
the divine Power; of divine understanding.

14. As all things are in God Text in Essence.
Essentially, and yet he himself is not that very Essence; and yet that
Essence rules every Essence according to its Property; so likewise the inward
spiritual man is an Image of the formed Word of divine Power, and the outward
an Image of the inward, viz. an Instrument of the inward; as a Master must have
an Instrument wherewith to finish and perform his work; so likewise the
outward man from the limus of the Earth and four Elements, with its outward
Constellation, is only an Instrument of the inward, wherewith the inward
frames and makes what the inward Spirit of the soul wills.

15. As we see that the Will is the Master in all purposes and undertakings;
and see further, that the inward man has divine will and desire, but the
outward a bestiall will, which is so by reason of the fall: the whole man is
but one only man: but his property lies in Sundry degrees according to the
inward and outward heavens, viz. according to the divine manifestation through
the Seven Properties of Nature.

Of the Creation of the Seventh Day.
16. GOd created all things in six days out of the Seven properties, and
introduced the six days works of the manifestation of his Creature into the
Seventh, wherein every life should work as in one body; for the Seventh and
first day belong mutually to one another as one: for the six properties of the
Eternal nature are all couched in the Seventh, as in a Operate or workhouse.
Structure of the other six; the Seventh Property is a Mystery, or Essence of
all the other: and out of the Seventh day the first day has taken its
Original and beginning.

Seventh Day, Saturnus.
17. FOr on the Seventh day, viz. Saturday, Saturn has his dominion the first
hour of the day in the Planetick Orb; which is a figure of the Sevenfold
Generation of the Eternal nature; for like as the first form of the Eternal
nature is the Astringent desire, viz. the Fiat, which in the desire impresseth
the Free Lubet (which is as a thin nothing in the Eternal will of God, in the
divine understanding) and introduces it into a Spiritual Essence, in which
Desires Essence, all the properties do arise as is above mentioned.

18. So likewise Saturn, or the Seventh Property of the Seventh day, is the
Rest, or mansion of the other six days works, wherein they work as a Spirit
in the body: the Seventh Property stands still as a senceless life.

19. But that now Moses says: God rested on the Seventh day from all his
works, and sanctified the Seventh day for rest: this has a very peculiar
Emphaticall deep meaning, and yet it were but plain and child-like, if we were
in Paradise and dwelt in the Sabbath: understand it thus.

20. Out of the Verbum Fiat, viz. out of the divine Word, and out of the divine
desire, which is the Fiat in the Word, wherewith the Word forms it self, or
introduces it self in the Spiritual Essence to the dark fire-and
light-world; the six properties of the Eternal and Temporal nature,
proceeded; and each has introduced it self into a sundry degree of a sundry
Property, which degree may be called a Heaven, or a Magical
Spirituall-Constellation.

21. For each Property is a Spirated Essence, viz. a Heaven: for Text Himmell,
expounded in the Language of Nature.
Heaven Himmell does properly and exactly denote and signify, in the language
of nature, a Spiration, or formation; where the Fiat forms what the Word
Speaks or breaths forth; and thus the Spiration, or Speaking was introduced
into six degrees or dayes-works.

22. Each Spiration continued a time, viz. the length of a day and night in the
formation and Conception, and each property of a day was mutually spoken or
breathed forth out of the other, even unto the Sixth, in which the Formed word
was manifest, which in the fifth form, viz. in the Love-desire did receive its
Aspect or illustration through the fire from the light; and Amassed or formed
it self in the sixth form of nature; in which formation, the Image of God (man)
was Created, as an Image of the formed Word, which God introduced into the
Sabbath, viz into the Seventh day, understand into the Verbum Fiat, viz. into
the first divine desire to nature, wherein Paradise and the Eternal Day was.

23. For in the Seventh Property lies the Eternal day, whence the days of
Time are proceeded; and the Ancient have called it As to the word.

Sun Evening, or the Evening of the Sun.

In our English Saturday.


Sonabend; but it is rightly called The Evening of reconciliation: or Saving
day.
Suhnabend; wherein Gods Love, does appease and Atone the Anger; as when the
six properties in the Operate, do enkindle themselves in the Impression in the
wraths property, they are atoned and reconciled in the Seventh property, viz.
In the manifested holy power of God in the Love-desire; (which holy power
manifests it self in the fifth and sixth Property, and does encircle the
Operate of all the rest as an holy heaven) and so are introduced into one only
Essence, wherein they Rest, as in the Text, in verbo Domini.
Word of the Lord; which has introduced it self with the Seven properties into
Nature and Essence, and thereof Moses speaks rightly, God rested on the
Seventh day from all his works, and hallowed the Seventh day.

24. Understand it here aright: God Rested with his Formed Word (which he
first introduces into darkness and fire) viz. into the first Principle,
according to which, he is called a Consuming fire), in the Second Principle,
viz. in the formed holy Word, where he educeth himself through the fire in the
light in the love-desire, viz. in the holy Fiat: and rests Eternally with his
manifested Word therein; his Rest therein, is a Dominion of joy; where the
Anguish-Source of Gods wrath, of the Eternal nature, is changed into a divine
Kingdom of joy.

25. And this Rest is the holy heaven in the Natural heaven, where time
works in it self, and sets forth its operate for the day of Rest, viz. the
day of Separation, where, at the end of the days of this world, the evil
shall be Separated from the good and each thing shall possess its own heaven,
viz. the property of its original [or sourcive] Spirit, whence it was
Generated.

26. But in this time, Gods Love and Anger must mutually work in one another,
and manifest the Wonders of God both according to the fire and light world, and
the Verbum Domini rests in the Seventh manifestation of the properties, and
shines with its And virtue.
power into the operation of the Six days, viz. into the six properties; and
affords aid and help to every life.

27. In the seventh property all things are brought into their End, viz. into
the first day of the beginning of all Essences; for the Seventh day, viz. the
Seventh property of the Eternal nature, is the transparent Glassy Sea before
the throne of the Ancient in the Revelation, whence, as out of Ex Mysterio
Magno.
the Grand Mystery, this world was created into sundry Peculiar heavens and
forms, and Formed in the Verbum Fiat: the Seventh day was from Eternity
without and beyond all Time, for it is the Formed Word of the Divine
understanding; in it, the Eternal wisdom of God is manifest, viz. the Powers
and Wonders of the divine understanding, in which the Deity works.

CHAP. XVII. Of Paradise.
1. MOses says; that when God had made man, that he planted a Garden in Eden,
and there he put man, to till and keep the same: and caused all manner of
fruits to grow, pleasant for the Sight and good for food: and planted the Tree
of Life also and the Treee of knowledge of good and evil, in the midst.

2. Here lies the veil before the face of Moses; in that he had a bright
shining Countenance, that Sinful Israel cannot look him in the face; for the
man of vanity is not worthy to know what Paradise is; and albeit it be given us
to know it according to the hidden man: yet by this description, we shall
remain as dumb, to the Beast, but yet be sufficiently understood by our
fellow-schollars.

3. The Garden Eden was a place upon the Earth where man was Tempted: and the
Paradise was in heaven; and yet was in the Garden Eden; for as Adam before his
Eve [was made out of him,] before his sleep was as to his inward man in heaven,
and as to the outward, upon the Earth; and as the inward holy man penetrated
the outward, as a fire through-heats an iron: so also the heavenly Power out of
the Pure Element penetrated the four Elements, and sprang forth through the
Earth, and bare fruits, which were heavenly and Earthly, and were qualifyed
[sweetly Tempered] of the divine Power: and the vanity in the fruit was held as
it were swallowed up, as the day hides the night, and holds it captive in it
self, that it is not known and manifest.

4. Paradise was nothing else but the Seventh days property; the heavenly
Essentiality of the second Principle is couched or shut up in the Earth, the
curse of God has hidden it, it budded (in the beginning of the world) through
the Earthly Essentiality, as the Eternity is in the time, and the divine Power
is through all things; and yet is neither comprehended or understood of any
earthly thing in selfehood.

5. But in Paradise the Essence of the divine world penetrated the Essence of
time, as the Sun penetrates the fruit upon a tree, and effectually works it
into a pleasantness, that it is lovely to look upon and good to eat: the like
also we are to understand of the Garden in Eden.

6. The word Ede expounded according to the Language of Nature.
Ede is nothing else, but what Moses says of the Earth: that it was Void.
eed, and empty: that is, it should not manifest its Might according to the
wrath of vanity, it should be still, as a mother to bring forth: for the
internal would rule through the external, as the Spiritual world through
time, heaven through the Earth; the Earth was empty without fruit: but the
heaven was its husband, which made it fruitful, and bare fruit by it until
the Curse, where heaven did hide [disappeare, or withdraw] it self, from the
Earth.

7. The whole world would have been a mere Paradise, if Lucifer had not
corrupted it, who was in the beginning of his Creation, an Hierarch in the
place of this world; but seeing God knew well, that Adam would fall; therefore
Paradise sprang forth and budded only in one certain Place, to introduce and
confirm Man therein; whom, (albeit God saw that he would again depart thence,)
he would again introduce thereinto, by Christ, and establish him anew in
Christ, to Eternity in Paradise.

8. For Lucifer poisoned the first Paradise with his false and wicked desire,
therefore God promised to regenerate it anew in Christ; for the seventh day
which God appointed for Rest, is nothing else but Paradise regenerate anew in
the Spirit of Christ in the humane property, wherein the poor soul shall rest
Eternally from the Source of the six dayes-workes, viz. of the six properties
of the life.

9. Also it is the Seventh time or manifestation of God, in which the Mystery
of Gods Kingdom shall be finished, when it shall be again Pure in the place
of this world, when heaven shall be again manifest in the world, and the Devil
driven out with his Text evil Essence.
wickedness: whereinto no unclean thing shall any more enter; for this world,
in which, Adam was, before his Eve, must again return, as it was, before the
Curse, in which, Righteousness shall rule: but the vanity shall be purged away
through the fire of Gods Anger, and given to the dark world.

10. But that Moses says, the Tree of life stood in the midst of the Garden;
and presently next after sets down, and the Tree of Knowledge of good and
Evil: Here lies the veil before his eyes, that the earthly Sinful man,
cannot behold him; for he is not worthy of it; for his earthliness in the Curse
of the bestiall vanity, shall not inherit Paradise.

11. The precious Pearl lies in [the knowledge of] the difference of the two
Trees; and yet it is but only one, but manifest in two Kingdoms for the Tree
of life stands wholly in the midst of the Garden: for it stands in two
Principles, in the midst, viz. in the holy world, between the Eternal dark
world of Gods anger, where God is an angry zealous God, and a Consuming fire;
and the outward visible world.

12. The holy Power of God in the Tree, was the middlemost Kingdom, and
Paradise was the outermost Kingdom; for the middlemost penetrated, the
outermost and manifested it self with the outward; this was the Knowledge of
the Good; which Adam should have as little known, in its Original, as the
Evil: he was created for an Instrument of God, with whom God would manifest
his wonders in figures; he should only keep a child-like mind, and be
resigned unto God.

13. Now the Tree of the Knowledge of evil, was the dark world, which also was
manifest on this Tree; likewise the vanity, as As at this Day.
now it is; all earthly fruit* was manifest therein* therefore Moses
distinguishes the Tree, and says, the Tree of life; thereby he understands
the property of the Eternal life in the Tree; viz. the Second Principle; and
by the words of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil he Or means.
understands the wrath of the Anger of God, which was manifest by the Essence
of the outward world, in earthlinesse in this Tree, of which Adam should not
eat; for he should Or eat.
have eaten with the inward mouth, and not with the Earthly desire but with the
heavenly, for he had such fruit growing for him, which the inward mouth could
enjoy* indeed the outward mouth did also eat thereof, but not into the worms
Carcass.

14. For as the light Avalleth.
swalloweth up the darkness, so the celestial swallowed up the Terrestrial,
and changed it again into That, whence it proceeded; or as the Eternity
swalloweth up the Time, and in it, is as a nothing; so likewise there were two
Centres in Adams mouth, for the Kingdom of God stands in Power; and Adam also
before his Eve stood in the Kingdom of God, for he was male and female with
both divine heavenly Tinctures: and neither the Fires or Lights Tincture or
desire, should be manifest in him, for they should stand in Equal weight [in
the true Temperature] resigned Or to*
in God.

15. But in the Tree of the Knowledge of good and Evil; the properties, viz.
of Gods Love, and also the earthlinesse, as it is at this day in the Curse,
were peculiarly manifest, each in it self, and did eagerly put themselves
forth, that is, they were departed out of the likeness out of the equal
harmonious Accord; and all the three Principles were each of them, in an
especial manner, manifest in this Tree, and therefore Moses calls it, the
Tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

16. Reason says: wherefore did God suffer this Tree to grow seeing man should
not eat thereof? did he not bring it forth for the Fall of man? and must it not
needs be the cause of man's destruction? This is that, about which, the high
schools contend, and understand it not, for they go about to seek and
apprehend the inward in the outward, and it remains hidden and dead unto
them, they understand not what Man is.

17. Man was created out of all the three Principles; and was placed in the
principle, in the properties of the inward and outward world, in equal number
weight and measure: none of the Principles did exceed the other: there was an
agreeing harmony: the Divine light temperized all the properties, so that there
was a mutual melody and play of unanimous Love between them.

18. The Fiery dark world rejoiced in the holy light-world, and the light-world
in the outward [world], as in its manifestation; again, the outward world joyed
it self in both the inward worlds; as in its life: and there was a mere
pleasing harmonious will, pleasure, and sweet delight, between them: the
Mercury, viz. the Sounding, hearing, and feeling life, viz. the manifestation
of the divine Word in the Fiat, did mutually penetrate all Essences, in a very
exceeding joyful Property.

19. The property or essence of all the Three worlds reached Or set their
desire upon the light.
with the desire after the light; and in the light the expressed Word was holy;
this holy word gave its power and virtue to the Sound of the inward dark
fireworld; and also into the Sound of the outward Elementall world; viz. it
gave it self into the inward fiery Word, or life, and also into the outward
earthly life.

20. Thus the holy divine World was predominant through all the three
Principles of the humane Property, and there was an Equal Accord; and no
Enmity or opposite will was manifest betwixt the Principles, but a mere
harmonious affection and inclination of will, pleasing relish, ravishing
melody, sweet Smell, a friendly smiling, and most pleasant Aspect, a meek and
kind sense, and mutual fruition of delight.

21. For, Man was on the sixth day, taken and created unto a divine likeness
and Image in the sixth manifestation of the Seven properties of the divine
harmonious manifestation in the Expressed Power, which has diffused and
manifested it self through the fifth property, viz. through the fiery
Love-desire; his true lifes-Centre was the fifth property of the Eternal
nature, viz. the fiery Love-desire; which held the Fire, and darkness, hidden
[or shut up] in it self, and used it to its joy and delight.

22. But it is very needful for us to understand aright in this place, whence
the desire to fall away from the Equal Accord did arise both in the Hierarch
Lucifer, and also in Adam the second Herarch or Royal Prince in the Divine
Image.

23. When the Eternal Only God once moved himself through the Eternal
Spiritual nature, viz. in the Eternal great Abyssall Mystery, and Comprised
[or amassed] this Mystery into a Circumference or Place, to manifest his great
wonders; and introduced the Eternal wisdom into a formal visible
contemplation, and manifested all the seven Properties of the inward Eternal
Spiritual world, and introduced them into a Creation of the Angels; then all
the properties were moved, and affected, and each desired to be in a Creaturall
form, in the Place, so far as the Verbum Fiat, had Or given it self in.
put it self forth to motion and manifestation.

24. And the Angelical Princes also with their Legions, were taken and created
out of the properties in the Verbum Fiat; even from the first Center where the
Eternal Lubet betaketh it self into a desire, and introduces it self into
nature, unto the most external manifestation, each hierarchy in its heaven or
Property.

25. But being Lucifer, was in his Creation or formation of the properties
apprehended in the Principle of the Property, where the Enkindling fire
arises, where the light is manifest, thereupon he became so Aspiring in
himself, as the most Mighty Prince; and being in the root of his Creaturall
Original, he understood the great Magical Constellation, viz. the Mystery of
the Ground of all beeings, but yet in the dark property, which yet was now
moved and affected; which Magical constellations also Or would be.
desired to be manifest and creaturall in the dark world) thereupon it set its
desire upon this mighty Prince and Hierarch.

26. And he, viz. Lucifer, turned himself away from the divine light into the
fiery Mystery, toward the darkness, whence the fire arises; and so the
Magical Astrum of the Grand Mystery of the dark world, apprehended him; for,
his desire, which the Verbum Fiat had extroduced through the fire in the light,
turned it self back again thereinto, and would be like the Creator of all
beeings, and change himself and the Essence according to his own pleasure.

27. Thus he contemned the meekness in the light, viz. the Second Principle,
which [ariseth] through the fire-death, (where the wrath or the Spiritual
Essentiality of the wrathful dark Property, dies in the fire; and out of
which death of Devoration, the Second Principle, viz. the holy Love-world of
great meekness and humility, is generated) and went back into the first
Principle, viz. in magiam naturae into the Original of the Eternal Nature;
and would be an Omniscient Artist: he would rule and domineer, in and above the
whole Creation, and be a Co-former in all Properties.

28. Thus the light was extinct to him, for he made his Angelical Essence
which stood in great meekness and in fiery Love-desire, wholly rough, Austere,
cold, wrathful and fiery, in the dark wrathful property; and the properties
of Enmity instantly arose in him, for, in the light they could not be manifest;
but when the light extinguished they were manifest; and he became a Devil and
was driven out of the Angelical world out of his own heaven of the Second
Principle.

29. Thus we are to know, that the fall befell him from his creature, for had
he not turned away his creaturall desire from the divine meekness and Love, in
Pride, and stubborn will to rule in the Matrix of the Pregnatresse which took
him as a Player; he had remained an Angel: had he continued under Gods
Love-Spirit and will, then his anger-Spirit and will, had not captivated him.

30. But seeing he has freely and willingly broken himself off from Gods
Love-will; he has now Gods Anger-will in him, wherein he must be a Manifestour
and worker of the dark worlds Property, for it would also be creaturall; Here
it has a right captive, that can artificially act in Apes-sport; and now as
the dark world is in its property in its desire; such is also its Hierarch or
Creaturall Prince.

31. And here it is very requisite for us to know aright, how man came to
fall. Man was created in the stead and place of extruded Lucifer, understand
the inward Spiritual man; he was created in the same heaven according to the
inward humane Soul, and should possess the Hierarchy which Lucifer had lost;
and hence the Devils Envy against man is arisen.

32. But seeing God did well know; that the Devil would Tempt him, and not
beteem him that honor; the deepest Love of God ( viz. the high Name Jesus out
of JEHOVAH) has freely given it self herein, to regenerate this Hierarchy
which Lucifer had defiled; and to purge it through the fire, and to introduce
his highest Love thereinto, and to overcome the wrath (which Lucifer had
awakened) with Love, and change it again into divine joy, viz. into an holy
heaven; Or unto which end the last judgment is appointed.
in which place the Last Judgment stands: and this is that which Saint Paul
says, Man was chosen [or elected] in Christ Jesus before the foundation of the
world was laid.

33. And for this end, God created man out of three Principles in One, that
[being] he did not live wholly in the Place of Lucifer, that so he might help
him; for God saw very well, according to the property of his wrath, that Man
would fall; but he would bring him again through and in the Name Jesus through
the corruptible Death, into the Royal Kingdom whence Lucifer was fallen; in
whose stead the Man Christ God and man in one Person, should sit as an
Hierarck, high Priest, or the Great Prince of men, in the Name and Power of
Jesus out of JEHOVA.

34. Therefore we are here rightly to consider of the fall of man; how he
stood in Paradise and was tempted; and what the Paradise was; man stood in
three Principles, which indeed stood in man himself, viz. in body and Soul, in
equal Accord and harmony, but not without him; for the dark world has another
desire then the light-world; now the Image of God stood between three
Principles; all which three did set their desire upon this Image; each would be
manifest in Adam, and have him in their Dominion for a Ruler, and manifest
their wonders through him.

35. But he viz. the man, should have introduced his desire only into the
Sixth Property of the divine manifestation, wherein he was created to an Image
of God; he should be wholly resigned to God: he should only live in the
manifested Divine Word, in obedience to God, and not enter into his own will,
but introduce his desire into Gods will, viz. into the sixth Property; that so
the manifested Word of God might be his will, knowing, and Doing: even as the
holy Angels do so live and rejoice only in the Divine Will, and melodise in
the holy Ghost, as he does open and manifest himself in them according to the
Divine wisdom; and thus they live, will, and Act, with a child-like mind and
will.

36. Paradise, or the Garden in Eden did indeed stand with its properties, in
equal Concord as to man: but the properties were in themselves an Awaked
hunger, each in it self; which verily the Divine light did again intoduce
into a Temperature: but the Devil opposed man, in his Enkindled Envy, and
insinuated his venomous Imagination into the humane Property, and Enkindled the
humane properties in the Center in the first Principle of the Souls Property,
wherein the Soul stands in like Essence and Being, with the Angels and
Devils.

37. Whence Adams Imagination, and earnest hunger did arise, that he would eat
of the Evil and Good, and live in his own will; that is, his will departed out
of the equal Concord into the multiplicity of the properties: for he would
prove, feel, taste, hear, smell, and see them; as the Devil did persuade
them also in the Serpent; they should be as God and their eyes should be open
in the properties, which also happened unto them in the Fall, that they knew
tasted saw and felt Evil, and Good: whence arose unto them sickness disease,
pains, and Corruption [or the dissolution of this carcass.]

38. And being the Divine Providence, did before know that the Devil would
tempt man, Note.
and bring him into strange lust; least he should long after the Center of the
dark world, and become a Devil as Lucifer did, God did represent unto him, the
Tree of life, and of the knowledge of Good and Evil, wherein the dissolution
of the outward life was manifest.

39. For it was long of Adam, when he was yet in Paradise, when he lusted after
vanity, and brought his Imagination into the Earth, viz. into that Essence,
whence the limus of the outward body was extracted; and desired out of his
mother to assay of the Enkindled vanity which the Devil had inflamed,
thereupon the Fiat drew him forth such a Plant out of the Matrix of the Earth,
whence also it had extracted Adams body, so that Adams hunger, had to eat.

40. For the Essence in the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, and the
hunger of the desire in Adam, were alike; what he desired was represented unto
him by the Fiat; Adams Imagination was the Cause of it.

41. Reason says; wherefore did God suffer it to come to pass? Christ said,
if you had Faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, and should say to this Mountain
be cast into the Sea, it should be done: I preethee, was not the Souls spirit
sprung forth out of the Great Divine Omnipotence out of the Center of the
Eternal Spiritual nature, whence all Beeings were created, and should it not
then be potent?

42. He was a fire-spark of Gods Might, but when he was formed into a
creaturall being of the Creatures, he withdrew into Self lust, and brake
himself off from the Universal Being, and entered into a selfefullnesse, and
so he wrought his own destruction, and this he had had, if Gods Love had not
redeemed him.

43. The Souls power was so potent before the vanity, that it was not subject
to any thing; and so it is still powerful, if the understanding were not taken
away from it: it can by Magic alter all things whatsoever are in the outward
worlds Essence, and introduce them into another Essence, but the vanity in the
outward Aires Dominion has brought a darkness thereinto, so that it does not
know it self, the Curse of God has cast the defiled child into the dirt,
that it must pray for a Laver; and must be in this life time its own Enemy,
that it may learn to be humble, and continue in the divine Harmony, and not
become a Devil.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Paradisicall Dominion life or condition.
State, showing how it should have been if Adam had not fallen.
1. I Know the Or Sophist.
Sophister will here cavil at me; and cry it down as a thing impossible for
me to know; being I was not there, and saw it my self: To him I saw, that I in
the Essence of my Soul, and body, when I was not as yet I, but when I was in
Adams Essence, was there, and did my self fool Negligently lose.
away my Glory in Adam; but being Christ has restored it again unto me, I see
in the Spirit of Christ, what I was in Paradise; and what I am now in Sin, and
what I shall be again: and therefore let none cry it out as a thing
un-knowable; for although I Indeed know it not; yet the Spirit of Christ
knows it in me; from which knowledge I shall write.

2. Adam was a A husband and also a wife.
Man, and also a woman, and yet none of them [ distinct] but a Virgin full of
chastity, modesty and purity, viz. the Image of God: He had both the Tinctures
of the fire, and light, in him; in the Conjunction of which, the own Love, viz.
the Virgineall Center stood; being the fair Paradisicall Rose-Garden of
delight, wherein he loved himself; as we also in the Resurrection of the Dead
shall be such; as Christ tells us: Matthew. 13. and 22. that we shall neither
marry, nor be given in marriage, but be like the Angels of God.

3. Such a Man, as Adam was before his Eve, shall arise and again enter into,
and eternally possess Paradise, not a Man, or Woman; but as the Scripture
says, they are Virgins, and follow God, and the Lamb, they are like to the
Angels of God, yet not only pure Spirit, as the Angels, but in heavenly
bodies, in which the Spiritual Angelical body inhabiteth.

4. Seeing then Adam was created in Paradise to the Life Eternal in the Image
of God; and God himself breathed his life and Spirit, into him; therefore we
can well describe him, how he was in his innocence, and how he fell, and what
he is now, and shall again be at last.

5. If God had created him Or for.
unto the Earthly corruptible, miserable, naked, sick, beastiall, toilsome
life, then he had not brought him into Paradise; if God.
he had desired [or willed] the bestiall copulation, and propagation, then he
would instantly in the beginning have created Man, and woman, and both Sexes
had come forth in the Verbum Fiat, into the division of both Tinctures, as it
was in the other earthly creatures.

6. Every creature brings its clothing from its Or mothers body.
Dam; but Man comes miserable, naked, and bare, in deepest poverty, and
un-ability; and is able to do nothing; and in his arrival to this world he is
the poorest miserablest, forlornest, and most shiftlesse Creature amongst all
kinds, which cannot at all help himself; which does sufficiently show unto
us, that he was not created of God unto this misery, but Or unto.
in his perfection, as all other creatures were, which [Perfection] the first
man fooled away [or lost] by false lust; whereupon God afterward in his sleep
did first figurize him in the outward Fiat to the Natural life in Man, and
Woman, according to the Property of all earthly Creatures, and hung upon him
the worms- Carcass with the beastiall members for propagation, of which the
poor soul is to this day ashamed, that it must bear a beastiall form on the
body.

7. Two fixed and steadfast Essences were in Adam; viz. the Spiritual body Or of.
from the Love-Essentiality of the inward Heaven; which was Gods Temple; and
the outward body, viz. the limus of the earth* which was the mansion, and
habitation of the inward Spiritual body, which in no wise was manifest
according to the vanity of the Earth, for it was a limus, an extract of the
good part of the earth; which at the last Judgment shall be Severed in the
Earth from the vanity of the Curse, and Corruption of the Devil.

8. These two beeings, viz. the inward heavenly, and the outward heavenly, were
mutually espoused to each other, and formed into one Text, Corpus.
body, wherein was the most Holy Tincture of the fire and light; viz. the great
joyful Love-desire, which did inflame the Essence, so that both Essences did
very earnestly and ardently desire each other in the Love-desire, and loved one
another: the inward loved the outward as its manifestation, and Sensation, and
the outward loved the inward, as its greatest sweetness, and joyfulnesse, as
its precious Pearl and most beloved Spouse, and consort; and yet they were not
two bodies, but only one; but of a twofold Essence, viz. one inward, heavenly
holy; and one from the Essence of time; which were espoused and betrothed to
each other to Or eternally.
an Eternal [beeing.]

9. And the Magical Impregnation [or conception] and birth did stand in this
fiery Love-desire; for the Tincture penetrated through both Essences; through
the inward and outward, and did awaken (or stir up) the desire; and the Desire
was the Fiat, which the Love- Lubet [or Imagination] Conceived.
took, and brought into a Substance; thus the likeness of the express Image
was formed in this Substance being a Spiritual Image according to the first:
As the Fiat had conceived, and formed the first Image, viz. Adam, so also the
likeness was conceived out of the first for propagation; and in this
Conception also the Magical birth was forthwith (effected,) where, in the
birth, the Spiritual body became external.

10. Understand, if it had been that Adam had stood, then the Magical birth
had been thus [effected,] not by a sundry peculiar issue from Adams body, as
now; but as the Sun through-shineth the water, and rends (or tears) it not;
even so, the Spiritual body, viz. the birth, had been brought forth, and in
its coming forth had become Substantial, without pains care and distress,
in a great joyfullnesse, and delight; it had been in a manner, as both seeds of
man and woman do receive in their Conjunction a pleasant Aspect; even so also
the magical Impregnation and birth, had been a Virgin-like Image wholly
perfect according to the first.

11. Which afterward, when Venus's Matrix was taken from Adam, and formed into
a woman, must be done through Anguish trouble smart, pangs, and distress; as
God said to Eve; I will multiply thy Sorrows when thou conceivest, thou shall
now bring forth Children with Sorrow, and thy will shall be subject to thy
Husband; Wherefore? because it was sprung forth from the Man's will: Eve was
half the Adam, viz. the Part wherein Adam should have loved and Impregnated
himself; the same, when as he stood not, was taken from him in his sleep, and
formed into a woman: therefore when Adam saw her, he said; she shall be called
Or Manness.
woman, because she is taken out of man.

12. Man should have walked naked upon the Earth, for the heavenly (part)
penetrated the outward, and was his clothing; he stood in great beauty glory,
joy, and delight, in a childe-like mind; he should have eaten, and drunk in a
magical manner; not into the body, as now, but in the mouth, there was the
Separation; for so likewise was the fruit of Paradise.

13. All things were made for his sport, and delight; no sleep was in him; the
night was in him as the day; for he saw with Glorified, illustrious.
pure eyes in in his own genuine innate light.
peculiar light; the inward man, viz. the inward Eye saw through the outward;
as we in the other world shall need no Sun; for we [shall] see in the divine
Sight, in the light of the Peculiar nature. No heat, nor cold had touched them;
there had also no winter been manifest upon the earth, for in Paradise there
was an equal Temperature.

14. The Tincture of the Earth had been their delight and passtime; they had
had all metalls for their play until the time that God had changed the outward
World: no fear or terror had been in them, also no Law from any thing, or to
any thing; for all had been free unto them; Adam had been their chief Prince;
and they had lived in the world and also in heaven, inhabiting in both worlds
at once; Paradise had been through the whole world.

15. But seeing the divine Providence did well know, that Adam would not stand,
being the earth was corrupted by its former Prince; in that the wrath of God
had moved it self, and Or took
Amassed the Essence into an Impression; therefore God created all manner of
fruits and beasts, also all sorts of Or Sovereign healing Animalls vegetables
and mineralls.
Medicines for the future sickness of man; and likewise all kinds of meat;
that the man might have food, and raiment also in this world.

16. For he had determined to send another Prince, by whom he would redeem man
from his sickness and death, and purify, and purge the earth through the fire
of God, and introduce it into the holy (being) as it was when Lucifer was an
Angel, before it came into such a Or Creaturall being.
creature.

17. And Adam was created only Or in.
unto the divine Image which should be eternal; and though it was known in the
wrath of God, that man would fall; yet the Or restorer.
Regenerator was also known in Gods Love; Text, for.
to whom this Hierarchy should be given for a Royal Possession in Lucifers
stead.

18. But that the Fall Or might not so much as appear to arise from the divine
decree.
might not proceed (or come) from the divine Appointment, God made man perfect,
and created, and ordained him unto Paradise, and forbad him the false lust,
which the Devil stirred up through the limus of the earth, in Adams outvvard
body, with his false Imagination, and Hungry-desire.

19. And Adam was (before his Eve) forty days in Paradise, in the Temptation,
before God made the woman out of him; if he had stood steadfast, then God had so
confirmed him to Eternity.

20. But that I write of forty days, contrary to the Custom [and opinion] of
other writers, is, that we have certain knowledge and sufficient ground of the
same, not only by conjecture, but from another knowledge, of this also we will
show you the Types. As (first) of Moses upon Mount Sinai when God gave him the
Law, this was done in forty days, and Israel was tried whether they would
continue in divine obedience; but seeing they made a Calfe, and an Idol, and
fell from God, therefore Moses must break the first Tables of the Law,
signifying, the first Adam in the divine Law, who departed from it: therefore
the same was broken from him, and he fell into the Destruction.
breaking of his body, as Moses brake the Tables in piece.

21. And God gave Moses another Scripture or writing upon Round ba^l* or Globe.
a Table of Stone; which signifies the Second Adam (Christ) who should restore
the first, and again introduce his Law into his Table of the heart, viz. into
the life into the humanity, and write it with the living Spirit in the sweet
Name JESV; thus the other Law was also written, how Gods Love would destroy or
break in pieces the Anger; of which the Covenant in the Law was a type, as
shall be hereafter mentioned in Moses.

22. The Second figure of Adam in Paradise are the forty years in the
wilderness; where Israel was tried in the Law with the Heavenly Manna,
whether or no they would be obedient to God, that the Anger might not so much
devour them. The Third figure is the true real one, viz. Adams hard Combat.
encounter with Christ in the wilderness, where he stood in Adams stead before
the Devil and Gods Anger, where he did eat forty days magically, viz. of the
Text of the Verbum Domini.
word of the Lord, in which Adam also was tempted, whether he would remain
wholly resigned unto Gods will, Christ was Tempted in Adams Place or liew.
stead in Adams Temptation, and with all that whatsoever wherein Adam was
tempted, as shall be mentioned hereafter.

23. The fourth Figure are the forty hours of Christ in the Grave, where he
awaked Adam out of his first sleep. The fifth Figure are the forty days of
Christ after his Resurrection in the last Proba, where the humanity was last of
all tried, whether it would now stand and be wholly resigned in God, being
that death was destroyed, and the inward humane life newborn in God.

24. These five figures belong unto the five degrees of nature; from the first
form of nature even to the fifth, viz. to the holy Center of the Love-birth; if
it were not too large we would set it forth very clearly, it shall be shown in
its place.

25. These forty days Adam was Or stood in the Proba.
tried in his Innocence, whether or no he would or could stand, to possess the
Throne of Lucifer, as an Hierarch, and Prince of God; but seeing God knew that
this would not be, he determined to move himself with his deepest Love in this
Adamicall, Angelical Image of the inward holy man, which did Vanish or
withdraw.
disappeare in Adam, and to regenerate him anew, viz. in the seed of the woman,
understand in the Love-desire's Seed, wherein Adam should have impregnated
generated or brought forth himself in a Magical manner. In this seed the Mark
or Bound of the promised Covenant Or with.
in Christ was set; who should restore the Angels-Image, viz. the divine man,
as it is effected.

26. These forty days, Adam, viz. the Soul of Adam in the flesh, was tempted
betwixt three Principles; for each Principle drew the Soul in the flesh, and
would have the upper-hand or Dominion.

27. This was the Right Trial.
Probra of what the free will of the Soul would do; whether it would remain
in the divine Harmony, or whether it would enter into the Selfehood; Here it
was tried in Soul and body, and drawn by all the three Principles, each would
accomplish [or work forth] its wonders With or by him.
in him.

28. Not that the three Principles did stand in un-equall measure, and weight,
in Adam, they were in equal weight in him, but not without him; moreover the
Devil was very busy in Gods Anger in the first Principle, with his false
Desire; and introduced continually his Imagination into the Soul, and into the
outward flesh, viz. into the Limus of the Earth, and insinuated it into the
first Principle, viz. into the fiery property of the Soul, even into the
Eternal Nature; whereupon the first Principle in the soul was moved to
speculate it self in the Devils Imagination (or glass of fancy) viz. to
contemplate in the magical birth, how, and what, Evil and Good were, how it
would relish, and be, in the In the dissimilitude or various disparity of the
properties which were without it self.
unlikeness of the Essence, whence the Lust did arise in the soul*

29. Viz. The Earthly lust to eat of the manifold properties did arise in the
outward part of the Soul; and in the inward fiery part of the soul the lust
of Pride did arise, to know and prove evil and good; desiring to be like God,
as the Devil also did, when he would be an Or crafts-master.
Artist in the magical birth; after which Adam here also lusted.

30. Albeit Adam did not desire to prove the first Principle, as Lucifer has
done, for his lust was only bent to taste, and prove evil and good, viz. the
vanity of the Earth, the outward Soul was awakened so, that the hunger entered
into its mother, where from it was drawn, and introduced into another Source.

31. And when this hunger entered into the Earth to eat of Evil and good, then
the desire in the Fiat drew forth the Tree of Temptation, and set it before
Adam; then came the Severe command from God, and said to Adam: thou shall not
eat of the Tree of the Knowledges of good, and evil, in that day that thou
eatest thereof thou shall dye the death.

32. And Adam also did not eat thereof in the mouth, only with the Imagination
or desire he did eat thereof, whereby the heavenly Tincture disappeared, which
stood in a fiery Love; and the earthly one did awake in the outward Souls
property, whereby the heavenly Image was obscured.

33. Thus the magical birth was spoiled, and it could not then be, although
Adam Or had stood.
stood in Paradise, yet it had not availed Or them.
him; for in the Imagination or hunger after evil and good the outvvard man
did awake in him, and obtained the Dominion; then Adams fair Image fell into a
Svvound, and drew near to the Or Rest.
Cessation of its operation; for the heavenly Tincture was captivated in the
earthly desire; for the outward desire impressed into it its essence out of the
vanity, whereby the man was darkened, and lost his clear pure Constant
permanent.
Stedy Eyes and Sight, which was from the divine Essence, from whence before,
he had his sight [or Seeing.]

34. Now Moses says; that, the Lord God said, it is not good that this man
should be alone, we will make an help meet for him; when God had created all
creatures with the whole creaturall host, Genesis 2. v. 18.
Moses says; and God beheld all things which he had made; and lo! it was very
Good; and confirmed all to its propagation; but here he says of man; it is
not good that he should be alone; for he saw his miserable Fall, that he could
not magically propagate himself; and said, we will make an help for him.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Or framing.
building of the Woman; showing how Man was ordained to the outward Natural
Life.
ANd Moses says, God caused a deep steep to fall upon the man, and he slept,
and he took one of the ribs out of his side, Genesis 1. v. 21.
and built a woman thereof, and closed up the place with flesh. Moses says the
woman was made of a rib out of Adams side; who will understand this, without
divine light? but here lies the veil before the brightness of Moses's face,
by reason of the unworthiness of the bestiall Man.

2. For we find, that the woman was taken and formed in the Fiat out of Adams
Essence; Or out of his body and Soul.
both in body and soul. But the Rib betokens Adams dissolution, or breaking;
viz. that this body should, and would be Or destroyed.
dissolved; for in the place of this rib Longinus's Speer must afterward, when
Christ was crucified, enter into the same, and tincture, and heal the breach
in the wrath of God with heavenly blood.

3. Now when Adams hunger was set after the earthlinesse; it did by its
magnetic power, impress into his fair Image, the vanity of evil and good;
whereupon the heavenly Image of the Angelical worlds Essence did disappeare;
as if a man should insinuate some strange matter into a burning and
light-shining candle, whereby it should become dark and at last wholly
extinguish: so it went also with Adam, for he brought his will and desire from
God into selfehood, and vanity, and brake himself off from God, viz. from the
Divine Harmony.

4. Even then, he forthwith sunk down into a faintness, or impotency.
svvound, into Sleep, viz. into an unability, which signifies the death: for
the Image of God which is immutable, does not sleep: whatsoever is eternal
has no time in it; but Or with.
by the sleep the time was manifest in man, for he slept in the Angelical
world, and awaked to the outvvard world.

5. His sleep Signifies or was the real type.
is the Rest of Christ in the Grave, where the new regenerate life in Christ's
Humanity, Or was to.
must enter into Adams sleep, and awaken it again to the Eternal life, and
bring it out of time into the Eternal being.

6. But the breaking [or dividing] of Adams Essence, when the woman was taken
out of him, is the breaking or bruising of Christ's body on the Cross, from the
sixth hour unto the ninth; for so long was the Fiat in Adams Sleep Or a making
the Sex of Male and Female.
in the Separating of the Man and Woman; for in such a space of time the woman
was completely finished [or brought forth] out of Adam into a female person [or
Image.]

7. And when Christ on the Cross had again accomplished this Redemption of
our Virgin-like Image from the divided Text, from the Man and woman.
Sex of Male, and female, and tinctured it with his heavenly blood in the
divine Love; He said, it is finished: for before, he stood in Adams thirst: As
Adam did thirst after the vanity; so Christ did now fill or satiate this thirst
of vanity, with the holy divine Love-thirst, and turned about the will of the
Soul, that it might again introduce its thirst into God: and when this was
brought to pass, he said; now it is finished, and converted; Christ turned
back Adam in his sleep from the vanity, and from the Man, and woman, again
into the Angelical Image. Great and wonderful are these Mysteries, which the
world cannot apprehend; for it is as blind in them, as a man that is borne
blind, is, to behold this world; but he that Regards and finds them, has
great joy therein.

8. Eve is the right Understand; as to the right life which was then manifest,
but afterward disappeared, for in her lay the woman's seed, which was to break
the monstrous Serpent of the earthly Eve.
magical child; for she is the Matrix in which the Love-desire stood in Adam,
viz. the Magical Conception.
Impregnation and birth; she was Adams Paradisicall Rose-Garden in peculiar
Love, wherein he loved himself; For the Amassing [or conceiving] of the
Magical Impregnation, or Incarnation, or divine formation of propagation, was
[or did stand,] in the conjunction of both Tinctures.

9. And God said, after the eating of the Apple, unto them, the woman's Seed
shall bruise the Serpents Head; the Ground, and Cornerstone lies here in this
Matrix; for the woman's Matrix wherein the divine formation stood; was as to the
Right life, heavenly, being out of the heavenly Essentiality, wherein
consisted the Right Paradise.

10. But Adam with his Imagination brought earthlinesse and vanity thereinto,
viz. Self-will; and then the holy part, viz. Venus's desire, which was the
divine Center in the humanity, viz. the manifested Love-word in the Image of
God did disappeare in this Matrix; therefore Eve Out of, or by reason of.
from this strange will introduced into the Matrix brought forth at first a
selfe-willed proud murderer; for Adam with his false Imagination had
introduced this vanity, so also the Devils desire, [thereinto.]

11. But the divine Love-will would not forsake this disappeared Angelical
matrix; and gave himself by promise thereinto with the Dear and precious Name
of Jesus, who should again awaken it in the Holinesse's property; and bruise
the head of the Devils insinuated desire and false Rebellious will, that is,
destroy, and take away the Might of its life, and introduce it again, through
divine Love, into the First life; and even in this holy matrix, which the word,
and power of God did again awaken in the sweet Name [of] Jesus in the Seed of
Mary in the Aim, mark or limit.
Bound of the Covenant, the Serpents poison in the Soul and flesh, was
destroyed.

12. And this is the Seed of the woman: dear brethren, observe it, it is
highly known: The Text, the promised mark of the Covenant.
Aim of the Covenant of Promise was pight [or set] into this Matrix: but Eve
was not the very child; for the part of the Heavenly Matrix stood disappeared
in her but [yet it was] in the Covenant of God, as the dry rod of Aaron (which
budded forth afresh) did tipify unto us.

13. She was indeed the whole Matrix of Adam, but the holy part was shut up in
her; and the outward part of the outwrrd world with evil and good, viz. the
matrix of the third Principle, which had indeed an half soule-like property,
but (captivated) in the prison of Gods anger: the holy Covenant of Love Rested
in the disappeared part, in the midst of the awaked anger; from which Covenant,
the Prophetical Spirit in the old Testament spoke, and prophesied of the
future opening (or manifestation) in the Covenant.

14. The greatest mystery is to be understood in the formation of Eve; for a
man must very entirely, and intimately understand and apprehend the birth of
nature, and the original of man, if he will see the ground; for she is the
half Adam; not taken only and wholly out of Adams flesh, but out of his
Essence out of the female part: she is Adams Matrix.

15. The woman received no more from Adams flesh and bones, save the rib in his
side, and the half Cross in the Or skull.
Head which was the life's birth-Crosse, whereon Christ destroyed death: The
Matrix of the heavenly part was in Adam, Or Magically.
Magical, that is moving in the Essence; but the outward part of the outward
world was made fleshie; and both were mutually bound [or espoused] to one
another; as the Time with the Eternity: the Holy part was in heaven, and the
heaven it self; and the outward fleshie part was in the outward world in in
the matrix of the third Principle.
matriee mundi.

16. Thus the Female property was in the Fiat extracted out of Adams Essence,
as his dearest Rose-garden, and he kept the limbus celestial and terrestrial,
according to the Eternal Fathers manifested Property, viz. the fire-soules
matrix's property; and the woman [kept] the part of the Spirits
Soules-property; the woman had the Center of the angelical world, in her
disappeared part of the Soul-like property, viz. the manifested Love-word, viz.
the fifth property of the Eternal nature; and the man had in his limbus the
divine fire-world, viz. the center of Or to.
of the light world; the Center of all beeings.

17. The man's limbus which he kept when the woman was made out of him, was the
Fathers property, according to all beeings; and the woman out of [or proceed
from] the man, was the Sons property, according to all beeings, understand the
heavenly part (both of the limbus, and matrix) therefore Christ became man in
the woman's part, and brought the man's part again into the holy matrix, so that
the limbus and female matrix were again one Or person.
Image, viz. a manly Virgin, above and in all the three Principles, as a
creaturall formed God, in whom the Eternal unformed God dwelt, with universal
fullness, both in the formed, and without the Formed [divine creature or
God-man;] for thus was Adam also, before his Eve, and so must we also be in
Christ, if we would be the Image and Temple of God.

18. Now when the pregnant matrix was taken from Adam, the woman was every way
formed with such members for propagation as she is at this day; and so Adam
also; for before when Adam was Male and Female, he needed no such members; for
his birth was Magical, his Conception moving in the Matrix [was to be] done
through Imagination; for the Fiat was manifest in him.

19. And the bestiall worms carcass of the bowels, with the formation of
other inward Principal members pertaining to the earthly life, was hung upon
Adam in stead of the female Matrix, and the like wormes-carkasse was also hung
upon the woman in stead of the heavenly limbus, that they might stuff in, a
deal of vanity, and live like the Beasts, seeing they did so eagerly lust
after Evil, and Good.

20. Reason will object against me, and say; God created Adam in the beginning
such a man, and even with all members as he now is; which, notwithstanding it
cannot make out or demonstrate; seeing the soul is ashamed of this beastiall
property: also I would feign know of this selfe-full Reason; whether or no such
an Adam (if he were created so miserable, destitute, naked, and bare, unto this
beastiall life) were created to eternal life without defect* and also without
need distress, and death? and whether this Sinck [or filthy carkase of earthly
flesh and bloud] were the Paeadise, and Temple of God; and how could he have
been able to defend himself from hurt, and ruin? for such a beast-like man
may be drowned in the water, and burnt in the fire, and also crushed to pieces
with Rocks, and stones.

21. But if thou say, that God did well know, that it should be so with
Adam, therefore he created him so at the very first? Against this the Scripture
declares, saying, God created man in his Image, yea to the Image of God
created he him; not to the beastiall Image; what Sin would God have imputed or
charged upon man, if he had created him in a beastiall Image; what then would
the new birth avail him [to what end then should he be borne again?] The new
birth contains in real Sum, this; That the Angelical Image must be borne
again, which God created in Adam. God formed Adam in the Image of God, and
though he knevv, that he would not stand; yet he appointed him the Savior, who
should bring him again into the first Image, and therein establish him for
ever.

22. Now it plainly appears that Adam stood in the Divine Image and not in
the beastiall, for he knew the property of all creatures, and gave Names to all
creatures from their essence, form and property; He understood the Language of
nature, viz. the manifested and formed Word in every ones Essence, for thence
the Name of every Creature is arisen.

23. Now being he knew how the word of Power was Text, stood in the form.
formed in every creature, thereupon we cannot esteem him Or make a mere
animal of him, as the schools in their brutish reason do, who understand not
what Adam was, before he lost the Image of God.
Beastiall; he was without doubt Angelical; for none other man shall arise,
but such an one as Adam was before his Eve: God created him perfect, but he
stood not in the Proba; whereupon it must now follow; that God suffered him to
fall into the outward Magic; and ordained him to the Image of this world; and
set him into the natural life, viz. into the Degeneration, and Regeneration.
Corruption and new birth, for in heaven there is neither Male nor Female, but
all one kind in peculiar Love without further propagation, in an Eternal
Confirmation.

24. This therefore does set forth unto us, that Adam dyed in Paradise, as God
said unto him; if thou eatest of the Tree, thou dyest: he dyed to the holy
[heavenly] Image, and lived to the awaked beastiall Image. For now, when Adam
did awake from sleep, he was indeed still in Paradise, for the vanity in the
flesh and Soul did not yet actually and effectually work, and was yet dumb,
still, and senseless, until they did eat of the forbidden fruit; and then the
earthly Dominion began to rise; then the vanity awaked, viz. the forms of the
life, each in its selfehood, and forsook severally their mutual harmony, and
forthwith heat, and cold fell upon them; for the outward (Image or being) did
assimulate [or ensource] with the inward, and the heavenly Image at last quite
disappeared; which in Adams sleep, and also in his awakening, did yet live both
in Adam and Eve, but in a very obscure, and impotent manner.

25. Adam in his Perfection, while he was man and wife, and had the magical
conception in him, did amuse himself on (or Imagine after) the Beasts, and
introduced himself into beastiall lust, to eat and generate according as the
beasts do: and so likewise the Fiat took in the same lust, and formed him in
his sleep even as the lust was; and every member was formed in its place to the
Conjunction of the beast-like copulation; for each Desire has obtained its
mouth to manifestation: Thus the Image of God formed it self in the Verbum
Fiat into such a beast as we are still to this day; and this same (was done)
in it self, viz. Man's own Fiat, viz. the first form of nature, which is the
desire of Gods manifestation, did effect it, and none other maker from without
him.

26. We are not to conceive, that there was any thing else upon Adam, which
made his Eve out of him, or that formed them both to the outward natural life,
save only the Verbum Fiat in them, their own very propriate, and not any
alienate (or any thing strange,) from without them, as the first creation of
Adam and all kinds of creatures, was so brought to pass; the Verbum Fiat
Coagulated each Ens, and the manifested word Severed it self in the Ens
according to its property, and formed the Creature according to its Astrum and
kind; where also in every Ens the Matrix was separated from the limbus, and
formed into a Male, and Female, [into an He, and She.]

27. The picturing of God as a man in making Adam, and afterward standing over
Adam as he sleeps, and making a woman out of him, is more Idolatrous then
real; and God has earnestly forbidden in Moses to make the likeness of any
God, for he is no Image save only in the Creatures, according to the Expressed
Formed Word, both according to the creatures of Eternity, and of time: he is no
[ such] maker, but a former of the properties, a creator, and not ( such a)
maker.

28. The Creating is the Fiat which amasseth [or formeth], and the Word in the
power of the Amassed [or conceived being,] gives the distinction according to
the Ens: As the Ens is in the generation of the Spirit, so a thing is formed;
for the body or substance of all things is nothing else but a Signature or
mansion Or of.
according to the Spirit, as the Birth is in the Ens where the Spirit forms
it self, so is likewise the body of all kinds of Creatures both in Animalls,
and vegetables; as we plainly see, that the first Creator, who has moved
himself and brought himself into a Creaturall Manifestation, has left in all
creatures a Power to their own Multiplication, or Increasing, propagation, and
Text, making.
procreation, and incorporated the Fiat in them as a Maker, for their own
propriety [or most innate Instinct]

CHAP. XX. Of the lamentable and miserable fall and Corruption of Man.
NOw when Adam did awake from sleep, he saw his wife Eve standing before him,
and took her unto him; for he knew that she was his own; that she was his
Matrix; and cast the property of his desire upon her, as he had done before
when he loved himself, so now also the Fiery Tincture of Adams soul entered
into the Spirits or lights Tincture in Eve.

2. But they both stood yet in Paradise in the Garden in Eden, and knew neither
Evil, nor Good; for they lived yet in joy, and delight, in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and it was Eves first longing to eat of good and evil: for Adams
desire had introduced and imprinted it into the Magical Image while it was yet
in Adams Essence, as a child receives a mark [or Impresse] in the womb,
which the mother imprints on it.

3. Thus also Adam did Impress the false desire into his Essence, whence the
woman was made: therefore the woman so soon lusted after the vanity; as to
this day, mere earthly Lust of the flesh is found in most of them: so soon as
this Sex comes but to any years, the selvish lust [and will] does
predominantly appear in pride and glistering shows of fleshly desires, and
they soon long after the forbidden tree, contrary to the Virgin-like modesty,
chastity, and angelical humility.

4. The Abomination which Adam introduced into his Matrix, is so exceeding
strong in them, that they are as 'twere Or very weak, and poor.
in Naked shame, before the Image of God which God himself created in Adam,
therefore they must be subject to the man, in that they are the cause, that the
vanity was enkindled, to which the Devil also was a strong Sollicitour.
promotour.

5. For when he saw Eve, he then knew his insinuated desire in her, which he
had introduced into Adam; the same did show forth and discover it self in Eves
lust; therefore the Devil came now in a strange form, viz. in the Serpents
Essence, which was the most subtle Beast, and laid himself on the tree of
temptation toward Eve, that the introduced Concupiscence in Eve which the
Devil had also infected, did Was much taken with.
amuse it self upon the outward Serpent, and so one lust took another;
whereupon Eve did strongly Imagine, and long after the forbidden fruit, which
the Devil persuaded her to eat; and then her eyes should be opened, and she be
as God, and know Evil and Good.

6. Which indeed was true; this knowledge did stick in the fruit; for the
Essences were discordant, and un-like therein; but he told her not that the
enmity would awaken in the Essences of her body and that heat, and cold,
moreover sickness, and death would force into her; Herein he was silent, and
fairly colored it over, and drew her in by collusion; as if God had withheld
some great thing from them, which she might find as a treasure; so craftily
did he deceive Eve.

7. And when she yielded to discourse with the Serpent, she was taken in the
voice; for the Devil infected the same with false delight, until he persuaded
her, she should be wise, if she did eat thereof.

8. For the Devil thought, that if Eve should bring forth chidren in Paradise,
then his Text, his cause might prove naught.
Design would miscarry: they might then possess his Angelical Kingdom.

9. Now the question is: wherefore the Devil did deceive Eve by the Serpent
only, and not by some other means? could he not do it in his own form, why
did he even speak Or in*
through the Serpent to Eve? and wherefore did the Serpent address it self to
the Tree to persuade her, against Gods prohibition?

10. Here the veil lies before Moses his clear eyes, for he sets down the
Hystory very right, but how can an un-illuminated mind understand it; in that
he writes of the Serpent; saying, that the Serpent spoke with Eve, and
deceived her; whereas indeed it cannot speak, and also is only a beast,
without divine understanding, and in its self cannot know the Image of God,
much less did the Serpent understand the heavenly Powers, or the Prohibition.

11. But hear what Moses says: the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of
the field, which the Lord God had made: Here the first question is, whence its
suttlety came, that even the Devil would choose to speak through its suttlety,
and deceive Eve: Herein sticks the Mystery.

12. When God moved himself according to his Expressed Word, in the Verbum
Fiat, according to both the inward worlds, viz. according to Gods Love and
anger, according to the Eternal Nature of the darkness, and according to the
Eternal nature and power of the light; then all the properties in evil and
good did Or were brought into a Compaction.
amasse themselves; for the Fiat was the Center in all those properties, as
well as in those wherein the divine Power was manifest in holiness: now
according as each [centrall] point was opened; understand, according as the
Lubet to the manifestation of the Grand mystery of all beeings [was in every
punctum], even so the Fiat, viz. the first form to nature, did apprehend and
bring forth an Ens, or limus, out of the earth, and so also above the earth in
each Magical Star.
Astrum according to the degrees of Severation; and so in the same Ens there
was a Spirit according to the same degree or magical Astrum, and the Fiat did
figure, and shape even such a body or corpus as the same Spirit was.

13. Now being that Prince Lucifer did sit as an Hierach in divine pomp, and
would domineere in divine power in the fires-might, above and in all, and
contemned Gods Love, and humility, and entered with his false desire into the
Essence of the expressed Word in the Fiat, as a Or false Magician.
Jugler or wicked Impostor, that would also form and make [according to his
proud perverse will,] thereupon he infected that same Essence, according to the
dark worlds property; which came forth also in the Fiat into a Compaction,
viz. into an Ens, wherein evil and good are mutually linckt together. For he (
viz. the Devil) did as an Apostate rebellious Jugler desire the greatest
suttlety proceeding from the Center of nature, and would domineere in the
Revealed Magic in the Fiat.

14. And out of the like Ens proceeding from this Infected Ens (where Evil and
Good was manifest in great Power), the Serpent was created in the Fiat:
therefore Moses says very right; it was more subtle then all the beasts of
the field; for the Devils will, viz. his desire, which he introduced into that
Ens, whence it was created, was in it; it had the Devils suttlety, and will;
and as the Devil was an Angel in the beginning, and was from a good Essence,
and yet introduced himself into an evil one: so likewise the Serpents Ens was
good before the Devils infection, before its creation, but in the Devils
desire it was brought into a property of subtlety, and craft.

15. For the Devils desire drew forth the Compunctive Stinging thorny sharp
subtlety out of the Center of nature, and introduced it through the Enkindling
of the fire into the Heavenly Salniter, viz. into that property wherein he sat
and was an Angel; and here that very craft came forth along in the same Ens
into a Compaction in the Fiat.

16. For the Serpents Ens was as to one part, viz. as to the Heavenly, a great
Power; as also there was a great Heavenly power in the Devil; for he was a
Prince of God; and so he brought his extracted sublety and lies into a
powerful Ens desiring to play his enchanting feats thereby as a peculiar
un-controulable God.

17. This the learned Searchers of nature do in like manner understand, viz.
that there lies excellent Art, and also virtue, in the Ens of the Serpent; if
the Devils poison be taken from it, the greatest Cure does then lie in it for
the Healing of all fiery venomous hurts and distempers; yea the best Antidote,
against poison, and all whatsoever has the Semblance of a fiery poison; for
therein the divine Power lies in a fiery Hunger, but hidden in the Curse of
the Anger of God.

18. As God does dwell hiddenly in the Cursed Earth; so likewise it is here;
yet it is given to the wise Godly Searcher of the Art, and he need not be
astonished or afraid of the Curse: for he shall rule in divine power in faith
over all creatures; if he were not so much captivated in a beastiall and proud
manner in the Serpents Essence, our sense and meaning might be opened unto him,
and he might here well find the Arcanum [or Secret] of the world.

19. This crafty Serpent was now in external show and Semblance, an exceeding
well-favoured, comely, handsome, neat, fine, brave, pretty beast, accurately
dressed, and set forth, according to the pride of the Devil; not that we are to
conceive, that the Devil was a creator of the Serpent, but the Fiat was
manifest in it according to Gods great good power, and also very potently
manifest according to the power of his wrathful Anger.

20. This Serpent was a living figure of the Tree of Temptation; like as the
Tempting Tree was a dumb power [or livelesse resemblance] so the Serpent was a
living power, and therefore the Serpent applied it self to this tree as to its
likeness, even the likeness of its Essence; which the Devil saw, and
possessed the Serpent in the part of his infected, and introduced poison, and
armed its tongue, and spoke out of its great Subtlety to Eve, so that she knew
not the horrible Enemy, and very hideous ugly Guest the Devil.

21. And the Devil therefore brought the Serpent to the Tree of Temptation,
(being he saw that Eve was taken much with beholding of the Tree, and feign
would eat of its fruit) that so he might make Eve Or, form strange
Imaginations of pride, in seeing the fair Serpent.
monstrous by the Serpent; and the true eye-marke [to reach the, real
understanding of the Serpents deceiving Eve] is this.

22. Eve did now long after the fruit of the tree of the Knowledge of Good, and
Evil; for Adam had introduced this lust into his Ens whence Eve was created:
but now the Command stood against it, and she feared God, and would not do
contrary to the prohibition; therefore the Devil cunningly insinuated into the
Serpents Ens, viz. into the greatest Subtlety; and yet craftily puts forth the
great power and wit in the Serpents Essence; that Eve might see, and know how
prudent wise and Subtle the Serpent was; and hung there upon the Forbidden
tree, and it did it no hurt, and she looked upon the Serpent and set her mind
amusing after it, in manner as a woman with child does amuse her self and
strangely or monstrously form her self [in her minde] and brings such a
figure upon the child, even so did Eve amuse her self upon the wit, and craft
of the Serpent, and also upon its nimble Agility, and Art, whereupon she longed
to eat of the tree; for the Serpent persuaded her by the Devils voice, and
speech, and pretended that it had its craft, and Art from the Tree.

23. Eves Essence was heavenly, but already somewhat poisoned and infected by
Adams Imagination; now Eves good desire of the good Essence in her, entered into
the Serpents great power and inward virtue, which it had from the heavenly
Essence, viz. from the good part of the Ens of the Earth; and the infected
property of Eve, which Adam had insinuated, and let in by Imagination, entered
into the Serpents Craft, viz. into the Center of the dark world, into Gods
anger; and on the other side the Devils strong desire, and Imagination, entered
through the Essence of the Serpent, into Eves Essence; both by the sound and
voice in their intercourse of speech, and also by the Conjunction of both
desires.

24. And here Eves desire, and the Devils desire, were espoused [or united]
in this conjunction; for the Devils desire made Eves lust wholly monstrous,
and did so egg or force her on in the lust, till he overcame her; and she gave
full consent thereto in her desire; she would feign also eat of the Tree of
understanding, and wise subtlety; and desired likewise to be, or be made so
wise, prudent, and crafty, as the Serpent.

25. For the Devil said: the fruit would not hurt, but the eyes of her sharp
understanding would be opened; and they should be as God; this Eve did like of
very well; that she should be a Goddess, and wholly consented thereunto; and
in this full consent she fell from the divine Harmony, from the Resignation in
God, and from the divine desire, and entered with her own desire into the
Craft, distemper, and vanity of the Serpent, and the Devil.

26. Here in this juncture [or point of time] the Devils desire, took full
possession of Eves will, and introduced it into a Serpentine Substance; and
even here Eve became monstrous in her own Essence, according to the Essence
of the Serpent; and here the Devil built up his Fort Rampant, and strong
hold, in the Humane Essence; and here Or was.
is the Death of the Heavenly Essence, viz. of the Heavenly being; Here the
Holy Spirit of God departed from Eve her Essence: thus in this point [of time]
the heavenly part of man, viz. the heavenly limus, in the flesh, did
disappeare; and this is it, which God said, in that day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall dye the Death,

27. When Eve had turned her will from the obedience of God, and introduced it
into the Serpents craft, then the power of the heavenly meekness and humility
in the heavenly Limbus, did disappeare; not that she fully received the dark
worlds Essence into her Essence; but as God said to her; thou shall dye; that
is dye or disappeare Or as to.
, in the Kingdom of heaven; for the Kingdom of heaven receives no true
Death; only when the light of the divine Principle extinguisheth, then that
Essence wherein it did burn, and from whence it shoane, is dumb, and as 'twere
dead, without feeling, and understanding, as a Nothing; like as a candle
burning in a dark place makes the whole Room light, but if it goes out,
there is not the print or impression of it, to be seen, its power enters into
the Nothing, in manner as God made all things of Nothing.

28. Not that we are to understand that man's Heavenly Ens became a Nothing; it
remained in man; but it was as 'twere a nothing to man in its life; for it
stood hidden in God; and was un-apprehensible without life, to man; Nothing
dies in God; but the holy Ens in the humane life, did disappeare.

29. And as Eve did now reach to the Tree, take the fruit, and pluck it off;
the same she had already done by the earthly limus; and by the will of the
Soul, which desired the suttlety from the Center of nature; which suttlety [or
discretion] she already perceived in her, in the Center, and yet was not
manifest in the divine Power, and in the Resigned Humility: In this essay the
devils desire, reaches along in her monstrous Image, to the fruit; and when
she took the fruit into the mouth, and did eat thereof, that her bodies
Essence, received in, this Essence, the humane Essence took the Essence in the
Tree.

30. And being she did not forthwith fall down and dye, she thought it would
not hurt her, for the Anger-source yet rested still in her, and she persuaded
Adam, that he also did eat thereof, being he saw that it hurt not Eve.

31. But now when they had eaten, the wrath of Gods Anger did awake in the
monstrous Image, viz. the properties of the dark world, viz. the Devils
introduced desire, which now had its Seat in the monstrous Image in the
Serpents Essence: in this instant, all the forms of suttlety and craftiness
did awake in the Humane Or hiddennesse.
Mystery; for so long as man stood resigned in God, in the Equal Accord, in
the divine Harmony, the heavenly part, viz. the life of the heavenly limus,
penetrated the earthly limus; and the properties could not be manifest; for
they were all in equal measure and weight; as the time is in God and God in
the time.

32. But when man's own will began effectually, and actually to work, then
also the properties of the universal Magical Astrum began also to work in
him each [ Astrum or Star] in its selfehood; for the universal Magical Astrum
lay in man, for he was created on the sixth day in the sixth manifestation of the
divine Mystery, as a limus of all beeings; a limus, or externe [or extracted]
birth, whence all the creatures were created; an Astrum of the universal
Astrum; for he should rule above all creatures of this world, and be Lord over
all creatures, and yet not be ruled or lorded over by any.

33. For he stood in Equal Essence; but now every Astrum of every Essence of
all the creatures do depart from their mutual accord, and each steps into its
selfehood; whence the strife, contrariety, and enmity arose in the Essence,
that one property does oppose it self against the other: thus likewise the
outward Spirit of the outward Astrum, and four Elements did presently
domineere in them, and heat, and cold were also manifest in their body;
moreover the property of all evil and good Beasts: all which properties before
did lie hidden.

34. Here the craft, and suttlety of the Serpent was manifest, and the
precious Image was corrupted, and became according to the limus of the Earth, a
Beast of all beasts; whereupon there are now so many and various properties in
man; as one a Fox, Wolf, Bear, Lion, Dog, Bull, Cat, Horse, Cock, Toad,
Serpent; and in brief as many kinds of creatures as are upon the earth, so
many and various properties likewise there are in the earthly man; each of one
or other; all according to the predominant Stars which make such a property in
the Seed, in the time of the Seeding, by reason of their predomination or
[potent influence,] that Astrum which is most predominant in the Constellation,
that has its desire in the Seed, and if it be sown, such a property is hatched
forth in the earthly part of man.

35. Not that the whole man is such a [very brute beast in outward shape] but
there is such a figure of the desire in the earthly Essence; and the man must
bear such a Beast in the body, which stirs him up and drives him to the
beastiall property; not that he has this form according to the outward
[person]; but really in the earthly Essence: according to the outward
[personall shape] he remains in the first formation [or platform.]

36. Yet this Beast does somewhat put forth its Signature externally in every
one; if one do but heed and well mind the same, he may find it: Hence Christ
called the Pharisees a generation of Vipers, and the Seed of Serpents; also
others he called wolves, ravening wolves, foxes, dogs and the like; for they
were such in the earthly Essence: and He taught us; that we must be borne anew;
and forsake this beastiall property; and become as children or we should not
possess the Kingdom of God.

37. For as the Essence is in the body, even so the Spirit does figure, and
form it self internally, and the poor soul stands in this prison, bound,
and married to such a beast, unless that a man be borne anew: for which ground
[and end] God ordained the Circumcision in the old Testament; and in the new
the Baptism in the Spirit of Christ.

38. Here we are highly to consider, what horror lamentation and misery;
Anguish, fear, and distress, did arise and awake in man; and was manifest as a
false life and will in man; of which we have a type in the Death of Christ,
when he destroyed the Death in our Humane awakened property, upon the Cross;
and overcame [it] with the great Love in his heavenly blood, which he
introduced thereinto; that even then the earth, viz. the limus of the earth,
whence Adams outward Essence was extracted did tremble and shake at it; now
when the great Love forced into the humane earth wherein the anger of God was
living and effectually working, in the Curse, [I say] when it now was to dye,
and to be changed into another Source, it did tremble before this great
Love-fire; like as the Love-fire in Adam and Eve did tremble in the awakening
of the anger in them; whereby they were astonished, and creap behind the trees
in the Garden; and were afraid, for the dread and horror of Gods anger was
awakened in their Essence, and they knew their beastiall properties.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Impression, and Original of the Beastiall man; and of the
beginning and ground of his sickness and mortality.
WHen Adam, and Eve were become monstrous; the Holy Spirit, proceeding from the
part of the heavenly limbus, departed; for the part of the Heavenly property
disappeared in the Soul, in which [part] the divine light shoane; and in which
the Divine power of the holy Tincture dwelt.

2. Understand, the power of the light Or withdrew.
departed from him into the Center, in manner as a shining light which flameth
forth from a candle, extinguisheth, and the fire- Source only, of the light,
remains; even so likewise the Magical fire-source only of the souls
property remained, viz. the Center of the Eternal nature, viz. the Fire-world,
and the darkness.

3. And on the outward part of the soul, the Air-Spirit with its Astrum,
remained, wherein the light of the outward nature shoane, which now, the
fire-soule must make use of; for the Fiat was enraged in the wrath of God, viz.
in the fiery property of the soul, and also of the body, and in a fiery hunger,
in the awakened Flagrat of Gods anger, had entered into, and taken possession,
of the Essence in soul and body, and with hard Attraction did impresse it self
in the Essence of the Or matter outward Essence
substance, in the Or limus.
limbus of the body, whereupon the flesh became gross hard thick and
corruptible.

4. For in the Flagrat of the wrath, all the properties of each Astrum
according to the property of all the creatures, did awake in the Essence,
whence the enmity antipathy, and contrariety, did arise in the Essence of the
body and soul, so that one property is against another, one taste Or a
loathsomeness to another.
against another: for all departed out of the Temperament, pain, tormenting
malady and sickness Or arose in them.
happened unto them.

5. For if an opposite Essence enters into another, it makes an enmity, and an
hateful overmastring, and destroying each the other: one property annoyes
weakens, and destroys another, whence the death, and dissolution of the body
is arisen.

6. For whatsoever stands not in the Temperature cannot subsist eternally; but
whatsoever stands in the Temperature, that has no destroyer; for all
properties do [there] mutually love one another: and in the Love is the
growth, and preservation of the life.

7. And we are here fundamentally to understand, how the gross properties in
the wrath of the Fiat in the Essence of the body have obscured and wholly shut
up the heavenly essentiality in the Sulphur, so that the heavenly man was no
longer known; as Lead does hold the Golds spirit Or blended.
avalled in it self, that it is not known [or discerned.]

8. For the desire viz. the first form of nature, which is the Fiat, has
swallowed, Or with,
in the grosseness, the heavenly part both in man and Metalls: like as all the
soverain power, of [or from] the holy worlds Essence, which is in all herbs,
and all other fruits, lies shut up in the wrath and Curse of God, in the dark
worlds property in the Earth; and springs forth by the strength of the Sun,
and the light of the outward nature, in the Essence, through the Curse, and
wrath; which budding or pullutation gives a Soverain power, and healing virtue
for the malignant Essence in the living bodies, whence the Physician is arisen,
who seeks and learneth to know the virtue [and temperature thereof,] that he
may resist and remedy the opposite Essence in the body; which notwithstanding
is only a lukewarm, and faint Sparckle thereof, if he be not able and
skillful, first to Separate the gross raw wildness, (which is from the dark
worlds property) from his Cure.

9. For if the captivated Essence of the heavenly worlds property, may be
redeemed from the Curse and wrath of nature, then it stands in the
Temperature; and if it then so comes into a living body, it does awaken also
the shut up [or imprisoned] life of the heavenly worlds- Ens, if that likewise
be in the body, and expels the wrath, whereby the Sickness is destroyed,
and the Essence enters into the Temperature.

10. That this is certainly thus, we may see by Adam and Eve, when the wrath
did awaken in their Essence, and the Fiat did Impress the beastiall properties,
and formed (them) in the Essence, that when the soul, viz. the Image of God,
did experimentally know this, it was ashamed of the beastiall deformity, and of
its being in a beastiall vessel, viz. in another Principle.

11. For the outward part of the Soul, viz. the Air with its Astrum, did
arise, and obtain the upperhand; as we may plainly see, that amongst the
greatest part of men; the outward part of the Soul bears the sway and
domination over the whole body, in that the beastiall man does only seek and
labor after the pleasure of this world, viz. after external honors,
authority, and beauty, and also how to pamper, fill and gluttonize the Beast;
and so to vapor and proudly pranck with the beast as with a God, and yet it is
only a Corruptible Evil Beast, in which the real true man lies shut up
without life.

12. Also this Gross Beast shall not possess the Kingdom of God; and also it
profits not at all; John 6. but the Hidden man, which lies shut up in this
beast, as the Gold in the gross Oar, which [hidden inward] man the gross
beast scarce regards or gives any respect unto, save only that it does
sometimes a little play the hypocrite with it, and comfort it with devout
words, but exalts it self in its place as a proud Peacock; and bravely
trimmeth adorneth and fatneth his beast, that the Devil may have an horse to
ride upon, and thereby mock God: and he rides thereupon in the vanity [of this
world] in the Kingdom of Gods anger, as upon a false Whore which desires to
live in its own selfefull might and wit.

13. For such a [beast] the Serpents craft did awaken and stir up in Eve, in
her awakened beastiall monstrous property; that now every man almost carries a
beast in the body which does plague molest, and burden the poor captive soul,
whereby it does make it self also Monstrous, and amuse it self on the beast,
and brings it self into a beastiall figure; which, so long as it has this
Image and figure in it, cannot see, or feel the Kingdom of God: it must be
again transmuted into an Angels form, or else there is no remedy for it;
therefore says Christ, unless ye be borne anew, you shall not see the
Kingdom of God.

14. The enclosed body of the heavenly part must be again borne anew in the
water of the heaven, viz. in the Pure Elements-water, in the Matrix of the
water, and in the Spirit of Christ, out of the heavenly Essence; that the
Souls holy part of the Angelical world may be revived and quickened, and live
and work in its disappeared, and again newborn body in the divine heavenly
Essence; and therein receive its food from the divine Power of the Second
Principle; otherwise the heavenly Image which God created in Adam is not
capable of the Kingdom of God; and without the same also it cannot possess it:
no glistering shows of devout hypocrisy, flattery, [seeming holiness, or
soothing the mind with an outward application of Christ's merits] or tickling
consolations, do avail any thing; it must be borne [anew] or quite forlorn;
for the Pearle-tree is withered in Adam, and Eve, it must re-obtaine divine
Essence and Dye to the Beast; or else it cannot spring forth, and bear fruit
for the soul to eat

15. Now when Adam and Eve were awakened in the beastiall property, the beast
stood then naked and bare; for before, the heavens Image did wholly penetrate
the outward man, and clothed it with divine Power; for the beast was not before
manifest: this property lay hidden in the temperature, as likewise it is so,
without the creature; but now when the Image of the heavenly Essence did
disappeare, then the beast, viz. the beastiall property was manifest; so that
now the poor soul which was from the first Principle, stood forth encompassed
with this beast wholly naked, and bare.

16. But if the Beast had been manifest in the beginning of man, then it had
also brought its clothing along with it from its Essence as other Beasts did;
but the man was not created unto the beastiall life; and though God knew, that
it would so come to pass; for which end he created so many kinds and sorts of
beasts for his Food and Raiment; yet he created man in and unto the true Image
of God out of the heavenly Essence; so that if this Image fell, he might again
bring it, through a new motion and Regeneration into its first state, as it is
brought to pass in Christ.

17. The Scope and eye-marke of our writing is, to search out the Image of God;
how it was created, and how it is corrupted, and how it shall come again into
its first estate: thereby to understand aright the new birth out of Christ, and
to know the inward and outward man, even what the mortal and immortal [man]
is, and how he is become mortal; and what he is to do that he may come again
into his first estate.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Original of Actual Sin, and of the Enkindling stirring up
or provocation.
Awakaning of Gods Anger in the humane Property.
THe Scripture says God has made all things by his word, and without the
same, nothing was made which is made, John 1. out of his Expressed Word (which
was Essential in the Verbum Fiat) all things came forth into formings: first
into an Ens, or desire of a property, and out of the same propriety, into a
compaction of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, as into a formed nature; and out of
the same Ens in the formed nature the word becomes a creatarall life; and
brings it self forth out of the Cumpaction of Sulphur Mercury, and Salt Or
into a body.
out of the Body, that is, it manifests it self in a plain visible being; to
which end God has created nature and creature.

2. Thus each creature has a Center to its re-expressing, or breathing forth
of the formed word, in it self, both the Eternal, and temporal creatures,
the unrationall, as well as man: for the first Ens was spoken forth out of Gods
breath through the wisdom out of the Center to the fire and light, and taken
into the Fiat and brought into a Compaction.

3. This same Ens is out of the Or eternal being.
Eternity, but the compaction of the four Elements are out of Time: thus an
Eternal [ Ens] lies hidden in every thing in the Time, in all things with
life, or without life, in Elements and creatures, in vegetative and
un-vegetative; The first Ens is in every thing, whence the form of Compaction,
(which is arisen from the time,) was Spoken forth out of the spiritual worlds
being, as an Eternal Ens out of the Eternall-Speaking Word, through the
wisdom into a time, viz. into a formed Essence according to the Spiritual
Ens; which Ens cannot be destroyed by any Element or thing whatsoever.

4. And although the Elementall Compaction, viz. the body, (which the Ens has
attracted to it self, that is, breathed it forth from it self, as an
external Degree) does vanish and come to nothing; (for it has a temporal
beginning); yet the first Ens cannot perish: As we also see, that all things
enter again into their mother from whence they are arisen and come forth, viz.
into the four Elements.

5. Now, in this Consideration, we find the true ground of Sins. Original:
Seeing that the living powerful understanding Speaking Word, was breathed
forth out of all the three Principles into the Ens of Man's Image, for his
Intellectual faculty.
understanding, that he should and could rule the properties of the compaction
of Sulphur Mercury and Salt, but he has now introduced this understanding,
viz. the Speaking powerful Word again, into the Compaction of time, viz. into
the earthly limus: where also the Fiat of time is Awakened in the body, and
has taken the understanding, viz. the inspired Sound or harmony.
breath captive in it self, and placed it self master over the understanding.

6. So that we do now see by woeful With great lamentation.
experience, how it is now with us; that when we would speak (albeit the
understanding Word does [Idea or] conceive it self in the inward Ens, and
desires to manifest the truth) yet the awakened vanity in the earthly limus of
the body, does soon forthwith catch it, and [cunningly blendes] and works it
forth, into its own property, [or Serpentine suttlety]; so that the word of the
humane understanding, does breath forth Lies, iniquity, malice, falsehood, and
such cunning vanity, and foppery, in which voice the Devils desire does mix it
self, and makes it to a Substance of Sin, which the Kingdom of Gods Anger
does receive.

7. For in what property every word does form and manifest it self in Man's
Speech, when he speaks it forth, let it be either in Gods Love, viz. in the
holy Ens, or in the Ens of Gods anger, of the same it is again received, when
it is Spoken, the false word proceeding from the false Ens being infected by
the Devil* and Sealed to destruction, is also taken into the Mystery of the
wrath, viz. into the property of the dark world: Every thing enters with its
Ens into that, whence it takes its original.

8. Seeing then the Speaking Word is a divine manifestation, wherewith the
Eternal word of God has manifested it self, and that this same Speaking Word
is inspired into man, we are therefore here to consider what Man does manifest
with this Speaking Word: understand it thus: if the humane Lubet and desire
(which is the Fiat or the creating of the humane word) does conceive the form
of the word, in the holy Ens, viz. in the heavenly part of the humanity, then
the word Or speaks.
sounds from an holy Power, and the mouth speaks Truth.

9. But if it be from the vanity, from the Serpents craft, which Eve imprinted
into her self, and thereby awakened its Suttlety, then the word sounds from
the Ens of the dark world, viz. it proceeds from the Center to the fire-word;
and thereinto also it enters (in its Ens.
End) when it goes forth out of the form, viz. out of the mouth, and
whithersoever it goes, it Works.
brings forth fruit.

10. If it enters into another man's Text, into the mansion house of his Tone
or Hearing faculty.
Hearing, in whom the hunger of craft, and vanity, stands in open desire, it is
soon received as into a fruitful Soil, and takes deep spreading root and
brings forth such evil fruit; whence also such sharp words and stinging Text,
Thorns, or jerking Taunts.
Taunts of the Devil are hatched in the devilish essence.

11. But if it proceeds forth empty and bare only, into the false Imagination,
then it ascends into the will of the Mind, and conceives it self in the Mind
into a Substance, for a Seat of the Devils desire, even for his murdering
Fort which he has in Man.

12. But if the false word be uttered against an holy man, in reviling, and
reproaching him, and the holy man will not let it take place in him, and not
stir or move himself in the evil part of his property with the like evil
word, then the wrath of God receives it from without the man, and is thereby
mightily Enkindled; and not only the inward Ens of Gods anger according to the
Spiritual dark worlds property is thereby enraged, but also the outward Ens
of the wrath in Turba magna is inflamed, and hangs over the wicked man's Head,
and does even encompasse him, and he is therewith taken, and possessed as if he
sat in the Hellish [flames of] fire.

13. Of which Christ said, that when the wicked did curse us we should bless
him, that is, Echo forth the word of Love against his fiery word, and not
suffer his malicious word to enter into us for to take root, and then it goes
back again, and apprehends the wicked Reviler himself, for Christ said: we
heap fiery coals upon his head.

14. For Every word of man proceeds from an Eternal Ens; either from the Ens
of Gods Love, or from the Ens of Gods Anger; and if now it be brought forth out
of the Ens, viz. out of its own place, or mother, it will have again a place
of its Rest, wherein it may work.

15. Now if it cannot take rest and work in its likeness, without the wicked
man, who has awakened and brought it forth out of his Ens, and introduced it
into a Sound, or Vocal.
wordy Substance, then it catches or surrounds its Expresser [or author] who
has brought it into a Substance, and enters again with its root into its
mother whence it did arise; that is, with the Enkindled Spirit, and with the
Substance (of its contrived matter) it does lay hold of and apprehend the Or
expressors Speakers.
Inventers Body; viz. the outward Essence of the outward Sulphur.

16. For every word when it is expressed, is outwardly made and formed; for in
the expressing or pronouncing thereof the outward Spirit, viz. the outward part
of the Soul receives it to its own Substance; and afterward being enkinded in
the wrath, and infected by the Devil in its coming forth, in its witty
glancing suttlety of the Serpent, does enter again into the Soul and Body of
the monstrous Image; and works according to its property Enkindled and
infected by the Devil, and continually brings forth such evil fruits, and
words,; as we plainly see, that out of many a wicked mouth nothing but vanity
proceeds.

17. Moreover we have a very great and weighty point here to consider of,
concerning the Serpents craft; that if the Devil has infected the word (when
it is borne in the Heart and formed in its Ens, and have taken possession of
the will, and made it substantial) this Serpents craft does then hold and
entertain the fame in the Devils murdering Fort, as a fine adorned pleasant
Text, Kittling.
brat; as the Serpent lying on the Tree spoke very pleasingly and takingly with
Eve, until it could by its friendly intercouse, catch her in the desire: even
so likewise the false, crafty, conceived Serpents word, which proceeds from
the false heart does hold forth it self as a very lovely Eloquent persuasive
Syrene, and calls it self holy, till it can discover man's desire set open for
it, there it lays open its very heart, and enters in to the desire [of him],
and makes it self a place to work, and re-procreate [its like.]

18. Hence now do come the false close backbiters tale-bearers, perverters and
wrong interpreters of other men's sayings, secret liars who are very fair
before and behind are a Serpent, Revilers and foul mouthed slanderers who
take away a man's good Name from him; and in this false smooth and well-colored
and adorned Serpents property, the Devil has his Counsel Chamber, his
school, where he learneth the children of Eve his Art, viz. juggling delusions,
foppery, pride, Covetousness, Envy, Anger, and all vices and abominations
proceeding from the Abyss of the dark worlds property.

19. Thus the Devil rules man in Body and Soul by the crafty Essence of the
Serpent, and works abomination with abomination, iniquity with iniquity, Sin
with Sin; and this is even the first Original of Actual Sin, that Eve and
Adam did introduce the Serpents crafty Essence which the Devil had infected,
into their [will and] desire; and so made themselves forthwith Monstrous in the
Serpent, where upon the dark worlds Essence did awake in them, that so soon as
this was brought to pass, the will did imagine into this monstrous property,
and formed it self into a Substantial word.

20. Even thus the word was now also manifest in man in the property of Gods
Anger, viz. in the dark worlds Ens; and thus man does now speak lies and
truth; for there is a twofold Ens in him, viz. one from the dark world
awakened and stirred up by the desire of the Serpent, and Devil; and one from
the Heavenly limus which is now stirring in man, wherein the free will takes
the word that is, whence it does generate a fruit out of the divine Expressed,
and formed word, which is again received of the likeness, either in heaven or
hell, that is in the darkness or light.

21. For the two worlds are in each other as one, the wicked forms and makes
[for] God a good word in his wrath unto Death, viz. unto the sting of Death,
and Hell; and the holy man forms and makes [to] God, out of his good Ens, a
good word unto the holy life, and Operation, as the Scripture speaks very
clearly: the holy is to God a sweet savor unto life, and the wicked a sweet
savor unto death, viz. to the dark world.

22. Now every man is a creator [or framer] of his words powers, and Doings;
that which he makes and frames out of his free will, the same is received as
a work of the manifested word, into each properties likeness.

23. For Gods word is also manifest in the dark world; but only according to
its property, as the Scripture says, such as the people is, such a God they
also have: Gods word is manifest in all things, in each thing according to its
Ens, whence the free will proceeds; the free will is the creator or maker,
whereby the creature makes [formeth and worketh] in the Or revealed.
manifested Word.

24. There is no herb or thing whatsoever that can be named, wherein there
lies not an Ens from the manifested Word of God, an Ens both according to Gods
Love, and Anger, according to the dark and light world: for this visible world
was breathed forth out of this same Word; now each Ens of the forth-breathed
Word has a free will again to breath forth out of its Ens a Its own
likeness.
likeness according to it self.

25. But this is now the Greatest Evil, that the Ens in its Center is departed
out of the likeness [and harmony] of the property into an Elevation, viz. out
of one only Ens into many entities, into many properties; of which, the Devil
being an Hierarch of the place of this world, and also the Curse of God upon
the Earth, is a cause, which Curse man stirred up and awakened.

26. For now, an evil Ens, which is from the Awakened property, does Text, or
is borne carried in, etc.
infuse it self into a good vessel and corrupts the vessel, whence the
free will should Or create.
draw from a good property: but the evil does mix it self into the good; and
both come forth again in the formed Word, into a Substance; as an evil man
does oftentimes stir up an evil word and work in a good man which he never
before conceived [or purposed] in his will.

27. For the Anger is become stirring [or quick] in the humane Ens, and
adhereth to the good Ens, and the will of the fire-soule is free, it Forms.
creates or draws forth.
conceives as soon in the Ens of anger, as in the Ens of Love, nay, in many a
one the Love-Ens is wholly impotent, and as 'twere dead or extinct, He works
only from the craftiness of the Serpent, fruit, unto Gods Anger, and though
his mouth does flatter in the Serpents craft, and make a devout show of the
holy Word, and sets forth it self as an Angel, yet it is only the Ens and
form of the crafty Serpent, in the light of the earthly nature, and the man
deceives himself.

28. Therefore Christ says, unless that ye be converted, and become as
children, ye cannot see the Kingdom of God: the free will must wholly go out
from the Ens of the Serpent, and enter again, in the Spirit of Christ, into
its heavenly Ens, which did disappeare in Adam, and again awaken and stir up
this Ens in the hunger of its desire, that it also may be again awakened and
borne unto a living Ens, in the new Regenerated Word in the humanity of Christ,
and which did araise, and powerfully quicken it self, in the great
Love-property in the man's property, in the person of Christ: where also, the
free will becomes a new innocent child, and neither wills nor lets in the
Serpents Craft, otherwise the free will cannot form, and manifest Gods holy
Word in it self, the free will must draw only out of the good Ens, if it will
work and live in the holy Word.

29. Now understand aright our writing concerning the Serpents Craft, and its
Adorned Art, and false virtue; (I say) understand our very profound and high
meaning, opened out of the Counsel of God, thus: The Serpents Ens and
Original was a virgin of heavenly pomp, a Queen of Heaven, and Princess of the
Beeings of God, apprehended, and formed in the Fiat of the divine desire,
through the fire in the light: in like manner as Hierarch Lucifer was so, and
Prince Lucifer sat in heavenly pomp in the Serpents Ens, who had infected the
Ens out of which the Serpent was created, and therein awakened the dark worlds
property, viz. the Center of the Eternal nature, whence evil, and good do
take their Original, but when the Good did in the Fire, sever it self into
the light, and the Evil into the darkness, the Serpents Ens which was good,
was then infected, filled, and possessed, with the darkness; and from hence
comes its Craft.

30. For even such a craft the Devil desired, which also took him in the
Eternall-Speaking word, in such a property, and confirmed him therein to For
ever.
Eternity; for it is also a Wonder in God, how an Evil could come to be, out
of a Good, that the good might be known, and manifest, and the creature might
learn to fear before God, and hold Willingly submit to.
still to the Spirit of God; that he only might act, and work in the
Eternall-Speaking Word, and make, and do what he please with and by the
creature.

31. And to this End Lucifer was swallowed up in the wrath, seeing his free
will went forth from the Resignation and departed from Gods Spirit, into the
Center, to be its own selfe-full maker and creator; that the Angels now have
an Warning, Text, Looking glass.
example in this revolted fallen Prince and Puissant Hierarch; for the Kingdom
of God, which is [peculiarly and properly] called Gods Kingdom, stands in the
deepest Humility, and love, and not at all in the wrathful fires-might, but in
the lights Ardent might, viz. in Power.

32. But the Devils Kingdom, after which he longed, and labored, stood in
the wrathful fires-might, but the same was In the being Essence or Substance.
Essentially taken from him in his place, and he was spevved out into the
eternal hunger of the darkness.

33. And that he had infected and possessed the Ens of the Serpent which was so
crafty, may be seen in its Body, which is only a dry, hungry Skin, and fills
it self with poison in the Tail, in which property the great craft arises,
and therefore the Serpent carries the poison in the Tail, which may soon be
pulled off, in that the same in the beginning was introduced into its
virgin-like Ens.

34. For the Serpent is therefore called a Virgin according to the Right of
Eternity, because it has both Tinctures; which is in no kind of earthly
creatures besides; but it is now in the curse of God, yet if the Artist knew
what its pearl was, he would rejoice at it: yet by reason of the worlds false
desire, which seeks only the false magic, it remains Hidden, also [it is
not manifest] that the wicked may bear his Rebuke.

34. For the Pearl of the whole world is trodden under foot; and there is
nothing more common then the same, yet it is hidden; so that the holy Ens might
not be introduced into an ungodly one which is not worthy of it; and so Gods
power and Word in the Virgin-like Essence be thereby brought into a Serpentine
[ Ens] as it is to be understood in the Serpent: enough for our
schoole-fellowes.

36. Thus we do fundamentally understand the Original of Sins birth; how Sin
was borne, and opened in the Humane Word; and how God is provoked to anger in
his Expressed Word by the Humane Re-expressing: for man bears the Word which
created Heaven and Earth in his Ens, for the same word is brought to Substance.

37. Now God has inspired into man's Ens, viz. into the formed Compacted Word,
the living Soul, viz. the Or understanding.
Original out of all the three Principles, as a Spirit of the formed Word;
this understanding has now power and might to re-conceive, and to Generate
again a formal Voice in the Ens, viz. in the Formed Compacted Word.

38. But being the Serpents craft, viz. the Devils introduced desire, became
manifest in the Ens of Adam and Eve, viz. in their Compacted, and formed Word:
thereupon the free will does now draw forth from this Serpents Essence, mere
Adders poison, and death, and forms its word therein, unless the holy Ens or
Seed of the woman be again awakened in the newborn Love of God in Christ;
then the free will may conceive in this same holy Ens, and bruise the head of
the Serpents, and Devils Ens in the Anger of God; that is, reject and abhor
the evil will, which desires to Idea, and imprint it self, from the
Serpents, Ens in the formation of the words, and bruise it in the will of the
Thoughts, with the Ens of the woman, viz. of Christ, and esteem it as the
Devils Mire, and Dirt, which in the children of God is a continual Combat
and strife between the Ens of the Serpent in the flesh, and betvveene the
Regenerate Ens of the heavenly part.

39. Also know this: Every Thought which is formed in the Will, so that a man
consents unto lies, or any thing else which is false, or if his will has
conceived [and contrived] any thing that is unjust, and he brings that
contrivance into the desire, that he would very willingly do it, or express it
in the false Evil formed word, if he could or knew how, and yet must let it
alone, either for fear, or shame sake; this same is all Sin; for the will has
formed it self in the Serpents Ens.

40. But understand it well; if a good will does Or form it self.
conceive in a good Ens, and yet the evil desire does adhere to it, and
wills to poison the good; if then [I say] the good conceived will overcomes
the evil, and casts it out, that the evil cannot also be formed or received
into the Compaction or Substance; it is no Sin; and though the evil desire
which adhereth to the good be Sin, yet if the good will does not close with it
and bring it into Substance, but rejects it out of the good will, as an Evil,
then the sinful desire cannot come into Essence, and the good will has not
hereby wrought any Evil, if it has not consented to the Craft of the Serpent.

41. Every Sin is borne of the strange Ens; if the free will departs from the
Ens, wherein God has created it; then the Sin which is conceived in the will
in false desire, and brought to Essence in the Ens of the will (so that man
would feign do wickedly or unjustly if he could but bring his intent to pass)
is also great in the sight of God; but if it proceeds so far as to hurt, and
injure any one, by word or deed, then the Sin is double; for it is formed in
its own Ens, and forms it self also in that whereinto it introduces the
false word, so far as the false word in its Speaking finds a place of Rest to
work [and bring forth its evil fruit.]

42. And therefore the holy word shall judge the False; as also at the end of
this time the holy word shall cast out from it self all false Carved work of
fancy.
Idol Opinions, and all whatsoever has been formed in the Serpents Ens, and
give them to the dark world.

43. All those that take, or conceive the word in them, in their devilish, and
Serpentine Ens, and use it against Gods children, in whom the holy Ens is
manifest, and do stir up also an offense [or occasion of stumbling] in the
children of God, that the free will in them does also conceive it self in the
Serpents Ens, viz. in Anger, and averseness, where always the holy Ens does
likewise form it self, and the Spirit of zeal arises: these false authors
beginners and Causers, do all sin against the holy Ghost.

44. For they do extremely despite, and defye him, that he must even proceed
forth, through the anger of the children of God, whereby he is stirred up, and
oftentimes shows himself in the Turba of the children of God, and falls upon
the neck of the wicked; as may be seen by Elias, and Moses, and also by
Elisha, who cursed the Boys, that the Bears came out and tore them to pieces;
for thus the sword of God comes forth, through the mouth of the Saints; if the
holy Spirit be extremely displeased, and set into a fiery zeal: then he
awakeneth Turba magna, which draws the Sword against a wicked people, and
devoureth them.

45. Thus understand it in its full scope, and meaning; Man has Gods Word in
him, which created him; understand; the word has imprinted, and formed it
self with the Creating; both in its Holiness, and also in the Anger; and that
also Or out of.
in the outward world; for the limus of the Earth, or the Earth it self was
amassed and compacted, through the word; so that the formed Word which took
its beginning in the divine desire, viz. in the Fiat, is an exhalation
forth-breathed from the Spirit of God out of Love and Anger: therefore it is
evil and good, but the Evil was hidden, and as it were wholly swallowed up in
the light, as the night in the day.

46. But the sinful desire in Lucifer and Adam, has awakened the Anger, so
that it is become essentially manifest: now the Gates of the formed Word both
in Love, and Anger, do stand open in the earth, and also in the limus of the
earth, viz. in man, and also in the free will of man, whatsoever he does now
form and amasse in his free will, that he has made, be it either evil or
good.

47. But now the Evil shall in the judgment of God be separated from the
Good; and in what part [either of the evil or good] the humane understanding,
viz. the soul shall be found, thereinto it must enter, with all whatsoever it
has done, as into its own made habitation; and therefore Christ says; their
works shall follow them, and be purged (or proved) by the fire: Note.
also at the end, when the books of the Essence shall be opened, they shall be
judged according to their works; for the work be it evil or good does embrace
the soul, unless it does wholly depart from the [evill] and destroy it
again, by reconciliation of his offended and wronged brother, and drown the
Substance in the Blood and Death of Christ, else there is no remedy.

48. Therefore a man must well consider what he will speak; for he speaks
from the formed Ens of Gods manifestation; and well bethink and ponder with
himself, before he intends [or conceives in the will] to do any thing; and
by no means consent unto any false backbitings or approve by a yea, neither
privately nor openly.

49. For all forged tales, and sharp taunts, proceed from the Serpents Ens; all
Cursings, and swearings, and stinging girds, proceed from the Serpents Ens; yea
though they be but in Jest, yet the Serpents Ens has stuck it self with them
to the good, and compacted them with the word: therefore Christ says, swear
not at all: let your speech be yea yea, nay, nay; for whatsoever is more then
these comes of evil; Note.
that is, it is borne of the Serpents Ens.

50. All Cursers, and swearers, have introduced their free will, viz. the poor
soul, into the vanity of the Serpents Ens, and form their Curses, and Oaths,
with all their lewd wanton talk, which is wrought, in the Serpents Ens, and
sow into Gods anger: and on the contrary all Gods children, who are in right
earnest, do form their words in the holy ens, especially the Prayer, when the
free will of the soul, does amasse or conceive it self in the holy Ens (which
is opened by Christ's humanity) then it forms the true essential word of God
in it self, so as it comes to Substance.

51. Therefore Saint Paul says; the Spirit of God does mightily intercede for
us in the sight of God as it pleases him; for the Spirit of God is formed in
the desire of the holy word; he is taken (or apprehended) and this taking or
receiving is that, which Christ said, he would give us his flesh for food, and
his blood for drink.

52. The souls will takes Christ's Ens, and in Christ's Ens, the word of Christ
became man, which the souls desire, or Fiat does receive or impresse into its
holy Ens disappeared in Adam; and here Adam arises in Christ, and becomes
Christ [the second Adam or the Anointed one] according to the heavenly Ens and
divine word, and from this Ens of Christ, proceeds forth, divine knowledge, out
of the word of God.

53. Thus the children of God are the Temple of the holy Ghost which dwells
in them, and so they speak Gods Word; and without this there is no true
knowing or willing, but mere fable, and Babel, a Confusion of the crafty
Serpent.

54. Therefore Christ called the Pharisees, a Seed of Serpents, and a
generation of Vipers, and although they were the High Priests, yet he knew them
to be so in their essence, for they had formed their will in the Serpents Ens;
they carried the words of Moses in their mouth, and therein they mixed the
Serpents Ens; as many still do to this day; where the incarnate Devil
carries Gods word upon his tongue; and yet does only hide the Serpents Ens
thereby, and introduces the Diabolical Ens into the litterall word, whence
Babell the mother of all Spiritual whoredom is borne, a mere verbal
contention, and wrangling about Words, where the Ens of the Devil and the
Serpent, does oppose the divine Ens in the Formed Divine Word.

55. But so it must be, that the formed and Conceived Word in Gods children may
be stirred up, whetted and exercised, and the truth come forth to light; Dear
brethren: this is the Inheritance which we have received from Adam and Eve; and
that is the cause that the Body must Dye, and wholly putrify, and entet again
into its first Ens; for the Serpents Ens must be wholly done away, it cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God.

56. The first Ens in the limus of the Earth which was coagulated in in the
Verbum Fiat, must be wholly renewed in the Spirit of Christ, if it will
possess the Kingdom of God, but if it remains captivated in the Serpents
Ens, it shall never be any more manifest, understand the holy Ens which
disappeared in Adam, and was captivated in the Serpents Ens, whereby Death came
into the flesh.

57. Therefore a man must consider what he speaks, thinks, and does, least
he conceive his Thoughts in the Serpents Ens, and frame a will in the Mind, in
the Ens of the Serpent; for else the Devil does set himself therein, and
hatcheth a Basilisk, viz. an hellish form in the word.

58. For all wrath which is conceived in man for Revenge, does primarily arise
in its Center out of the nature and property of the dark world, viz. in Gods
anger, and forms it self further in the Serpents Ens to Substance; let it be
what zeal it will, if it brings it self into a wrath to its own Revenge, it
is formed in the Ens of the Serpent, and is devilish.

59. And though the same were a Prophet, and an Apostle, and yet would bring
himself in the wrath to his own Revenge, then this Substance is formed from
the Anger of God in the Serpents Ens, and goes into the wrath of God; and the
Anger of God is therein zealous, which oftentimes does so stir up and form it
self in the holy children of God, that The Saints.
they must against their purposed will, bring down the Turba upon the house of
the wicked, also upon his Body and Soul, as may be seen by Moses, upon
Chorah, Dathan, and Abiram, whom the Earth swallovved up; so also by Elias in
the Fire, concerning the two Captains over fifty, whom the fire devoured,
also by Elisha, and many other Prophets.

60. And there are many remarkable examples to be found concerning this in in
the holy Histories, how oftentimes the children of God have been forced to
carry the Sword of the Turba in them: a great example whereof we see in
Sampson, and also in Joshua with his wars, and likewise in Abraham; how the
zeal of God did enkindle it self in them; that they in their spirit of zeal
have oftentimes awakened the Turba magna in the Anger of God, and raised great
Rebukes judgments, and plagues, upon whole Countries; as Moses in Egpit did
with the plagues upon the Egyptians.

61. But we must here distinguish, if the zeal of God should awaken it self
in an holy man without his purposed will, and give him the Sword of Gods anger)
such a one differs much from those who in their own Thoughts contrive and plot
in the wrath, and introduce the Conceived or purposed will into the Serpents
Ens and make it to Substance, for that is Sin, yea though the The greatest
Saint.
most holy man should do it.

26. Therefore Christ so emphatically and punctually teaches us in the new
birth, Love Humility and Meekness; and would that a Christian, should not at
all Revenge, Note.
also not be Angry, for he says, that whosoever is angry with his brother is
guilty of the judgment; for the Anger is a conception in the Serpents Ens,
which must be cut off, by the judgment of God, from the Good Being: and
whosoever shall say unto his brother Racha, shall be in danger of the Counsel:
for the desire of Or Revenge.
Racha arises in the Center of the dark fiery wheel of the Eternal nature;
therefore in the fire-soule there is a form of the fire- word [in manner] of a
wheel like a madness; and the souls fiery-forme stands in the Racha as a mad
furious wheel, which confounds the Essence in the Body, and destroys or
shatters in pieces the understanding: for every Racha desires to destroy Gods
Image: thus the soul hangs on the wheel of the Eternal nature, viz. on the
Center of the horrible Anxious birth; as is before mentioned concerning the
Center of the birth of nature.

63. Moreover Christ says; Whosoever says to his brother thou fool shall be
in danger of hellfire: this is thus wrought, when the Conceived will has
formed it self in the furious wrath of Gods anger, and introduced it into the
Serpents Ens, then it stands in the furious wheel as mad, and if it does now
purposely go on, and so form the word, and casts or speaks it forth against
its brother, and enkindles in him also an hateful enmity in the Serpents Ens,
the same burns in his Expressed Word in the fire of Gods anger, and he is
guilty of it, for he has enkindled it in his Racha.

64. Therefore said Christ, if thou will offer thy Gift, go first, and be
reconciled to thy offended brother or neighbor, for otherwise he brings his
wrath into thy offering, and withholdeth thee in thy desire toward God, that
thou can not reach the holy Ens which else washes away the Turba in thy
Enkindled vanity.

65. For, the Word fool, is in it self in the Essence, nothing else but an
enkindled wrathful fiery wheel, an outrageous madness; and he that so calls
his neighbor without a cause, he has brought forth a word in the fire-wheele
in Gods wrath, and is guilty of it; for the forth-produced word is arisen out
of the Ens of the Soul and Body.

66. Every word when it is formed; does first awaken its own Ens, whence it
takes its original, then it leads it self forth through the Counsel of the
five Senses against its brother: now whosoever uses such a wrathful devouring
fire-word against his brother, he sows into the Anger of God and is in danger
to reap the fruit which he has so sown, when it springs up, and grows.

67. Therefore take heed and beware O Man what thou think speak, or
desire to do, look well always in what zeal thou stand, whether it be
divine, or only of thy own poysonfull nature! thou Father, thou mother, thou
brother, and Sister, which proceed and come from one blood, from one Ens, and
mutually Assimulate each with other as a tree in its branches: think and
consider what kind of Sound [or tune] thou introducest into the vital Ens of
thy fellow-twiggs and branches, whether it be Gods Love-word, or his Word of
Anger, if ye do not destroy the introduced Evil again with Love, and
introduce again the Love- Ens into the Anger [to overcome and reconcile it]
then the Substance must come Or before.
into the judgment of God and be separated in the fire of God; as the Devil
is Severed from the good Ens; and so shall thou oh wicked man with thy wicked
formed Word, [which thou have conceived], out of the Ens of Gods Anger.

68. And therefore God has introduced his holy Word out of his deepest Love
again into the humane Ens, being the same was introduced into Adam and Eve in
the Anger, that man might conceive [or form his will and doings] again in the
introduced Love of God in Christ Jesus, and in him destroy the wrathful anger:
and therefore Christ teaches us that he is the Gate which leads us into God,
that he is the way and the light, whereupon we may enter in to God, and in him
Regenerate [or quicken again to life] the holy Ens.

69. And therefore Christ forbids us to be angry; and conceive our will and
word in the Revenge: but if any one did curse us we ought to bless him; and if
any did strike us, him we should not resist; least our Turba should be stirred
up in the newborn Holy Ens of Christ, and introduce the Serpents craft,
iniquity, and Ens, thereinto.

70. But we should be as children in Love, who understand nothing of the
Serpents craft; therefore we declare in divine Knowledge, as a dear and
precious truth, that all contention, covetousness, Envy, Anger, War, false
desire, or whatsoever may be of the like name [and nature] does take its
original out of the Center of the Or devoureing property or wolvish gulf.
Revenge of the wrath of God, out of the dark world, and is brought in the
Serpents Ens to a Substance, wherein the false Serpents Ens will behold and
contemplate it self, in Pride.

71. Whatsoever does strive, and contend in this world about selfehood, selvish
interest, temporal honor, its own profit, for its own advancement; the same
is bred and borne of the Serpents Ens; be it either rich or poor, in Superior
or inferior, no order rank or condition whatsoever excepted: all men who
would be called Christians, or children of the Love, they must be borne again
in their First Ens (which disappeared, and corrupted in Adam) out of the Divine
Love in the holy and heavenly Ens, or else none of them can be a child of the
Love of God: All the greediness, and covetousness of all Places and Politic
Powers under what name or Title soever does wholly proceed from the Serpents
Ens.

72. I speak not of the Offices but of the falsehood of the Officers: the
Office in its place and station is Gods Ordinance, if it be carried on in holy
desire, and arises out of a divine root, for good, if not, but that it rises
only out of a root for selfehood, and pride, then it is from the Serpents
craft, and goes into Destruction.

73. All war however blanched over, and under what pretense soever takes its
original out of Gods Anger; and he that begins it, does it from a
selfe-full desire to Selvish interest, from the Serpents Ens: unless that war
arises from the Command and injunction of God, that a Nation has brought
forth (it self) in his wrath, that he would his Anger should devour it, and
ordain an Ho^ier in the room, as was brought to pass by Israel among the
Gentiles, otherwise it is wholly borne in the Selfefull Turba in selfehood. It
does not belong to any true Christian borne of Christ to raise the Sword of the
Turba, unless the zealous Spirit of God does stir it up in him, who often will
Rebuke Sin: whatsoever exalts it self in the wrath about its own Honor, and
pride, and brings it self to Revenge [or bloud-shed] is from the Devil, be it
either by Nobles or ignobles, none excepted; before God they be all alike.

74. Earthly Dominion and Government has its Original from the Fall, in the
Serpents craft; being man departed from the Love-will, from the Obedience of
God, therefore he must have a Judge to Rebuke the false desire in its
Substance, and destroy the false Substance; therefore Magistracy, and
Superiority, Note.
is ordained of God for a defense of the Righteous Substance and will, and not
for its Selvish interest, and its own perverse will, to break down and destroy
Governments at its pleasure, and to oppress the poor and impotent, whatsoever
does that, is arisen from the Serpents Ens, let it glister and color over it
self with what Hypocrisy it will; and though it were clothed with Gold, and
Pearls, yea even with the Sun, it is bred and borne out of the Serpents Ens,
and has the Serpents Ens in its Government, and tends into Destruction,
unless it be borne anew [in the Ens of Christ.]

75. Whatsoever is not borne out of the Ens of Love, and bears forth a will
of righteousness, and truth, to work something that is good upon the earth
for the Service and profit of his neighbor, the same is Idolatrous; for in
Adam we all are one Tree; we are all sprung from one only Root.

76. And God has begotten us in his Love, and brought us into Paradise, but
the Serpents craft has set us at variance, so that we are departed out of
Paradise, and come into its villainous subtle craft, into Selvishness; whence we
must again depart, and enter into a Childs Coat.

77. We have nothing in this world for our own propriety but a shirt whereby we
cover our shame before the Angels of God, that our Abomination may not appear
naked; and that is our own and nothing else, the other is all common:
Whosoever has two coats, and sees that his brother has none, the other coat
is his brothers, as Christ teaches us.

78. For we come naked into this world, and carry away scarce our shirt with
us, which is the covering of our shame, the Rest we possess either by
necessity of Office, or else out of covetousness, out of the Serpents false
desire: Every man should seek the profit and preservation of his neighbor,
how he might serve and be helpful to him; as one branch of a tree gives its
power Essence and virtue to the other, and they grow and bear fruit in one
desire; even so we are all one Tree in Adam.

79 But we are in Adam withered in the Serpents Ens as to the Love-will; and we
must all be nevv-borne in Christ's Love- Ens, and will; without that, none is a
child of the Love of God; and though there may be Something of the divine Love
in many an one, yet it is wholly covered with the Serpents Ens; which devilish
Ens does continually spring forth above the love, and bears fruit.

80. There is not any who does good in selfehood, and own will; Note.
unless that he forsake in the own (appropriating) will, all whatsoever he
has, even to the Infants-shirt, that he must keep for his own and give it
none; for it is the Covering of his shame, the other is all Common, and he is
only a servant and Steward of the same; a Guardian, and distributour to every
one in his place.

81. whosoever suffers the poor and miserable to be in want and distress
under his charge; and gathers into his Mind Temporal Goods for his own
property, he is no Christian but a child of the Serpent, for he suffers his
under branches to wither, and keeps away his sap and power from them, and
will not work forth fruits by his fellow-branches.

82. We do not hereby mean the wicked Idle Crew which will only suck the
sweet, and not work and bring forth fruit themselves in the Tree, that they
should be pampered, to exercise pleasure and vanity: but we speak of the twigs
which stand in the tree, and cooperate, and would feign grow and bear fruit,
from whom the great branches of this world do withdraw the Sap and hold it in
themselves, that they as lean overdript twiggs do wither, by and under their
charge: such are the rich, Potentates, and Nobles; with them, the Spirit of
zeal does here speak; so far as they do keep and hold their Sap within
themselves, and suffer their small branches to dry up and wither, and wholly
withdraw the Sap from them, they are branches on the tree of the Serpent, which
is grown up in the Curse of Gods anger, and is reserved for the fire of Gods
Anger; says the Spirit of Wonders.

CHAP. XXIII. How God re-called Adam and his Eve when they were entered into Sin
and vanity, and awakened in the Serpents Ens; and laid upon them the Estate or
calling, or Ordinance.
Order of this toilsome laborious world, and ordained the Serpent-bruiser for
an Help (or Savior) to them.
NOW when Adam and Eve had eaten of the tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, and were become Monstrous by the Serpent; Moses writes of it thus:
Their eyes were opened, and they knew that they were naked, Genesis 3. v 7.
and they sewed Figg-leaves together and made themselves Aprons: Here the
Soul did even now know the monstrous Image, and was ashamed of it; that such a
gross beast with gross flesh and hard bones should awaken [or show it selfe],
with a beastiall wormes-carkase of vanity in their tender delicate Body; and
they would have covered the same from the eyes of God, and for shame crept
behind the trees; so very ashamed were they of the foul deformity of the
beast, for the Beastiall Ens had swallowed up the heavenly, and got the upper
hand, which they had not before known; now they could not tell for shame what
they should do.

2. The Serpents craft would not Here cover the shame, but did lay it only
more open, and accused them, as revolting faithless Rebels; for Gods anger
did awake in them, and arraigned them now before the Severe judgment, to
devour them into it self, as into the dark world, as happened to Lucifer.

3. And this is the State, Condition or Thing which caused the Earth to
Tremble, etc.
Place whereby the Earth trembled in the death of Christ, and the Rocks clove
in sunder: Here Gods Anger shut up the holy Ens of the heavenly humanity in
Death; which, Christ when he destroyed death on the Cross, did again Open,
at which the wrath, in the Curse of the Earth, and rocks, shook and trembled.

4. And here was the Soar combat before Gods Anger, in which combat Christ
in the Garden (when he prayed, and was to overcome this Anger) did sweat drops
of blood, when he said; father, if it be possible let this Cup pass from me;
but if it be not possible but that I must drink it, thy will be done.

5. Christ on the Cross must drink down this wrathful anger, which was
awakened in Adams Essence, into his holy heavenly Ens, and change it with Great
Love into divine joy; of which the drink of gall and vinegar, being a mixed
Draught which the Jews gave him was a type, signifying what was done inwardly
in the humanity of Christ.

6. For the outward Image of man should also be redeemed from the Anger and
death and again arise out of the Earth: therefore Christ's outward humanity from
the Kingdom of this world must also drink of this Cup, which God the Father
had filled to Adam in his anger; the same, Christ must drink off, and change
the anger into Love; therefore said Christ; is it possible then let it pass
from me: but it was not possible to overcome the anger, unless the sweet Name
Jesus, drink it into it self, and change it into joy: then said Christ,
Father! thy will be done, and not the will of my humanity.

7. Gods will should also have been fulfilled in Adam, but he exalted his own
will by the Serpents craft: now the Humanity of Christ upon the Cross must
give this own self-will unto the Anger for to devour it: but the holy name
Jesus brought it into the death of selfehood, that it must dye in the wrathful
death; and enter again through death in his Resurrection into the true
Resignation viz. into the divine Harmony.

8. Adam when he had awakened the Anger in him stood in Paradise in great shame
and scorn, before God and all holy Angels; and the Devils did mock and
deride him: that this Image of God which should possess his Royal Throne,
was become a monstrous Beast: and into this Scorn Christ must enter, and
suffer himself to be reviled, mocked, spit upon, whipped, crowned with Thorns,
as a false King; for Adam was a King and Hierarch, but become false, and
Rebellious.

9. Here Christ stood in his stead; and was condemned to death; for Adam also
should have been judged by Gods Anger; Here Adam that is Christ in Adams
humanity, stood in his stead: Adam should have been rejected as a curse, even
as a scorn before Heaven and Earth, and and in Sum, the whole process of
Christ from his Incarnation unto his Ascension, and sending of the holy Ghost,
is Adams estate, what Adam had merited as a malefactor; Christ himself must
take upon him in Adams person, and bring again the life out of death.

10. Adam was made by the word of God, but he fell from Gods Love-word into his
Anger-word; thus God out of mere grace did again awaken his Love-word in the
deepest humility Love and mercy in Adams wrathful Image, and introduced the
great Love- Ens into the Ens of the awakened anger, and changed the Angry Adam
in Christ into an holy ONE.

11. Moses describes it very clearly, but the veil lies before the beastiall
man, that he does not know him: for he says: And they heard the voice of the
Lord God, Verse 8*
which walked in the Garden, when the day grew cool, and Adam and his wife hid
themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the Trees.

12. Moses says; they heard the voice of the Lord God, which walked in the
Garden: what is now this voice which was [or stirred] in the Garden? for Adams
ears were dead to the Divine hearing, and were awakened in the wrath; he could
not in his own might hear any more Gods holy voice, for he was dead as to the
Kingdom of Heaven, as to the divine holiness; as God told him: in that day
that thou eatest of this Tree thou shall dye.

13. The voice was Gods Anger, which forced in to Adams Essence, when the day
became cool, understand the Eternal day in Adams Essence was awakened in
cold, and heat; threfore now they heard the voice of God the Lord in his Anger
in their Essence; for the Turba was awakened: the Tone or Hearing of the dark
world did Sound [or ring its sad knell.]

14 But that which walked in the Garden, and re-called Adam was another voice
which brake forth out of the Anger; and walked [or moved] in the Garden for the
word ( which Der walke^ gieng in the Garden im Garten) is the difference, or
note of distinction, and signifies the voice JESUS proceeding from (...)
JEHOVAH; the voice was (...). Nomen Quatuor Literarum,

That Name of four Letters.


TETRAGRAMMA, but that which walked in the Garden was TON, viz. the Center of
the light world; and the voice TETRAGRAMMA is the Center to the fire-world,
viz. the first Principle, and the TON, the Second Principle, as fire and light
are one, but they Sever themselves in their coming forth to manifestation into
a twofold Source, the like also is to be considered concerning this.

15. The voice of the fire-world entered into the Essence of Adam and Eve; the
same they heard, therefore they were afraid, and crept among the Trees: but the
voice of the light-world is this, whereof Moses spoke, which Der walked gieng
in the Garden: im Garten the holy voice walked in the Garden of Paradise, for
the Word ( Text, Der.
which Der) denotes the Person of Christ, who vvalked in the Spirit, in the
Garden, and went forth from the fires Center, who took possession of Paradise,
and would invest Adam again with it.

16. Therefore says Moses now: and the Lord God called unto Adam: and said
unto him, Verse 9.
where art thou? wherefore said he not Adam and Eve where are ye? no, He called
to Adam; viz. to the first Image which he created in Paradise; and not unto the
man, and woman; for He that called, was He which walked in the Garden; viz. the
word of the light-world, the voice of the Second Principle, which called back
again in [and from] the enkindled Anger, and espoused it self again unto the
disappeared heavenly Ens, that it would araise, and stir up it self again
therein, in the Name Jesus, viz. in the deepest love of the Deity, and unite,
and manifest it self in the fullness of time, in the disappeared Ens with the
introducement of the holy divine Ens of the heavenly worlds- Essence thereinto,
and open Paradise again; and in the mean time bruise the Head of the Serpents
Ens; this Serpent-bruiser said to Adam; where art thou?

17 Now says Reason; He saw him well enough, wherefore said he then, where art
thou? he did indeed see (...)
Adam, but Adam did not see him; for his eyes were departed from (...)
Adonai, from the divine world, into time, viz. into the outward world; into
the Serpents Ens [both] evil and good; into the Death and Corruptibility, out
of these Monstrous eyes Adam saw in the property of the Fires Tincture; but the
property of the lights Tincture, which he had wretchedly lost, said unto him,
where art thou Adam? which is as much as if he had said, Seek me, and see me
again: I am come to give my self again unto thee; Verse 10.
and Adam said I heard thy voice in the garden and was afraid for I am naked.

18. This Calling him was nothing else, but the voice or Sound of the holy word
introducing it self again into the vital light, else Adam could not have
heard this voice: therefore he said; I am naked, and afraid.

19. Of what was he afraid? he felt in him the world of Gods anger, and
feared, that it would wholly enkindle it self, and devour him as happened to
Lucifer: therefore he trembled at the Call of the holy Voice; as the Anger
trembles at the Love, as may be seen on the Cross of Christ; for even here
was the fear and dread of the Serpent; for she knew the voice which called
into Adams Ens; and feared before the face of God, for it knew [or perceived]
the falsehood, which was in it, which it would hide.

20. And God said, who told thee, that thou art naked? that is, Verse 11.
the Serpents Ens has told thee, that thou should imagine after the
beastiall property, and awaken the same.

21. And we see here very clearly; that Adam knew nothing of this naked
beastiall property in his innocence; but if it had been manifest in him, surely
he had then known it; but now God says to him; who has told thee it; have
thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat? Did
not I charge and command thee that thou should not awaken the property of
nakedness in thee; wherefore have thou by Lust brought thy self into the
Beastiall property? did not I create thee in the Angelical property; wherefore
art thou then become a Beast in my Power: have not I made thee in and through
my word? why has thy own free will changed my Word?

22. And he said; Verse 12, 13.
the woman which thou did join with me gave me and I did eat of the Tree:
and God said to the woman wherefore have thou done this? and she said, the
Serpent beguiled me and I did eat. Herein it is plainly and clearly laid open,
that the Devil in the Ens of the Serpent, did deceive Man, as it is before
mentioned; and that they both, Adam and his wife, were made monstrous by the
Serpent.

23. For God said to the Serpent, by whose property the Devil had made
himself a Seat, and habitation in man's Image: because thou have done this be
thou accursed above all cattle, Verse 14.
and above all the beasts of the field; upon thy belly shall thou go; and Dust
shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

24. But here the veil lies before the face of Moses, who passes by the
Serpent, and does not describe what it was: but seeing now God said unto it,
that it should go upon the belly, and eat earth, and no Law was given to it in
the beginning; thereupon we are here well able to find what it was; being it
was the most subtle Beast among all the Beasts, and slew Eve her virgin-like
chastity, that she lusted after the beastiall copulation; thereupon we
understand in the Serpents property, the desire of [carnall] brutall
copulation, and all unchastity, wanton uncleanness, and Beastiall Whoredom of
man.

25. For it, viz. the Serpent in its inward limus whereinto the Devil
introduced his desire Or had been.
was a virgin-like Ens; understand, in the good part of the heavenly Ens which
was taken in the Verbum Fiat, and brought into a creaturall Image according to
each property; as also the Devils Ens before his Creatur-[ship] was a
virgin-like Ens of Angelical property.

26. This Serpents Ens was modellized, and ingrafted in Adam and Eve, for the
desire of Eve took hold of this beastiall property, and imprinted it into her
self, as a blemish [or foul marke] into the right pure Virginity, into the
Pregnant Matrix; therefore God cursed the Image of the outward Serpent, and bid
her go upon the belly, and eat earth, and herewith also the mark [or blemish]
of the impressed monstrous Serpent [was enstamped] in Man.

27. For as now the outward Serpent must go upon the belly and eat earth,
which had brought its figure into the Matrix in Eves Belly, so must now the
Belly of Eve eat of the Cursed earth, and the Matrix goes as a subtle Serpent
upon its belly, and beguileth the limbus of of the fires Tincture; thus it
longs after its Belly and Serpent-creeping, whereas it is only, that this
Serpents Matrix might exercise whoredom, and effect a beastiall work, as Eve
did deceive Adam, so that he did eat of the fruit, and as the outward Serpent
was cursed so also the Serpents Matrix of the beastiall property in Eve, from
whence all her children are corrupted, and are all borne of a monstrous Matrix,
which is a Text, an whore.
defloured Maid in the sight of God; for Adam had already corrupted it when as
he stood in both Tinctures; but when Eve was separated from Adam it came with
her into Act.

28. And God said: I will put enmity between thee and the woman; between thy
Seed, Verse ^^.
and her Seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall sting it on the Heel.
Now the ground does lie herein; for God did not mean hereby the outward
beastiall Serpent Extra Hominem.
without Man, which hides it self in holes, and cranies of the Rocks, and
inhabiteth in the rude Solitary places [of the earth] but the monstrous
Beastiall Serpent in Man, which was figured in the woman's Matrix.

29. For when God called Adam when he hid himself among the Trees, and was
ashamed, and feared; then the voice of the holy Word entered again into the
vital light; and here when God said; I will put enmity, the Seed of the
woman shall bruise the Serpents head; then the holy voice of God went forth out
of JEHOVAH, which would once more move it self in time, and manifest JESUS in
the woman's matrix, in the disappeared heavenly Ens; and incorporated it self
anew with the holy Word [therein] as into an Mark, limit or Bound.
Aim of an Eternal Covenant.

30. And this word which did promise in-hest and incorporate it self into the
Woman's Seed, was that same word which did move it self in Mary's Seed, and
opened the Name Jesus out of the Center of the deepest Love in the word, and
quickened the disappeared heavenly Ens with introducing of the holy living Ens
into the disappeared Ens of Mary.

31. Understand the heavenly chaste Virginity was again revived in the Name of
Jesus in the Seed of Mary in the motion of the Incorporated Word; and this
Incorporated [or Engrafted, or In-Spoken] Word stood in Eve her Seed in the
Matrix as an Butt, limit, the Eternal Loves Eye-Marke.
Aim of a certain Covenant; and was all along propagated in Eve's seed, from
man to man in the Heavenly part, as a Sound, or Incentive of the divine holy
lights fire, wherein the Name Jesus was all along propagated in an Aim, and
Covenant, as a glimmering Incentive, until the time of the Awakening [or
manifestation] of it in Mary, where the Covenant was Text, stood at the end.
fulfilled, and the doors of the shut Chamber were again opened: and this is
that Holy Fire out of which the Name Jesus was manifest, which holy Fire did
burn in the Jewish offerings, which appeased [or Atoned] the Anger of God, and
bruised the head of the monstrous Serpent in man, viz. the monstrous
fire-Spirit, and will.

32. The bruising of the head, is nothing else but to destroy the Abomination
of the Serpent, to take away its power by a right desire of Faith; and by such
a strong importunate Imagination of faith on the promised Word, to take the
same word, and introduce it into the Serpents Ens, and therewith destroy and
ruin the Devils Theft-fort; and thereby kill the matrix of the whorish
desire, and introduce the matrix with its desire into the virgin-like Ens, into
the Aim of the Covenant.

33. In which Covenant the The female and male property.
Woman and Man shall and must Dye; and the chaste Virgin must be borne out of
the Death in the word of the Covenant, with both Tinctures of Peculiar Love,
and then the Serpent in its desire in the Anger of God, will sting the
virgin-childe of the new birth in the Faith on the heel.

34. For the Virgin-like child is fast bound by the heel with a strong chain,
all this life time, unto the monstrous Image; and is not able to get quite rid
of the Serpents chain all this lifetime; this chain is the brutall beastiall
monstrous man, in whom lies the monster of the whore, and Serpent; a figure
whereof we have in the Revelation of John, where the woman stands, with the
Crown and twelve Stars upon the Moon.

35. The Moon signifies the beastiall man, and the woman signifies the virgin
like matrix in the Aim of the Covenant, out of which the virgin-child is borne.

36. When as Adam was man and woman, and yet none of them both, the virginity
according to the lights Tincture in the holy Ens was poisoned and infected in
him by false desire, for the fiery property of the Soul carried [or directed]
its lust into the earthlinesse; and out of that virginity, the woman, by the
adjoining of all the Three Principles, was made; and the woman made her self
monstrous by the Serpent, and corrupted the virgin-like matrix, and by her Lust
did introduce a beastiall monstrous Serpentine Or whorish property.
[ matrix] thereinto, infected with the Devils will and desire.

37. Now this holy Virgin-like matrix in Eve was captivated by the monstrous
property, and the Image of the heavenly Ens did disappeare in her, and in this
heavenly Ens, understand in the Right virgin-like Seed of chastity, Sanctity,
and Purity, which was captived in Eve by the monstrous Serpent, and beastiall
Whores-desire, the word of God did Inspire infuse or recall or apply it self
as a Balsame, that is, put or promise it self.
inhest it self with the dear precious and holy Name Jesus; that it would
again introduce [a] living heavenly Ens into this captived disappeared Ens and
bruise the head of the Serpents Ens, viz. the Whores Monster, and mortify its
desire, and cast away the Whores-Image [or Bastard] and over-povver and allay
the Enkindled anger of God in this virgin-like matrix with the deepest Love of
God, and wholly kill and Or do away.
null the Monster [of the Serpent in flesh and bloud], and this is that which
God said, the Seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head.

38. Understand it aright, the virgin-like Seed of Eve in the word of God,
should do it in the Name and sweet power of Jesus: the Seed included in the
Covenant of God, whereout the Virgin-child is borne as the dew out of the
morning, that (I say) should, and must do it.

39. For the child which is from the blood of the man and woman, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; but that which is [borne] of the virgin-like
Ens, in the Aim of the Covenant, out of the promised Word of God; the child
of the man and woman is a Monstrum, and must dye, and putrify, and rot in the
earth; but the virgin-like Ens which lies hidden in this Monstrum, is the true
Seed, of which the children of Christ are borne, yea even in this life time,
for the life of this child, is the true Faith and great divine desire.

40. This virgin-like child does live in Christ's children in the Spirit and
flesh of Christ, in a spiritual body outwardly covered with the Monstrum in
the child of the whore and Serpent; there is no man, which does not outwardly
carry on him the Serpents child.

41. But the virgins-childe, borne of the divine virgin-like Ens, of Jesus,
does not live in all: there is indeed in many an one a glimmering incentive
thereunto, viz. a Weak Faith, and Or godly.
divine desire; but the true holy, and precious life of the virginity is not
borne, it stands captivated in the judgment of God.

42. Yet well for those, who have but an incentive in them; to those we give
this direction; that their Souls desire should in the Spirit of Christ dip,
plunge or baptize.
dive it self into the divine Incentive; and with the fire-desire enkindle
that Incentive, and also forsake and hate the Serpents Monster, and bastard,
and introduce their great hunger and thirst into the virgin-like Ens, into the
Word of Gods Covenant, and into the fulfilling of the Covenant viz. into the
humanity of Christ, and ever mortify, and trample under foot the Whores
Monster in the will of the desire, as a venomous stinging evil Serpent, a
false bastard, that cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and is only an
hinderance to the Virgins child.

43. For the word of the promise in the Covenant would not incorporate it self
into the man's Tincture, viz. in the Souls-fire- Ens, but into the woman's, viz.
into the Lights Tincture; into the virgin-like Center, which should have
brought forth magically in Adam; even into the heavenly Matrix of the holy
pregnatresse; in which lights Tincture the fiery Souls Ens was weaker, then in
the Man's Fire- Ens.

44. In this Lights Ens God would araise the Fire- Ens, viz. the true Soul,
and as it were beget it anew, as may be seen in the person of Christ, according
to the humanity, who in this virgin-like Ens did assume a manly fire-soul from
the woman's property, from the female virgin-like Seed, wholly contrary to
natures proper and peculiar Ability, for the Image of God is a Man-like virgin,
neither woman nor man.

45. And if a man will rightly consider both properties according to the divine
property, then let him ascribe the male to God the Father, viz. to the first
Principle, where Gods word does manifest it self with the fireworld, which is
the first Center of the Creature; and the Female let him ascribe to God the
Son, viz. to the Second Principle, where the divine eternal word does manifest
it self in the light of Love, and opens another Center in the Love-desire,
and comes into the Fires-Centre; in manner, as the fire produces a light; and
the light [is] a great meekness of an oily, watery, and aerie property, which
property the fire draws in again, whence it receives its shining Luster, and
also its life to burn, else it would smother and suffocate.

46. And as these three, viz. the fire, light, and air, have one only
Original, yet they give a very evident distinction in their property; the like
also we are here to mind: into this property in the life of man's Soul, the
most sweet name JESUS has incorporated it self in the word of promise; as
into the likeness, which stood in the lights Center of the heavenly matrix,
viz. in the Right virgin-like Ens, inspired out of the lights property into
Adam; and has awaked [it selfe] in the same limus, as a true Center of the
Second Principle, viz. of the Angelical world, a ^eall Temple of the Spirit of
God; an open, and Or stirring.
wide Gate of the divine wisdom, in the highest beauty excellency and love,
wherein the holy Angelical life consists, and bears therein the Name of the
great holy God, viz. the holy word of the Deity.

47. Into this property the word of God did betroth and espouse it self in the
Covenant; for it was opened out of the holy Word in Adam; God would not forsake
his holy Manifested Word, which had introduced it self with the Creating of
Adam into an Ens, which the Devil obscured and darkened in the Serpents Ens
from the Anger, but would again open the same, and thereby bruise the head of
the Serpents Ens, and beget the humane Soul out of this divine Ens, to a
manlike virgin, viz. to an Angel, Servant, and child of God.

48. We do not mean, that this holy Ens did receive the Serpents desire into
it self, when Adam and Eve became monstrous, no; but it disappeared; yet the
soul according to the first Principle, took it into the fires property, viz.
into the Fiat, and introduced the Serpents Ens with the desire of the Fiat into
the Earthly Limus, whereupon out of the One only Element four Elements were
manifest in man.

49. Therefore the virgin-like Ens of the One only Element must now bruise the
head of the introduced Serpents Ens in the four Elements; and the man of the
four Elements must dye and putrify, and the first [man] must return at the
last Day clothed with the Virgin-like Ens in the One only Element wherein all
things lie in equal weight, [or perfect harmony.]

50. For this virgin-like Ens, newborn in the Spirit of Christ, dies not any
more, although the four Elements man, viz. the Image of this world dies, but
it lives in Gods Kingdom; and shall in the Resurrection of the dead embrace
and put on the limus of the earth, Note what shall rise again at the last Day.
vix. the third Principle, as a Garment of the wonder-deeds of God, but the
Serpents Ens remains in the Earth; and shall be burnt away at the last Day
through the fire, from the pure limus of the Earth; where the dark world shall
devour it with all its Works.

51. Thus we herein understand very clearly; how God out of great Love, has
promised the Serpent-bruiser to the fallen man, and espoused, and betrothed it
unto the virgin-like, and disappeared Center, and given in it self, therewith,
for an help, and companion; for when they were fallen from God, and had made
themselves monstrous, then the Image out of the limus of the Earth, became
wholly brutall, and lived in opposition, in distemper, in sickness, and also
in heat, and cold, as all other Beasts.

52. Now therefore God told them what their labor work and employment should
be in this world, viz. that they should bring forth children in Sorrow with
painful smart, in trouble, and distress, and eat the herb of the field, and
now cloth their beastiall Image in turmoile, and cumbring care in toil and
labor, until the four Elements man in the beastiall Serpents Image should
again be broken and dissolved, and return unto the earth, from whence it was
taken, and extracted as a limus.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Cause, and rise of the Curse of the Earth, and the Body of
Sickness.
Genesis 3.17, 18.
GOds Cursing of the Ground for man's Sins sake that it should bring forth
Thorns, and Thistles, and commanding Man not till after Sin was committed, to
eat of the herb of the field, and in the sweat of his face to eat his bread,
does plainly and sufficiently show us, that this had not been in Paradise, the
Ground should not have borne Thorns and Thistles, and other evil herbs,
which are poysonfull, but in the Curse, all these properties became manifest;
for as the body was after the fall, so likewise its food, the halfe-Serpentine
man must now eat such food as his desire required, [or coveted.]

2. The Curse is nothing else, but the Holy Element hiding of it self, viz.
the holy Ens, which budded forth through the Earth, and bare fruit, and held
the property of the four Elements as 'twere captive in it self; [did withdraw
or closely conceal it selfe]; the Heaven in the earth hid it self from the
Earth; the holy Tincture, from the awakened vanity, viz. the heavenly Part,
which was from the heavenly Ens (did keep Secret) from the Part in the Curse,
viz. in the Ens of the dark world.

3. Thus the heavenly part was a mystery unto man, and so remained in the Curse
between time and Eternity, half dead as to the heavenly part, yet anew embraced
with the promise in the Aim of the Covenant, and as to the earthly [part]
strongly bound, to the band of the Stars, and four Elements, infected with the
distemper of the Serpent and the Devil, very hard tied with three strong
chains from which he cannot get free till the total dissolution of his
earthly Body; for the Curse of the Earth and the Serpent forced also into the
earthly man, viz. into the limus of the Earth.

4. For God said, thou art Earth and unto Earth thou shall return; Verse 19.
for when the desire of the limus of the Extract of the Earth, ( viz. of the
outward man) did enter again into the Earth, and Imagine after the earthly
fruit, then the Devil infected this desire by the property of the Serpent, and
in each desire is the Fiat, which does Or amasse it into fashion form and
figure.
Impresse and make the desire essential; thus the earthly hunger became at
this instant wholly earthly; therefore God said now unto him: thou must turn
again to Earth from whence thou wast taken; for the heavenly, disappeared in
the earthly, as the Gold is disappeared in Lead.

5. Thus an Earthly body is now Sown into the Earth, and the Earth receives it
as its own propriety: but the Ens which is from the Eternity (which cannot be
destroyed) lies in this earthly Or enterred.
sown body; nothing is broken or dissolved but the gross beast, viz. the
being [or Substance] of time; As a fixed metal is not destroyed [or corrupted]
in the Earth; even so also the fixed part of the humane Body; and as the Artist
brings forth an excellent Gold out of the Earth, so likewise the humane Gold
lies buried in the earth, and waits only for the Artist to raise it up.

6. And as there is a various, and manifold diversity of metalline property in
the Earth; so likewise of the Ens of humane property; therefore all things
shall be proved through the Fire; what kind of property every one has in this
Time assumed to himself, and impressed on his Body, ( viz. with the desire of
the Fiat) that shall be tried in the fire, whether or no he has impressed a
fixed steadfast property from the divine Ens into himself, or an hellish
beastiall one; all this shall be tried and proved in the Fire of God, and as
the Ens is, in each body, such a fire also shall be enkindled, in the same Ens.

7. And as Quicksilver does Evaporate in the fire; even so shall all the wicked
devilish Serpentine works, which have been Brought forth or formed.
Impressed out of the dark world, and Devils desire.

8. Now if a man has in this life time impressed into himself [a] divine Ens
by earnest Faith and divine desire; understand by the humane Soul, introduced
into the mortal part of the limus of the Earth, then it lies shut up in the
mortal part, yet as a glimmering incentive which longs and labors to
burn and shine, or as the precious Gold lies shut up in a gross drossy Oar,
or in Lead, and waits only for the Artist to come and release it, even so
likewise shall the delivery, and releasment of man's body be, out of the Earth.

9. Now also we do herein understand the body of sickness, and the Physician
[or Curer thereof], for when the heavenly Ens did disappeare, and was
captivated with the earthly, as the Gold in the Lead; then the outward Astrum
awakened in the Body; and now as the outward Astrum does mutually destroy and
ruin one another Ens, and change it into another Ens according to the
greatest and most predominant power; so likewise the humane Mind (which is a
Magical Astrum) is hereby governed and ruled, and the Body also; and is
thereby brought into Strange desire and lust; whereby man does weaken plague,
and perplex himself; and one introduced Ens does marter weaken and annoy
another both through Meat, and thoughts, or cumbring molesting care.

10. As we plainly see, that man for the most part does rack and plague
himself in the Astrall mind, with the desire about that which cannot be his
own, which stands not open in his Astrum; and his Astrum cannot apprehend take
or receive it, about this the false introduced desire from the strange Astrum
does plague perplex and spend it self day and night, whence the great
Covetousness does arise, that man does desire and introduce that into his
Astrum, which is an hurtful poison, and plague unto him: and yet with such
[infoisted] strange matter, cannot make any fixed steadfast [thing or being] in
him, which may subsist in Eternity.

11. All whatsoever the own peculiar Astrum (viz. the life's right Astrum) does
impresse [or foist] in to it self from [or of] a strange Astrum, is false, and
an adverse will; whence enmity ( viz. the great Envy in nature) does arise,
that the humane Mind wills to domineere over the strange Ens; and if he
cannot get it, yet that strange infoisted introduced Ens burns in him in a
spiritual manner as a poysonfull hungry fire of Envy; that does not freely
beteeme that to any, that it wills to possess it self.

12. And though it comes about, that it may through the Serpents Craft, draw
it, to it self, or possess it, yet it has no fundamental Seat [or true
root] in its Right lifes-Astrum; for it is not capable of it, but the desire
does advance, and set it up as a King, and vaunt it self therewith, as an
absolute peculiar God, which has taken upon it self, Might over others, and
sets it self upon Strange Authority, and domination; whence the Pride of
Riches, and Self-assumed Honors, and Domination does arise, and yet in its
ground and original it has taken its rise from the Devil, (through the
Serpents Ens), who also departed with the free will from his own peculiar Ens
into strange desire, whereby he has introduced and awakened in himself (by
reason of his strange in-foisted Ens) the hellish torment pain and Sickness,
so that his life's Astrum, is wholly departed from its mutual accord and
harmony, and entered into an Enchanting Sorcering property; and so likewise it
goes with the fallen man.

13. But now, Man has his Cure, and the Devil has not; for when the divine
providence knew that he would not stand, he caused all manner of Medicine [for
hunger and health] to grow out of the Earth, to resist and withstand the
strange introduced property, both from the Astrum and Elements; and for the
Cure of the Mind God has given his holy word; that the mind should Immerse
it self into the word, and through the Power of the word, continually cast
away the introduced Strange Abomination.

14. And if it does not this, but continues in the strange introduced Ens
(which the Devil continually introduces through the Serpents Image) then the
strange Ens becomes Substantial, and Surrounds the Hidden Ens of the heavenly
worlds Being; and even then that Ens which is from and of the divine property,
remains disappeared in Death, and cannot attain the Place of God; and hence
comes the eternal death, as is to be seen in Lucifer, in whom also his divine
Ens, is included or shut up into the nothing, viz. into the greatest
Hiddennesse, [or privation] that he in his Magical Astrum in the creaturall
property cannot reach or obtain the place of God.

15. Therefore it is very necessary for man wholly to sink, and dive himself
into the promised incorporated Word of God; and continually, and fully reject,
and cast away the strange introduced Ens, which the Devil insinuates into his
Mind, whereby he desires strange things, and only take that he may obtain
with good truth, and real upright honesty, which befalls him in his
Employment Businsse or Affa^res.
Calling for his Corporal necessity, and livelihood; the same, his Right life's
Astrum does bring unto him, and he is capable of it, and it creates him no
vexation trouble discontent and pain, if he does not let in the Serpents
Covetousness, pride, envy, and Anger thereinto.

16. And it is the greatest folly that man does eagerly and tearingly strive
and hale for Heterogene and hurtful to his soul.
strange things, and bring that into his desire, which does only discontent,
and disturb him, and at last cast him quite from God; which does shut up his
heavenly Ens in body and Soul; what profit is that unto him, which he sees
without him, and does exalt himself in an outside luster [as in a specious
shadow and resemblance of a looking-glasse] and yet is not capable of the same?
and if he does get to be capable of it he turns it to his temporal, and
Eternal vexation, and disquietness.

17. God has created man naked, and given him nothing in this world that he
can or may call his own, saying this or that is mine; Indeed all is his, but it
is Common: for God created only One man, to that one only man he gave all
whatsoever is in this world, now all men are proceeded out of this only man,
he is the Stem or body, the other are all his branches, and do receive power
from their Stem, and bring forth fruit upon one, and each twig enjoys the
Trees Ens, also they do all enjoy the four Elements and the Or Stars.
Astrum alike.

18. What folly [and madnesse] is it then, that the twig wills to be an own
[selvish] Tree; and grows up of it self as a strange plant, as if its
fellow-twig did not stand also in its Stem; it is the Serpents introduced Ens
which seduceth, and divides the branches on the life's tree of man from the
Only life of man, bringing each twig into a peculiar Sundry hunger, desiring
to be a tree by it self in selfefull Power, and domination; and therefore it
desires the Or abundance.
muchnesse of this world for its own propriety, that it might greatly enlarge
it self in the Serpents Ens, and be a great, thick, strong, fat, well spread
Tree.

19. O thou selfe-exalting Vapourer; of what do thou smell, and Savor? even
of the Serpents wantonness, Lust, concupiscence and Poison, and the Temporal
and Eternal Death; and this thou art in thy own selfe-Tree, and not a whit
better, and though thou were a King, yet that which is under thy jurisdiction
is only for thy Office, and not thine own.

20. If thou will enter again into the life-Tree and be a twig on the only
life of man, then thou must utterly forsake in thy mind and desire, all
whatsoever is in this world; and become as a little child; and look only
upon that which thy own life's Astrum does cast upon thee in thy estate calling
and place; and therein thou must work, and not say it is mine alone; albeit
thou art a Steward therein, yet thou servest therein the root only, upon which
thou stand; thou bear fruit to the root in thy Labor, which thou must
let stand free, and therewith be diligent and careful in preserving thy
Calling, and place, to serve thy brother, and help to increase his Sap, that he
may grow up with thee, and bear fruit.

21. In all Selvish interests, mine-hood, and thine-hood, meum and ^uum.
selfehood, and own-hood there is a false plant; one brother should be the
Sovereign Cure and refreshment to another, and delight or content his mind
with the Insinuation of his Love-will, There were enough, and enough, in this
world, if Covetousness drew it not into a selvish propriety; and would bear
good will to his brother as to himself, and let his pride go, which is from
the Devil.

22. He runs with great pride, and Belly-carking, only to the Devil in the
Into the Abyss.
bottom-lesse Pit: he will be Noble, and better then his brother; but whence
will he have it? did not God give but one life to man, and out of that one
comes the life of all men.

23. But that he phancieth to himself that he is more Noble and Gentile
therein (then others) and vaunteth therewith; is an Apostasy and fall from God,
and his word: for in the word of God was the only life of man, which the Word
breathed into the created Image, and this same One only life is from Eternity,
and never had any beginning; wherefore does man then bring in a strange life
thereinto, that does disquiet and disturb the only life; now it must come to
that pass, that he does either with his will and desire enter again into the
Only childlike life, and forsake all whatsoever he has introduced; or else
remain for ever in disquietness in that his infoisted Essence [or life.]

24. Now then, being I must forsake all whatsoever I have introduced into my
self for propriety, and that the same is only my Loss, or damage.
hurt, wherefore then do not I forsake this false desire, which brings Death
and hellish vexation and torment into me? better it is to quash and destroy the
desire, then afterward the Substance with great Anguish and sadness; as it is
a very difficult, and painful combat when a man must come to destroy the
Substance in him by an earnest Conversion into the child-like life.

25. But if the Free Will does in the beginning break and quell the desire amd
lust, so that the lust becomes not Substantial, then the Cure is already
produced, and afterward there need not be such an Earnest Purpose and
Endeavor, as he must have, who is to depart from his Contrived Abominations,
and forsake and destroy that Substance [or matter] which he has forged, and
made in his mind, and yet it must come so about, or else he cannot attain the
Gates of the Eternal Only life, which God gave to man; and if he reaches it
not, then he also Or enters not into Paradise.
reaches not the Gates of God.

26. For the only Eternal life must be introduced into the Nothing without
[or beyond] every creature, and Substance or thing.
being; for it has its Eternal original out of the Nothing, viz. out of the
divine understanding and it is in a disquiet Source in the Something; unless
that its Something be also bent and set with its desire into the nothing; and
then the Something is a joy to the life; that the life of the Nothing in it
self may dwell and work in Something.

27. For God in reference to the creature is as a nothing, but if the creature
introduces its desire into him, viz. into the Nothing; then the Creature is
the Something of the Nothing, and the Nothing moves wills and works in the
Something of the Creature, and the Creature in the Nothing; and in this
Working, no Turba can arise, for it is its own Love-play, a mutual Loving it
self, and it stands at the end of Nature with its life.

28. Thus we understand what inheritance Adam has left us, viz. the Curse, and
the vain desire, and we consider the outward man in its life as a monster of a
true humane life, unless that the precious noble mind be borne again in the
Spirit of Christ, else the outward Center in the Mind is a Serpent.

29. And in this Serpent, the Gross Beast which is from the Astrum and four
Elements, does sit, and holds possession in the house of the mind; and
according to its beastiall property produces various desires, one desiring
this, another that, and causes manifold figures in the Minds of men; one
makes in his mind a fixed Project, devise, or matter.
Substance, another a [shattered] ruinable matter, that which he makes to day
that he breaks down to morrow, and has an unconstant Beast in the Mind,
falls sometimes upon this, sometimes upon that [and often changes his mind.]

30. But he that brings up a fixed Beast, he holds it in him for his Treasure,
and vaunteth therewith as if it were the virgin-childe, and gathers up
Earthly Treasures for his beastiall pleasure, and yet before God he is only a
fool with his beast, for he must leave it to the Earth and the judgment of
God.

31. But he in whom the Virgins child is borne, he treads the beast in the
Mind underfoot, and must indeed suffer it outwardly upon him, to creep and
faulter, as a Laden Ass that must carry the earthly Sack; but he has enmity
with it, as God said to Adam, I will put enmity between thee and the Serpent,
and between the Woman's Seed and the Seed of the Serpent, which shall bruise the
Serpents head, viz. the Serpents Beast: This monster of the Beast in the
earthly mind, the true man does bruise the head of its desire and Might.

32. Thus a godly man must have enmity in himself, and trample under foot the
monster, viz. the Serpents child, and continually kill it, for if this
beastiall Serpents Seed Or had not been.
were not impressed, and wholly incorporated in us, God would not have said, I
will put enmity between the woman's and the Serpents Seed, the enmity is within
man and not without man with the Creeping Serpent; this Serpents Seed in man is
the Devils riding Horse, his strong Hold and Fort, where he is able to dwell
in man.

33. And therefore because the Devil was a Prince of this world, and still is
so, in the Anger, it is his will and Aim to possess the Image of God, which
God created in his stead, and to rule it under his jurisdiction, and bring it
into his Kingdom, and this the Curse of Gods anger has brought along with it,
which now works mightily unto Destruction.

34. And on the contrary the Serpent-bruiser works unto Eternal life, and
the humane Mind stands in the midst of these in the free will, to which the
free will does Inoculate, or incorporate.
Engraft it self, therein the mind works: it brings up a beast, and also
an Angel, or a beast and a Devil, according to the outward world a Beast, and
according the inward spiritual world an Angel or Devil.

35. Here a grain of seed is sown, which stands in three Principles, and is
fit or pregnant to bear a creature in and to all three; for the Divine
possibility from Gods manifested word in love and anger, viz. the Verbam Fiat
lies therein: as the free will conceives it self so it begets (or generates)
an Ens; and in the Ens the spirit arises, which forms it a creature out of
the Ens, and the spirit signeth it self in the Body, what it is: and so stands
its figure.

CHAP. XXV. How God drove Adam out of Paradise, and laid the Cherub before the
Garden.
WHen God had cursed the Serpent, and the Earth, then the Beast-Man was no
longer profitable in Paradise, for he could not any more enjoy the fruits of
Paradise; therefore he laid upon him the labor, and toil of the world; and
drove him out of the Garden of Eden, and placed the Cherub with the fire sword
of judgment before it, that if the new born virgin-child of the seed of the
woman, would again return and enter into Paradise, this Angel with the
fire-sword should cut away the Serpents-beast from it, and not any more suffer
Understand the beast.
it to come into Paradise.

2. The Angel with the fire-sword is the right destroying Angel, who carries
death and life in his Sword; he has therein Gods Love, and Anger, and when man
Dies in this world, then he comes before the Gates of Paradise, before this
Angel: and even there the poor Soul must pass through this [Garden] judgment.

3. Now if it be captivated in the Anger of God, then it cannot pass through
this judgment, but if it be a virgin child, born of the Seed of the woman,
then it may pass quite through this Sword, and then the Angel cutteth off the
Beast begotten of the Serpents Ens, and even then the Soul is an Angel of God,
and serves him in his Temple, in Paradise, and expects the Day of judgment,
viz. the Resurrection of the outward body, when this Angel with the fiery
Sword shall Sever the Earth from the Curse, then the right humane body returns
again, for it must also pass through this Sword, and the Sword will cut off
its Beast, that he may be only a Man and no more a Beast.

4. The Speech of Moses concerning this Mystery, is wholly hidden to the
Earthly Man: for Moses speaks of an Angel, and Sword; and albeit the Outward
figure was even just so (for so was Adam driven out) yet it has far another A.
B. C. internally, the natural man without Gods light understands nothing
thereof.

5. This Sword is in man, when man converteth and enters into sorrow for his
committed Sins, and casts away the vanity, and steppeth into the Infants
Shirt, then the morning- Star arises in the spirit of Christ, in the
virgin-like Or shut up Ens.
occluse Ens, in the true woman's seed.

6. And in this Anxious Sorrowful Gate of true Repentance, the Angel stands
with the fire-flaming sword, and the virgin-Bud forces quite through this
fire-sword into Paradise, viz. into the light, into the life of Christ, and
grows forth through this sword.

7. And now the virgin-child stands with its fair Rose in the New Plant in
Paradise, and the poor Soul which begets this child, stands the whole
time of this life, under the reach and Swinge of this fire-sword, and is fast
bound with a band, to the gross beast in the outward world, where the
virgin-child is sufficiently thrust at, and wounded with this fire-sword; for
the fire-soul, which in the fire-Sword of Gods Anger, is bound to the Serpents
Monster, does daily amuse it self upon the Serpent-Monster, and Sins; and
even then this fire-sword does cut away the Sins, and devoures them into Gods
Anger, where they are examined and judged.

8. Therefore the poor virgin-child which is borne out of the Soul must stand
under Christ's cross, in Christ's death; and the pierceing Sword of Tribulation
and grief passes quite through it; it must suffer it self to be drawn quite
through this flaming Sword; and the fire burns away the Abomination which the
soul continually brings into it self from the Serpents Or false Image.
Monster; and even then it is in a Sore strait, when that is cut off from the
fire-soul, which it feign would have from its Monster.

9. Then must the virgin-child Supplicate the fire-soule and tender it the
Love, that it should only forsake the Monster of the Serpent; here then
arises strife and opposition; for the part of the fire-soul has introduced
the Serpents Monster into it, and desires also to have its joy therein, and
loves the Evil Beast.

10. Then Sophia, viz. the Second Principle, viz. the Part of the light world
does speak against it, and hence comes up the Strife betwixt the Seed of the
woman and the Seed of the Serpent, and then man goes up and down in Sorrow and
Sadness, trouble and perplexty, sometimes the virgin-child prevails, and
sometimes the Serpent-childe.

11. And then the Devil stirs up, and incenseth all Monsters against the
virgin-child, to strike it, to mock it, scorn it, revile, and laugh it to
shame, and make it ridiculous; that it may by no means be known, least the
Devils Kingdom should become manifest.

12. Thus the virgin-childe must be exercised by this, in the Spirit of Christ,
and suffer it self to be whipped, persecuted, and injuriously reproved, and
often called, one possessed by the Devil; be cursed, and continually accounted
an offscouring of the world, until the outward Beast has finished its Course
in its Constellation; and then the Cherub cutteth off the gross beast, and
lets it fall even unto the judgment of God, and then the part of the fire-soule
must forthwith force through the judgment of this Sword.

13. Now if the fire-soul has Impressed.
taken in much vanity into it self, viz. much of the Serpents craft, and lust;
then the part of the fire-soule must stand Or in.
under this Sword, until the fire of Gods Anger consumes this introduced
vanity, which to many a one is Refining fire.
Purgatory enough; which this present too too wise world will not believe, and
will be only an Adopted child from without, and so have an external washing
away of Sins in Grace; but it has another A. B. C. here, God will not let the
Serpens Ens, neither in body nor Soul, come into Paradise.

14. The fire-soule must subsist in the fire of God, and be so pure as the
clear refined Gold, for it is the husband of the Noble [virgin] Sophia, [which
is] from the woman's Seed, it is the fires Tincture, and Sophia the lights
Tincture; if the Tincture of the fire be wholly and thoroughly pure; then its
Sophia will be given to it; and so Adam receives again into his arms his most
precious and endeared Bride, which was taken from him in his sleep, and is not
any Or from thence forward.
longer man or woman, but a branch on Christ's Pearl-tree, which stands in the
Paradise of God.

15. To the description whereof we need an Angels Tongue, and yet we are
understood well enough by our School-fellowes; we have not written this for
Swine; for none but those only who have been by and at the marriage of the
Lamb do understand what kind of entire inward great joy and Love-delight is
therein: and how Excellently with surpassing beauty glory and delight.
dearly the Bride receives her Bridegroom in his pure clear and bright fires
property: and how she gives him her Love-kisse: unto others, this is dumb.

16. When Reason hears one speak of Paradise, then it understands only a
certain place apart: and it is even so, there was a certain place which was
called the Garden in Eden where Adam and Eve were tempted, and from which place
they were driven after the fall; but yet the whole world was such a Paradise
before the Curse: yet seeing God knew the fall, the holy Paradise was only
opened unto them in one certain place: for to what End should the whole world
bring forth Paradisicall fruit, seeing there was no creature upon the Earth
that was capable to enjoy the same.

17. But Adam and Eve were however brought into Paradise, that, although this
first Body should fall and come to ruin, yet they and their children might by
the new Regeneration in the Spirit of Christ, enter in again through this
fire-Sword: this Mystery is exceeding Great.

18. For Prince Lucifer, before the time of the Created Earth, sat in the
heavenly Ens in the Angelical world in the Place of this world, wherein the
Ens of the Earth was comprehended in the Fiat, and brought into a Compaction,
his false Imagination had Made it subject to infection and pollution.
tainted the limus before the Compaction, it was the place of his Hierarchies:
now the outward body of man was taken out of the limus of the Earth in the
Verbum Fiat, and formed according to the property of the humane life, which was
in the Word: the word, formed (by or through the Fiat) the Ens or limus of the
Earth according to the form of the humane soulelike life which was in the
word; and being God had set himself, through his word, to be judge, against
the false Infection and desire of the Devil, to judge him and his enkindled
whickednesse which he had brought to Substance, the judicial Or Sword of
execution.
Sword was already in the limus of the Earth whereof Adam was made.

19. For when God created the Earth, he Certainly appointed and set a time.
founded its time, when he would keep the judgment, and sever the evil from
the good, and give the evil for an habitation to the Apostate Prince; but
being the Good in the occluse Earth was without heavenly creatures (seeing its
Prince was cast out;) God created Adam an other Hierarch out of this good Ens
to be a Ruler of this place; and hence came the Devils Envy against Man and
all good creatures of this world.

20. But now we are here to consider of the Apostasy of man, with the Sword of
the Cherub; for Saint Paul says: we are chosen in Christ Jesus before the
foundation of the world was laid; and even here this saying of Paul does
belong: God knew that this Ens, of which Adam was to be created, was already
somewhat subject to false lust by reason of the Devils introduced desire;
therefore God foresaw or provided for.
chose this limus in Christ Jesus before the foundation of the world, out of
which he would make man; that he would through the judgment of the flaming
Sword bring it through death, and through the fire, and wholly burn away the
false infected desire of Lust; and regenerate him anew in Jesus in his deepest
Love in his Word in Jehovah, that is opened out of Jehovah, and introduce a new
limus into the tainted one; and bring them together, quite through the
judgment of the fire-Sword, and purge and purify them wholly and thoroughly.

21. And here also is Christ's descention into hell, where the Love of God in
Christ entered into this fire-sword, and changed the wrath into Love; and did
also destroy the sting of death which was insinuated into the limus of the
Earth out of which Adam was created according to the outward humanity; and this
fire-sword had its raising and Original in the Corruption of Lucifer.

22. For albeit Adam was created as to one part out of the heavenly
Essentiality, that was in the word of man's life, which was inspired and
breathed into his outward and inward limus; yet this fire-Sword lay hidden as a
glimmering incentive in the earthly limus of the outward body, which also
assaulted Adam, so that he lusted against the command of God, and the Kingdom
of Heaven; in which incentive the Devil also introduced his desire into him,
and provoked him to fall; which being God well knew that the poor man would
not stand, he ordained an help and Savior in Christ, to guide, and bring him
into that holy Ens whereinto he should be brought, viz. into the true Sabbath,
and Eternal rest.

23. Indeed Adam was set wholly perfect in equal harmony and accord, and
brought into Paradise (to try) if the soul could have overcome the incentive
[of vain lust] and therefore the tree of temptation was represented to him, to
see if it were possible for the soul to overpower this contamination of lust,
and remain wholly and fully in the likeness [and harmony].

24. But it was not possible; therefore Christ must afterward Undergo this
Proba.
come into this place; and be tempted forty days in the wilderness in Adams
Ens, and in his new introduced heavenly Ens, to see whether the fire-soul would
stand in perfect purity; and being it did now stand in Christ, the new
intoduced heavenly Ens did destroy the sword in the death of the outward body
of Christ, and brought the outward body which he, in Mary, received from her
Seed, quite through this sword of the Anger of God into the holy Ens, and in
this Power the outward body did arise from death and got victory over death and
this fire-sword, and took the fire-sword into its power, wherewith at the end
of the world he will purge his Floar; as a judge over Devils and men; as well
as of the Earth.

25. For the maine ambition was about the fire-Sword, for King Lucifer had
changed it from the pure clear light into fire, wherewith he willed to
domineere and rule as a God; but God sent to him another Prince and King, who
took it from him; and thrust him from this Throne; and should turn this Sword
in the Ens of the Earth again into the divine property, and cast out, and
judge the Devil, with this Sword.

26. And there is not such a silly, and narrow Meaning of the fire-sword as
hitherto has been generally understood; although it has been hidden by the
Counsel of God, yet we should now open our eyes, and deeply consider what this
manifestation imports; that it does even foretell and signify the judgment
of this sword; that he will come, who carries it in his mouth; and it is also
a messenger, [declaring] that Babell shall [soon] come to its End by this
Sword, and be given to this Sword to be devoured.

27. Now says reason; wherefore did not God examine this Ens before, out of
which he created the Earth, and man out of the same Earth, before he created
the Earth and man? forsooth, dear Reason, here thou have hit the matter
right; Gods Omnipotence, and omniscience must serve thy turn; whereby thou art
able to bring all things into Gods will, as rational fancy dictates: hearken,
o Reason! do thou know, whence the Earth is generated? thou say, through
the Word, viz. in the Verbum Fiat; I say so too: now, what was this word? Here
look upon the Earth and the whole Creation and thou will see what the desire
of the word has brought into Essence out of the spiritual Ens, thou will
every where see good, and Evil, and find out Gods love, and anger.

28. The Word was a full Spiration from the spiritual fire-and light-world,
according to which God calls himself a Strong jealous angry God as to the
fire, and a merciful Loving God as to the light.

29. Now if God should have Nulled abolished or taken away.
quelled the first Principle, viz. the fire-Source, in the Ens of the Earth,
out of which it was created; whence should the light have its might? does not
the Father viz. the fire-world, beget the Son viz. the light-world; but now
being the word in the fire-world was vehemently enkindled by Gods motion to the
Creation, as we may see by the Coagulation of the Stones; if we were not
blocks, and had only calvish understandings; wherewith then should this Fire
but especially the enkindled Ens in the Coagulation be reduced and brought
again into the light into the Equal Temperature and harmony; Gods Love must
then only do it.

30. Now; how will [or can] a creature, viz. a fire-soule or Angel, come into a
creaturall being or formation, if the fire-Source were not moved and stirred in
an especial manner: Like would only then remain in Like; and if it be only
a mere Likeness, then it has its Sport with and in it self, as it was from
[and in] Eternity; and therefore the unchangeable God has moved himself
according to the fire and light, and stirred up the fires property that he may
make him a play, and melody, viz. a formed Word out of himself; that there
might be a play before and in the un-formable Word.

31. Now we do here understand this, that if God should have again introduced
the enkindled Ens, out of which the Earth and man were created, into the
un-formable Word, viz. wholly and fully into the likeness, into the Love, then
no creature might have been produced, or brought forth; for every
Soules-Spirit; yea the Angels, and whatsoever lives, must be a stirring [or
working] fire.

32. Now no fire-Soure can be generated out of the perfect likeness, unless
the likeness does move it self: yet the Eternal likeness viz. God, had
before moved himself in his Mystery with the creation of the Angelical
Thrones; now if he should have changed this motion, which was Enkindled, and
also poisoned by the Hierarck Lucifer with false distemper, into Love, before
he had created the Earth and man, then he must yet once more have moved
himself according to the fires property, if he would have created another
Hierarck, and Angelical Prince.

33. But being that might not be, he created the Earth, and out of the Earth,
Man, out of the first motion, and breathed into man the Light-and fire-soule
out of that breath of his manifested and moved word, viz: out of the first
motion, for out of the first motion of the word, another Prince should come
into the princely created Throne of Lucifer, and take in, and possess the
first motion.

34. And God appointed the Judgment to the first motion; and took away
Lucifers Domineering Fire-Sword, and gave it unto Adam; and afterward
introduced the deepest Love of God in Christ, into Adam, and brought the Moved
Word again into the likeness, viz. into an Eternal Confirmation, and gave
Adam in Christ the Fire-Sword over the fallen Prince Lucifer.

35. For Adam, viz. the corrupted limus of the Earth, should, in Christ its
first enjoyed Prince, judge with this flaming Sword; as Christ has told us,
that the Saints shall judge the world; understand, the Enkindled Ens of man and
of the Earth, should judge the false Prince of Lies, who had perversely changed
the Truth in the holy Ens into Lies, and corrupted it with such [false desire.]

36. But being the Ens of man was corrupted, and could not, God out of his
deepest Hiddennesse introduced the most holy Ens into the Corrupt Ens of man,
viz. into the heavenly part, and brought the outward [part] also through the
Sword of the fire and death into the inward, into an Eternal likeness [or
temperature:] And thus there is here a Looking-glass for Reason; if it be
illuminated of God, It will then understand us here; but if it be not, then
there is not any possibility to understand this.

37. And we faithfully and seriously warn the caviller and carper; not to say,
it is a blasphemy: let him first put away his Calvish and Beastiall Eyes; and
look us here in the face, before he takes upon him to censure and cavil at
us, it has far another A. B. C. then Reason has. It must have its Birth a
degree deeper.

38. Thus we are able very well to understand the casting out of Adam,
wherefore he was tempted, and driven out of Paradise: being his Ens was
somewhat enkindled by the Devils poison, he could not possess Paradise, and
therefore God drove him out from thence, with the Sword of judgment into death
and corruption, and yet gave the promised word of his deepest Love to be with
and in him in the Ens of the heavenly worlds-being, for a sure and certain
Covenant; wherein Adam and his children should Trust; and believe that at the
end, and accomplishment of this time, he would in this Incorporated Word bring
them again with the introduction of the holy Ens, out of death through the
fire-sword; and clean cut off the false infection and lust with the Sword of
judgment, and set them as Angels of God in the place of fallen Lucifer; and
this is the mystery of the Angel and Sword of Paradise.

39. The Angel did bear the Name of the Covenant, out of which God would
manifest Jesus, viz. the High and Almighty Prince; and it was even this Angel,
which afterward wrought many wonders upon the Earth, who was with Abel Sem
Enoch Noah Abraham, and Moses, who appeared to Moses in the fire-sword of flame
in the bush and brought Israel out of Egypt, and went before them in a fiery
Pillar [by night] and in a cloudy Pillar by day; who gave them the Law in the
fire, and at last brought them by Joshua (being the type of him who was to be
borne out of the fire-sword) into the Land [of] Israel.

40. This fire-Angel turned its internal light outward, and manifested it
self in Christ's person in the humanity, Or in which.
with whom, Christ, viz. the holy Anointing Oil of the deepest hidden Love,
changed the fire-sword of the Angel into a Love-sword, and holy Dominion.

41. And this is the true Cherub which drove the false Adam out of Paradise,
and brings him in again by Christ, the virgins child, new born out of Adam in
Christ; and it has no other ground or meaning.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Propagation of man in this World and of Cain the first
borne the murderer of his brother.
1. WE are here to consider this weighty Point, in right earnestness; and not
to make Conclusions with fictions and fables as hitherto has been done as
touching the Election of Grace; whereas it has been handled only in a very
blind and absurd manner, and no right [fundamentall] understanding has been
found thereof.

2. Seeing that men have only sought in Reason; and have not been able through
true Repentance to force through the fire-Sword and see with divine Eyes;
thereupon the fire-Sword of Gods Anger, and Severe purpose and Decree of
judgment has remained only in the eyes of [their] Reason; and further they
have not seen, therefore they have made dreadful and dangerous conclusions
without fundamental and plain understanding.

3. But Christendom is hereby faithfully and truly admonished, once thoroughly
to awake, and shake off the conclusions of Reason, and to see Gods clear
countenance, which desires no evil nor can desire it; but has also set
himself to be judge against all wickedness; and will destroy all such
Conclusions in the Sword of his anger, and do away the Cherub.

4. Now it does here offer it self to our consideration, how it came to
pass, that Adam and Eve at first brought forth an evil child and a murderer:
to this, Reason says, that it was from Gods purpose, who has made to himself
an Election, and chose one company of men to damnation, and the other unto his
love.

5. Forsooth! dear Reason; whence art thou borne, and from whence do thou
speak under the covert of the Scripture? Do thou not speak from the Ens, and
words of the Serpent? who brought the false Ens into Eve her Matrix, wherein
Cain was apprehended? did not the Devil do it through the Serpent, and make
the matrix of Eve monstrous?

6. Do thou not understand how the word of promise did forthwith incorporate
it self in to the matrix of Eve in her Seed, and that the contest betwixt Gods
anger and Gods Love did presently begin; for Gods Love had incorporated it
self [and betrothed it selfe] to bruise the head of the Serpents Monster in
the anger of God; and thereinto the fire-soul, which lay captivated in Gods
anger, should give its free will.

7. For the fire-soul is a root proceeded from the divine Omnipotence, and
therefore it has free will, and nothing can deprive it thereof; it may
conceive either in the fire or light.

8. But if thou ask, why the Serpent-bruiser did not forthwith bruise the
head of the Serpents Ens in the first seed; and not suffer the Serpents,
murtherous, poysonfull will, to get the upper hand in the Souls Ens? It is just
as if I should ask; wherefore did not God when he saw that Adam became evil,
wholly reject him, or make him to nothing, and create a new Adam? thus likewise
will Reason judge of the Devils, saying, that it has pleased God that there
should be Devils that it might be known what an Angel is.

9. Hearken Reason! I have already above answered thee, that if God should once
more have moved himself for man's sake, and introduced the first motion in the
humane and earthly Ens into a Stillnesse, then the six days works of the
creation must have retired back; and have been brought into a worke-lesse Rest;
and this, God would not; the whole creation, should and must subsist in its
first motion; its first formed Ens in the Verbum Fiat must stand, be it either
in Love or anger; let who will apprehend either; the Anger was open, and so was
the Love also.

10. The Love only is called God, the Anger is called his Strength, and might;
Now what the free will would desire, therein it should be confirmed either in
the Love or anger.

11. For the free will was borne or sprung forth from the Love and Anger, viz,
from the fire-and light-world: and so likewise it might choose it self a place
for its working Life; If Gods Love should have drowned the free will in the Ens
in Eve's seed in the Love, in which [seed] The free will.
it was enkindled in the Anger, then the fiery motion in the matrix must have
ceased; now out of the light's Ens only and alone, no soul may be brought
forth.

12. Also the corrupt Ens of the earthly limus, must have then been presently
judged through the fire, which could not be, for the motion of the new
Regeneration, and the opening or full explication of the divine Sweetness and
the overcoming of the fire, viz. of the anger of God, did belong only to the
Name of Jesus.

13. The word which had incorporated it self, had from without, the
fire-sword, viz. the Cherub, and from within, the Jesus who should overcome the
fire-sword with Love: thus the Name JESV stood hid in the fire-sword and was
not manifest until the Time that God would move himself therein, and manifest
the same.

14. Thus the insinuated Ens of the Serpent, that Eve had introduced through
Imagination into lust, must be wholly cast away; for in Cain the murdering Or
the evil corrupt nature and property.
Image of the Serpent was manifest, which cannot inherit the Kingdom of God;
but on the contrary the Mark of the Covenant in the promised word was in the
free will and in the heavenly disappeared Ens of the Soul, into which [covenant
of the promised Grace] the Soul should enter.

15, And although the Serpents Ens should have been rejected, as it must be, in
all the children of Eve, yet the part of the heavenly worlds being, lay hid in
the Covenant of the Word in the disappeared Ens, as a possibility to the new
Regeneration; therefore God said to Cain, when the murdering Spirit persuaded
him, Rule over the Sin.

16. If thou say, wherewith? he could not: but wherefore could he not? the
Serpents desire held him, and brought him to kill his brother: wherefore? the
Free Will had given it self up into the Serpents Ens which held him captive.

17. Now says Reason; God would have it so, else he had turned away his will.
No: indeed Gods Anger-will in the Serpents Ens which had captivated the
free will, would have it; but yet Gods Love-will said in him Rule over Sin,
that is over the wrath and Anger of the Serpent, and let it not have its power
and prevalency.

18. And here we are rightly to know, how Gods Love and Anger are in continual
contest, understand, in the manifested Word in the limus of the Earth, and in
the Ens of the humane property out of the Earth; for the Anger- Ens is stirred
up and driven by the Devil, and desires continually to devour the Love- Ens,
and possess this Kingdom in the Anger- Ens.

19. The Anger- Ens desires to have man; for it has its King in Lucifer; and
the Love- Ens desires also to have him; for it has its King in Christ, and
therefore Christ must bring the humane Love- Ens through death and the Anger-
Ens, and open another Principle, viz. another Kingdom, and leave Prince
Lucifer in his own Anger, for his free will had chose it him.

20. Thus also the free will in Cain did choose the false, viz. the
Devills-will: but thou say; was then the murthering-will wholly rejected; it
did Reprobate or abandon. NOIE.
reject it self; but if the free will had again conceived in the Love Ens it
would have been again borne anew, yea even after the murder, which we leave
unto the judgment of God, whether it were so or no, seeing the Text in Moses
does give him so bare a name in despair; for the word out of which the Name
Jesus was made manifest, was given, to call, poor lost Sinners to Repentance,
and not the righteous ones, who were apprehended in the Love; as Christ said.

21. Cain was a type of the first corrupt Adam in Sin, and Abell was a type of
Christ the second Adam, viz. of the virgin-childe; for the Tree of evil and
good began in Adam; and so likewise the fruit did forthwith appear, viz.
Christ's children, and the children of the Devil and the Serpent.

22. Now reason says: was Cain then wholly conceived of the Serpents Ens in
the Anger of God and predestined to damnation? Answer: no; He was (conceived)
of the Ens of Adams soul and body; and so also of the Seed and Ens of Eve her
body; but the Monster in the matrix of Eve did environ the sown Seed, and it
was that which did seduce and beguile him; but the mark [and Aym] of the
Covenant lay hidden in the Ens of the Soul and body; for the Ens of the Seed of
Adam and Eve was out of the heavenly disappeared [ limbus] and then also out of
the earthly awakened limus, but the will of the Serpent, and of the Devil took
possession of the house; as the like was in the Devil, who was an Angel but
the will of the dark world took possession of the house in him, and got the
upperhand, so also it was here in Cain.

23. But thou ask, how this came so to be? hear, and see thou fair child in
the will of Adam and Eve, what their desire was before and after the fall, they
only desired the Earthly Kingdom; as we see that Eve was so wholly and only
minded, for when she brought forth Cain; she said, Gen: 4. Verse 1.
I have gotten a man [who is to be] a Lord; she thought him to be the bruiser
and breaker of the Serpent, he should take in and possess the earthly
Kingdom, and expel the Devil; she did not consider that she should Dye to
her false earthly fleshly will and be borne anew Or with.
in an holy will; and such a will she also brought into her Seed, and the like
did Adam also.

24. And hence now the will in the Souls essence did arise; the tree brought
forth a twig out of (or like) it self; for it was Cains desire only that he
might be Lord upon the Earth; and being he saw that Abell was more acceptable
in Gods Sight then himself, his free-beastiall will in him did elevate it
self to slay Abel, for Cains Aim and endeavor was only about the outward
world, to domineer and be Lord and master therein; but Abel Sought Gods Love.

25. Thus there are yet Two such Churches upon the Earth; One which only
seeks worldly pleasure might honor and the outward God Mammon and Mausim,
and therein it lodges the Serpents child, the other which seeks the
virgin-child, and Gods Kingdom, and must suffer it self to be persecuted,
reviled, reproached, and killed by the Cainicall Church, as Cain did to Abel.

26. For the Devil will yet be continually a Prince of this world in the
Serpents child; and if the virgins child which bruiseth the head of the Serpent
be not manifest in the Serpents child, then the Devil is and remains Prince
and Host in the house of the Soul, as happened to Cain.

27. And do but understand the ground aright: in the birth of this world two
Kingdoms lie manifest; viz. Gods Love: Kingdom in Christ, and the Kingdom of
Gods Anger in Lucifer: these two Kingdoms are in Contest and strife in all
creatures; for the Original of all Spirits is in the Contest, and in the
Combat of the fire the light is made manifest: the fire is a cause of the
light, Gods anger is a cause that God did yet once move himself in his deepest
Love in the Name Jesus and thereby vanquish the Anger.

28. Now what can the Love do, if the free will espouseth it self to the
Anger? or what can the Anger do against it, if the free will conceives in
the Love and destroys the Anger? must it not hold still and suffer it to be
done; and though it does oppose and rage against it, yet the Love pierces
quite through it, and changes it into Joy; the Anger is the root of Love as
the fire is the root of the light; but in the Free Will is the understanding,
which makes it self to what it pleases.

29. Do thou not see this in the Earth, that the free will in the Ens of the
word has made it self stones, metalls, and Earth: the stones and Earth are
not the free will; but the free will has introduced it self into such an Ens,
and by its Lubet, and motion introduced the Ens into a Compaction or
coagulation; there was no other maker there but the free will in the formed
and manifested word: thou may indeed see wonders enough.

30. Behold the unreasonable Creatures, as worms, toads, Spiders, and other
wild venomous and horrible Beasts, and thou shall see somewhat in very deed,
if thou be not dead; but thou say, God has created it so: yea, Right! his
desire in Love and anger has amassed the Ens with the motion, and compacted
each Ens according to the free will into a form; there was no other maker
there, but the free will in the word.

31. The desire in the word was the Fiat, which introduced the free will into
an Ens; thus the same Manifested Word is yet in all things, and has the Fiat,
viz. the desire in it self; As the free will in every thing introduces it
self into a Spirit, even so the Fiat forms, and Signeth each thing; every
Root brings forth from it self a branch of its own likeness; but when the
branch or sprout is to be borne, and receive its beginning in the Ens of the
root, the Ens does then form it self to such a twig, as the root at that time
is apprehended in its power and free will both by the Superior and inferior
constellation.

32. The like is also to be understood in man; as the will is in the Seed, that
is, as the desire of the father and mother, together with other Influences from
the Stars and Elements, yea oftentimes from the Devils assaults and
insinuations, are at that time, Even such a Spirit is formed in the Ens of the
Seed, sometimes an Angel if the Parents be in Holy Desire [or in the true faith
of the engrafted Word] Sometimes also a beast, a Serpent, and Image of the
Devil, both according to the Ens of the Soul and the outward flesh.

33. The power of the manifested Word does give in it self into all things,
into every thing according to its will, according to the desire in the Ens, for
the desire in the Ens is that which forms the word, viz. the Sound of life;
as it is written; such as the people is, such a God they also have, with the
holy thou art holy* and with the perverse thou art perverse; this is wholly to
be understood, concerning the Expressed Word in the Fiat, viz. in the desire of
nature: and therefore God has espoused and betrothed another word out of the
Center of his Love to the Image of man, that, although he be arisen out of an
evil property, yet the free will Note.
has power and information to disclaim its Selfehood, and die to its Self in
this holy incorporated Word; and then the Fiat begets and forms another
new creature in the Free Will out of the Ens.

34. The Possibility lies in all men, but the making or forming of the child
of God belongs now to the holy Fiat in the new introduced Word, for it lies
not on any man's self- willing, contriving, running, and toyling, but on Gods
mercy: He has mercy upon whom he please, Note.
viz. upon those only who with their Free Will dye to their Selfehood in his
grace, and resign up their selves to him; and he hardneth whom he please, viz.
those only who run with selvish Cain, and would themselves take the Kingdom
of God in their own evil will, and will not dye to their own selfe-full-will.

35. Now says the Scripture: has not a Potter power to make of one lump of
clay what he please; Note.
a vessel to honor, and a vessel to dishonor; that is; will the selfefull
will be Angry, if it be Evil, that the Fiat in the Word makes it to be a
vessel of the Anger; or will it therefore be angry, if the holy Fiat in the
holy Word makes that will (which diveth it self into the Love and Mercy of
God, and dies to its Selfehood) to be a vessel of honor; has not this
Potter power to do with his clay, viz. (with the Ens or Seed) what he please;
whereunto every Seed is good and profitable, thereunto he makes him a vessel
either to the use of his Anger or the use of his Love.

36. The Holy is unto God a Sweet Savor to life; and the wicked a sweet Savor
to the death in his anger; all must enter into his Glory, and praise him, one
in the property of his Anger, who must call the Evil good; the other in the
property of his Love who must call the Good, good; for so it must be, that the
difference of the Good and Evil, of the light and darkness, of the life and
death may be known; for if there were no death then the life were not manifest
to it self, and if there were no darkness, the light were not manifest to it
self.

37. And therefore the Eternal free will has introduced it self into
darkness, Pain, and Source, and so also through the darkness into the fire,
and light even into a Kingdom of joy, that so the nothing might be known in
the Something, and that it might have a Sport in its Contra-will, that the
free will of the (...)*
Abyss might be manifest to it self in the (...).
Bysse, for without Evil and Good there could not be any Bysse [ground or
foundation.]

38. For the Evil makes pain and motion, and the Good causes Essence and
power, and yet both Essences are only One Essence, as fire and light are only
one Essence, also darkness and light are only one being; but it Severs it
self into two mighty distinctions, and yet there is no Sundry Separation, for
one dwells in the other, and yet does not comprehend the other; the one does
deny the other, for the one is not the other.

39. God dwells through all and that all is not God, also it does not reach
him; but whatsoever quitteth it self free of its free will, that falls into
his possession, that he must have, for it is will-lesse and falls into the
Nothing; and he is in the Nothing: thus the Resigned will may dwell in the
Nothing, and there is Gods Mercy; for he will have Something out of the
Nothing, that he may be manifest in the Something, and therefore he has mercy
upon the Something, which is fallen into his Nothing, and makes it in himself
to be his Something; which he himself rules, drives and acts with his
Merciful Spirit.

40. And herein lies the precious Pearl, dear brethren who are driven too
and fro with Contention; if ye did but know it; you would leave off from strife
and call Reason a fool: no Searchings of Self, obtains it, but the will
freely Resigned into Gods Mercy, which enters in by the way of Earnest
Repentance, and mortification of its own evil will, that falls into Gods
Mercy, and does apprehend [and obtain the right understanding], and without
this, there is mere selfe-running walking, and willing; and yet nothing can be
obtained, save only in the will freely resigned into Gods Mercy.

41. We have a very excellent and notable example and type of this in the first
birth, which opened the womb, that it was to be sanctified, and offered up to
the Lord, and yet the true living offering proceeds from the Second, new
birth, as we may see in Abell Isaac and Jacob. Cain Ismael and Esau were the
firstborn, the inheritance belonged to them; but the lot, and Mercy fell upon
Abell Isaac and Jacob; for the first Ens of man was infected and made crasie by
the Devil; therefore it must be given to the fire for an Offering, and food;
and out of the offering, viz. out of the fire of Gods Anger, the Love of God was
made manifest in Mercy; and the first Adam was the Inmate; or of his family,
Servant.
Sojourner of the Second in Christ, for the Second redeemed the first.

42. The Devils desire and the beastiall Ens of the Serpent had got the upper
hand in the matrix of Eve, and apprehended the first Seed in the desire: now
the Kingdom of God did yet belong to the first man, but being he did lose it
by his negligence, the first Adam must be offered to the Earth, and also its
first Seed to the Anger.

43. And after this first Seed, Abel came forth in the holy Covenant, and
offered his sweet blood for the sinful Seed, to the Anger, that the anger
might let its flame fall, and suffer the first birth to press Viz. through
death and the anger into life.
through in the blood of the Second.

44. The first birth was a murderer, which signifies the Devil in man; the
Second was the offering of [or for] the first, that the Anger-Devill in the
first Adam might be appeased in the offering of the Second.

45. Not that we would exalt or take in the wicked, into the offering of
Christ, so long as he is wicked; the Devil devoureth most of the wicked crew:
only the wicked Sinner has an open Gate made for him in the offering of the
Second [ Adam] if he did convert, and turn himself (from his wickedness.)

46. But that some write, there was a twofold Seed which did Sever it self in
Eve, viz. one wholly devilish from the Ens of the Serpent, and the other from
the Ens of Christ [or the promised Seed of the woman] in the Covenant, is
nothing so; these have not at all learned the A. B. C. in this school; they
have only a dreaming shadow and fiction of the Mystery, and not the true
Sight; thus they build the Election of grace upon this; but they are much
mistaken: Note.
they speak only the Serpents words, which desired to have it so: observe it
thus:

47. Adam had only one limbus to his Seed, and Eve only one Matrix for her
Seed, but they both stood in three Principles: the Principles were in Contest,
as still they are at this day: the Second Principle viz. the Kingdom of God,
or Angelical world, did disappear in the Souls Seed, and God espoused his
only most holy word again therein unto the new birth.

48. And this espousall or betrothment stood as well in Cains Ens, as in Abels
Ens, but Cains Ens was apprehended in the Contest of the three Principles in
the Anger, and covered with the Serpents Monster; not so, to an impossibility,
as if he were borne to condemnation; but even to a possibility of the
Free Will, whether he would lay down the selfefull assumed and self
appropriated Right in Adam, and live in Gods will, or whether he would live
unto himself; upon this was the Election set.

49. Now God knows whereinto the free will is entered: if it be entered into
iniquity, and selfe-hood; then Gods Anger establishes or confirms it in its
choice to condemnation; but if it be entered into the word of the Covenant, then
God confirms it to be a child of Heaven, and here that saying has its proper
signification and application: I have mercy on whom I will and whom I will I
harden: God knows his children even in the Ens in the mothers womb; to what
end should he give his Pearl to him, whom he yet knows would turn himself
away from him; the Pearl's ground lies indeed in him but hidden, and shut up,
if he brought his will into the Pearl it would open it self in him.

50. All men proceed from one only Seed; but in one the holy fire glimmereth
and in another it lies as 'twere shut up, and cannot, by reason of the Mire of
the Serpent.

51. Thou say then: is the Serpents Ens more mighty then Gods Love: I have
already answered thee: that Love and Anger are in Contest; whereinto the Ens
does espouse it self, of that it is apprehended and confirmed, yet so, that
the will is free to go from the Evil into the Good, and from the Good into
the Evil; and that while it lives upon the Earth, both doors stand open unto
it: for the free will is not bound: but if it were bound then no judgment
could with righteousness pass upon it: it has Laws and instructions, which
are given it, not unto death but unto life, but if it transgresses these, and
continues in the transgression; now the judgment passes upon it; for every
judgment [or sentence of Condemnation] arises from the transgression of the
Command.

52. Thou say he cannot keep them; he is drawn [to transgression], yea very
right; does not the Truth rebuke him even to the face, that he is a faithless
wretch, that suffers himself to be drawn to Evil: the Law to do Right is in
his vital light as a continual Looking-glass: he sees and knows it very
well, that he is a liar, and walks upon the way of the Devil: it shows him
the way of truth but the free will rejects it, at present he is predestined
to condemnation, yet so that the will is free, so long as he is in this
Cottage; but the heavy band of Gods anger in the drawing of the Devils desire,
draws many an one to the damnation of death.

53. Reason says: if a man has free will, then God is not omnipotent over
him, to do what he please with him: The free will is not from any beginning,
also not amassed or taken out of any ground, into any thing, or formed by any
thing; it is its own peculiar Original out of the word of the divine Power out
of Gods Love, and Anger; it forms, it self in its own will, a Center to its
Seat; it begets it self in the first Principle to the fire and light; its
right and genuine Original is in the Nothing, where the Nothing, viz. the
(or as a man might unfold it A. O. V.) does introduce it self into a Lubet to
contemplation; and the Lubet brings it self into a will, A. O. V.
and the will into a desire, and the desire into a Substance.

54. Now the Eternal Original, viz. God, is a Judge over the Substance; if
the Lubet (which is departed from him) has introduced it self into an Evil
being; then he judges that being or substance in its Principle; in what Source
and property soever, or in what Ens soever, the Lubet, proceeding from the
departed
, has introduced it self into a Principle; therein the universal Eternal
free will which is the Abyss, and Cause of all Bysse, does confirm and settle
it.

55. The Abyssall judges That which does intoduce it self into Bysse, and
severs the good* (which has introduced it self into a good Ens) into the
good, viz. into the divine Love; and the Evil (which has brought it self
into an Evil Ens, and set, and formed it self into a Center to an evil
Spirit, and will) into his wrath and Anger.

56. For how can he judge a thing whose own it is not? how would God judge the
will of the creature if it were not sprung [or arisen] from him? or rather how
can a Judgment pass upon a thing, which is bound, and not free in its willing
and working?

57. The humane and Angelical will is arisen with the motion of the Abyss
(when the Diety once moved it self in its Contemplation and Sensation, and
with the motion introduced it self into a beginning of the Spirits) [the will
of Men and Angels did spring forth] out of this beginning; now every beginning
goes into its End; and the End is that which was before the beginning, and
there is the trial of the beginning; [which shewes] whereinto the beginning
has introduced it self.

58. Now God is before and without all beginnings, and from him every beginning
proceeds, also he is the End of all beginnings; now the middle of all
inchoated things stands between the beginning and the End; for it must with
its beginning enter again through the End into that whence it did arise.

59. Seeing then that God is a jealous God and a consuming fire, and also a
loving merciful God: Every free will with its introduced Center has its own
judge borne in its self; either divine Love, or divine Anger; for when a thing
begins; it goes into a time; but when this time is apprehended of the End,
viz. of the Eternity; then it is in its own Eternal [beginning, and End]
whence it has introduced it self into a Compaction, so confirmed to Eternity.

60. Therefore the free will has its own Judgment either for the good or
evil in it self: It has its own judgment in it self: it has Gods Love and
anger in it, what it amasseth, and defireth, that it forms in it self; and
does only so form its own self in its own Lubet into a Center.

61. For thus the world has likewise its Original: namely in the Free Will of
the two Eternal Principles, both from the dark fire-lubet and also from the
divine lightfull fire-lubet; The free will introduced it self in the Verbum
Fiat into distinct and several Entities; and that even according to the
Possibility of the Eternal Pregnatresse; as the Will in the Verbum Fiat
conceived it self in each place in the Pregnatresse, even such an Ens was
brought forth, and out of the Ens arose its Spirit according to the Ens, viz.
from Gods Breathing or stirring up.
Spiration or motion in the Principles.

62. But being the Principles were together as one; no thing was ever amassed
or formed in the free will but the same has a good and an evil in it;
according to the nature and Power of the Eternal Pregnatresse to light, and
darkness.

63. But now every Spirit arises with its free will first out of the
Compaction of its Center, and is, after its effected birth, free, and may draw
into it self either out of Gods Love, or Anger, and introduce its will as it
pleases: but this is the maine thing; as the mother ( viz. the Ens) is,
whereof the Spirit is borne, even such a Lubet arises also in the Spirit.

64. Now the Spirit has understanding, and the Ens has none; also Viz. the
Spirit.
it has a Law, for it knows what is evil and good, what is right, and
wrong, also God has given it laws, that it should break the lust [to evill]
and with the understanding of the light, rule over the Lubet of the darkness.

65. Now if it does not, but departs with the Lubet out of the understanding
into a Selfe-Lubet, then the Lubet or lust does amasse it self into a
Substance, whereof a new false will is again borne, and this same is a bastard
before God and the Eternal nature; for it arises not out of the Law and Right
of the Eternal nature but out of Self; and upon this the judgment of the
Eternal nature does pass; and at its end (when the Center of the Spirit shall
step again into the beginning) it will be spewed out from the free will of
Eternity.

66. Understand Us but aright: The first free will, which was breathed into
Adam, was good, indeed it was both from Gods Love and anger, viz. from the
Center of the Eternal Pregnatresse, of the Eternal Spiritual nature; but it
had the understanding in it to rule and govern it self, so as it might stand
and subsist Eternally.

67. But the crafty distemper or infection introduced by the Devil was in the
Ens of the Earth Or whereof.
whence Adams outward body was formed: into this earthly Ens the Devil brought
his desire by the Serpent, viz by the Serpents crafty Ens, so that the Lubet
arose in the Ens of the body, whereinto the first free will of the inspired
Soul entered, and assumed the Lubet of the body, and introduced this Lubet into
a desire to Substance.

68. And out of this Substance another new Selfefull will did now arise, viz. a
bastard, a false Serpent-childe; and this bastard, Adam did Originally
propagate to his Eve, and Eve to her Son Cain, and so one man to another: thus
we have now in this Earthly flesh this same false will proceeded from the
Serpents Substance, whereinto the Devil introduces his desire, and tempts
us, and continually makes us lust and long after the devilish property [ viz.
pride, covetousness, envy, and anger,] that so his desire which he insinuareth
into the false bastard in us, might become substantial and essential; out of
which such an whorish and devilish Serpentine Seed is continually begotten;
and out of the same false Ens [or Seed] a Devils will.

69. Thus the Devil rides in and upon man, in and upon body and Soul: but now
the first introduced free will, which God breathed into Adam, lies yet in all
men, for it is the true real Soul, the Center of the fire and light, a spark
of the Divine Power and Omnipotence, but wholly hemmed in and captivated in this
wicked introduced Bastard.

70. Therefore God has again Imputed introduced recalled, or really promised
into the Soul.
in-hested, and incorporated the Aim of his new Covenant, in the word of the
divine holy power, in the Name of Jesus into the property of the lightfull fire
( v^z. into the disappeared heavenly holy Ens, which did disappear in the
darkness) that the first free will which now lies captive, in the child of
the whore and Serpent, should introduce its desire into this Aim of the
promised Covenant (which he has fulfilled in Christ's humanity), and with the
desire of the Souls free will re-introduce the holy Ens of Christ (which he in
the Seed of Mary introduced into our disappeared Ens) into its disappeared
heavenly Ens; and if it does bring it so to pass, then out of this introduced
Ens of Christ, arises Christ's Spirit which destroys the false will of the
Serpents Bastard in the flesh, and trampleth upon its head.

71. Now says Reason: God gives this holy new Ens of Christ to whom he will,
and suffers whom he please to harden, and remain captive in the Serpents
Ens: yes very right: He gives none this holy Ens into the Self-will of his
Serpents-child; there belongs far another earnestness thereto; for selfehood
cannot now any more take any thing of God.

72. But this is the process which the free will must go, if it will receive
the holy Ens: it must wind it self out of the Serpents desire, ( out of its
selfish self and somethingnesse) and wind it self into Gods mercy; and
become a deadly mortifying Enemy to the fleshly desire in it self, it must
wholly forsake and depart from the selfe-full desire of the flesh; and bring
its hunger wholly and only into the mortification of its selfish
somethingnesse, desiring and endeavoring continually and willingly to dye to
its iniquity and false desire which sticks in the flesh, in the Serpents
child, and in Christ's Ens arise with a new will.

73. This desire, which departs from the Serpents Ens, and hungreth after
Gods mercy, receives Christ's Ens into it self, whence a new will is borne,
which bruiseth the head of the Serpent in the flesh, for it is the new birth
out of God in Christ Jesus.

74. But if thou will say, thou can not desire any good, that is not true;
only thou suffer the Serpents will in thy right Eternal Souls will, to
hold thee; and with the Souls will, do play the whore with the Serpents
will, in the flesh; from whence arises Gods Election.

75. God knows the false whorish soul, which does only woe and wantonnise
with the Serpent, (with the Idol Babell) and will still live in the lust and
will of the flesh and of the Serpent; and yet wills to be an outwardly
Adopted child: God should forgive it its sins by an outward Word-speaking, but
it wills still to hang and cleave to the wanton Love of the Serpent in its
false lust; this, God chooses to Judgment.

76. For the free will, which was inspired into Adam, and which The Soul.
it has inherited from Adam hangs on Lucifer; and therefore God Confirms it
unto the Kingdom of darkness with Lucifer; but the Gate of grace stands yet
open unto it this time of the outward life.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Cains, and Abels offering, and of the false and antichristian
Church, and also of the true Holy Church.
A Looking-glass for the World.
1. Here again, the veil lies before the face of Moses, in respect of the
Offerings of both these brothers; wherefore God willed to have them offer,
whereas the Reconciliation, and Atonement consists only in the earnest will
toward Gods mercy, in prayer and Supplication to God, that a man depart and
turn away from his evil will, and repent, and introduce his Faith and Hope
into Gods mercy.

2. They must verily needs know, wherefore they offered Incense; what pleasure
and delight God took therein; which Moses has not once so much as mentioned,
and that from Gods purpose; and yet it has not been hidden to the children of
the Saints, and also not to Moses, but he has a veil hanging before his Eyes.

3. Israel (being for the most part they were evil children, and also
Idolatrous, as soon appeared by making them a Golden Calfe) might not know it
by reason of the false Magic; and we also shall write only to those that are
of our Tribe, and yet plain and easy enough to be understood: Observe and
mark it, thus.

4. The Souls free will, is as Or subtle.
thin as a nothing, and though it be, in its body indeed, encompassed with the
Something; yet its Amassed or conceived Something is in a false distempered
Essence, by reason of the Original of Sin.

5. Now if the free will would approach to God with the desire, then it must
depart out of its false Something, and if it now does so depart, then it is
bare, and impotent, for it is again in the first Nothing: for if it will come
to God, then it must dye to its false selfehood, and forsake it, and if it
forsakes the same, then it is barely and merely as a nothing, and so it cannot
go, work, or move: if it will show its might, then it must be in Something,
wherein it does Imaginate and form it self.

6. An example hereof we have in Faith: if Faith would effectually work, then
it must immasse [or Imaginate] it self into Something wherein it may work;
Gods free will has conceived [or immassed it self with the inward Spiritual
world and works through the same; and the inward worlds free will has
conceived it self in the outward world and works through the same: even so,
the Souls free will, which also has its Original out of the Abyss immasseth
it self in Something, that it might be manifest, and thereby be able to move
and act in Gods Sight.

7. Seeing then Adams Body was out of the limus of the Earth and also out of
the limus of the holy heaven, which limus of heaven in Adam was now
disappeared, wherein the free will had power to immasse, [or conceive] it self
into an holy form, and act, work, pray and Supplicate before God; therefore
they made burnt-offerings of the fruits of the Earth; as Cain, he brought of
the fruit of the ground, Genesis IIII. verses 3, 4.
and Abel also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and these they enkindled
with fire.

8. But understand a magical fire (as that of Moses) for Moses declares so
also; God looked graciously upon the offering of Abell and not upon Cains: that
is, they brought offerings before God, and the free will of the soul should
earnestly press with its prayer, in to God; therefore it would have a Subject
or means.
Substance, when it would go out of the humane house of corruption into God,
that it might work in Something, therefore the Imagination of the will did
Immasse [or Imaginate] it self, through the offering, and God enkindled the
offering of Abell with the holy fire in the Aim of the Covenant, which in the
fullness of time should again enkindle it self in the Souls fire.

9. In this, the will of Abels Soul did Fashion or Idea.
inform it self into an holy Substance, and pressed with the desire of the
Informed free souls will, before and into Gods free will, and this the will of
the Devil and the Serpent could not brook; and even this the will of the
Serpent and Devil in Cain did well understand; that the Aim of the Covenant
did open it self in the Holy Fire in Abels desire and prayer.

10. And therefore he would kill the Body of Abell according to his earthly
limus; least such children should be begotten of him, and so he might loose his
Kingdom in man; But God would not enkindle the offering of Cain, now Moses
makes a veil here before it, and says, God would not look Or have respect to.
graciously upon Cains offering.

11. The Enkindling of the external offering was a figure of the internal
Spirit: for the souls Spirit in the free will (as to the Center of the light)
was enkindled with Gods Love-fire, and the Imagination of the Body also
[understand of the heavenly part] was inkindled in offering with the fire of
the holy part of the Earth which lies hidden in the Curse; and therein the
free will of the Soul, and the free will in the Ens of the heavenly part of the
body, did Immasse it self into a Substance; and therewith did press in before
the holiness of God.

12. And here the Serpents head was first bruised; for it was a figure of the
new birth out of Christ; not that Abel had at this time put on Christ in the
flesh; but indeed the Spirit of Jehova, in the Aim of the Covenant; in which,
the Name of Jesus stood hidden in God as a Regeneratour, which would move, and
manifest it self in the fullness of time, in this Aim [of the Covenant] and
introduce an heavenly holy Ens into the disappeared Ens of the heavenly part,
and quicken it to life again in the opened power of Jesus.

13. If a man would rightly and fundamentally understand the Sacrifices.
Offerings, he must consider that, whereof the Offering consisted, and what
severed it self with the Enkindling in the fire, out of the fire, viz. out of
the Enkindled offering; for in the Enkindling, nothing is seen or perceived,
but 1. the wood to the fire. 2ly The matter of offering. 3dly. The fire, and
light. 4ly. The Smoke of the fire, which arises from the burning wood and
matter of the offering; all this without the faith and divine desire is as an
abomination, and indeed Nothing in Gods sight and attaineth not the Gate of God:

14. But if Man brings his faiths-desire thereinto, then he resigneth the
free will thereinto, and will thereby as by a means (in which fire the
Free Will of the introduced Sinful abomination does burn and consume away)
press in to Gods Eternal free will: and now how this is effected and comes to
pass, understand as follows.

15. Gods Imagination or Lubet meets the Free-inspired-will of the humanity,
and the humane free will meets the deity, here is now the Conjunction.

16. But now Man's free will is become Sinful, and Gods free will (from whence
the humane free will did first take its rise in its in-Spiration) is holy, and
pure: as yet the humane free will cannot press into Gods will, unless it also
become pure before God.

17. But being God will out of free grace receive it into him for the delight
and harmony of his praise: there is no other way or remedy, but that God move
himself in the Center of the Eternal nature according to the fire of the
Second Principle, viz. according to the holy fire, and devour that enkindled
Anger and vanity of man's free will; and annihilate it in the mortification of
death, viz. in the Anger-fire of God, that the humane will might become pure
before Gods will, and so might enter into Gods Love-will: and therefore Gods
Love-desire did it self enkindle the offering of Abel and Moses, that so the
holy-and Love-fire might devour and swallow up the Turba in the humane
free-Soules-will, in the Anger-fire of the Eternal nature, in the Fathers
property.

18. But, that there must be an Earthly offering thereunto, is thus to be
understood: the Body of man as to one part is a limus of the Earth, and as to
the other part a limus of heaven; and into this Body the free will was
inspired, and body and soul is only one man.

19. But being in the fall, the earthlinesse and false suttlety of the Serpent
(by the insinuation of the Devils desire) was awakened in the flesh of man,
and so the earthly beastiall property got the upperhand in his Ens, and
devoured the right humane will in the beastiall property, that is, took it
captive; thereupon the earthly will which was from the limus of the Earth must
also be offered up in the fire.

20. For the limus of the Earth shall arise again out of earth; but for to
make it an offering it must also be offered in an earthly Elementall fire of
its likeness; so that an heavenly fire, and an earthly Elementall fire might
be in one another, and each will in the offering might respectively find a
place for its own comprehension and capacity: viz. the will proceeded from the
earthly limus of the Earth from the Kingdom of this world; and the heavenly
will; out of the heavenly limus, viz. out of the Ens Of the Semina^l and
Centrall Love of the word of the Lord.
of the Verbum Domini; each property of the free will went into the offering,
and from the offering into the fire, where the Atonement was.

21. For the Covenant of the promise touching the Serpent-Stroyer did manifest
it self by the holy fire, which holy fire enkindled the Elementall fire, for
the holy fire shall awaken and raise up from death the Elementall man out of
the limus of the Earth, and in the holy fire Man (who has taken his Original
from Time) shall be purged and tried in the Resurrection; who verily must first
go through the fire of the Anger, but the power and might of the holy fire
shall bring him through the Anger-fire, and cleanse and purge away his
introduced abomination of Sin (in the Serpents and Devils Ens [in him]) from
the limus of the Earth, that the limus of the Earth may be no more earthly but
as a fine purified Gold which subsists in the fire.

22. Even thus the Earthly man shall be purified in the Resurrection through
the fire, of which the Offerings were a type, and yet they did really subsist in
their power, as to the Spirit: but the Body must dye, and the true corporality,
and Regeneration, must come forth [or begin to spring afresh] in the opened
body of Christ, who with his Entrance into, and manifestation in the humaniry,
did again open the heavenly disappeared limus in the humane Ens, which did
disappeare [or fade] in Adam and Eve.

23. Thus understand us aright: Abel and Moses offered the fatt of beasts, and
enkindled that with the holy fire, which fire was first enkindled by God; for
the beastiall property became manifest in the outward earthly man of the limus
of the Earth; the humane limus of the Earth was turned to a Beast, and was
moreover sinful and evil, full of the Serpents poison, and Cunning Suttlety.

24. The free will did immasse it self in the Serpents craft and Devils
desire; and formed to it self such a figure in the Ens of the flesh as the
desire was, whereupon the Body was more vain in Gods sight then a beast.

25. But being the heavenly Ens lay hidden and shut up in the earthly property,
God would not utterly forsake the whole Image; which Abel and Moses did
understand, in the Spirit of God, by their offerings; and therefore they
offered the Fat viz. the oil of the beasts and other earthly good fruits, that
so the desire of the true man, created out of the limus of the Earth, who shall
arise from death, might in the enkindling of the offering in the fire, have a
Substance whereinto it might give it self, and Imaginate it self; and so in
the property of the holy fire it might be able to enter with its will into the
Aim of the Covenant, which stood before God in the figure, until [the
promise] of the woman's Seed was fulfilled and accomplished.

26. In which Seed the dear and precious Name of Jesus did open it self out of
Jehovah and did again awaken the heavenly life in the disappeared Ens in the
humanity, and offered up this whole Image in the Person of Christ, to the Anger
fire of the Father, and with the holy Love fire Regenerated and enkindled in
the humane life, did bring it quite through the Anger, viz. through the fire of
the Eternal nature of the Fathers Manifestation, and changed the anger-fire
into a love-fire, and this was just thus prefigured in the Offering; for the
Love-fire enkindled the offering, and in the offering was yet the Curse of the
Earth as well as in the humane free will, and when the offering was offered, it
was a Sin-offering whereby the free will of man's Soul was Reconciled with God.
propitiated before God.

27. Now if Sin shall be reconciled and appeased, then it must be brought into
the Anger, viz. into the judgment of God, into the sword of the Cherub, that
it may cut off the same, which (Cherub) is the Sword of Gods anger: and if then
the humane will be wholly Sinful and altogether capable of the fire of Anger
then God Enkindleth the Sin-offering, in which the Anger-fire lay hidden in the
Curse, with the holy fire that the humane will which was apprehended in the
Anger-fire might be atonened in the Love-fire.

28. For the Love-fire of God tinctureth the souls desire in the Offering, as a
tincture tingeth brass and Iron and changes them into Gold: even thus the
humane Souls free will, which was inspired wholly pure and spotless into
man, was tinctured and again purified before God, that so it might enter into
Gods mercy: for the mercy was hidden in the Love-fire, viz. in the Aim of the
Covenant, in the Name of Jesus in God, in which Covenant, and Name, the Anger
of God was Reconciled and Atonened in the offering, and laid down its
Anger-burning flames, and suffered the souls free will to pass quite through
it.

29. But as touching the offering in it self, with the Wood, Fire, Light, and
Smoke; understand it thus: Abel offered of his flock, without doubt, sheep, or
oxen, as Moses did the like; namely, the fat of them, now the offering ( viz.
the wood and Smoke) on the outward part as to the matter, was earthly; and so
was Man as to the outward Body, earthly, and in the earthlinesse lay the Curse,
both in Man and in the Offering.

30. But when the Offering was Enkindled, it was Spiritual, for from the wood
proceeded the fire, which took the Offering and consumed it, and out of the
consumptivenesse, went forth, first from the fire the smoke, and afterward the
light; this was the Figure, whereinto Man's and also Gods Imagination entered,
as a Compaction or Conjunction.

31. In the Enkindled Consuming fire was the desire of the Angry Father, viz.
a Conjunction of the eternal natures-fire with the Temporal fire; the
Eternal is Magical, and the temporal is the Substance and matter of the
magical, viz. its Or Amassement.
Reception and in the enkindled Light was the holy love-fire, which is also
magical, as subtle as a will, which did also immasse it self in the
enkindled light and in the forth-proceeding smoke, which is an Elementall
Sulphur and Mercury, viz. a life of the quality; the smell or taste went forth
also, which signifies the humane power of the Body, and the outward spirit of
nature.

32. In this power which proceeded forth from the offering, out of the fire and
light, the Spirit of God which proceeds forth from the Father and Son did
Amass it self in the Amassement of the humane Faiths desire, and so took the
humane Faiths desire into it self, and did Amasse it self into a Substance of
the fire light and power proceeding forth from the Offering, and brought it
through the Gates of Gods Anger, upon the holy Altar, in the Aim of the
Covenant, upon which the Lamb of God should be offered for the sins of the
whole world.

33. For this Lamb of God, viz. Christ, should complete, perfect, and make this
introduced offering fully acceptable, upon the Great Altar of the Angelical
world; that it might be to God an Eternal Sweet Savor of his deepest Love,
which he represented in Man, in his introduced offering in the Lamb of God
Christ, and Mankind, in this Representative offering.

34. The humane offering was the Sojourner of the true Lamb and offering of God
in Christ, and now where the offering is, there is also the spirit of man, for
man's spirit is gone forth, and departed from God into Time, and in the Time it
has defiled it self, therefore it must forsake the Pollution, and enter in
again through this Offering to God.

35. But if it will enter, then it must do it in manner and form as it went
out; for it brought it self into false desire, and lust: even so likewise it
must introduce it self again by a Returning into a Sorrow and conversion, and
in the Sorrow or Repentance again, into a divine desire which is called Faith.

36. But that it might apprehend or lay hold on the divine desire; Note.
it did bring the faith or the believing desire into an offering, and so amassed
or formed the believing desire in the offering, into a Substance or Essence,
that the Faith also might become essential, and this essentiallity of faith
received the holy fire of God, which would in the fullness of time open it
self in the essentiality of faith, and bring the humane Substance thereinto,
and also bring it forth in it self through Gods Anger, and change it in it
self into a Love-fire, for all the words of prayer in the offering were also
received into the Substance of Faith.

37. For as all things were formed Amassed and introduced by the word of God
into a Substance; so likewise the words of the prayer of Abel and Israel in the
offering were formed and amassed to substance viz. unto an Incorruptible
Essence, in which Essence, Christ, Gods Son, in the fullness of time brake
forth out of the Covenant, and took upon him this same Essence together with
the humane Essence, and as a potent Champion and mighty Conqueror destroyed
the Kingdom of death and the Devil.

38. And to this faiths Essence in the Spirit of Christ in all his children and
members, was given the Judgment over the world, yea over the Kingdom of the
Devil and of death; thereby to destroy and bring to naught their works, and
Possess the Royal Throne.

39. This was the real offering of Abel; for the Spirit of the holy love-fire,
in the Aim of the Covenant, had opened it self in him, so that he understood
it; and therefore he offered, that so his believing desire might be accepted
before God and be brought into a substance to the new Regeneration; for he
looked upon the promise of the Serpent-Stroyer, and introduced the desire of
his faith, into him, and desired that his faith, spirit, and life, might be
confirmed in the Serpent-Stroyer, who was promised; he would fain be therein
accepted before God; as it was granted him, so that the fire of God did
enkindle his offering, and received his prayer in the Love-fire; and in the
Sweet Savor of the offering, it was brought by the Spirit of God in the power
of the light, into an holy Substance, and it is rightly said: his offering was
acceptable before God.

40. The offering alone could not have been able to have done it, only the
Faith which did Idea, or lay hold on the promised Messiah in the offering, which
apprehended the Covenant, and the true very precious and dear Offering; the
same did effect it; the offering was only a figure of that which was therein
accomplished and performed, as the outward world is only a figure of the
inward Spiritual world, whereby the Spiritual world does introduce it self
into a figure and Essence, and beholds it self therein as in a Looking- glass.

Of Cains Offering.
41. BY Cains offering we rightly understand the verbal Christendom, the
titular Christians, in the spiritual babylonicall har^ottry, the Type and
Image of whom is Cain; and as Cain in his offering sought only the outward
world, might, and pleasure, and would be an outwardly adopted and received
child; God should permit his evil Beast to be Accepted, and offered up; he
desired to be Gods acceptable child with the selfehood in the Serpents Ens and
falsehood: he was an Impenitent proud man, who thought to be a Lord of the
world, and to domineer over Abel and his posterity; and just thus is the
Antichristian Church upon the Earth, it builds also Churches and Altars,
preaches, sings, and tincketh, and does likewise offer in the bequeathed
Covenant and Testament of Christ, and so covers it self with the offering of
Christ, and will be an outwardly accepted, and adopted Son, notwithstanding
that, its offering is not accepted in the Covenant and Testament of Christ, nor
brought to Substance.

42. The cause and ground of it is this: men depend and rely only barely and
nakedly upon the offering, and teach, that the offerings take away Sin, Christ's
testaments do absolve Sin: but as little as the offering of Cain was acceptable
before God, and took away his Sin, and as little as Cains desire was
introduced into the divine Substance, so as to have the divine fire to enkindle
in his offering, and receive his Faiths desire into it, even so little also does
the verbal (lip-laboring) Christendom enjoy the offering of Christ in his
humanity: it must be an Abel only, that does enjoy it, the Titular
Mouth-Christian attaines only the Smoke of the true offering; It must be only
a right hungry thirsty converted soul, which desires wholly and fully to
depart from the Serpents Ens and all vanity of this world, and striveth to
mortify, the Serpent and all vain will, in the Death of Christ, and desires
to arise in a new will totally Resigned in all Submission in God.

43. This true hungry will offers rightly with Abel, and its offering, is
received into the holy fire of Christ, and formed [or amassed] in Christ's
humanity into a Substance: there must be earnestness and Power, which
earnestness stirs the Love-fire of Christ in his Testament, so that it does
enkindle it self in the desire; and then the desire becomes a true right
Faith, for there is no right Faith without divine Comprehension Amassement or
formation.
Taking.

44. When Man's Desire introduces its hunger with earnest Sighing and prayer of
introversion, Resignation, and departing from vanity into the offering of
Christ, even then the Souls desire, does form it self, in the heavenly
Essentiality, in the humanity of Christ, upon the High Altar of God, into a
Substance; the hungry desire, becomes in the word of God, in Christ's
Testaments, flesh, an heavenly supernatural flesh, and this flesh is the true
Offering of God, which God takes to his habitation, and not the beastiall
mortal Man.

45. In this holy Substance only, is the true Faith of Abel, without this,
there is only an hystoricall painted and feigned faith, a Cains offering which
does not take away Sin: for Sin must always be brought into the judgment of
God, wherein it was borne; and the holy Love-fire of God must drown and wash it
away, else there is no forgiveness; neither offering nor Covenant does avail
any thing without it; also no going to Church, neither Singing nor devout
showing does attain it, nothing else at all does it but only the hungry
desiring Faith through the Alone Offering in the blood and Death of Christ,
where the Desire does wholly dye in the death of Christ to its Selfehood, and
arise in Christ's Resurrection with a true Faith and christianity, not in a
specious show of holiness but in the inward Essence in words and works.

46. For He is yet far from a Christian, who calls himself a Christian, or is
so termed only, but he is one, who is borne in the offering of his humanity in
him: neither Covenant nor Laws avail any thing before God, but a new
creature: no Cathedral Stone-Church meeting house or hypocrycie, or whatsoever
it be called, can inherit Gods Kingdom, but only and alone the true living
Offering of the new regeneration arising from the Covenant of promise in
Paradise, through the quickening Word in the Offering of Christ.

47. It is only and alone the Temple of the holy Spirit, where Gods word is
taught and taken, without that, is Cain with his glistering Stone-Church full
of pride, and stinking Ambition, the Great building of Babylon, where the
Language of Gods word, viz. of the written word is confounded and divided into
manifold contentions, and Languages, where there is nothing but wrangling,
jangling, and snarling about the Letters, and no true real living effectual
and powerful knowledge.

48. Now where the living knowledge of Christ is, there is the Altar of God in
all places, where the hungry Soul may offer the true acceptable holy offering,
in prayer, there it may introduce the prayer in the Word, in its hunger, into a
Substantial Faith.

49. Not that we would hereby wholly abolish and race down the Stone-Churches,
but we teach the Temple of Christ, which ought to be brought along [in the
heart] into the Stone-Church, or else the whole business of the Stone-Church is
only an hypocritical antichristian whoredom, a Cains offering, both of the
Preacher and hearer: so that one is not a whit better then another, unless he
enter through the true door Christ in Spirit and power in the Temple of Christ
into the Stone-Church, or at least resolve to fix betake and fasten himself
there, into such an earnest desire, [that he will take and hold fast that which
is good only for the amendment of his life] else Cain goes to Church to
offer, and comes out again a Killer of his brother.

50. As it often appears; that when men in the Stone-Churches have taken and
amassed io their Minds a deal of revilings, reproaches, and Censures; [that
have fallen from the false smoaky Cain-like fury and pretended zeal of the
Preachers] then they forthwith come with all and murder Abel and Christ's
members, as this Spirit has many hundred times found by experience, and that
only for the sake of the Temple of Christ.

51. Now if we would rightly consider of the offering of Cain; then we must
look him into the very Essnce of his will and desire, for he also would offer
and be acceptable to God, but he loved only his ownhood, and selfe-full self;
his aim and endeavor was not, to be or become a new creature, but God should
so take away his Sins in the offering from him, but he would still remain the
old Cain, and so offer to God, that he might be so accepted with him: the
Devil came in the form of an Angel before God.

52. Cain Or did not acknowledge.
knew not his evil Serpentine property, the poor Soul was captivated
therewith and had set it self up in the Serpents wit and pride, it would needs
be an outwardly adopted child and heir of God, the offering must make
reconciliation for him; as Babell does, which takes also the Mantle of Christ
upon her, and says, Christ has undertaken and suffered for all my Sins upon
the Cross, I cannot purchase or do any thing for my self, my works avail
nothing before God, I need only believe that Christ has done it, and comfort
my self therewith, and then I am already justified and acquitted from all my
Transgressions.

53. Thus she comes before God, and thanketh God that he has paid the
reckoning and score, in his Son, and offreth with Cain and the Pharisee in the
Temple, and remains in her self a brother-slayer with Cain: and this is the
babylonicall fruit; like as Cain would take the offering upon him for a cloak
and Covering; so also his succeeding Church takes on it the offering of Christ
for a cloak, and Covert of its Sins, and false murder; and covers its
murtherous Spirit, so that men must call it an holy devout Christian.

54. Saint Paul must serve their turn thereto, when he says; I do that I
would not, now if I do it, it is not I but Sin that dwells in my flesh, but
that he says; now then with my Mind I serve God, but with the flesh the law
of Sin: the same, Cain will not understand, how the Mind must without
intermission rule and reign over the Sinful will and desire of the flesh, and
mortify the lust.

55. Saint Paul speaks of the heavenly Abel-like desire, how Sin must be
mortified in the flesh, and not rule over the Mind, as it did in Cain, when he
saw his brother was accepted before God, and that he himself was not; then the
murdering Spirit arose in his Mind, which should have been mortified in the
offering by true Repentance and conversion.

56. Thus also goes Babel under the Mantle of Christ, which offers also to
God, and thanketh him for the offering of Christ, but it self remains in the
Mind of the Cainicall brother-slayer, in pride, covetousness, Envy and Anger,
in Persecution, in war, and Contention, it fights about the Offering, and
about the Outward Covering, least it should be stripped thereof; and does in
the mean time fatten it self under it, with the beastiall offerings of the
fatness of the Earth, and still remains the Cainicall Beast, and does also
continually murder Abel in Christ's Members, and comfort it self with the
death of Christ, the same must be a Covert for the false murdering Spirit.

57. The heart and mind is far from the new creature: it is only the old
Cainicall brother-slayer, which bemantles it self with Christ's offering, and
offers with Cain; such, and nothing better remains now of Or Christendom.
Christianity among all Sects, except the children of Christ, who are here and
there hidden with Abel.

58. Cain's Church was never more potent, and predominant upon the Earth then
it is even at this time, whereas notwithstanding men cry out with full
mouth-cry, and great ostentation; Come all h^^her: we have found the offering of
Abell in Christ: yes forsooth dear Babel thou have indeed found the Mantle of
Christ, but behold thy Cain-like heart, and thou will see whether thou offrest
with Abell from the new creature, or from the false brother-slaying Spirit;
where are thy fruits? where is Love, and Righteousness? where is truth? where is
patience and meekness? where is the Mind that with Paul serves God? where
art thou, thou fair Christian Church upon the Earth? art thou not become a
murdering Den of the Devil? now show thy Christian virtues; art thou not full
of contention and murder, both in the Church and without the Church? thy mouth
is only a prater of Gods Kingdom, like as Cains mouth prated of the offering,
but his heart was a murderer.

59. Thus likewise men do prate in the Stone-Houses, of the mantle and offering
of Christ, and yet in the mean while in this Prate and Babble do murder the
children of Christ, condemn and judge them, and make a whole heap and crew of
reviling devouring wolves, that do all cry out, snarle and snap, and none
knows where the Hind is which they hunt, save only that the Devil does
thus act and drive on his sport by them, so that the true real offering of
Christ may remain covered and hidden, and be only as a Mystery in this world.

60. For we poor children of Eve do sojourne here in this Cottage in a
strange Or harbor.
lodging, wherein the Devil in Gods Anger, is Host: we dwell upon the Cursed
Earth, where the Devil rides over our Soul and Body, and at all times
tempts us: we had need be wary and watchful and at no time secure: it
costeth Body and Soul.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cains Fatricide.
killing of his brother; viz. of the Proud Haughty Antichristian hypocritical
Church, upon the Earth; and also of the true Christendom hidden under this
Antichristian Church.
WHen the Devil in Gods Anger, in the wrath of the Eternal nature, had
introduced his Throne, and Seat, into the humane property, and awakened the
Center of the wrathful nature, in him, there forthwith arose up such a desire
out of the awakened Angers property in the humane Ens or Seed, in the
Propagation, out of which property, Babel, viz. the Antichristian Church, is
begotten and brought forth.

2. And now as God had incorporated, and promised the Serpent-bruiser of this
false property, (who should bruise the head of the Serpents Ens and will or
desire) unto the heavenly Ens of man, which disappeared, in and to Paradise,
which word of promise was a Mystery, and a very Secret hiddennesse to the
earthly Man; even so also the false Cainicall Church of hypocricie and seeming
holiness, whose heart and desire is only [of] the outward world, has gotten
aloft this whole time, and has the outward dominion and Name as if it offered
to God: but the true real Christian Church is hidden under it, as a very
secret Mystery, and is not known of the Cainicall Church.

3. Cains Church sets forth it self very devoutly, and glysters on all sides
with specious Ceremonies, and pompous ostentation; giving forth, that it is
holy righteous and good; that it also offers in the Covenant of Christ, but its
heart is only a glozing soothing bravely attired Harlot, full of Cainicall
murder, reviling and blasphemy, full of censure and selfe-speculation, in
pride, in covetousness, and high mindedness; but Abels Church is hidden under
it in great plainness and with no Respect and Reputation, and is accounted but
foo^ish in reference to the glittering show of Cain; and is continually slain
by Cain in its simplicity.

4. Now says Reason; what, had God any pleasure herein, that he suffered Cain
to kill Abel; and why is it still to this day that the children of God, are
slain, despised, contemned reproached mocked scorned and cried down for false,
by Cain, viz. by his posterity; one cause hereof is this.

5. Prince Lucifer was an Hierarch in the Kingdom or place of this world, (as
Christ even calls him a Prince of this world, viz. in the Kingdom of
darkness in the Anger of God) and was cast for his pride sake out of the light
into the darkness.

6. But being God then created another Prince, viz. Adam in and for this place,
with whom he bound himself even with his deepest Love before the foundation of
the world in the dear and precious Name JESUS, that he would break down and
destroy, the throne and Kingdom of proud Prince Lucifer in the humane
property, and overcome and be predominant with Love; thence forthwith arose his
Envy, and wrath against man.

7. Secondly, the Cause is this; In the fall of man, the wrath of the Eternal
and also of the Temporal and inchoative nature, obtained the Superior Sway
and dominion in the humane property; for the Kingdom of Heaven did extinguish
in Adam and Eve when as they became Earthly; and in the room and stead thereof
the Kingdom of the Devil did awake, in the Serpents wit and pride, in them:
for the Man's will.
humane will had broken it self off from God, and was entered into selfehood,
and no longer understood any thing of the Mystery of Gods Kingdom.

8. But seeing that the Kingdom of God did again bud, and break forth in the
ATM of the Covenant in Abel and the children of God; the Devils Kingdom and
will in the Serpent-Monster could not brook it; Also the Love-Kingdome, is a
great Enmity against the wrath of the Eternal nature according to the dark
property, for the humane Essence was become according to the dark worlds
property, as to the Soul an half Devil, and as to the outward worlds vanity
an half Beast, in which Beast the false subtle crafty wicked lustful proud
covetous envious and angry Serpents worm, did sit, infected with the Devils
will.

9. This wrathful vile malicious monstrous beast would live in its own self
property; therefore the Angelical virgin-childe which should destroy and
possess the Kingdom of this Evil Beast, did appear against him in Abell;
This was now a Great Enmity, for the Anger of God had captivated Man, and would
work and rule in him; therefore Gods Love brake forth out of the Anger, as a
light out of the fire, and would kill the Anger, and change it into Love, and
help again poor man's Image, and redeem it from the Eternal Anger and death.

10. But being the Anger had got the upper hand and sway in man; and yet the
virgin-childe of the Angelical worlds Essence should spring forth and grow out
of the Covenant of God, out of the disappeared Ens, through the Anger, as a
clear delightful light, shines forth out of the Candle, through the wrathful
fire, which depriveth the darkness of its power and prevalency; therefore the
outward body in [ Abel, and] the children of God must suffer it self to be
slain, and persecuted by the wrath of God; for The outward Body.
it was a strange figure on the virgin child.

11. For Abel in his outward flesh had the Awakened vanity lying in him as well
as Cain; he was also Sinful as to the outward man, but internally the
Angelical word and Image of Paradise did spring and bud forth again in the
Covenant; this was now a great enmity against each other; the inward man
bruised the Serpent-Monster upon the head of its false desire, and the
Serpent-Monster stung him on the heel of his Angelical will, and openly mocked
the Angelical Image; as it is so still to this day; so soon as the
virgin-childe is borne in the Spirit of Christ, the outward earthly body
together with the virgin- child, is by the children of Cain persecuted,
contemned, reviled, and accounted as a strange child of the world.

12. For the Serpents-Monster is as a fool before God, and being the noble and
precious virgin-childe must bear such a Monster on it in the outward flesh, to
which the Devil has yet continual access, therefore this body is strongly
assaulted and struck at by the Devil in the Anger of God, and its children;
they would continually slay it; for the virgin-childe works through the
outward man, as a light through the fire, and manifests it self: it teaches
and reproves the wicked Sort: and this the Devil cannot endure, for it is
against his Kingdom, as the offering of Abell was against Cains.

13. For Cain offered in the proud Serpents desire as an hypocrite, and would
be an honest demure devout and Godly child in his Serpents desire; but Abel
humbled himself before God, and set his desire into Gods mercy: Gods Love-fire
took his offering, and penetrated through the earthly offering and fire; and
the like also is to be understood in the Body of Abel; as the Incorruptible
[being] shall swallow up the corruptible, so also the heavenly took the
earthly captive in it self.

14. But that Cain slew the outward body of Abel has this Signification.
type and figure; that the outward body shall be Or mortified.
slain in the Anger of God; the Anger must devour and mortify the outward
Image which is grown up in the Anger; and out of Death springs forth the
Eternal life.

15. Abel was a figure of Christ; the children of Gods Anger must execute the
Right of Gods Anger upon the outward earthly, and also beastiall Image of the
children of the holy One; even as the Pharisees, (who before God were only
false Serpent-children as Christ called them) must persecute, and kill the
humanity of Christ; so likewise was Cain a type of these Serpentine wolvish
Pharisees, and also of the verbal Titular Christendom.

16. As the false Serpents-child is a monster and fool before the Angelical
world, so likewise the children of darkness do account and esteem the
children of the light for fools; for there must be a contrary, that the one
might be manifest in the other; if the Anger had not taken hold of the
humanity, and devoured it into it self, then the deepest Love of God would not
have been manifest in Man.

17. But thus the Love takes Cause by the Anger to overpower and prevail over
the same with its motion and manifestation; as the same may be known in Christ:
the true Son of God gave himself into our Image which was awaked in the Anger,
that so he might be made manifest with his Love in the Anger, and change the
same into joy.

18. Christ gave our humane Image to the Anger of his father to be devoured in
death, and brought his life into death, and yet manifested his Love in the life
which death had devoured, and brought forth the life in Love through the death;
as a Grain of corn which is sown into the earth, the same must dye in the
earth, but out of that mortifyed grain grows a fair new body; even so the
corrupt body of Adam shall and must be offered to death, and the Anger; and out
of the Death and Anger the body of the divine Love shall be manifest.

19. It was exactly Typified, and prefigured in Cain and Abel, how it would be
in the Succeeding and future generations; being Abel outwardly did bear the
Earthly Image; and yet in the Spirit he was an Image of heaven; his outward
body in the Corruption was only a Text, Larva or strange disgu^sed person.
visard before the outward world; for there was another Spirit hidden therein,
which was not of the outward worlds Essence and property, therefore because he
was not wholly a right child of the earthly world, it would not suffer him
(being as a strange child) in it; for the Devil was Prince in the wrathful
Essence in this world, who would not that a child of the light should spring
forth through the wrathful Essence [and be in his Garden.]

20. Thus the Image or person of Cain and Abel is a true figure of the false,
and then also of the holy and true children of God; of the outward Sinful
corrupt and mortal Man, and of the inward now regenerate holy man, when Christ
with his Love-Kingdome arises from death out of the disappeared Ens, then
Adams earthly Image must dye in Christ's death; and if it now be, that the
outward body must yet live, it is only a scorn and fool before the Heavens
Image, and so also before the natural All natural men.
life of this world.

21. For so soon as Christ is borne, the Sinful life is condemned to death;
and stands in scorn, and open shame before all the false children in the
Anger of God, as an whore in At the house of correction. or whipped through the
streets.
Bridewell, whom other whores likewise help to deride and scoff at, and yet
they do but only judge, and condemn themselves thereby; for if Christ be
born, then the judgment passes upon the false beastiall life, and that man
must stand in the judgment of God, as a malefactor, and be termed a fool, a
Heretic; and be jeered scoffed and reviled, yea even utterly defied and
slain, that the Monster may be judged before Gods Anger: but those that do
it, are the children of the lusty, pampered, and well-fatned, Anger of God,
whom the wrath of God uses for its Instrument, for God is a Spirit, therefore
he accomplisheth his judgment by a material By some outward substantial
means or Persons.
Image.

22. For so soon as Abell did in his Offering put on, or attract the Love of God
in the Covenant anew into his humane desire, and comprehended [or amassed] the
same into his Essence, then forthwith the judgment passed upon the external
mortal Man; and Gods Sword of Anger took him, which Cain executed, and slew
the outward body of Abel, and at this time also the judgment passed upon the
false Image of the Anger in Cain, for he stood there, and cried My Sins are
greater then can be forgiven me.

23. This does now hint, and point at the figure of Christ, how the Anger of
the Father must Or swallow up.
devour the life of Christ in death, and when as the Anger had devoured the
life in death, then the holy life of the deepest Love of God moved it self in
the death and the Anger, and devoured the death and anger into it self,
whereat the Earth trembled, and the Rocks clove asunder, and the Graves of the
Saints opened.

24. And so likewise the Love-fire Good and evil now mixed and in contest one
with the other.
and the Anger-fire in the place of this world (which wrathful fire was
enkindled in the Creation when the Apostate [ Lucifer] fell) shall at the Last
Day be again changed into the Divine joyfulnesse, and be Avalled or swallowed
up in the Love; understand it shall be thus in the third Principle where Love
and anger do strive this Time one with anorher: but Lucifer.
HE remains in the darkness in the first Principle.

25. The true Cause wherefore Cain murdered Abel was by reason of their
Offerings and worship of God, viz. Religion; as this Contention continues still
to this day; the Cainicall Church is not yet one with the Abelicall.

26. Now says reason, I see it well enough, that all contention and strife
arises from Religion, but what is the ground and most undoubted cause and
reason thereof: behold! this is the Cause: set before thee the false Serpents
child which is Evil and good, and then set before thee the virgins-childe
borne of Christ, and then thou have the fundamental Cause exactly drawn to the
life, before thine eyes.

27. The Cainicall Church drives a subtle Trade with external Ceremonies, and
will appease God with some external thing or other: it will be outwardly an
accepted and adopted child, it must down right be called honest godly holy and
heavenly, it adorneth and trimmeth up it self very finely, and stands
mightly upon its Calling, which it has it self Ordained, and Instituted, it
makes a very specious and Renowned show in the white sheep clothing, and
therein lodges the High Priest of selfehood without Christ's Spirit, and rules
and masters the work of the outward letters, and whosoever learneth to
transpose and compose the same boldly and bravely [according to their form of
forged opinions] he is an high Priest in their Office and Order: he puts
Christ's garment of innocence on him for his Cloak and Covert.

28. The other party of the confused cainicall Church cries out, and holds
forth the Goodly glistering child to Makes good merchandise of its religious
ceremonies.
sale for Money; and has bound the Kingdom of Heaven to its Ceremonies, and
will sell it for Money; so that the Man may but fat himself in this world
under the white Garment [of its hypocricie.]

29. The third party gives forth that they have so holy an Order, that it does
even Sanctify and save them, and they above all others will be esteemed holy.

30. The fourth party (or Sect) will obtain the Kingdom of God by their Text,
mouth-cry.
lip-labor with muchnesse of Speaking, Reading, Singing, Preaching and
Hearing, and it rebukes, censures, and reviles, all that will not approve of,
praise, and give diligent attention to its lip-labor [and fine conceited long
Prating.]

31. This Party has clothed it self with the ( white) Garment, and set it
self upon the letter [or writings] of Gods children, and therewith it does so
lustily bestir and lay about it, as a Beggar, that casts stones at the Dogs;
and sometimes hits a Or Evil.
churlish one, sometimes a Or Good.
quiet one, and he that is hit at makes him hear of it, and then others fall
on pell mell, and bite and wurry him; and there is a continual biting tearing
confounding, reviling reproaching, cavilling and jangling about the Letter, a
mere external work, whereby men [ blindely zealous] suppose to serve God,
and obtain Grace; a very Cainicall Offering.

32. The Cainicall Church, is in the outward world, evil and good, it
builds, and breaks down, and is only a figure Or according to.
of Gods Love and Anger; what one party builds and calls holy, that,
another pulls down and revileth, with one mouth it builds and with another
it teareth down; what One hypocrite praises, that, another dispraiseth; and
thus there is only a Confused [shattered] Babylon; Evil, and Good; a wonder
of nature and time.

33. All these run on in their selfe-contrived and devised Orders, and rely
upon their received Orders, and so they offer the Letter of the word and the
work of their own hands before God, and will needs be outwardly adopted and
accepted children before God, God must have respect unto their Offering, and
forgive them their Sins by a word speaking, as a Lord out of favor and
clemency freely gives a malefactor his life; such an unmeasurable matchless
heap of Grace they have brought into their literal Offerings, and into the
works of their hands; so that their Teaching, and the hearing of them is
accounted for the most holy way wherein salvation is to be had, and whosoever
does not worship and honor this their way with exceeding diligence, and
subject himself thereunto; him they reproach persecute and kill, or else hold
him for an Heretic.

34. But Abels children in Christ have far another worship and Service of God,
they dwell indeed among Cains children, and do also appear in their Orders
and Offerings; they Offer to God a broken and bruised heart, and an humble
Contrite mind, in true Sorrow for, and Conversion from, their committed Sins;
and with their Spiritual will do go out from and forsake all their
creature-selfefullnesse and selfish interests and arrogation, and dye to their
selfehood in the Death of Christ; and become as children who neither know nor
will any thing but only their mother which has brought them forth; they cast
their selves into her bosom, and they take in Patience whatsoever she pleases
to do with them.

35. For their internal will is quite mortified to the outward world with all
its glozing show and alluring glory; they account themselves very unworthy
before the great Grace of God, and their vanity which the flesh desires is
always in their sight; and to this the inward spiritual will is a deadly
opposite Enemy, and yet it cannot be wholly separated from it in this
lifetime; their whole course through this world is a mere work of Repentance,
for their Sins and Impurity do appear continually in their Sight.

36. There is a continual, and constant Combat in them, of the flesh in the
earthly desire against the divine desire, and of the divine desire against the
lust of the earthly flesh, for the divine desire does Betake.
amasse it self into Gods Grace and Mercy, and brings it self into a Center
of a working life, and penetrates through the earthly false lustful life, and
strikes the false lust and Imagination down; and then the false Imagination
falls into great Sadness, when as it contemplates and beholds the voluptuous
pompous stately brave glistering Course of this world, and finds it self so
mean and foolish, that it must forsake and forgo that, wherein it might have
its chief joy pleasure and delight.

37. Also the Devil he comes forthwith with his temptation, and brings his
desire into the false Imagination; and shows him the fair Kingdom of the
world, and rebukes his Intent as a false Fancy and mere conjecture; stirs
up the crew of the wicked against him, who scorn jeere reproach and contemn
him; and then sometimes the Sprackling glimps, and divine desire, does even
lose it self, for Christ, viz. the virgins-childe in the Spirit of Christ, is
lead into the wilderness, and is tempted of the Devil and of the Anger of
God, and also of the Carnal worlds spirit, and oftentimes the Spirit of Christ
does hide it self, as if the virgins-childe were quite gone and past Hopes,
also the Devil makes his address thereto, and brings him into Doubt as if the
virgins child were not borne.

38. For the virgins child is hidden in the Desert, and then the poor
captivated Soul is in great Sorrow and lamentation, sigheth, and cries to
God, also it cannot love, or away with, the beastiall Image, but it does stir
up it self as a great assaulting Storm in the Body, and seeks the Gates of
the deep in its Original; and forces with might [or holy violence] into that
word which has formed it to be a creature, and diveth it self thereinto as an
Impotent, will-lesse child, and desires its first mother, whence the first
Soul was born, for its Nurse, and makes it self wholly will-lesse in this
mother, and lies only at her Breasts, and sucketh her Love and grace into it,
the mother may do with it, what she please: this is the true meaning, and the
right manner of dying to selfehood and selfefull Imagination and lust in ones
self, and becoming as to the will of the Soul as a child in ones self; as
Christ says, unless ye be converted and become as children, ye can in no
wise see the Kingdom of God; self, and selfefull Reason in the lust of the
flesh, can neither taste or see it.

39. From this mortification, of the Selfefull will, and earnest Resignation
into Gods mercy, the virgins-childe does again Spring forth out of the Desert
with its fair and glorious Pearl-blooming Tree with very excellent and new
fruit, for so it must be tried in the fire of Gods Anger, that the Abomination
of the introduced earthly will, may dye in it.

40. For the fire-soule, viz. the first Principle, hangs upon the Band of the
outward world, and continually and eagerly introduces Something of vanity into
it, whereby the virgin-childe of the Angelical worlds Essence, viz. of Christ's
essentiality, is defiled, obscured, and darkened, therefore it must be so
refined purified and purged again; and many a cold piercing rautish wind of
tribulation Anguish and great perplexity, blows upon this child; it must be
continually as an offscouring of the world, for its Kingdom is not of this
world; as Christ said, my Kingdom is not of this world.

41. But the effect is this; when the fair morning Star does dawn and arise in
the virgin-child, then the outward life is even illuminated Or while it ^ives
here.
in this time, and it gives it self up unto the obedience of the Internal
[life] as an instrument and Servant of the internal.

42. And then the holy Spirit of God shines forth through the virgin-child,
and preaches Christ crucified, and reproves the world for its Sins and wicked
malicious doings, and shows them their false hypocritical erroneous way, that
they will needs be the children of God in the outward Kingdom, in their
selfe-contrived and devised ways, and will seek an external forgiveness of
Sin, in their own conceited, and received ways; and yet will still remain in
the vanity, and in the pleasure of their flesh; and desire only to make devout
shows before God, and give good words in a soothing glozing gloss of fine
hypocrisy, as if they served God, in their contrived Conjectures, and
Opinions, but still they will continue in selfehood in the outward show and
Ostentation.

43. These, the holy Ghost does rebuke and reprove by the Virgins child in
Christ's Spirit, and calls them hypocrites and wolves in sheeps clothing, and
crafty Foxes borne of the Serpents Ens, in whom there is the very property of
Toads, Dogs, and wild Beasts; and shows them, that they draw near to God with
their lips, but their Heart is full of murder, gall, and Serpent-desire, and
has no true upright Love-desire in it; also it shows them, that they are but
mere flatterers and dissemblers in their Office, who only seek pleasure and
Temporal Honor and Respect thereby, that so they might be able to domineer
and Lord it over men's bodies and Souls Goods and Estates, and thus they serve
God only from without with hypocritical mouths, but their heart hangs to
the whoredom of Babylon, full of devilish murder and poison against him,
that does but touch their Conscience.

44. Such children in the Serpents craft, who are best able as cunning Crafts
masters in Sophistry, to turn this Suttlety most takingly and artificially,
the children of the world do set up unto themselves for Teachers, and will
learn the way of God from them.

45. These Teachers do assume unto themselves [and presume upon] the writings
of the Saints, and proclaim with open mouth, that they teach Gods word, the
holy Spirit is poured forth by their teaching and preaching; and though their
conscience does even convince them, that they are not capable of the Office of
the Ministry, and that they are in no wise the Temples of the holy Spirit, who
should teach in and by them, yet they care not for that, it brings them money
and Honor; Christ is gone up to heaven, and has placed and Ordained them to
be Stewards and Vicars in his office, they must compose, and contrive their
Doctrine out of the writings of the Saints, and out of their Reason upon the
Letter of the Scripture; their heaping together and composing of the words [in
the form of their Subtle Reason] must be the voice of the holy Spirit, they
say the holy Spirit is thereby poured forth into the Hearts of men.

46. And though they themselves be only Cain, and in their Or composing of the
texts, or bare letter of Scripture.
litterall and Bookish rapsody in their Sermons, do cast forth a great deal of
light lewd Cainicall scorn, and brother-slaughter, and oftentimes mix lies and
truth together, yet the holy Spirit must have taught, and the Congregation must
thank God for such holy [sound orthodox Evangelicall] Doctrine as they call
it, and after their killing of their brother there, they must also help with
boldness courage and zeal, to murder and slay Abel, and the little child
Jesus, in his members, with words, and deeds.

47. Such Teachers the world sets up to learn the Kingdom of God from, and
whosoever can but lustily cavil, censure and condemn others in their Gifts;
and propose it with fine Distinctions, and subtle Arguments; and cloth them
with the mantle of Reason, and hide the Wolf (which thereby murthereth, and
devoureth Christ's flock) under the purple mantle of Christ; to him they give
diligent attention, for the fleshly Serpents Heart does therewith sooth up and
flatter it self in its evil property; It has even such an Artificial nature
and Constitution.

48. Such Seed these Teachers chosen of men do sow, who only desire the
Calling for temporal Honor and pleasure but are not called of God, and are
also without divine knowledge, [and understand not what true divinity is] they
enter not by the door of Christ; but they come into place by the Election and
favor of men; through the means of their own willing, walking, and running:
these can no way be acknowledged for the shepherds of Christ, for they are not
borne of Christ, and chosen to this Function and divine calling.

49. They are only the great Master Builders of Babylon, where the Languages
are confounded, and men thereby set at ods and variance, and they set up war
and contention upon the Earth, for they wrangle, and jangle about the mere
Husk, viz. about the written word and Letter, and they have not the living word
of God dwelling in them, from which they ought to teach, the Spirit of Christ
it self must be the teacher in the word with the living voice [or Expression]
the Spirit The humane Spirit.
of man must know and feelingly find Christ in it, otherwise none teaches the
words of Christ, only dumb [sencelesse] words without power and Spirit.

50. Now the Spirit of Christ in his children does reprove these, and shows
them the true way viz. how we must dye wholly in Christ's death to the selfehood
and the false selfe-full desire of temporal pleasure, and honor, and be borne
again of Christ's Spirit with another new will and desire out of Christ's Or body.
Love in peculiar Real knowledge, and preach and teach Christ from our [own
peculiar, and singular knowledge of him in our] selves.

51. This, Babel in Cain cannot endure, that one should teach, that Christ
himself must be the teacher in the humane Spirit; they plead their Cause from
the forewritten Apostolical word, and say, if they teach the same, then the
Spirit of God is poured forth; yes forsooth! very right, I say so too, if the
same be taught in Christ's Spirit and power, then it is so indeed.

52. But the Spirit of Christ in his children is not bound to any certain
form, that it need not [or ought not] to speak any thing which stands not in
the Apostolical Letter; as the Spirit in the Apostles was free, and they spoke
not all one and the same words, but from one Spirit and ground they did all
speak, every one as the Spirit gave him utterance; even thus likewise the
Spirit speaks yet out of its children, it needs no form aforehand composed
and gathered together out of the Literal word, it indeed does put man's Spirit
in mind of what is comprehended and contained in the letter; for Christ said;
the holy Ghost shall take of mine, and declare it unto you.

53. Christ is Alone the Word of God that teaches the way of truth through his
children and members; the literal word is only a manuduction, and
manifestation of Christ; that we should have the same before us as a Testimony
and witness of Christ [shewing] what he is and what he has done for us that
we should conceive set and fasten our Faith therein, and yet with the desire,
enter into the living word* Christ; and be our selves borne to life therein.

54. None is a shepherd of Christ, but he that has Christ's Spirit and
teaches from him; no Art nor University makes one a shepherd of Christ,
unless he be capable of the office in Christ's Spirit, if he has not that,
living, and working in him, then Man has only chose him to be a Carver and
builder of the Great Babylon; a letter changer, [a verbal jangler and
wrangler] without divine understanding, and knowledge; for the Scripture says,
the natural man perceives nothing of the Spirit of God; how will then he
teach the way of God, who himself understands nothing thereof.

55. And Christ says; he that enters not into the sheepfold by him, viz. by
the doare of his Spirit, but climeth up some other way, as by Art, and Reason,
or by the favor of man, into the same: whosoever seteth up himself not being
called of Gods Spirit to be a shepherd of Christ, for humane and temporal
repute, and Revenue's sakes, he is a Thief and Murderer, and the sheep hear
not his voice, for he has not Christ's voice, and comes only that he may rob
and steal.

56. But they say, the written word is Christ's voice, yea, it is indeed the
Cabinet thereof, viz. a form of the word: but the voice must be living which
opens the same, and likewise acts it in due motion as a watch-worke: the Letter
is as an Instrument thereunto, as a Trumpet, but there must be a true and right
breath and air which agrees with the air or tune in the letter.

57. The word of the letter is a prepared Or work.
Instrument, what kind of Trumpetter takes it in hand to play thereon, even
such a sound it gives: Is not I pray the Great Babel built out of this work,
every one has sounded the Trumpet of the Letter, as his own Air and Tone has
been in him, and so it has been approved and received by each Trumpetter, and
brought into a Substance, and this same substance is the Great Babylon, where
evil and good is built into a building.

58. But if men had not introduced any Exposition upon the Apostolical Word,
and brought or contrived the same into other forms, then the Instrument had
remained Pure: but the un-illuminated mind has set it self up to be a master
therein, and bowed the same according to its own Imagination and well-liking;
for the humane pleasure has thereon set it self, and formed and expounded the
same according to the Rule of fat Benefices for the Belly sake and worldly
pleasures. And thus the Spirit is extinct; and it is turned to an antichristian
Order and Custom; men have taken and formed the word as an Organ, and so they
have brought it into a fashion, and custom that a man must play thereon and
others must hear the Sound and tune which he makes; and thus for the most part
such Organists are only used, who strike the Organ from without, and make a
fine contrived and composed Piece which they willingly and readily hear, but
the Organ Sounds only as the Master Or plays on it.
strikes it.

59. But to this Christ says: Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted shall be rooted up: also whosoever is of God he hears Gods word:
Christ said; the Son of man speaks nothing but what he hears the Father
speak in him: so likewise must a teacher of Christ hear the Fathers Spirit in
Christ speak in him; he must hear Gods Word in the Spirit of Christ in him; as
David says, I will hear what the Lord speaks in me; he must be a Temple of
God in whom God dwells, and from whom he speaks, being only an Instrument
thereto; for Christ said; we will come to you and make our Abode in you also I
will put my word into your mouth; says the Prophet; also the word is nigh thee
namely in thy mouth, and heart; here the Spirit of God speaks of the living
Word; and not of a Bell without a clapper.

60. This, the Spirit of Christ in his children, does teach, and reproves the
wooden clapper in the right bell, which has hung it self up to be a clapper
in the Bell of the divine word, and yet has no power to make the Bell sound:
this, Cain in his offering, can by no means brook, that one should tell him, his
offering does not please God.

61. He sets forth himself with very fair glozing and glistering outside
shows, and has made himself such a brave glorious form; moreover he is
chosen of the high schools and worldly might thereto, and if a mean Layman
without humane calling should come thereinto (as Christ was accounted for a
Carpenters Son) and offer to reprove such an High Priest in such great dignity
Honor and Respect; the same the world believes not that it is from God; that
he is sent.

62. The Great Bear thinks presently, this is only a sheep which I will
take into my mouth, and devour him, what? shall a sheep reprove me who am a
Bear? will a disesteemed sheep nullify my Reputation and esteem among men,
and dare to quetch at me, I will soon rid him out of the way, and so defile
him, that he shall not be known that he is a sincere and single-hearted Lamb of
Christ and speaks from Christ's Spirit, I will so wallow and mire him in the
Dirt disgrace and scorn, that he shall be held for a filthy Beast, or a very
defiled Swine.

63. In the mean time I live in my delicious Days of pleasure, and remain
Lord over Soul and Body, but if the sheepling shall offer to stir, and show
more then a sheepling of Christ, then I will help the Butcher drive it to the
slaughterhouse.

64. Thus it goes with the Simple single-hearted children of Christ, whom the
Spirit of Christ drives, and out of whom he teaches here in this world etc.
they are only as sheep among Wolves, as Christ said I send you as sheep among
Wolves, the earthly man is a Serpentine Wolf, under whom the virgin-childe
viz. Christ's Lamb must dwell; and then begins and arises murdering Or
robbing.
slaying, and killing.

65. But it does not at all hurt the virgin-childe; Its External Wolf is also
by this means bitten off, by another: for the outward Wolf of all men is
grown from the Anger of God, and arisen with the Sin in Adam; therefore it
must be given for food to the Anger of God that the virgin-childe of the woman's
Seed may become manifest.

66. For thus they do Separate themselves as two Enemies, and are continually
opposite Enemies one against another in the time of this outward life, for the
Judgment is given to the virgin-childe against the introduced Serpents child
of Sin; In the Resurrection the virgin-childe shall condemn the Serpent-childe
into the Fire of God, there the limus of the Earth shall be proved and purged
from the Serpents Ens, and again put upon the virgins-childe.

67. Now says reason; what pleasure has God in this murdering of his
children, can he not defend them from the Enemy? thus it must be, that the
light may be manifest in the darkness, else the light would stand still in the
darkness and bring forth no fruit: seeing then the light receives into it
self Essence and perceivancy, also Sensation, from the darkness, viz. from
the Source of the fire, therefore, one is set against the other, that so one
might be manifest in the other: the joy against grief, and grief against joy;
that it may be known what Evil or good is.

68. For if there were no grief then the Joy were not manifest to it self;
but yet all is in the Free Will, as every thing does introduce it self into
evi^l or good, so it runs on its Course, and the one is but the
manifestation of the other, for if there were no night or darkness, then we
should know nothing of the Light or Day: thus the great God has introduced
himself into Severation, to his own contemplation and Sport of joy.

69. The like also is to be understood in the various diversity and Severalty
of Men touching evil and good; The Evil must be a Cause, that the good be
made manifest to it self; and the Good must be a cause to manifest the Evil
in its wicked malicious Suttlety and iniquity; that all things may come into
their contemplation, [and visible ken,] and every thing might manifest its
judgment in it self unto the Great Separation- Day of the LORD of all beings,
where every thing shall give in it self into its Barn for its usefulness and
profit, that, in the Eternity, the Great God may be known, in a creaturall and
formal manner, according to light, and darkness.

70. For all things were created by the word, and brought into a form; seeing
then God is an angry jealous God, and a consuming fire, and also, a
mercifull-Loving meek God of light and Giving, [or Free-Grace] in whom there
cannot be any Evil at all, therefore he has introduced fire, and light, Evil
and good one with another in the Verbum Fiat, into a free will, whereby, the
will may Or work.
form either in the evil or good; and yet he has created all things good,
and to the light, and set them into the free will, to multiply themselves in
the free will, to conceive in Evil or good; and yet has associated to each
thing its likeness, viz. to a male its female, that so nothing has cause to
Or fall from its place and order into Destruction.
degenerate, and to man he has given Commands what to do and leave undone.

71. Thus all things stand to the judgment of the Great God, and in this time
they must be in Contest, that one may be manifest in the other, but then in the
Great Harvest every thing shall have its own Seat in it self; when strife
shall be taken up and cease, and all things must stand to the Honor and
Admiration of the wonderful works of the great God, who Alone knows whereunto
every thing shall be good, and for what he will use it.

CHAP. XXIX. Shows how the Adamicall Tree has put forth and opened it self
out of its Stock, and introduced it self into boughs branches, twiggs, and
fruit, out of which pullulation or manifestation the Invention of All Arts, and
Or Polities.
Governments is Arisen.
The Deep Gates out of the Center of the Eternal and also the Temporal
Nature, showing how the Eternal Wisdom has introduced it self into a
formal [visible and Ideall] Contemplation.
Genesis IIII. chapter
1. THe Eternal divine understanding is a free will, not arisen either from any
thing or by any thing, it is its own Peculiar Seat, and dwells only and
AlOne in it self, un-apprehended of any thing, for beyond, and without it is
nothing, and that same NOTHING is only ONE, and yet it is also as a Nothing to
it self; It is One only will of the Abyss, and it is neither near, nor far
off, neither high, nor low, but it is ALL, and yet as a Nothing; for it is in
it self no contemplation Sensation or perceivancy, whereby it might find a
likeness in it self.

2. Its Finding is its own forth-proceeding, so that it beholds it self in
the Or proceed-forth.
Egresse, for that which is proceeded forth is its Eternal Lubet, Sensation,
and perceivancy, and it is called the Divine Wisdom; which Wisdom, the
unsearchable Abyssall will apprehends in it self to its Center of Or
Imagination desire* or Magia.
Lubet, viz. to an Eternal mind of the Understanding; which understanding the
free will forms in it self to its own Or express Image.
likeness, viz. to an Eternal- Speaking, living, [working] Word, which the
Free will does speak or breath forth out of the formed wisdom of the Lubet.

3. And the Or Spiration.
Forth-breathing is the Spirit, or Mouth of the understanding in the formed
will of the wisdom, which does distinguish [or variously Severize] the
Speaking Word, so that the Mind, and the understanding of the mind, becomes
manifest and revealed, in which Manifestation, the Free Lubet, or wisdom, is,
in the Speaking or forth-breathing, formed of the free will, by the Spirit,
into diversity and variety.

4. In which formation; the powers of the divine properties do arise; so that
it is truly said and declared concerning God: that he is the Eternal will,
Understanding, Mind, Counsel, Power, and Wonder; Or with
in which wonders of powers he has moved and formed himself from Eternity; in
which formation consists the invisible spiritual world, wherein the Spirit of
God has melodized and Sported with it self from Everlasting, which also has
neither ground limit bounds or Original.

5. For it is the Divine Contemplation.
Vision of the formed wisdom; its Center is the formed Will, viz. the Word
forth-Speaking out of all Powers, and its life is the Spirit which proceeds
in the Speaking or breathing, which distinguishes and forms the Lubet of the
wisdom, so that the formed wisdom plays before the life of the Deity, as
little children play before their parents who have begotten them, out of their
Essence, for their joy, and in them the parents take their delight, and Pastime.

6. Thus likewise we are to understand the Being of Eternity; which Being, the
Eternal free will, has in the forth-breathing word introduced into a Desire,
viz. to an external comprehensivenesse, in which comprehensibility the
beginning of the Corporeal Being is arisen, viz. the Center of the Formed
Nature, wherein the desire has Amassed formed and introduced it self into
properties, viz. into darkness and light, into Pain and Source, into joy and
Sorrow; and yet we must not understand any Sorrow to be in the Pregnatresse;
but so the free will does form and conceive it self in the desire to the
Contemplation, and manifestation of the wonders; that so the properties might
be peculiarly manifested and revealed in each other.

7. For if there were no Contra-will then there would be no motion in the
properties; but being the free will has introduced it self into Love, and
Anger, viz. into Evil and Good; a twofold will is arisen in these properties
viz. a wrathful [will] according to the Nature of the fire, and of the
darkness, and a good Love-will according to the nature and quality of the
light; so that one might dwell in, and manifest the other.

8. Not that this Birth has received only a temporal beginning: it Or has
been.
is Eternal, and is the manifestation of the Divine vision, Sensation, and
perception: only in the Creating of the Creation this Birth introduced it
self into a Compaction or External comprehensivenesse that it might have a
Distinct Dominion to work in for its own Sport and play.

9. Also we are not to conceive that in the Creation, the Evil proceeding from
the darkness and fiery property was Separated from the Good, and placed in a
Peculiar Sundry working Dominion, but the one is in the other: yet the light
shoane through the darkness, and the darkness could not comprehend it: Every
life in the Creation proceeded forth from the fiery property and the Spirit of
the rational understanding did arise from the lights property; In the Creation
Every fiery life was brought forth in its beginning In or for.
to the light.

10. Moreover the Creator of all Beings has given the Creatures, of the
outward world (which has a Temporal beginning out of the Eternal word) An
Universal light for visible contemplation; also every life in the Creation
has received the light of nature out of the Center in it self, out of which
the understanding arises, so that the Creature can rule and govern it self.

11. And nothing was created Evil or to the Dominion of iniquity; for though
on one part it has an Ens of the wrath in it self for its life, yet on the
other part it has also an Ens of the light and good virtue in it self; and it
is set in the free will to conceive [or worke] in Evil or Good; for there is
nothing so Evil but it has a Good in it, whereby it may rule and be
predominant over the Evil.

12. But man was in Equal Accord in his properties, no property was manifest
above the other; for he was Gods Image; like as there is no Evil manifest in
God, unless he would himself manifest the wrath of the Eternal Nature in a
thing; Even so also the divine free will was given to man.

13. And with all, the Command, that he in his free will should not lust after
Evil and Good, viz. after the divided properties, he should continue steadfast
in the equal harmony of the properties, and rule with the light over the
Darkness, and then the properties of the wrath had stood in mere Joy delight
and melody in him, and he had been a mirror and form of the divine wisdom,
which had seen and beheld it self in him according to the Kingdom of Joy.

14. But being that he did contemplate with the free will in the dissimility,
how evil and good were each of them in its own peculiar selfefull property,
and brought his Lust and longing thereinto, desiring to taste thereof in the
Essence; whereupon this same property did also take him in his lust, and
prevailed in his will, and also in the Ens whence the will did arise, to its
own Contemplation, and Dominion; and thus the first man, who was good in the
beginning, became a Stock or Tree of the Taste of the Knowledge of Evil and
good, viz. a Contending Dominion, in which both wills viz. the Good, and the
Evil ruled in one another.

15. But being the fiery wrathful will so overcame the good, which was from
the lights Essence, that the lights Ens was taken captive in the wrathful Ens,
this Image fell under the power and Command of the outward Dominion, which was
Evil and good; and also under the wrath of the inward nature, viz. of the
fiery darkness; upon which Image, God had compassion, and did re- In-promise.
inhest the Covenant of Grace into the Captivated, disappeared and (as to the
divine wisdom) blind Ens of the holy worlds being, and did Incorporate the
same as a Covenant of a new Regeneration of a new Holy Will, and life.

16. Thus now we are to consider aright of the Stock of the humane Tree, how it
has spread forth and displayed it self in the properties, and introduced it
self as a Tree (evil and Good) into boughs and branches; and from whence his
Temporal Government of distinct, and Sundry Offices, and Callings is arisen,
which He did awaken in him, when he lusted after evil and good, and thereby
brought himself in Subjection to nature, being he fell under its Dominion.

17. And we see very clearly, that Moses has described and set down in his
Genesis.
first book, how the humane Tree has opened it self in Evil and good, and
introduced it self into boughs, and branches for its fruit; also we see how
the fiery wrathful property has always gone before, and first of all brought
forth its fruit: we have a clear and plain understanding hereof in the Names
of those which the Spirit of God, has put, by Moses, in the Geneology.
lines of Propagation.

18. For first he sets Cain, whereby is understood in the Language of
nature, a Source out of the Center of the fiery desire, a selfefull will of the
fiery might of the Soul, viz. a Sprout or Twig out of the first Principle, in
which branch or Sprig the first Principle, did in an especial manner prevail
and would Sever it self into a selfe-fulnesse, and break it self off from
the Love- Ens; yet not as a Dark Source, but as a Source of selfefull Lust,
and also [of] fiery Strength and might.

19. For out of the Ens of Cain (as the same was in the Center of the Begetting
nature in the wrestling wheel of life) arose his will; and out of the will,
the desire; and out of the desire, the Substance, in which Substance the false
mind is understood; wherein the dominion of the outward, did form, and fasten
it self; whereinto the Devil also in the wrath of nature croap in with his
desire, and desired the Lordship and domination of this world in Selfehood; as
the fallen Devil does always desire domination in the Place of this world in
the inward Eternal, and outward Temporal nature.

20. But being the word of divine Power, and Holiness, had Or espoused it
self.
incorporated it self with a Covenant of Regeneration, into the woman's Seed,
viz. into the disappeared Ens of the Spiritual worlds Essence, that it would
deprive the fiery wrathful will, proceeding from the Center of the dark
world, of its fiery might of Selfehood; thereupon after Cain, there Sprung
forth out of the humane Tree a Sprout out of the Aim of the Covenant, viz.
HABEL, whose Name in the Language of nature, signifies an Out-breathed Angel,
which in the first will of the Essence, whence the soul arises, had formed
and fixed it self in the Center of light, in the Love-desire, and penetrated
quite through the fires Center; whereupon the fiery desire, did desire to cut
off the Earthly life which has its Original out of the fiery desire, as its
propriety; for which cause Abel and all his Or Successors.
Posterity became Marters.

21. For this is the Doar of Christ who must give himself into this Death of
the wrath, and Penetrate the Humane Center of the Souls Original according to
the fire-world, with the Love- Ens, viz. with the deepest Love of the deity,
and change the fiery wrathful desire of the dark worlds Essence into Love.

22. Adam was the Stock of the universal humane tree, but when Eve was made
out of him, then the tree was divided according to two Principles, not wholly
in the Essence, but according to the nature and quality of the Centres of fire
and light; for the Center of the light, viz. the ground of the Love-desire did
stand in Eves Matrix; but it disappeared as to the Creature in her fall;
therefore the Divine Word did Espouse betroth or promise.
re-inhest it self therein to a Center of Regeneration.

23. Now Cain, and Abel were the two twigs which grew out of this tree from the
property of both Principles, viz. of the fire, and light; and they were a Type
of the whole Tree with its fruit which it would bring forth; but being Abel was
a type of Christ who was to be conceived without the help of man only and
barely of the incorporated word in the Seed of the woman, who should suffer
death for Man; therefore Abel must pass through without branches and fruit;
for the fruit which Christ should bring forth, was to Generate anew the humane
tree; and not produce other twiggs out of his Loins and therefore Habel also
being the type of him should not generate any twigg out of his loins; for the
line of the Habelicall Seed remained in the Covenant, and pointed at Christ,
who should spring forth out of the Habelicall Line, and again manifest the
spiritual worlds Essence.

24. Therefore Adam must bring forth another branch by his Eve out of the
vital Tree; which was to be like Adam in his Image; viz. SETH; which Name does
signify in the Language of nature a forth-running, or leap, where a glance or
aspect of a Love-will arises out of the fiery will; which notwithstanding is
withheld, and hindered by the outward worlds being, Essence, and Substance, viz.
by the Corrupt house of flesh.

25. Now Christ must come to help this captivated forestalled and obscured
will; which notwithstanding has its first ground out of Gods love, and free it
from the band of wrath, wherewith the divine Ens was captivated; for this was
Christ's Office, not that he should beget, but give himself into the Generation
of Seth, and Redeem Seth and his branches from the wrath, and regenerate him
anew in himself; he was not to beget children to this world, but to bring
forth, Seth out of this world, and bring him in himself into the Spiritual
world.

26. Now in Seth the Line of the Covenant went forth, in which Christ would
manifest himself according to the humane Tree; but in Cain the line of the
wonders, viz. of nature and its Government went forth; Genesis 4. v. 17.
for Moses says that unto Cain was born Enoch.
Hanoch, and he built a City and called the Name of the City after the name of
his Son Hanoch; now Cain was the first man borne of a woman and Abel the
Second, whom he slew.

27. Now Moses says, that Cain built a city, whereas indeed if we would go
merely upon reason, there were not men who might be able to build a city, and
inhabit it; for the Spirit does here make a veil before the understanding,
which lies in the Word City; for he says; Cains Son was called Hanoch, and
also the City; now this is verily true; but the Spirit in Moses looks upon
the root of Cain, and Adam; how the Tree Evil and Good, has opened and
displayed it self into its boughs and branches; for by the Name of Hanoch the
Spirit looks upon the property of the branch, viz. of Cains Son, intimating
what kind of people would arise from thence viz. a Or Commonwealth.
City, and Dominion of the outward world in Selfehood; for in the Language of
nature it is to be understood in the Name.

28. HANOCH signifies a forth-breathing of life, and a re-assuming to a
Selvish contemplation; a child of Self, which in nature does introduce it
self into a selfefull Dominion and will, so that it does Imagine and frame in
its Mind, a Dominion, or Region, Country, or City, desiring and aspiring in
its will to be a Tree, or Prince of men; for when the humane life departed from
the Spirit of God into selfehood; then it would be a Peculiar Selvish Lord,
which will's Son was Hanoch, viz. a City or Amassed Substance to a Selfe-full
domination and Government.

29. From which Government and dominion, the branches or children were borne,
concerning which the holy Spirit complained in Noah; that Genesis 6.3.
they would not suffer his Spirit to reprove them any more, for they were a
tree or branch sprung forth from the tree of Selfefullnesse; from which the
wordly Principalities and Superiorities have taken their rise and Original,
for when the humane life fell unto the Stars and the Spirit of the outward
world, then the same brought it into its own Dominion; from the Angelical into
the Astrall and outward elementary Dominion, according to its figure; this the
City of Cain viz. Hanoch does signify unto us, viz. the Dominion upon the
Earth.

30. But now Hanoch cannot be the Ruler, but the City is HE, that is, the
branch or the Country of the children of pride, who departed from God in their
own selfish power and authority; now the multiplicity of wills must have a
Judge, being 1 Samuel 8.7.
they would not suffer the Spirit of God to rule them; therefore the Spirit in
Moses says, and Hanoch begat IRAD, Genesis 4. v. 18.
this is now the Governor who out of their own essence set himself up to be
Judge, and Lord over them, viz. a Potentate, and Tyrant.

31. For the Name is very pregnant in the language of nature, and signifies a
forth-breathing of life, where the life does soon Or take.
form it self in the Center of the fiery property, and Strong Might; viz. in
the Anger of God which was become Ruler over the life; the same took Irad, as a
Lord, and Tameour of the life, and set him over Hanoch.

32. From this root the Rulers of the world are arisen; for being that man
would not have God for a Ruler of his life, and will, God Or permitted.
gave them the Ruler in Nature, from among themselves; that they might lord it
over and rule one another.

33. For God has not given man any Law or Government among themselves but made
him only to be Lord over all creatures, so that he should rule over all
things; but he himself would rule with his Spirit over man and Govern the
humane life; but being that selfe-hood would not, then Irad, that is the fires
Strength and might sprang forth forcibly out of the humane Tree, and set it
self over the City Hanoch upon the Earth.

34. But now Irad must have something wherein and wherewith all to set up
himself to rule and Reign, for the fires wrath and fury would not have
suffered them; and also the Government must be somewhat profitable and
advantageous; therefore Moses writes now very right and exceeding wonderfully
and says, Irad begat MEHVJAEL, which intimates very emphatically in the
Language of nature, an Or apprehension taking forming, or amassing to it self.
assuming of the outward and inward Center of nature, viz. of the outward and
inward world; a Selfe-conceived bold courageous vainglorious Arrogant mind,
which would possess the Riches of the outward world in its Domination and
Superiority, viz. all manner of Creatures and Fruits; and especially it
denotes a Splendor of the inward assuming viz. an Earthly God, which
externally sets it self in Gods Office; out of this Name, Babel, viz. the Beast
with the Whore, was afterward brought forth.

35. And Moses says further: Mahujael begat Methusael; this is now the right
wonderful Name, wherein is signified how the Life does arrogate divine power
to it self; for METHVSAEL would intimate in the Language of nature thus much,
that is to say; Mine is the divine Might; I am an Angel set therein by God, or
I am the Ordinance of God, which indeed is true, but according to the first
Principle by the outward nature, viz. a natural Power and Ordinance.

36. Moreover in this Name there is hidden under the Angel, the praise of the
children who should be Subject to this Might, and live under the same as under
the divine Ordinance; but this Angels Name in divine Power does first form it
self in the fleshly Selfehood; for the syllable ME- which begins the word
of the Name does first Text, take or conceive.
form it self in the outward worlds birth; in the Mine-hood, and shows
that this Ordinance does not arise out of the Kingdom of heaven in Gods
holiness, but out of the first Principle, which forms it self in the third
Principle, viz. in the outward worlds nature in to such an Order, and therefore
it shall and must be abolished, and proved through the Judgment of God.

37. And Moses goes on to write and says; Methusael begat LAMECH; now in this
Name the hidden Mystery of the divine Ordinance by the Angelical counsel is
contained; and it signifies in the Language of nature in this place, as much
as, a Sending of the Angel over the Dominion of the humanity; viz. over the
Regions of the world, over the fleshly life, which should be Subject to the
Supreme governing Prince in nature.

38. For here the Wound which Adam received is sought: in that two Superior
Princes do reign over the humane life; viz. the ordained good Angel, and the
incorporated Evil Angel in the flesh; also hereby is understood the powerful
assault of the Evil Angel from without, and from within, for the inward
Spirit in the name goes forth out of the Covenant of God, and passes into the
outward world, which denotes how man would become lewd and profane and also
vilify the Covenant of God; and yet with the Assuming goes again into
Selfehood, and forms it self in the forth-proceeding Angels Name, which
denotes an hypocritical whoredom in an Angels form; which enters again
into the external and at last casts away the Covenant, together with the
Angels Name, quite from it self.

39. Further Moses writes; Lamech took two wives the one was called Ada and
the other Zilla. Gen 4. v. 19.
Hereby is understood in the generation of the life's Tree, thus much; viz.
that the humane life knew the wound which was arisen in its Stem or body.
Stock; and thence forward took two wives, that is, a twofold Essence and
will; viz. ADA signifies: how the Soul goes with the will through the Mind,
and forms it self with the desire in the first stock of Adam, and would be
feign honest again; but the life had also taken to it self ZILLA for wife of
the pregnatresse; viz. fleshly joy and pleasure.

40. The wife or will Ada would exercise a good Dominion, and rule and
maintain it self upon the Earth according to Gods Command, and she bare
Jabal: JABAL betokens the Simple plain man; such as Countriemen are etc. for
Moses says; Verse 20.
that from him proceeded such as dwell in Tents and keep Cattle.

Verse 21.
41. But the other brother says Moses was named Jubal; who was the Father of
all those that handle the Harp and Organ; for the other will proceeded from the
spirit of the outward world into temporal pleasure and joy, and devised all
kinds of joyful Sport and pastime for the recreation of its life; and this
signifies JVBAL: viz. an external Jocund Angel with whom the inward Spirit
sported before it self in a likeness.

42. And Zilla, says Moses, Verse 22.
she also bare Tubal-Cain a master in all Brass and Iron-workes: that is,
ZILLA is the fiery desire which forms it self in the humane property into a
Substance of Sulphur and Mercury, and brings it self forth with its Spirit out
of the Substance into a contemplation and visible ken, in which understanding
man has found out the Arts of Metalls.

43. For the Sister of Tubal-Cain was Naema; Here lies the precious pearl,
dear masters; NAEMA is heavenly in her property, clothed with the external
vesture, so that you do not know her, for the earthly man is not worthy of it;
for her Essence is virgineall, a virgin of purity; it points in one part at
the inward new man, viz. the Sister of the Sulphurean man; and on the other
part it signifies the Gross Metal of the Earth, and also the precious
Metal, viz. Gold and Silver.

44. For Tuball-Cain is the brother of Naema, they lie in one womb; but
Tubal-Cain is of this world; and Naema is a virgin hidden under her brother,
and herein the twofold Earth is understood, viz. in a twofold property; one
heavenly, and the other gross Earthly; viz. an Essence out of the dark worlds
property, and an Essence out of the lightfull worlds property; and thus also it
is to be understood in Man; for by the property of Gods Anger, viz. by the
dying of the earthly man Naema becomes manifest.

45. Wherefore does Moses add the Name Naema and yet speaks nothing either of
any that she brought forth, or that she married? Answer; because that in the
Regeneration the natural Generation cease; the new virginity in the Spirit
of Christ does not produce any creature more, but they must all proceed out of
the first Center and stock, so that they may be all One Tree; and by the fire
the Metal, viz. the virgin which is Tubal-Cains Sister, is made manifest.

46. The Name TVBAL-CAIN has an excellent understanding in it, for it shows
how the Sulphurous Mercuriall wheel does open it self in the birth and
generation of Metals and also in the Original of life; for God Subjected all
things to man; and gave him all things for his delight and play; therefore
Tubal Cain must open and discover himself in the humane Tree, that so they
might understand it; Hereby we have signified enough to those that are our
School-fellowes.

47. And Lamech said to his wifes Ada and Zilla: Verse 23.24.
Hear my voice ye wifes of Lamech, and mark what I say: I have slain a man
to my wound, and a young man to my hurt. If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold,
truly Lamech seventy and seven fold. This is a wonderful strange and
mavelous saying; who would understand what the Spirit signifies here,
without its own peculiar exposition: I do seriously admonish the Mocker to
leave our work here uncensured, for he understands not our Spirit and Sense.

48. Lamech says that he slew a man to his wound, and a young man to his hurt.
This man is Abel according to the outward humanity of the Kingdom of this
world and the young man is the Image of Christ proceeding from the virgin-like
line out of the Seed of the woman in him: the Man he slew to his Rebuke, viz.
to an un-curable wound, and the precious young man in the Man to an hurt, which
would gall and trouble him as an Evil hurt bruise or Bile in the conscience of
Sin: for the wrath of God wrought in this Bile, and the wound being a great and
woeful hurt might not be healed; for the Curse of the Lord went forth out of
this Bile into the wound, in which the Earth was cursed, so that the humane
Dominion became a valley of misery.

49. For Lamech saw the sore wound, and returned; and thereupon took two
wives, that is, a twofold will into his Mind for his Government, whereby he
would rule upon the Earth, viz. one went forth from Ada into the Grazing and
keeping of cattle and the hard labor of the hands for a temporal livelihood,
wherein he found the Curse and wound; and the other went forth out of the
branch of Zilla into the Earth after the Metalls, to make useful Tools and
Instruments for the Tillage and husbandry of the Ground, and for other
necesaries; and so he found in the metalls the rusty Bile and sore in their
metalline nature; for the precious tincture or the fair blossom of the Earth
was hidden in the Curse, viz. Environed and beset with an Evil Bile and sore.

50. Now Lamech knew the woeful Hurt, and said; hearken ye wives of Lamech,
and mark what I say; he would feign express the Hurt and damage,; he saw
back again into the Tree of man, and considered the revenge of God, which had
laid hold of man's life, and said, Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, and Lamech
seven and seventy fold; for God said also to Cain when he stood and cried; Ver.
14.15.
thou drivest me out this day from Or from the Land and Country.
the face of the Earth; and it will come to pass that whosover finds me will
slay me; [but the Lord said to him] whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be
taken on him seven fold, and he set a mark on Cain, that none should kill him.

51. These are most vvonderfull and hidden sayings Cain shall be avenged
Sevenfold and Lamech seventy and seven fold? wherefore shall Lamech be avenged
Seventy and Sevenfold, and Cain Sevenfold? who has done any thing to Lamech?
Here the Spirit points out of the Center of the humane life upon the time
which was to come, intimateing, how it would afterward go with man, in this
Wound, when as men should multiply and Increase, and make unto themselves
Kings, and Princes, Dominions and Governments; that the wrath of God would
also forcibly exercise it self in man's will, and even open and display it
self in the humane Life and Dominion.

52. Now if a man would understand what Lamech says concerning the Revenge;
then he must look upon the Center, for the life of all creatures consists in
Seven Degrees or properties, as it is above clearly mentioned; now Adam was
the Stock; for Adam and Eve are one Tree; from the parting and division of
which, Evil and Good did arise; and Cain was the first twigg which sprung
forth from this tree, wherein the Seven properties of life did put themselves
forth out of the right divine order and harmony in the life, and destroyed the
Image of God; which was long of the Devil, who egged him on also in the
divided properties to the brother-slaughter, so that he slew Abel; now God
said: Cain shall be avenged Sevenfold if any one slay him; and he set a mark
on Cain that none should kill him.

53. The Devil had folded up himself in the wrath of God, and cunningly
insinuated himself into the Seven properties of Life, being they were departed
from their mutual Harmonious Accord, and he would be Lord in the place of the
Spirit of God in the life of man, and would wholy murder and slay the life
as to the Kingdom of God, therefore God set a mark with the Promise of the
Covenant therein, so that none could slay it.

54. For Cain did not cry out only for fear of the outward life, but he
feared that his right Eternal life might be slain, that his life should be
wholly blotted out from the Face of God; for he cried also and said, Lo! thou
drivest me out this day from off the Earth; and I must hide my self from thy
face; and I must be a fugitive, and a vagabond in the Earth, and it will now
come to pass, that whosoever finds me will slay me. He cried out for fear
of being killed, and was sore afraid, and yet there was no man besides him
upon the Earth, save only his Father Adam, and without doubt his sister whom
he took to wife.

55. Cain feared the Spirits, who had moved him to slay his brother, that they
would also kill him; for he says, I must be hid from thy face: now this was
not in any external manner, but in an internal, for God dwells not in the
view of the outward eyes but in the inward Spiritual [ vision]; therefore God
said; whosoever kills Cains internal life, vengeance shall be taken on him
sevenfold; and he set the mark of the Covenant on his life so that no spirit
in the wrath could murder it; for he was a twigg out of the Tree of life.

56. Although the Seven properties of nature in him were departed from their
mutual accord in each other; yet he was not the sole cause of it, for he had
so received his life from Father and Mother in the divided property, and
therefore the Grace passed as well upon him as upon Abel; except only that
Abel proceeded out of the other line; but the Center of the Soul was alike to
them both; but the motion in the Seed was unlike; for they were the two types
of the world; viz. Cain the type of the Selfehood in the wrath and Abel the
type of the resignation of life; where, from the Resignation, another world
springs forth through Death out of the Center.

57. Not that Cain was borne to destruction, but that evil awakened property
in the dissimility, viz. the Soul of the outward world, brake forth forcibly
in the Seed; and took the Center of life into its Power, and therein God set a
mark, viz. his Covenant, that the murderers should not slay the Souls life.

58. But if it should so come to pass, that the own peculiar will would give
it self to the murderers, then the life of Cain should be avenged Sevenfold,
that is, through all the Seven properties: and the free will which did slay the
life of God which was in the Word ( John 1.) should be rebuked and punished
sevenfold through all the Seven forms of nature, both temporally, and
eternally; and this is the meaning: whosoever kills the life, [that is] what
free will soever murthereth its life, vengeance shall be taken on it Eternally
in the Seven properties of the dark world.

59. And in this place we are further to consider aright of the great
mysteries; for the Seven properties of the humane Tree producing and
manifesting the life of the Wonders of God, had now Spread forth themselves
even unto Lamech; the Dominion of the world was now wholly brought forth with
Lamech in nature; for Lamech was the Seventh man in the Root of the Wonders
arising from the first Stock: that is; Adam was the first; Abel belongs not
unto the Line of the Wonders, but unto the Regeneration: Cain was the Second in
the Line of the Wonders: Hanoch the third: Irad the fourth, Mahujael the fifth,
Methusael the Sixth, and Lamech the Seventh.

60. Now Lamech did spring forth from Cains Root out of this Line of the
Wonders of God; and he was an honest upright man, but was Taken or beset.
environed with the Spirit of the Wonders, and he Looked back upon the Wound,
and also upon the Or Seal.
Sign of Grace in the Covenant, and knew for certain that even now the Spirit
of the Wonders should be fully brought forth, and manifested in the humane
life; whereby all Arts of the world should be found out.

61. And he saw also forwards, how it would fall out in these Wonders of the
world; how his children would introduce his life which they should receive
from him by propagation into a Babylon of folly, and Corrupt the same; and
hereby also he looked especially upon the word whence the humane life was
Sprung; and how the life in the Spirit of the Wonders of the world would
introduce it self into a seven and seventy-fold word of Languages, and
Nations, as came to pass at Babel; and how the free will of Nature would go
astray from the Only God, and be corrupt, and that it should be avenged
seven-and-seventy-fold; that is; every tongue and speech should be Avenged in
the Anger of God: and therefore, because they would Corrupt Lamechs life which
they received of him by propagation; and this the Wrath of God would Avenge in
the free will of his children; divided into several Speeches.

62 For the Spirit saw forwards how the free will would give up and addict it
self to Selfehood, and Apostatize from the Only God, and ^ovv the Anger of
God would Seize upon and confound the Natural Spirit of the Wonders in man:
viz. the Soul of the outward world, from whence the Great Babylon of
Contention about Gods being and will would arise; and this the Spirit said
should be avenged seven-and-seventy-fold in Lamech.

63. For this was a Seven and Seventy-fold Racha [or Avengement] upon the Word
of the understanding in the humane life; that out of one only tongue; out of
one only Speaking Word and vital Spirit, a Seventy and sevenfold tongue (
viz. a Confusion of the understanding) should be made; before, the
understanding lay in one Sound [voice or Harmony] but now the Racha came into
it, and Confounded and shattered it into Seventy and seven parts.

64. For the humane wheel of the Sound or understanding was turned round, and
the Ten forms of fire, wherein time and Eternity does consist, did open
themselves in every form of nature; which was seven times ten, which makes
Seventy; whereto also belongs the Center with its Seven unchangeable forms
of the Eternal nature; which is together seventy and seven.

65. And herein (Dear brethren) lies the Mysterium Magnum.
Grand Mystery; if ye were not clothed with the Garment of the Contentious
Languages; then we would be bold to declare something more in this place unto
you; but ye are yet all captivated in Babel; and are contenders about the Or
Meaning.
Spirit of the Letter; and yet have no understanding of the same; ye will also
be Doctors and learned Masters (forsooth) but yet ye understand not your own
Mother Tongue: ye bite and devour one another about the husk of the word,
wherein the Living word does form and amasse it self, and ye neither desire
nor understand the living word; ye speak only out of Seven and out of
seventy and seven, and yet ye have the Word in one Number, wherein the Or the
understanding of all things.
whole understanding is contained, ye have it moving upon your tongues, yet ye
cannot comprehend it.

66. And the Reason is, that you will only speak out of Seven, and seventy
and seven, viz. out of the wrath, which has divided the tongues; and does
Avenge the Life of Lamech Seventy and Seven times in your Tongues and Speeches:
but if ye would Or enter into.
go unto the Center, and open your eyes, then you would see how the
babilonicall Whore leads you captive by her String, and how she has set her
self over the life of man with One Copy has it seven, seventy and seven.
seventy and seven numbers; and has wholly hidden our Sister Naema with the
Numbers; that the Beast of the Numbers might Reign and rule in the wrath of
God over the life of our Sister Naamah.

67. But we have heard a watchman say: Away; the Beast, with the whore, which
stood upon the Earth in Naamahs stead, is quite fallen, and given to the Press
of the Sevenfold Vengeance
Racha in the Seventy and seven etc. the Racha arises up in Lamech, and goes
through the seventy and seven; and this none can hinder. AMEN.

68. For Naamah shall be manifested to all Nations tongues and Speeches; and
even then out of the Seventy and Seven there shall be but One word of
understanding; for the life of man proceeded from ONE only word of God, and
has formed and divided it self in Selfe-hood in the Spirit of the wonders of
the world, into Seventy and Seven properties of the Only Word: Now comes
the time that the life's beginning shall again enter with the Spirit of the
wonders and Speeches into the End, viz. into the Beginning, and therefore the
child of the wonders which has given it self forth Or before.
in the Sight of God, must be made manifest in the Unity.

69. And being that the free will has given it self into the vanity of the
Speeches and the multiplicity of the Powers, and defiled and slain the life of
the Only Word, the Racha proceeds forth from the Murdering Spirit through
Seventy and seven, until the Beast together with the Harlot be consumed, and
devoured with the fire of Gods Anger.

70. And then Tubel-Cain finds his Sister Naema in Golden Attire, and Ada
rejoices in her Son Jabal, who is an Heardsman: for Lamech has again found
his children which he left in the Racha: and the Pride of Self, and also the
craft Deceit and Suttlety of the Serpent cease: Or, for.
Then Every Beast shall eat its Own Pasture, the Time is near, HALLELV-JAH.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Line of the Covenant.
THe Line of the Covenant is not so to be understood as if the Covenant fell
only upon this Line; no, the Covenant Passes upon, belongs to, or is
Entailed upon.
befalls the only Life, which was in the word before the times of the
humanity: the Line of Seth passes only upon the manifestation in the flesh,
in which line, the Word in the Covenant, would externally manifest it self in
the flesh: but the Spirit proceeding from the Center in the Covenant, falls as
well upon Cains line as upon Abels, yet in Cains [line] in the Spirit, and in
Seths in the external mouth [or manifestation] viz. in the formed and
conceived Word, that is, in the office and ministry of Teaching and Preaching:
for Seth was sprung forth according to the Spirit, out of the Covenant, where
the Spirit moved it self in the incorporated Word in the Covenant; and Cain
was comprehended under the Spirit of nature.

2. For by Cains line the Arts were brought forth to light, which were a Wonder
of the Divine wisdom, Contemplation and formation viz. of the Formed Word
through and in nature; and in Seth the word was brought into a formal Life,
viz. into a spiritual contemplation, wherein the word of God did behold it
self with the wisdom in a spiritual Form, or Figure.
Image; and in Cains line it beheld it self in a natural formed Word; and
both Serve to set forth the wonderful deeds of God.

3. Not as Babel judges, that God out of his purpose and determinate counsel
has thus predestined and chosen one Part of men in his Anger to
condemnation, and the other Part to life: they that so judge are yet under the
Number Seventy and Seven in the multiplication of the word; for the Promise was
Given to Adam before Cain was conceived: the Covenant touching Grace rested in
Adam and Eve; but the Spirit of Sanctification, and Regeneration by Christ,
passed only upon the Seed of the Woman, viz. upon the Seed of the Kingdom of
Heaven which was shut up: that is, upon the lights Tincture, upon the Matrix of
Venus, wherein Adam when he was Man and Woman should have propagated himself
in Peculiar Desire and Love, which, seeing it could not be [by reason of Adams
strong Earthly Imagination] was taken from Adam, and made into a woman.

4. But when the woman became earthly, the heavenly Part of this Matrix [which
was to the producement] of the heavenly birth, was shut up in death, into which
Matrix the word of God did again incorporate it self with the Covenant, to
open and manifest himself in this Matrix with a living and heavenly Seed, and
to destroy the Power of death.

5. For the word would not open it self in the formed word of nature, viz in
Cains Generation, but in the disappeared heavenly Ens; and by the same revived
and requickned heavenly Ens, that is, by the VVomans Seed of the heavenly Part,
bruise the Serpents Head, viz. the Devils introduced desire in the wrath of
nature; that is, overcome the wrath [and curse of God] in the Generation of
Cain and Seth.

6. The word in the Covenant did open it self in Seth and Abel, it being as a
Voice of the Teacher, and Cains Generation should in its life receive this
Voice, and impresse it into its Life, so that it might produce the New
Regeneration; but that many of them have continued in death, and contemned this
Voice, is long of the free will which suffered it self to be held by the
Devil in the Anger of God, and still to this Day does suffer it self to be
held, in that the Cainicall will does Love nature, and Self, too much.

7. For if the free will of the Soul will apprehend the Word in the Covenant,
then it must Dye to its natural Selfehood, and selfefull Will, and be wholly
Resigned to the Own will in the Covenant, that it may with its Desire follow
the Word and Spirit in the Covenant, as the same does lead guide and move it.

8. And This Cain is very loath and unwilling to do; he will be a Selfish Lord,
and with the desire does figure and shape a monster, and an Evil Beast in his
free will, which does not resemble the first Image of the formed Life in the
word of God: now against this Beast the words of Christ are directed, when he
says; Unless ye be converted and become as children (that is, unless you do
depart from, and utterly disclaim the will of the Selfe-Generated Beast, and
enter again into the form of the first Life) ye cannot else see the Kingdom of
God: also, ye must be borne again of the water of the Heavenly worlds
essence, and of the same holy Spirit proceeding from the Covenant, otherwise ye
cannot see and behold God.

9. This Evil Beast of the Godless form, Note.
is predestined to condemnation; but the Covenant is in the Life; if the free
will Resigneth it self up to the Covenant, then Christ arises in his
humanity, out of the Covenant, in the Life; and even then the strange Beast
dies in Christ's death, and the will forms it self again into the first
Image according as God created it, and this is not annexed only unto Seth, but
unto Adams life, viz. unto the Only life of man which was in the Word of God,
and passes from one upon all, as all branches in one tree do receive sapp from
the Only root of the stock.

10. But the properties of nature, viz. of the natural life, have brought
themselves out of Adams stock into sundry boughs, and branches, whence the
multiplicity of Nations, Tongues, and Speeches, is arisen, but the Life is
only One, and the Covenant in the life sprang forth from the root of life,
viz. from the Word of God, out of which the Life came upon all, even as the
Sin, viz. the fall and apostasy passed upon all, none excepted; for the
Children of Seth were concluded under Sin as well as Cains; but the Covenant
Or, the open and outward manifestation of the Covenant.
with its manifestation passed upon SETH; for his name signifies in the
Language of nature, a forth-breathing Spring out of the Life through the first
Center of the Soul, wherein the word of God would open it self through the
Life.

11. And Moses says; Seth begat Enos, Genesis 4.26.
and then began men to preach of the Name of the Lord: for the Name ENOS
signifies in the Language of Nature, a Divine Lubet through the life, wherein
the Formed Word would behold it self in the Sound and Voice of the Life;
therefore the Spirit of God began to Teach out of the Covenant through the Life
of man, concerning God* and his Being, and Will: this was the beginning of the
Divine Contemplation through the formed Wisdom in the word, where the word did
behold it self through the wisdom of the formed Humane Voice.

12. And as the Life did form it self by Cains line through the wonders of the
formed wisdom in Nature with all manner of Arts, and works, and also
Dominions, Governments, and Orders, and introduced them all for the Setting
forth of Gods wondrous Deeds and Acts, viz. to a Contemplation of Evil and
good, light and darkness; so likewise the Spirit of God did bring forth out of
the Line of the Covenant in the manifested Word, the wonders of Divine
Holiness, Truth, Righteousness, Love, and Patience; and by the Preaching of
the formed word did declare what the holy and Spiritual Kingdom of God is.

13. In Cain the Kingdom of nature was represented, and in Abel and Seth, the
Supernatural Divine Kingdom: both these arose together and went all along one
in another to the Remonstrance or Contemplation of the Divine Lubet in the
formed wisdom; and Each put it self forth in an especial manner into its
visible Ken as a wonder.

14. For from Adam even unto Lamech in the line of the wonders there are Seven
Generations, and in the other line, viz. in the line of the Covenant from Adam
unto Enoch, are also Seven Generations, Enoch is the Eighth, viz. a beginning
of the prophetical Spirit; for in the first Seven Generations, the form of the
Spiritual Kingdom proceeding from the Life's Tree, was set forth.

15. Adam was the stock, for his life takes its original out of the word, but
being the Life of nature in him did predominate over the life in the formed
Word, and would have the Supreme dominion, and obscured the life proceeding
from the word; the word it self freely gave it self with a Covenant to be a
Life therein; and set forth its figure in Abel how the natural life should and
must be broken; and the word of the Divine power should again spring forth
afresh out of the first Life.

16. Thus Abel was the Figure of the Second Adam, Christ, and therefore he must
be slain for the Covenants sake; for Christ should kill the exalted haughty
natural will, and being forth a new one; and therefore Abel also should not
beget any natural child; else it had been strange to nature; for they should
all proceed forth out of one stock, and the word would spring forth anew
through the Only Tree in the Covenant; that so the Children of Grace might be
brought forth out of the Tree of nature, as the dew out of the Or, Morning
daybreak.

17. For thus also the figure of the new birth was represented out of the Stem;
namely, the line went forth out of Adam, he was the first, Abel the second,
Seth the third, Enos the fourth, where men began to teach of the Spiritual
Kingdom: Or, Cainan.
KENAN the fifth, which signifies in the language of nature a forth-going
Re-apprehend.
re-conceived Lubet or desire of the divine Contemplation, in which the word
Taught did form it self, viz. in Prayer and in the wills desire and also in
their Offerings.

18. MAHALALEEL was the sixth, and signifies in the language of nature an
Angelical form of an Angelical Kingdom, where the spirit did typifie and
pourtray the Kingdom of Christ in this Name.

19. JARED was the Seventh; by this Name is understood in the language of
nature, a Priest or Prince of the Spiritual Kingdom: for as Irad should be
the Regent or Ruler in the Kingdom of nature, so Jared should be the Regent in
the Spiritual Kingdom; for out of Jared came the office of Moses; and out of
Irad proceeded the Kingdom of worldly principalities, and framed Governments
and Dominions.

20. But the language of nature shows very clearly, that Jared is only a
type of a spiritual Kingdom; for the Name carries forth the Cherub along
with it through the word; for the spiritual Kingdom upon the earth was all
along captivated in the wrath of God, until Christ who destroyed the Anger.

21. The Office of this Jared is twofold, viz. externally it is the figure of
the Spiritual Kingdom, bound with the wrath of God; and internally it is the
true holy Kingdom which the Penitent man receives or takes possession of:
Outwardly it is Moses; and inwardly Christ.

22. From this outward Kingdom the great mother of the babylonicall whoredom
is Arisen in the Kingdom of Moses among the Pharisees; and in the Kingdom of
Christ among the Text, The Letter crie^, or Literalists.
verbal and titular Christians; who do all Only boast, and gloriously set up
themselves in the figure, as an Idol; and appear as if they were the holy
spiritual Kingdom; but the Cherub carries forth the Sound through their
word, as a consonant of the wrathful Anger of God.

23. And therefore they must contend about the Kingdom of Gods will; for they
have not the Spirit of the inward Spiritual heavenly Kingdom; but only the
voice out of the figure, where Evil and good are in contest; they have, and
use the letter, but as an Empty unprofitable instrument, as a figure of the
spiritual Form; for thus also the Spirit did represent it by the name Jared,
as a mixed Kingdom upon the earth, whereby the inward spiritual newborn
children should be exercised and proved.

24. And by this form it did signify and foretell how that the greatest part
in this Spiritual Office would be taken in the Sword of the Cherub, and that
their Office would be cut off by the Cherub from Gods holiness, and given to
the Spiritual Eternal Kingdom of the Anger.

25. For as Lamech in Cains line took two wives, viz. two wills, and confirmed
his Kingdom therein, and at last brought forth [or pronounced] the Seventy and
Sevenfold Racha proceeding from the Center of nature (even from the seven
properties) upon the Murder of the free will, which would murder and slay his
life, in many: even so likewise Jared carries two wills in his Nature's Name:
viz. One into Gods Love and mercy in the Covenant, and the other into the
Figure, in which the Anger of God arises up and carries the abominable Idol
(the Belly-God) along with it; which is here deciphered and painted forth to
the Life.

26. And Moses says further, Jared begat Enoch. Here the great and wonderful
gate does open: for out of Jared, viz. out of the Kingdom of the wonders, the
Prophet must arise: for the Prophet is the mouth of the Kingdom: he shows
what the Kingdom is, and how it is taken and apprehended in the Evil and
good, and what the issue, and end of all things shall be; also he declares and
points out the Or the middle, viz. what has bin done and acted by the Turba
in the wonder of Time.
Means, how the Turba has apprehended the life; and denounces severe and
earnest Threatenings concerning Gods anger; how the sword of the Cherub will cut
off the false [man or Prophet.]

27. HENOCH signifies in its own Speech as much as a forth-breathed breath of
the divine Or Lubet.
good pleasure, which has in the time thus beheld it self with the
out-breathing in a form; which power of the forth-breathing, does again draw
the formed breath into it self, and does only give forth its Sound, as a
voice of the Divine will: and First it does point at a Twigg, springing from
the line of the Covenant; viz. out of the internal Priestly office, out of the
holy divine Lubet of the wisdom of God, out of Jehovah; the Spirit would
comprehend the deepest Love in Jehovah in one Name and Word, which is called
Jesus; but in the mean time it did thereby play in the Time of the Figure, in
the holy wisdom, in the Line of the Covenant, as with an internal hidden holy
Kingdom, which he would manifest in the fulness of time.

28. Secondly, it signifies the power of the formed word; viz. the Person, or
the Body out of the Limus of the Earth; [viz.] of the heavenly part of the
Earth; intimating that this body should be taken into the holy word; and
translated from this earthlinesse; as the light does withdraw and swallow up
the darkness, even so likewise the good part of the true humanity in Adams
first Image Text, should or is to be.
shall be translated [extracted, or drawn forth] by the word out of the
earthlinesse, and arise out of the earth, which Enochs Translation from this
world does point out and signify.

29. Thirdly it signifies and points at the Prophet, viz. the Voice of the
Divine Lubet, Note.
which did declare and set forth the Kingdom of Christ, and also the Kingdom
of the wonders in their future transactions and junctures of Time; for the
prophetical voice did manifest it self again out of the translation, and did
foretell and signify out of the Essence of the spirit, viz. out of the most
spiritual Kingdom, that is, out of the Humane Angelical Kingdom, through
the Souls spirit: and then also from the whole Body of the Kingdom: viz. from
the nature of the wonders, from the Limus of the earth, and of the Stars [I say
it did set forth both from the spiritual and corporal Kingdome] how the
outward Kingdom of man should afterward arise in this worlds-being, and what
should happen and come to pass therein. This the inward holy omniscient spirit
does signify Or by.
through the outward, viz. through the wonders of the pregnatresse [or mother]
of the outward beings, viz. through the Spirit of the outward world: for the
inward spirit did view it self through the formed wisdom of God, and did
contemplate and behold it self in the formed spirit of the wonders: this the
Name Enoch signifies unto us.

30. Now the Spirit in Moses does further demonstrate and says: Enoch was 65.
years old, and he begat Methusalah, and after that he begat him he continued in
a divine life three hundred years and begat Sons and daughters: Genesis 5.21, etc.
so that the whole Age of Enoch was three hundred sixty and nine years: and
being he lead a divine life God took him away and he was no more seen. Here
the veil hangs right before the face of Moses, by reason of the
unworthiness of man: and the Spirit signifies very clearly in Moses, if we
had but the eyes of our understanding open, when these Mysteries should be
manifested [or fulfilled.]

31. But seeing the most High has freely granted us by his Counsel to
understand this, we will, so far as we As we ought.
dare, somewhat unfold these Mysteries to our school-fellowes, and show the
precious Pearl unto the children, and yet with all, suffer a Bolt to lie
before our description, that the false heart shall not enter into it, but we
shall be sufficiently and fundamentally intelligeable unto those that are Ours.

32. Moses points in each degree in the Lines, only upon one person, which
he also sets into the Line through which the Spirit of wonders goes;
afterward says Moses, and he yet lived such Or so long.
a time and begat Sons and daughters; of which he says nothing any further:
thereby he would intimate and signify unto us, the Spirit of the
manifestation of the wonders of God in each line, their Age, which the Spirit
sets down, denotes the Note.
Times how long each Dominion and government, both the worldly and Spiritual
[or Ecclesiastical Kingdome] should stand in its form and Structure: that is
to say, how long each Beginning growing arising.
prevailing Monarchy of the Secular and wordly power and domination should
continue, and so likewise of the Spiritual Monarchy.

33. And these Or Monarchs.
Monarchies of the wonders are forthwith represented out of the first Twiggs,
springing from the beginning of the humane tree: that is: they are set forth in
each line in Seven numbers; from Adam through Cain even unto Lamech; and in the
other line from Adam unto Jared: by which Numbers and Names the Spirit points
in each line especially at Seven of the forth-proceeding properties of the
Tree, and powers of the wonders: intimating how the powers of the wonders
should afterward bring themselves into Goverments, and how one figure should
arise out of the other, and how one should destroy and break down the other,
and set forth out of the destruction another form as it has been brought to
pass in the Ecclesiastical and Temporal.
Spiritual and worldly Goverments: for always the worldly Government is to be
understood with the Spiritual: for the outward formed Word in the dominion and
Regiment of nature does evermore set forth its form by with and in the
Spiritual [or Ecclesiasticall] form [or manner of Discipline,] therefore
observe and mark here with precise Exactness.

34. There are Seven Times appointed to proceed from the Tree of life in the
word of power; the first proceeds from the pure life of Adam; for before the
creature, the life was in the word, whence it was brought pure into the Image;
this continued until the fall: from this pure life there springs forth a twigg
in the inward [Kingdome] this same was Abel, but being the fall hung on him
externally, this same pure life was carried through Death into the holy world:
this signifies and points at the Kingdom of Christ, who should bring us
through Death into the pure Life.

35. The Second time begins with Seth, for Moses says: that Adam was an
hundred and thirty years old, and begat a Son in his own likeness, and called
him Seth: understand, he was such an Image as Adam was after the fall: and was
set in the Spiritual Line of the Wonders, and Cain also with him in a worldly
natural line of the wonders, for both Secular, and Ecclesiastical.
Kingdoms go together: Seths time continues till the Deluge, and bears the
Supremacy even to the Deluge or Noah's flood.

36. The Third time begins with Enos under Seths time, and carries forth it
self all along as a Spiritual Ministry, or Knowledge of God, under Seths time
as an hidden Kingdom, and continued till Abraham to whom the Covenant of
Christ was established in the flesh.

37. The Fourth time begins with Cainan which is the Spiritual form in
prayers and Spiritual offerings, wherein the word formed it self in the
wisdom, and carried it self forth all along, under Seths, and Enos his time,
and manifested it self with Moses; like as Enos his time was first truly
manifested with Abraham with the promise in the Covenant; this time of Cainan
continued in its manifestation and dominion under Moses till Christ in the
flesh.

38. The fifth time begins with Mahalaleel; and it is the Reception or formation
of the Angelical form, viz. of the new Regeneration out of the Covenant; and
goes Secretly all along under the Ministry of Enos, under Seth and Cainan, in
the word of the promise, through all the Three times, and did manifest it self
with the fulfilling of the Covenant in the humanity of Christ, where the true
Mahalaleel and Angelical Image, which did disappeare in Adam, was again
manifest in the humanity of Christ.

39. The Sixth time begins with Jared; which is the spiritual Priesthood under
the external, where outwardly Seth Enos Cainan Mahalaleel were in their Times
in their Orders [or outward forms,] as the ministry and preaching of Enos
concerning God and his being and will; so likewise the preaching of Abraham
concerning the Covenant and Circumcision; Also Moses with the Book of the Law:
under all these the inward Priest Jared went along hiddenly. Inwardly this
Spiritual Priesthood is Christ in the new man; and outwardly in the
selfe-elected Priests it is Babel.

40. This Sixth time began in the Kingdom of Christ after the Death of the
Apostles, when as men chose themselves Teachers out of favor, and outward
respects; that is, it did even then first open it self out of the Or veil.
hiddennesse of the shadow, and put it self forth in the Churches of Stone,
where the Church stood in stead of the holy Temple of Christ: then indeed the
holy Jared, viz. Christ's voice, ruled in Christ's children internally; but
externally the Cherub with the Sword did only bear rule; for the outward
authority which these selfe-elected Priests do manage is the Sword of the
Cherub: which is signified in the Name Jared: That is, in the word JARED the
Language of Nature does emphatically express, that the Sword of the Cherub
should Domineere the whole Time of the Sixth Seal among the Priests, who should
have taught the Love of Jesus: but by this Sword they fall. AMEN.
which powerfully forces it self forth all along in the word, in the language
of Nature.

41. This sixth time is hidden and manifest; it is known, and also not known:
for Christ said, my Kingdom is not of this world. So that this time has been
feign to pass away as it were in a Mystery under Antichrist, where inwardly in
the children of God, Christ's Kingdom has been manifest, but in the Rest (who
have also lived under this time, and have been called Christians) Babel and the
Antichrist has only been manifest, both in the Priests, and their Hearers:
for they which have been borne of God, have heard the true Jared, viz. Christ's
voice in them: but the other have heard only the Outward voice in Babel, viz.
disputation and Contention about Christ's Kingdom.

42. For all war which the Christians manage, is only the Sword of the
Cherub proceeding from Babel: true Christians wage no war; for they have broken
the Sword of the Cherub in the death of Christ, and are dead with Christ, and
risen again in him, and they live no longer to the external Might and
Dominion; for their Kingdom is manifest in Christ, and is not of this world.

43. This Sixth Or sixth Seal.
Kingdom, begins after the death of the Apostles, and continues with its
outward Government even to Mount Zion till translated Enoch does again appear
in Spirit, and power, for Enoch is the prophetical Root, and holds in his Or
Regiment.
Dominion Noah, Moses, and the Sword of Elias, at the End of this sixth time the
Outward Jared falls, and with him that same Outward Building, viz. the City
Babel.

44. The Sign of the End is Or stands with such a figure.
deciphered with such a figure: This Figure was thus deliniated in the Authors
Manuscript, and so received, by Abr: von Somervelt.
And denotes the Time when the Triple Cross does open and declare it self in
the voice of Enoch, as a manifestation of the holy Trinity, to make known the
same in the figure, and similitude, in all visible things; moreover it denotes
the Conquest of the Sword of the Cherub in Babel, when the force and violence
of the City Babel turns it Sword with the Point downwards: thirdly it denotes
the great Rod and Punishment upon Babel, which Rod does mightily advance its
Power on high: Fourthly it denotes the wrathful Enkindled Fire of Gods Anger,
which shall devour the Sword and Rod; this will be the End of the Sixth time:
the threefold Cross does betoken the Time when this shall come to pass [or be
fulfilled] when the Kingdom of Christ shall attain such a Number then is the
sixth Time wholly past.

45. The Seventh Time begins with Read the 35. quest. of the 40 Quest. of the
Soul.
Enoch, viz. with the Prophetical Mouth, who declares the Secret wonders of
God under all the Six times; laying open what should Be [and have been] done,
and brings it self all along quite from under the veil of Noah, Abraham, and
Moses, even into the Kingdom of Christ, where this same prophetical Spirit
Or, has been.
is translated in Christ's Spirit, till the end of the Sixth time; then he
manifests himself in the Number of the Triple Cross. When the Triple Cross
does manifest it self, then stands the Right Triple Crown upon the Cross:
and even then the Enochian Prophets mouth does express and speak forth the
Great wonders of the Triple Cross, that is, he speaks no more Magically
[viz. in Types and Parables] but shows the holy Trinity in the figure, viz.
the Formed word of God in all visible things, and reveals all Mysteries,
within and without.

46. And Even then is the time, when Enoch and the children under his voice, do
lead a Divine Life, of which the first life of Enoch was a Type, and then there
is a blessed and Golden year, till Enochs last translation comes, and then the
Turba is born (which, when it shall enkindle its fire) the Floar shall be
purged, for it is the end of all time.

47. Enoch begat Methusalah, who was the man of the longest Age, and was
translated three hundred years after: This intimates and declares, that the
Spirit which in Enoch did bring forth a twigg, viz. Methusalah, who attained
the highest Age, shall rule in the Last, and highest Age [of the world] and in
the mean while hide it self before that time, and remain as it were
Translated, as Enoch was translated, and was no more Seen.

48. His translation was not a dying, or a putting off of nature and creature,
but he went into the Mystery, betwixt the spiritual and outward world, viz.
into Paradise, and is the Prophetical Root, out of the Stem of Adam, in the
line of the Covenant, out of which Spirit afterward the prophetical mouth
spoke.

49. This spirit was translated in Christ's Living voice, when it spoke in the
flesh, and must be silent, till the voice of Jared i^ finished, then he
proceeds forth again from his first root, through All voices, viz. through
the voice of Noah, who denounces the deluge of Anger to come upon Babel, and
through the Stock of Noah, and the whole forth-spreading propagation of his
Tree through all the Lines, viz through the Through Hams, Japhets, and
Sems-line.
Heathenish, Japheticall, and Sem^^ line, and through Abraham's, and Nimrods
children in Babel, through Moses, and the Prophets, and lastly, through the
voice of the manifested Word in the spirit of Christ, and reveals the whole
Mystery of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.

50. For through his voice all the forementioned voices of the wonderful
Lines (whence the Kingdoms of this world have had their rise) shall be changed
into One voice and knowledge, and transplanted into one Kingdom, viz. into the
first Tree of Adam, which is no longer called Adam, but Christ in Adam: All
Nations, tongues, and speeches, hear this Voice: for it is the first word,
whence the life of mankind proceeded, for all wonders do join again
together in the word into one Body, and that body is the formed divine word,
which at first with Adam did introduce it self into One Only Stem; and through
him into a Tree of manifold boughs, branches, and fruits, to the contemplation
of the Divine wisdom, in the wonders of the powers, colors, and virtues,
according to Evil and good.

51. This High Tree does disclose, and clearly open it self, what it has been
in time, and what it shall be Eternally, and in its Disclosure, or Opening^
manifestation, Moses puts away his Veil, and Christ his Parables in his
Doctrine, and then the prophetical mouth of this Tree of wonders, does
express in Divine Power, all the voices of the Powers of the Tree, whereby
Babel takes her End, and this is a wonder: and in this same wonder all Numbers
and Names are made manifest, and this no man can hinder.

52. For that which is Lost in the Spirits of the letters shall be again found,
and the * Spirit of the letter shall be found again in the formed word of the
Creation, and in the Creation shall be found and known the Being of all Beings,
and in the Being of all Beings the Eternal understanding of the holy Trinity:
Even then the contentions about the knowledge of God, his Being, and will, do
cease: when the branches shall know that they Stand in the Tree, they will
never say that they are peculiar and Singular Trees, but they will rejoice in
their Stem, and they will see that they are altogether boughs and branches of
one tree, and that they do all receive power and life from one Only Stem.

53. And Here Moses shall keep sheep, and Every sheep eats his own pasture;
therefore observe, it when this approaches near to be fulfilled, then Noah
denounces the Deluge, and Elias brings the flaming Sword upon the false
Israel, and the Turba in the fire of the wrath devoures the wild Tree with its
fruits, and branches; let this be told thee Babel.

54. For as concerning Enochs Divine time, our Speech is taken from us, seeing
Babel is not worthy of it, and also shall not see it, and likewise we must be
Silent concerning the discovery of the Times of the Ancient, whose Number shall
stand open in the Rose of the Lilly.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Enoch's Wonderful Line.
MOses writes: Enoch begat METHVSALAH, Genesis v.21.
this Name signifies in the language of Nature, as much as a Or, Outgoing.
forth-proceeding Voice, which intimates, and denotes the Spirit of Enoch;
which voice does Frame, or comprehend.
form it self into a Body, viz. into Nature, and goes forth in strong Might
through the word; and when the conceived or formed word is proceeded forth, it
does then contemplate it self; for the Syllable (-SA-) is a fiery glimps of
Light; and the Syllable (-LAH.) is the forth-proceeded Word, which beholds
the property, of what kind of Ens it is, wherein the word has formed (or
comprehended) it self: the Divine Sound beholds it self in the humane Ens,
and Word, contemplating how the free will proceeding from the humane Ens, has
introduced the Divine voice or Breath, into a form of the Spirit.

2. Now says Moses; And Methusalah begat Lamech, the Spirit did now put it
self forth by Methusalah, even out of the Ens into another twigg; and called
it Lamech; viz. a Contemplation, and beholding of the Great affliction and
wound, that the humane Ens was Corrupted; for like as Lamech in Cains line did
Express the Wound of Corruption [and misery that was broke in upon Mankind]
and spoke of a Seventy-and-seven-fold Racha upon the free will which did
Corrupt the life; Even so here the Divine Spirit said, the humane Ens is
Lamech; that is, the wound is too Great, it prevails; although the strong,
and mighty breath of God in Methusalah, proceeded forth out of the Prophetical
Voice, yet the Ens in propagation did form it self in the Corrupted nature in
Lamech; that is, in Two wills, as Moses says, the first Lamech in Cains line
took two wives, viz. Adah, and Zillah; Even so here likewise it would not be
otherwise.

Verse. 28.
3. Now Moses says; And Lamech begat Noah: with this Name the spirit goes
forth out of the wound of Lamech into the End of Time, and brings the End
into the beginning; for NOAH* Signifies in the Language of Nature, End and
Beginning; now the Spirit finds in the End, the holy word, which had espoused
and incorporated it self in the Covenant, Verse. 29.
and says, This same shall comfort us in our labor and toil upon the Earth
which the Lord has Cursed.

4. For the Comfort of man must come out of the beginning and End; for in the
Beginning is, and was, the word of God, which is the beginning of all things;
and in the End is also the Word of God, which is the comfort of all things;
that the creature shall be delivered from the vanity; whereunto the Spirit
looked, and said; this Same (where he meant the word which would manifest it
self in the humanity) shall comfort us in our labor upon the earth which the
Lord has cursed; for Noah could not comfort men, for he Preached to them the
Rebuke, Punishment, and Perdition; but he that was in the Beginning and End, he
comforted mankind in their Labor and toil upon the Earth, which they had in
the Curse and Anger of God.

5. In this Name Noah the Spirit in Lamech looks forwards into the End, and
backwards into the Beginning; and conceives it self in the Beginning and End
into a form, and calls the same Noah, that is, an Ark of the wonders which were
in the Beginning and End, and in the whole Time; and displayeth or puts
forth this same spirit of the whole form through Noah into Three Branches,
which went forth out of the Tree of wonders, viz. out of the prophetical Ens
of Enoch in the humane property; and thereof Moses says, And Noah begat Sem,
Ham, and Japhet; these were the Three twiggs of the Second Monarchy, under
which, most excellent Mysteries are given us to be understood.

6. SEM signifies an out-breathing Divine Lubet [or desire] out of the Line of
the Covenant, out of the Life of man, and a Comprehension of the Lubet, viz. a
type of that, which Secretly passed forth afterward, under the Lubet: it
points at the humanity of Christ in the flesh, the Type of which, was Sem,
viz. a representation [or express forme] in the same Lubet, in which Lubet
also the Covenant was made with Abraham, concerning the Seed of the woman,
wherein the Blessing should appear.

7. The other branch or Twigg the Spirit called HAM, which signifies a Strong
breathing out of the Center of Nature, and a gross amasment or compaction into
a flesh: which denotes, the earthly, natural fleshly man, which holds Sem
captive in it self; [understand by Sem] the inward man, which shall Note.
Concerning the Resurrection.
arise from death out of the Earth: understand the man proceeded from the Limus
of the good part of the earth, which was in Sem Or taken into the Divine Lubet.
formed according to the Divine Lubet.

8. We do not hereby understand the Totally spiritual man, which is only as a
spirit, But that [man] which is from the Limus of the good part of the earth,
which lies captive in Ham, that is, in the gross bestiall flesh, and is as
dead, without the Divine Lubet, which the spiritual Christus, viz the totally
spiritual man shall put on at the End of the days in Noah [that is, out of
the Beginning and End:] This inward hidden man, his gross earthly brother Ham,
viz. the gross earthly flesh, (which is nothing worth, John 6.) does devour,
and swallow up.

9. And from the Lubet of Sem springs forth the third branch out of the
Center of Nature, where the Divine Lubet does behold it self through nature;
and this the Spirit called JAPHET, which is in the language of nature an
Appendix of Sem, a birth out of Cains Line of Wonders, where the Divine Lubet
does bring it self through nature into a form of the wonders of the Divine
wisdom: with Sem it introduces it self into a contemplation of the
spiritual wonders in the holiness of God, and in Japhet into a Natural
Wonder, viz. into the Septenary of the Eternal, and Temporal Nature,
understand, into a form of the Seven fold Orb, or Sphere.
wheel, or life's forms, in which Or, life's wheel,
vital sphere the Spirit of God appears as a glorious Glee, or Gleam of the
Wonders.

10. Sem is a type of the light-world, and Japhet is a type of the fire-world,
where the light does through-shine: Japhet a Type [or Image] of the Father: and
Sem a type of the Son: but Ham is an Image and type of the outward world.

11. For the type and figure of the Three Principles stood in the Three
brethren, and clearly points out the Second Monarchy, even to the End of the
World; and withal shows, what kind of men would thence-forward possess the
world, viz a spiritual world, and a natural world of wonders, and a bestiall
world of folly; these are the Three Sorts of Men, viz. out of the stock and
family of Sem came Israel, and out of Japhets the Gentiles, who Governed
themselves in the light of Nature, but Sems (Generation were disciplined) in
the Covenant and Word of God; But Ham [both in Sem and Japhet] he ruled
himself in the beastiall brutish property, against whom the Curse of God was
pronounced through the Spirit in his Father Noah: for Christ said, that flesh,
and blood, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

12. And Moses speaks now further thus: Genesis vi.1. etc.
But when men began to multiply upon the earth, and daughters were born unto
them; that the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, and
took unto them wives as they pleased; Then said the Lord, Men will not suffer
my Spirit any more to reprove them, for they are flesh; yet I will make their I
will yet give them 120 years respit.
Days an hundred and twenty years. Here Moses has again the veil before his
Eyes; for he says that the children of God looked upon the beauty of the
Daughters of men, and took unto them wives according as they listed, and would
not suffer the Spirit of God to reprove and admonish them.

13. The meaning of it is this; the children of God, in whom the Spirit of God
did manifest it self, looked in the lust of the flesh, after fleshly Women,
although they were of the Generation and lineage of Ham, without Gods Spirit,
yet if they were but fair and beautiful for their lust of the flesh, they
introduced the Seed of the holy Ens into such beastiall vessels, and afterward
brought forth such Giants.
Tyrants, and fleshly minded men, who would not suffer the Spirit of God to
rebuke them for they were only flesh without divine Spirit and will.

14. They should not have mixed themselves with the beastiall Daughters, but
look after those in whom the Spirit of God was, even those who feared and
loved God; but they looked only at the lust of their eyes, and flesh, and
corrupted the holy Ens in the Covenant, in which God had Incorporated.
espoused and betrothed himself: against these the Spirit here complains,
that they would not be instructed and reformed, but follow the lust of the
flesh.

15. We see this very emphatically set forth unto us in Sem, Ham, and Japhet:
that it is so, that the Spirit would not that the children of God should mix
themselves with the very carnal or beastiall People; for after the Deluge the
Spirit divides the three brethren into three Families, and would that each
family, should remain apart by it self.

16. For therefore came the Deluge upon the Earth and destroyed these mixed
people, and afterward made a Separation amongst them according to the Nature
of the Three Principles; that each property might possess its Quire, and line,
in the Nature of the Wonders; but yet it would not do; so that at last, the
Spirit divides them with the Confusion of the Languages at Babel, that so they
might come into a Several division; for the properties of the Tree did there
divide and spread forth themselves into Seventy and seven; viz. into the Wonder
of the Nature of the formed Word.

Verse. 5, 6.
17. Now says Moses, And the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great
upon the Earth, and that all their Thoughts and Imaginations in their Hearts,
were only Evil continually; then it repented God that he had made man on the
Earth, and it grieved him at his very heart, and said; I will destroy man which
I have created from off the face of the Earth, both man and Beast and creeping
thing, and all the fowls of the air; for i^ repents me that I have made
them; these are mavelous and wonderful sayings; that the Spirit says it
repented God that he had made man, and the creatures: who would understand this
without divine knowledge; that any thing should grieve the unchangeable God:
Reason would be ready to say; has he not known aforehand what would be? how
can his will, which is himself, grieve and repent?

18. Here we must go into the Center. In God there is no grieving or
Repentance; Nothing can grieve or trouble him: but there is a grieving in his
expressed formed Word; for it repents the formed word in the Devils, that
the Ens of Light is turned into an Ens of Darkness; it grieveth the Devil,
that he did not continue an Angel; also it repents the wicked man eternally
that he stood not in the divine Ens in the formed word, and has turned the
power of the word into malice and iniquity; also there is a grieving in the
formed word in Nature over all kinds of creatures that the property of the
wrath in the Curse of the Anger does rule and domineere in the formed expressed
Word: it grieveth the Love-Ens of the word, that the Devil and wrath
domineereth in it, and corrupts, and destroys many.

19. Now when God says, it repents him: It is to be understood according to
the creation of the formed word, not according to the Eternal- Speaking word
which is unchangeable, but according to the Good property in the creation, that
it must be laden with Evil against its will: for the Spirit says in Moses:
and it grieved him in his heart: yea! it did truly grieve or trouble him in his
HEART, the good Ens of the Earth which went also along with it into a
compaction, which is from the spiritual worlds property from the holy word,
the same was in the Sin [or fall of man], captivated in Death, and shut up in
the Curse in the Earth: now the formed word grieved at it, and troubled or
affected the Eternal Speaking word, viz. Gods Heart.

20. For our Soul cries unto Gods heart, viz. unto the Eternal Speaking Word,
and moves troubles or affects the same, that it should move it self in us
according to its Love. Now the humane word works in the divine; and stirs
the divine; so that the divine [word] enters into our Sorrow for Sin, and
helps us to repent of our Sins: for the Spirit in Moses said; when Lamech had
begotten Noah; this same shall comfort us in our Labor.

21. This was now the Spirit of the beginning and End of all things; it
repented through nature, of the iniquity of man, and grieved at the captivity
of the vanity of the creatures; and wrought Repentance into the holy Eternal
Speaking word; the Spirit in the formed word of the whole creation of this
world, said: It grieveth me: that I have brought me into such an Evil
property in the creatures: And wrought Repentance into the living Eternal
Speaking word, from whence the out-breathed formed word was flown forth and
proceeded.

22. For, That this is so; Note.
let us take an example on our repentance; we cannot work any Repentance,
unless our inward humane Soul does repent that it has made formed or brought
forth the Beast of vanity in it self; but if it will repent, then its formed
Word must enter, or make its earnest approach into the Heart of God, and press
the same with an uncessant importunity, and move in it; and now when this comes
to pass then presently the deluge comes upon the evil man of the vain will,
which must forthwith be drowned in its Sorrow in the word of Death, Here then
God repents in man; that the Evil beast full of Sinful desire, is born, and
in this same divine Sorrow it must be drowned in Gods Love, and die unto the
wrathful evil life and will.

23. Now understand Gods Sorrow or repentance, in the Creature of the
Creatures, aright: The Spirit in the whole creation even in every life which
moves in the fire and air, said, it grieveth me, that I have figured this
Image of vanity on me; and this Sorrow of the formed Spirit in the expressed
Word grieved, that is, moved the Eternal Speaking word in it, then said the
Eternal word I will yet give them an hundred and twenty years respit, (for
even so long the time in the Dominion or Government of Seths Spirit did
continue) and then the Turba in all flesh shall perish or be thrown down; for
this Sorrow was nothing else, but that the Word in the Covenant did grieve at
the misery and vanity of man, and would comfort mankind by the Covenant
through Noah, which comfort did first open it self in Abraham, viz. in Enos
his manifestation.

24. For the comfort went forth in the Love of the Covenant and opened it self
with its branch at its right Limit or juncture of time; for God has confined
all things into a certain limit, when every thing shall come to pass; and from
the comfort of the Moving Word in the Covenant, proceeded forth the judgment
that the old Adamicall man, with all his desires concupiscences and lusts
should in the Covenant (when the same should open it self in the flesh) be
drowned and mortified in the same New humanity of Christ; and out of the
comfort of the Covenant, a new humane Spirit, and will, should arise, which
should live in righteousness, and purity; of which the Deluge was a type.

25. For, the grief or Repentance came out of the Covenant upon the formed
word in the life; and therefore seeing the same word Repented of the vanity;
thereupon the vanity of the creature must be drowned; for the will in the
Covenant went forth from the vanity, and grieved the life of God; and moved the
matrix of Nature in the waters birth, and drowned the fiery wrath in the fires
Nature.

26. But the Spirit in Noah, does especially complain here against man, for
their Sodomiticall beastiall Concupiscence and filthy lusts of the flesh: viz.
Against unchastity, and unclean lascivious wantonness; and also against the
High Oppressors, and Tyrants, who put forth and advanced themselves in their
own lust, and would rule and domineere, and no longer suffer the Spirit of God
to rule in them, and reprove them that they had intruded themselves, to
compel, and tyrannize over, one another, without Command: all this was an
abomination before God; and it grieved the Spirit in the formed Word, that it
had brought forth such Evil Beasts, and would no longer endure them.

27. Even this same prophetical Spirit, whose root did open and display it
self in Enoch, which also by Enoch did propagate and put forth its Line with
its branches: which also by Noah did grieve at the wickedness and iniquity of
mankind, and drowned them with the Deluge; even this is he, which now also
does grieve at the Great Sins, and vanity of Men: for his mouth is at present
opened; he has been translated in the Spirit of Christ: Now this word which
became man does Repent at the vanity and wickedness of men: that its children
of the new Covenant will not Suffer the Spirit of Christ to draw them.
give willing obedience to the Spirit of Christ, therefore this prophetical
Mouth does now disclose and put forth it self, for it is the Time of its
manifestation; and proclaims the Great Deluge of Gods Anger, and the Flaming
Sword of Elias, who also was Translated into the Mystery; for he must draw
forth his Sword in the Turba.

28. Let this be told thee Babel, he complains mightily against thy beastiall
unchastity and Tyranny; Against thy own usurped power force, and violence,
wherewith thou art proud, and wanton, and have thereby set up thy self in Gods
Government; he will drown thee with thy Tyranny, and beastiall wantonness in
the fire of Anger: Seeing thou will not repent thee of thy vanity, therefore he
repents through thee, with the Turba, and will drown thy Turba, that so His
Repenting may be made manifest in his children, and also his refreshing Comfort
and consolation might be manifested out of his Repentance.

29. For without Gods repenting there is no true Sorrow or repentance for the
vanity, for the natural spirit desires not to Repent, yea if it could be more
wrathful malicious Evil and vain, it would please Love and delight it self
therein; for it is Nature's spirits Strength, and Might: but the Word of God
which in the creation did Impresse and give it self into the humane Ens for a
Soverain powerful [and holy] life, the same [incorporated engrafted Word of
life] if it be stirred and moved, does repent, and grieve, that it has such an
Evil Beast in Nature on it; that says; it repents me that I have created
the evil beast in nature.

30. But this Sorrow is not a Sorrow to annihilation, as if he would have no
more to do with the creature, but it is a Sorrow which saddeth and moves Gods
Heart, viz. the holy divine word, and sets the natural spirit a time for to
repent, that so it might enter into divine Sorrow, but if it does not, then he
will drown the Natural Spirit in its Evil will and ways as came to pass in
the Deluge.

31. God said: the Earth is corrupt, and full of perverseness; Verse. 11.
and the End of all flesh is come before me I will destroy them: Here is again
a great Mystery, in that God said, the Earth was corrupt before him; that all
flesh had corrupted its way; and that the Earth was filled with Violence.
perverseness through them, and lo! he would destroy them. The Earth was before
with Cain accursed according to the vanitie's property; but now he says also
in this place; all flesh has corrupted its way, the end of all flesh is come
before me* This is not so mean and slight a thing as one would look on it to
be; for the Spirit complains against all flesh; that all things were become
vain in his Sight, and full of perverseness.

32. Now says Reason, a Beast does not Sin it does according to its Natures
property, how can any perverseness be attributed to it? so far does reason go,
and further it knows not; also it understands nothing of the divine mystery;
It understands nothing of the formed Word that has formed it self through the
Nature of time: It says only God has created and made: and considers not
that all things are created in the word, that the Word has introduced, and
compacted it self into an Ens: Also it will know nothing of the Eternal
Spiritual Nature of divine Manifestation; it understands nothing of the
Ground, or Original of the outward visible world with its creatures, when it
says God has made all things out of Nothing, then it means that he has so
spoken it forth, and yet it is wholly blind, and Senseless in it: it looks
only upon the outward Color, and knows not from whence it takes its
Original; thus it is only learned in the external Color, and prateth of the
painted work of the outside and shell; and concerning the Ens whence the
Color arises, it is dumb and senseless.

33. The Spirit complains against all flesh upon the face of the Earth, even
Text, lives in the air and fire.
whatsoever has breath and Sense; the outward Nature had corrupted it self in
Every kind of life, and brought the formed expressed Word into an Ens of
Vanity; this was the perverseness and violent selfe-willednesse of the natural
life, the Spirit of nature which takes its Original in the fire, had exalted
it self in its fiery property, and introduced it self in to a wrathful life,
and driven it self even to the utmost End of Meekness.

34. For the Devil was an insinuating predominant Prince in the wraths
property, which had incited and stirred up the Center of the outward nature in
the fires Matrix, and had not only corrupted the Natural life of man, but
also the creatures; for he Moved and Acted Man in Gods Anger, who used the
creatures for their Service and food, so that the Curse, and the Vanity was
also manifest in Every life; and man in his Conversation stood in the Curse and
vanity, and so came in the vanity in the Curse even into the Abyss, viz. into
the End of this world, therefore said the Spirit; the End of all flesh in its
perverseness and violence is come before me: Every life had through the vanity
of man brought it self unto the End of the outward nature; and the Throat of
wrath was Open in Nature, and would devour and swallow up all things in the
wrath.

35. For the Kingdom of Gods Anger, viz. the dark world, had gotten the upper
hand in its property, and brought the Good part of Nature even unto the End,
therefore the formed expressed word did Move, or Repent through Every life of
this vanity, that it should bear the Abomination on it; and said, that it would
destroy the womb or pregnatresse of Vanity proceeding from the fires mother,
with- water, and break its power and force.

36. For before the Flood the fires-root was more strong and potent then the
waters root, and that, from the Original of the fiery Motion, that is, the
Fiat stood in the fiery property, and compacted the Earth and Stones, so that
there was then a great wrath powered forth in nature, and that by reason of the
Casting out, or Ejection of the Hierarch Lucifer into the darkness.

37. And Here by the flood or Deluge the force and violence was taken from the
wrathful fire-root, in the Center of Nature; for the Repenting or the Grieving
of the formed Word was Nothing else, but a Type of Christ, where the Eternal
living Divine word in the humane property, did repent and grieve in the formed
Creaturall word, at our Sins, and Vanity, and Dyed from the vanity.
mortified the same vanity in his Death in the creature; and drowned the formed
creaturall word in the humane property with the divine water of love and
meekness in the holy heavenly Blood.

38. So also in this place, the formed Word grieved at the vanity of the
Creatures, in that they were laden therewith, and brought the life of all the
Creatures into death; and in its Sorrow moved the meekness of the water-Source
in Nature, so that all the fountains of the deep did open themselves, as Moses
says, and devoured the fire-source in the water: this signifies unto man the
Baptism of Christ, where the fire-source of the Soul in Gods Anger was in the
word of Christ's Covenant baptized with the Regenerated water of the Spirit,
understand the Spiritual water, which shall quench the fire of Gods Anger: As
it was above mentioned concerning the Seven times, that Each time of the
Seven degrees of nature, has brought it self unto its End, and in the End
there was a sorrow for the Abomination, and in the Repentance and Sorrow the
Turba was broken and destroyed.

39. Now behold here aright, by Noah with the Flood the Second Time, viz. Seths
time was at the End; and with Adam in the fall, when he lusted to Eat of the
vanity, the First time was at the End.

40. In Adam the Word repented, and gave it self with a Covenant into the
life, to help comfort and restore the life; and by Noah the word repented and
moved all the fountains of the deep in nature, and drowned the wrath, and
opened the Covenant of Grace.

41. And when the time of Enos was at the End in the days of the children of
Nimrod, the word grieved at the vanity of Man, that they would not know God,
and drowned the Understanding of the one Only Tongue, and divided it, and gave
Or, out of.
by its Repentance the certain Understanding in the Covenant with Abraham.

42. And when the time of Cainan was at the End, that the children of Abraham's
Covenant were compelled in the Vanity of Servitude: the Word grieved at the
Vanity, and destroyed Pharaoh, and afterward all the men of the children of
Israel in the Wilderness, save Joshua and Caleb, and gave them, out of its
Sorrow and Repentance, the Law of his Covenant, a True Type of Christ, who
should drown the Abomination in his Blood.

43. Thus also when Mahalaleels Time was come to the End, the Word grieved in
the deepest Repentance, and brought the life of God in Christ Jesus into the
formed Creaturall Word in the humane Ens, and drowned the Turba in the humane
Ens, with Gods Love and Mercy, and gave them the spirit of comfort, and the
Gospel.

44. Thus Even Now also; where the Time of Jared is at the End, which has been
covered with Babel: Even now at this present, the Word does Repent and grieve
at Our great Vanity, and will destroy the Abomination with the devouring jaws
of wrath: with Sword, hunger, fire, and death, and Gives, out of its Sorrow,
grief, and Repentance, a Lilly out of Enochs mouth in Gods sweetness.

45. And when Enochs line shall be at the End, that the vanity does again grow
in the Turba: then comes the greatest grief and sorrow of all, upon the Nature
of the wonders; that it is at the End, and there is no more any Remedy for it;
Even then comes the Last Motion Or, of.
with the Turba in the first Principle of the Eternal Nature, and swalloweth
up the outward Nature in the fire: Even then the formed Word shall be wholly
freed from vanity, and gives From, or out of.
by its last REPENTANCE the Holy Spiritual World. AMEN.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Covenant between God and Noah.
1. GOd said to Noah, I will establish a Covenant with thee, and thou shall go
into the Ark with thy Sons, Genesis VI.18.
and thy Sons wives with thee. A Great pregnant and remarkable Example we have
here in Noah, and his Children: the Covenant was made with Noah; for his spirit
was a discovery or beaming forth of the formed word in him, in the Beginning
and End of Time: and the beginning and End was the Eternal word, which had
espoused it self in the Covenant, in which Covenant the Soul of Noah, viz. the
formed word of the Eternal Nature, found Grace, and obtained the Confirmation
of the Covenant of Grace.

2. As his Name does properly and peculiarly signify in the language of
Nature, a Beholding of the Beginning and End. In this same Beginning and End,
viz. in the Eternal Speaking Word of the Father, which would manifest and open
it self again in the humane life, Grace was opened and presented to Noah, so
that God did establish and Confirm the Covenant with him.

3. And here we have a very Excellent, and an Emphaticall example, which is
exceedingly worth the mentioning, in the Three Sons of Noah, which in their
Properties were sprung forth from the Stock of Adam in a threefold Line; for we
see that three Nations [Severall Sorts of People] did arise from them, and that
God did include them all Three with their wives in the Covenant of Grace, and
commanded them also to go into the Ark, into the Second Monarchy, and did not
exclude the fleshly Ham.

4. This is first highly to be considered, that a Gate of Grace stands open
to all men, and that God has not Set any Election or Predestination in nature;
but the Election or choice does arise out of the free will, when it turns it
self from the Good into the Evil.

5. Secondly it is a Type of the Three Principles, viz. Sem is a type of the
Spiritual light-world in the Covenant; and Japhet of the fire-world, which
should be a Sojourner of the light-world, and a Mirror of the great Joy in the
light-world; and Ham is a figure of the Limus of the Earth, to which the Curse
and the Anger of God does hang; all these Three, God took into the Covenant
with Noah, and brought them into the Arc.

6. For Every man has these three worlds upon him, and in him; and the
Covenant in the word was therefore given, that the whole man should be Redeemed.

7. For Japhet Signifies the fire-Soule; and Sem the Image of God out of the
light-world, viz. the spirit out of the Holy word; and Ham betokens the Limus
of the Earth with the outward Dominion or Region of the Air, and of the
magical Etheriall Constellations, together with the Body, which shall be freed
by the Covenant from the Curse, and arise again out of the Earth. The three
Brothers were a type of these three Principles.

8. Not that One did wholly arise out of one Principle alone; No! Sem and
Japhet had likewise Hams property in them, as did plainly manifest it self
afterward in the Jews, who became so wicked and vile a people: Only we speak
here of the Superior Dominion or predominant property, of which Principle the
Creature has had in the outward life in its figure.

9. Ham had the outward earthly Elementall Kingdom in the figure, which stood
in the Curse; therefore his Image [or person] was also Cursed of his father, in
the spirit; for the earthly Image shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, but he
also had a Soul from Adam, which stood in the Covenant; but the free will does
very Seldom work any Good thing in such a Lodging, and very easily attains the
Curse upon the soul, as we see that the Curse did afterward come upon this
Generation; that Israel must destroy them by their Entrance into the Land of
Promise; albeit they did not wholly destroy them all, yet the Curse was come
upon them.

10. There is a very great Mystery in the Ark of Noah, which the Lord commanded
him to build after that manner, and showed him how High, How Long, and how
Broad, it should be, and directed also that it should have Three Several
stories; also concerning the Creatures which he commanded him to bring
thereinto; which is such a Mystery, that the wicked malicious man is not worthy
to know it: and we also shall not mention it in the ground [or depth of its
meaning] for it has its Time wherein it shall be opened, viz. in the
Lilly-time, when Babel has its End; but yet to set down somewhat for a
furtherance and direction to our fellow-Branches, to whom in its due time it
shall break forth and grow out of Our Ens of this Lilly (which also shall be a
Rose in the lilly-time) we will set it down in an hidden Exposition.

11. The Mystery of the holy Trinity; also the Three Principles: also the Three
Sons of Noah, also the Three men that appeared to Abraham in the Plain of
Mamre; also the Vision of the Great Temple in Ezekiel; and the whole Revelation
of John belongs unto this figure; also the Temple of Jerusalem.

12. Set before thee, the figure of the Arc with its Three Stories, with its
height, length, and breadth, and place it in the Three Principles; and in the
three Principles open the Mysteries of the Or, Hierarchies.
Hierarchy of Christ in the Three distinctions of Heavens, which yet are only
One; but in three properties; as Fire, Light, and Air, are Three; and yet but
One: Place in these distinctions [or Several differences] the Three Sons of
Noah; and go out of their properties into their Monarchy in the world, which
continues to the End of days: also set before thee the formed Word according
to all the Three Principles; and so you will find the Ground of all:
especially Set before thee, Moses, Elias, and Christ, in their appearance, and
Transfiguration upon the Mount: the Ark of Noah is the first Type of all these
figures; and the Hierarchy of Christ is the fulfilling of them at the End of
days: enough to ours.

13. And the Lord said, come thou and thy whole house into the Ark, Genesis VII.1.
for thee have I seen Righteous before me at this Or, Generation.
time: The Scripture says elsewhere, Before thee none living is righteous if
thou will impute sin: but here God says, I have Seen thee righteous before me
at this time: the Creature was not the Righteous One, without Evil; but HE,
who at this time did in Noah open and manifest himself out of the Covenant,
who grieved at the evil of this time, and introduced his Sorrow into Gods Love
and Mercy, and so brought the Righteousness of the mercy into the Sorrow, and
manifested the Grieving mournful Spirit in the Ens of the Covenant in the
creature; thus Noah was righteous before God at this time, when the Covenant
did move it self in him.

14. This time is (or signifies) the motion of the Covenant, which made Noah
righteous, for this was the time. When Noah received Life in the womb, the
spirit looked with his first glimps of life out of the Divine Ens of the formed
word into the Beginning whence the life was come, and into the End which was
the Kingdom of Christ: in this Aspect [or Divine glimps] the life of Noah
receives the Righteousness in the Mark of the Covenant at this time, for that
was the time in him wherein he was found Righteous.

15. God brought Eight persons into the Arc, and of the clean Beasts Or, Seven
pair.
Seven and Seven, the male and its female. The Seven persons point at the seven
properties of the natural life, that God will have children out of all the
properties into his Eternal Ark; the Eighth person was Noah, and in Noah was
the Righteous One, that was the Covenant, out of which the Kingdom of Christ
should come, therein stood the Ark of Noah; but the Ark has three Stories,
which are the three Principles in one only Divine manifestation, for each
property of the three has its own peculiar Heaven and Certain Quite in it
self.

16. The Seven pair of clean Beasts, are Even the very same Mystery, for the
Center has Seven properties, and yet they are but one in the Divine Power: but
according to the Eternal nature there are Seven of them as to the Divine
manifestation: which signifies unto us, that the Creatures were brought forth
into life out of this Sevenfold Ens, where each degree has again Seven in it,
to its manifestation, whence the infiniteness, viz. the form of Gods wisdom,
does appear, and shine forth, and that in the formed wisdom, whose Image and
figure shall not vanish or perish, although their life, and the creature, which
has a Temporal beginning, does pass away, but the The Form shall remain in
the Figure.
form shall remain in the Divine wisdom, viz. in the Ens of the formed Word in
the Figure, to the Praise of Gods wondrous deeds; indeed not to a restoration
of their Creature, but for a visible mirror or Looking-glass in the formed
wisdom of God.

17. But of the unclean Beasts God commanded Noah to take only one Pair of
each kind with him into the Ark: understand it thus, the unclean Beasts have
on one part, their Original out of the Limus of the Earth according to the
Grossnesse, viz. according to the dark worlds property; although their spirit
takes its rise out of Nature, yet we are to consider the difference in nature
in respect of that which came forth, in the Verbum Fiat out of the Source of
the dark worlds property, into a Compaction, whence such an Ens does adhere
unto many an unclean creature, and it signifies unto us in the Right
Understanding, that the dark world, viz. the unclean world shall appear before
the wisdom of God only in one manifest form, viz. in the darkness, but the
properties shall be manifest only in the creatures themselves each in its own
peculiar Self and nature.

18. For the formed wisdom as to the darkness is the Heaven of them all,
which is only manifest according to the darkness, wherein the property lies
hidden, according to which God calls himself an angry zealous God: out of
this dark heaven, Every creature receives its Power and virtue according to
its property, according as its hunger is, so it sucketh with its desire from
thence: and it signifies unto us, that the unclean Beasts each kind of them
in their form, shall appear only in One form in the wisdom of the
darkness, viz. in the figure, as they were created in the beginning, and not
in Seven properties according to the Center of nature, in all (properties
according to light, and darkness) as the rest shall; for they are in the
figure of the first Principle, which in the pure heaven shall be manifest only
in one property viz. according to the burning [property] wherein the Light is
Moveable and formable.
Moved, and the wisdom formed.

19. But here I will warn the Reader to understand our sense and meaning
aright, and not to put me Calves, Cowes, and beasts, in their spirit and Body,
into heaven; I speak only of the Eternal formed wisdom whence Evil and good
has been brought to manifestation.

20. Moreover God said to Noah; for yet seven days will I cause it to rain
upon the Earth forty days, and forty nights; and every living Substance which
I have made will I destroy from off the face of the Earth; wherefore did God
say after seven days the flood shall come? why not presently, either sooner or
later; why does he set even Seven days: In this the Seven properties of
nature are contained mystically, in which the Verbum Fiat had introduced it
self into an Ens viz. into the formed Word; that is, into the creation of the
world; in which Creation the Formed Word Repented at the vanity of all
creatures, and moved it self through the generatresse of Nature, in the Formed
Word to destroy the Turba.

21. Now the first motion, and information of the word in the creation with the
Six days works and the day of Rest being Seven days, was brought into a form
of Time, and it yet stood so, in its form; now then when the word (which said
it would drown every life with water) did open disclose and manifest it self,
through the Seven properties of nature to the waters-birth, it came to pass
in the Form wherein the word had given in it self with the Creation viz in
the same Seaven-fold operation, which should open it self in its own peculiar
order, and not enkindle or elevate any one property above the other; but if all
Seven would open and manifest themselves according to the waters-birth; then
the Only fountain or head-spring of all the deeps in the Center of nature
should break open: and being they came in Seven days into their outward formed
working Dominion; the Speaking word did also proceed in the opening thereof in
Seven days unto the limit for its manifestation of that which it desired; as
namely to drown the Turba.

22. And let none look upon this as a fiction or laugh at it, for whosoever
does so, does not yet understand our spirit and meaning at all, nor has any
knowledge at al of the Formed Word, but has only an external understanding
of nature (like a brute Beast) or a Bird that flies in the air, and knows
not what the essence is.

23. Now says reason: wherefore did it Rain just forty Days and forty
Nights; could not God have drowned the world in one hour?

Answ: In the space of forty days the Turba was borne in the humane property,
viz. Adam before his Eve stood in the Image of God forty days and nights,
which yet in the Image of God were only as one Day; there he wrought forty
days in his desire, viz. in the Fiat, and brought forth the Turba in himself,
in his lust after the Grossness of the Earth: the Good part of the Limus of
the Earth, which was drawn, in the Verbum Fiat, into a Mass, did hunger after
the Evil gross part which was of the dark worlds property.

24. And even in forty days the grosseness did arise in his Imagination in the
good Ens: viz. a selfefull will to the perception or intromission of the gross
earthliness, in which Evil and Good was made manifest, and when this same
wills-spirit was arisen in the desire, it entered into its own selfefull
Dominion, and in its fiery and earthly might, strongly suppressed the holy
Spiritual Ens in the word of Power, even then Adam fell asleep viz. into an
impotency and disability of the Angelical Spiritual world, and the woman was
taken out of him; and both were in this Turba Text, figured.
formed unto the outward natural life.

25. This Turba is that wherein God did also set the Curse; which with Noah was
first at the End; when God said; the End of all flesh is come up before me:
and out of this forty-dayes-produced Turba, the fountains of the deep did
arise in the water-Source and drowned the Turba in the flesh of these Sexes.

26. For from the Sin of Adam came the Deluge over the world; and this
forty-dayes-produced Turba was the Sin in the flesh; otherwise if the
water-fountaine had not opened it self, the fire-fountain had proceeded forth
out of the Turba in the wrath of God. Therefore God said; it repented him that
he had made the creatures; and his Sorrow went into the Turba, and drowned it.

27. And let the Reader be put in mind, that so often as he finds the number
forty in the holy Scripture, that it altogether, in the Beginning points at
the forty days produced Turba: viz. the forty Days of Moses upon mount Sinai:
Item; the forty years in the wilderness: also the forty hours of Christ in
the Grave: also the forty days after his resurrection before his Ascension,
do all belong unto this: and all the numbers forty in the Secret and mystical
prophetical sayings of the Prophets: for out of this Turba the Prophet is
arisen with his Prophecy.

28. But in that I say, that if the water-fountaine had not been opened, the
fire-fountaine would have broken forth: is also true: for the children in the
Turba would have also burnt Noah in the Arc with fire, if the most high had
not hindered and prevented them with the water: for the fires Turba was moved in
them: this was the worlds end or the end of all flesh: for at the End all shall
be purifyed and purged in the fires Turba: for it will enkindle it self.

29. There is a very great Mystery in that which the Spirit says in Moses:
Noah was five hundred years old when he begat Sem Ham and Japhet, which
otherwise is against the ordinary Course of nature, to beget children in such a
natural Age; also there is a very great mystery in that God said that he would
give the world an hundred and twenty years respit, and yet the Deluge came in
the Six hundredth year of Noah, viz. in the hundredth year after the warning or
notice thereof, and it signifies the abbreviation of time in its natural
course, and also the End of the world, how that there shall be an abbreviation
or shortning of time in the Circle of the conclusion of all Beeings, Quere this
Treatise by it self.
of which we will mention something in a Treatise by it self, if the same be
permitted us.

30. When Noah entered into the Ark; Moses says: Verse. 16.
the Lord shut him in: the intimate signification of the Spirit here, is: He
shut up the Second time or Age of the world, which was at the End, being the
fire would feign have moved it self, therefore the Lord shut it up with water,
and herewith also [he opened] the Gate of his Entrance to go forth in the
Third time, and begin the Second Monarchy in the outward world: for the first
time was in Paradise; the Second under Seths manifestation: in the third Enos's
manifestation should be opened, and set forth.

31. And Moses says further: Chap. VIII. verse. 3.1.2.
and the waters stood upon the Earth one hundred and fifty days, then God
remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in
the Arc; and God caused a wind to pass over the Earth and the waters
assuaged, and the fountains of the deep and the windows also of heaven were
stopped. Moses says, God Remembered Noah: now reason thinks, had he then
forgotten him? whereas he is present to all things, and is himself through
all, and in all things: the Spirit in Moses does here hang a veil before the
Mystery, that the natural man does not understand it.

32. Gods Remembrance here is the beginning of the Third Time, even the
Beginning of the Second Monarchy in the four Elements with the creatures: for
in the Covenant made with Noah the Second Monarchy was comprehended, which went
forth out of the Center of the Generatresse through the divine wisdom in
Nature.

33. And Moses speaks further: Verse. 4.
when the waters were abated the Arc set it self down upon the Mount Ararat.
This Name [ ARARAT] does plainly hint unto us in the language of nature a
mountain, or a Compacting and an Amassing of an Essence out of the Center of
nature, even out of the wrathfulnesse, being the Anger of God had then reposed
it self there; the Arc stood upon the Allayed Anger, but the last Syllable in
this word Ara-RAT, does signify that the wrath of the eternal nature
proceeding from the Center, has betook or formed it self into an active
Dominion, and would thence forward ride through nature, as a warrior; and
mightily exercise its Power and violence in the humane property, whereby they
would undertake wars, and advance themselves in Pride Pomp and Power, and
butcher and slay one another, Eagerly Contending about this mountain of the
wrath's Might, or Severe humane Authority.

34. This Mountain Ararat denotes the Houses of the Great ones, or domineering
Potentates upon the Earth, viz. the Great Castles, Forts and Bulwarks; the
mighty mountains of the Power violence and strength of the Rich; and also the
high Nobility sprung up from the mystery of the Great world; upon which
Kingdom the Arc of Noah has set down it self, but the Covenant with Noah I
mean the Kingdom of Christ, has set it self to be an Eternal Lord over
this mountain of the warlike might, and force of Arms sprung up from the
Anger of God, which dominion and Reigning Power of Christ, shall abolish and
take away the Kingdom of this Mountain, and quite suppress it: and it
denotes unto us truly, fundamentally, and exactly; that this Power and
Authority would take upon it, in its own Power, the Arc of Noah, viz. the
Divine Covenant, and carry it: yea put it on as a Garment, and proudly perch up
it self therein, as if it had the Kingdom of Christ in its own Power.

35. And also it shows and denotes unto us, how that this mountain of the
wrathful Anger of God in the humane property [or in man's Nature] would
beautify trim up and adorn it self with the Arc of Noah; and would
proclaim it to be the holy Arc of Christ; and yet it would be only founded
upon the wrathful Anger, and be only an Antichristian Kingdom: which indeed
would Carry the Ark viz. the Name of divine holiness in the mouth, but its
Heart would be only this Mountain, A Vessel, and Confused heap of Gods
wrath; and yet it would make devout shows of holiness, and glory in having the
Ark upon it self, but the Aim and intent of the heart would be set upon the
Strong Holds; the preferment power and Riches of the world.

36. Furthermore it denotes, that the Potent, and Mighty of the world would
build the Arc, viz. the Service and Worship of God upon their Heart and
Reason, with Great Stone-houses, and Churches, and that these houses thus built
up of Stone, should be their God, whom they would Serve in the Ark, and they
would wage war for the houses of Stone of their own contriving and framing, and
for their devises and Opinions therein maintained; and contend about the figure
of the true Ark, and not consider, that the Arc stands upon their mountain;
that God has set it above them; and that they ought to walk under Gods
Dominion in humility and suffer the Ark to stand upon them, and not usurp unto
themselves the Power of the holy Ghost, or take it away, and bind him unto
their feigned Power and hypocritical forms, and command him to be Silent, as
they do, in that they cry with full mouth: lo! here is an assembly of
Divines; here is the true Church of Christ, this you must believe and do, This
is the law and Ordinance of the Church; no, the Ark stands above them, they are
under as the Mount Ararat was underneath the Arc: Christ is the Arc; and not
the Contrived Heaps of Stone; or any form of man's devised Worship or Opinion.
All Assemblies, Congregations or Synods are under the Ark Christ, and not
above, for the Arc of Noah placed it self above the Mountain, to Signify
that the mountain must bear the Arc: we must bear the Arc of Christ upon
us, and have the Temple of this Arc within US*

37. Furthermore, it denotes how the figure of this Arc, viz. the
Ecclesiastical Clergicall Priesthood.
Spiritual Kingdom upon the Earth would place it self upon the mountain of
power domination and lordlinesse, and would rule with the Mountain in the Ark;
and take upon it self to meddle with the worldly Dominions and authority; and
bring the mountain, viz. the Power of the Secular Arm above the Ark: whereas
the Ark ought to stand upon the mountain, and Noah with the Covenant to
remain in the Ark, till the Lord bid him come forth, that is, till Christ
deliver the Ark to his Father.

38. And Moses says further, At the end of forty days, Ver. 6, 7.
when the Ark had set it self down, Noah sent forth a Raven, to see whether
the water was abated, but the Raven flew too and fro till the waters were dried
up from off the face of the Earth: The Raven denotes the earthly Man, and
shows, how that he would first put forth himself upon the Mountain Ararat,
that is, advance himself in his Selfe-hood, and earthly lust, and build up his
Kingdom in the Second Monarchy.

39. And though he came forth out of the Ark, yet he would fly to and again in
the Kingdom of his Selfe-hood, and not return^ into the Ark, from whence he
departed in Adam, and would only be a covetous Muck-worm, and a greedy
devourer of fleshly temporal pleasure in his own will, and remain as the
Raven, and not return to the Ark, desiring to enter into it, but mind only
to possess the Kingdom of this World in Glory and State: also it betokens
that the Generation of this Raven would have the chief place, pre-eminence, and
Government, in the Second Monarchy (like the Devil in the wrath of God) as
Histories witness that it so came to pass.

40. Afterward he sent forth a Dove from him, to see if the waters were abated
upon the Earth, Ver. 8, 9.
but when the Dove found no Rest for the Sole of her foot, she returned again
unto him unto the Arc, and he put forth his hand and took her to him into the
Ark. This sets forth and denotes the figure of Gods children; who soon after
come also under the Government of the Ravens property, and are brought into the
Government of this world, for they are also with Adam gone forth out of the Ark
to behold and prove this Evil corrupt world, and live therein; but when their
Spirit can find no rest in the earthly dominion, then they come again before
the Ark of Noah, which is set open in Christ, and Noah receives them again in
Christ, into the first Ark, whence Adam departed.

41. Moreover the Raven betokens the sharp Law of Moses, in the fiery Might
under Gods Anger, which binds, and slayes man, and brings him not into the
Ark: but the Dove betokens the Gospel of Christ, which brings us again into the
Ark, and saves the life: for the Mount ( Ararat) does as an exact type and
figure, point out unto us the Kingdom of Moses, and the Ark wherein the life
was kept and preserved, signifies the humanity of Christ.

42. And he stayed yet other Seven days, and again he sent forth a Dove out
of the Ark, and it came to him about Evening, and lo! Ver. 10, 11.
she had plucked off an Olive-leaf, and brought it in her mouth: and he stayed
yet other seven days, and let a Dove fly forth out of the Arc, which returned
not to him any more. The Spirit in Moses shows by these Three Doves, and the
Raven, which Noah sent forth out of the Ark, a great Mystery, which albeit he
does not clearly unfold, yet for certain is couched therein; the Raven does
also denote the Law of Moses in Nature, which will remain in its Self hood,
and will not return in true Resignation, and Self-denial, under the
obedience of God, but will enter in to God by its own strength, Power, and
ways.

43. The first Dove signifies the prophetical spirit, which arose under
Moses, viz. under the outward Law, and offerings, and pointed through the
offering into the Ark of Noah, and Christ, this Prophetical Spirit went all
along through the office of Moses: it indeed flew under Moses, but it tended
again into the Ark with its Prophecy, as the first Dove which Noah sent forth
flew indeed into the world, but came again into the Ark of Christ.

44. The Second Dove with the Olive branch which also came again to Noah into
the Ark, denotes the Word in the Covenant of Noah, which came forth out of the
holy Ark of God into this world, viz. into our humanity, and plucked off an
Olive-leafe in the World, and brought it to Noah, that is, it pulckt off a
Branch from our Humanity, and took it into the holy Word, viz. the Mouth of God
(as the Dove the Olive-leaf) and brought the branch to Holy Noah, that is, to
God the Father, but that it was an Olive-leaf, denotes the Unction of the holy
Spirit, that the same should Anoint the Humanity, and bring it again with this
Dove into the holy Ark.

45. The Third Dove which Noah let fly, which came not again to the Ark,
betokens the Kingdom of Antichrist upon the Earth, which indeed is flown
forth with its Doctrine out of the Ark, but its spirit remains only upon the
Earth, feeding upon the fat grass [upon the Riches, Honor, and beauty of this
world] and so it stays only in Selfehood [and returns not to the Ark] it
indeed makes devout shows of holiness to God, and gives good words, but the
man with its Senses and Reason will not forsake the world, and return again to
the Ark. They build themselves stately Palaces without the Ark for the
pleasure of the flesh, and are very zealous and devout in hypocrisy without
the Ark; they will be accounted children by an external Imputation of Grace,
and Adoption, but they will not enter into the Ark, but they say Christ is in
the Ark, he has purchased and paid all, we need only to comfort our Selves
therewith, he will bring us in well enough.

46. The other Party says; they have Christ in their Works of hypocrisy, they
take the Ark along with them when they fly out in their fleshly Pleasure: all
these remain without the Ark in this World, and return not to the Ark. This the
Third Dove denotes: for the Antichristian Kingdom walks demurely in the
shape of a Dove, and as a sheep, but it is only a figure and darksome shadow
of Christ's Kingdom, which consists in the Spirit in Power, and is really in
the Ark.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the beginning of the Second Monarchy, and of the Covenant of
God with Noah, and all creatures.
ANd Moses says: Then God spoke with Noah, Genesis VIII.16, etc. to the end.
and commanded him to go forth with Every living thing, Each with its Kind:
but Noah builded an Altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean Beast, and of
every clean Foul, and offered burnt-Offrings upon the Altar, and the Lord
Smelled a sweet Savor, and said in his heart, I will not henceforth curse the
Earth any more for man's Sake; for the Imagination of man's heart is evil even
from his youth, and I will not any more smite every living thing as I have
done, while the earth remains, Seed-time, and Harvest, cold, and heat,
Summer, and winter, Day and night shall not cease. Moses says that God smelled
a Sweet Savor, and Said in his Heart, he would not again curse the Earth, or
smite every living creature any more, for man's sake. This is a figure or
mystical Type, as is before mentioned in the Offering of Abel.

2. For his Heart is the word in the Covenant, which took the Prayer and
will-spirit of Noah through the holy fire in the Offering, and brought it in the
word to Substance; and withal smelled in the Divine Power, the humanity of
Christ, who was to Resign himself in the Covenant into the Word of Power;
that is, it desired to have the humanity in his Power and virtue as a pleasant
Savor; and from this Smell [or sweet savor of holy Rest in the Paradisicall
property] the Spirit of God declared, that he would not again destroy Man and
the Creatures any more; so long as the Earth should endure, these Creatures
should also continue.

3. For Noah offered all manner of clean beasts, and foul; and the Spirit
says, that he Smelled herein a sweet savor of rest: now [he does not mean]
that he took pleasure in the Smell or Savor of the offering, for all Beasts are
in his Power and are continually before him; but he spoke it in reference to
the hidden offering in the Covenant, which the inward world in the creatures did
smell, which hereafter would deliver them by its own peculiar That is, the
inward centrall fire, which shall purge the floor, and cristalize the Earth into
transparent Gold.
Offering from the abomination of vanity, and set their figure into the holy
wisdom, viz. into the spiritual world.

4. When Noah offered, then the Lord (that is, God manifested in the Offering by
the unmanifest holy Name JEHOVAH through JESUS) did Smell the holy disappeared
humanity in Adam; that is, he did taste in the Lubet or good pleasure of his
wisdom, how the same should be again manifest in the holy Name Jesus. And then
he blessed Noah and his Children, and said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the earth; and the fear and dread of you be upon every Beast of the
Earth, Genesis IX.1, 2, 3.
and upon every Foul of the air; Even upon all* that creeps upon the Earth;
and upon all the Fishes of the Sea; into your hands they are all delivered;
Every living thing shall be meat for you; Even as the green Herb I have given
you all things, but the flesh Or which yet lives in the blood.
with the life thereof, that is, with the blood thereof, you shall not eat; for
I will require the blood of your lives, of every Beast will I require the same;
and at the hand of every man, will I require the life of man, being that he is
his brother; and whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
for God created man in his own image: And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply,
and be industrious upon the earth, that you may increase abundantly.

5. When God blessed Noah through the Offering proceeding from the Covenant, and
bad them be fruitful, he gave them again the whole world, withal its Hosts
in possession; all whatsoever lives and moves, should be Subservient to them,
and be their own; and he gave it them all in common, he made there no
difference between Noah and his children, no Master.
Lord nor servant, but he made them all alike, none noble or ignoble; but like
as many branches and twiggs grow out of one Tree, and yet all together are but
one only Tree; so also he established the humane Tree upon the Earth, and gave
them all beasts, fishes, and fowls in common, with no distinction,
restriction, or prohibition, save only that they should not eat their life in
the blood, least they should become monstrous in their life Or with the Eating
the life of the B^asts.
with the bestiall life.

6. God Commanded them to rule over all the Beasts, and Creatures, but in this
place he gave them no peculiar Domination, or ruling Power over one another:
for all Domination, Lordly rule, and authority, whereby one man rules over
another, does arise out of Ararat, that is, from or through the Order of
nature, according to its properties, according to the Constellations, and
outward Dominion of the Princes under the Constellations, or Astrum.

7. The true Image of God has no other Dominion in its members, then the Body
has in its members, or the Tree in its branches, but the beastiall Image from
the Stars, and four Elements, makes it self a Dominion and Government,
according to its mother, whence it takes its rise, and wherein it lives.

8. Also all Laws, and external Ordinances which God has appointed man, do
all belong unto the Order of nature, viz. unto the expressed formed Word, the
same, God has given man for a propriety, that he should rule therein with the
inward spiritual man of Understanding, according to the wisdom of God, and
make himself [Lawes and] Order according to the spirit of wisdom.

9. Over which Orders and Ordinances of men, which they make unto themselves,
HE [viz. the Lord] has set himself as Judge, and thereupon has appointed the
Last Judgment, to separate wrong from right, and whatsoever proceeds not
from Truth, Righteousness, and Love, and tends to the same, against that the
judgment of God is set; for it is generated or hatched through the false
spirits of darkness in Turba Magna, and introduced into the humane property as
a false Lust and Suttlety; and is a stranger or Bastard wisdom, which shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God.

10. All Royal, and Princely Highness and Excellency, together with all
Governments, and Dominions, do arise from the Order of nature, in the Image of
God there is no compulsion [no force violence or oppression] but a mere free
willing desirous Love-Service, as one member in the body, or as one branch of
the Tree does freely and readily serve each other, and rejoice in each other.

11. But being that man has introduced himself into the outward formed Word
Evil and Good, viz. into the Kingdom of nature; the Kingdom of nature has
deprived him of the holy Dominion; and has placed it self with its power over
the humane property; therefore if he will have the same again, he must be
borne anew of God, and then he may rule with the new regenerated life in the
Spirit of God, over the Kingdom of nature.

12. Indeed there are Orders of Princely Angels or Hierarchies, in the
Spiritual world; but all without compulsion in one Harmonious delightful
Love-Service and will; as one member in the body does readily serve another.

13. All whatsoever man in the Kingdom of nature does draw under his power,
and abuses it to Superfluity, and excess; and thereby withdravveth from his
fellow members, whereby they are put to want, poverty, and distress, and their
freely given, right, and due, is wholly withheld from them; the same is
imprinted [or comprehended] in Turba magna, as an abomination of nature, and
put into the judgment of God, to the day of Separation.

14. Nature requires only Order, and gives distinction of places and
Offices; but the Turba brings its abomination from the dark worlds desire,
thereinto; viz. Pride Covetousness Envy Anger and falsehood.

15. These five vices or iniquities, are the Whores Bratts in the Kingdom of
nature, and shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; God holds the Kingdom of
nature, for his Order, and has given the same into the power of man, that he
[as Gods instrument in this vvorld] should sever the Evil from the Good, and
choose himself a Judge to pass righteous judgment upon the iniquity and
malice of the false desire and lust [of man], for he says; whosoever sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; viz. by the Order and institution
of nature; not that any should revenge himself upon others by his own selfish
power or force of Arms; but through the Order of nature, through Gods Law, and
appointment; the same is the true Avengeresse; for God said, I will avenge your
life's blood, and will avenge it upon every beast; here he means, by the Order
of his Law and its Officers who officiate in the right and due execution of the
same.

16. Not that a Prince or Lord has Power to shed blood without the Law of God;
if he does so; then the Law of God condemns him also to Death. Here there is
no peculiar Selfefull Power given, over man's blood; let him be King or Prince;
for they are only Officers over the Order of the Divine Law, and they ought
not to go further then the Command of God gives leave: indeed they have the
Law of nature committed to their charge as Servants of the same, but they must
deal therein only according to righteousness, and truth, and not do any
thing through Selvish [covetous proud and envious] desire, for God has created
man in his own Image; now the Kingdom of nature in its Offices has no power
over this divine Image to kill the same, but the office or Commission in Gods
Order Or has power over.
passes only upon the outward Image of nature.

17. Therefore if an Officer of nature [ viz. any Magistrate] take away the
life of a righteous man; him, nature appoints unto the Judgment of God to
the Day of Separation, wherein God will judge all the unrighteous Acts of man:
what will then become of the Tyrants who turn the truth into Lies, and
shamefully abuse, and condemn the Children of God for their divine knowledge
and profession sake, and stir up war and Contention, to desolate and
destroy country and people: all these belong unto Turba Magna to the judgment
of God; for they manage the Sword of the Turba in selfefull Lust and pleasure;
unless the Spirit of God command them, and then must do it for their Office
and charge sake [and execute the just judgment of God upon those who have
filled up the measure of their iniquity] as Israel was commanded to do among
the Heathen.

18. Whosoever sheddeth blood out of his own pleasure to advance his authority,
without urgent absolute necessity or Gods command, he is moved, Acted, and
driven, by the wrathful fire of Gods Anger, and falls at last to be a
captive in the same Kingdom.

19. Every warrior [or Souldier] is a Rodd of Gods Anger; wherewith he does
through his wrath and Indignation, rebuke, and devour the iniquity and malice
of man: and it does not belong at all unto the Order [or ordinance] of nature,
but unto the wrathful desire, unto Turba Magna, unto the order of the eager
fierce-devouring wrath, whereby Gods Anger does overturne and lay waste
Countries and Kingdoms.

20. Understand, it is the Order of the dark worlds property, which by Gods
permission advances its mighty force in the Time of man's wickedness, and then
it goes as the wrath will have it, until the same be well satiated in the
blood of man.

21. For this is even the Revenge of Gods Anger, of which he says, that, he
would take vengeance for [or require] the blood of man; therefore he often
takes one man and by him in Anger slays another that has deserved Death.

22. When the Great and potent Rulers shed innocent blood; then comes the
Anger of God with its Officers and sheddeth their peoples blood, and brings
the Sword of the Turba upon them, whence War arises; but this is not from
the divine Order of the Good Nature in which God Governs with his wisdom.

23. The wisdom of God desires no war, but the Anger of God according to the
dark worlds nature, does eagerly desire it, and effects the same in the
vanity and iniquity of man.

24. If we lived as the children of God one among another, we need not have any
warring and fighting; but that we wage war, we do thereby testify, and
declare, that we are only children of this world and fight for a strange
Inheritance, which yet we must forgo, and thereby we serve the God of Anger as
obedient Servants; for no warrior or Soldier shall inherit the Kingdom of
God, while he is such a one; but [he that is] a child newborn of the Spirit
of God, which forsakes this world.

25. And God said further to Noah, and to his Sons with him: saying, Lo I,
Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
even I establish my Covenant with you, and with your Seed after you, and with
every living creature that is with you, of the foul, and of the Cattle and of
every Beast of the Earth that is with you, even of all that came forth out of
the Arc; that hence forth all flesh shall not any more be cut off by the
waters of a flood; neither shall there any more come a flood to destroy the
Earth; And God said, this is the token of the Covenant which I have made
between me and you, and every living creature that is with you from henceforth
for ever: I have set my Bow in the Clouds, the same shall be for a Token of a
Covenant between me and the Earth, and it shall come to pass, when I bring a
Cloud over the Earth, the Bow shall be seen in the Cloud; and then I will
remember the Covenant which is between me and you: This Covenant with man is a
type of the Three Principles of the divine Being, viz. of the Being of all
beings.

26. For the Rainbow is the Sign and token of this Covenant, that God does
here mind, and very intimately look upon, that man was created out of Three
Principles into an Image, and that he should live in all Three; and beheld now
the unability and great peril of mankind; and set the Sign of this Covenant
before him as a representation that his wrath should not any more be stirred so
to destroy every life.

27. For the Rainbow has the Color of all the three Principles; The Colors
of the three Principles in the Rainbow.
viz. the Color of the first Principle is red, and darkish-brown; which
betokens the dark and fire-world, that is, the first Principle, the Kingdom
of Gods Anger; the Color of the Second Principle is white, and yellow; this is
the majestaticall Color, Signifying as a type of the holy world, Gods Love.
The third Principles Color is Green and blew; blew from the Chaos, and green
from the water or Saltpeter; where, in the flagrat or Crack of the fire the
Sulphur and Mercury do sever themselves, and produce distinct various and
Several Colors which betoken unto us the inward spiritual Or world.
worlds, which are hidden in the four Elements.

28. This Bow is a figure of the last judgment showing how the inward
Spiritual world will again manifest it self and swallow up or Avall into it
self this outward world of four Elements.

29. And this is even the Sign or token of the Covenant of Grace, which Sign
in the Covenant betokens the Judge of the world, viz. Christ, who at the end
of Days will appear in all the three Principles, viz. according to the
fire-signe as a Severe Judge over the Turba, and all whatsoever shall be found
therein, he will manifest the fiery judgment, and enkindle the Turba, so that
the first Principle shall appear in its fiery property, for all things of this
worlds being, must be tried or purifyed in the fire of the first Principle viz.
in the Center of the Eternal nature; and even then the Turba of all beings
shall be swallowed up in the fire.

30. And according to the lights Sign he shall appear as a pleasant visage to
all the Saints even in the midst of the fire; and defend his in his Love and
meekness from the flames of the fire.

31. And according to the Kingdom of the outward nature of this world, he
shall appear in his assumed humanity; and the whole outward Mystery of the
four Elements according to Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, even according to all
the properties of the Wonders of the Expressed and formed Word, even all shall
be made manifest before him according to light and darkness [ viz. according
to their Good and Evil.]

32. Of this the Rainbow is a type and figure, for it is a reflex [Antitype]
or contra-glance of the Sun; showing what kind of property [or vertue] there
is in the deep; the Sun casts its shining Luster into the four Elements
toward the Chaos, and then the Chaos whence the four Elements do proceed
does manifest it self according to the Principles with its Colors: and it
denotes and points out the hidden or mystical Ground of the four Elements,
viz. the hidden world, and also the hiddennesse of the humanity; for in this
hiddenness [or Secret Mystery] of the Creation, God did set forth his Covenant,
that he would not destroy its Image any more with water; that the fountains of
the deep should not be any more opened in the Chaos, as came to pass in the
Flood, and in the Creation of the world,

33. The Rainbow is an opening of the Chaos in nature; and it may very well if
the Sun be in a Good Aspect in the Elements, produce and bring forth a
wonderfulll birth both in the vegetables, and Animalls; also there may thereby
be a creaturall Living Being produced in the (deep) even according to the
property of the Suns powerful influence; according as it finds in the
Elements a properry from the Astrum or Constellations either to Evil or good;
as oftentimes to worms, flies, grasshoppers, and the like, and also to a good
life according as Saturn, and Mercury are enkindled in their desire.

34. For when the Chaos does open it self, then the harsh-Astringent Saturnine
property does attract, as an hunger or desire, unto it self, and takes the
property of the Chaos (wherein the hidden Powers are contained) into its desire
and coagulates the same, and forthwith Mercury becomes quick in Sulphur, for
the Sun enkindleth the fiery Mars in its property, whereupon Mercury is stirred
up or becomes active; this, Saturn frames [Amasseth] into a body, viz. into
an Ens; now the Saltpeter cannot agree or unite it self with Mars, and
therefore there is a Severation or motion; and being that they cannot Or eskape.
get rid of Saturn viz. the Fiat of the outward world; it becomes a flying
life [or creature] according to the property of that same constellation.

35. Saturn [hath such a power or property in it as that it] may if the Sun be
in a good Aspect, take in, the distilling dew out of the Rainbow, into it
self, understand into the Saturnine property, which afterward falls upon the
water, which some fish do eat down, and Coagulate in them, whence precious
Pearls may arise.

36. Eor the Paradisicall property does open it self all along in the Chaos,
if it be not hindered by evil malignant Aspects: which Master The false
Philosopher or Sophister.
Wiseling will scarce believe: He can speak of the ground of nature exactly,
and has it at his fingers end, and yet is blind in the Mystery, and
understands not either the inward or outward [part of nature] for such, I have
not written any thing: for I need not such Text, Calves.
Animals to the understanding of my writings, but good clear quick-sighted
illuminated Eyes; unto all others they are dumb and absurd let them be as wise
and learned as they will.

37. The Chaos is the root of nature, and yeildeth of it self nothing else but
a good property, but if the Constellation be evil, the evil malignant desire
takes the good property into it self and changes it into evil; as a good
man among evil Company does change his good also into an Evil.

38. And the Rainbow is especially represented [or freely given] unto man, for
a Token of the divine Grace; so that he might behold and view himself as in an
open and perspicuous Glass, what he is; for the sign of Good and Evil is
manifest as a type of the Center of nature, out of which Evil and Good take
their rise, over which the Son of man was set by God, to be Judge.

39. For the Type or form of the Arc of Noah is also in the Rainbow; if we
were not blind it would plainly appear so unto us; also the Trinity of the
Deity is therein pourtrayed: for the red color betokens the Father, the
yellow and white the Son, and the blew the Spirit.

40. And God has set forth himself in a figure according to his manifestation
in the Sign of the Covenant, that we should fly unto his Grace, and receive
his Covenant, and be always mindful of his Revelation to come, where he will
again manifest the Spiritual world; as he has set it forth unto us by way of
Similitude in the Rainbow; to the end that we should see what is in Secret,
and how his Covenant is Eternally established with us in Secret, and stands
ever before him.

CHAP. XXXIV. How Noah cursed his Son Ham, and of the mystical Prophecy
concerning his Three Sons and their posterity.
AND Noah began to be an Husbandman, and planted a vineyard: and he drank of
the wine and was drunken, and lay uncovered in his Tent, Genesis IX. verse. 20, 21,
22, etc.
and Ham Canaans father saw the nakedness of his father, and told it his two
brethren without, and Sem, and Japhet took a garment, and laid it upon both
their shoulders, and went backwards, and covered the nakedness of their
father, and their faces were backwards, so that they saw not their fathers
nakedness; now when Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger Son
had done unto him; he said cursed be Canaan a servant of all servants he shall
be amongst his brethren; and he said further; blessed be the Lord God of Sem;
and let Canaan be his Servant; and God enlarge Japhet, and let him dwell in the
tents of Sem; and let Canaan be his Servant; This is an exact real Type of the
humane property according to the Three Principles or worlds: for the Spirit in
Noah speaks from the Center; and the Three Sons of Noah did now stand before
the Spirit in a figure; typifying what kind of People should arise from them.

2. By this figure the spirit of Noah prophesied or declared from the very
Stock or root of the formed word of the humane property, what the Second
Monarchy should be: Noah was drunk, and lay naked with his shame, at which his
Son Ham mocked and also declared it to his brethren, that they also should do
the like: here the Spirit intimates and points out, whence the Curse arose
upon Ham, viz. from the shame of his father.

3. For this was even the Abomination before Gods Holiness; out of which root
Ham and his generation viz. the man of vanity does arise, for in the Image of
God the shame is an abomination.

4. Therefore God commanded Abraham to be circumcised on this member, to show
that this member was not given to Adam in the beginning, and that it should be
again cut off from the Image of God, and not inherit the Kingdom of God; upon
which Cause and reason also, the Souls spirit is ashamed to uncover it.

5. But being that Adam did not stand in the Image of God when his Eve was made
out of him, it was hung upon him for to propagate in a beastiall nature and
kind; thereupon also this beastiall Tree viz. the fleshly spirit of vanity,
came to be propagated all along from this property, and adheres to man, the
figure of this was Ham, and therefore he mocked his own property in his father.

6. The Spirit of this property mocked its Ens which it had from the Center of
nature: it beheld it self in his fathers shame from whence it had its rise, as
in a looking-glass of its selfehood: and thus this spirit [of fleshly Ham]
forthwith brake forth as a Life of vanity and manifested what it self was;
viz. a scorn [disdain or mock-god] of heaven.

7. Which the Spirit of Gods Image in the formed word of the good Ens in Noah
did well know, and did awaken in him the fire-Centre of the Soul in the wrath,
and cursed this spirit of vanity; that it should not co-inherit in the Kingdom
of heaven: the Scoff-Spirit shall not possess the Kingdom of God, but be cut
off from the Image of God, that is from the outward Image of the formed
creature.

8. For the same property from whence the shame arises, is Good in it self;
but in Adams Imagination after the beastiall property it became Monstrous
Beastiall and Strange in the Image of God; and therefore this strange form and
shape shall not remain for ever.

9. From this strange false shape the Scorner or Scoff-Spirit did arise; the
Devil insinuated into the Figure of Hams strange spirit, and mocked at the
Heavenly Generatresse, that it was now even become a Monster in the Image of
God; and therefore the spirit of Noah cursed the false scoff-spirit [in Ham and
all his generation.]

10. Not that we are to understand that Ham was accursed in his Soul, and
Soules-spirit, but according to the figure [He and all his were accursed] in
the property of the reviling mocking Spirit, which brake forth and manifested
it self out of the monster; but He (that is the earthly Image of the Limus of
the Earth) should be hidden with its own self-will in the Image of God and be
only as a Servant, or instrument of the divine Image proceeding from the holy
Ens, the Earthly Spirit should not rule, but the heavenly, viz. the Soul with
its spirit; the Monster, that is, this vile reviling spirit must not be
manifest: but being the free will did awaken and stir up the Monstrous spirit,
which was only a scorner of the Mystery and hiddennesse in the Covenant; Noah
cursed Or it.
him, and said, he shauld be a Servant of his brethren.

11. For he said blessed be the God of Sem, and let Canaan be his Servant; God
enlarge Japhet and let him dwell in the tents of Sem: The God of Sem was he who
had espoused or incorporated himself with the Covenant in the Seed of the
woman; the figure and type of this (in the Spirit) was Sem; and Japhet was the
figure of the poor Soul captivated in the monster; God should let this
Japheticall (or Souls) property, dwell in the tents of Sem and enlarge it in
Sems figure.

12. But Hams figure according to the monstrous spirit should not have any
dominion or Reign in the life of the new birth, but be only as a servant or as
an instrument without self-will or any peculiar life of Selfeness, must serve
and administer to the use of the Spiritual Kingdom; in manner as the night is
hidden in the day, and yet it is really there, and yet so as if it were not; and
it is the Handmaid to the days operation and power.

13. Thus in like manner the Spirit did express how the three properties of
the humanity, viz. the woman's Seed, and the creaturall Souls Seed, and the
Earthly Seed in Hams figure, should stand in their place order and rule in the
Regeneration in the Spiritual Kingdom; and thereby it did declare and point
at the Kingdoms of the world, intimating that this same figure would all along
put forth it self in the Kingdom and Dominion of the Or mankind.
humanity upon the Earth, and thus keep its figure externally so long as
mankind should live in the dominion of the four Elements; as it has thus
fallen out.

14. For Sems figure passed in the Covenant upon Abraham and Israel, among whom
the word of the Covenant was manifested and spoken forth; and Japhets figure
went along in nature; viz. through the wisdom of nature in the Kingdom of
nature; whence the Gentiles arose, who looked upon the light of nature and Sems
lineage looked upon the light in the Covenant; thus Japhet, that is the poor
captive Soul which is of the Eternal nature dwelt in Sems tent, viz. under the
Covenant: for the light of nature dwells in the light of Grace and is a
tenant or inhabitant of the light of Grace, viz. of Gods light, it is even as a
form or framed Substance of the unformed un-comprehended Light of God.

15. And Hams line passed upon the Animal beastiall man proceeded from the
Limus of the Earth, in which was the curse; whence the Sodomiticall and almost
wholly brutish people did arise; who esteemed neither the light of nature, nor
the light of Grace in the Covenant.

16. This signifies and points out, the outward part of the Soul from the
spirit of this world; which in the regeneration in the Spiritual world shall
be a formed and very fixed will; which may not or desires not to rule in the
manner and condition of a Selfish peculiar Spirit; but shall be as a Servant
and Minister of the cre^turall Soul and Gods Spirit in the holy lights Image,
it shall not be manifest in any Selfe-full arrogative understanding of
Selfehood, but remain hidden, as the night is hidden in the day, and yet it is
really there.

17. For the Animal Soul shall not inherit the Kingdom of light; although it
shall and will be therein; yet it has no dominion or predominant virtue of its
Selfenesse; as an Instrument is a dead senseless thing in reference to the
master, and yet it is the masters Tool wherewith he makes what he pleases;
the same in like manner we are to understand concerning the Animal Soul in the
Regeneration.

18. But in the Time of the four Elements, it will have the upper hand and
Sway, for it has brought it self into a proper selfehood, and Imaginative
life of Selfish propriety; and therefore God has accursed it, and condemned it
to Death; so that it must dye to Selfe-hood.

19. For when Adam did awaken the earthly properties out of the Limus of the
Earth in his desire, so that they went forth out of their just accord and
mutual Harmony, each of them into its own self-will and lust, to behold, and
look upon its Self as a peculiar selfe-Life; the beastiall Soul was hereby
brought to its predominant power and force; and this same is Hams property;
which God has ordained to be Servant under the Angelical Kingdom; and Cursed
its jeering Scorning Power; in that it did mock at the heavenly Matrix, and set
forth its own figure and form.

20. The Spirit says in Moses; that Sem and Japhet took a Garment upon their
shoulders and went backwards to their Father and covered him; Gen IX. Verse. 23.
so that their faces were turned backwards and they saw not his shame. O thou
wonderful God! How very Mystically and Secretly do thou carry thy works: who
would know and understand thy ways if thy spirit did not lead us, and open the
understanding.

21. Both these brothers took a garment upon their shoulders and covered the
father: wherefore did not one do it alone? or wherefore did Noah drink
himself drunk? and lay so naked with his shame? This, reason looks upon, as
if there were nothing more in it, but only an Hystory of such an Act: but
being that Ham was thereby cursed, and made to be a Servant of his brethren,
and not only he, but also all his posterity out of him; we see thereby very
clearly what the Spirit does hereby signify; viz that it is a Type Character
and figure of that which should afterward come to pass.

22. The Earthly spirit, which the Devil had made monstrous, was a Scorner and
jeerer of the heavenly birth; it indeed saw the shame which it must bear upon
it as a Monster, but He went away as a Beast, and mocked the new regeneration
of the heavenly Matrix; but Japhet viz. the poor Soul, and Sem, that is, the
disappeared Heavens Image, which was moved stirred or quickened again in the
Covenant, they took a Garment upon their shoulders: this Garment was the new
humanity which should open it self out of the Covenant out of the Angelical
world.

23. And they went backwards, and covered the Fathers shame; this intimates
and betokens that the free will of Self, must and shall wholly turn it
self away from the beastiall Monster of Selfefulnesse and ownhood wherein the
shame stands open, and enter again into the Resigned filiation or
child-ship; and go no more forwards but retire again backwards, and must take
the Garment of the new humanity viz. Christ's innocence merit and Satisfaction
upon it, and therewith cover the shame which our father Adam has with the
monster passed upon us by inheritance: This was the Type which was here set
forth.

24. And that Sem did not carry the Garment alone and cover the father, does
figure out unto us, that the Soul viz. Japhet; that is, the inward Kingdom of
the inward Eternal nature, must help; for the Soul is of the Fathers property;
and this Japhet does typifie: and the Souls spirit viz. the fair Image of God
in the light, which did vanish or disappear in Adam, and stood Or in the Image.
typically in the Covenant, of which Sem was the figure, does point out unto us
the Sons property, who should open the Covenant; thus also we are to understand
that the Father in his will, who freely gave us the Son, took on one part the
Garment of our Sins Covering, and this was typified by Japhet; and the Son on
the other part who covered our shame with the Fathers will, and this Sem was a
figure of.

25. For if Christ shall lay the Covering Garment upon our shame, then the
Soul must help, that is, it must give up and resign its will wholly
thereinto; and go backwards with its will toward the Bosom of the father;
and not any longer parley with it self in its own will and knowledge, how it
goes or will go; but so it must take the Garment in true repentance upon its
shoulders; and leave the other part upon the shoulders of Sem, viz. unto the
true Image of Or God.
Christ which is the pretiou^ noble Sophia.

26. Both these take the heavenly Garment, and go backwards to the Father; and
though they cannot see how they go yet they go in Faith trusting on Gods
Mercy, and turn away their eyes from the shame, vanity and false will; for
going backwards and covering the shame in this place signifies nothing else,
but to Convert the Selfe-hood naturally going forwards in its own will and way,
and go back again into the ONE, out of which the free will departed and came
into the monster, or shame.

27. Noah's* drunkenness signifies, that when Adam entered with his Lust and
desire into this worlds property, he became drunk, in the beastall property;
and therein he uncovered his shame; that is; he disclosed and made bare therein
the beastiall Lust; now when this was done, he stood before God in great shame;
and then the beastiall spirit in this Monster of false lust and poysonfull
concupiscence brake forth, and reviled the precious heavenly Image, and made it
self Master.

28. And thus Christ must in our Soul and in our disappeared and again revived
noble Sophia cover the shame of our father Adam, and his children; for he would
therefore not be borne of the Seed of man; but out of the heavenly disappeared
Ens* and brought his living Ens of the holy world, thereinto; that so he might
cover our monstrous Text, Seed.
Shame of the Souls property which Adams lust had uncovered, with the heavenly
Ens.

29. The corrupt nature which had opened it self now in Paradise, went along
in all men; and though the Image of God was again regenerate in the Spirit of
the Saints, as in a figurative form until the fulfilling of Christ in the
flesh; yet the monstrous Image was propagated all along in all in the earthly
property.

30. But being the First earthly world of the humane property was drowned in
the flood, and there the first Monarchies ceased; the same figure did forthwith
represent it self again in Noah and his Three Sons: so that now the spirit
does here signify from the very stock and root of the humane property, how it
should afterward be viz. the Tree of man would in its properties introduce it
self into boughs and branches; that is, spread forth it self into distinct
Nations and Governments; and that they would not all know the Only God
according to the light of his Grace; and how that God would represent unto them
the light of Grace in the Generation of Sem.

31. For Noah says; blessed be the God of Sem and let Japhet dwell in Sems
tents; by the God of Sem he means the holy word in the Covenant, intimating
how the same would manifest it self; and then the Japhites or Gentiles, which
lived in the light of nature should come to the light of Grace manifested from
the Generation of Sem; and enter into Sems Tents and dwell therein; this did
point at the Gentiles who before knew only of the Light of nature, but when
the word did manifest it self in the Person of Christ with the gracious light
of the Gospel; they came into the Light of grace.

32. And even here Ham viz. the fleshly lust-spirit, must be in its own
property and selfehood a servant among the children of light, for the children
of God do compel him to servitude and keep him under, and take away his
reviling scorning will; for the spirit of Ham which Noah cursed, does intimate
how this Hams spirit would be great upon the Earth, and go on only in its own
proud monstrous and beastiall knowledge, and scoff at the children of the
light, account them fools because they hope upon something else, which they
do not outwardly see.

33. Thus the spirit in Noah points out unto us three Sorts of men; first it
signifies the children of faith, who nakedly and merely look upon the hidden
light of Gods grace, and have the same shineing in their Hearts.

34. The other would look upon the light of Nature and Reason, and would
endeavor to fathom and search out the hidden light, by the strength of
reason, and that they would therefore contend dispute wrangle and jangle, and
bring forth many wonderful strange monsters and Conceits out of the light of
nature, and set them up for Gods or Gods light, as it has so come to pass
among the Christians and Gentiles.

35. The Third Sort would be of Hams nature and Generation; and know neither
the light of nature or grace; but walk as the Beast, and be only Titular
verbal praters and litterall children, and moreover mockers scoffers, and
fleering Apes, who would also be called the children of God; but their
knowledge would be only of the external Stone-Church; a mere custom, and
verbal round of a Or Divine Service as they call it,
Service of God, where the mouth would use indeed the Name of God; but the
heart would only bring forth a beastiall spirit to earthly pride lust and
pleasure.

36. Thus the spirit of Sem Ham and Japhet would dwell together in one
Congregation: Sems generation in faith hidden among the Japhites as a poor
disesteemed contemned abject people; but the tribe of Japhet would set forth
themselves with great plausible words, with great and huge ostentation of Gods
Service; but yet it would be but as an hypocricy and seeming holiness
proceeding from the light of nature; but Hams lineage would be full of gluttony
and drunkenness scoffing and reviling, and they would mock at both, viz. the
children of the Caine-like seeming holiness, and also at the children of the
true light; and would live as the wild brute beast; and yet in their Swinish
life would be children of Grace by an outward appropriation or Adoption.

37. This Ham has now the dominion in Christendom; he has flattered with
Japhet, so that he has set him up by the light of nature an external specious
divine worship; as a Titular God: This Titular God has covered Ham in his
beastiall Sodomiticall spirit with a very fair and glorious covering under the
purple mantle of Christ; and laid under his Head great Or Sachells full.
Sacks full of the light of Grace; and these the beastiall mouth-spirit of Ham
must take along with it; and when it must indeed dye then it has whole sacks
full of the light of Grace.

38. But the light of Grace remains only in the Sacks; and Hams spirit
remains in it self an Evil Beast; and cannot truly open the Sacks and take
out the light of Grace; this Hams spirit is accursed, and shall not inherit
Gods Kingdom; unless it be really born again out of the light of Grace; or
else the sacks, and coverings avail him not at all.

39, For a Beast goes into the Sanctuary [or to holy Service of God] and
remains a Beast when he comes thence. Thy seeming Holiness and Devotion, thy
comforting flattering and soothing up thy Self, availes nothing, unless thou
return again into thy first mother from whence man is originally proceeded,
and become as a little newborn child, and let Ham and Japhet go with all
their Arts, and Pratings.

40. For Japhet obtaines it not in his specious glistering Kingdom; unless he
enter into Sems tent, viz. into the light of Grace; so that the same may be
born in him: outward adopted children avail not in Gods account; but innate
children born anew of the heavenly Ens in Christ Spirit; and whosoever has not
the same is already judged. Joh. chap. 3.

The Second Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE Mysterium Magnum Begins with the Propagation of the
Humane Tree through Noah's Children.

AND The building of the Tower of Babel and Confusion of the Speeches, and
their Division into Several Nations.

This is The other Tree Wherein the Powers of the Properties unfold and form
themselves into the Languages; even out of One into many Languages Tongues and
Speeches.

Beginning with the X Chapter of Genesis and the 35th Chapter of the Mysterium
Magnum: and ending with the XXXV. Chapter of Genesis and the 64. Chapter of the
Mysterium Magnum, at the 5th verse.

Written by JACOB BEHM Teutonicus.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for H. Blunden, and are to be sold at the Castle
in Cornhill. 1654.

CHAPTER XXXV. Shows how the Or Tree of Mankind.
Humane Tree has spread forth it self in its properties by the children of
Noah; and how they were divided and Severed at the Tower of Babel in their
properties, by the confusion of the Tongues into distinct Nations.
EVERY tree grows first (after that it shoots out of its pregnant Grain
Kernel pippin.
Seed) into a Stock, Genesis X.
afterward into Branches and Boughs; and brings forth further out of its
Ens, the Blossom and Fruit; thus also we are to understand of the Humane Tree,
according to its virtue and manifestation of its hidden wonders of the divine
wisdom, which lay hid in the humane Ens, and put it self forth in time out of
each Degree of the properties.

2. Adam was the first Ens to the Grain [or pregnant fruitful seed of
mankinde] and this same Ens which produced the humane life was in the divine
wisdom in the word of the divine power of the divine understanding; The Spirit
of God brought this holy Ens out of the divine wisdom, and lubet, into the
Verbum Fiat, viz. into the desire of the forming word, viz. into Nature; and
therein the Spirit of God figured the Ens of divine wisdom, through the
Speaking Word, into a formal life; and the nature of the three Principles,
into a Body; into which body (understand the Ens of nature) the Spirit of God
breathed this same figured shaped creatural life of Divine Understanding.

3. And hence man had his rise, and became a living Soul, both out of the
heavenly spiritual Ens; and out of the temporal Ens of the Earth, and four
Elements; both out of the constellation or Astrum of the divine Magic, and
natural Magic; a complete perfect likeness of God; a delightful Tree of the
life of divine wisdom and Contemplation ingrafted into the Paradise of God,
viz. into heaven, and into the Time of this world, standing in both; fit to
Generate again or propagate.
regenerate, and form his like out of himself; like as out of one Tree many
twiggs broughs branches and fruits, do grow: where every fruit has a Grain
Kernel or Pippin in it, fit to produce a new Stock and tree; the like we are
also to understand concerning the tree of mankind.

4. The inward spiritual Ens grew in its power in Adams life, until the
outward earthly natural one overcame him by the infectious persuasion of the
Devil; and then the natural Ens put it self forcibly forth in the powers of
the wonders of Nature; and brought forth its branches and boughs out of the
essence of nature.

5. And though the holy Ens of the heavenly worlds Essence and being, did
disappeare in Adam by his infection and poysonfull Imagination, yet the word of
divine power did give is self again thereinto by Covenant; so that this Ens
of the heavenly world was propagated all along in this tree, until the time of
its now springing forth in the Ens of Mary, where the Covenant was accomplished
[stood at its aim and limit.]

6. Adms spiritual holy Stem grew until his fall, and there it stood still;
and then the word freely gave it self by the Covenant thereinto as into a
disappeared [expired] Ens to regenerate it again in its true Entity; and the
outward natural Stem obtained the power and the selfe-growing life, in the
fall, where then the Elements, each of them in its property, became sensible
and full of its own selfefull power and operation, and grew so unto the flood,
especially before the flood, in its boughs and branches, and did show it self
as a full grown Tree according to all the properties in Evil and Good.

7. But the Powers had not as yet unfolded and explicated themselves therein,
for all men had only one Language; the Languages were made manifest, out of
the properties before the flood.

8. They indeed understood the Language of Nature, viz. the formed word in its
difference, but this difference or distinct variety was not as yet formed and
framed into Tongues, until the Stock of the Humane Tree, did, after the flood,
bring its power into the Branches; whereupon the tree of mankind began to
bloome and bloossme forth out of the properties of the powers of the formed
Natural Word, viz. out of the Blessing, wherewith God blessed Noah and his
children, viz. the branches of the tree, and bad them be fruitful, and fill
and replenish the Earth, and gave them the Covenant of Grace.

9. For in Cain this Tree was cursed, but in Noah it was again blessed, that
the properties of the formed natural word should put forth themselves with the
Tongues through the property of nature as a Wonder of many words or Gods in the
Only living Word.

10. The Image of God in the formed word, should bring forth the formation of
the only word, out of the first Ens, into many formations or forms of tongues
and Speeches, according to the nature and manner of the Princely Dominions of
the high Spirits, which also are in their distinct Degrees and differences in
the formed word, and in the Deep of this world do rule in the properties of
nature above the four Elements, yea also above the operation of the Stars in
the Soul of the great world; which also bear the Names of God in the formed
word of nature, as an instrument of God, whereby he, in a formal manner,
rules in his Dominion and Love-delight or Harmony.

11. That the Patriarchs.
Ancient Fathers lived so long before the flood; was, because that the powers
of the formed word of the divine property, were yet undivided and un-manifested
and un-explicated in them, as a young Tree, which is full of power virtue and
Sap, does excellently manifest and display it self in its Branches and
spreading growth, but when it begins to bloome, then the good power goes into
the Blossoms and fruits.

12. The like also we are to understand concerning the first Age of mankind;
when the powers were couched in One property in the Stock, then men did
understand the Language of nature, for all Languages did lie therein; but when
this Tree of the one only Tongue did divide it self in its properties and
powers among the children of Nimrod, then the Language of nature (whence Adam
gave names to all things, naming each from its property) did cease, and the
Stem of nature became faint feeble and weak, by reason of the divided
properties in the word of the powerful understanding.

13. Thus they did not any longer live so long; for the true power of the
humane life, whence the understanding flows, is Or proceeded.
come out of the word of God; but being that the understanding did divide it
self into many Tongues and properties, Nature grew weaker and weaker; and the
high understanding of the properties of the Spirits of the Letters did fall,
for the internal brought it self into an external, in manner and wise as a
man relates and speaks of a thing which he has by hearsay, and yet has no
right understanding of the same, also is not able to see it.

14. Of Such a Gift (as the understanding of the Language of nature) mankind
was deprived of at Babel, when as they so highly exalted nature, and would by
the outward nature, build them a Tower, whose top should reach even to heaven;
which has a very subtle hidden and innate understanding; and it lies very
excellently and emphatically in the Names of Noah's children and childrens
children; which the spirit in Moses has set down in the line of their
forth-spreading Generations; wherein the properties of the division of the
only understanding and Language, may be understood; for they do entirely
intimate, how the properties of the understanding, do give forth and unfold
themselves one out of another, and how each, mutually brings it self into a
Sundry particular Speech; as into a peculiar Selfely word.

15. For, the names of the children of Noah and their children (from whom the
Second Monarchy had its rise upon the Earth) are Seventy two; which the spirit
in Moses does point out; and herein lies the Great Mystery of the Tower of
Babel, viz. the division of the Tongues.

16. For 77.
Seventy Seven is the whole number of the divine manifestation through the
formed word; 72.5.1, ^
seaventy two, are Babel, viz. the tongues of the wonders; the other Five are
holy, and lie hidden under the seventy two, and they take their Original out
of JOTH, and the JOTH stands in the
, viz. in the one, which is the Eye of Eternity without ground and number.

17. Through the five holy Speeches proceeding from JOTH, the Spirit in the
formed word of nature speaks holy divine words in the children of the Saints;
and through the Seventy two Tongues, he speaks through the Nature of the
wonders both from the Evil and good, according as the word does form and
amasse it self in an Ens.

18. The five Speeches belong to the Spirit of God, who speaks by his
children, when, and how he pleases, but the Seventy two belong to man's
Selfnesse and particular ownhood, whence man's selffull understanding speaks
Lies and Truth; therefore the seaventy two Languages, viz. Babel, must pass
through the judgment of God, and the pure, shall be separated from the Impure,
and tried in the fire.

19. For him, who is taken under, and capable of this knowledge we will give a
short direction and manuduction, to trace out our Sense and meaning, (which yet
we in this place will keep to our selves) and thereby intimate unto him, how he
may search out all Mysteries and Secrets which lie coucht under these Names,
which the holy Spirit, in Moses has marked out.

20. The Spirit in Moses sets down Seven Names in Japhets Line; viz. the Seven
Sons which he begat; which are these; Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal,
Meschech, and Tiras: Now Japhet is the first, and betokens the first
Principle; and therein the Kingdom of nature, intimating, how even out of
Nature the Seven free Arts or liberal Sciences should be found under a
natural Philosophy; and these were found out in this Japhets line in a
natural manner, by the heathenish Philosophy; for this was the twig which
should dwell in Sems Tent as Noah foretold.

21. For the Seven Sons of Japhet signify and point out the Seven properties
of nature, and under their Seven Names lies the great Mystery of the
Japheticall Lines in the Kingdom of nature; intimating to us what kind of
people and Kingdoms should arise from them, even unto the end of the world,
concerning the manifestation and writing of which, our Speech is stopped and
taken from us; but it shall be freely and fully manifested to our
school-fellowes in its Time; and be wholly made known and revealed.

22. After this the Spirit mentions only two Sons of Japhet which begat
children; viz. Gomer and Javan; he passes over the other children of Japhet in
Silence, and mentions not at all what children they begat; and this is not
without cause; the Spirit points at the two sorts of men among the Gentiles
in the Kingdom of nature; viz. under Gomer he sets three Names, Askenaz
Riphath and Togarmah; these were the Sons of Gomer; who do thus manifest
themselves in the Language of nature, viz. they form [conceive or Amass] the
Ens of nature, viz. the formed Word, into an Ens, and bring it into a
Contemplation, that is, into an acute speculating Reason; and make a figure out
of it; viz. a Dominion (or form of a Government of self-will) according to
the Kingdom of nature, for Temporal Glory and Renown.

23. And under the other Son Javan, he sets four Names, viz. Elisa Tharsis
Kittim, and Dodanim; and he says, that of these fourteen Names, all the Isles
and Languages of the Gentiles were filled, and that they had their rise and
Original from hence: These four Names do intimate out of the properties of
nature, thus much, viz. by the first [Name ELISA] a good half Angelical will:
by the second [ TARSHISH] an introduction of the good will into the wrath of
nature, from whence an Evil warlike Selfenesse arises; by the third [ viz.
KITTIM] a false understanding, whereby the Angelical Good will, is brought in
the selfehood of Reason, even to be a fool, and sets forth it self with a
strange outside Luster, and it signifies the heathenish Idolatry whereinto
they brought themselves through Reason, without Gods Light, and thereby did set
up heathenish Idols, and made themselves Great Kingdoms; so that the spirit
of Nature has brought them under its power and might, into its own form; and
under the Name DODANIM the spirit intimates the Kingdom of nature in
Selfehood with its selfely Divine Service, viz. an external visible God, which
may be shown by the pointing of the finger.

24. And under these fourteen Names in Japhets line, the Humane Kingdom of
nature is wholly pourtrayed and typifyed; and we are in an especial manner to
observe, that the angelical will is therein concluded, betokening the wise and
deep understanding Heathen in the light of nature, in whom the inward Holy
Kingdom did behold it self, who, notwithstanding they lay shut up in the true
divine understanding, and saw by an external light [or reflex] into the
Restitution of all Beings, shall, when the Covering is taken away, live in Sems
Tent, viz. in the Formed Word of nature, yet in their property.

25. Out of this fourteenth number of the fourteen Names of Japhet came the
Prophetical, and Apocalipticall Numbers; 14. Names.
from which the Spirit prophesied how the wonders of nature should open
themselves one after another, and what should happen in each Degree of their
manifestation; which we will here pass over in Silence, and mention it in its
due place.

26. Under Ham, the spirit brings the greatest intimation of the Kingdom of
Nature, for he fully sets forth the external form of Reason, for he says;
Ham begat Chush Mizraim Puth and Canaan. CVSH gives in the Ens of the pregnant
Generating Nature, a signification of a form of sudden conceived Swift
ascending lust in Selfehood, like to a Running, or far and wide domineering and
Reigning might; and it is the root of the Princely Government according to the
third Principle; but Japhet is the same ground [or work] according to the first
Principle.

27. MIZRAIM signifies a forth driving Power, which does forthwith comprehend
it self again in the Lust, in which the Center of Nature does go forth all
along in a strong through-breaking lust and desire, and breaks open the form
of the Lust; intimating unto us the Original of the divided Tongues, and how
the power of the only formed word of the understanding should be divided.

28. The Name PVTH shows forth even from the Ens of nature, a High City or
place whereby the will [of these men] would advance it self on High in
contriving and framing how to build them an High Tower; CANAAN signifies a
Land of lowliness and humility; showing, that God would be found in the lowly
and humble, and it especially signifies, that this high flown aspiring will
shall be overthrown and cast down.

29. Although the Reader may not be able to understand us in this Tongue, yet I
set this down only to the end, that he may learn to consider and meditate on
the Great Mystery, which the Spirit of God has signified under these Names,
from whence such a purpose of a few men did arise; that it is even wholly a
mere wonder, whence the Tongues and speeches do take their rise and
Original: for the Spirit does set down afterward, that Chus begat Nimrod, who
began to be a mighty Lord upon the Earth; and was a mighty hunter before the
Lord; who would now understand what kind of mighty Lord and hunter he was
before God, without the understanding of the Language of nature; which being it
is not every man's gift to understand, we will only intimate the sense and
meaning; even what the Spirit does thereby understand in the word of the
Essence.

30. Nimrod became a mighty Lord, and was an Hunter before the Lord: Now if I
be able to see the Spirit in its Essence, in the formation of the word, then I
see what a Lord and Hunter Nimrod was, for the Spirit does herein signify and
point at the properties of nature, showing how the same have opened themselves
in man's nature, and brought themselves into an external form to a contrived
framed Government among men; the Spirit signifies by the Name how the humane
free will has formed it self in the Nature of the understanding; and Imagined
such a Model, and platform into its mind, out of which Imagination and fancy
the outward work arose.

31. For the Name NIMROD does give a very clear signification, in open
understanding; that he came from Chus; for he is in himself a taking
apprehending or an Arrogation of Power and might out of nature; intimating, how
nature does form and frame it self into a Government in the Mind; and has
put it self forth with Power, and has hunted suppressed and oppressed the
inferior properties; therefore the Spirit says, an Hunter before the Lord;
for the Nature is before the Lord, therefore the Spirit speaks here of an
hunter before the Lord; for look as an Hunter does hunt drive take and tame
wild Beasts; even so the spirit intimates, that out of this selfe-advanced
humane Nature, such evil Beasts would arise, who would live only to the
outward nature.

32. Now out of the wrath of nature, arose, over these foolish beastiall men,
the Hunter; viz. the outward domination; which should hunt catch kill, and keep
them in Awe, so that the Hunter might Tame them, and hold them under a
Government, else there would be only a General raving, raging, biting,
tearing, devouring and eating up each other, among the Beastiall men; being
they would not suffer the Spirit of God to rule and guide them, they must
suffer the Office of nature to rule them; for otherwise what need has the Lord
of an Hunter, that the Spirit in Moses says, that he was a mighty Hunter
before the Lord; that which hunteth before the Lord of all beings, does not
hunt Hares or other Beasts.

33. Moses has a veil before his clear shining Eyes; the Spirit does hereby
hint at the Government of nature; showing how the humane Government has formed
and contrived it self in the Soul of the outward world; and how it should
afterward be among them; and what Hunters would arise over them; and compares
the humane Dominion to an Hunter, who hunteth for Beasts to catch and slay
them; and thus it would be also among them; that these Hunters would Hunt after
Men; to take them and bring them under Slavery and Servitude; and chase and
course them too and fro by their Bloud-Hounds; bite tear slay and devour them
by war and murtherous acts; and tame and bring under all, with force fury and
violence; and excellently well manage the Government of the Hunter in their own
self- assumed Power.

34. For Man was fallen under the possession of Gods wrath in nature; the same
forced forth it self now with its desire, and formed it self into a
Government according to the outward Constellations and the four Elements; as
they do build up and break down; even so did this Hunter do with his Beasts
in his Sport.

35. Here the world may take an exact Looking-glass to behold it self in; it
is the true Original Ground of the worldly Dominion and Lordship.
Rule; and although the same ground of Government has an internal spiritual
Original; yet it is in the outward form only, before God, as a beastiall
Huntsman-ship among the Beast-men, who must be bound and tamed.

36. For the inward spiritual Government stands in great humility in an
Angelical form; whereunto God also created man; if he had but remained in
Paradise, then he should have had no need of the Hunter, but being he would be
a Beast, God ordained him also an Hunter, who might keep under the wild unruly
beastiall, men: and the Hunter, and beast, are both alike before God, in this
worlds beastiall property; but being it may not be any otherwise, God holds
it for his natural Order; for he has given every thing its Government
[Station and Order.]

37. But it is to be lamented, that this Hunter does hunt slay and devour the
Tame humane beasts, which do not belong to his Game: but what shall we say; or
wherewith shall the children of God excuse themselves, or quit themselves of
this Hunter, before God, seeing every man bears externally the Hunters Hind
on him, over which the hunter of nature has power; the inward spiritual man
must leave his outward Beast unto the Hunter; for his outward Beast is also
evil.

38. The spirit of Moses sets under Hams lineage twenty nine Names, which
came from Ham; 29. Names.
which intimate the twenty nine properties proceeding from the third Principle,
viz. from the spirit of the outward world; hinting how the formed word should
be manifested through the outward nature: both in Tongues and Properties,
whence the Governments and Orders of Countries and Nations have had their rise;
albeit each property has again its externe Birth; like as one branch or sprout
of a tree does produce and bring forth other Twigs, yet the spirit in Moses
does point at the chief head root, and the properties under these Names;
showing what kind of people should arise from thence, and what their
alterations and their final conclusions should be; all this lies hidden under
their Names.

39. Thus Ham has twenty nine Names of his children, 29.
and he is the thirtieth, twenty nine is the set Numbers of his children and
childrens children, under which the number of the end lies in Hams Government
and Dominion. Thirty is his whole Number, whereof the Prophet speaks, 30.
that this Ham would sell the righteous One for thirty pieces of Silver; and
give the same for a Potters field: as a Pot is accounted of in reference to its
maker, even so is the fleshly man Ham in regard of God; he takes his thirtieth
number, which he ought to bring into Gods Kingdom, and gives it for an
earthly vessel, which does resemble a field, and in that, does sell the
righteous one, who lies hid under the thirtieth number in the word of Power:
thus the righteous one under the thirtieth Number, does by the death or
mortification of Hams flesh, Sever himself from the twenty nine Numbers of
these properties, which have gotten the upper hand in Ham; for in the thirtieth
year, the Righteous one, viz. Christ, did separate himself unto his Office,
and in the thirtieth Number lies this same Mystery; this is understood by our
fellow-schollars, and only hinted at in this place.

26. Names.
40. Sem has in his line of Propagation twenty six Names; and he is the twenty
seventh. 27th. Name.
And the spirit in Moses speaks very hiddenly; Genesis 10. Verse. 24.
saying, that he was the Father of all children of Eber; and Eber begat two
Sons; the Name of one was Peleg, for at his days the world was divided; 25.
and the other was named Or Jaketan.
Joktan: all whatsoever the spirit in Moses speaks of the outward Acts of the
Patriarks, he has under them a single inward eye upon the line of Christ; for
he says that Sem was the father of all the children of Eber; although Eber be
first in the Third degree after Sem; yet the spirit looks so punctually upon
the word in the Covenant, wheresoever it does open it self in a Line.

41. For EBER signifies in the forming of the word, as much as a Sound, or
manifestation of the word out of the Center; and says further; that he begat
Peleg; and called him so by reason of the division [of the earth] the spirit
does not only look upon the outward division of Lands and Countries, but much
rather upon the Line in which stood the Or Mark.
limit of the Covenant, for in Eber the limit of the Covenant did open it self
in the word as in the Sound or manifestation and went all along in the Seed
upon Peleg; and the line of Adam and Christ did there sever it self in the two
brethren; as afterward it did among the children of Abraham and Isaac: with
Isaac and Ismael; and with Jacob and Esau; thus likewise it was here with Peleg
and Joktan: externally the world was divided; and internally the Kingdom of
Christ, and the Kingdom of the world; Not that we are to understand, that
Joktan did not remain in the Covenant; only the spirit does here look upon
the motion of the Seed, in which line the limit or mark of the Covenant was to
be moved, wherein the word would again move it self in the disappeared
humanity of the heavenly Ens, and manifest it self in the Humanity.

42. The Names of Sems children and grandchildren are mere intimations and
significations of the properties out of the wonderful line of the prophetical
spirit of Enoch; where these same properties were brought forth out of the
Stock into Boughs; but here into Branches.

43. The spirit in Moses Genesis 10. from 26. verse. to the 30.
sets 14. Names.
fourteen names under Jocktans line which are the wonderful Number of this
bough in the trees property, being the Kingdom of Christ according to the
property of nature: Genesis 11.18. 1. Name.
and of Peleg he says no more but of One Son, which he calls Regu, whom he
begat when he was thirty years old, intimating and pointing at the line of
Christ wherein the maine limit and eye-marke of the Covenant stood: the Spirit
denotes only One, for by One the Covenant should be opened; for the spirit
looked with the one upon the Kingdom of Grace; and with his brothers fourteen
Names, it hinted at the humane Kingdom.

44. And in that he says, that he begat Regu, when he was thirty years old,
the Spirit therein looks forwards upon Christ, 30. years.
who should arise and come forth out of this Stock; and manifest himself the
thirtieth year of his age in his Office; as also likewise all the Ages under
the line of Christ, which Moses has set down, have a very certain intimation
and Prophecy, and point at the Times of the motion in the Covenant; as [may be
seen] through the Prophets and other Saints in whom the Covenant has moved it
self.

45. The spirit of Moses sets five Names of the children of Sem, 5. Names.
which came forth of his loins; and though he did beget more (for Moses says
that Genesis 11.11
he begat Sons and daughters) yet the spirit minds only the properties of
the formed Word in the Covenant of the humane property; these Five Names do
figure out and set forth as in a type the Five head speeches of the spiritual
Tongue through the formed Word, proceeding from the High Name of God; Five head
Speeches.
out of which Tongues, the prophetical and Apostolical Spirit, Or spoke.
speaks.

46. And though we could set down a form of the same; yet we should be but as
senseless or dumb, to the Reader which understands not the Language of Nature;
and therefore we have but given an hint of it, to our School-fellowes; for the
spirit does also, under the Names, point at the Kingdoms and Dominions, and
they are Gods, who with his Name does Order govern guide and lead every
Kingdom, according to the property of his Name: as the property of each
Kingdom is, even such is the Tongue Language, Phrase, and manners of the same;
as it is written, such as the Nation is such a God it also has.

47. Not that there is more then one God; only we understand therein, the
divine manifestation, how God does give himself forth, in his manifestation in
the formed word, to all Nations, according to every Nations and peoples
property; so that every Nation and people does use or bear forth, the same
only Word according to its property, the external form and division of
which, is Babel; for Genesis XI. Verse. 6.
all people had only one tongue and language, and dwelt together.

48. The Only Tongue, was the Language of nature, out of which, they all
spoke; for they had it in one form, and understood in the Language and speech,
the Sense, viz. the Ens, even how the will formed the Ens; for so also was the
spirit in the Ens; of which we will give a short intimation and manduction, to
the understanding and illuminated mind to consider of, to prove exercise and
make trial of it in himself, not that a man can express it, and bring it
into a certain form, no, that cannot be, for it is the spirit of the wisdom
of God, his manifestation.

49. The spirits of the Letters in the Alphabet are the form of the Only
spirit in the Language of nature; Alphabet.
5. Vowells.
the five vowells bear for^h the holy Tongue of the five holy Languages out of
the Name Jehovah, from whence the holy spirit speaks; for the five vowells
are the holy Name of God according to his holiness; for the Name Jehova has
nothing in it, save only the five vowells A, E, I, O, V, the other Letters
signify and express the Nature, even what the Name of God in the formed Word
is in Nature, both in Love and Anger; in darkness and light: but the five
vowells do signify only and alone what he is in the light of holiness; for
Nature is Tinctured with the five vowells, so that it becomes Text, a Kingdom
of joy.
full of joy and delight.

50. But that the Ancient wise men, skillfull in this tongue, did interpose an
H in the Name JEOVA; and called it JEHOVA; the same was done with great
understanding, for the H. makes the holy Name with the five vowells, even
manifest in the outward nature, it shows how the holy Name of God does breath
forth and manifest it self even in the creature: the five Vowells are the
Hidden Name of God, who dwells Alone in himself; but the H signifies the
divine Lubet, or wisdom, showing, how the divine Lubet does breath forth it
self out of it self.

51. The inward understanding in the five vowels is this: I. is the Name of
JHESUS. E. is the Name Germ. Engel.
Angel. Engel. O. is the formed WISDOM, or Lubet of the I, viz. of JESUS, and
is the Center, or the HEART of God. V. is the SPIRIT, viz. the Viz. the
Sweetness.
SVS in JESUS, which proceeds forth out of the Lubet. A. is Germ. Anfang.
the der beginning Anfang and und the das End, End viz. the will of the whole
comprehension, and it is the FATHER.


52. And these five do fold themselves up with the comprehension or formation
into Three, viz. into such a Word;
, that is, A. O. V. Father, A. O. V.
Son, holy Ghost: the Triangle denotes the Trinity of the properties of the
persons, and the V. on the Triangle, denotes the spirit in the H, viz. in the
breathing, where the universal God does manifest himself spiritually with his
own proceeding forth or procession out of himself. (...)


53. The other Letters without the five vowells, do all proceed from the Name
(...).
TETRAGRAMMATON, viz. out of the Center of the Eternal nature, out of the
Principle; and do denote, and speak forth the Varieties.
Differences of the formed wisdom, viz. of the formed word in the Three
Principles, wherein the whole creation lies, they are the sense of the
creation, viz the property of the Powers, and the true Revealed God in the word
of nature: understand this further thus.

54. When as the Lubet of man, viz. the free will of man, does conceive or
form it self into a desire, then it conceives the whole Alphabet; for the
desire is the Fiat, and the Lubet to the desire is the contemplation of the
free will, viz. the formed word of wisdom, wherein the free will does behold
it self, and contemplate whereinto it will introduce the Lubet of the wisdom;
either into Evil or Good; and when the free will has thus be held it self,
it does conceive with the Lubet, in the Letters, viz. in the Sense of nature,
and composeth the Senses of the Letters together, and forms the Lubet into a
word, the same stands in an internal form, viz. in a conceived Thought.

55. And even then the free will takes the H, viz. the Spirit of the
forth-breathing, and brings the formed Thought before the counsel of the
five Senses, who behold the formed word, and prove the same, whether it be apt
or not, if it does but please them, then the H, viz. the breathing Spirit,
takes the word, and brings it upon the Tongue, into the Mouth; there is the
chief framer v^z. the Fiat, which, is the divine Instrument, and figureth the
Senses of the properties out of the letters, as the free will has set and
composed them into a Substance to the Sounding or pronouncing, manifestation or
Expression.

56. Now mark and observe us here, very exactly; how every word is formed or
brought in the mouth to Note when a word is formed or expressed, it is brought
to Substance.
Substance; viz. to the expression; How the chief worker and contriver viz. the
Fiat which is in the Senses does shape and figure it, and how the Tongue
cooperates or frames it self therewith, when it takes it, and by what way it
brings it forth, whether through the Teeth, or above, or with open Mouth; also
how the Tongue does frame it self in the conjunction of the word, which Sense
it does again draw back, and will not wholly cast forth, as there is many a
sense which is not half put forth, but many, fully, and many again are drawn
half backwards toward the heart. And now as the word was formed, so is also
the thing in its form and property, which is named by the word, (provided that
the free will gives it also a right Name, and does not impose a strange Name
on it out of Malice or Ignorance) so it is externally noted, and internally in
the compaction of the Senses it has such a virtue, or ill malignant property.

57. Now whosoever has the understanding of the Senses viz. of the Spirits of
the Letters, so that he does understand how the Senses are set or compounded in
the Lubet, he understands it in the framing of the word, when the same is
formed or brought forth to Substance, and is able to understand the Sensual
[Naturall or essentiall] Language of the whole creation, and understands whence
Adam gave Names unto all things* and from whence the Spirit of God has
prophesied in the Ancient.

58. This is now the ground of the Head Languages; when as all people spoke in
one Language then they understood one another; but when they would not use the
Text Sensual.
Natural Genuine tongue; then the true and Right understanding was put out in
them; for they brought the Spirits of the genuine tongue of Sense into an
external gross form, and framed the subtle Spirit of the understanding into
a gross form, and learnt to speak out of the form only; as at this day all
Nations speak only from this same form of their contrived sensual tongue.

59. Now No people do any more understand the Language of Sense, and yet the
Birds in the air, and the beast in the fields understand it according to their
property.

60. Therefore man may well think and consider, what he is deprived of; and
what he shall again obtain in the New Birth; although [perhaps] not here upon
the Earth, yet in the Spiritual world; for in the Language of Sense all
Spirits speak one with another; they use no other Language, for it is the
Language of nature.

61. Our Learned ones do term themselves Doctors, and Masters, and yet none
of them understands his Mother Tongue; they understand no more of the Spririt,
then the Country man does of his Tool to the tillage of his ground; they use
only the bare contrived form of the gross compounded words, and understand
not what the word is in its Sense; hence arises the contention and strife
wherewith men contend and jangle about God and his will; men will teach what
God is, and yet understand not the Least of God.

62. The five holy Speeches in the Language of Sense, are Gods Word; they are
his operation through the Sence-tongue, viz. through the properties; as it
cannot be denied, that God gives power virtue and life to all creatures and
vegetables; for his holy Name is through all; and Adam had this holy Name as a
proper possession, working, ruling, and sensibly efficacious in his Senses; and
even this jewel he lost, which is now again restored and enkindled in the holy
Name JESUS.

63. Therefore none can with Right be called a Divine, or Learned in the holy
Scripture, much less a Doctor of the same, unless that he understands the
SensVAll tongue, and knows how the holy Spirit has spoken by the Sensual
tongue in the holy Penmen of the Scripture, if he understands not the divine
Sense in the holy Scripture, Let him not undertake to be a Master over it, to
censure or interpret it, he is not at all learned therein; he is only a
changer of letters; a Chop-Logick in the Scriptures, and understands not one
letter in its Sense.

64. Thus understand us herein concerning the children of Noah; viz. Japhet,
Sem, and Ham; and their children and grandchildren; they had lost the SensVAll
Language, and had made themselves a formed contrived one, and so spoke in a
formed Language which they themselves understood not in the true Sense;
therefore God was hidden to them; for they understood no more, the voice of the
holy Spirit in their Language, viz. the Mental Tongue of the five Vowells.

65. And they looked about, or Imagined, where God should be; and supposed that
he must needs be something with form, and dwelling apart from them; and being
they could not understand any thing of God upon the Earth, either what, or
where he was (and yet had heard so much of God spoken by their forefathers)
thereupon they thought, that he must needs dwell on high above the Stars; and
thought them not able to reach thither,; therefore they undertook to build
them a Tower whose Top should reach to heaven, that so they might ascend up to
him; also they would thereby make themselves a Great Name; that it might be
said, they had built a Tower even unto Heaven.

66. Such a knowledge the formed understanding, had of God; as still to this
day such Doctors are to be found, who know and understand no more of Gods
habitation and being, then these Builders of the Tower, and build in their Art,
altogether ( except the true genuine understanding ones) upon this high Tower,
and can never ascend up to God, and therefore they contend about the Building;
every one says how it might be built sooner and better, and yet they could
never agree; for they have all built themselves even to Death thereon, until
the Lord sends a watchman and shows them, that it is in vain; that they
shall not find him on High; but that he is even among them under the Letter,
and they have not known him.

67. At this we do exceedingly rejoice, that the time is borne, that we are
lead from the Tower of Babel, and are able to see the holy God in the SensVAll
Language: Hallelujah. The Tower is broken, and fallen down; at which our
fathers have built themselves to Death; and yet have not built it up; the
foundation thereof shall not be any more laid while the Earth stands, says
the spirit of wonders.

68. The hidden Mystery of the Tower, and the divided Languages, is this:
mankind had framed the Sensual Language of the holy Spirit into a dumb form;
and used the formed word of the humane understanding, only in a form, as in a
contrived vessel, or vehiculum; they spoke only with the outward contrived
vessel, and understood not the word in its own proper Language of Sense; they
understood no^ that God was in the Speaking word of the understanding; as at
this Day the like comes to pass, and is.

69. But, being God, had in the beginning of the creation, incorporated
himself with his word, into man's Image, viz. into the properties of the
Senses, and would not be without Sense, or in one only conceived form: and
likewise, seeing that all things do stand, in growth Seeding and Harvest, even
now was the time of the humane Trees Blooming, where the spirit of the Senses
did put forth it self in its properties with Blossoms; and manifested the
properties through the Blossoms, and out of the Blossoms brought forth the
Fruit; and like as every blossom does open and put forth it self, at the
outmost part, or highest of the stalk, or branches of the Tree or stock; even
so the spirit [of nature] drove the children of men to the extremest Height,
that they also would build them an High Tower like to an high Tree, or tall
stalk; for it would manifest its blossom, and fruits also, in the highest of
the stalk; and upon the Tower which they would build up unto heaven, the
SensVAll Spirit opened it self with the Blossom.

70. For man's will was, that they would ascend up to God; and the God of
[nature, or] Sense, put forth himself in the same desire and will, for they
sought him, only, in a circumscribed, [Locall, outward,] manner; and even so
he applied himself to them in a Conceived form of Sense out of the contrived
formed tongues and Languages, wherein notwithstanding they were dumb and knew
him not.

71. They were entered with the Sense, viz. with the Or the spirit of their
Mind.
Mental spirit into Nature, and nature had captivated them in the
understanding; therefore God also manifested himself to them with the Sensual
Spirit in the contrived form of the tongues out of the seventy two properties,
72. Properties.
through the Three Principles; viz. through a threefold Sensual Alphabet
according to the Three worlds property; viz. through ^
three times four and twenty letters; and they brought the Sensual spirit of
the letters in their contrived form through the Tongue out of each Letter,
through the three Principles; viz. into Three properties of tongues and
Languages, according to the property of the Trinity of the Deity.

72. And hence arise seaventy two Languages out of one only Sensual tongue,
72, Languages.
wherein all Speeches and Languages are contained, and each Tongue and Language
fell upon its people; according as every Family of the Stock of the humane Tree
had a property out of the formed word, even such a Language befell them out of
their Sense, viz. out of the same property of the formed word.

73. For, the Sense of man's speech, that he is able to speak, does come unto
him originally out of the divine word, which introduced it self with the
Verbum Fiat into a creation, now this word brought forth it self through the
compacted properties, according to their Compaction, nature, kind, form, and
property; for so distinct and various also are the Senses in the quality even
in the place of this world, far otherwise in one Country, then in another, and
even so God did likewise form the Languages according to the property of every
Land and Country.

74. For being that people were to be dispersed into every Country and Climate;
he opened to each people a Language, according as it should be in a Land; which
did apply it self unto the same quality of Sense, and accord therewith; so
that the quality of the Country did not introduce the Turba into it, if they
with the word of their voice agreed to the Sound of the formed spirit in the
Soul of the Great world in that place.

75. For, as the manifestation of the formed word was in the spirit of the
world in every place; even so the Spirit of God did form, through the nature
of the properties, the Language and speech in every Country; first the seventy
two head Languages out of nature, and afterward the Or Dialects of Language.
collateral affinities, proceeding from the Senses of every head Language; as
we plainly see, that a man does scarce find, in any place of the world, among
all the head Languages, one and the same sense in any head Language, within the
compass of fifteen or eighteen miles: 15. or 18. miles. According to the
Elevation of the Pole, Climate or Zenith and Nadir.
they alter and change almost every fifteen or eighteen miles, all according as
the properties of that Pole, or Elevation, are: Look what kind of property the
Lubet has in its predominant Constellation, even such a property the vulgar
people have in their Language and Speech.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Antichristian babilonicall Whore of all Nations Tongues
and Speeches; showing what is contained under the Languages and Tower of Babel.
An open Gate of the Mystery of the Great Babylon.
Courteous Reader, I desire to warn thee in Love, that thou would not
understand our Sense and meaning according to partial affections, to detract,
Revile, or especially to contemn or despise any, as from us; much less, to
set upon them, in their Office Function and Dignities, out of passion; but we
shall speak in General: Let every one prove himself; he shall indeed find
the Great Mystery of the babilonicall Tower, in himself; and also the Number
of the Beast.
Number of the false Beast. Let him but read our meaning with Patience, and
take himself along, as to his evil innate hereditary property, under the
same, as, really the earthly mortal man, in all men, belongs unto this text.

2. we will here write what the time has brought forth and manifested, and if
it were not manifest by Man, yet the beasts should be driven to manifest the
same; for the time is Or fulfilled.
borne and nothing can hinder; the most High accomplisheth his work.

3. Moses says; Nimrod, Hams [Grand] Son, began his Kingdom at Babel, and was
the first Lord upon the Earth after the flood, Genesis X.8.10.
and was the first Erectour of the Tower and City Babylon; yet we are not to
understand that only Hams children would build the Tower, but also Japhets,
and Sems, for they were yet All together as One people, and would build them a
Tower whose top should reach even unto heaven, that they might thereby make
themselves a great Name. Genesis XI.4.


4. This Tower, on which the Tongues were divided, and where the Great City
Babel stood, is a figure of the fallen earthly man who is entered into
Selfehood, and has made the formed word of God in him, unto an Idol; for the
nature of the Tower was even this; viz. that it should there stand as a great
wonder, which men had made in their own contriving Fancy, whereupon they would
ascend up to God; and signifies, that man has lost the right understanding of
God and his habitation and essence.

5. Man had compacted [or framed] his understanding through the desire of
selfe-elevation, and exaltation into the Sensual tongue; and contrived or
conceived the same into a selfely propriety, in which conception or
comprehension, the spirit of the Mental Tongue of the five vowells, was
departed from him.

6. Not that we are to conceive, that this spirit was departed from its
creature; only the free will of man, had, in the formed word of the Or
speechless dumb letters.
Consonants (wherein, the spirit of the five vowells, viz. the unformed spirit
of God, did manifest it self) brought it self forth, (as a peculiar God) out
of the Resignation to the unformed spirit, into a self fulness, and
selfe-willed weening, and fancy; the type whereof was the Tower, where the men
of Babel would come and climb up to God in their own conceived will and
Thoughts; they themselves were gone forth from the spirit of God, and would
through their own power and Ability take the Kingdom of God to themselves in
Selfehood; they would enter with their own will, selfe-borne in evil and good,
into the property of Gods holiness; this denotes and declares the divided
tongues, where every property had brought it self forth out of the universal
SensVAll tongue into a Selfishnesse, and a peculiar Selfly understanding, so
that they did not any longer understand one another; where the understanding
was compacted and brought into a propriety out of, and according to, the Three
Alphabets.

7. This compacted formed Tongue, the holy Ghost did open on the day of
Pentecost in St Peter's Sermon, where Peter from the opened Sensual tongue
spoke in one Language all Languages; and this was also Adams Language, whence
he gave Names to all creatures.

8. Thus understand us aright, what Babel and the Tower of Babel does typifie
and point out. The City Babel is the Ham-like man, who builds this City upon
the earth; the Tower is his Self-chosen God, and Divine worship: all
Reason-taught, from the school of this world, are the Master Builders of this
Tower; all those who have set up themselves to be Teachers, and are chosen
thereunto by man without Gods spirit, they are the Master-worke-men at this
Tower, and the Idol of the world, None excepted; they carve and frame
altogether only Stone and wood for this Tower.

9. For the Name NIMROD shows us very clearly also in its own sense of the
formed word, that it is a self contrived formed amassed and compacted lust,
which did advance it self on high as a selfly God; the Type whereof was the
Tower; God suffered them in their confounded understanding to set forth the
figure of their property, as a type what Man would be in the presence of God.

10. Now says Reason, wherefore did God suffer it to come to pass? Answer:
Thus it must be; that the wonders of the wisdom in the unformed Word of the
five vowells might introduce themselves through the formed word of the three
Principles, into a form or external contemplation, as a counter-plat-form,
draught, pourtracture, or formation; for the dark world of Gods Anger, was
become manifest in man, whence the gross earthly property was generated, which
also had wholly captivated man, and the same did here likewise represent its
image as a selfly God.

11. Now then, the Tower was a type of the dark world, where man would behold
God in the dark selfehood; and denotes the earthly man, who stands in Gods
sight as this Tower, and is an Image and resemblance of Or Gods contempla-
divine Contemplation according to evil and good, as a Painted life; for the
true humane life was the formed life; which became, in own desire to Selfehood,
such an Image, before God, as this Tower.

12. All men even from Adam who have taught of God, without the divine vision
of the Spirit of God in them; they have all spoken and taught from this Tower
of the confounded tongues; and even hence has the Strife arisen about God and
his will, and Essence; so that man has contended and jangled about God, in
Selfehood: one has said, they must bring Bricks to the building of the Tower,
another Stone, a third Lime, a fourth, wood, water, or other needful
Materials; and their chief Master Builders have been manifold, every one
according to the property of his own Tongue: every one has desired to build
the Tower upon his own foundation and proper ground; one has had in the
property of his Country and Climate Stone for the building thereof; another
lime, the third chalk or clay, the fourth wood; and every one has thought
good to build the Tower alone for himself out of the material of his own
property for a great wonder, that all the world might look and behold that
which he has built.

13. And then, when people of other Countries have seen what that has built,
then they have contemned it, and said, that the property of their countries
material has been better for the erecting the Tower; and have begun to reject
it, and to build the Tower for themselves, and praised that also, which
likewise has again been despised of others, who have accounted their countries
material better, so long till they have fallen quite out, in Pride and
Contention, and have left off from the Tower, and have fallen upon one another,
and persecuted slain and murdered one another about the Knowledge of the Tower
of Babel, and that party which has then got the victory, that has again built
the Tower out of its own property, till other people have also risen up and
accounted their own matter and stuff for the Best.

14. For the Speeches of the understanding were confounded and divided; and
therefore the people neither knew nor understood one another property; and
each people or Nation, has supposed and looked upon the other, to be strange
in the power of the understanding in the formed word; from whence the Contempt
of Religion, viz. of the knowledge, and confession of the word, has arisen;
for the Sensual [intelligible] tongue was compacted according to the
multiplicity of the properties.

15. And thus the wrath of the eternal nature (and also the Prince who dwells
therein, viz. the Devil in his Legions) does satiate, and recreate it self in
the strife and contention of man in the compacted word of the tongues; and thus
the Antichrist, who is the Tower of Babel viz. the Self-will of the Ham-like
man, domineereth in the Temple of God, and there has set himself up in the
place of the Holy spirit.

16. For, the Temple of God, is the formed word of the humane Languages and
tongues in man's understanding; as it is written, Romans X.8.
the word is nigh thee; namely in thy mouth and Heart, and the Seat and
habitation, of the opposite adverse Devil, is the monstrous property out of
the dark world.

17. In this formed word of divine understanding, the Antichrist, viz. the will
of Self out of the properties of nature, has set up and established himself,
and pranketh and set forth himself, with his property of nature, as if he were
God, and yet he is the condemned accursed Son chosen to death, which cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, for he was not made a creature out of Gods will,
but out of the will of Self; as the Devil, who was an Angel, yet became a
Devil, from the will of the dark world which advanced it self in him.

18. The like also we are to understand concerning the Antichristian
babilonicall Beast of Reasons self will, which terms it self divine, and is
only a monster of the true man which died in Adam to the holy Image of Gods
spiritual world, and shall and must be borne anew in the word, which did again
manifest it self in the humane property, in Christ; or else it cannot see the
Holy word, viz. the unformed Divine word of power.

19. This same holy word, must again enter into the Compacted Sensual tongue,
and bruise the same, so that the whole and perfect understanding of all tongues
may be again manifest in one, as Christ said of the Cornerstone that it should
be Rom 9.33. 1 Pet. 2.8.
a Rock of offense; upon whomsoever it should fall, him it should bruise.

20. Thus understand us now what the Antichrist or the babilonicall Whore with
the Dragon Beast is, as may be seen in the Revelation: Every man which is not
born again of God, has the mark of the Beast and the false whore in him.

21. The Beast is the Animal [naturall] earthly Ham-like man, who is from the
Limus of the Earth, according to the Earths grossness and malignant Malice,
which arises out of the dark world, and stands in the Curse of God. This
beast did arise in Adam and Eve, when they did Imagine after evil and good;
and came into its selfefulnesse, away from the divine power and will; and is
before God only as a beast: This beast, the Devil has infected, with his
desire, and made it wholly monstrous, and insinuated his desire thereinto, so
that it only lusts after vanity as a Cow does after Grass.

22. But the whore of the Beast is the poor Soul captivated in vanity; which
soul, had its rise in the formed word of the three Principles, which was Gods
Image, but now by the Lust of the beast, it has begotten to it self, an own
self-will, which is departed from God into selfehood, as a self-willed
self-born creature; which does what it pleases, and not what Gods Spirit
wills: this self-will revoulted and apostatized from God, is the whore of
the beast, which whoreth with its self in the Pride of selfehood.

23. But now the poor captive soul lies in this Gross beast, and is
captivated in its own selfe-borne will, viz. in the whore, and longs after
God, from whom it proceeded and was inspired into the created Image; and
looks about on all sides, where its true native Home of Rest should be, and
it finds that it is clothed and covered with this whore; and then it
brings its desire into this whores will: and seeks the place of God for
Rest, and then the whores will takes the poor captivated souls desire into
it self, and thereby does exalt and set up it self; it persuades it self,
that it, in the souls desire, is the fair child of God which shall possess
Heaven, and gives out, that it is holy, and sets forth it self, as a God,
which men must honor and adore.

24. And being this Bastard, viz. the false will of selfehood, cannot see or
behold the place of God, either what or where God is; then the false will goes
on in the way of its property, and betakes it self unto, and appropriates to
it self, the manifested Word of the Letter, viz. the formed voice of Gods
children, who spoke from the Living word, and sets its contrived form of
its own conceived Ens into the Literal word, and clothes it self externally
with the literal word, stands forth with boldness and selfe-achieved
confidence, and says, here is the place of God; here is heaven; here is God
manifest; but it is only a Bastard and is predestined to Condemnation; for
God has not created it; Note. Predestination.
but it was born and brought forth out of the Lust of the Soul, when it did
turn its face from God into the Center, and would taste, and prove evil and
good.

25. This Harlots Bratt, sits upon the beastiall monstrous man, and rides
upon him as upon its horse, and is half Devil, and half brute Beast, which
shall and must dye, or else the soul will not be redeemed so as to see the
face of God again.

26. This whore has taken its power and understanding out of nature, viz. out
of the Compaction of Evil and Good, that is, out of the dark and outward
world, and has swallowed up [or avalled] the precious Image of God in it
self, which after God, was created out of the heavenly Ens.

27. Here is the Swinheard, as Christ said; who had consumed his fathers
inheritance with the Swine; he means the poor Soul, which has devoured,
spent, and consumed, its heavenly Goods in the heavenly Ens with this whore of
the evil Self-devillish will, so that it stands in Gods sight as a tattered
patched Swineheard, and keeps the fruit of the evil whore, viz. of the
Devils fatted swine, upon the Earth, which are the wicked ones, in their
fruits.

28. Thus we understand what the Antichristian babilonicall whore in man, is,
which has arisen out of the divided properties, viz. out of Adam, in whom the
properties departed out of their mutual and Equal Accord, each into its own
desire and lust to Selfenesse, whereby Adam became earthly and mortal; out of
whom afterward the Tree of the multiplicity of tongues and speeches did arise
out of one only tongue.

29. Now know this; that the multitudes or variety of Faiths are generated out
of the divided Tongues; so that almost every Nation has brought it self into
sundry several and peculiar Opinions, of Gods being, and Essence, and therein
consists the Confusion, viz. the Mystery of the great Babylon; concerning which
the Spirit of God did prophecy and declare out of the prophetical root (both
out of the Line of Christ, how Christ should come to restore and remedy the
poor captive soul, and regenerate its right true life: and also out of the
Turba magna) how this Beast together with the whore should be cast from the
face of God into the fiery furnace.

30. With this whore of Self, all the false Spiritual Clergicall and
Ecclesiastical.
ones or priesthood, have clothed themselves; who set up themselves to be
Teachers of the mystery of Gods Kingdom, without Gods Spirit: they have
externally covered themselves with the prophetical and Apostolical word, and
pleaded the Testimony of the Bible, but they have introduced their own sense
out of the Whores Ens thereinto, and have hung, in their heart, to the
babilonicall fleshly whore, and have not understood the Prophetical and
Apostolical Tongue in its Sense.

31. They have spoken from the sense of their own beastiall selfe-hood,
through the prophetical, and Apostolical word, and have brought and used
Christ's words to their own selvish babilonicall Harlottry, and committed
whoredom; and likewise have Adorned and trimmed up their Bastard under Christ's
purpur-mantle with Silver, Gold, and precious stones, and also with worldly
dignities Honors favor and riches.

32. After these, men have run, and have even adored and esteemed them as Gods,
falling deeply in love with their Bastard; although their hearts have never
agreed, or stood upon the only true ground, but have been at variance with
each other: and this is that of which the Prophet Daniel speaks, saying,
Daniel 11.
they shall honor a God whom their fathers knew not, with Gold, Silver and
precious stones; and unto those that help them to strengthen their [strange
God] God of forces.
Maozim they will divide the Land for inheritance; this whole chapter does
belong hereunto.

33. Now, when we consider aright what this babilonicall Tower is at present in
Christ's Kingdom upon the Earth, and what it was under Moses, and among the
Gentiles; then we find very clearly, that among all Three it is of one
property; and so also among the Turks and present Jews; every Nation builds
it, out of its own materials for in the Right universal Sensual tongue, (if
it be manifest in one) we are altogether but one only people and Nation even
from Adam.

34. But the very cause that we are divided, and brought into Opinions, is, by
reason of our Master Builders and founders viz. of the high schools, Priests,
Popes, Bishops, Doctors; also the Rabbis and Masters of all nations; who are
set as workmen to the building of the Tower; all these have judged from their
own Language, and natural understanding, viz. from their conceived and formed
sensual tongue, from the outward letter; and have indeed neither known God or
the Light of nature; but have been blind and dumb as to both; both the Jews
and Gentiles; and also the Selfe-made Teachers of the Christians.

35. Whosoever have run, devoid of Gods spirit without divine understanding,
either among Jews and Gentiles, Christians and Turks; they have built only
this Tower, in their own essence, and the same is even a Tower of the great
wonders of God, of divine Contemplation both according to light and darkness,
life and death, joy and sorrow.

36. Not that we are to understand that this Tower is not at all profitable
before God; it is even the great Mystery of Gods manifestation according to
Love, and Anger; as God has created out of the great mystery all manner,
kinds, and sorts, of Beasts Birds Worms Trees and Herbs, evil and Good; and
that all, to the manifestation of the Great wonders; thus likewise the humane
Tree has brought forth such wonders out of its Sensual tongue, out of the
multiplicity of the properties, and introduced them into a Substance, for its
Growth and glory, viz to the great Harvest of God; where each property of Love
and Anger, Light and darkness, shall reap in, its own fruit, and every thing
shall possess its heaven in it Self in its own formed and conceived Ens, out
of the only word of God which has given forth it self to every life, (even
unto every life and Being according to its own proper quality and virtue,
according to, and out of, its Principle) as an universal word, to the glorious
manifestation of Eternity.

37. Now, when we further consider of this Beast, with the Whore; what it is in
it self, within, and without, then we find, that it is the formed compacted
word of the spirits of the Letters; for men are all of one only property as to
their life; all are begotten out of one flesh and Soul; and have all but one
only kind of life; as a Tree in many boughs and branches, where the boughs
and twiggs do not perfectly and wholly seem alike, or the same, in form, but
all have one only Sapp and virtue: so likewise the creature of mankind, among
Jews, Christians, Turks, and Heathens.

38. And the only difference is this; the spirits of the Letters in the formed
word, do sever us in the understanding; else we live all alike in the four
Elements, and eat of the fruits of one Mother, and remain in her, when we dye
to this outward life.

39. The compacted Sensual tongue, which is divided in the spirits of the
Letters, does confound us, and make us to err; so that we do suppose we are
strange one to another, and yet we are all but one only Tree; which the Devil
has poisoned with his desire in Adam, so that the equal Temperature or Accord
was brought into distemper and discord, whereupon the spirits of the Letters
were [variously] made manifest, so that we speak from many speeches; that is;
we have introduced the powerful word of God into the multiplicity of the
divided properties; and have made, in each tongues property, a Selfehood, or a
Self-ish desire, to arrogation, self-apprehension and assumption.

40. Hence arise the contrarieties, differences, and Text Images.
Opinions; in that we have introduced the unformed word into the form of our
own selfe-made Image; now we contend and strive about these Images and
conceits; and every one supposes his own to be best; and when we bring all
these Images and several Semblances again into one Language and Speech, and
mortify them; then the Only Quickening Word of God, which gives power and
life to all things, is again manifest; and strife cease, and God is all in
all.

41. Therefore we say as we have found it in the Grace of the One; that all
men's Imaginations opinions and Knowings of God, his being, and will, without
the divine light, [or The undoubted Unction of the holy Ghost
illumination of the Spirit] are this same whores Beast, which is flown forth
and arisen from the compacted spirits of the Letters; whereby men contend about
the Spirits of the Letters.

42. We have lost the Five vowells in the Alphabet; which do introduce all the
spirits of the Letters into one pure harmony; and the five vowells are as
it were senseless or dumb in reference to the other letters, and yet they are
the life of the rest, for there cannot any word be formed, but there must be a
vowell.

43. Now there is no better way or remedy to bring us into union, that so we
may become ONE again with one another; One people, One Tree, One man in Soul
and body; then to destroy and kill all the Images or forms of the Letters in
us; and suffer none of them at all to have its own selfe-life: not desiring to
know or will any more of God save only and alone what God wills to know in
us and through us; and also that we do immerse or resign the Souls hunger
and desire merely only and nakedly without any other knowing or willing, into
the five vowells; and therein the great holy Name of JEOVA or JESUS (viz. the
living word) is manifest, which gives life unto all things, and not according
to the property of nature, desire and will the different variety of many
things, but give up our selves into the one only Love-Sun, therein He is
manifest.

44. As the outward Sun gives life and power to the whole world; so likewise
this only Name, in its Power, gives life and understanding to all the
Letters; and understand us aright what we mean by the whoredom of the Letter.

45. The letters, viz. the properties of the Sensual tongue, have introduced
themselves into an external form, or selfe-full will and understanding, and
brought themselves with the vowells into a compaction [selfe-comprehension or
particular formation] and when this was done, then JESUS viz. the holy Name
JEOVA, died [or disappeared] in the Sensual tongue in the Letters with the
five vowells of the one only holy mental tongue; that is; the spiritual Man,
which was resigned in [and to] God, dyed to the divine understanding and will.

46. Now there is a selfe-willed Beast of Selfishnesse and own-hood brought
forth out of the spirit of the other letters, which does only kill, Christ in
Paul. 2 Cor. 3.6.
and bring forth dead fruit: for Christ says; the letter kills, but the
spirit makes alive; understand this thus.

47. The divided Sensual tongue kills us, sets us at ods and variance, leads
us into Babel; but the spirit of the vowells; viz. the holy Name of God, does
again revive and quicken us in him; therefore the holy word of the five
vowells did again (when as the spirits of the letters were divided and brought
into the Selfehood of the wonders of God) espouse and incorporate it self
forthwith in Paradise with the precious covenant, into the Letter viz. into the
Natural man; for to manifest it self again with a motion in the Compacted
Tongue, and to introduce the holy Sense again into the Sensual tongue.

48. Thus understand us aright; the literal form in the Sensual tongue, is
now the Evil Beast, which will domineere in its own power: now into this evil
Beast the spirit of the five vowells viz. the Name JEHOVAH (which with the H,
has breathed the JESUS thereinto) has given in it self, and killed the evil
Beast viz. the Self-will, and has again Tinctured the spirits of the Letter,
viz. the right natural man, with the Tincture of the holy Name of the vowells
or JEHSVS; and with the Love has slain the death or deaths in the letters,
and destroyed their Self-will; so that the spirits of the letters, cannot any
more introduce themselves into a selfefull Compaction of the Sensual tongue;
for they are dead in their own will; and the Spirit JEHOVAH in JESUS is become
their life; Romans 6.2.
so that they live no longer to their Selfehood; viz. to the nature of the
wrath, but in that they live, they live to God.

49. Thus now the Beast of the whore is in us outwardly, viz. in the mortal
man; and inwardly is Christ in the immortal man, who is passed through the
death of the letters and has turned the death into life. Joh. 5.24.


50. Now it behooveth man, and his main happiness depends thereon, that he
also dye unto the Images of the letters in him; and disclaim or depart from
all Reasons schollarship, or knowledge of nature, and all babylonicall
Master Builders however they be called; and enter into the one only life
JEHSVS; and not at all dispute about the way, where it is; but only Or
consider.
think that it is in him; that he must forsake all, whatever he has, either
Art wit or skill etc. and become one barely and nakedly in himself, bring
himself into the ONE, viz. into Gods will, and be freely willing with
whatsoever it will work or do with him: he must give up himself will-lesse;
and leave himself wholly in Gods Mercy; and bring all his learnings into this
one only Thing; that he in his teachings and learnings will not do or speak
any thing but what God wills through him: and thus all Images [opinions and
conceits] do dye in him; and the Souls life falls into the only living
word, which has manifested it self again in the humanity.

51. For this is the great Beast of the Babilonicall whore in us, that we bring
our selves into the Images and forms of the Letters; and make Opinions to our
selves: that Opinion, is a Beast.

52. Also we must not desire to know and will* our selves; but dye continually
with our own self-will; and in all things give God the honor; and give him
again that which he gives us; viz. whatsoever understanding wisdom and skill
we have; and acknowledge that it is not our own, but that the divine Sun
shines out of, and through, us, and works in us as it pleases.

53. Thus likewise we must diffuse and give out again our power and virtue,
which the divine Sun works in us, universally to all, without any gain,
advantage, or hire, from any; whosoever shall help to maintain and nourish our
life, unto him we must be thankful, and not flatter any for his authority's
sake; or receive his false glance show or luster, into this Sun-light; but all
must be in General or Common, as the Sunshine does give it self universally,
and gives no strong Great or Potent thing, any more but its purity and
brightness, it Tinctureth the Earth and its children with one only power and
virtue, and gives life, and strength to all things.

54. Herein now we shall know, whether one be a Teacher sent of God; or whether
he has his rise and original only out of the spirit of the Letter; if he be
born universally out of the Love, then he has the light of divine knowledge,
viz. the Sensual divine understanding, a Tongue, Tinctured from the divine Ens
of the five vowells, and speaks from the Spirit of God; rebukes and teaches
powerfully without respect of any man's person; and has no Image [or mental
Idoll] in him; for he teaches from the Spirit of God, even what the same
[spirit] teaches in him.

55. But if he be a Master Builder of the Tower of Babel, born of the spirit of
the letters, viz. of the disharmony [or diversities] then he is a hypocrite,
and flatterer, a glozing fawner, that will say any thing to please those that
are gainful and advantageous to him; a soother of those that do help to
honor his Maozim, and adorn his Letter-God in the divided tongues; a scorner,
evil speaker, and bold censurer of those that do not honor him in his form,
and Sect of religion; a selfe-applauder, ambitious, proud, and under a
glistering show of Religion and seeming holiness, a covetous, malicious
envious one; putting forth himself with ostentation; that so he may be known
and honored; he will be applauded and set by, of man; attributes to himself
understanding and wisdom; and boasts of wisdom and a rectified judgment
and understanding, and yet has none of them; but he is only a builder on the
Tower of Babel; viz. of an external figure and form; a painted Christian; he
will undertake to teach others, and yet he himself was never taught of God; he
teaches only from the form of the compacted spirits of the letter, which
have compacted themselves in evil and good, he takes these into his own
power and ability; and compacts, and sets the words together into an Opinion.

56. And that opinion, is the Tower of Babel, and they which run after him, and
associate gather and bind themselves with him in the opinion, are the City
Babel, viz. the children of Nimrod; who will climb, and ascend up to heaven
upon this Tower, and are continually a climbing up, their whole life, yet come
not to heaven in the opinion, but when the time of the outward literal
constellation is out, then this built Tower falls down; viz. the outward man,
together with his opinion, and all shatters and breaks to pieces, even to the
only soul, which then stands naked and bare before God.

57. Here is now no remedy, unless that it has the one only spirit of the
Sounding Letter, viz. the informed word of God in it, so that it is able in its
desire to attract and draw the same to it self, and cloth it self therewith,
that the same does cleave and break in pieces all the formed contrived
compacted tongues and Images of the letters, and introduce them into one only
tongue and will, which is God all in all; all things must enter again into the
ONE, viz. into the universal; in the multiplicity there is nothing but strife,
and disquietnesse, but in the Oneness there is an eternal Rest, and no enmity
or contrary will.

58. Now when we do truly consider again what the Tower and the City Babel is
in its formed Image upon the Earth, and what and where it is, then we find it
clearly pourtrayed before our eyes, that it is the great Houses of the
Churches, Cloisters, Fortresses, and also the strong walls, and Towers of the
Cities upon the earth, wherein men hide themselves from force and power, and
in the Opinions play the Hypocrites before God in the Churches Cloisters, and
strong holds; and cry unto him that he should receive and accept of them in
their contrived framed, and received opinion of the letter.

59. What is all this? an Idolatry and hypocricy; An Antichrist with show and
glistering glory; what do men bring into this glozing hypocritical Babylon;
nothing but Images mental Idols and selfe-contrived opinions forged out of
the form of the letter; what do men carry home with them from this
hypocritical specious house? only the Images of the letters; into these
Images, and conceits the poor captive soul does wrap it self, which
notwithstanding is full of fear doubting and trembling, by reason of the
conceived, and received Image or opinion; and is continually in fear least
another people might break in upon its received framed Images and destroy and
overthrow these its received Images, and therefore men have made Fortresses
Bulwarks and Towers and strong walls about their Cities and Churches; that so
they might defend themselves least the Tower upon which they would ascend up
into heaven should be destroyed.

60. Now says reason; these are indeed houses of meeting, where men do teach
and instruct the simple and ignorant, where men sing and pray etc. lo!
externally, in, and among, the literal men, they are only the Tower and City
Babel; but internally among the children of God, in whom the Temple of God is,
where the Images and mental Idols are destroyed, there is Christ: that is, in
those who have pulled down and broken all Images, and opinions in them, and are
entered through the conversion from Images and conceits only and alone into the
only mere naked Grace Mercy and Free compassion of God, and esteem
themselves as wholly unworthy empty Nothings, and become as 'twere dead in
themselves, willing, or desiring nothing else save only the mere purity of
God in his Love-will, and account themselves too unworthy of attributing or
taking any thing to themselves, and freely fall in deepest humilty into Gods
tender mercy, as if they were not: and wholly cast their desires and wills into
Gods compassion; so that, what he wills and does in them, that they also will,
and nothing else; in these I say it is a house of teaching and an house of
hearing, a Temple of God; where the Spirit of God teaches hears, sings and
prayseth in the Soul; for they are dead to all selfehood, and selvish willing
and weening, and do melodize with unity and oneness of Spirit in the praise
of God, in the knowledge of the holy Ghost; these are the Church of Christ.

61. But the rest have only the Tower at Babel in the opinion, in their
conceits and Images; these Idols they carry with them into the Houses of
stone, and glory in them, worship them, and carry them again home with them;
and fight for them, as if they had the living God in them; and wage great
wars for these Images; laying Country and people waste and desolate; and yet
they are more foolish then the Birds in the air, which do all praise and
honor God in one tongue, and understanding; for they are all without any
Images; whatsoever the great God does with them therewith they are content.

62. The humane Tree is only one Tree; if they continued in the one only God
who has created them; and did not make unto themselves Images, who would set
them at odds and variance about God? they indeed Acts 17.28.
are and live in the one only God, and yet they contend and jangle about God.

63. Wherefore do they contend? for the Idols of their heart, for the
Stone-houses of the Churches and for the pride of the Images, [and forged
opinions] every one will honor his Image, and set it up aloft as an high
Tower; that so he might have great respect in the City Babel; and therefore
they build themselves strong holds, and make great bulwarks, and walls to
defend and keep the Image, and flatter themselves in hypocricy, and understand
and mean by the contrived and painted Image, the God Maozim, viz. the
fat-belly God, and pleasure of the beast, viz. of this whores Image; they set
the Image upon the Tower for the show of their holiness, and therewith they
are very devout in glistering appearances before God; as with a peculiar
Selfe-born God; but they immure the Beast within their Stone-houses that it may
be secure, and there fat it self.

64. What is now this beast with the whore; it is halfe-devill, which has its
Kingdom upon the Earth, and it is half beast, this evil Beast has devoured
man, viz. the Image of God.

65. And for this cause God became man, that he might destroy, slay, and
nullify the works of the Devil; and we must put on this divine humanity, and
destroy the Devils Kingdom in us, and mortify all Images, otherwise we
cannot see God; the living word must mortify the literal Image.

66. The living word is therefore become man, that the literal Image might
dye, and the first man, which was formed out of the living word, in Gods Image,
might be regenerated anew in Christ's Spirit, viz. in the living word; and if
now he be borne, then all the Image-teachers are more prejudicall then
beneficial to him; for they introduce their Images only into the Temple of
Christ, and destroy the Image of God.

67. And let this here be declared concerning the children of Nimrod, and the
Tower of Babel; as the Spirit has so given us to know; and we do admonish the
Reader, in Love, to prove and examine himself; he shall find where he is:
this is not written to reproach any; but thus the Spirit speaks with open
mouth, and shows, what all things are, from whence they come, and into what
End they shall go.

68. But the reason why so much is written of the Beast and the Whore of Babel,
is, because it is at its End, and shall soon be broken in pieces; therefore it
must be revealed, that men may see and know it; for Babel falls not unless
that all whatsoever has made the Images does likewise fall: all Images [
Opinions and Sects of Religion] together with the Beast and whore must fall;
else there is no Cure, or remedy.

69. Men have for a long time been a patching and pieceing of it; and have
verily thought, to have made a virgin of the whore, but her whoredom has
thereby been only adorned, trimmed up, and made the greater: if this whore
shall fall; then all Sects, which are only the Images of the whore, must fall
down and come to naught, together with Beast upon whom she rides: every man
must break down and destroy the Images and Idols in himself, and where they
will not do it, there the zeal of the Lord does it.

70. How very finely does the whore at present perck up its head, and being it
hears that the spirit does intimate [great and glorious things] of Zion, viz.
of the Adorned holy bride of Christ; then it thinks that it is the fair
child, which God will bring into a golden Temple, wherein there shall be a
brave Golden Time, and mere joy pleasure and delight* and it looks about, to
see from whence this fair Temple of God should come, into which it should
enter, and become a virgin; it hearkneth continually from whence these holy
People should come, who as it supposes should make a Golden world.

71. But it thinks not to leave off from its covetous voluptuous whoredom, and
be converted; no! it grows worse and worse; and more unchaste and abominable,
full of blasphemies; so that there is scarce any good at all in it; and it
stands before God, as an arraigned condemned whore.

72. Hearken thou Adorned and crowned Babylon, full of evil and wickedness in
the sight of God, and his Angels; we have heard a watchman say; Away! the city
together with the Tower of the whore, and the beast, is fallen, and judged of
the most High: thou shall not see the city of God for ever, unless that thy
children do put off and cast away the defiled Garment full of shame; and fall
down wholly naked and bare, without any Image, at the feet of the most High;
and turn unto him* such as these may indeed see it; but as for others who hope
for golden mountains and seek for Temporal honor, money, and pleasure of the
flesh; not any of them. AMEN.

73. Reason will, here, in the above mentioned Text, where it is mentioned,
that a true Christian must dye to all Images Opinions and Selfe-knowledge, and
be wholly annihilated in himself, begin to speculate, cavil and say, that we
do forbid man the natural knowledge and external Rational wisdom, whereby
men do Govern the life and all things of this world, and if this were so all
understanding would be abolished.

74. Unto him, we declare, that nothing is hereby taken away or abolished in
man, neither understanding skill or Art; for all these arise out of the divine
wisdom, we do not nullify the expressed Word of the formed wisdom, but
only the Beast which will rule in divine contemplation, viz. the beast-like
will of Self, and selvish ownhood and propriety, which is departed from God,
which honors it self as a false selfly God, and cannot believe or trust in
God. (This is even the Antichrist which has 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
set himself up in Gods place:) and we withal, do teach, that man must
wholly dye to the Antichristian Image; that he may be born again in Christ,
with a new life, and will; which new will has might and ability in the formed
word of nature, to see and behold with divine eyes, all the wonders of God both
in nature and creature, in the formed wisdom.

75. For if the Antichrist dies in the Soul, then Christ arises from death;
for he rests in the five vowells in his grave, viz. in the mentall-tongue,
which dyed in Adam, and lies captive in Antichrist; when this same arises
from death in the mental tongue, and is made alive, then he opens all the
treasures of the heavenly wisdom in the Sensual tongue; so, that man does far
more clearly understand the spirits of the letters, viz. the formed word of
nature, in all the three Principles, then he did before in the Antichristian
whores child.

76. For the new birth is indeed effected and brough^ to pass in the mental
tongue, viz. in the disappeared Image of the heavenly humanity; but it Tingeth,
and casts away the false antichristian Image of the natural humanity; viz.
of the spirits of the dumb senseless letters, and does make them all
senseless and dead, in their selfe-hood; and gives them their own life; so
that they do behold themselves in the new humanity; and make all their
assumptions and formations in the new humanity.

77. These new assumptions and formings are effected and wrought forth, in the
divine will, in Resignation, and they are the heavenly Images and formings
which are formed and shaped in the holy Ghost to the honor of God.

78. For if the holy Name of God, be not in its power, in the forming of the
words, viz. in the spirits of the Letters, which are the formed word, and helps
to form the word in the Sensual tongue, then the false Antichrist speaks
only from his own self- assumption of the literal form.

79. For the Spirit of God does form and imprint into the word of the mouth
(when as the Sensual tongue takes it;) righteousness, truth, faith, Love and
patience; viz. divine power, and virtue; but the Antichristian child does
co-forme in the conception of the word out of the Serpents Ens, lies,
falsehood, Tales, unfaithfulness; pride, coveteousnesse, bitter stinging envy,
anger, backbitings, revilings, and all whatsoever is against God, and makes
the formed word of the letter, to a Beast, and wicked Bastard, which is
rejected from the face of God upon which the Judgment passes.

80. The like is also to be understood concerning the external wisdom and
Art; if the divine wisdom works therein, then the understanding and Art, is
very good, and grounded in the divine wisdom; but if it be otherwise, it
stands in mere antichristian false Image [and Phancy] to the Judgment of
God.

Note.
81. Therefore Let a man prove and try himself, what falls in, and suggests it
self, into the Sensual tongue in the formation of his words; if it be truth
righteousness faith in hope, Love in patience, an earnest full unfeigned
desire to speak and do the truth and that for Gods sake, in hope of Eternal
life, then it is well with him; let him continue steadfast in such exercise; and
work more and more effectually and powerfully therein; and his precious Pearl
Tree stands in its growth and increase.

82. But if the contrary be found in him, that when he will speak, that then
lying, a proud look, great words, for pomp and ostentation, also envious
bitterness, false speaking against his neighbor, falsehood, Anger, a
revenging desire, false and evil interpretings, and wrong harsh censurings do
fall in and imprint themselves into the formings and Fancy of his words; then
he may ceratinly and really know, that he has the antichristian babilonicall
whore together with the false wicked Dragon-Beast sitting in his Heart; which
does introduce and insinuate and imprint such will and desire in his words; for
the forming and building up of the Hellish Images; for these false insinuations
and suggestions are all brought to Substance in the formation of the Sensual
tongue.

83. Therefore know O man! Note.
(and prove thy self) that thou art the Image of God according to the divine
word and understanding: if thou speak willest and do righteously, then
thou art that same Image of God, wherein God dwells speaks wills and
works, but if otherwise, and the contrary is found in thee, then thou art the
apostate rebellious Lucifer in his Generation and train; and do, willest,
and desire even that which he wills and does.

84. And though thou desire not Hellfire; Lucifer also did not desire it;
but there is no other reward for the false Image; being it forms it self out
of the Abyss, it must verily enter into its Fathers country.

85. For, the speech, and understanding, of man, does not befall him from the
Stars and Elements; for then other creatures could also speak and understand:
Man has the same, Originally, from the incorporated formed word of God, it is
the Name of God, which he must not abuse, upon pain of eternal punishment:
This incorporated word, man has, out of all the Three Principles, in himself:
and has a free- own-peculiar-will to form a Substance, out of which Principle
he will; and thereupon also follows the Separation, and reaping in, of every
thing into its receptacle [or appointed place.]

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Abraham, and his seed, and of the Line of the Covenant in its
Propagation; and also of the Heathenish Gods.
IF we look upon the Hystory of the Acts of the Ancient holy Patriarcks, with
right eyes of understanding, then we see therein, mere wonders; for the lines
[or Races] of the children of God, are like unto a tree, which grows into
boughs, and branches, until it bears fruit: thus also the line of Christ grew
in the Stem of the promised word in the Covenant, from branch to branch, even
into the height of the twigs, unto its right Age, until the Power of the Tree,
that is, the word in the Covenant, put forth it self with the glorious
Soverain fair blossom.

2. Out of which blossom the holy Image of God is again grown in flesh and
blood viz. in a holy Body: we see its boughs and branches so fair and
excellent, that the soul does most exceedingly rejoice at this contemplation,
and truly desires to bud and grow forth along with these boughs and branches,
to the great Praise of God in our Angelical Tree of the Hierarchies of Christ,
Text of.
in the holy Paradise.

3. God made a Covenant with Adam after his fall, when he dyed to the heavenly
Ens, in him, that he would quicken him again, and regenerate him anew; and
this Covenant was the root in the disappeared Ens which grew in this line of
Adam from Seth and his children and posterity, even unto Noah, in one In the
Stock or body of the tree.
Stem of the tree; and with Noah God renewed the Covenant.

4. For the undivided Sensual tongue, wherein the spirits of the letters did
rule in one harmony, continued until the flood, so that all men spoke in one
Tongue, in which Tongue the divine Spirit of the five vowells, viz. the divine
understanding, moved.

5. But being they had introduced the Image and Beast of vanity, into the
sensual tongue, and fell wantonly in Love with the babylonicall whore of
self-hood, therefore God complained against them; that they would not suffer
his spirit any more to rule them; and said; that it repented him that he had
made man.

6. For as the Sorrow to destruction did manifest and open it self, even so
also the sorrow of repentance to the new regeneration out of the Covenant: thus
the sorrow of the formed word in the only Sensual tongue destroyed every life
and being which lived in the Air, that is, in the manifested Spirit of God,
viz. in the third Principle; and the word of the Sensual tongue, did, after
the flood, put it self forth in a compaction of the spirits of the Letters.

7. For God said to Noah: the men are flesh, and moreover vain and wicked even
from their youth; thus the holy Spirit would not any more manifest himself in
the evil contrived Sensual tongue, but left them to follow their own Fancy;
seeing they refused to follow him: he suffered the power and force of nature to
manifest its wonders out of evil and good viz. in Images of the dark and
outward world, where their Images were trimmed up and set forth in the glory
and light of the outward nature, wherein evil and good are mixed together, to
the contemplation of the wonders of God, according to Love and Anger; from
which ground, the Heathens understanding, with their Idols, did arise and
spring forth.

8. For the understanding of the spirits of the letters, did bring it self
into the formings of many speeches, and in those formings of Self, the Images
were brought forth in the understanding, wherein the outward nature did behold
it self; and also the Devil did from Gods wrath, introduce his Imagination
and desire into men, thereby to lead them from the true understanding into
Images; so that they did not know the True God.

9. For all the Oracles of the heathenish Gods do take their Original out of
the outward, and inward nature of the dark world; as a Figure, or
understanding of the Soul of the outward and inward dark world; like a
peculiar Selfely God; understand, a Nature God; for as the Sensual tongue was
become such a Nature-God, and understanding, which did play the hypocrite with
it self, and formed the Images in it self: so God suffered it to be, that
nature did likewise represent it self to them as a God in the Oracles, and
spoke through the Images.

10. For the Heathens worshipped the Stars, and four Elements; being they
knew, that they governed the outward life of all things; their understanding of
the Compacted Sensual tongue, viz. the Comprehended word of the understanding,
did also enter into the formed Compacted and amassed word of nature in them;
and one understanding moved the other, viz. the humane understanding, in their
desire, moved the understanding in the Soul of the outward world, viz. of the
expressed and formed word out of the inward dark and fire-world, and out of
the astrall and elementall world, in which Soul the meaning of the Sphere of
Time, is in the understanding.

11. Through which understanding of the Soul of the outward world, the
Prophetical Spirit has signified from the Spirit of God, how the formed and
expressed word of nature and time should afterward bring it self into forms,
of pulling down and setting up, among the Nations, viz. into the building and
rearing up of Kingdoms, and of their destruction and ruin, in which Soul of
the outward world, all things stand in time limit measure and weight, like to a
clock, or Horologe, of which, the Scripture speaks much.

12. From this Soul; viz. from the Horologe of the understanding of nature, the
Heathens were answered by their Images and Idols; viz. through the Sense of
the Astrum which their faith (that they powerfully brought thereinto) did move
and stir up.

13. And not wholly by the Devil, as the Calves eyes judge, who know nothing
of the mystery and say, only Devil, Devil, and know not what God or Devil
is: they are themselves Idols and men-Devills, and serve their Image-God
Maozim [and Mammon] in selfe-hood, and are as much, counterfeit Images and
Idols, as the heathens were.

14. And they have at present made, the Turba in them, a false God, which will
even bring the Deluge of fire upon their Necks; of which they have no
understanding or faith; and say continually there is no danger [a brave time of
Reformation] whereas they have brought the Horologe of nature, to its set
limit, to destruction: for the withheld Spirit of the wonders is at the end
and limit of its imprisonment, and manifests it self out of the great Horologe
of the inward and outward nature, with the mental tongue, through the Sensual
compacted tongue; and this is a wonder, which none can hinder.

15. Now as we are to understand and consider thus, of the Sensual compacted
tongue of the formed understanding of the Gentiles, who were of Hams and
Japhets generation; the like also we are to understand, of the mental (yet
compacted) tongue in the Covenant, which in the manifestation of it from Sems
children and generation, fell upon Abraham, where, after the flood, the first
spiritual holy Oracle did open it self out of the mental tongue of the five
vowells, out of the holy Name of God; viz. out of the holy fire of the Love of
God; through which fire, the divine voice was made manifest.

16. And we see very excellently, and fully, how the Spirit in Moses does
intimate and declare it in the Geneology even in the Names; how all the Read
the 1. Question of the 40. Questions of the Soul.
Ten forms of fire viz. the Ten properties of the holy tongue Of; or producing
the fire-life.
to the fire-Life, (understand to the fiery Tongue) are set forth, in the Names
of the children of Noah, even unto Abraham.

17. For, in Abraham, the Spirit of the fiery tongue [ viz.] of the holy
understanding, of the mental tongue, did open it self out of the Covenant,
and set forth also its figure out of its compacted formed mental tongue, viz.
the circumcision and the Offerings, [or Sacrifices] which figures, did all
point at Christ, who should open and unloose the band of the mental tongue to
the divine understanding, and again enkindle the light of Grace in Love, even
in the formed word in the Letters of the Sensual tongue, and destroy the Beast
of the formed tongue; in which, the Devil sported, and set himself therein as
God.

18. This Guest, the holy flaming Tongue viz. the Spirit of Christ, did drive
forth, in the opening and manifestation of the Covenant; and took possession of
the Throne of Prince Lucifer in the humane property, in Gods children.

19. Moses sets down ten Names from Noah to Abraham in the line of the
Covenant, viz. Sem, Arphaxad, Salah, Eber, Pelegg, Regu, Serug, Nahor, Terah,
Abram: and he sets down very wonderfully, that Terah begat three sons viz.
Nahor, Haran, and Abram: this is even a type of the three Principles,
intimating how all three should be opened in this holy flaming line of the
Covenant, through the holy fire, and be Severed from Vanity; and how the whole
man should be borne anew and formed to the Image of God, through the holy fire
in the Covenant: as indeed the names of the three brothers do represent and
hold forth so much, in the tongue of Sense; if a man does but introduce the
true Mental understanding thereinto, then he sees it in the form of the
composed spirits of the Letters; which although we could well give an hint of,
yet the un-illuminated reader would not understand it, but to our
School-fellowes we need not decipher it, they have it already in the
understanding.

20, By the Ten forms of fire I understand first the formed word in the Seven
forms of nature, 10. Forms of fire.
and the Eighth ninth and tenth forms are the inward world, which is unformed;
viz. the Eighth number is the fire of the Eternal nature of the divine
manifestation, also the Strength, and Omnipotence, which at the end of days
shall purge the floar: the Ninth number is the heavenly Tincture of the fire
and light; and the Tenth number is the Love-fire, viz. the Triangle of the holy
Trinity in the majesty; Signified enough to those that are our school-fellowes:
The 40. Questions.
it is explained at large in the Forty Questions of the Soul; even the
Philosophic discourse at the beginning and entrance of the same [Questions.]

21. Out of these Ten properties of the Names in the line of the Covenant, the
Oracle, viz. the divine voice was made manifest in Abraham; and therefore the
Spirit of the Lord commanded him to go from his own Country, and from his
kindred; for the voice of the divine manifestation with the Messiah or Christ
should not come forth out of his Kindred, viz. out of his own blood, but out
of God; but yet in him lay the vessel, viz. the Ens, in which the divine voice
would manifest it self; and therefore, because another Seed should be
introduced into his own feed, viz. an heavenly Ens, Joh. 3. he commanded him
to get out from his kindred, and fathers house.

22. For the possibility and Ability to the divine manifestation, did not stand
in man's Ens but in Gods; but man's Ens must come thereunto; that so Adams
heavenly disappeared Ens, might be quickened in Christ's living Ens, and in
Christ, arise from death, therefore God said to Abraham; get thee into a Land,
that I will show thee; here the Spirit signifies; that he should not see God
in his fathers Country; that is in the earthly man, but in the Land which the
Lord would show him, in his Seed, which was another Seed out of the divine Ens,
in this strange Seed he would bless his own seed, that is, tincture it with
the divine tincture of the ninth number in the Sacred Ternary, even with the
Tincture of the holy spiritual world.

23. For thus said the Lord to Abraham: Genesis XII.1, 2.
Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy fathers
house, into a Land that I will show thee, and I will make of thee a great
Nation, and I will bless thee; and make thy Name great, Thou shall be a
blessing. I will bless them that bless thee and curse them that curse thee.
The Great Name which he would make him in his seed, that was not to be
understood only as to the Kingdom of this world, for Abraham was only a
stranger upon the Earth, and must wander up and down from one place to
another, and possessed no Princedome or Kingdom, as the great Names of the
Gentiles out of the Sensual compacted tongues; for he was to be a stranger and
Pilgrim upon the Earth in the promised Seed, and blessing, for Christ said
also, his Kingdom was not of this world.

24. But the great Name which should be a blessing, wherein God would bless
all Nations, was the hierarchy of Christ, in the Covenant, which would open it
self in Abraham's seed: This was an Eternal great Name of a Royal Hierarchy of
an Enthroned Prince in divine Power and Omnipotence, which should rule over the
Curse; for God said, he would curse them that cursed him, viz. the apostate
revolted Devils, and all wicked men, who would curse this holy Seed and
blessing, upon their Head this Seed should tread.

25. And here, under Abraham's great Name and blessing, the person of Christ is
wholly to be understood; for he said, in thee all Nations shall be blessed, and
thou shall be a Blessing. Now all the families of the Earth could not be
blessed in the outward mortal man of Abraham; for Abraham dyed and his
children and grandchildren were a long time strangers, Servants, and bondmen
in strange Countries; as in Egypt for three hundred years and upwards, and had
no Scepter till under Moses; who also was no King, but a Prince of God [which
Princedome] continued unto King Saul; where they would indeed have a King
against Gods command and will; whom notwithstanding God did afterward reject,
and set up David to be King (out of the prophetical spirit in the compacted
Mental Tongue) under Christ's person, who should bring forth and manifest the
geat Name, and Eternal Blessing.

26. But here now we are rightly to understand what the Person of Christ should
be under this Name and Blessing; not wholly a stranger [or another person]
which should not be out of Abraham's, and Adams Seed; as some do err
concerning it, and install or set Christ only in the promised Seed viz. in
Abraham's promised Seed; wherewith the poor captive Soul would be little
benefited; also hereby the The Resurrection of our Earthly Bodies.
Resurrection of the dead out of these our present bodies would be wholly
nullifyed.

27. For if Christ were wholly another, then also another [or wholly a strange
person] must be borne in us out of Christ's seed and flesh, which would not be I
or my self, but wholly another man, as some do Err; that we are so borne of
Christ, as the dew is out of the morning, which indeed is true, but my I-hood
[or personality] which was created in Adam out of the divine Ens, (viz. out of
the good part of the Ens of the Earth, which came forth also out of the
heavenly worlds being, as to the good Ens into a Coagulation) must also be
therewith joined, as the like is also to be understood in Abraham.

28. For God said, in thee all Nations shall be blessed; he said not, alone in
me, but he said, I will bless thee and make of thee a great Nation, and make
thy Name Great; and thou shall be a blessing, thou thy Self shall be it, that
is, Christ should become Abraham, and Abraham Christ.

29. For the Seed which disappeared in Adam and dyed to the mental life, into
which God engrafted or incorporated the Limit or Aim of his Covenant, with the
quickening Word; the same is that, into which God would introduce his Blessing,
viz. the living divine heavenly Ens, and would bless Abraham and Adam and
their children in this re-quickned Ens or disappeared Seed, and make them
truly alive; the living Ens of the word in the Covenant and the Adamicall
disappeared Ens in Abraham, should become one person and body; for the same are
one kind of Ens.

30. But the poysonfull malignant Sensual desire which the Devil had made
monstrous, had shut up this holy Ens in Adam in death, and covered it with the
gross earthly property; like unto a fair piece of Gold which were changed into
Lead, so that one would say, the Gold is dead and gone, and it were truly so
indeed, if the Artist did not again redeem it.

31. Thus likewise the heavenly Artist would not reject Adams disappeared Gold,
and make, clean another new thing, but he took his own Tincture and of his own
Gold, out of which he had made Adams Gold, and tinctured Adams Gold with his
own Gold; even with his Tincture, that is, with the word (viz. with the power)
of God, and with the Essence of the word, viz. with the heavenly corporallity.

32. So that Christ became a God-man, and Adam and Abraham in Christ a man-God;
God and man One person undivided, according to, and out of, all the three
Principles of Eternity and Time, according to, and out of, Body and Soul; with
every property of man, and every divine property: Except the Serpents property
which Adam lusted after, took in, and imprinted on himself; the same he did
not assume; but the Ens, understand the humane Ens, whereinto the Devil had
sown his seed, that he must assume, and therein bruise the head of the Devil,
and of the insown Serpents Ens, and destroy the prison of death, which held the
heavenly Ens shut up; and spring forth afresh, as the dry Rod of Aaron which
budded and bare green Almonds was a lively representation of this: and this is
the true understanding of the Seed of Abraham and his Blessing, as he means.

33. Abraham in the spirit of Christ should be a blessing; for Abraham's Ens,
and Christ's Ens has blessed all Nations; understand the line of the Covenant,
in which the promised word stood in the Aim or limit of the Covenant, viz. the
Spirit of the five vowells, the Great Name JEOVA, which God, by the motion of
the Covenant in Abraham's Seed, made to [be] JEHOVA, or JEHOVAH, as an inspired
or inbreathed God, who should bless the whole Alphabet of the Or Tongue that
expresses the sense of all Languages in One.
Sence-all Tongue, understand, the formed compacted word, viz. all Nations,
Tongues, and speeches: a blessing of the Jews and Gentiles.

34. For he said, all Nations shall be blessed in thee, no nation or people
excepted, but all, even All, not only the line of the Covenant, but Adam in
his children; the line of the Covenant should bless the line of Japhet and
Ham; for Japhet should dwell in Sems Tent, that is, in Christ, viz. Japhet
should be received into Sems line.

35. But the gross earthly Ham (understand the gross flesh) is accursed in
Ham and Cain and shall not inherit Gods Kingdom, Joh. 6. not Ham in Soul and
body is cursed, but the Serpents man, whose figure according to the outward,
Cain and Ham must represent, so that all properties might be manifest in an
external figure.

36. Therefore we admonish the Jews, that they learn to know their Messiah,
for the time of their visitation is at hand, wherein they shall be redeemed
from the Captivity of their misery, and be made free again.

37. Also we admonish those that are ours, that they grant Mary to be the
daughter of Abraham, and Adam, and Christ's mother as to the Soul and Adams
created Image, and not according to the deity, or according to the Ens in the
word of life which came from heaven, for that was not her propriety, indeed it
stood in her, but [it was] in the word of the promise in the Eye-mark of the
Covenant, (which was accomplished or) at the limit, [ in her.]

38. But she is not the mother, which has brought forth, or born, God, as the
Jews, and Turks do say that we so teach; but God has brought forth and
blessed the same in her Seed; she in her Seed received the power of the holy
Ghost in the word, and brought forth the creature which was God and man.

39. And not the property of the deity, which has neither beginning nor End,
also does not possess either time or place, but is through all, and in all
from Eternity to Eternity, and has only manifested it self in the humanity,
as the fire does through-heat an Iron, and changes it wholly into fire; and
yet the Iron remains Iron still; so also the man or the humanity which Mary
brought forth out of her Essence and out of Gods Essence in one only Essence,
is to be understood.

40. She brought forth the humanity, and God the Father has from Eternity
brought forth the word which did manifest it self in the humanity, and filled
the humanity, as the fire does through-heat an Iron, and the Sun illustrate or
through-shine the Water or Glass.

4. She indeed has brought forth the heavenly body, but not from the power of
her Ens or seed, but from the power and ability of that Ens which did manifest
it self in her seed; as the Essence or being of Eternity manifested it self
through time, and yet the time was not able or capable to receive the Essence
of Eternity into its own might; but the Essence of Eternity assumed or took on
it the Essence of time; as the inward heaven and world, has brought forth and
assumed the outward heaven and world: so likewise the Eternity assumed the
Essence, that it breathed into Adam, which dyed or disappeared, in the Seed of
Mary, understand in her own humane Seed.

42. And this is the great Name of Abraham in Christ, and the Blessing of
Abraham, wherewith God blessed Abraham, and his children, and not a strange
person, as some erroneously conceive, who understand not the Three Principles.

43. The Person was strange but it is become an indweller in us; the heaven
took on it the world, and made the world in it to heaven, and yet each
remained dwelling in it self; viz. the formed word of the body, a creature, in
it self; and the unformed word in it self, God over all, and in all, and
through all; thus also we are to understand and consider of the heavenly living
Essence, which gave it self into Adams, and Abraham's Ens, as filling All in
the person formatively, and without the person at once through all, and with
the word of Power as an habitation or mansion of the power also through all or
every where, but not to be comprehended of any thing; as the Suns Power and
influence, and the Air, do penetrate through all things, and give life to
every being; the like is here to be understood.

44. We must by no means abolish the Creature in Christ's person, for that
which he assumed both from the Soul and body of man, the same, is creature; but
that which he introduced out of the deity into the humanity, that is, neither
nature, nor creature, yet in our humanity formatively, but immense,
uncircumscribed, not particular; like as the air, and Sunshine is whole or
entire, so likewise it is here; and we are in like manner to understand it, as
if the Sunshine did introduce it self in Something, into a form, and yet
were wholly One thing with the shine or light without the form: thus likewise
Christ's heavenly divine Ens which he introduced into our humanity, is to be
understood.

45. God did often appear to Abraham, and spoke with him as one man speaks with
another; therefore reason says; how was it done? did God assume the form of a
body? God appeared to Abraham in the Ens and Essence, wherewith, he would
manifest himself, in his seed viz. in Christ's person, and spoke from the word
of the Covenant in the Limit, in Abraham's seed, even unto the Mental Tongue of
Abraham, which moved it self in the Covenant, and this the Sensall Spirit in
Abraham did understand.

46. For otherwise Abraham was not able to see God; but in the formed Ens of
the heavenly Essence, Abraham was able to see in the spirit of the Covenant,
viz. in the same Spirit, which would manifest the represented type, and
Essence, in the humane Essence.

47. For it is written in Genesis 18. that God appeared to Abraham in the form of
Three men, and told him of a Son which should proceed forth out of his Loins,
whom Sarah should bear unto him, upon whom the Covenant passed; now what did
the Appearance of these Three men typifie? nothing else but the Trinity of the
deity, and the manifestation of the divine formed word through the Three
Principles: therefore the divine Image was represented in Three men; for it is
a Threefold Ens, but one only Essence; viz. Three worlds, and yet in one
another as one, but differenced in three Principles; viz. with the dark
wrathful fire-world, and with the holy light-and-Love-fire-world, and with the
outward visible world.

48. Out of these three worlds man was created, even into an Image of the
divine manifestation; therefore God showed himself to Abraham in the same Ens
and Essence, as in the form of the Angelical Message, and yet spoke of
himself.

49. For the represented Ens through which God spoke, was Angelical and
humane, it would become humane, for Christ as to the person of the creature
should be a Prince or an Angelical Hierarchy; so likewise God appeared to
Abraham in this Entall Essence and property with his own in dwelling voice.

50. Very exceeding wonderful is the hystory concerning Abraham, for the
Kingdom of Christ is therein wholly represented, not only the Kingdom upon
the Earth in the time of the four Elements, which also is pourtrayed and set
forth under it, but yet only as a Pilgrimage, which should not be the right
Kingdom, for Abraham must continually wander up and down, and also his
posterity, and yet God promised him the Country wherein he was a Pilgrim for
his propriety, that he and his children should eternally possess the same.

51. For so God said to Abraham, Gen XIII. Verse 14.
Genesis 13. Lift up thine eyes and look from the place where thou art,
Northward, Southward, Eastward, and Westward; for all the Land which thou
feast, to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed for ever: but now they obtained
possession of this Land a long time after; and were first brought in by Joshua;
and Abraham and his grandchildren lived not to obtain it, and they were very
often driven out from thence; and yet God said he would give it Abraham and his
children for an eternal possession.

52. But we see at present that they have it not in possession; for the Turks
have now possession of it; and Abraham's seed, viz. the Jews have at present
neither Land nor Princedome, but are almost in all places only as captives,
but now the purpose of God must stand, his word must be true: Abraham in his
seed shall eternally possess it, for Eternal is not Temporal only.

53. Therefore also God spoke of the Place, and shows the same to Abraham,
that he might see it with his eyes: and even here lies the Great Mystery; for
Paradise was in the world, and Adam lost Paradise; but in Abraham's seed viz. in
Christ, Paradise was again restored, not according to the mortal man, but
according to the heavenly.

54. Now we see at present that Christendom has not these Lands or Countries
in Possession; and so likewise the Jews have them not: and now being that
Abraham shall eternally possess them in his seed, viz. in the holy Seed;
thereupon we are to consider of the place of the holy Paradise aright; as the
Prophetical Spirit in Ezekiel, and Daniel, and others of them do signify and
declare; but especially Saint John in the Revelation, Rev. 21.
concerning the holy Jerusalem which comes down from God out of heaven, as a
Bride prepared, and Adorned to her Bridegroom; and in all, thus much is
signified, that Christ in Abraham's Seed shall take in his Kingdom.

55. For with the dissolution of the four Elements, when the four Elements
shall be in equal weight [or brought into the true Temperature] and the Earth
crystallized like a glassy Sea, Reve. 4.6.
as may be seen in the Revelation; even then that which was promised to Abraham
concerning the Eternal possession shall be performed; for Christ said: my
Kingdom is not of this world: but now the Kingdom of this world was shown and
promised to Abraham; therefore we must thereby understand the heavenly
Kingdom, and even that very place which was shown unto Abraham, when Paradise
shall be again made manifest and Abraham in Christ shall appear to the eternal
possession.

56. For although at present the Turk has it according to the four Elements
in possession, yet Abraham in Christ has it with his seed in possession
according to Paradise; viz. in the Paradisicall world; Abraham is arisen in
Christ, and possesses his promised Land in his Principle: He is in Paradise
and the Turk in the outward world.

57. Paradise is in the world, yet not in the third Principle, but in the
Second: the one does not confound the other: when Abraham's children in Christ
do part from the earthly Body, then they take possession of this promised Land
according to the spiritual man, and possess the same Eternally.

58. And this is that which God so often said to Abraham, That he would give
him the Land to an Eternal possession, for when he promised it him, then he
commanded him to go away from that place, to signify, that he did not mean
the External Kingdom, but the Eternal; and set him forth a figure in the
Stars of heaven, saying, that even so his Seed should be multiplied and
increased; and as the Stars have a pure clear body in comparison to the
earthly bodies, so likewise the seed of Abraham should be an heavenly Eternal
One.

59. But that Abraham's children; viz. the Jews are at present cast out from
thence, and disperced into the whole world, the reason of it is, their
blindness and obstinacy, until the time of the Gentiles be accomplished; they
have not known the Lord of glory but have rejected him; but when they shall
know themselves, they shall be planted again into the Root.

60. Not that they are cast out of the Root, but they must be blind, that
their light might shine to the Gentiles; Note.
until the Gentiles also become blind in this light of Abraham (as indeed
they are at present really blind) and even then the light of Abraham shall
again arise out of its own root and Stem, and shine unto all Nations: even
then Japhet shall dwell in Sems Tent, and Israel shall be brought together unto
the open grace-fountaine of all Nations: concerning which all People are as yet
blind.

61. But the time is near; and the morning Star is appeared; if any be able to
see: but the Babilonicall whore has blindfolded all; so that all Nations walk
in the Night; her Abominable whoredom is come before the most High who will
blot out her shame, which has defiled the heaven. This thou shall soon find
by Experience in thy Drunkenness, says the Spirit of Wonders from its own Root.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A clear manifestation of the beginning of the heathenish war:
how Abraham delivered Lot his brothers Son; and of the Royal Priest
Melchisedeck of Salem, to whom Abraham gave Tithes.
HEre we see very clearly, Genesis XIV.
what the Imaginations purposes intentions and undertakings of men have been,
even from their youth upward; how they have brought themselves out of the Image
of God into half beastiall and half devilish properties, viz. into Pride
Coveteousnesse, and selfefull domination, in like manner as the Devil desired
the same, and therefore was cast out from his Kingdom.

2. For here the Gentiles, and the children of Ham at Sodom and Gomorrah, and
in the whole Region thereabouts, did now begin to exercise their domineering
Power, among whom Abraham was only a stranger, and dwelt in the Plain of
Mamre as in a wilderness, where he kept Cattle, but the Gentiles did tear and
rend for the Kingdom of this world, and for the external might and power,
striving how one people might rule over another, whose will and Dominion has
continued even to this day, and has received its beginning from the heathens,
and the children of Ham; viz. from Babel, from the divided tongues.

3. When the Powers of the formed word, viz. the properties of Nature did
divide themselves, and each introduced it self into a Selfishnesse, then
Strife, and enmity did arise among them for the Center of the nature of the
dark world, has obtained his Dominion in the fallen property of man; for men
were as dead, to the Kingdom of God, viz. in the Love and humility, and lived
at present to the outward Stars and the four Elements.

4. Also the Devil had built his strong hold in the Serpents Ens in man;
therefore they sought only after that which made them Great and Potent in the
world, and yet we may see, how the Devil did only fool and Ape them in the
wrath of God, so that they s^ew one another, and esteemed Temporal pleasure
higher then their life, which is the greatest folly under the Sun, that man
should bring his life into deaths danger, for a poor silly pride sake, whereas
yet he knows not whether he shall hold and possess that, for which he
murthereth kills, and slayes.

5. And we see how soon the Devil in his envy and pride ruled in them; for
though they had the whole Earth before them to possess, and many Countries,
and Islands were un-inhabited, yet they undertake war, that so they might but
domineere over one another, and rob, and plunder one another; thus the Devil
as man's Enemy, brought them into his pride that they might serve him.

6. It Is not in vain that Christ calls him a Prince of this world, he is a
Prince according to the property of the wrath of the dark world; in and
according to the same property he rules man in body and Soul, in will, and
mind.

7. For all war and contention does arise out of the nature, and property of
the dark world; viz. from the four Elements of the Anger of God, which
produces in the creatue, Pride, Coveteousnesse Envy, and Anger, these are the
four Elements of the dark world, wherein the Devils, and all evil creatures
live: and from these four Elements arises war.

8. For although God bad the people of Israel drive out the heathen, and wage
war, yet the Command was wholly from the Angry zealous God, viz. from the
fires property; for the heathen had stirred up the wrath and indignation which
would devour them; but God, so far as he is called God, desires no war, yea
he cannot desire any thing that is evil or destructive* for he is according to
the Second Principle only Good, and giving, and gives himself to all things.

9. But according to the dark worlds nature he is an Angry zealous God, and a
consuming fire, if his wrath be awakened; according to this property he
desires to consume all that moves and enkindleth it self therein; and from
this property, God bad Israel fight, and Smite the heathen; for his Anger was
set on fire in them; and they were as wood cast into the fire, which the fire
desires to consume.

10. Therefore the wrath of God bad one Nation slay another, that it might even
out of his wrath be taken away; otherwise the fire of his Anger would have
Enkindled it self, as happened to the five Kingdoms of Sodom and Gomorrah; thus
the wrath of God did satiate it self in the life of the wicked, which it
devoured into it self, in that they slew one another.

11. As it yet now adays so comes to pass, that oftentimes men cry unto God,
for to give them Success, and Victory, against their Enemies, that they might
murder them, but God gives them not victory therein, but the Sword of his
Anger, which they awaken with their prayers fierce desires and will: were they
true men, and children of God, they would need no war, for the holy Spirit does
not wage war, but he only loves and gives, but according to the property of
the Anger he consumes all un-godlinesse and wicked doings, and is thereby more
blown and stirred up in indignation.

12. For the more a man adds wood to the fire, and stirs it, the more it does
elevate and inflame it self until it devoureth whatsoever it can reach; the
like also is to be understood concerning the zeal of God: this Enkindled
Anger-zeale of God was set on fire in Adam; and it did devour his Image of the
holy world, and passed from Adam upon all men.

13. For they which were in the line of the Covenant had the Enkindled zeal,
according to the first Principle, viz. according to the Soul and body, also in
them; the one not better then the other; the Serpents Ens lay as well in
Abraham, and his children according to the Enkindled Soul; and according to
the gross beastiall property of the mortal, as in the Gentiles; except the
Line of Christ in them, which was not the Sinful man's Selfehood, but it stood
in Gods power, as the heaven stands in the world, and yet the one is not the
other; and as the heaven stands in hell, and hell in heaven, and yet the one
does neither confound or comprehend the other; or as the night is in the day
and the day in the night; or as the light of nature dwells and shines in the
darkness.

14. Thus we are to understand, how the children of the Saints have waged war
against the crew of wicked men, and drove them out; viz. in the Angers
property, which managed its Sword by them, to destroy the heathen and the
Generation of Ham; Gen XIIII. Verse 14.
for Abraham went out with his whole house and people, against the Heathen who
had carried away Lot his brothers Son captive, and he smote the heathen, and
delivered his brother. This was done in the zeal of God; which thus delivered
his children through the might of his Anger; for what conduces to the wicked
for destruction the same conduces to the holy men for life and deliverance.

15. But that those who will be called Christians (who ought in and with Christ
to be dead to the Anger and wrath of God in Christ's death) do wage war; they
do it not as Christians, but as heathens; No Christian warreth; for if he be a
Christian then he is dead in and with Christ's death to the four Elements of
Gods Anger in Self; and born a new man in Christ's spirit of Love; who lives
in Righteousness, in Love, and patience, and lives not to himself, but to
God in Christ.

16. For a true Christian leads his conversation and will in heaven, in the
life and Spirit of Christ; as St Paul says our conversation is in heaven; but
when the Christians do wage war they do it from the heathenish property, and
not from Christ's property; for a Christian is not of this world; his Kingdom
is in heaven; and he is dead in Christ to the world, according to the new
spiritual man in him: the Heathen-man, viz. the halfe-devillish man (who has
his Kingdom in this world, who never has room enough upon the Earth, but
lives in the four Elements of Gods Anger, viz. in Pride Coveteousnesse Envy
and Wrath) the same desires in the Christians, to war fight and slay.

17. Saint Paul says; give your members to be weapons of Righteousness; for
why do men fight? for the Kingdom of this world; Romans 6.13.
and yet as Christ said; his Kingdom was not of this world, James 4.1.
so also his childrens Kingdom in him is not of this world; Joh. 18.36
now then if we give up our body and Soul for weapons of Gods Anger, and seek
only thereby Self [interests, liberties, and privileges of Mammon] and slay
one another for the Kingdom of this world; I think we are herein Christians
indeed in the mouth, but the heart and Soul is an heathen, and not born out of
Christ's Spirit.

18. When Abraham had smote the heathen; he desired nothing of the goods which
he took, but restored to the King of Sodom what the Heathen had taken from
him, and was only zealous in the Lord; he did not fight for Country, and
Kingdom; but to deliver his brother Loath; this was a true zeal, which the
Lord drove in him; he did not stand up, and fight for Country, or City, and
albeit he obtained it, he desired it not, but went again unto his own place.

19. And here the Spirit in Moses speaks very wonderfully and says, that
when Abraham returned from the Slaughter, that the King of Sodom met him; and
Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth bread, and wine; who was a Priest of
the most High God, possessour of Heaven and of Earth, and blessed Abraham, and
Abraham gave him Tithes: And though we find almost nothing elsewhere in the
holy Scripture of this Priesthood, yet the same was really in the figure of
Christ; for the Spirit says in another place, of Christ; that he was an High
Priest in the order of Melchisedech.

20. Thus the Spirit of God does very secretly, and mystically represent the
Figure of Christ by Abraham; and calls him a King of Salem; and a Priest of
the most High God; viz. a Priest of Salvation and the holy Unction as it
intimates in the SenSAll Tongue; that is, Christ has blessed Abraham, and
brought him forth bread and wine; viz. his flesh, and blood; and is the high
Priest before God that makes Atonement for Abraham and his children.

21. For Abraham had managed the Sword of Gods Anger against the Heathen, now
came Melchisedech, and blessed Abraham again, least the Sword of the Turba
should lay hold on him; and he gave him forth bread and wine, that is, the
heavenly Ens; which he would introduce into Abraham's Seed, and change it into
flesh and blood; and here he appeased the Fathers Anger in the Covenant as in
the Type.

22. For this Priest with Abraham is really to be understood in a spiritual
manner; for although Abraham might have externally a Priest after the same
manner with him, under the figure of Christ; yet Moses says, he was a Priest
of God; and said to Abraham: blessed art thou Abraham unto the most High, who
possesses heaven and earth; who has shut up thine Enemies into thy hands;
here is none other to be understood but Christ, who very often appeared to
Abraham in the figure, and blessed him always; for the Spirit in Moses calls
him also a King of Salem; which is nothing else, but a King of Salvation.

23. And Abraham gave him Tithes: indeed he might have such a Priestly Order
with him, to whom he gave Tithes: but this King and Priest was he of whom he
preached; to whom Abraham gave tithes; viz. the Tenth Property of the humane
properties of the fiery tongue of the Soul, and the Priest gave his bread and
wine, and his blessing thereinto; viz. the Love-fire, the Tincture of the
light, together with the heavenly Substantiality; that so Abraham might receive
the lights Tincture into the Souls fiery Tincture and become again a complete
Image of God; which was separated in Adam with the woman: therefore Christ,
viz. the woman's Tincture, gave him again the lights Ens, that so the male and
female property might become one Image or person; this the Spirit does here
signify in Moses, under the Royal Priest of Salem.

24. For Esdra, when he dictated the lost Bible, in the knowledge of the Spirit
of God, to his Scribes, saw this very well; Note. Esdra dictated the Bible that
was Lost. 2 Esdra 14.
and therefore the holy Spirit does so set it down: and we see very exactly,
how Esdras wrote the hystories of Abraham in the vision of the Spirit; for the
whole hystory of Abraham is delineated under Christ's Person, and is an Image,
or Type of Christ.

25. Abraham saw in the Spirit, this Priest of Salem; and when Abraham offered
Sacrifice, then this Priest was in the offering, and offered to God; for he was
to make reconciliation for the world with an offering; therefore he was a
Priest of God.

26. He brought Abraham's will-offering viz. his prayer and desire in faith,
into the holy Ens of God, and in the same Ens, viz. in the divine Essentiality,
heavenly bread and wine was brought to Abraham's Soul, that it might eat at Gods
Table, till this Priest became Abraham; that is; did manifest himself in
Abraham with the heavenly Corporeity, viz. with the Souls food in the Right
bread and wine.

CHAP. XXXIX. How God appeared to Abraham in a vision; and established the
Covenant with him in his Seed, and how Abraham's faith laid hold of the
Covenant, which God accounted unto him for Righteousness, and how God
commanded him to offer Sacrifice, and what is thereby to be understood.
MOses says, After these things it came to pass, that the word of the Lord
came to Abraham in a vision; and said, Genesis XV. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
fear not Abram I am thy Shield, and exceeding great reward; but Abram said,
Lord God, what will thou give me seeing I go childlesse; and the steward of my
house has a Son; this Eliezer of Damascus; and Abraham said further: To me
thou have given no Seed; and lo! this son of my servant will be mine heir; and
behold the Lord said unto him he shall not be thine heir; but he that shall
come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir; and he commanded him
to go forth and said, look toward the Heaven, and number the Stars, can
thou number them? and he said unto him even so shall thy Seed be; Abraham
believed God, and that was counted to him for Righteousness.

2. In this portion of Scripture lies the Root of the Christian Faith, for God
said to Abraham, that he was his Shield and Reward, that he would give him the
seed out of his loins: God would be Abraham's reward; and give him a Son of his
own, whose Seed should be as the Stars in heaven, which are innumerable; and
his Stewards son should not be heir; viz. the Animal humane Seed full of the
Serpents Ens shall not inherit: but Gods Reward, Gods Ens: He would give in his
Reward into his Seed, viz. into the Power of his loins, which should be a Seed
like unto the Stars of Heaven; he looked upon the Seed in the Covenant, viz.
upon the Eternal Kingdom, which should be as the Stars in Heaven, so pure,
bright, clear, and innumerable; and this Abraham believed and it was imputed to
him for Righteousness.

3. Believing here is this much; viz. he received and laid hold of the word; he
took it into his desire viz. into the humane Ens; the Aim in the Covenant in
the formed Compounded word, viz. in Abraham's nature and property, Received the
Speaking word of God, viz. the Promise; and both these were formed into One,
and in this One Abraham's faith was Right; for God counted the word, which
Abraham received into his faiths desire, unto him for Righteousness, for
propriety and for Justification.

4. For thus received or in-taken word, justified the creaturall word, viz. the
expressed, created word, understand, that word which had formed it self in the
humane property, and brought it self into a creature; and put it self forth
out of the Three Principles into an Image; in which Image the Self-will had,
through desire, and lust, elevated it self with the dark worlds property viz.
in the fire of Gods Anger, and introduced it self into an Earthly grossness;
into which Gross Image the Devil also had introduced, by the Serpent, his
Ens, will and desire.

5. Now the living Eternall-Speaking holy word, came forth out of the Light's
and divine Love's property, to help this Ens, this compacted Word, and created
Image; and became its Reward; this same, Abraham's natural word, and power,
received into it self; and this same Word of God, intaken, and fixed in the
desire, justified Abraham's Corrupted word; it was his Righteousness; the same
destroyed the Anger, and ruinated the Devils desire and will; understand in
man's Ens, viz. in the formed word, this was effected.

6. For there is no Faith without Gods word and power; therefore Abraham did
now take Gods power, and promise, into his Ens in him, and formed or conceived
the same into a Substance of his Spirit; this was the Faith of Justification;
that Gods word and the humane will and desire came into one spiritual
Substance: Thus God accounted the Received or in-spoken Apprehended Word, unto
Abraham for Righteousness; viz. for propriety; and this is the ground and root
of faith; that he took in or imprinted Gods promise into his desire, as his
very own; and let not the same pass from him in Doubt; as Jacob did, who took
the word of promise into him, and said; I will not let thee go until thou
do bless me, and wrestled the whole night with the word of Power, until he
obtained victory; so that the promised word gave in it self to him, for
propriety; viz. to a blessing, or a great Reward, as here in Abraham.

7. Thus understand us very accurately; the Incorporated word of the Covenant
in Paradise, which God promised to Adam concerning the bruiser of the Serpents
head, did here at present wrestle through Jacobs formed word of the humane
property, with the new promised word, viz. with the living word (which did at
present move it self in him) and would, that the corrupt humane Ens might be
blessed with Gods Love, that the wound might be healed; and it did long and
pant after the fulfilling of the Covenant; that God would be pleased forthwith
to introduce the holy Ens of his heavenly essentiality into man's Essence, that
Christ might be born out of Gods and man's Essence; therefore Let Christendom
know, that Faith is not only an hystory or knowledge [but a real Substance.]

8. Faith is nothing else, but the uniting of ones will to God, and the
receiving of Gods word and power into the will, that so both these, viz. Gods
will and man's will become both one Substance and Essence; that the humane will
be even Gods will; and even then Christ in his Suffering, death and
Resurrection is accounted unto his own humanity for Righteousness; so that man
becomes Viz. Christ^
Christus, or the Anointed; understand according to the spiritual man: and
thus we put on Christ in Abraham's faith, and are twiggs, shoots, and branches
in his vine, and the Temple of God; he that teaches and believes otherwise,
is yet in the compacted un-contrite or un-cloven Tongue of unbeleefe, in the
whoredom of Babylon.

9. This is the true real ground of our Christian faith; that as Abraham put
on Christ in the faith, so we also at present do receive, and in our heavenly
part of the humanity put on Christ in his humanity, according to the heavenly
worlds Essence, in the same flesh and blood which Melchisedech represented and
brought to Abraham, in the heavenly bread, and wine, viz. in the Type thereof,
yea wholly receive it into our Ens of the heavenly worlds Essence, which dyed
in Adam, and become alive therein and arise from death in Christ, and dwell
very essentially with our spiritual man, in him; and even then he is our own
Righteousness, we in him, and he in us, Only One Christ, One God, One Faith,
One Tree in the Paradise of God, in the Stem which is God, and in the Power and
virtue thereof which is Christ, and in the branches of the tree which are we
Christians, wholly One Tree, not two; we understand not herein the gross
beastiall man full of the Serpents Ens which shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, John 6. but the true man, which God created in his Image.

10. Let Master Sophister or wiseling of Babel look us right in the face, and
see what spirits child we are: we understand not the Beast, but the man Christ,
which dyed in Adam, which was again Regenerated out of Abraham's Seed, and
deprived death of its might, and destroyed Hell in man, and slew the Death in
us, and arose again from death, and lives for ever; the same we mean by a
Right Christian, and not Calves, and Oxen, Dogs, Adders, Serpents, Toads and
the like, who would with their Beasts of vanity be outwardly Adopted, and
Regenerate children of God; no such Beast comes into heaven, only and alone
and none else but a Christ, viz. a child of Christ, which is born of Christ's
flesh and blood; Rev. 22.1^.
without are Dogs.

11. Therefore Let it be told thee, O Babel, thou ridest upon the Dragon of thy
own contrived half devilish, and half beastiall tongue in thy own words and
will, and have not Abraham's faith, viz. in the received and formed word, which
became man; but thou howlest with the Dogs; and wilt with thy snarling jeering
contentious dogs-will in a strange child, be Abraham's heir.

12. But God said to Abraham; thy servants child, shall not be thy heir, but
he that is begotten out of thy loins, who is borne of the Faith of
Righteousness, he shall be Gods heir, and not the Son of the Bondwoman, viz.
the Strange introduced gross beastiall Serpents Ens.

13. And God said to Abraham: I am the Lord, that has brought thee out of VR
of the Chaldees to give thee this Land to inherit it; Genesis XV. v. 7, 8. etc.
to the 17.
but Abraham said Lord God whereby shall I know, that I shall possess the
same, and he said unto him; take me an Heifer of three years old and a
Shee-Goat of three years old, and a Ram of three years old, and a Turtle-Dove,
and a young Pigeon; and he took all these, and divided them in the midst, and
laid each Piece one against another but the Birds he divided not; and when the
fowls fell upon the Carkases, Abraham drove them away, and when the Sun was gone
down, a deep sleep fell upon Abraham, and lo! an horror of great darkness fell
upon him; and he said to Abraham, by this thou shall surely know, that thy Seed
shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs; and they shall be compelled
to serve, and be afflicted 400. years; but I will judge the Nation whom they
must ser^^^; and afterward I will bring them out with great Substance, and
thou shall go to thy fathers in Peace and be buried in a good old Age; but
they shall come hither again after four Generations; for the iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full; now when the Sun was gone down and it was dark; lo!
a Smoking furnace, and a fire-flame passed between the pieces. Here the right
figure of Christ's Offering for the humanity, is represented; and also his
suffering and death, his persecution; and also his victory, is deciphered
herein; and likewise the Man of Sin and vanity; intimating, how he must fill up
his measure, and whereunto each is appointed.

14. God gave Abraham the Sign how it should go with his Seed; in that
Abraham said, Lord God! whereby shall I know that I shall possess the same?
then God set the figure of the Seed, before him (for he had comprehended it in
his Faith, which was made his righteousness) and showed it him in a figure:
for the Offering, signifies the Offering of Christ; the three sorts of Beasts,
viz. the Heifer, Shee-Goat, and Ram each three years old, betoken the part of
the outward humanity of the time, viz. out of the limus of the Earth.

15. But that they must be three years old; betokens, the whole outward
threefold man, of the Sulphur Mercury and Salt, viz. the three properties of
the three Principles which lie in the Earth in one Essence or Substance.

16. And that Abraham divided these three beasts, and laid one right over
against the other; Signifies the twofold limus of the Earth; viz. the Gross
property out of the dark worlds property; and then Secondly the limus out of
the heavenly worlds property which lies in one Compaction in the Earth, whence
man was created as to the body.

17. But that Abraham divided them; signifies; that the grossness which Adams
desire introduced, must by death be Separated from the pureness of the
humanity, and one must lie right opposite to the other, and be divided from one
another, each into its property, as light and darkness are divided, and yet
are near one another.

18. The Turtle-Dove betokens the poor Soul captivated in this beastiall
property; and the young Pigeon signifies the inward disappeared humanity of the
poor Soul, which shall become young again in the offering: viz. a new birth.

19. But that the two Doves were not divided but offered whole, Signifies,
that nothing shall be taken from the Soul, and from the inward man of the
heavenly limus, they shall remain whole and entire in their Substance, and be
offered whole to the Angry fire of God in Christ, and be brought quite through
the fire of Anger; through death; viz. through the great darkness and horror
of death and hell, as this was the figure thereof.

20. When Abraham had set forth his Offering, he fell into a deep sleep, and
horror, and great Darkness did encompasse him: the sleep Signifies the death
of Christ, and the horror, the wrath of God, viz. the Abyss of Hell; and the
darkness, the Dark world, into this, the word, which had given in it self
into Abraham's faith, to be a Seed of the children of God, should enter with the
Offering in the whole humanity (both with soul and body) and ^esigne it self
up wholly to the Anger of the father to be devoured.

21. And the Enkindling of the fire which passed between the Pieces was now the
holy fire of God which came forth out of the holy burning, viz. out of the
Love-flaming word, which gave in it self to Abraham's faith, in the humanity of
Christ in Soul and body, when he stood in the fathers Anger, in the death and
darkness in Hell, and cast the humanity in Soul and body unto the Anger, and
changed the Anger into Love-fire, for the wrath of the father according to the
Eternal nature of the dark world, which was enkindled in the humanity must in
the humanity receive such an holy Ens, wherein the Anger, might in its fire, be
changed into a light or Love-fire.

22. This holy Ens in the word of faith must enter into the great horror of
Gods Anger; for the Soul stood therein essentially in its property; it is out
of the fathers fire-property, (out of his Strength and omnipotence) viz. out of
the first Principle; and here the Second Principle, viz. the Love-fire came to
help it; therefore it must enter again into its own Root from whence it came
to be a creature; and be Tinctured in the power of the Love-fire, in the divine
light, and be changed into an excellent pure divine Gold; of which this Offering
was a Type.

23. And that the fowls fell upon the carcasses, which Abraham drove away;
signifies the hungry, essence of the wrathful property of the Anger of God in
man, which hungered after the humanity and would devour the same into it
self, but the word in Abraham's faith drove away the Devourer from thence; it
should not be devoured; but be offered; that so one Essence might enter into
another and overpower the other.

24. The Offering of Christ, ( viz. the humanity of Christ) did indeed give it
self wholly as an offering or Sacrifice into the Fathers Anger, into his fires
Essence* but the Love-Spirit of God hindered the wrathful Essence of the fire,
so that the fire could not devour the humanity of Christ; it took only the
Self-will of the humanity, and brought it again into the first universal
Entire will; out of which man's will was given him; which had corrupted him; and
brought him to selfe-hood; Here it was again introduced into the fathers will,
viz. into the first root; for so also Christ said (when he in this condition
or Trial on the Mount of Olives Sweat blood) Father Thy will, Luke 22.42.
not my will be done.

25. The divided word of man's property which had turned it self away from the
universal perfection, viz. from the ONE into a self-hood, must enter again
into the ALL, and be tried purged and purified through the fire of God; and
live, and move in the One; viz. in the fathers only will.

26. The figure of the Servitude in Egypt signifies, that Christ in his
members should be only a pilgrim and stranger in this world, and that the
outward man which is of this worlds Essence, should be subject to the dominion
and power of this worlds essence; and be plagued; and always accounted only
as a Carpenters Axe, whereby men do build the house.

27. For a Christian man is even as Gods Hatchet, wherewith God builds his
house for an Habitation; both as to the holy children, and also to the Wicked;
they must build both, inwardly from Gods spirit they build Gods Temple, and
outwardly with their hands they must be in Servitude; for the outward Kingdom
wherein they dwell, is not theirs, but the Heathens, which have their Heaven
therein, and work therein in Gods Anger.

28. As it was very fully and mystically told to Abraham that he should be
subject to servitude in his children, until the iniquity of the Amorites was
full; so that herein we see very clearly how Gods children must serve the
Amorites, viz. the Gentiles, until they also obtain their inheritance in the
wrath of God, and wholly accomplish their works also in the Anger of God for a
Building of the dark world; for God said, they should serve the Egyptians, and
have only plagues for their reward, until they had accomplished and filled up
their measure: thus the wicked must wholly finish their works; and the
children of God must be Note.
embroyled also in servitude with them.

29. Therefore dear children of God! albeit you oftentimes must serve wicked
Lords and people, and be accounted as Bondslaves as it yet at present so falls
out; yet think that ye also serve God therein; for as ye in your hearts and
mouths do build Gods Kingdom to your Possession; so you must likewise with
your hands help your Masters to build their Hellish Seat, for ye are Gods
instruments, fit enough for all kind of Structure; you must not do it from
your choice, and well-likeing, but from the command of God you must do it.

30. For in that the Potent do compel the poor and force them into
servitude, and slavery, that he does from his God, viz. from the Kingdom of
Nature, from the Stars, and from Selfehood, wherein he builds up the house
of his wonders to the Kingdom of nature; this is his Office whereunto his God
uses him; and it is also a great Wonder before the Eternity; but it arises
from the divided Tongue, where the properties entered into selfehood each in it
self; over which, the strongest domineere; unto all these, viz. to the
Kingdom of nature* the earthly man I mean, the outward man, must be Subject,
else he Note.
resists the Kingdom of Nature, viz. the formed Word.

31. Now it does not belong to the children of God to resist or oppose, but to
do all for Gods sake, whereto only God will use them, they must think that
they in this world and in the Eternity are Gods Servants, will serve him in his
Order [or Ordinance].

32. We do not hereby judge or condemn the worldly Magistracy and Order; but
we show the ground of all Mysteries; Dominion and rule arises out of the
Kingdom of Nature, and may indeed enter into Gods Kingdom, if it manageth its
authority and power as a Servant of God in the Kingdom of Nature, and not as a
selfe-willed God, who will do what he please; if Rulers acknowledge and behave
themselves as Gods Stewards and officers in his Kingdom of Nature, and
transgress not the Order of nature and do not advance themselves higher then
the office of nature sets them, and so make themselves Petty-Gods to command
and impose what their will and lust leads them to, then well and good; but if
it be otherwise, they shall find it, as God said to Abraham; This People whom
they must serve I will judge.

CHAP. XL.. Of the Hystory, and exceeding wonderful Typification of Gods
Spirit concerning Hagar Sarahs Maid, and her Son Ismael, and his rejection from
the Heir-ship and Inheritance of Isaac.
WHosoever will read the Acts of Abraham Isaac and Jacob, Genesis XVI.
and rightly understand what the Spirit of God does signify and mean by the
same, he must not look upon them only as an Hystory, as if nothing else were
couched therein then an outward achievement or relation of an Act or thing
done: the whole Kingdom of Christ together with the Kingdom of Nature is
therein set forth exactly; not only the work of man's Redemption; but also
what men, how or what in man, shall possess and inherit Gods Kingdom; not as
the Jews boast, that they alone are Gods people; no! It is far otherwise, God
looks not upon one Sort or Generation of mankind; but upon the Stem or Root
of the Tree.

2. In the two brethren, viz. in Isaac and Ismael; Both Kingdoms are
Typifyed; viz. in Ismael, the Kingdom of Nature, and in Isaac the Kingdom of
Grace; and thus also in Esau and Jacob; for at present two lines went forth out
of Abraham; viz. Japhets and Sems; Ismael was the first, as Japhet among Noah's
children; and so likewise Cain among Adams children; these point at the
Kingdom of Nature, which has its Original out of the Fathers property, and
must always be the first, if a creature shall be brought forth [or to the
producing of a creature.]

3. Afterward comes the Kingdom of Grace which takes in the Nature; as first
there must be a fire, ere there be a light; the fire begets the light; and
the light makes the fire manifest in it self; it takes the fire, viz. the
nature into it self, and dwells in the fire.

4. The like also we are to understand concerning the two properties of the
humanity, viz. in the Two Principles, according to fire and light; viz.
according to the Fathers, and Sons property, according to the Anger, and
according to the Love, both which are in one essence.

5. But being man's will had subjected it self to the Kingdom of Nature; the
kingdom of nature did now also represent its property in man's Image, to the
Highest God, especially in this wonderful Man Abraham, in whom the Spirit and
Word of God moved it self; now the figures of the Eternal Principles, viz. of
both wills were represented out of one man to the word of God, which had
brought forth and formed all essences: viz. the revolted disobedient (will) in
Ismael, and the holy obedience, which sprung forth from the Power of the
received word of faith, in Isaac.

6. Two types were here set forth; viz. in Ismael the poor sick distempered
evil corrupted Adam, fallen from the will of God; and in Isaac the Image of
Christ was represented, which was come to help the poor corrupt Adam, and to
introduce his Apostate will into death and mortification, and purify the same
again in the fire of God; and regenerate it anew in the Love-fire, and in the
first Only eternal will of God, where the Father and the Son are one only
will and essence, in the wrathful Anger-fire, and in the Love-light-fire.

7. For with the motion of the divine property, when God moved the Nature, and
crea^ed the creatures, the two properties, viz. of the Love and the Anger in
nature, did sever themselves; so that the mystery of God, viz. the invisible
spiritual World might be manifest, and come into a wrestling [Love-striving]
sport, in the strife, and Counter-will.

8. For if there were but one only will, then all essences would do but one
thing, but in the Counter-will each exalts it self in it self to its
victory and exaltation; and all life and vegetation stands in this contest, and
thereby the divine wisdom is made manifest, and comes into form to
Contemplation, and to the kingdom of joy; for in the Conquest is joy; but one
only will is not manifest to it self; for there is neither evil nor good in
it, neither joy nor sorrow; and if there were, yet the One, viz. the only will
must first in it self bring it self into a contrary, that it might manifest
it self.

9. The like also is here to be understood concerning Isaac and Ismael, for
Christ must be born of Abraham's seed; and the corrupt man must also be born out
of this Abraham's seed, whom Christ should help and save.

10. For Christ, viz. Gods word and will, took unto him, on his holy heavenly
Ens, man's revolted Ens and will, and brought the same in him into the
mortification of selfhood, even into the Root whence man's revolted apostate
will did arise in the beginning of his creation; viz. into the wrath of the
eternal nature; into the Fathers property as to that nature; and regenerated
the revolted humane will in the same fire through the Love-fire; and united or
Atoned Gods Love and Anger, viz. the divided nature, in the humane will; which
nature, in the creation of the world had introduced it self into a Contrary,
to the manifestation of the Wonders.

11. Now understand us here aright, according to the very acute depth* Christ
must be the King and Hierarch, viz. the Humane Prince in the Eternal Kingdom;
and the Kingdom was his own Peculiar; now his Subjects, viz. his Servants must
be other persons then He, all which, must introduce their will into him, as
into one Stock; He must be the Tree* which should give to his branches, viz. to
the rest of mankind, Sapp, Power, and Will, that so they might bring him forth
fruit; but being the branches on his Tree, which was himself, were become
Evil, he gave himself into their evil essence, and put forth his power and
virtue in them, that so they might become good again, and flourish in him.

12. And that this might be effected, the Tree, and the Branches of the Tree
must be distinguished or ^everized, that so the wonders of the formed wisdom
of nature in this Tree might not cease and come to naught; for which [wonders]
sake, God had moved himself to the creation, and severed the will of nature,
viz. his formed word, into a Contrary.

13. Isaac was conceived in the Ens of Christ, viz. in the apprehended or
formed word of Faith, of Abraham's Ens in the faith, and stood in the figure of
Christ; he was not wholly and only out of the heavenly Ens; but out of both
together; out of Abraham's Adamicall Ens, and out of the conceived or
apprehended word of Faith; and Ismael was out of Adams Ens, of Abraham's own
nature, according to the corrupt property, he was wholly out of the essence of
Abraham's soul and spirit, but not out of the apprehended word of Faith which
passed upon Isaac.

14. Now Ismael was even as his father Abraham before the conceived word of
faith; and should also take or receive that same word of faith in the desire
out of Isaacs heavenly divine innate or imbred word, and bring it to a
Substance of faith in him; for God anointed the humanity of Christ, and the
humanity of Christ anointed his boughs and Branches, viz. those who also bring
their desire into him; and so they also come even to the same ^^^ction,
wherewith God anointed Abraham's seed in his faiths desire.

15. Thus the figure of Christ was represented in Isaac, and Adams figure in
Ismael; and in Abram God and Adam did stand as it were opposite: God received
Adam again in Abram into his Covenant, word, and will, and out of this same
Covenant, word, and will, which Abraham received of God, in which Abram was
justified, Christ was born, who received Ismael, and all the poor corrupt
children of Adam (who do but introduce their desire into him) into his word and
heavenly Ens, and delivered them to his Father, viz. to the bosom of Abraham,
into which his Father had imbosomed or immersed the eternal holy word of
divine Love, wherein stands the Compassion over us the children of poor Eve.

16. Thus understand us now aright in this, concerning Abraham's Bondwoman, and
concerning the Free* What does that mean which was said to Abraham, Genesis 21.10.
Gal. 4.30.
The Son of the bondwoman shall not inherit with the free; it was not only
spoken concerning the outward inheritance only, but concerning the Eternal
inheritance of the Adoption or filiation of God.

17. The rebellious self-will of nature was in Ismael, which he inherited from
his mother Hagar, and from Abraham's natural Adamicall will, which was a mocker
of the new birth.

18. For the Devil had introduced his will into the humane will inclined to
selfehood in the Serpents Ens, which will did only mock and scorn the new
birth, just as the Devil is only a scorner and contemner; when he is told,
how that the Anger, viz. the wrath of the eternal nature, of which he is a
Prince and possessour, shall be changed in man again into Love, the same seems
ridiculous to him; this false spirit was a reviler and mocker in Ismael; of
whom God said; Cast out the Son of the Bondwoman, viz. this Scoffer; for the
scoffers spirit and will shall not inherit with the free; viz. with the only
will of God.

19. But now we are not to understand this concerning the whole Person of
Ismael; as if God had rejected him out of his purpose from the divine Adoption:
No, no; the contrary plainly demonstrates it self; for when Hagar waxed proud,
being that she had conceived, and not her Mistress; and lightly set by Sarah
her Mistress; and Sarah reproving her sharply for it, Genesis XVI.7.
she fled from her; then the Angel of the Lord met her, and said unto her;
Hagar; Sarahs maid, whither will thou go? return again to thy Mistress, and
humbly submit thy self unto her, I will so multiply thy seed that it shall not
be numbered for multitude.

20. And the Angel of the Lord said further unto her; lo! thou art with child,
and thou shall bear a Son, and his name shall be called Ismael, because the
Lord has heard thy afflistion. He shall be a wild man; his hand will be
against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the
presence of all his brethren; and she called the Name of the Lord who spoke
with her; Thou God see me; for she said, here I have seen him, who has
looked after me; therefore she called the Well, where this was don; the Well
of the living who has looked upon me.

21. Understand this figure thus; Hagar fled in the will of Self, viz. in
disobedience, that is, in the will of Nature, in which the Devil according to
the wraths property, desires to be a Prince; this will would not humble it
self under the Covenant, and obey the Free one, viz. Gods only free will:
Hagar fled away in the figure; for the will of selfe-hood must fly away, and
wholly dye, and not inherit the Covenant, and the Adoption; but the Angel of
the Lord met Hagar, and said, Whither will thou go, Hagar, Sarahs maid, return
again to thy Mistress, and humble thy self under her hand; behold! thou art
with child, and shall bear a Son, whose Name thou shall call Ismael; because
the Lord has heard thy affliction; the meaning of it is this.

22. Thou poor miserable man, captivated by the kingdom of nature; nature has
indeed brought thee forth in its contrariety, in its wonders; and the Devil
has poisoned thee, so that thou must be a wild man upon the earth, to the
opposition of Gods children, so that they must be tried and excised by thee,
and be brought into Tribulation, that so they also might powerfully put forth
out of the holy Ens, the sap of their Root of Salvation, and in the pressure,
move, act, and penetrate with the ardent desire, through the Love Ens, which is
wholly meek, soft, and still, so that in this contrariety and contest, fruit
might also grow upon the divine One: thy wild will, must indeed be cast out,
and mortified; but return again to the free, viz. to the only will of God, and
humble thy self before the free One; for I have looked upon thy misery and
affliction, and have not cast thee from my presence, but only the wild
property, viz. the will of the natural selfehood.

23. But I must have it also in the Time of this world, for it shall dwell in
the presence of all its brethren, and exercise them in the fear of God with
its opposition; but return thou only in Repentance unto the Free, I will so
multiply thee that thy seed shall not be numbered.

24. Why must even the Mocker be thus don unto? because in him lay the Kingdom
of the wonders of Gods manifestation out of Nature, viz. out of the fire world,
out of Gods strength and omnipotence, which he will again introduce in Christ
into the Love, viz. into the only free One; but Hagar, viz. the will of the
fire-Soules nature, must be converted and enter into repentance; humble it
self before the Free, viz. the only merciful Love-will, viz. before the
Covenant and Seed in Isaac, and cast away the rebellious will from it self.

25. And therefore the Lord sent his Angel to meet her and manifested himself
unto her with his voice, and she called the Name of the Lord, Thou God see
me: here I have seen him who has looked after me; that is, the contrary or
rebellious will ran away from the free, viz. from God; but God looked again
upon the poor miserable, and captive Soul, and called it again; and then said
the Soul; Certainly, here I have seen him, who has looked after me; after that
my will of Self, viz. of Nature was ran forth from him; which is thus much,

26. When as the mocker, viz. Self-will is gone forth in its nature; and has
brought it self into an opposition against its Understand the powers of the
soul; and also all holy men in whom the light prevails.
brethren, (who sometimes will not work in their heavenly allotted Ens) and set
it self against them with contempt and scorn; and performed its office of
nature given unto it for the exercise of the children of God; then God looks
also upon the Mocker, as his instrument to the exercising of the Soul, and
wills not that the soul should perish; he looks on it again, instructs it,
and calls it, and draws it also in man's conscience unto himself; This now
is the meaning; He has looked after me, even when I had almost accomplished
the work of Nature in the will of self.

27. Hagar being thus seen of God, when she became disobedient to her
Mistress, and ran away from her; and without doubt in an opposite will against
her Mistress, the same did much trouble, move, and affect the woman; Thereby
her Mistress, viz. Sarah was also exercised, so that she was earnestly moved
in her self, and called, and prayed to God, that he would take away her
reproach, in that she was barren, and bless her, and make her fruitful; that
she also did purify the house or vessel wherein she should receive the holy
Seed of Abraham in his blessed Seed, and not introduce any humane wantonness
of nature into Abraham's blessed Seed; but desired she might have a right
divine desire in her, wherein she might take the seed of Abraham.

28. And even therefore God made her barren, even to her old age, least the
beastiall lust should be predominant in her, and mix it self in Abraham's
blessed seed; for she should give all her humane power, ( viz. the woman's seed
in the Covenant, which did move it self in her, as to the kingdom of Nature)
into the seed of Abraham; not out of the wantonness of beastiall lust, but out
of the desire of the Nature of the formed word; and therefore the beastiall
lust introduced by Adam, (in which lust the Devil had made his murdering Den)
must be first even as quite mortified in her that so the inward nature might
yet stand only in the desire; viz. the formed words Ens as to the creature.

29. For the promised word in the Covenant with Abraham should give it self
out of Abraham's seed into Sarahs seed; viz. into the woman's matrix in Venus's
Tincture, and take unto it the female Ens out of the Love-Tincture, which had
parted it self from Adam into a Woman, indeed not according to the manifest
life of the holy heavenly Ens shut up in her, which disappeared in Adam and
Eve, which was first made manifest in Christ; but according to the kingdom of
the formed word of nature, in which the heavenly Ens lay shut up, until the
motion of the Covenant in the Ens of Mary, where the limit or Eye marck stood
at the End of the Covenant.

30. Thus Hagar and her Son Ismael (who as to the will of self, viz. as to the
Devils introduced desire and his outward Constellation, was a mocker of his
brethren, and did exercise them) must be an Instrument of Nature, whereby God
manifested his Wonders.

31. But as God will not for ever cast away the nature from him, but thus uses
it in time in a contrary, to the opening of his wonders of wisdom out of Love,
and Anger; as a Generatress of his wonders [in good and evill] The like also we
are to understand concerning the evil innate property in man, which cannot
judge the Soul.

32. But the free will which it has, if it therewith continues in the
iniquity in selfehood, that condemns it; for it will not enter again into the
One, viz. into the quiet Rest: Note.
Its condemnation is in it self, and not without it, it makes its hell in it
self; that is, it awakeneth, out of the center of the eternal spiritual
nature, Gods wrath in it self; viz. the property of the dark fire-world; in
which it is not the child of Gods Love, but of his Anger, of which substance
and essence it self is.

33. For if the soul dies to self will; then it is dead unto hell, viz. to
the Kingdom of the wrathful nature: now it cannot do this in its own self
ability, No selfe-ability.
unless God look upon it again, as here happened to Hagar, when she said; Thou
God see me; and therefore she called this place or fountain, the fountain of
the Living and Seeing; for the fountain of life did even there manifest it
self in her, and brought her again to Conversion.

34. For she should not be cast out with her Son from the purpose or Note.
Election of God, but God did only set forth the figure of both Kingdoms in
their seed; viz. in Ismaels, and Isaacs: For thus said God afterward to
Abraham; Genesis 17. Chapter 20. verse.
Moreover concerning Ismael I have heard ^ he also, behold, I have blessed
him, and will make him fruitful, and multiply him exceedingly: Twelve Princes
shall he beget; and I will make him a great Nation.

35. Now what God has blessed; that the Bishop with his Reason shall not
unhallow or make execrable: God
He has set Ismael.
him up to be a Ruler in the Kingdom of nature, that he might manifest the
Wonders of Nature, and not predestined him to condemnation, as Babel judges;
in whose hand a Shepherds crook were more comely and fitting, then to expound
the mysteries of the Scripture with earthly eyes [or apprehensions]* and make
conclusions therein; which indeed serve the Devil, and make men lewd, and
profane.

36. For though Ismael was afterward cast out with his mother Hagar, so that he
attained not to the Inheritance of Abraham's goods; the same has far another
figure then reason sees in it; God set Ismael to be a Prince in the Kingdom
of Nature, and Isaac to be a Prince in the Kingdom of Grace; Ismael must
possess strange [or another sort] of goods; because he was not sprung forth
out of the line of the Covenant; and Isaac was of the line of the Covenant; and
therefore God gave Isaac Abraham's goods, viz. the blessed Inheritance, because
he was born of the blessing, and out of him the Lord of the goods should come;
Therefore he in the mean while should be a possessour of the same dominion,
until the Lord should come; and Ismael must be a servant and minister of the
same Lord who was to come after.

37. For the children of Nature are Servants in the kingdom of Grace, not
Lords in self-will; they must not with the own self-will enter upon the
inheritance of the kingdom of Christ; for Romans 9.16.
it lies not in any man's own willing, weening, running or going to will and
take the same in their own selfe-wills ability; but it lies in Gods mercy, it
is a kingdom of Grace; not a kingdom hereditary to one generation of men
only, but God gave it of Grace to Abram in his Seed.

38. The mocker Ismael must be cast from the blessed inheritance, for he was
not born of the line of inheritance, viz. out of Gods special gift as Isaac
was, who represented the person of Christ; for Christ alone should be the heir
of Gods blessing, who had the same out of the Right of nature, all the rest one
with another must be as his Sojourners; for Japhet must dwell in Sems Tent, not
as a Lord and Master of the Tent, but as a Servant.

39. For the person of Isaac also according to his innate Adamicall Nature was
no otherwise therein, then as a Servant; but that he was chosen to be Heir, the
same was from God, who bestowed it on him as a Vicar or Deputy of his Lord, who
should spring forth out of him; whose property given of God, he did carry in
himself as in the place or Mansion of the Covenant; understand, he bare Christ
in himself in the Covenant of God, and to him alone the goods did belong out
of the Right of nature, for he was Gods child by divine nature, and an heir of
all whatsoever God had created.

40. But unto all others the heavenly goods did not belong out of a natural
right, for they had lost the Right of nature in Adam, and attained thereunto
only by the Free-Gift and gracious Donation of the giver, even by the Mercy of
God; therefore Ismael was cast out from the inheritance of Abraham's peculiar
goods; for the figure of Christ's kingdom to come, was here represented.

41. And we may yet see this clearly, sufficiently, and fully set forth, in
that Abraham lay with an Egyptian strange maid, and begat a Son of her out of
his seed, viz. out of the essence of his body, and soul, and yet afterward
rejected this Son from the inheritance, so that we plainly see here the figure
of the right childrens inheritance, that none can come to the Adoption [or true
childship of God], unless he be born out of this Covenant, out of Christ's flesh
and Spirit.

Note. Predestinate to Condemnation.
42. The old Adamicall man as to its own self-will out of the Serpents Ens is
wholly rejected, and cast away: he is nothing profitable, [or wholly unfit] for
the kingdom of God, he is only an Instrument, whereby God proves, and
exercises his children, as a Besom wherewith the house is swept.

43. The soul must forsake its own will unto all eternity, and must have a new
body born or generated in it out of the heavenly Ens, which heavenly Ens did
disappear in Adam as to God, and was introduced again thereinto out of Christ's
Spirit.

44. The gross introduced beastiall property, is also Alike rejected or
Reprobate.
alike rejected from the kingdom of God in all men who are born of Adams
sinful Seed, as well in Isaac and Abraham as in Ismael; but the Ens in the
Covenant shall live for ever, and at the Last Day it shall again put on the
true man created in Adam out of the limus of the earth, which is of the
kingdom of this worlds essence; yet not the grossnesse of the earth, but the
Note. The Resurrection of the Body.
Ens of the formed word, which has given forth it self into a creation.

45. The inward Ens of Christ (which the soul puts on it for an heavenly
body out of Christ's spirit, and out of his flesh, and blood,) is spiritual; It
is a spiritual body, which dies not at the death of the outward man, yea it
is not buried; neither does it arise again; but it is dead and buried, and
risen again in Christ, for all, and in all, and lives eternally, for he is
passed from death to life.

46. And therefore Ismael came not to the inheritance of his fathers goods, for
he had not yet put on Christ in the flesh and spirit, but Isaac had put him on
in the Covenant, viz. in the incorporated word, and had Christ now in the
Covenant from Gods Gift, as a natural Right in himself; not from his own
power and ability, but from the power of the Giver, even from the power of the
Covenant.

47. But now Is^ael must put on the Covenant from Christ, and not from the
inherited adoption or childship as Christ who had it from God in a childlike
[or filial] Right; and now Ismael must do this for the obtaining of it; viz. he
must behold himself in the fountain of the seeing, and living, as his mother
Hagar did, and return again with the lost Son to the Father; and fall down
before Abraham's feet, that is, his heir Isaac in Christ, and pray, that he
would receive him into his house, (which is Christ's humanity, viz. the
spiritual world) as a servant, and Day-Labourer; for he has had no more any
Right to his inheritance; he has been begotten and born only as a
Step-Brother (or Son in Law) of a strange Mother, viz. of the Kingdom of
Nature.

48. And for their sake Christ came, that he might have Mercy on them, for he
himself also said when he was in the flesh, Or, justified one. Matthew. 9.12.
He came not to seek the Righteous, but the poor Sinner, his brother in Ismael,
and Adam, not his line in Isaac; for the Or, justified one. Matthew. 9.12.
whole has no need of the Physician; but the sick wounded poor Sinner.

49. And we will not herein conclude so blindly concerning Note. Predestination.
Predestination, and Election of Grace, as Babel does, which teaches, that God
has ordained a certain number, and company to Damnation, and the rest to
Salvation.

50. If this were so, then Nature must needs be limited, confined, and
determined, when it should beget and bring forth a child of God, and nothing
would be in the free condition or liberty; yea God must then confine and shut
up his unchangeable [one, infinite] will into a beginning and limit, and
nothing at all could be free in the humane property, but whatsoever any one
did, that must unavoydably so come to pass, let him rob, steal, murder, or
blasphem God, and live as he pleased, it must be so; if this were true, then
the Ten Commandments, and all Doctrines, Teachings, and Laws were to no
purpose, and none need Repent, unless God compelled him threunto.

51. I say whosoever teaches so, he uses and Exodus 20.7.
takes the Name of God in vain, and horribly prophaneth the holy Name of God,
which is free, from eternity, and offers it self to all poor Sinners, and
Exodus 20.7.
bids them all come unto him. Matthew. 11.28.

52. The Covenant was indeed Set forth.
established in Isaac, viz. the divine might and dominion; but it was given to
no man in the line of the Covenant, but only and alone to the Man Christ, so
that none came, out of a peculiar Right, to God, but all in the Grace of the
one, and God did declare his mercy and compassion in Christ unto all, and
without him there was no Door of grace, to the Jews, viz. Abraham's Seed, and
also to the Gentiles; all are only children received out of Grace, and
newborn in him; and none either of the Jews or Gentiles without the life of
Christ, [are received to mercy], all men who have pressed [or earnestly come]
in to God, viz. to his Grace, those he has all received in the Grace which he
offers in Christ.

53. Therefore Christ also prayed for his Enemies, which knew him not, but
crucified him, that God would forgive them in him, and receive them to favor;
in which Access, all Nations who knew not Christ in the flesh, have an open
Gate, and are taken into Gods Mercy.

54. For, Without.
besides Christ no man comes to the childlike inheritance; to him alone the
goods do belong, viz. the Hierarchy of men; as he himself also said; Joh.
17.6.
Father the men were thine, but thou have given them me, and I give unto them
the life eternal; and therefore it belongs unto him, because he is Gods Son,
born of his Essence, from eternity.

55. Adam was also Gods natural Son, which he created out of his Essence, but
he lost the childship, and the inheritance, and was cast out, and with him all
his children, as Ismael was cast out from the childlike or filial inheritance.

56. For in Abraham the inheritance of the true Sonship was again manifested;
but Ismael was not born of the inheritance of the Sonship, but of the rejected
Seed; but now God offered again, out of Free Grace his holy inheritance in
Abraham; that he would generate the rejected Seed in this new Mother, which
gave in it self into Abraham's Seed again in himself to a childlike Seed.

57. Not that the rebellious Runagate Adamicall will in the Selfe-hood in
Ismael, should be received into this Mother, no, the same is wholly cast out
with Ismael in all respects from the filial Inheritance; he cannot be born
anew, unless he dye to his self, and own willing, and come in a converted will
to God in Christ as the lost Son, who neither wills nor desires any thing from
a natural proper Right, but only, that the Lord of the Goods would have Mercy
on him, and receive him again to be a Day-labourer; This converted will God
does Text. Engraft, or in-linage.
take in, to his gracious free-given inheritance, viz. into the goods of
Abraham in Christ, and makes it to be Heir in Isaac's goods, viz. in Isaacks
freely given Inheritance in Christ.

58. Ismael was cast out from Abraham's, viz. from Gods, goods, that he might
come unto his Son, to whom he gave the whole inheritance, and entreat him for
the filial inheritance; for, the natural Adamicall man had lost it; and that
which was lost was again freely given to the Covenant of Abraham, viz. to the
blessed Seed, that is, to the man Christ; and he now does freely give it unto
them who come unto him.

59. All men who come unto God the Father, and pray unto him for the Eternal
Or, Sonship.
Adoption, unto all them, he gives the Adoption in his Son Christ, unto whom
he has freely granted the whole inheritance, viz. the Hierarchy of mankind,
viz. the possession of the Throne of the Angelical World, even in the place of
this world; and given unto him all the power of rule and dominion; as he said;
Matthew. 28.18. all power in Heaven and in Earth is given to me of my Father.

60. For God the Father rules the place of this world in his Son Christ; and
all men who now come unto God, they come to him in Christ, who is the Lord;
viz. the mouth of his Father.

61. Christ is the Staff, wherewith he [guides and] feeds his sheep: in
Christ's voice all poor Sinners who turn to God are born to a new will and life;
and in the filial birth in Christ's voice they dye wholly unto the own will of
selfehood in Christ's death.

62. For Christ is dead to the humane Selfehood in the Fathers Anger* and
buried with the will of Self in the eternal death; and is risen again in his
Fathers will, and lives, and rules to all eternity in his Fathers will.

63. God the Father introduced his Voice and Word, viz. his manifestation into
the Seed of Abraham, viz. into man's will of Self; and brought that will of the
humane Selfehood with his own introduced voice into the death and into hell,
which death and hell were manifest in the Selfehood of man's own will; and in
the Power of his manifested voice, He did destroy the death and hell in the
Voice and Word of man's Selfehood; so that man should not any more will to
himself, but what he now wills, the same he must will in the manifested
voice of God.

64. So long as Ismael Or, would take the inheritance.
willed in the voice of his scorning contemning Self, he could not be heir of
these introduced free-given goods: but when he has turned to God, and forsaken
the will of Self; then God also sends the Angel to him, even while he is in
his Mothers Womb; and says; Genesis 16.9.
Return again to the free; and humble thy self under her hand, and thou shall
live.

65. For Ismael was run away from God in the womb; which signifies the
fugitive runagate nature of man in Selfehood; and in the Mothers womb God sent
him an Angel to recall him: noting; that Note.
all wicked men are called inwardly by the voice of God while they are yet in
the womb, and also the time of their whole life, in their own essence, and
being; Only the natural will of Selfehood stops its hearing, so that the
voice of God is not manifest therein.

66. That is, like as the Sun shines all the day long, and gives it self
unto every Essence which will but receive its power; so likewise the voice of
God sounds through all men, to recall [and reclaim] them, the whole time of
their life: so soon as the Seed is sown in the womb, the voice of God is
sounding [or working] therein to a good fruit; but on the contrary also the
voice of Gods Anger sounds in the Essence of man's Selfehood; there is a
continual combat betwixt them; as with heat, and cold; that which gets
victory, of that is the fruit; this strife continues as long as man lives in
this world.

67. Therefore we declare with good ground; that men ought not to make
conclusions concerning the children of Gods Saints; as if God had so out of his
purpose begotten one to condemnation, and hardened him that he could not come to
the Adoption; and chosen in himself another that he could not be lost; it is a
mere groundless fiction; [There is no footing or foundation at all for it,
either in the book of Nature or in the holy Scripture, it proceeds from the
Abyss and bottomless smoaky pit, of darkness and hypocrisy.]

68. By the Or, the Stems.
Tribes of the Saints (in whom the divine Covenant has opened it self, viz.
by the Patriarchs, as Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) there are always
two figures represented, viz. Christ and Adam, a good, and an evil man.

69. Cain, Ham, Ismael, and Esau, were types of the corrupt man, and Abel, Sem,
Isaac, and Jacob, were types of Christ, who opened himself in this line, and
set himself forth before the corrupt children of Adam as a light, and Preacher
to convert them.

70. For Joh. 3.17.
God has not sent his Son to condemn the world, viz. the poor corrupt man, but
he has therefore sent him into the world among the Godless crew of evil men,
to teach and call them; and those who have a willing desire to hear he will
save, even those that have but a sparkle of the divine Ens, which is capable of
hearing, in them. The quickening and renewing voice of Christ does cry and call
in that little spark which is in all these, that is, it blows up that little
spark that it may become a divine fire.

71. And that we may open wide the eyes of the blind Selfe-named Christendom,
and also of the Jews in their boasting, that they may not so brag, and stand
upon their knowledge, as if they only were the children of God, because they
know the Name of God, and flatter themselves with the knowing it, and condemn
other people, who are deprived of knowing as they know, and have introduced
another knowledge, as they alas! do most blindly; in so much, that one Nation
and people does exercise [or evilly entreat] another, know; that Cain, Ham,
Ismael, and Esau, are the types of the Turks, and Heathen, whom God blessed in
Ismael; and gave them to possess the Princely Dominions in his Kingdom of
this world, and cast them out in their own contrived knowledge from the
knowledge of the Or, Sonship.
Adoption of Christ; as he cast out Ismael; but recalls them in the Womb by
the Angel of the great Counsel, unto the free; viz. to Gods goods, that they
should return to him.

72. For they lie shut up under the vail of Christ, as Christ did under the
Leviticall Priesthood under Moses; and as the Children of Israel under the Law
were not justified through the Law, but through him who was hidden under the
Law, and thus they are now hidd under the true knowledge, and lie as it were
shut up in the mothers womb.

93. But the Angel of the great Counsel, calls them by their mother Hagar,
viz. by the Kingdom of Nature; that she (the mother and her child) should
return home to Sarah; viz. to the free, that is, to the one only God, who has
born his Son of the free* thus they come as it were under the vail in the
mothers womb to the free, viz. to the one only God; who has born unto them
of the free [woman] the true Lord, unto whose goods (they being strangers are
received in Grace) as sojourners.

74. For as Ismael did not go to Isaac for the inheritance, which did of Right
belong to Isaac, (because the Lord was in him, who freely bestowed it upon him,
and set him as a Steward) but would have it of the Father; even so the Turks
have turned themselves from Isaac, viz. from the Son, to the Father, and will
have the inheritance of God from the Father.

75. Now the Father is manifested to us in the Son; and when they now do call
upon the Father, he hears them only in his Son, viz. in his voice manifest
in the humane property, and they yet serve the Son in the Father.

76. For we men have no other God at all without Christ the Son; for the
Father has manifested himself toward us with his voice in the Son, and
hears us only through his voice manifested in the Son.

77. Now when the Turks worship the Father, he hears them in the Son, and
receives them to adoption in the Son, in whom God has only manifested
himself in the humane property, and in no other property besides.

78. Now says Reason, how can they attain to the Adoption of Christ, when as
they will not have the Son to be the Son of God, and say, that God has no Son;
hear O man! Christ said; Mat. 12.32.
Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, to him it shall be forgiven;
but he that blasphemeth the Holy Ghost, to him it shall never be forgiven: that
is, as much as if he should say.

79. Whosoever reproacheth the humanity of Christ in Ignorance; [considering of
it] as his own flesh; to him it may be forgiven; for he knows not what the
humanity of Christ is; but he that blasphemeth the Holy Ghost, viz. the only
God, who has manifested himself in the humanity; wherein Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are One only God; he has no forgiveness for evermore, that is, he
that rejects the only God, he has quite broken himself off from him, into
an ownhood of Self.

80. Now the Turks do not blaspheme the Holy Spirit, who manifested himself
in the humanity, but they reproach the humanity, and say a creature cannot be
God.

81. But that God has wrought, and don Or, Miracles.
wonders in Christ, that they confess, and blaspheme not the Holy Spirit which
has wrought in Christ, viz. in the humanity; blindness is happened unto them,
so that they walk under a vail.

82. Now says Reason, God has taken away the Candlestick from them, and
rejected them; hear O man! what was the cause that God (as he threatened by
Saint Paul) did take away the Candlestick from them, and shut them up under the
vail, think thou that it was don without his foreknowledge, without his
will, no, it was don with his will.

83. He permitted the kingdom of nature to give them a Doctrine of Reason;
seeing Christendom became blind in their Reason, in respect of Christ's Person,
and did wrangle and jangle about Christ's Humanity, and put all manner of scorn,
reproach, and disgrace upon his Person, as it fell out among the Arians, when
they denied his Deity, and the Bishops in their covetousness did apply his
merits in his humanity for the Belly-sake to their Belly-Orders, and did
practice all manner of lewdness and profaneness (even with swearing, cursing,
juggling and sorcery) by his suffering, and holy wounds; so that there the holy
Name of God, which had manifested it self in the humanity* was abused;
thereupon God did hide himself from them in their understanding, so that first
they became blind with the Arians in respect of the Deity of Christ.

84. But afterward when as they would be only blind Beasts, he hid himself
also from them in respect of the humanity by the The Doctrine of Mahomet, or
the Alcoran.
Turkish Religion, so that they were wholly deprived of the Candlestick of the
world, and it went with them, as the Prophet said to Israel under their King;
Ah! Isay 1.26.
I must give thee Judges as in former Times.

85. Thus the King of light in the humanity was withdrawn from them, and the
Judicature of nature was given them again for a guide and Governor; so that
they returned again into the mothers womb, viz. into the Root, out of which
man was created, that is, to the only God; so that the Name and Knowledge of
the holy humanity of Christ is yet put out with them.

86. And that they might not use the same so vainly, and uneffectually for
swearing, and false defense [or covering] they must again enter into Hagar, as
into the mothers womb, and have now verily been a long time a people run away
in their mother Hagar from Abraham's house, viz. from the humanity of Christ.

87. But know, and declare this as a word of the most High, known in the Sound
of his Trumpet, which he has prepared to awaken all Nations, and to visit the
face of the whole Earth; That the Angel of the great Counsel, viz. the holy
voice of Christ is not departed from them eternally to forget them, Isay 49.15.
So little as a mother can forget her child, that she should not have pity
upon the Son of her womb, albeit he were disobedient to her.

88. For as the Angel came to Ismael (being yet in the womb) when his mother
fled from Sarah; and did enrich him with a blessing and worldly Dominions, and
bad the mother with the child return to Sarah; Thus likewise when the Eastern
Countries entered again into the mothers womb with their knowledge of Religion,
God gave unto them in the kingdom of nature power and authority over the
Princely Dominions of the world, for to possess and rule them under the light
of nature, till its time, and then they shall come in again with great joy, and
with great humility to Abraham, viz. to Christ.

89. And not in the form of the Babylonicall, formal, litterall Christendom,
in their invented and contrived Orders; which are only Verbal, outside.
letter Christians (so that a Testimony [or some outward footsteps] of Christ,
and his Kingdom have still continued upon the earth) but they shall be born in
spirit, and in power; for they are the lost Son which is wandered away from the
Father, and is become the Swineheard.

90. But when the Angel shall bid them return, they come in the humility of the
lost Son returning to the Father, and then there will be Great joy celebrated
by Christ, and his Angels; That the dead is made alive, and the lost is again
found, and the true Golden Jubilee-year of the Marriage of the Lamb arises up
among them.

91. And albeit the Elder Brother (who has continued in the letter) does
grumble at it, in respect of the different form which he has made to himself
(for the most part for his Belly, and Honor) yet they are not moved at it;
they are merry with the father.

92. Now then, if we truly compare Painted.
counterfeit Christendom, and the Turks together; and look upon them a right;
then we see that they (since the Turks departed from them) have been but one
people (before God in righteousness, and holiness) with different names.

93. And they are the two Sons, Mat* 21.28.
to one whereof the Father said, Go and do this; and he said, yea, but did it
not; and to the other also do this, and he said no, but did it; which does so
highly advance or set forth the Turks in the kingdom of nature, which the
blind Christian world does not understand.

94. Not that we justify the Turks, and say, that they should remain in their
blindness; no; but to the Painted.
counterfeit [verball] Christians we declare, that they are alike (with them)
before God, in that they are as blind as to Christ's Kingdom as the Turks: as
it plainly shows it self, in that Christendom is full of strife, and
contention, about Christ's Deity, and humanity; and abominably prophaneth the
holy Name in his humanity; and use it only for a form and custom to swear
[and Covenant by] also to Idolatry [and hypocrisie] and are gone from the Sword
of the holy Spirit, unto a bloodthirsty confounding Sword, wherein is nothing
but contending, and contemning one another, and the whole Titular Christendom
is turned into mere Sects, and Orders; where one Sect does despise, and brand
another for unrighteous: and thus they have made of Christendom a mere
murdering Den, full of blasphemies about Christ's Person; and have bound the
Spirit of Christ, in which a Christian should live in deepest humility, to the
Forms and Orders of Disputation; and have set foolish Reason to be a Or, to
judge what the meaning of the Holy Spirit is in the Scripture.
master of the understanding above Christ's Kingdom.

95. But ought we to speak so of Christendom, and the Turks, as if they were
alike? Thus we say, The Turk is openly an Ishmalite, and a mocker of Christ's
humanity, and holds him not for the Son of man, and God too; for he
understands not the heavenly Ens in the Person.

96. But the Sects of Christendom do indeed cover themselves with Christ's
Mantle, but do attach him in his humanity, and Deity, and revile him in his
whole person; tear, and rend one another [with words, and swords] about his
person; the one will have it this way, another that way, every one will be
master over his words, and spirit; and de^ide Christ in his members, and are as
revolting rebellious and fugitive Ishmalites as the Turks, and live in their
selfish will; and serve the kingdom of nature in their Self-hood, and worldly
interests, and pleasure.

97. A Christian should be dead with Christ, to self; and be risen again in
Christ; and be born anew of Christ, and put on Christ; that so he might be a
Christian in Christ, in the spirit and heavenly flesh of Christ, according to
the internal spiritual man.

98. But instead hereof men have put on ^abel, and the Antichrist; and do bo^st
themselves of their Ordinances, [and of the divine Orders in the performances
of devout duties in lip-labor and much prating.] And in the Stone-houses of
the Churches, Cathedralls, and Cloy^^ers of Christendom; where indeed they do
counterfeit somewhat of Christ; seeing that they there read the writings which
the Apostles left behind them: but afterward in their Preaching, for the most
part, they foist in the Kingdom, and Government of nature, with brawling, and
disputing; and spend the time with disputing, confuting, and contending about
Sects, and their different mental Idols and Opinions, in so much that one
party is brought wholly to condemn another, and the Ears, and hearts of the
hearers are so infected with Gall, and bitterness, that one Sect wilfully
opposes another, and cries it down for devilish; whence nothing but wars,
and disdainful provocations do arise, to the desolating of Countries, and
Cities.

99. Thus they are alike before God, and lie as it were shut up in Hagar, in
the dead Reason, except the true Children of God, which verily are here and
there to be found among all Nations, and Sects, but wholly simple, and
despised; also covered under Christ's Cross, to the Reason-wise world.

100. For as the four Elements receive the powerful influence of the Sun; and
we see in the Substance, the body, but not the Sun; although it works
therein; so likewise the Spirit of Christ is hid in the children of God; but as
an herb springing from the earth, does by the virtue of the Sun* put forth a
fair Blossom, and fruit; so also Gods children out of their disregarded form,
[o^ homeliness to the lewd worlds or prating hypocrites eye, do bring forth the
fair fruits, of humility and piety.]

CHAP. XLI. Of the Seal of the Covenant of Circumcision, and of Baptism.
WHen God had made a Covenaant with Abram, and blessed him; Genesis XVII.
and made him a father of many Nations; which should be blessed through him,
viz. by Abrams Blessing in the Covenant; then he gave him the Seal of the
Covenant, viz. the Sign and the Figure upon what Ens the blessing passed; and
showed him in this figure, what in man should Inherit and possess the
eternal blessing; that is to say, not the gross earthly beastiall Man, which
is conceived and born in the lust of the flesh, out of the Beastiall lust of
Man and Woman; which did involve or insinuate it self into Adam, according to
the Brutish, and beastiall property of the divided life's Essence; upon this
the Covenant, and blessing does not pass; but upon the Ens of the Word formed
out of the heavenly worlds property, out of the Limus of the Earth; not upon
the introduced Serpents Ens out of the dark worlds Ens, and property; but upon
the Soul, and its right Body, which was created to it in Adam.

2. And we here see by the Circumcision, the Types that the beastiall
copulation of man and woman, is an abomination before the holiness of God,
which yet is boarne withal, by divine patience, and permission, seeing now it
cannot be otherwise with Man, he having lost the magical birth of Paradise;
for here God set forth the figure in the Circumcision; that every Male must be
circumcised on this member of the propagation of the masculine seed, in that,
man sows his own will out of the property of nature in his seed; therefore
God set forth the figure with the Circumcision, both of the earthly Seed, and
also of the member and will; for the spirit in the Covenant must out off
through Christ's death this figure in the inward spiritual man, together with
this beastiall will and desire.

3. For the beastiall gross earthly Seed of the man or woman shall not put on
the Covenant, and blessing; as Christ also said; but He, Joh. 1.13.
who is not born of the will of man, nor of the flesh, but of God; the
beastiall birth with its members must be cut off through the Temporal death;
and dye in the spiritual birth through Christ's death, and be buried in the
eternal death, viz. in the nothing.

4. But being the Covenant of God had incorporated it self in Abraham's seed to
a propagation, God did here set before him by the Circumcision, the person of
Christ, in whose death, this Beast and Monster should dye, and out of his death
a new Angelical form should come forth; for the Circumcision was not the
Atonement, but the apprehended [or conceived] Ens of faith was the Atonement;
out of which Ens of faith Christ should be born; but the Circumcision was the
Sign, that the Ens of faith in the word of God, should cu^ off the earthly
Seed.

5. For the living word of God looked into the Covenant; and in the Covenant,
the humane Seed of the heavenly part, lay disappeared; and in the disappeared
Ens stood the Aim or Limit of the new Regeneration in Christ's motion, where the
word of the divine Tincture, and power, would again move it self in the true
humanity created in Adam; and also it did move it self in the Spirit of the
children of faith, so that they were received and accepted of God in the Spirit
(upon the Promise, of the motion or manifestation of the shut-up Ens) as dear
innate children.

Note.
6. Not that they had put on Christ in the flesh before his manifestation, but
indeed the same Ens in their faith, and this same received or intaken Ens of
Faith was the Circumcision, which circumcised the heart and mind, and rent in
twain the sinful veil, and pointed at the cutting off of the earthly
introduced Serpents Ens in Adam, viz. of the earthly Seed, and the earthly
members to the Beastiall propagation; it showed; that Christ (when the
incorporated Ens of faith should manifest it self in the humanity) should, and
would cut off this Beast, and destroy the life of death, and hell therein.

7. We must not look upon the Circumcision only and barely as a sign or
figure, for it is the Seal of the Covenant, which stood as a Seal imprinted on
the Ens of faith, for the Spirit of the promised word to the new birth, was in
the Seal, as among the Christians it is in the Seal of Baptism.

8. And therefore God said, that soul that shall contemn this Covenant, shall
be rooted out from among his people, and commanded the Natives and strangers to
be Circumcised, although they were not of the Seed of Abraham, to signify,
that the Covenant passed upon all people, who would but receive the Ens of
faith; even there the Circumcision should be don.

9. For that was not the right Circumcision which was don outwardly on the
flesh, but it was the Sign only of the Circumcision; the true Circumcision
was effected in the Ens of faith, in the Covenant, in the power of the word,
and Holy Spirit, where the word, in the spirit of Christ, does cut off the
Serpents Ens from the right humane Ens of the heavenly Part; viz. it cuts off
the Ens of the dark world introduced and insinuated through Adams evil desire,
and the Devils in-flying poysonfull desire.

10. The Baptism of the Christians, and the Circumcision of the Jews hold
wholly one and the same Right; among the Jews the Circumcision was effected or
performed in the word of power, the Holy Spirit baptized them with the holy
fires Baptism, understand, it baptized their true man corrupt [and withered]
in Adam, the same was Tinctured with this Baptism, viz. in the Ens of faith;
for the Ens of faith was the Baptism of the Jews, where the Holy Spirit did
inwardly baptize them unto Christ's humanity.

11. But now being this same word of faith; ( viz. the Ens of faith) has put
on the humanity, and quickened it in it self to life; this same Spirit does now
Baptize with water, pointing at the humanity of Christ; Note.
for the water of eternal life, viz. the heavenly worlds substance, was
disappeared in Adam, and made alive again in Christ's heavenly Ens, (being also
the water of the heavenly Powers) introduced into our (in him assumed)
humanity; therefore the humanity of Christ was the firstborn from the dead.

12. And with this same heavenly water, which Gods word and power introduced
into the humanity of Christ from heaven (understand from the holy spiritual
world, viz. from the Second Principle) the Holy Spirit of Christ does baptize
the Christians in their Baptism of water; which externally is also but a Sign
of the internal Seal, in which Seal the Holy Ghost baptizeth.

13. And therefore Christ has appointed the Seal of the Circumcision into a
baptism of water; being the fire-baptisme in the Covenant, is become manifest
in the water of life in the humanity; so that this fire-baptisme, viz. the
flaming-Love-word, is made flesh; therefore Christ said John 3. We must now be
born anew through the water, and spirit, else we shall not see God.

14. For in the water wherein the flaming Love-word in the Ens of the Covenant
has manifested it self in our heavenly disappeared water (which is become
incarnate) all the children of Christ must be newborn, and take this water in
their faith's desire; in which water the eternal flaming Love-word of God has
incorporated it self; this same water baptizeth the inward man which
disappeared in Adam to the new regeneration; Note how we are Baptized into
Death.
and the earthly beastiall half-Serpentine-and-Devillish man to mortification
and Death; it circumciseth the poor captive soul, and puts the Covenant and
humanity of Christ upon it in the inward spiritual man, now disappeared or
withered, as to the kingdom of heaven.

15. Understand it aright ye Jews, and Christians; you have but one only
baptism; the Jew is baptized inwardly on the soul in the Ens of the Covenant,
and circumcised on the disappeared Ens of the Right heavenly humanity; viz. the
Serpents Ens is cut off from the heavenly Ens in the Power of the word's
humanity, and the flaming Love-spirit in the Ens of the word, Tinctureth the
true humanity, and baptizeth it with the in-taken or conceived Ens of Faith;
the Faith in the Spirit of God, baptizeth it with its heavenly water.

16. And the Christian is baptized even with the same very word and water in
the faith; it is wholly One and the same; only this is the [externall]
difference, that God has appointed and established the Covenant of
Circumcision in the baptism of water; being that this fire-baptisme has
manifested it self in Christ's humanity in the water of life.

17. And that you may yet see, that they are both One; Christ was circumcised
as a Jew, and was baptized as a Christian; thereby to declare, that he, in his
Love revealed in the humanity, had manifested the fire-baptisme in the water,
viz. in great meekness, and long-sufferance, and changed them into One.

18. The Ens of faith was not yet become incarnate among the Jews, therefore
God gave them the Sign of the inward Circumcision by the cutting off of the
outward foreskin, that so, they might have a Sign, that the Holy Spirit in
the Ens of faith in the Covenant, would cut off their Sinful birth; whereby,
they were the children of Grace in the Ens of faith.

19. But this same Ens of faith was first made flesh among the Christians in
Christ's humanity, and is also now incarnate in the children of faith in their
true man: the Christians do now in their faith's desire, put on Christ, ( viz.
this Ens of faith, which the Jews did also put on in the flesh) in the
heavenly flesh, viz. in the heavenly living water in the divine manifestation.

20. This water is the heaven, wherein the only holy Element is the motion,
and essence; it is Christ's, viz. Gods, holy corporeity, viz. the formed wisdom
of the forth-breathed or formed word of the divine powers, Gods living,
eternal speaking word, which is a spirit, and the divine understanding, which
again attracteth to it self its own forth-breathed essence, viz. the forming
of its wisdom.

21. The fathers will, draws the Soul, which is a fire-breath out of its
fire-spirit, unto it self; and the Sons will draws the noble Image created
out of the wisdom, viz. out of the heavenly essence; to it self, and the Holy
Spirit draws the whole moving humane understanding, to it self, so that it
is a God-Man, and a Man-God, God made manifest in an Image; and this is the
Image of God; and thus also, the Circumcision and the Baptism is to be
understood, which in both is the ground, and chief corner stone to the
new birth, among the Jews, and Christians.

22. Now in that the Males were to be circumcised and not the Females, Note.
Why Miles only Circumcised. Why Males and Females both Baptized.
and yet all are to be baptized among the Christians is thus to be understood,
as follows; mark it aright ye Jews, and Christians, and all other Nations,
we tell and declare it unto you all, for ye are hereby called, the Time is come
about, that the Antichrist must dye.

23. Adam was the Image of God, he was man and woman and yet neither of them,
before his Eve, but a masculine virgin in peculiar Love, full of chastity and
purity; The Tinctures, viz. the Power of the fire and light according to the
property of the Father and Son were both in each other as One, in an uncessant
Conjunction of desire, wherein stood the peculiar fiery Love-desire.

24. But being the Devil assailed the property of the fires-Tincture, and
brought his false desire thereinto, so that the fires-Tincture was divided in
the properties of the eternal nature, each property on the center gave it
self forth into its Selfehood, whence the selfly revolted will and the false
lust did arise, which lust desired to prove the dark worlds essence, viz. the
earthly essence out of the dark worlds desire, and to taste in it self, how the
same would relish, if evil and good (each manifest in it self) were together,
viz. in the dis-Temperature without the divine One; hereupon the false fiery
desire shut up the property of the lights Tincture with the introduced vanity
of the Devils desire, and with the earthly hunger after the vanity (proceeding
from the dark worlds essence) in the earth, and in the Elements, so that the
heavenly female or right virgin-ike life was extinct in the Ens of the light.

25. For the Holy Spirit departed from the introduced vanity; and so the holy
matrix, viz. the heavenly Generatress, disappeared, and the mother of the
outward nature, viz. the outward natural woman, understand the property of the
woman, got the upper dominion in the birth, so that Adam must now be divided
and figured into a man and woman.

26. But being the fiery property of the Tincture, (which now has the dominion
in the man, and is called man by reason of the fathers property) was the cause
of the poysonfull infection; so that the Tincture of venus, viz. of the woman
or the light, was mortified; and being he introduced in himself the
abomination of lust into the woman's property, (whereby afterward the woman,
viz. his Eve, did so eagerly lust after evil and good, and began the earthly
Eating) Thereupon we are here to consider, that this same fires-soul, viz. the
man's Tincture, must be baptized again with the divine Love-fire, that so it
might not introduce the Ens of the Devil, and Serpent, insinuated into the
masculine Seed; so poysonfull, into the woman's matrix; it must be tinctured,
and baptized again with the divine Love-tincture, viz. with the holy Love- Ens,
which came to pass in the Ens of faith, in the promised incorporated Word, of
the power of God.

27. But the Woman, viz. Adams virginity, was now transformed or formed out of
Adams nature, and essence, into a woman or manness, and in her the holy
virginity, disappeared as to God, viz. the Tincture of the Love, and light, did
still remain, but as it were dead or disappeared; for the outward mother, viz.
the elementary mother lived now in its stead in her, and was the Generatress of
nature, which must receive Adams, viz. the man's Seed, into it self.

28. Into this disappeared heavenly Tincture of the light, viz. into the true
holy virginity; the Eternal holy word of the power of God, which had created
Adam into an Image of God, did promise in-hest, and incorporate, it self, with
a Covenant, to bruise the head of the Devil, and the Serpents Ens.

29. Thus understand us here, very accurately; like as the Father generateth
the Son; and as out of Adam, who betokens the Fathers property, the woman; viz.
his Love-Tincture, was taken; and as before, while the woman was in the Man,
the fires Tincture penetrated into the lights Tincture, and loved it self,
therein; and as man and woman are one Body, so likewise the fire-baptisme of
the Circumcision went forth out of the man's fire-Tincture into his female
Tincture in the woman; God baptized the fires Tincture in the Man, and out of
the Man's Seed comes both the male, and the Female Sex.

30. Thus the man's Covenant and Baptism entered into the woman, viz. into the
female property, for the Woman's Tincture had in it (already) the holy Ens in
the Covenant, that Gods word in the Covenant would become man, in her shut up
[barren] Ens, and quicken again therein the disappeared virginity.

31. Therefore the woman must not put on the Seal of Baptism in her own
peculiar will or desire but have it from the man, being she was taken from the
man, that so she might become a right woman [or manness] in the man's Baptism,
that so the Image of God in her might obtain the fires-Baptisme and Tincture
from the man.

32. For St Paul understood this very well, when he said, 1 Timothy 2.15.
The woman shall be saved by bearing of children, if she continues in the
Covenant, and in the Love; for the woman has her soul from the man's soul; and
when she is given to the man, then she is one body with him, and brings forth
children to the man, she is his woman, his instrument; an half-man, and the Man
an half-woman.

33. And that the man's property might again obtain the perfect Love, viz. the
female Ens, and the woman the Masculine Ens; the Holy Spirit baptized the man's,
viz. the fi^es Tincture, with the heavenly holy virgin-like Tincture, and the
man baptized the woman's essence in his Seed with the fiery and also divine
Tincture; therefore God commanded the males only to be circumcised.

34. For in the Jews fire-Baptisme the Spirit baptized only without water,
but among the Christians the Spirit baptizeth through water; the Jewish women
could put on the Spirit indeed in the man's fire-Tincture, but now being this
same Burning, ardent.
fire-word is become flesh; they ought now of right also to put on Christ in
the flesh, and be baptized; for their heavenly disappeared virginity must also
put on Christ's introduced heavenly virginity, so that they might be true
manlike virgins in the spirit and essence of Christ.

35. Now Reason asks further, Circumcisi^n the 8th Day.
Wherefore must the male-children be circumcised just on the Eighth day? why
must it not be either sooner, or later? did it not lie in man's choice and power
to delay the same if it were weak? Herein is contained the mystery, and wonder;
dear brethren cease from the contention of the letter, and learn to understand
the hidden mysteries, we shall deal with you in a child-like manner; do but
look us in the face, from whence we come, and whence it is that we know and
understand all this.

36. God Commanded the Boys to be circumcised upon the Eighth day, and
wherefore? Six days are the Man in nature, the Seventh is the day of Rest in
him, viz. the heavenly disappeared Ens, wherein the six spirits of nature do
work; As God made the Creation in six days; viz. out of the six properties of
nature, and brought them to Rest into the Seventh, viz. into the Emanation or
flowing forth of the heavenly Ens, which God has co-imprinted into the
compaction of the creation, which is the rest, and right life of the six
properties.

37. Thus man has gotten seven days for his own, the Seventh is his day of
Rest; understand the Seventh property is the heavenly nature, which dyed in
him, whereby he came into disquietnesse; therefore the Eighth day came out of
mere Grace to help him, and gave it self again into his Seven working days,
viz. into the Seven properties of his own essence; and THIS DAY is Christ in
the Circumcision and in the Baptism.

38. For God in this process holds the order with the Regeneration of man, in
manner and nature as he created him out of seven days; understand in six days
his natural life was brought out of the six properties of the inward and
outward nature into an Image, and the Seventh property was the Paradise, viz.
the Text. The Sun-Evening, or ^he Evening of atonement, according as the word
will bear it. See Chap the 16 of this book. Paragraph 16, 17, etc.
Saturday, in which the six spirits of nature in their operation were
reconciled, and Atoned, for it was the spiritual world.

39. And hence arose that command unto the Jews, that they should sanctify
and rest, even externally on the Saturday, viz. the Sabbath, to signify, the
inward holy Eternal Sabbath, in which the Spirit of God works in man and
every creature, in each, according to its property; for every created being
rests in him.

40. And therefore he commanded the male children to be circumcised on the
Eighth day; viz. in himself, for he himself is this Eighth day which
circumciseth; for before Christ's humanity the process went in the form of
nature; but being now Christ has fullfilled the nature of man, and given
himself into the Seven days of man's property; children may now be baptized
every [or any] day. Baptized every Day.


41. We see here a very excellent figure by the beginning [or first
institution] of the Circumcision; and Covenant of the fire-baptisme, against
the makers of the reason-conclusions upon the letter, who will needs have it,
that some children are damned from the womb, and even therefore, because they
are taken and born out of the corrupt Ens of nature; For Ishmael who was by
nature a mocker, and captivated in the poysonfull, and corrupt Adamicall Ens;
Even He, must be the first man which Abraham circumciseth; who was baptized in
the Covenant.

42. Ye reason-wise! I pray set this looking-glass before your eyes; and think
what you do with your Conclusions concerning Predestination; we show it you in
humility, if you will not see, it shall be shown you with fire* which is
certainly known; for Christ came for Ishm^els sake, and for those that are like
him, to help, and save them, if they would themselves; but in Isaac shall the
Seed be called; viz. the Eighty day, which is come to help the other six days,
and introduce them again into the Seventh, viz. into the day of Re^^.

43. Dear brethren be instructed aright; the God of Love, He will not the death
of the poor corrupt man; but has powered forth his best Treasure (which he had
in himself, and is himself) in Grace, over all men; like as the Sun does
shine unto the good, and evil; but the wicked does corrupt, and spoil the His
precious image.
Treasure in himself, and will not receive it; but takes in the Ens of the
Serpent full of vanity, and is baptized with the fire of Gods Anger in the will
of Self.

44. But if he went with his own will into the death of Christ; and desired
from the bottom of his heart, to dye unto his selfehood and own will, in Gods
Mercy, and cast his whole trust and confidence in God, and thought that he had
nothing of his own, in this earthly cottage, but that he was only a Servant,
and Steward of God and his neighbor, in all that he has and possesses; and
forsook the propriety and [selfish-interest] thereof, in his mind, he should
soon be baptized with the Holy Spirit, and put on Christ in his will.

45. But these mischievous earthly Temporal Goods; Temporal honor, and
pleasure of the flesh, captivate him in the Ens of the Serpent, so that he is
not capable of the Baptism of the Holy Spirit.

46. Also the Selfe-elected unfitted and unprofitable Teachers (trained up in
the School of the disputing Reason, and chosen by the favor of Man) are wholly
blind herein, and teach only of the husk or outward vessel of the
regeneration; they will needs be outwardly adopted children (forsooth) by an
external imputation of Grace; albeit they live only in the will of Self;
they will preach the holy Spirit into the Beast of self-will, which yet is no
ways capable of the Holy Spirit; They understand nothing fundamentally, either
of the Baptism, or the Lords Supper; the new birth is strange unto them, they
deny the divine essential in-dwelling in Gods children; viz. the Temple of
God, and so stand before the Jews, when they should declare unto them, What
Christ is IN US, and what Baptism, and the Lords Supper is, just as pictured
Christians, or as Idols.

47. For the Jews know that God has spoken with their fathers, and given them
the Circumcision, and the Covenant; there they stick; but could the Christians
fundamentally demonstrate to them what the Covenant, and Circumcision is
essentially, and effectually, together with their Sacrifices.
offerings, they would forsake the Sign and enter into the Substance.

48. But that it has so fallen out, that both the Jews, and also the
Christians have walked in blindness, even till this last time, and so also the
Turks, who by reason of the blindness, contention, and ungodliness of the
Christians, have turned themselves unto Reason and nature; God has therefore
permitted it, because the Christians and Jews both in the old and new
Testament, received and appropriated to themselves the Covenant, and the Seal
of the Covenant in the outward shell only, viz. in the vessel, [or litterall
notion and apprehension] and lived only to the outward earthly mortal man;
they all ways minded, and provided for the Earthly kingdom and life, more
then for the eternal.

49. They would understand in the Husk, viz. in the outward letter, what God
has spoken; and chose to themselves reason-wise people, which were gifted in
the outward, formal, logical, and notionall, understanding of the letter, who
had not the spirit and power of Gods word and life in the new birth, in them;
but only the spirit of Self, pride, and the earthly Belly-God, contriving
thereby how they might be rich, in Christ's poverty, upon the earth; These men
have blinded them, so that both among the Jews and Christians men have minded,
and loved, only the Earthly Ens.

50. Therefore God has permitted, that the wonders of nature in the power of
his anger should be opened and brought forth in them, and that they should thus
stick in blindness, yet in controversy and contests, (so that the name and
memory of his Covenant might not quite be extinguished) and one Nation has by
reason thereof exercised and evilly entreated another in the contention and
contrariety, whereby oftentimes a fair green Twigg has sprung from the right
understanding, which has been strange unto them, by reason of their received
Opinion, and they have contemned, and persecuted it; for the earthly man in
Self is not worthy of the holy Covenant, and Seal.

51. And seeing God knew very well that they would run of themselves without
being sent of him, and would abuse the holy Ens in the Covenant; thereupon the
vail of Moses has beset the Jews, and the Tower of Babel with the Antichrist
( viz. the outward Christ instead of the holy Ens in the Covenant, that is,
Gods presence) the Christians; so that they have been evermore seeking, in this
Antichrist, what God is, in his Covenant, will, and essence.

52. Thus they have been exercised in contention, and persecution, in that they
have persecuted one another; yet so, as that Gods children have sprung forth,
in the Cross; and Christ has been inwardly manifest to them, but outwardly
Babel has yet stood both among the Jews, Christians, and Turks; the
Antichrist is only the same among all, for he is the Titular- or letter-God,
wherein the Self-will seeks and worshippeth God in the Husk.

53. Hear therefore, ye Christians, Jews, Turks, and Heathen: even all
Nations of the earth; what now (yet once more for a farewell in this worlds
being) is freely tendered unto you, in the visitation of the merciful God in
the voice of his Trumpet, by his Love-will and spirit; the Sound of the Trumpet
concerns you all; let it enter into your ears, and do but open your ears and
hearts a little from self, and then you shall hear the Sound in you; it
Sounds through all, even to the ends of the earth, but no Self-will hears
it.

54. The only divine way, wherein man may see God in his word, being, and
will; is this; that man become wholly one in himself; and in his own will
forsake all, whatsoever he himself is or has; let it be Authority, Might,
Power, Honor, Beauty, Riches, Money, Goods, Father, Mother, Brother, Sister,
Wife, and Child, Body, and Life, and become wholly a nothing to himself: He
must freely resign up all, and be poorer then a Bird in the air, which yet
has a Nest, the true man must have none; for he must travel away from this
world, that so he be no more to himself in this world; He must be a nothing to
the worlds self and interests; for the substance of this world which he
possesses for a propriety, is the Tower of Babel, and the Antichrist, wherein
men will be their own God; and with this self made God they will ascend upon
the Tower to heaven, and place themselves Or, with God.
for God. Understand it thus.

55. It is not meant that one should run from house and home, from wife,
children, and kindred, and fly out of the world, or so to forsake his goods as
not to regard them; but the own self-will which possesses all this for a
propriety, that he must kill, and annihilate.

56. And think, that all that, of which he is a master, is not at all his own,
let him thrive or go behinde-hand, gain or loose, be rich or poor, wise or
simple, high or low; let him have something or nothing; let him esteem all
these things alike; a fair Garment as a course patcht one, the prosperity of
this world as the adversity, life as death; his authority as a servants place;
a kingly Crown as an old Hatt; and forsake it all in his mind, and not account
it for his own.

57. But think, and wholly resign up his will thereinto; that he is but a
servant of all whatsoever he has; and is only a Steward in that Calling,
Profession, Office and Order, wherein he is; that it is Gods and his brethren's
in common, that he only serves God and his brethren therein, and let him look
that whatsoever is conferred and put upon him, be so received of him, and
managed by him, as that it may conduce to the general brotherly order and
profession, and that God may make such Orders in this world, as a figure of the
Angelical world, that so he might serve him therein.

58. And not at all insinuate his mind into selfehood, as to think (let him be
either King, Counselor, or Judge of the people) that he is therefore better
before God, or before man; he must continually look upon his naked bosom, and
think, that one naked man does always resemble and is like another; and also
that his Gown of state, and Office, over which he has charge, is the brotherly
Societie's.

59. And all whatsoever is bestowed and conferred upon him, either for honor,
power, wealth, and goods, to return and give it back again to God his Creator,
and say unfeighnedly in his mind, Lord! it is thine, I am unworthy to have
command over it, but being thou have placed me therein, I wholly, and fully
resign up my will unto thee; Govern, and work thou by me as thou please,
that it may be don in thy will, and conduce to the profit, and service of my
brethren, whom I serve in my calling, as thy Command; do thou, O Lord, all,
through me, and say only in me, how, and to what, I ought to direct the works
of my hands; to whom I should give, and bestow money, goods, power, and honor;
and thus continually think, how he in his place may please, and pleasure ( not
himself, but) his brethren.

60. But if he be a Servant, then let him think that he serves God in his
will, and Men in Gods, and the General brotherly Function, and that is, in
that little which God has given him, in this Cottage, for food and Raiment, is
as rich as a King, for if he looks upon himself naked, he sees the Truth.

61. And when man brings it so far, that all is One unto him [that he is able
to esteem all things alike, and be content with any condition, as St Paul
teacheth] then he is as the poor Christ, Matthew. 8.20.
Who had not whereon to lay his head; and rightly follows Christ, who said;
Mat. 19.29.
He that forsakes not house, Court, moneys, goods, brethren, sisters, wife,
child, and denies himself, he is not worthy of me.

62. And for this Self and unworthiness sake, God has turned away his holy
countenance from the Nations, so that they have known him only through a dark
word and shadow.

63. But he that enters into this total Resignation, he comes* in Christ, to
divine contemplation, so that he s^eth God in him, and speaks with God, and
God with him, and understands what Gods word being and will is, this man is fit
to teach, and none else; he ^eacheth Gods word from him; for God is made known
and manifest to him in his Covenant, of which he is a Servant and Minister; for
he wills nothing save what God wills through him.

64. He teaches when God commands him; let it be either to friends or foes in
their season, or out of their season; he thinks that God must do in him as he
please, and albeit that he must therefore suffer scorn, yet it is all one unto
him; if he be honored and respected of men, he humbles himself before God and
his brethren, and gives God and his brethren the Honor, and takes it not at
all unto himself; but if they curse him, and smite him on the face, he thinks
thus; I now stand in Christ's estate of persecution, it shall turn unto the best
for me and my brethren.

65. Lo! Loving brethren, this is a Christian, and such a kingdom he now
offers to you, by the wonderful Sound of his Spirits Trumpet, and there must
and shall be such a kingdom soon manifest and come into being, for a witness
unto all the Nations of the earth, of which all the Prophets have prophesied.

66. On the contrary, he offers to all wicked, unwilling, stubborn men, his
anger, wrath, and hardening, to devour them, and to make an end with Babel;
This say not I, but the Spirit of the wonders of all Nations.

67. Therefore trusse up thy self in Armor, and lay lustily about thee thou
Antichristian Babylon, and devour much blood, for thou thy Self art even he
that destroys, and qui^e ruins thy self; For thee, there is no remedy [thou
wilt take no counsel, thy own Cain like fury in hypocrisy does harden thee]
also there is no repentance in thy will, but for the children of God under
thee, we have written this as we have known, and seen it.

68. Now says Babel; whence shall this people come that shall know the Lord,
and live in God? Hear O Babel! among thy brethren in the time of thy
affliction and tribulation, they are brought forth, in their disrespect and
misery; and thou call them fools, and know them not; let no man wait for
another coming; the time is already come about; the voice of the caller and
hearer is already present, the Covering is put away from this voice, thou art
not at this time called under a vail, but with open mouth, very clearly.

69. This voice of the Crier opens Gods clear Countenance in his Children,
and in the ungodly, the angry Countenance, seeing they desire fully to purse up
all, in covetousness, into Self, viz. into the Antichristian bagg, and to
bring the whore of Self even to the very topp of the Babylonicall Tower.

70. The Sign of this Image, and its destruction, is the Covetousness, and
envy; its Sign stood before in Silver and Gold; that was the Banner, and
Standard of Antichrist; but now the Banner has changed it self into Copper,
being Mars is the Soul, viz. the man or husband in Copper, so that this Or,
Sword.
Mars is given to Babel for a Banner and Ensign, which shall Rule, till Babel
has an end, and no wicked man shall know this; and though he carry the Sign
in his hands, yet he calls it only his Loving Companion.

71. But upon the Kingdom that is, and is not, and yet is, shall the glorious
Ornament of Gold be put, for the Prince of the powers of the earth has given
it to them. Amen.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Three men which Appeared to Abraham in the Plain of Mamre,
who went toward Sodom, and set the Cities of the Children of Ham on fire from
the Lord.
The meaning of this figure.
Genesis XVIII.
AT first, while Abraham was called only Abram, God appeared to him in the
Vision as One; and when he had sealed the Covenant with the Circumcision, he
called him Abraham, viz. a Company or multitude of Nations, a forth-breathed
manifest people of God, in whom God had forth-breathed or manifested himself,
and he appeared to him also afterward in the manifestation of the holy
Trinity, viz. in Three men, which were only One, wherein the manifestation of
the holy Trinity in the Deity was set forth and represented in man's Image, how
the whole Trinity of the Deity would now manifest it self in this Covenant in
the humanity, that the Trinity of the Deity should be seen in the flesh.

2. And hereby is declared the great humility in the Deity, viz. in Christ, how
Christ would visit man kind, and take care of man, and also condescend to be
entertained by man; as he came, in these three men, to Abraham, and suffered
his feet to be washed, and did eat and drink; which betokens, that men must
cherish or lovingly entertain the poor Christ, who is poor in this world, in
his members, and children, who also would be poor contemned and despised
people; and what men do unto them, that they have don unto these three men,
viz. to Christ the holy Deity in the humanity.

3. The words of this figure run thus; Verse. 1. to the 16.
And the Lord appeared unto him in the plain of Mamre, as he sat in the door of
his Tent in the heat of the day, and he lift up his eyes, and looked, and lo!
three men stood by him; and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the
Tent-door, and bowed himself ^owards the ground, and said; My Lord, if I have
found grace in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy Servant; let a
little water be fetched I pray to wash your feet, and rest your selves under
the tree, and I will fetch a morsel of bread, that you may refresh your
hearts, after that, you shall go on; for therefore are ye come to your Servant;
they said, do as thou have said; and Abraham hastened into the Tent unto Sarah,
and said, make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make
cakes upon the hearth: and Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetched a calf tender
and good, and gave it to a young man, and he hasted to dress it; and he took
butter and milk, and of the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them;
and he stood by them under the Tree, and they did eat.

4. And they said unto him, where is Sarah thy wife; and he said, behold, in
the Tent, and he said, I will certainly return unto thee again, Or* in that
manner. As Our translation. Acc^^d^ng to the time of life.
as I live, and lo! Sarah thy wife shall have a Son; and Sarah heard it as she
stood behind at the Tent-door. Now Abraham and Sarah were both old, and well
stricken in Age, and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women, and
therefore she laughed within her self, and said, now I am old, shall I have
pleasure, my Lord being old also? And the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did
Sarah laugh, and say, Is it of a certain, that I shall bear a child which am
old? is any thing too hard for the Lord? At the appointed time I will come unto
thee again as I live, and Sarah shall have a Son; then Sarah denied it, saying,
I laughed not; for she was afraid; and he said nay, but thou did laugh.

5. O thou great and wonderful God; how plainly and simply do thou represent
and pourtray the kingdom of thy Son in the humanity; how lively and fully are
the greatest Mysteries delineated herein; and indeed they are so plainly
Represented in such entire singleness and simplicity, as Christ, who
notwithstanding was the King of Israel, did ride into Jerusalem upon an Ass;
here the proud world may have a very true looking-glass, and see if they be
the children of this Simplicity.

6. The great Love, and humility of God in Christ's person, is fully represented
in this figure, how God came in the deepest humility, and simplicity into the
humanity, when the humanity was enflamed with highest heat of the wrathful
indignation of Gods Anger, as the figure here denotes.

7. The three men came before Abraham's Tent, in the very heat of all the day;
This signifies, that God did first incorporate [or betroth] himself with his
Love-Covenant, and also with the fullness of time touching the Covenant, when
the humane day, understand the six properties of the days, were most of all
inflamed and set on fire in the wrath of nature in man; that is, in the fall.
And afterward in the fullness of time when the humanity of these six days was
in the very exceeding burning heat, of vanity, and the beastiall property; he
did manifest himself with his tender humanity out of the Ens of the holy
Covenant, and came in three persons of the Deity before the earthly man's
essence, or earthly Cottage, viz. the Souls- Tent, and appeared to Abraham,
that is, to Adam in his children; viz. to the humane Essence.

8. And here is fully set forth the Type, and Image of Christ; When Abraham
espieth these men he goes to meet them; and boweth himself toward the earth;
and runs away from the door of his Tent unto them; and prays them to rest
under the tree, until he should do that for which they came.

9. We must look upon this figure thus: when the divine voice had represented
it self in the Ens wherein it would become man, in three persons to Abraham;
then Abraham's apprehended Ens of faith set it self forth also to this Image,
viz. to the triune humanity in the figure; for the Ens in the Covenant in
Abraham's faith was surrounded with the great heat of Gods anger when the humane
day was grown hottest in the humane essence.

10. But when he looked up, and saw the Type of the Triume Deity, standing
before him; this faiths Ens in deepest humility in Christ's person (being that
which was to become Christ) did bow it self before the Trinity of the Deity,
which was come unto him; which would in the fullness of time give forth and
manifest it self with the voice (which now spoke in these three men with him)
in this Ens of faith; (being the humanity of Christ before his Father) and
said; Lord, if I have found Grace in thy sight, pass not away from this Ens of
faith, viz. thy servant.

11. For Abraham was now in the Spirit; and spoke from his faith's Ens in
Christ's humanity, and before him stood the Type and Image of Christ's Deity; and
said in the great humility of the humanity of Christ; Let a little water be
fetched, and wash your feet; this is the great humility of Christ, who washed
his Disciples viz. his childrens feet (as these three men here were washed)
signifying, and pointing out, that Christ should wash with his blood, the feet
of Gods children, who should be born of these three men, viz. of the Trinity of
the Deity; whereby they might come to God.

12. And he had the three men rest under the tree; This now signifies the tree
of life, under which Gods children should sit down; and then he would bring
them a morsel of bread to refresh and comfort their hearts; and afterward they
should go, that is, when Christ has washed his childrens feet with his blood,
whereby they are able to go to God, viz. the holy Trinity, then he gives them
a morsel of Bread, that so they may recreate and Strengthen their hearts; that
is, he gives them the bread of life, viz. his heavenly flesh for food, so that
they wax strong, and are able in the divine Power, to go from Abraham's earthly
^ent through this world in Gods Anger, to meet the Lord, and bow themselves
before him, as this figure signifies.

13. An he says further; For ye are therefore come to your Servant:
understand it thus: the holy Trinity was here at this time represented in an
Image of our humanity, and Abraham stood in the type of the humanity of Christ,
even as Christ and his children are in reference to each other; the holy
Trinity leads the children of Christ in the div^ne drawing to the humanity of
Christ; and now these three men stood there in Our stead before Christ, viz.
before the figure; for the Father draws them to Christ, and through Christ
Or, in.
to the Father; they are washed and atoned in Christ, therefore now said Christ
to the three men, which God represented to him in his person; even Therefore
are ye come to your Servant.

14. For Christ must be our, viz. these three men's, servant; and God brings
his three men, viz. us, who approach unto him, in himself, viz. into the will
of the holy Trinity, unto his Servant the Man-Christ; that so he may wash and
feed them; and then they are able with boldness and confidence to come unto
the holy Tri-une Deity.

15. And the Men said to Abraham, Do as thou have said; that is, Christ
offers himself to his Father, viz. to the Three-One God for a Servant;
understand; the word, which the Three-one God did in-spire into Adam concerning
the bruiser of the Serpents head, offers it self for a Servant unto the
Three-one God, viz. unto the children who should possess the kingdom of
heaven; now the Tri-une God says, Do with these thine and my children as thou
have said, that is, with these children which are now set before thee; for they
shall be Angels, and thou shall thereunto help them, for I am therefore come in
them unto thee; now do as thou have said.

16. Here God fully gave the man-Christ to accomplish the Consummatum with
them, as he had said; and the whole, entire, excellent and holy figure of the
new birth is therein emphatically and lively set forth; and it shows, how the
holy Trinity does delight it self with figures concerning the Word incorporated
and inspoken into Adam, and now opened in Abraham's Ens of faith; and sets it
forth with types, and plays in figures with this Christ, who was to come;
where God represents the person of Christ in Abraham; and the children of the
new birth, whom Christ should beget anew; in the person of the three men, viz.
in the Three-one Deity, which brings them through Christ into it self, and
places them in the Angelical Quire; as these three men did appear in the form
of three Angels; and also in the person of the holy Trinity; signifying that
the holy Trinity would dwell in these Angelical men, and that they should be
the Image, viz. the manifestation of God.

17. Abraham commanded to take three measures of fine Meal, and to knead it*
and bake cakes that the men might eat; what does this mean? these three men had
no need of any such eating: it is the figure of man's regeneration: the three
measures betoken the three Principles, viz. the three worlds in man: the fine
meal points out the heavenly humanity; viz the divine heavenly
Substantiality, that this heavenly and divine Or, Essences.
Substantialities property, should also be kneaded, and mixed with ours
disappeared in Adam; and a divine Cake, viz. sweet bread for food of Gods
children should be baked thereof, understand in the fiery heat.

18. When Christ stood in the fire of his Fathers Anger, viz. in hell, then
these sweet cakes were baked for Gods children, which they should eat; and the
three measures are now the three worlds (viz. the whole man without the
Serpents* and beasts property) which shall be mixed with the divine Ens into a
Or, Batch.
lump, and cakes baked thereof; this is now Christ's flesh, which he has joined
or mixed with our humanity; and gives us now the Sweet cakes thereof, to eat,
viz. the heavenly flesh; here the Holy Spirit did play therewith in the figure.

19. And Abraham ran to the Herd, and made ready also a calfe tender and good;
that is, he gave it to his young man to dress it. O thou wonderful God! how
much does simplicity please thee? how plainly and simply do thou represent
the great mysteries unto us? I thank thee, that thou show me unworthy man
such things, wherein the whole world is blind, O God, open thou their eyes, I
pray, that they may see, and turn unto thee, and enter into humility.

20. The tender Calf, which was made ready for this Meal, is the Limus of the
earth, viz. the outward man, which is before God as a Beast; understand, it is
a Mavelous or wonderful.
wonder-Beast, like as the whole outward world, before the divine
understanding, is only as a beast, wherein God forms himself with the holy
spiritual Ens into an external Body, to the manifestation of his deeds of
wonder, both of Love, and Anger; which figure of the outward world, viz. the
divine Beast, shall Note. What shall arise at the Resurrection.
not be wholly turned into Nothing, but the vanity only shall be separated
from the Good into the kingdom of darkness.

21. In like manner, God will not wholly cast away the divine Beast on man,
which indeed dies here, but only the introduced Serpents Ens, and the vanity
of the dark worlds Essence: the divine wonder-Beast, which is the Servant of
the divine spiritual Image, and shall be so in eternity, the same shall arise
at the Last day, and be proved through the fire of God; where it shall be made
very pure, as a crystal, in which the Angel, viz. Gods right Image, shall
dwell, in which Angelical Image God is primely manifest, and thence shines
through the Beast, as the Sun through a cristall; this now is the signification
of this Tender and good Calf, which was dressed for this Meal, and shows that
the outward man according to his right Image created in Adam out of the Limus
of the earth, shall be brought upon Gods Table.

22. But that Abraham says; He gave it to the young man to dress, that is,
the Servant; does betoken that this heavenly Beast-man is the instrument of the
Angelical man, who is prepared to be a servant of this Angels Image.

23. And Abraham took Butter, and Milk also, and set it all before these three
men, and came before them under the Tree, and they did eat. When Christ has
fed his people with his Body, and Blood, (and even while he feeds them) he
comes in his power in his children, before the holy Trinity, and waits in
his children upon these three men, and gives them from this prepared food,
wherewith he feeds his children, Praise and spiritual food.

24. These three men, viz. the holy Trinity, do eat these holy spiritual
meats, out of the power of Christ's Body; for man's will gives it self wholly,
peculiarly, and fully, to these three men, for a food of praise, with an holy
voice and prayer of Thankesgiving; and this voice of praise, eats the power
of God into it self, in manner as a man willingly eats the tune, harmony, or
pleasant air of a delightful music into his hearing, and is therein merry and
pleasant; even so, God does awaken or manifest himself in his power in his
word of hearing, or divine Sense, with man's pure humble voice or melody of
praise.

25. For thereunto God has created Angels and Men, viz. to his own joy; and
know, that we speak from the true ground, and not from conjecture or Or,
Parables.
Similitudes, but from the Open Seal of God, as we really see; do but
understand it aright.

26. And now when God had delighted, and fed himself with Abraham in the
heavenly Ens, which he would, by the opening of the living word in the Seed of
the Woman (being also the heavenly Ens) manifest, and introduce into the Ens of
the Covenant; and had sported in the Ens of Abraham's faith; viz. in the power
of the praise of Abraham; viz. in his humility; then God asked after Sarah,
whom he well knew, but Sarah knew him not; that even the Lord should be in such
a form; then he said to Abraham* Where is thy wife Sarah? that is; she was not
yet in this Play until she had received Abraham's Ens of faith, and then this
Play would awaken it self in her; therefore she laughed at this; for she knew
not the Mysteries; they did at present only manifest themselves in Abraham's
spirit, where the Ens of Faith lay; and he said, She is in the Tent; that is:

27. She is in the humane Tent covered with the Earthly Tent, that she does not
see who now is with me; and the Lord said; I will come again to thee, Ger. So.
signifies, As, or If.
As I live, and lo! Sarah thy wife shall have a Son; that is; I will come again
to thee with the motion of thy Seed: and when Sarah shall conceive; then I will
open and unloose her in her shut up Seed, and come into thy Seed; that is,
move; for, to come, signifies to move: when God comes, then he moves man,
and comes or goes in and with man.

28. But that he says; As I live; this is spoken after an essential manner;
for God told him how he would come; not before him, as at this time he did; but
Or, If.
As, that is, as the lightfull influence, and power of the Sun gives it self
into a fruit, which when it comes does not step near to the fruit, but Or, If.
As; that is, it penetrates essentially with the As into it; for As is as much
as thus, I will see into it [or open my Love-aspect in the Ens of its life.]
Or, If.
As I live; hereby we are not to understand; as if he had said; if I yet live,
but he would live in the As; he would come in the As, viz. Essentially, and not
figuratively and typically, as at this time he did.

29. For when God comes, then he comes no otherwise, then Or, If.
As, that is, like the Sunshine into the fruit: this is understood in the
Language of nature Essentially, with emphaticall excellency; for if God
speaks of his own Coming, then he speaks only essentially, in nature and
manner of the uncompacted tongue of Sense.

30. And Sarah laughed at this; she thought that she should bring forth a Son
from Abraham's lust only, from the humane cohabitation in the concupiscence of
the flesh; therefore she said, Shall I, now I and my Lord are both old, take
pleasure; the beastiall worlds-spirit laughed at its youth, in that it was now
weak; and should now again become youthful; and thought with it self, this
were a sport, if thou could; As if one should tell an old man; thou shall
become young again; and receive such a desire and lust as when thou were young;
at this, nature would laugh; and think, yes indeed; would that were true; as if
doubt and hope were coupled together; thus it was also with Sarah: for the
world-spirit understands not the mysteries of God; it is before God only as a
beast; and being the world-spirit did now hear that it should so come to pass;
then it thought thou shall be the work-master; oh that thou could, thou
would very fain; and laughed at it self, that it should become young again.

31. The natural man understands even as much of God, as a beast; when it sees
the Hay, then it thinks, now there is somewhat for me to eat; but if it sees
nothing; then it hops for it out of Custom; but Sarah had now hoped, until
she was ninety years old; and thought it to be very wonderful, that God
would do somewhat unto her above the ordinary and usual course of nature; and
Imagined it unto her self after the manner of humane pleasure.

32. But the Lord said; Wherefore did Sarah laugh at it, and she was afraid and
said, I laughed not; but the Lord said, it is not so, thou did laugh, should
any thing be too impossible for the Lord to do: Here is the Type of Eve; when
she had turned her vain curiosity into Self lust, to eat of the forbidden
tree; and God afterward asked her, Wherefore she had don so, she denied also
her own lust, and laid it upon the Serpent.

33. And being that now God had here alluded with Abraham concerning the new
birth, he also does the like with Sarah concerning the lust of Eve, which this
woman's Seed should slay as a lie; for Sarah must here therefore tell a lie,
that she did not laugh, in that Eve also lied; God did here represent before
him the lie of Eve, and that he would confound it with the eternal truth, and
reclaim her; as he did to Sarah, and convinced her so of her lie, that she
must be ashamed of it.

34. And here we are to understand that God has represented (or delineated)
the whole process, how he would regenerate anew the true man which he created;
and how the same should come to pass, and how he would burn the Serpents Ens
in the Eternal fire, and how he would put the lie of the poor Soul to open
shame, and death, on the Cross; for we see this here very excellently in the
Type.

35. After that God had set forth the process of the new birth; these three men
went toward Sodom; and would burn Ham, viz. the evil Ham-like fleshly
property, with fire from the Lord, as it also came to pass, so that we see it
very emphatically, how the judgment of God begins at the House of Israel; How
Christ is set to be a Judge of the Devils Ens and will, who shall burn the
Devils Essence, with fire; as this following figure signifies.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Ruin, and Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, how the same
was foretold of God unto Abraham.
ANd the Lord spoke to Abraham, when he had blessed Abraham, and had said, Genesis
XVIII.
that he would command his children to walk in the ways of the Lord, and that
he would also bless them, as is before mentioned; Behold! there is a cry of
Sodom and Gomorrah, which is Great; and their Sin is exceeding grievous;
therefore I will come down and see, whether they have don altogether according
to the cry which is come unto me; and if not so, I will know; and the men
turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom. God said, How can I
hide from Abraham that thing which I do; seeing that he shall become a great
and mighty Nation; and thereupon showed him what he would do.

2. The un-illuminated Reason looks upon this figure very wonderfully; that
God said; he would come down and see if the cry was true; that he might know
whether it were so or no; reason supposes with it self; is he then
Comprehensible or measurable.

Concluded in a place severed and apart by himself.


Circumscriptive, or dwells he aloft only and above, does he not know all
things before? does not the Scripture also say of him; Am not I he who fills
all things; also the heaven is my throne, and the earth my footstool; would he
then first come down like unto a Comprehensible or measurable.

Concluded in a place severed and apart by himself.


circumscriptive being, which were separate from time and place?

3. Much more is reason incapable to search out the Cry which came up before
him; and hereupon the creaturall reason thinks, that God dwells only on
High above the Stars, in an heaven, alone, and looks down here beneath, as
the luster of the Sun looks and shines from its body upon the Earth; so far
reason reaches, and further it knows not what God is, or where he dwells: it
knows not that he is every The whole Being, Substance, or Essence.
Essence, and dwells through every essence or being, and possesses no
locallity, also needs no place or space for his habitation; and yet that he (so
far as he is called God) is no Substance, thing, or being.
Essence, but is as a Nothing in reference to the Essence; and yet he is even
through all things, and gives in himself, in an Energeticall working manner,
to every Essence, as the powerful influence of the Sun to the fruit; but
works with the creature, and its life, not from without into it, but from
within out of it, to his own manifestation; and that the nature and creature is
his manifestation; if Reason.
it did but understand this aright, it would here make no further Question,
[but be undoubtedly satisfied in it self what God is.]

4. Now, understand the sum of all briefly thus; God dwells in himself, both
according to the Love, and according to the Anger, each property sees only
into it self, and is not manifest in the other with its own property; as ye
have a similitude of this in the day and night; viz. in the light and
darkness; the light dwells in the darkness, and sees it not; also the
darkness sees not the light; and as the light dwells in its great meekness
in the fire, and yet receives not the source and pain of the fire to it self,
but remains only Good, without any feeling life of the fire, and yet it
arises through the consuming of the fire, viz. through the dying of the
Material substance.
Essence; in like manner also understand the being of God.

5. Gods Love-Eye does not see essentially into the wicked rebellious Apostate
Soul; neither also into the Devil, but his Anger-Eye, sees thereinto; that
is, God according to the property of the Anger, or fire of wrath, sees in the
Devil, and in the false Soul.

6. Therefore God said; There was a cry come up before him; there he
understood, before his manifested Word, viz. before the voice in the divine
revealed Ens of these three men; It was come before the Ens, and before the
Hearing which had now in the promised Ens represented it self, in three
persons, unto man, concerning the humanity of Christ.

7. For the judgment over all the Devils, and wicked men, was given unto this
word, or Hearing; for it was the Affective* or Effective.
moveable Hearing whereby God the Father heard in the humanity, and whereby he
would separate the evil from the good.

8. Now this Hearing, viz. the Hearing which would manifest it self in Christ's
person in the humanity, heard the voice of the Sodomites, viz. of the children
of Ham in it self; that is, according to the property of the Anger; and
brought the Hearing before the infinite Hearing into the first Principle, viz.
into the Original of nature, and creature: for the Sodomites, viz. the
children of the flesh, do all live in the Hearing of this world; viz. in the
expressed formed Word, in the figure of the Deity, where Evil and Good are
manifest together in one Essence.

9. Now understand us here very punctually, and accutely; the Angelical world
is Or, is said to be.
called above, and the formed outward is Or, is said to be.
called below; in manner as we may say when a fire is enkindled, then the light
is above, and the Substance [or matter] below; when we speak of Gods [being]
Above, then we mean and understand within, for the [being] within, Extra
substantiam.
without the Substance, is the [being] Above; for without the Substance [or
matter] there is all Above, No below, that which is under the Substance, is
also above.

10. Now the Cry of the Sodomites was come before the Or, Highness.
Above, viz. before, and into the first Principle, where the Or, Highness.
Above does conceive or comprehend it self out of the Nothing in the first
Eternal beginning; viz. to a nature, and formation of the Powers, or Word; and
Gods formed word or voice out of the Fathers and Sons property, out of Love and
Anger, (which had betrothed it self by promise to be a Christ to man, and
formed it self into a divine Ens) heard the Cry in the property of the Anger,
wherewith he is a Judge of the wicked Ens, or ungodliness.

11. Therefore said the Father; I will come down that I may see whether it be
so or no; that is, he came down, that is, Or, from on High.
out of the Above with that formed Hearing of these three men, in the Ens which
God had formed to be Judge of the world, which was to become the Christ.

12. For this Ens was to be creaturall in the Person, therefore it was
formative, in an Angelical manner, in the conceived word of the promise; and
therewith it came from above, that is, out of the Above, viz. out of God; out
of the unchangeable God; and heard first in Abraham into the Ens of the
Covenant, into the Aim or limit of his Covenant with his Love; and with the
Anger, viz. with the Hearing of the fire, he heard into the iniquity and vanity
of man; and saw with the Anger what they did; that is, his wrath saw
essentially into the vanity of man, in manner as an incentive fire should arise
in any piece of wood or fuel, and would devour the wood; so likewise God
looked with his Anger-Eye in the formed Ens (through the same judicial word in
Christ's Ens, wherein he will judge the world) into the wicked infection and
will of the children of Ham at Sodom and Gomorrah.

13. For when God had set before him, in Abraham, the new birth of his holy
children out of his Love-Ens; he also set before him, the Judgment in his
Anger Ens, how he would through this Christ, prove the wicked in the fire.

14. And the judgment upon Sodom is a figure of the Last Judgment; As the
three men which came before Abraham were a figure of our new Angelical
humanity, where God dwells in man; so was also his Anger in the wicked; and
we see here, that God will Judge the Devils, and all wicked men, by the
Children of the Saints; as he now did represent the figure of the Judicial
Office in an humanity of three, and destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah from the world.

15. Also God said to Abraham; How can I hide from Abraham the thing which I
do? It was hidden unto the Earthly Abraham, but unto the heavenly out of Gods
Ens, God would not hide it; and here he set forth, the figure of his Love, and
his Anger; viz. the humanity of Christ in the great humility and Love; and his
truth, and Righteousness in the Two Angels.

16. For thus says the Text in Moses; Chap. XVIII. from the 22. to the 25
verse.
And Abraham stood yet before the Lord, viz. before these three men, which he
here calls only one, and came near to him, and said; Will thou also destroy
the Righteous with the wicked, peradventure there are fifty Righteous within
the City, will thou also destroy them; and not spare the place for the fifty
Righteous that are therein, that be far from thee to do so, to slay the
Righteous with the wicked, and that the Righteous should be as the wicked, that
be far from thee; that thou who art the Judge of the whole Earth, should so
judge.

17. This is now the very excellent and pregnant figure; how Abraham (in the
Ens of faith in Christ's Person and Spirit) comes before God, viz. before the
Tri-une God, before the Severe Righteousness of God; and will reconcile and
atone the Father; and prays for his children, which dwell among the Company
of the wicked; that his Father would be pleased to spare that place (where yet
righteous people dwell) from Rebuke, and draws his Mercy into his
Righteousness, and says; Thou will not so judge who art the Judge of the whole
world.

18. This figure is nothing else but God in his Righteousness, and God in
Christ with his Mercy: Here the two types stand both together; what should it
else mean, that a man would withhold God from doing what he please?

19. The Man Christ does withhold Gods righteousness, and severe judgment from
falling on the crew of wicked men, else they had been devoured at the first
disobedience in Paradise; this is he which comes before God, and into God,
viz. into Gods Anger, for he is of God, and therefore he can come before God
[draw near to, or intercede with God.]

20. That is, the formed word, viz. the creature, stands before the
judgment, and sits in judgment, and suffers not the Anger to judge, so long
as there are righteous people; as is here to be seen; If there had been but ten
righteous persons, God had spared them; indeed there were but Three persons
only which were righteous before God; viz. Loath, with his two daughters, his
wife was also not fit [or capable of this mercy,] therefore although she went
out of Sodom, yet she remained still, and was turned to a pillar of Salt, as
shall afterward be cleared, and expounded.

21. Abraham, that is, the Spirit of Christ, entreats so far with God, that
God would spare all these places for ten persons sake; but they were all
revolted, and gone astray, save his brothers Son, who was a stranger among this
people, whom God first brought out, before he enkindled the wrath.

22. The Spirit here speaks very covertly and hiddenly in Moses and Esdras,
who wrote again these Acts in the Spirit of God, Note, Esdras wrote the Book of
these Acts, viz. Genesis. etc.
after that they were lost among the children of Israel, and we here see very
fully and pregnantly, how exactly, and punctually the Spirit here aymeth at the
figure in Abraham, and points out what thereby is to be understood.

23. For at the Appearance unto Abraham, he speaks of three men; and here he
speaks of two Angels, which went toward Sodom, and destroyed the Cities, to
signify, that the person of Christ is the Third, which went not along, for
here only two went, viz. Gods Truth, and Gods Righteousness; viz. the
judgment, and the truth; the judgment remained Upon. Genesis XI X. verse. 1. etc.
in Sodom, and the Truth brought Lot out.

24. And when both these [Angels] at Even (when their time was out, and their
day passed) came to Sodom; Lot sat at the Gate, and when he saw them, he arose
up to meet them, and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground, and he
said, Behold now my Lords, turn in I pray into your servants house, and tarry
all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your
ways, but they said nay, but we will abide in the street all night; and he
earnestly entreated them; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his
house, and he made them a Feast, and baked them unleavened cakes and they did
eat.

25. If we should declare, and explain this in its right understanding; then we
would express it after this manner; the cry of the Sodomites was the Curse,
which Noah laid upon Ham when he cursed him, by reason of his unchaste wanton
beastial Eyes, and desire; this same cursed, beastiall, spirit, had propagated
and bred up it self in the malicious profane wholly earthly and serpentine
property, in the flesh and soul of this generation of Ham, so that it had
established it self in a Kingly Dominion, under which they lived more like to
Beasts, then true Men.

26. This Cry of the cursed Serpents Ens grown up to its full height in the
Anger, was made manifest, and sounded aloud in its Mother, viz. in the Anger of
God in the dark worlds property, and had awakened the judgment upon and in it
self; and now God sent his judgment upon the Serpents Ens; this was now the
time of Enos his hidden, and at present opened Seal (as it is before mentioned
concerning the Seven The 30 Chap. of this Book. verse. 36.
Lines [or General junctures of time.]) where his mystery was at the end; and
was now revealed as a Sound of his preaching in the word of power, both in Love
and Anger.

27. As in Abraham in Love; for here the formed word which began to be taught
in the days of Enos, did now manifest it self in the formed pregnant and
Grown Ens [or being] in Abraham with the promised and holy Seed of Faith; And
in the children of iniquity, who were of the generation of cursed Ham, the
property of the Anger did here manifest it self out of Enos his Preaching,
wherein he threatened Gods judgment and Rebuke; this same was now grown up in
the children of iniquity, and brought to Substance.

28. And now seeing the Seal of this Enos did open it Self, being his mystery
was at the End; and was forthwith to be manifest according to Love and Anger;
thereupon each property set forth its Substance to the divine Contemplation;
viz. whatsoever the word in the Love Ens had wrought under the sound or voice
of Enos, and also what the Sound of the denunciation of the Anger of God had
wrought: Here now the Essences of both properties did open themselves, and set
themselves into the judgment, to the final sentence of the righteousness of
God; Now in this final Arbitration, or determination of the divine Justice,
viz. in Abraham, there stood Christ in the judgment of Enos his Preaching of
Repentance; and in Enos his threatenings of plagues, and punishment, the earnest
and severe judgment of God, viz. Prince Lucifer, did there stand (in the
judgment in the children of the curse in Ham) to execute the fame in the wrath
of God as a servant of the house of darkness.

29. For God said to the people of Israel on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20.5.
I will visit, and punish the iniquities of the Parents upon the children, even
unto the third and fourth Generation, which is here to be seen in Ham, Noah's
Son; here came first the curse of Noah into Judgment.

20. And here two Angels were sent (that is, in the power and might of the
judgment) in Christ's stead, being Christ was not yet in the flesh, and in
Office, for Christ's Office continued in Abraham before the Lord, and prayed for
the Rebellious men of Sodom and Gomorrah.

31. But when they were tried in the judgment, ( viz. in the Office of the
Love of Christ before the Lord) whether there were any men of Sodom who were
capable of the office of Christ in the Love, and yet none were found; then the
office of Christ in Abraham remained behind, and went not unto Sodom, but the
Office of divine Righteousness and truth, went in the form of two Angels to
Sodom, and looked very intimately into their essence and being, and proved the
same in it self, as it is to be seen, that as soon as these two Angels came
into the City, the property of the People did open and manifest it self, and
they would have these Men brought forth among them.

32. For these two Angels had stirred up or moved their properties, and set
them in open view before the Lord, to see what was in them; and then they
found, that they were only beastiall, unchaste, lewd murderers; which brought
them into judgment; and now they must be judged according to their Essence.

33. But that the Spirit in Moses signifies; That Lot sat at the Gate, and
knew these Angels, and entreated them earnestly to turn in unto him, that so he
might wash their feet, and bake them cakes, and that they did eat; and yet at
first did deny to turn in unto him; The same is a very hidden mystery; for it
is the Spirit of truth, and righteousness, which Lot knew very well, for it was
moved in the Essence, and entered first with the Trial into Loath; and when as
he humbled and bowed himself before the Lord, he was proved and found upright
in himself.

34. But the truth did first refuse to go into his house with the
Righteousness, viz. with the judgment, and would remain in the street, for it
was because of Lotts wife, who, when she was proved, and the judgment passed
through her, was cast as to her Temporal life, for she continued in the
judgment, as a Prima Materia.
first matter, [ viz.] as a Sulphur, Mercurius, that is, an The hard Astringent.
impressed matter of the judgment, as a transmutation into the first Essence
out of which the Body was created.

35. Yet not so soon before the execution of the judgment, but when Lot went
with her out of Sodom, and the judgment began, she drew the judgment back
again on her, as is to be seen in the judgment, which then laid hold on her,
for it had taken her in the probation.

36. Yet the Command was given her not to look back, and so she might have
overcome, if she had forthwith entered into Repentance, and broken the evil
earthly will, and fallen down with Lot, at the Lords feet: and this was the
cause, that the two Angels refused to turn in unto Lot.

37. And by Lotts wife the earthly Matrix is signified, which shall not go
along through the judgment, although it must help to work and bring forth
fruit, as an instrument; yet it is not in its outward form chosen unto the
kingdom of heaven; for it was adjoined to Eve in the sleep in Adams fall, and
shall remain in the Judgment, and be changed again into its first matter out
of which it was created; it is not condemned into the Abyss, but it shall
pass into the mystery, viz. into Sulphur, and Mercurius, which In Mysterio
Magno.
in the Grand Mystery is a Salt-spirit, viz. a cause of all corporality, as it
shall be mentioned hereafter concerning Lots daughters, who for this very cause
were to be gotten with child of their father.

38. Thus understand the figure farther internally, Lot baked cakes of
unleavened dough, and made them a feast, and they did eat. Now the Angels do
not use any such food; but they were only formed Angels in an Angelical
shape, for Abraham and Lot also called them, Lord: it was Gods judgment, and
truth.

39. This Feast was eaten in manner as the Offerings of Abraham, and Moses, as
is beforementioned; for the wills-desire Amasseth, conceives.
forms it self therein into a Substance: God eats only the word of the
will, but the food is consumed in the outward spirit, in which it is wrought.

40. For Lot his Faiths-desire was the divine food of these men; but with the
feast, which Lot gave them out of his good Love-will, Lots will was formed into
a Substance; that so he might be preserved in this judgment outwardly as to
the earthly life, and inwardly as to the will of faith.

41. For these Angels did eat of Lotts food as if they had eaten of his Body
and Spirit, which was therein apprehended, in manner as it is to be understood
in the Or, Sacrifices.
Offerings, as is before sufficiently explained concerning the Or, Sacrifices.
Offerings of Cain and Abel: for the unleavened cakes were (or did signify) the
informing, [or Impression], as may be seen every where in Moses, and they
denote the Body of Christ, whereinto the Imagination of God entered as into a
Type, and yet was only conceived or apprehended in the Faith.

Verse. 4.
42. Furthermore, the Spirit in Moses says: And before the men lay down; the
men of the City Sodom came* and encompassed the house round about young, and
old, even all the people from every quarter; and called for Lot, and said unto
him, where are the men that came in unto you the last night, bring them out
that we may know them.

43. This is now the figure, as it is beforementioned; the Judgment (after
that it had bound it self with Lot in the Feast) did now penetrate and press
in the probation of their Essence and Being, into All; that they came pe^me^ on
heaps, running as mad enraged people, driven forced and compelled to the
Judgment.

44. For the zeal of the Lord, which longed after them, drew them to it self;
it hungered earnestly to devour their vanity; therefore they run altogether
young, and old, and would know the Mouth which hungered after them, for they in
their blindness know not what they did; thus the Anger drew them to it self.

45. And Lot went out unto them at the door, and shutt the door after him; and
said; ah! I pray dear brethren do not so wickedly, I have two daughters which
have never known man, let me I pray you bring them out unto you, and do with
them what seems good in your eyes; but unto these men do nothing, for therefore
came they under the shadow of my roof; but they said; Come hither, thou art the
only stranger among us; and thou will rule, well, we will deal worse with thee
then with them.

46. Here the ground of their Sin is finely deciphered and laid out in its
colors; wherein their cry was come before God; as namely, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Tyranny, Self-willed perverseness; and the greatest of all was,
the Contempt of God; for Lot had told them of the punishment, which God would
bring upon them; and then they said, Thou art the only Stranger among us, and
wilt go about to rule and judge us, we will yet plague thee worse then those;
to signify, that God had before sent them warning by the Messengers of his
mouth, and that they had only plagued, and contemned them, therefore they said
also to Lot, will thou govern us with thy Threatenings, and contem and nullify
our works, we will serve thee worse then them.

47. For when they understand, that Men of God were come in unto Lot, who
threatened them with ruin and destruction; they made an uproar against them, and
would kill them; as the mad blind world has always don, when God has sent
them Messengers, who have rebuked and reproved them; then the Babylonicall
Whore has cried out, run, run, there is a new Heresy, which would teach us
other Doctrine, and reprove our way which we go in.

48. Thus it was here; the selfefull rebellious Devills-will, in his Serpents
Ens would be uncontrollable, unreprovable; and Being these men were come they
cried out Murder.
Mordio; and said there were false Prophets and Teachers come, to rebuke and
contem them, as the Babylonicall Whore has always don; for she will not hear
what the Lord speaks through his children; but that only must be accounted
Sacred, which (...) speaks from the Serpents Ens.

49. This Whore has covered her self with the Literal Word; and gives forth
her self for Holy, and boasts much in a Strange Attire, but her heart is
only Sodom, and Gomorrah, when she sees these two Angels come from Abraham,
that is, from Christ, to her in her Sodom and Gomorrah, and lay open her shame,
then she makes the whole City of an (...), with a cry of murder; so that all
people, young, and old, come running together, and think that there is some
strange wonderful Beast arrived,

50. TAnd when they can perceive no new strange thing in Gods Messengers; and
hear that they do only Teach, and reprove; then they think, O! Our Minister,
and our Pastor calls him a new upstart, an Heretic, and false Prophet, there
is a fool and a frantic fellow, sure enough he is worse then out of his wits;
and they begin to wonder at him [like birds] at an Owl, and assault him, and
his house, his wife, and his children with scorn, reproach, and contempt, as
the Sodomites did Lot; every one thinks, that he does well, if he can but
Jeer, and revile these Messengers.

51. And although he knows no other ground or reason in the world, but only
that the Or, Some noted Minister.
high Priest (who has put on the whore of Babylon) does set him at naught; yet
he is very raging mad, and suffers a false wind ( viz. the spirit of the
Babylonish whore) to drive him, and raveth in misunderstanding, as here the
Sodomites did, who (both young and old, small and Great) do force upon Lot, and
the two men which were come in unto him; that they might know them; That they
might plague them, scorn, revile, and reproach them; for thus the Anger of God
does drive it self into a fire, for its own enkindling: And thus mad also must
the people be, when the punishment shall come, that they must all make up the
measure of their iniquities.

52. And we will not hide from thee, thou unclean, lascivious, rebellious,
self-willed, lewd, Idolatrous, murtherous Babylon, full of all vices, sins, and
abominations; that now also these two Angels, viz. Gods truth and judgment,
are come into thee; and declare unto thee, now at the end of Enochs Seal, which
was hidden (but at present is opened in its sound and voice) thy destruction
and overthrow; for the Time of thy Judgment is at hand; and behold thy self
aright; and observe it very narrowly; thou have at present cast scorn, reproach
and contempt upon Lot, and the two Angels, as the Sodomites did; and therefore
thy punishment hangs over thee; and observe it; when the two Angels shall
carry forth Lot under the opened Seal from thee; then the Day of thy
destruction is at hand, which now thou will by no means believe, but must be
forced to find it so by sad and woeful experience, says the spirit of wonders.

53. We may see very fully what was the Sodomites vice, and great Sin; the cry
whereof was come up before God; for Lot would bring out his two daughters,
which were yet virgins, unto them; that so they might but cease from the raging
uproar against these Angelical Messengers, for he knew well enough, that they
were wholly drowned in uncleanness; if so be they might satisfy their desire.

54. The inward figure in the spirit giving us to understand what Moses does
hereby typifie, is this: The judgment begins at the house of God, as here in
Lot, the children of God must be first brought into judgment, and proved; if
there be children of God in any place which may withhold the Anger, so that the
punishment may be kept back, then the spirit takes the children of God and
proves them in the same vice and sin of that City or Country, [to see] if they
be capable of the same lewdness.

55. Lot must set his two daughters with entreaties into judgment; he would
give them to the unclean lascivious people to be tried; for, that which he
said, was so directed by the Spirit, which had the two daughters of Lot in the
judgment, and had brought the Proba or Trial into their Essence, and hereby
signified and laid open the sin and shame of the City, viz. that they were
only unclean Harlots-beasts.

56. But when these two virgins were not capable of this vice, the spirit, viz.
the two Angels defended them; understand, Gods truth protected them from the
judgment of this people, and also from the sin of uncleanness; for Lot did not
speak so of set purpose, as if he would suffer his daughters to be defloured,
and defiled; but the Spirit did set forth its figure.

57. And know for certain that this first book of Moses was written wholly from
the Prophecy of the Spirit, intimating what each Act, or sentence of the
History holds forth in the figure, and whosoever will read, and rightly
understand these Acts [of the Patriarchs]; he must modelize or represent in his
mind, the old and new man; and set Christ and Adam one against the other; and
then he may understand all, and without this, he understands nothing hereof but
a child-like History; which yet is so rich and full of Mysteries, that no man
from the cradle unto the longest age, is able to express them; although he had
obtained the knowledge, and understanding thereunto in his childhood; and we in
our gifts do also give but some glances, and hints thereof, albeit we have
obtained the apprehension and meaning of them from the gift of God; yet we
cannot express all, and the world were not able to To understand or apprehend
it aright. V. 9, ^0, 11.
receive it.

58. And Moses says; The men of the City pressed sore upon the man Lot, and
when they drew near together to break the door, the men put forth their hand
and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shutt to the door; and the men
which were before the door of the house were smitten with blindness, both small
and great; so that they wearied themselves, and could not find the door.

59. This figure was Acted or don.
achieved thus externally; so that they were thus blind with visible eyes, and
could not see the door, and did no hurt neither to Lot and the two men with
him, or his house either; but in the spirit, the figure stands thus.

60. When God sends these two Angels, viz. his truth, and judgment, into a
man's spirit, viz. into the house of his heart; as here it came to pass in Lot
(in whom also the spirit, viz. Gods truth, and judgment was manifest, and
therefore he rebuked Sodom, for which cause they did encompass him about, to
slay and murder him) then the Judgment passes first upon this man, who is
represented unto the Sodomites, as if he were a fool, whom they must vex,
plague, and perplex, and they also do without intermission revile and rail at
him, and condem him for false.

61. But he must reprove, rebuke, and teach them, and he has no external
protection of man, they all cast the dirt of their mouths upon him, and they
that should hinder it, do but laugh at it; let him look where he will, he has
no Deliverer; then supposes the common people, God rebukes and punishes him
on this wise.

62. But these two Angels are with him in his Heart, and stand in his person,
as in their vessel and instrument, even amidst the enemies; but the common
people do eagerly labor and bestir them to destroy him, and his house.

63. And when it comes to the trial in earnest, then these two Angels, do putt
forth their hand upon the wicked malicious men's heart, and strike them with
blindness, that they are confounded, and know not how they should get Or,
(...)*
by this Lot, and the two Angels; one casts forth this, another that; one
says he is honest, another reviles him and says all evil of him; so long
till they cannot find the door, wherein they would break in unto him, and do
him mischief; for these two Angels do shutt him up in themselves, that they
cannot see the door of Revenge; as may be seen here in Lot, how God does
deliver the messengers of his mouth, and hides them from the enemies; and this
Underhand the Author.
Pen has so found it by good Experience.

Verse. 12, 13.
64. And these men said unto Lot, have thou here any besides? Son in law and
sons and daughters; and whosoever belongs unto thee in the City, bring them
out of this place, for we will destroy this place; because the cry thereof is
waxen great before the Lord, who has sent us to destroy it; and Lot went, and
spoke to his Sons in law English translation, which married.
which were to marry his daughters; and said, Arise, get ye out of this place,
for the Lord will destroy this City; but he seemed unto them as one that
mocked.

65. This is now an excellent Mirror, how God also gave warning unto these men,
and would have spared them for Lots sake, if they would but have followed him;
but the wrath had captivated them, and wholly hardened them; that they did but
laugh and jeer at him; and as it were said unto him, what is happened to the
fool? he thinks the sky will fall.

66. The inward figure stands thus: Gods truth in the Love drew these men Lots
Sons in law, and would deliver them; but the wrath was stronger in them, and
had captivated them in the probation of their heart; they continued in the
judgment, as Lots wife, whom notwithstanding Lot brought forth with him before
the City, yet the wrath drew her back again into judgment; so that she (being
she was for Lots sake freed from the fire-sword) must go into a Transmutation,
until the Last Judgment, which is a terrible Example.

67. In this figure this present world may behold it self, and take warning;
for as certain, and as true, that the Preaching of Lot was true; and the
punishment followed thereupon; so certainly also shall the Or, Judgment.
punishment of the Sixth Seals Time (which Seal is even now at hand and has
already opened it self) suddenly follow.

68. But that the warning hereof came so long ago; declares that the time of
the sixth Seal in its manifestation, is the most wonderful of all the Six
Seals; till the Seventh Or, Seal.
Number which is yet more wonderful; for it is the End of this world, and the
Last Judgment.

69. Let this be declared unto thee Babel, A mystical mark whereby he shows
to Babel the pouring forth of the sixth Seal in wrath on the mystery of
iniquity, and also the Time.
under the voice of the open Seal of this sixth time, although thou contemnest,
and deridest it, it hitteth thee, and has already stricken thee with the
obdurate obstinacy of wrath, which has thoroughly sifted thee in the Appearance
of the Message of these two Angels, and shall now be hinted only to some few,
which shall go out, and be delivered with Lots daughters.

70. The hardened surprised and apprehended crew is already Judged; for the
Doleful sifting Sword has taken hold of them; they run now in a raving raging
manner as mad people in Pride, Covetousness and Envy, and contem what the
Angels Trumpet sounds.

71. The Cry which the Angels Trumpet sounds is this; Go out from Babel; Go
out from Babel; Go out from Babel; she stands apprehended and captivated in
the Flaming Sword. AMEN.

CHAP. XLIV. How Lot departed out of Sodom, and of the Terrible overthrow of
this whole Region in Hams Generation; of the circumstances thereof, and how it
was effected.
WHen as the wrath of the Judgment was now set on fire, Genesis XIX. verse. 15.
etc.
and the day Appeared, that the Sun shon bright, and every man thought, all is
in peace and quiet; there is no danger; The Angels commanded Lot to make have,
and said; Arise take thy wife, and thy two daughters which are here, least thou
also perish in the iniquity of this City; and while Lot lingered; the men
took him, and his wife, and his two daughters by the hand (the Lord being
merciful to him) and they brought him forth, and set him without the City.

2. The internal figure stands thus: the Spirit in Moses sets the figure so
clearly, that a man may easily take it; for he says; when the morning came,
and the Sun was risen; they took him by the hand, and brought him and his wife,
and his two daughters forth out of the City. And now as the figure was
externally, in the arisen light of the day and the Sun; so it was also
internally in Gods Truth and Judgment.

3. Namely, in the truth the figure was internally thus: In Lot, and his two
daughters, the light of the understanding concerning the Messiah was arisen in
Gods truth; which Lots daughters knew very well; that it [ viz. the light of
the Sun of righteousness] in Gods truth had moved it self in their father Lot;
from which cause afterward when they were gone out from Sodom, and the night
approached, they made their father drink sweet wine to the full; and lay with
him; that they might receive Seed, viz. the holy Seed from him; for the Spirit,
both in Lot and his daughters did also signify thus much, in their risen
light, and showed it to them.

4. And now as the Sun was externally risen, and it seemed to be a very lovely
pleasant day; so also internally in Gods truth, the Sun of the Covenant, viz.
the holy Sun-Day was risen according to the probation in their Essence, for
they were now passed through the judgment: And likewise on the contrary, the
Sun of the dark worlds property, viz. the working of Gods Anger, was risen now
in the children of Sodom, and forced mightily into Gods Righteousness;
therefore the Angels bad Lot make have; for the Sun of Anger was already risen,
and had apprehended the children of Iniquity.

5. Like as the holy Sun in Gods truth (which had apprehended Lot and his
daughters in the Essence of Faith) took Lot and his daughters by the hand, and
brought them forth from them; so likewise the Wrath had already taken the
children of Sodom by the hand of their Essence; and brought them into the
judgment of Execution. And we will signify and apply (O Babel) this figure
unto the time of thy Seal; mark and observe it ye Daughters, children of Lot:
it concerns you.

6. When God will punish a Land, he first sends them Messengers, and exhorts
them to Repentance, and declares unto them his Grace; soon after he sends them
the Angel of righteousness, who tries and sifteth them whether they be capable
of the Grace that is tendered unto them; and sets judgment before them with
threats of their ruin; denouncing great war and Plagues upon them to blot and
root them out if they will not return and repent; and shows them also by his
Messengers, the light, and way of Righteousness; and suffers them to run on in
the light that is tendered to them, till they be weary and glutted with it, and
hold it only for a common customary thing, and an history, and again become a
Sodom.

7. And then he sends them both Angels together, to wit, the Angel of
righteousness, and the Angel of truth; and first threatens them severely, and
exhorts them, and setts the judgment before them; but when they ar^^e.
grow wholly a Sodom, he leaves off from the outward figure, and letts them
fill up their measure, and then it seems as if the Sun were risen upon their
Sodom, and now it should be good and Prosperous; but even then says the Angel
of truth in his children hasten and go out; the Punishment and Ruin is at hand.

8. Thus we declare unto thee Babel, that God has already long since sent thee
Messengers, and with the declaration of the Gospel has tendered thee his Grace;
and therewith also has mightily threatened, to punish thee with Ruin; but thou
have made only a contentious disputing Babel of the light of the Gospel, and
art now the well-fatted Sodom.

9. And know for certain, that the Lord for a farewell has now sent thee two
Angels, one has the truth in him, and bids Lot with his daughters to go out
from Sodom; and the other has the Severe judgment, and has now at last
sifted thee, and turned thy inward Signature outward, and set it before the
Lord; and thy Thy Cain- like crying for ruin upon others.
murtherous Cry is come up before the presence of the most High; and it is
exceeding great; he has sent his Angel to destroy thee, and to overturn the
Cities.

10. Thy signature wherewith thou art now outwardly marked is the Great
Covetousness and Envy, together with thy Ammunition-money; and the great
wrathful severity of thy Oppression of the poor and miserable, in that thy
covetousness has served it self so high, that it desires to devour all into
it self, whence thy great The scarcity and deerness of commodities, and all
oppression arises from the covetousnes and pride of man, who seeks to
maintain it by the sword.
Enhancement of men's Necessaries is risen.

11. But thou say now it is a good, and a prosperous time; the Sun is risen
upon me, and shines on my purse, so that I can fill it as I please; it is a
good and a fine time for me; it shall now be a good and a golden time sure
enough; I shall certainly enjoy it, and arise in High power and authority, and
be respected.

12. But hear now, what at present the Sound of the Trumpet declares; it says
go out from Sodom; the Sun is risen in Love and Anger, this we will not hide
from you; the Angel of truth has now already taken Lots daughters, with the
father, and his wife, by the hand; and bids them go; it is time; this thou
shall soon see by woeful experience.

13. For the Angel of Anger has also taken thee into Judgment, and therefore
thou art so wrathful, covetous, murtherous, and wicked; do but behold thy
self whether we speak truth; thou gettest thy self much to spend in thy
Signature; and thou have indeed a storehouse full of provision in the Abyss:
he that can see, let him see; in whom there is but the least inckling of the
Trumpets Sound, let him go out of Sodom: there is no longer any tarrying.

14. And Moses speaks further; and when he had brought Lot forth, Verse. 17.^.
the 23.
he said, escape for thy life, look not behind thee, and stay not also in this
whole Plain, escape unto the mountain lest thou be consumed; but Lot said unto
him; oh not so my Lord; behold now being thy Servant has found Grace in thy
sight; be pleased to magnify thy mercy which thou have shown unto me, in that
thou have saved my life; I cannot escape to the mountain, least some evil take
me, and I dye; behold there is a City very near unto which I may flee, it is a
little one; O let me escape thither (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall
live. And he said unto him; see, I have accepted thee concerning this thing,
that I should not overturn the City for which thou have spoken; have thee,
escape thither; for I can do nothing till thou be come thither; therefore the
Name of the City was called Zoar: and the Sun was risen upon the Earth when
Lot came into Zoar.

The inward Figure stands thus.
15. The spirit of truth had moved the spirit in the Covenant in Lot, and taken
him by his spiritual hand, and brought him forth out of the Judgment;
understand, the soul of Lot, in which the word of promise in the Covenant had
opened it self according to the spiritual property, into which also the now
sent voice of truth and judgment did force, and defended Lot from and in the
judgment.

16. For with the Judgment, the first Principle, viz. the Souls Center, was
sifted and proved through all the properties of the Eternal Nature; into this,
the Lords hand, viz. the Angel of the Lord, did put it self, with the Grace of
Christ's Covenant in Abraham, and drew Lot out of the judgment, and from the
children of Sodom; therefore the Angel said Deliver thy self, and look not
behind thee into judgment, viz. into the enkindled wrath, least the same take
thee; as happened to Lots wife, who turned her desire back again to see and
behold what the wrath of the Lord should be.

17. As Adam and Lucifer also did the like, who would essentially behold and
prove, Gods, viz. the Eternal Nature's wrath, which yet is a consuming fire,
and forth with proves spirit, and body, and if it reaches any thing of which
it is capable, it devoureth it into it self.

18. Now the Soul of Lot trembled and stood in fear before the Angel of the
judgment, viz. before Gods righteousness; and entreated his truth, that he
would be pleased to magnify his Mercy in the Covenant toward him, least the
Turba should take hold of him; and it is a very excellent example; how God
takes his children, in the Time of punishment and judgment, into his Love,
defends them, and brings them forth from great destruction; as he did here
unto Lot, and also, unto the upright children* in the final destruction of
Jerusalem.

19. Also the Angel of vengeance said; I can do nothing, until thou be come
thither: Oh! thou wonderful God, who can hinder thee? but this is even thus to
be understood; the spirit of his Love in the Covenant, had set or established
it self with the Truth, in Lot, and kept off the Anger that it could not burn
until Lot came out.

20. And we see that oftentimes the children of God are able to withhold great
plagues, and punishment of God [from coming down on a people] there is even
such a might in them, that Gods Anger is able to do nothing; and is as it were
impotent where they are present; also they are a might and power against Hell,
and the Devil; for such a thing is true real Faith, that it can withhold, and
overpower God in his Anger.

21. Therefore the Lord said to Lot; I cannot do any thing; until thou be gone
out, and he spared also the little City called Pella, or Zoar, (viz. a
diversion or turning away of the Anger) for Lots sake; for when he came
thither, the Turba must be extinguished, as the Name, in the uncompacted tongue
of Sense, does express it.

Ver. 24, 25, 26.
22. And then the Lord rained upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrah, brimstone, and fire
from the Lord out of Heaven; and overthrew the Cities, and all the Plain; and
all the Inhabitants of the Cities; and all whatsoever grew upon the ground; and
his wife looked back, and she became a pillar of Salt.

23. This is now the figure of the kingdom of Christ, who had opened himself
to Abraham in the Love, how he would sit in Judgment over the world; and how
the Might and Dominion is given unto him of God, that he should destroy the
Devils Kingdom upon the earth, and give all wicked men unto the Anger of God
to be devoured; for when he had manifested himself to Abraham, and confirmed
the Covenant of Righteousness, he then sent these two Angels, viz. Gods truth,
and judgment to Sodom, to blott out and destroy the children of Ham, viz. the
malicious, vile, rebellious, halfe-Devills, men; that so the Devils Kingdom
might be lesned, and not grow so great upon the earth, and hinder his Kingdom.

The inward Figure stands thus.
24. It rained brimstone and fire from the Lord from Heaven, says Moses: This
was not the inward hellish fire, which at the End of days shall purge the
Floar; otherwise the four Elements would have been changed: it was only a
figure of the future: The Original of the brimstone, and fire was generated in
Turba magna in the third Principle: it was only a Sword of vengeance: The
inward fire consumes earth, and stones, and all Elements: but this was only a
fire, as is generated in the Thunderclap.
Tempest in Turba magna in the Or, Excrement.
Egest, which the Constellation casts forth from it self, which is a materia
thereunto; although it be no palpable matter or substance; yet it is a
spiritual substance, in which Mercurius does enkindle it self in the
Salniter, viz. in the fire crack, where then also the flagratt or fire crack
does fix it self into a Substance or Essence, which is Brimstone.

25. For the Three [first properties] viz. Sulphur, Mercurius, and the
Salt-sharpnesse are in the Original (as they are yet a spirit) only one
Thing; but when Mercurius, viz. the Sound of the formed word, does move it
self in the Principle, viz. in its first Original by an Opposition or
Contrary Aspect; then he is terrified in himself: that is, the motion stirs
the Original of the heat and cold; viz. the Original of the first Principle
according to the cold and hott fire; which is the beginning of the Contrariety
and horror; from whence the fire-flash or Salnitrall flagratt does arise; where
also the Three first; viz. the heat, the cold and the Sound, do each impresse
and introduce it self into a peculiar substance in the Flagrat, viz. the heat
into Brimstone, and the cold into a saltish property, and Mercurius into a
watery property; and yet they were not wholly separated, and each of them of
another or sundry substance by it self, but fixed together according to one
property.

26. The like also we are here to understand concerning the Brimstone-fire: the
wrath of the first Principle, viz. Gods Anger according to the eternal nature,
did behold the outward nature in the third Principle with an Or, Dar^ing flash.
Aspect, which is called Turba magna, being a Turba in the Soul of the outward
world in the spirit of nature, whence the outward nature does inflame and
enkindle it self; and the The prime Ternary of nature.
three first [properties] do fix themselves into a Substance, viz. into
Brimstone, Salt, and into a Mercuriall poysonfull water, in which the flagrat
or flash of the fire did enkindle and impress it self; and so being enkindled
did rain upon Sodom, and Gomorrah, and upon the Plain of the Country, and
destroyed all; this is it which is said, The Lord rained brimstone and fire
from the Lord out of Heaven.

27. Not that this matter of the Brimstone and fire came from the inward
heaven; but the wrath came forth from the inward into the outward [Principle]
so that the outward in the Might of the inward did impress and enkindle it
self out of the properties of the inward; and this is a real Type of the
inward dark world; if the same nature does move it self, then it is even so in
spiritual property, which God calls his wrath, and Anger, and a consuming
fire; for if this inward spiritual dark World did move it self, the outward
World with the four Elements would forth with be swallowed up in this same
spirit-fire; which shall come to pass at the End of Days.

28. And here we have a figure of this in Lots wife, who was turned to a Pillar
of Salt: that the three First [properties] had moved themselves; for she, after
that she had looked back into the Turba was apprehended or taken in the
Salts-spirit in its Impression; which denotes, that she was Or, that property
was most predominant in her.
most of that very property, viz. Covetous in the desire, in which she also was
taken and apprehended in the sifting Probation of the Angel.

29. And though the Angel had defended her from the fire-wrath, yet she was
taken in the wrath of nature of her own peculiar property; viz. the Turba magna
laid hold of the Body, viz. the substance of the third Principle, and changed
it into its own peculiar property, viz. into the might of the first, which was
chiefly predominant in her Body, according to which property also she was
apprehended in the Turba.

30. And we ought not to account this a strange thing; for we have very much
hereof in the Scripture: Let us look upon Vzza, who was apprehended and smitten
by the Ark of the Covenant, when he did only touch the same, when the wrath of
God was moved but in the That is, awakened and stirred up, and not atoned.
Sound. Let us see also, how it seized on the Philistines, when they had the Ark
of the Covenant with them: also how it devoured Chorah, Dathan, and Abiram, by
Moses in the Wilderness: all these have but one Original; but each is
peculiarly manifest in its own [matter and manner] according as the Turba is
enkindled among the Three First, [properties.]

31. But if Lots wife had apprehended, and laid hold of the word of Truth and
Mercy in the Message of the Angel, it had well protected her, but she did not
believe what the Angel said, and very like she loved her Temporal goods, all
which she must forsake, and looked back again, and earnestly longed after the
Temporal, and the Turba of Time did also apprehend her; so that she according
to the substance of the Body must remain in the first matter (out of which God
had extracted the Limus of the earth, and formed it into a spiritual living
Image) until the Lord shall again transmute the same substance into a
spiritual Essence.

32. And it was don to the End, that man should yet see, what he is according
to the outward Body, if God withdraws his Spirit therefrom; and that he
requires the ground of the heart, and not only a mouth-hypocrisie and
flatteries of a seeming holy devout lip-labor, that a man should only comfort
himself with the Grace tendered [feeding himself with an outward apprehension
or application thereof] and receive the same only as a free gift of grace from
without, and yet remain an Evil Beast in the spirit and will.

33. As the present Babylonicall Christendom does, which also with Lots wife
receives the grace only externally [or by a strange Imaginary Imputation] and
comforts it self with the grace, but remains in the heart in selfehood and
the lust of the flesh, unconverted, and has turned its eyes only toward
Sodom, but with the mouth it is gone out of Sodom, and the body is yet at Sodom,
and looks with Lots wife only upon Covetousness, and temporal pleasure, and
will not go with the heart out of Sodom.

34. Therefore the Angel of the wonders says; Thou art sifted, and Taken or
captivated.
apprehended in the Turba, thou art guilty, and capable of the Brimstone-fire:
thy verbal hypocrisy, in that thou say, that thou art gone out of Babel, and
Sodom does not at all avail thee; thou art wholly captivated with Lots wife in
the three First; being thou hungerest only after the three first; and usest
the Spirit of Christ only for an external covering, and wilt not hear in thee
what now the Lord speaks; but hear only what the Antichrist speaks in
his pride, covetousness, envy, and Anger, how thou may please thy Earthly
mortal Idol Maozim, and Mammon, viz. Self-love, Self-will, Selfe-Sence.

35. Thou seek and honor only the external Idoll-God, viz. Silver, and
Gold, Copper, and the fullness of the Belly to thy Luxurious sumptuous, and
Stately Sodomiticall pleasure: and this Idol is also sifted for thy sake, and
is made nigh and far off unto thee, and thou understandest not what it means:
thou say; there is no danger, and it may well be helped and amended; we may
contrive it well enough to a good use; but thou know not what is thereby
Signed, and signified.

The most inward figure of Lots wife being turned to a pillar of Salt is this.
36. When these two Angels came from Abraham, viz. from the Spirit of Christ,
unto Sodom to Lot, and he bowed himself before the Lord unto the earth, and
entreated these Angels to turn in unto him; they entered according to the
divine property Essentially in unto him, in manner as they came in unto Abraham
with the Ens of faith; even so it was here; for it was but one Covenant; but in
Abraham the Seed to Christ's person was named, and not in Lot; as Moses
declares very sufficiently.

37. Lots faith took the Ens from the Angel, who brought the same to him from
Abraham's faiths- Ens; for of one, ( viz. of him, who did move and manifest
himself in Abraham) they must all be sanctified; now Lot by the Administration
of the Angel (understand formed Angels sent out of the divine property, out of
Christ's Ens and word) was sanctified as a Or, line of affinity.
proxime line, or branch on the Ens of Abraham.

38. And being Lots daughters were capable of this Sanctification, and not the
mother, the mother must go again into the first matter; and Lot must copulate
with his two daughters in the blessed Seed; for they were capable of it, and
none else in the world; for two Potent Generations were to arise from thence,
viz. the Moabites, and the Ammonites, A Great people, as the Spirit in Moses
does also speak very covertly and hiddenly concerning Lots daughters; that the
one said unto the other; Lo! there is not a man on the earth to come in unto us
after the manner of men; come let us give our father sweet wine to drink; and
then we will lie with him; that so he may not know it, and we may preserve Seed
of our father: for the mother was not capable of this holy Seed, being she was
captivated and taken in the Or, sifting Trial.
Probation in the Turba.

39. Now Reason would object, and say; wherefore did not the daughters of Lot
marry with Abraham's Generation; why would they lie with their Father, Contrary
to the Right, and Law of Nature, and all Nations? Answer; This might not be,
for the Seed of Christ was called in Abraham; but now there lay two other lines
in the Seed of Christ; as near affinities; which should be born of Abraham's
faith; viz. of Christ: As Abraham's faith was born out of JEHOVA, out of the
Name Jesus, so these two lines of Affinity were in the Tree of Wonders, which
should spring forth from Gods Truth, and Righteousness, and be brought into the
Love of Jesus; this manifestation the Angels brought unto and into Lot, which
opening and manifestation did spring forth in Lots Seed.

40. But being his two daughters did also stand in this judgment, and were
apprehended in the same Spirit which opened it self in Lot, and received also
the same properties as their father, it must be so, and it was so permitted of
God, that these two sons, Ammon, and Moab, must be born of two Sisters of One
Seed; for they were to be two Nations proceeding from two Lines of nature, yet
from one root.

41. But in that the Spirit in Moses does so cover it and says, The two
daughters caused their father to drink sweet wine, that he did not know what he
did, and so were gotten with child of their father in the fathers drunkenness,
(which yet seems to be wonderfully strange without Gods work) The same is thus
to be understood; Not that it did not so come to pass; it did so come to
pass, as the Text in Moses declares; but this was a work of the Spirit of
God, and hereby also he covers the external shame.

42. For the outward work is only a shame in Gods sight, and also in the sight
of all People, but the inward work in its figure, must be so; and it is the
true figure, that the Man Christ, viz. Gods Son should be born through a shame,
which also was a shame before God; but so he took our shame, and reproach upon
himself, and hung it as a curse upon the Tree of the Cross, and offered it up
unto the righteousness of God; so likewise both these lines must be covered
with a Shame; that they both might be sanctified only and alone under Christ's
shame on the Cross; and they should not dare to say, that they were pure before
God, and nature; for the Scripture says; Romans 11.32.
He has shutt them up all under Sin, that he might have Mercy upon all.

43. And that this was truly and certainly a work of God, appears in this;
that on the same day the mother was turned to a pillar of Salt, and Sodom
destroyed doubtless with all their housholdstuffe and Goods, that yet they that
same night they set about this work, whereas they continued all night in a Cave
of the Mountain by Zoar [so that we may well thinke] no natural fleshly
instigation did provoke them thereunto.

44. But it must be, that the father should be drunk, that the humane
understanding might not do it; but that it might be Gods work; also that the
Soul of Lot might not be Turbated in the Tincture of the Seed with the shame of
the daughters; it must be don therefore as it were in man's drunkenness, and
misunderstanding, least the Nations should make a Right or Custom thereof; for
the daughters of Lot were also as it were drunk in the spirit, so that the
spirit might do what he would, and they only were an instrument.

45. And that they did understand that the father was sanctified, and they
willingly would conceive of the holy Seed, appears, in that they said; There
was not a man upon the earth who could come in unto them after the manner of
mankind; and therefore they would lie with their father, that they might
preserve Seed: there were indeed many upon the earth, but none was capable of
this Seed, but these his daughters, this the spirit in them gave them to
understand.

46. Therefore we ought narrowly to observe what it means, when the spirit in
Moses draws a vail before his face, that it does not appear wholly pure
before God, and yet for the unavoidableness sake, it must be so.

47. And we ought not also to judge in the deeds of God according to Reason;
for Reason looks only upon the outward* and understands nothing of the
inward: it knows nothing of the Root of this tree; and of its Boughs and
Branches, from whence each Branch or People must take its unavoidable rise and
Original.

CHAP. XLV. How God lead Abraham very wonderfully, and how he always stood by
him in Temptation, and defended him; what we are to understand hereby.
ABraham must be only as a Pilgrim upon the earth, Genesis XX.
and travail from one place unto another, and dwell in Tents; and was every
where Tried, and Tempted; his wife Sarah was twice taken from him; but
wonderfully protected, and preserved of God; as once by Pharaoh in Egypt, and
then by Abimilech King of Gerar; but both times protected by God.

2. And now that Abraham, viz. the Stock, and beginning of the conceived Ens of
faith, in which Christ was understood, must thus wander from one place to
another, and could have no abiding place upon the earth, and moreover must
stand in fear and Temptation; the same is the true Type of Christendom upon
the earth; how the same should not be bound unto any certain place; Not unto
any People that God did choose thereto in a peculiar manner; but that Christ
was given, with his Gospel of the Kingdom of God, to all Nations.

3. And how he would wander with his knowledge from one people to another; and
have no where any constant abiding place with a people, but be among the
Nations with his children upon the earth, only as a Sojourner or Stranger; and
how they would continually try to destroy The true Christians.
Christendom among the Nations, and cast reproach upon it, as they would
sinfully reproach Sarah Abraham's wife.

4. And how the Christians should be continually tempted and exercised of the
Nations, and plagued with Contention and war: also how Christ would go with
his Gospel from one people to another, when they should be weary and glutted
with the same, and hold it only for a Custom and a common ordinary thing; and
so they would grow wholly blind in it, and make only a A work of prating and
fair spoken discourse.
fine devout lip-labor thereof, and suppose to find out Christ by their
accute disputations and Arguments.

5. And then he would depart with the understanding and spirit from them, and
come unto another People, which also would be only fleshly, and account, and
look upon Christ externally as a mere Man; as Pharaoh and this King Abimilech
looked upon Abraham, and his wife; and desired to have carnal knowledge of
Sarah, by reason of her beauty; which did signify and denote, that they would
put on Christ in the flesh in an outward beastiall manner, but not in power,
and spirit.

6. As it is here to be seen in Abimilech, and also in Pharaoh, that when they
desired to know Sarah carnally, that the Lord came in among them with
punishments* and plagues, and showed them his Angry countenance, shutt them up,
and dismayed them, as if he bound them with the chains of his might; and made
their women barren, and terrified them with visions and presages; as he did to
this Abimilech; and threatened him with Death in the Dream; and made known unto
him, that Abraham was a man of God; and how he was blessed of God.

7. Through which means God brought the Nations to the faith; [for] when he
came unto a fleshly unbeleeving People, then he showed himself in power and
wonders; which the carnal Nations seeing, did convert themselves, and turn unto
God.

8. Thus Abraham must be a Type of Christ's Kingdom upon the earth; and go up
and down from one People to another, whereupon the people which he left, did
yet boast themselves of Abraham, and called themselves after his Name, but were
only historical children brought forth of strange women without Abraham's
faith and spirit.

9. Thus also it has fallen out in Christendom, when they have been Negligen^
of*
weary of the spirit of Christ; and made only a prating business thereof the
Spirit of Christ has then departed, and hidden it self from them; and then
these people have indeed stood yet in the History, and boasted themselves to be
Christians, but have been indeed only the children of the Bondwoman, viz. of
Hagar; and the sons of mockerey, who with Disputing and wrangling about Christ's
Name and will, have mocked, scorned, reviled, contemned, reproached, and
branded each other for Heretics, and mere Ishmalites have risen of them.

10. As it is as plain as the day, that now men go from the scorning and
reproaching each other, to the Sword of murder; and will wholly slay and root
out Christ [in his members] and set the Babylonicall Tower in Christ's stead,
whereby a man shall be able in self-will and power to climb into heaven; so
that a man need not enter in through the mortifying of the old evil man, but
may be able to come in, after a fine hypocritical way with the Selfehood of
the evil man; or indeed as outwardly adopted children covered with Christ's
purple-mantle; where yet the will of Self is unmortified, and cannot truly
come to God.

11. Now as these people were afterward judged when Abraham departed from
them; they being only mockers of the children of Abraham, as may be seen in
Pharaoh, and the Heathens also, especially in the Land of Canaan: so likewise
it has happened to the Christians, that these Nations which continued only
under the Name of Christ, and yet were only heathenish in the heart, were
always judged and banished by such heathenish People, as may be seen by Asia,
Egypt, and Griece, and many other Nations besides; how God has pulled off the
Mantle of Christ from them, as verbal hypocrites, and mockers of Christ, and
given them a darkened heart and understanding, of the Kingdom of Christ, and
^ast away their Candle-stick, that they could no longer say, we are Christians,
and belong unto Christ, but Turks, and Barbarous People, begotten of the wild
Tree of nature.

12. Thus Christ must here in this world wander only as a light from one
people to another, Mat. 24.14.
For a Testimony unto all People: And unto thee, O And to thee also O England.
Germany it is now shown [and also to those Nations of whom thou art born with
the Name of Christ] in that thou have for a long time walked under the Mantle
of Christ with an heathenish heart, and boasted of the Adoption, but lived
only in the iniquity of the flesh: That thy Judgment is nigh at hand.

13. For the Angel of the judgment calls aloud to the residue of Abraham's
children in Christ, Go out of Sodom: Abraham in Christ is gone away from you;
ye have no more of Christ then an empty breath; and a disputing verbal
lip-labor; a mockery; whereby one brother does contemn, scorn, and mock
another for Christ's Knowledge sake, and only kills Christ in his members.
The City Jerusalem and Babylon wherein thou have gloried [and proudly percked
up thy self in thy devout hypocrisie] shall go to ruin, Amen.

14. Lon Star shines from the East and North, which shall blindfold thee, and
break down thy walled Towers and Strong Holds in Jerusalem and Babylon, for
thou art called no longer Jerusalem, but Babel; and the children which sit in
the shadow of the night, and which lie imprisoned in Babel, shall be delivered,
and come forth, and enter into the City of God, which he has set open to all
Nations and tongues of the earth, that his glory may be known: A light for All
Nations, [or people.]

15. The figure of Abraham, Sarah, and Abimilech (Genesis 20.) is an emphaticall
Type of Christendom, how they should be weak in their own power, and be
delivered by God only; as Abraham was of a faint and timorus spirit, when he
was to go among these Nations, and prayed his Sarah, that she would say of him,
that he was her brother; that so they might not slay him for her sake; to
signify, that a Christian in his own strength is not able to do any thing, or
to take unto himself therein the spirit of Christ, who gives courage; but he
must go only naked among his enemies; and not at all rely on himself and his
knowledge, but merely and only upon Gods Grace.

16. For he himself cannot stand, only Christ in him must be his sole
courage, and steadfast perseverance; As Abraham here in his own abilities was
full of doubt before Pharaoh, and Abimilech, and continually fearful of his
life, and must see only when, and how, God would shield him, and his Sarah;
and this history is excellently, elegantly, and exactly written of Note, Esdras.
Esdras in the vision of the spirit of Christ concerning Christ's Kingdom, as
if the spirit had on purpose figured this History concerning Christ's Kingdom,
for it aymeth directly thereat.

17. But the outward man understands nothing of the Kingdom of Christ; as we
may see in Sarah when she conceived, and brought forth Isaac, she said, the
Lord has made me to laugh, the people will laugh at this, that the very Aged
Sarah should give a child suck; she did not yet understand the Image.
Type of Christ; but the Spirit of Christ in her understood it; and not the
natural man in Selfhood, but the will which was resigned and given up to God,
the same only did apprehend the Covenant and the Spirit of Christ.

18. But Reason, viz. the selfefull will, did not perceive any thing thereof,
it was only matter of mirth and laughter to it; for it looked only upon it
self, what it was; As Abraham's will of selfe-own hood, looked only on it
self, and was afraid and dismayed; and yet in him there was the great might
over all Powers and Principalities; but it did not belong to the humane
own-hood.

19. For Christ in his children does not belong to the humane own-hood, viz. to
the selfewill; neither does he appropriate or give in himself to it; but unto
the humble resigned will; to that he does incline and appropriate himself; and
sometimes he does also defend the own will thereby.

20. For the own self-will is of the nature of this world, born of flesh and
blood; but the Resigned will dies to the world; and is brought forth to life
in God; Thus also we are to understand in Abraham and in all Christians, a
twofold will; viz. one of this world; which allwaies stands in fear; and then
according to the Second Principle, viz. the Kingdom of Heaven, the poor
captive souls will, which diveth and immerseth it self into Gods Mercy in
Note. Hope.
Hope.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Isaac's birth, and the casting-out of Ishmael, with his Mother
Hagar. What thereby is signified.
Genesis XXI.
THe Spirit in Moses sets the figure of man's Regeneration in its process, so
exactly and orderly together in the history of Abraham, that a man may even lay
hold of it, much more see it, how he does set the natural man in self, and
Christ, so punctually by each other; and points even with the finger at the
figure: for when God had destroyed Sodom, and Gomorrah, and that Plain, over
against which Abraham dwelt; and brought forth Lot; then Abraham journeyed from
thence toward the South; showing that when the Kingdom of Christ should be
Corrupt.
despoyled in any place, that then Christ would depart thence.

2. And He lived under the King Abimilech, and sojourned as a stranger at
Gerar; In these two Names, viz. Abimilech, and Gerar, the figure stands plain
in the generation or formation of the word without any interpretation or
exposition; wherefore the Spirit in Moses wrote down this History; and from
whence he looks as through an exact Perspective: for ABIMILECH denotes the
man of ingenious and discreet Reason; viz. the true man, but without Christ;
only in the creature as he is created: GERAR betokens the strong Austere
life of nature, wherein the understanding must dwell, which nature, is
corrupted, and from that corruption casts or darteth Temptations and
oppositions continually into the life's understanding, or Reason-light; so that
the life stands in a constant contrariety, and is uncessantly sifted winnowed
and proved, which is the Note.
Cross of the children of God; that they see, that while they live in
themselves in selfe-Reason, they can do nothing else but go astray, slip, and
err; as may be seen here in Abraham. When God lead him away from the borders
of the Sodomites, he went toward the South unto King Abimilech.

The inward figure of this stands thus.
3. When God had manifested himself to Abraham, and set forth the figure of
Christ and his Kingdom, and also the Power of Judgment upon the whole earth,
then God hid himself again from Abraham; and then Abraham went toward the
South Country; that is, into his Reason; viz. into man's own understanding; and
dwelt at Gerar, that is, in the corrupt nature; which manifests it self
plainly, in his carriage toward Abimilech, where he in the fear of nature, in
the Temptation, did deny his wife, and said, that she was not his wife, that so
he might but preserve himself by the suttlety of Reason; and we see here also,
how that that very thing, by which he thought in Reason to keep himself from
mischief, must reprove and teach him; as we see how Abimilech reproved him in
that he had denied his wife, with whom he had almost sinned if the Lord had not
warned him; and the exposition is this.

4. If we see a man whom the Spirit of God drives, and by whom he oftentimes
speaks, we must not so take it up, and think, that he is something more then
other men; as Abraham was no more then others in his own Reason; the
selfe-reason in them is as wavering, dubious, and imperfect, as in other men,
and That what they know, and teach of God, is not their own propriety; as we
see here in Abraham, how he out of fear did not spare his Sarah, (but denied
her out of a timorous conjecture; though Abimilech had taken her away from him
to be his Concubine) that so he might but live, and it might be well with him
for her sake.

5. Thus God proves his children, that they might see, that they in their own
ability are no more then all other sinful men; and that men should not so set
by them and hold them for a God; thus oftentimes God permits them to go astray
and err, and yet then he rebukes them also by those whom they ought to teach,
as we see here in Abimilech; how he must reprove Abraham, and make him ashamed,
that he would not spare his wife for a small fears sake, but would deny her.

6. And although it does fall out that sometimes we see, such a man whom God
drives to err, yet we ought not therefore presently wholly to reject him, and
set him at naught, and think that he is wholly without God, as the world does;
but think that God does thus set his children under the Cross to prove them;
that they should learn to know themselves; and then the Sun arises again upon
them; as here it did upon Abraham; when God had suffered him to go unto Gerar;
that is, into his natural rational life, wherein he committed a great offense
before Abimilech. A twofold Sun did afterward arise and shine on him; viz. one
was, that Abimilech did acknowledge him, and learned to fear the Lord; and gave
the Land for a possession unto Abraham; he gave him also Gifts for rebuke; as
the Reproof of the Saints, is, that men should fear at Gods reproof; Thus the
Sun of King Abimilechs favor arose upon him. And then the other Sun which
shoan on him, was, that Sarah conceived; and a branch sprang forth unto him out
of the line of the Covenant from the divine Suns Power, and Isaac was born unto
him.

7. And that we may understand the very truth; we see, how allwaies the Cross
stands by the children of God; and Adam and Christ are continually set by each
other; as here Abimilech and Abraham; and Ismael and Isaac; and also the man of
right reason; and the corrupt nature against reason; which uncessantly sifts,
and trys reason; as we may see it here in Hagar, and Sarah, which also were set
one against another, that one did exercise the other; as Hagar in the property
of corrupt nature, viz* in Adams life; and Sarah in Christ's Person; so that
Hagar did exercise and prove the natural Sarah; that she pressed forth out of
the Reason [or carnal Or, natural carnal wisdom.
wisdom of the flesh] into God.

8. And we have here in Sarah and her Maid Hagar, with her Son Ismael, and with
Isaac Sarahs Son; how Sarah cast out the Bondwoman with her Son; which seemed
grievous to Abraham, and yet was right in the sight of God, such an excellent
mirror, as we find not the like again in the Bible; showing how Christ and
the natural man dwell Sojourn together.
by one another; and how the natural man with Ismael and his mother must be
wholly cast out from the right of Inheritance, and self-will; that the
natural own will is no heir of God.

9. And when the resigned will has wholly cast Understand the selfe-assuming
will of nature, which seeks to be master in man.
him out, then the poor nature of man sits in its rejected will in fear, and
trembling, and utterly despairs of life; as here Hagar with her Son Ismael;
when she was cast out from Abraham, she wandered in the wilderness of
Beer-sheba, that is, in the brokenness of her heart; and looked upon her self
as one wholly forsaken; and as one quite spent and faint, despaired of her own
and her Sons life; for she had lost the Inheritance, and the favor of her
Mistress also, and all her goods, and there was neither water nor bread for to
preserve life, and they were, as given up to death; for she went and sat a
stones cast from the child, because she would not see him dye; and when she had
even wholly given on her self to dye; then the Angel came again unto her and
called her, and comforted her, and showed her also a fountain; and told her,
that she should not be so afraid of death; her Son must yet become a great
Nation.

The inward figure of this is thus.
10. When Isaac, that is, Christ is born in the Convert, then the spiritual
newborn will rejects its own evil nature; it contemns it, and condemns
it to death; casts it out also from it self, with its Son the mocker, viz
the false interpreter [and perverter of the truth]; as if it would even burst
the same in the Mind; so very an hateful enemy the newborn spiritual will
becomes to the natural will in its Evil qualities; viz. to Ismael the Son of
the natural will, who is only a mocker, scoffer, pharisaicall censurer, liar,
backbiter and unrighteous.

11. And when the newborn will has thus cast out the evil nature with its
wicked children from it self, then the poor forsaken nature stands in great
distress, trembling, and desertion; for the internal holy Soul does forsake
it; and then it even gives up it self wholly to death; and wandreth in it
self in the wilderness; and looks upon it self as a foolish and simple one,
who is every ones byword, and laughing stock.

12. And then when the nature does willingly give it self thereunto; that it
also will now dye wholly to its selfeness, and dispaires wholly on it self, as
a poor forsaken woman, that is deprived of all the worldly glory, riches,
beauty, and the pleasure of the outward life also; being wholly cast out from
its former desire; and almost quite forlorn; so that the own desire begins to
faint and quail within it self, then comes the Angel of God to the nature; and
comforts it; and bids it not to despair; and gives it also water to drink; that
is, some faithful upright man, [or some inward ray and beam of light from the
new birth of Christ in the heart] which comforts it in its forsaken condition;
and helps to nourish, and cherish it, and tells it, that it shall not dye, but
become a great Nation, but not in its innate and inbred heritage; viz. in the
evil Self-will, but in Beer-sheba; that is, in the true Contrition in the
wilderness, viz. in the valley of tears in the desertion; that is, the poor
nature must work in this forsakenness, and in its present banishment and exile
[from the sensible and full enjoyment of Paradise] bring forth much fruit,
which fruit the Angel brings again into Abraham's Tent to be a sojourner of
Christ.

13. That is (we must understand) when Christ is born in man, he rejects the
vanity of nature, with the will which works and desires vanity, and makes
the natural will to be Servant, whereas before it was Lord and Master; but
Nature stands in the wilderness, in the vanity of death, encompassed with
Sin; and now it must work and bring forth fruit, and yet it looks upon it
self as wholly impotent; and as one wholly cast out from the inward spiritual
will of Christ; and in it self it seems as one foolish, and contemned of the
world; and every way beaten off from its own will; and then it begins even to
sinck and quail in it self; and to leave off from its own will; and all things
are of small esteem with it: That which before did rejoice it, that now is
against it; and it stands allwaies as if it should dye; it hops, and
doubts; that is, it hops amendment, that it might yet once be delivered
from the scornful contempt, and be set again into the honor of its selfehood;
but it dries up also its well of water; and Gods anger appears in its sight;
that is, all its friends depart from it, with whom before in its Temporal
goods and prosperity it had pleasure, respect, and honor; so that it looks
upon it self as continually a dying.

14. And when this comes to pass, then it is right in the way to Beer-sheba;
and wandreth in the wilderness; for it knows not what it shall do; it is every
ones scorn; whatsoever it looks upon, rebukes it for a fool, in that its power
is taken from it; that it must now forgo the beauty, riches, and honor of the
world, and all whatsoever might advance and prefer it in Temporalls; and yet
it would fain have them; but yet it is drawn from them by the inward man in
Christ's spirit, and Blamed or upbraided.
reproved in these Temporalls for unrighteous, and abominable.

15. And then indeed it enters right into Beer-sheba, viz. into the Contrition
of the heart, and setts reason by the empty water-pott of Hagar; and goes a
stones cast from its Son Ismael; viz. from the own desire of nature; and stands
and compells also the thoughts of nature; and will not give any thing any
longer to its own children, viz. to the Senses and cogitations of the mind;
but casts them away (as children that now must dye) a stones cast, that is, a
while from it self, that it might not see the death of its children; so wholly
does Hagar, viz. the nature with its Son, give up it self to the mind for the
mortification of the selfehood of the own will; sits also and mournes in it
self in Beer-sheba, viz. in the broken and contrite heart; and wholly despairs
of its Reason; would fain dye, that it might be but freed from the miserable
forlorn condition.

16. And then when it is thus prepared, that it quite despairs of its Self,
and gives up it self wholly into the death of selfehood; then comes the Angel
of God to Hagar, that is, to the poor forsaken and dying nature; and says;
What aileth thee Hagar? God has heard the voice of the Lad, where he lies;
arise, take up the Lad, and hold him in thy hand, for I will make him a great
Nation; and then God opens the eyes of Hagar, viz. of nature; and she sees a
well of water, and then fills her bottle with water, and gives the Lad drink,
who grows in the desert, and is a good Archer, and dwells even in the
wilderness of Paran, and must take an Egyptian wife.

The inward exceeding precious and worthy figure of this stands thus.
17. When man has put on Christ in Faith, and is entered into right true
Repentance, and has in his mind forsaken the whole world, even all its
honor, goods, and things temporal; then the poor nature of man does thus
stand in the mortification of self, as is abovementioned concerning Hagar,
and her Son; for it desires also to dye, even to the Senses and cogitations of
the mind; and to enter wholly into Resignation.

18. And when it stands thus in the thoughts of death, having given up its will
and cogitations into mortification, then the inward Voice of Gods Word
manifests it self in the Mind and Thoughts, meditations.
Senses; and even there the divine word hears the voice of the child's crying;
viz. the troubled disconsolate Mind in its Cogitations, meditations.
thoughts; for it sounds therein in the divine voice; and says in the divine
voice to nature; viz. to Hagar; What aileth thee thou troubled and perplexed
nature? fear not, God has heard the voice of the Lad; viz. of thy thoughts,
which thou have offered up in the desire to God: Arise, that is, lift up thy
self to God in this resignation; and stand up in the voice which has
graciously heard thee, and looked upon thee, and take thy cogitations, viz. thy
Son, by the hand of faith; and guide and govern the powers of the Mind; they
shall not dye, but live, and go; for I will make them a great Nation; that is,
to a great divine understanding and capacity in divine Mysteries; and God
opens unto nature the fountain of living water; so that it receives, into
the Bottle of its essence in it self, of Gods wellspring, and therewith it
gives the Lad, viz. the Senses [or powers of the minde] drink.

19. And then God is with this Lad of the Thoughts, and he grows great in the
wilderness, that is, in the corrupt nature, the right discreet and
intellectual child, grows great in the Spirit of the Lord, and becomes an
Archer; that is, an Archer of the Lord, and his brethren; who shootes the
Birds of prey, and the wild Beasts; understand, he shoots down out of his
Spirit the evil beasts and birds in his brethren, with the holy Spirit; he
teaches them, and reproves them with divine Arrows.

20. But he must dwell in the wilderness of Paran, viz. in the corrupt flesh;
and in the wilderness amongst ungodly People, and there he must be an Archer of
God; and his Mother, viz. nature, gives him an Egyptian woman, that is, nature
lays a fleshly woman by the noble Mind born in Christ's Spirit, with which
the noble newborn Mind must sit in wedlock, and be plagued with this
Idolatrous fleshly woman; understand it thus.

21. This Egyptian woman is his flesh and blood with Reason, wherein the Idol
Maozim, viz. the Babylonicall whore sits, where the Devil has his Pulpit,
which, to the precious Mind, is the Cross of Christ, where the woman's Seed,
viz. the Spirit of Christ must uncessantly bruise the Serpents head, viz. the
Devils introduced desire in this Whore of Babylon.

22. This whore is now the Exercise, and Probation of the spiritual
cogitations or senses in the Christian Mind; but this whore does not hurt the
children of Christ; indeed it has a false lust, and is a very wedded Harlot,
which shall not see the Kingdom of God; but it must yet serve for good to the
children of God; for by it the Cross of Christ is laid upon the precious mind,
so that the mind must continue in humility, and not say, I am righteous, I am
holy; No! no! the holiness is not this childs own; but it is Gods Mercy, who
has heard the crying of the Lad, viz. of the poor forsaken mind: thus the
noble holy mind, viz. the new man, born in Christ's Spirit, must be wedded with
this Egyptian, evil, malicious, Idolatrous, whorish, ungodly woman, which is
Note, how we cannot so much as think a good thought.
neither able to do, will, or think, any good, and bear with it the foul shame
and reproach, so long, till the unclean Idolatrous whore dies; and then this
Lad is led of the Angel into Isaac's Tent, viz. into Christ's flesh and blood.

23. And this is the very real figure of the Spirit in Moses, wherefore he
has so punctually, and emphatically deciphered this figure; for the Spirit in
Moses aymeth so directly and fully at the mortifying of man's selfehood; and
plainly speaks, that the Selfewill must be cast out from God; and where
Christ is born, there the same is brought to pass; as here when Isaac the Type
of Christ was born of the free woman, then the Son of the Bondwoman must be
cast out; for in Isaac the seed which should inherit the Kingdom of God was to
be called; it should not proceed out of the selfefull nature, of the flesh and
will of man, but out of Gods will: out of the mortified will of our nature,
which dies to its selfehood, and despaires of it self, a Christian must be
born: that is, Ismael, viz. the poor Sinner (when he becomes an enemy to sin,
repents of it, and wills it no more) shall be born in Gods mercy, indeed nature
must and shall be there, even with its evil earthly flesh, but Christ is
brought forth from thence, as a fair blossom out of the wild earth, as a
pleasant fruit out of the kernel.

24. A very excellent figure, the Spirit in Moses does present unto us, in
Abraham and Sarah; when Sarah would cast out the Son of the bondwoman from the
inheritance; so that the Son of the bondwoman should not be heir with the
free; the same seemed unjust to Abraham being he was of his Seed and his own
Son; but God said to him; Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the
Lad, and because of the bondwoman; in all that Sarah has said unto thee,
hearken to her voice; for in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

The inward precious figure of this is thus.
25. When a man is born again in Christ's Spirit, as it was here with Abraham;
then he thinks sometimes, that he is wholly new, and knows not himself yet
aright, and that he has the whorish Egyptian bondwoman with her scoffing Son
of vanity in his Arms; and now, when it happens that oftentimes the mocker,
viz. Ismael the Son of the Bondwoman does break forth out of him, yea even
wholly without his will and purpose; that Sarah, (that is, honest Minds, to
whom God does make it known) do reprove him; nay and is oftentimes reproved of
the evil, so that it is plainly declared to him that this mocker should be
cast out; This Abraham, viz. the man will by no means brook; he will be
uncontrouled, and yet he does not know, that he in this time of his earthly
life stands in the judgment of God; that his words, and works must be daily
proved, and judged; he will often go in a way of justification, and maintain
his own cause, and will be praised, and in the mean time forgetts the Egyptian
Bondwoman in his Arms and her scoffing Son, who sometimes peeps forth in his
words with evil interpretations, wrong meanings, and evil surmises, and
covers it self finely under a glozing mantle of glistering hypocrisy; this
now the free woman casts out, that is, the Spirit of Christ casts it out, by
other peoples mouth; and yet this seems to be unrighteous to the man; being the
word is born of his body, and arisen out of his very Mind.

26. But the Lord speaks in the Spirit of the humility of Christ; let it not
seem grievous in thy Sight, that people do find fault with thy words, and
reject thy labor; Hearken to Sarah, viz. to the divine voice; and do thou thy
self cast out from thee whatsoever thou have at any time spoken or meant
evilly, wrongfully, or partially, for in Isaac, that is, in thy deepest
humility, thy Seed shall be called, where, in thy words and works the Spirit
of God works in Love, and not in thy natural selfeness and peculiar ownhood
of reason, wherein the Son of the bondwoman speaks and works.

27. And the children of God ought well to consider this figure, and think,
that whatsoever is spoken and don from favor, affection, and partial siding,
be it either toward honest or dishonest men, the same proceeds from the Son of
the Bondwoman, which must go into judgment to be tried; and must be judged of
men; viz. of the evil and good; it must be cast forth among a company of
evil, and good Tongues; where every one passes his sentence and judgment
thereupon: God judges upon the earth externally by men, both by the Evil and
Good.

28. This now must seem so very grievous and heinous to Abraham, viz. to Man,
when his words and works are judged and proved, and think, that his divine
Seed must be brought forth only in the Love and humility, and that whatsoever
he speaks, judges, or does from partiality or favor, does belong again unto
judgment, where it must be proved, and purged; As Hagar with her Son Ismael
was, and then, when it is judged; that is, cast out by the people; then comes
the Angel of God, and speaks to the natural man, that he should not despair
in this judgment; but take it in good part, and be content, that his words and
works are judged.

29. Therefore we say as the Lord has given us to know it, that whosoever will
read and understand aright the history of the old Testament, he must set before
him two Types; viz. externally Adam, viz. the earthly man, and internally
Christ, and change both these into One, and so he may understand all whatsoever
Moses and the Prophets have spoken in the Spirit.

30. He must not be so blind as to look upon it as the Jews and Babel do, who
make only of this History, Conclusions of reason in respect of the Election of
God, as if God had thus only chosen to himself a sundry and peculiar Nation
or sort of people to be his children: the Election of God passes upon the
figure only, showing, what people should bear the figure of the inward
kingdom of Christ in the outward, in which people God would set forth and
manifest the kingdom of Christ externally: the Jews have had only a mirror
and type hereof externally, and so likewise the Christians, who looked upon
Christ in the flesh as a mere pure man.

31. These figures have remained very speechless to the world, even to this
last time, and that from the purpose of God, being man is such a piece of mere
vanity, and flesh, and so soon weary of the Pearls, and afterward comes to
trample them under-foot, Therefore God has dealt with man in Types and
Parables; as Christ also did when he came upon the earth; He spoke all these
mysteries in Parables for man's unworthiness sake.

32. But now at present there is Great Cause (as all the Prophets have
prophesied thereof) that the same should be made manifest; and the Cause is
this, that in this Last Trumpets Sound the Rev. 10.7.
mystery of the kingdom of God shall be finished; and the bride of Christ,
viz. the wise virgins shall be prepared, who shall meet the Lord in his
Appearance; and it betokens the day of Christ's Coming, when he will appear with
the holy City the New Jerusalem, and bring home his Bride: Therefore the
mystery of the Kingdom of God must first be unfolded and explained out of its
Types, and become wholly manifest.

33. And this will be the fall of the fleshly Sinful man, in that the man of
Sin must be made manifest, as Saint Paul plainly prophecieth thereof, 2 Thessalonians.
2.3.
that the child of perdition shall be revealed to all Nations, speeches, tongues;
and the Beast with the whore shall go into the bottomless pit; that is, when
the Kingdom of Christ becomes wholly manifest; then the Beast, and the whore
of flesh, viz. the false Bondwoman, with her scoffing Son, stands in great
shame, and is Judged of Every one, as an whore in the Cage, that Every one
scorns and scoffs at.

34. As indeed hitherto men have reviled Christ in the outward Image of
Simplicity in his children and members, in which, Reason has seen and known no
more, then Hagar and Ismael in their miserable banishment; under which
notwithstanding, the voice of the Angel has been; which they have scorned and
mocked in the foolish plain simplicity under the vail, and have set up the
mocker Ismael in Christ's stead; which has been only an Antichrist: Now this
mocker and Antichrist shall be revealed under this Trumpetts Sound; and be cast
out Or, by.
of the children of God into the ^^te.
Abyss, this Babel shall see in a short time, Declares the Spirit of the
wonders of God.

35. We see all an excellent figure of this in Abimilech, that, when God will
manifest himself to a people, how he terrifies them in the midst of their
Sins, and appears to them in Anger; as to Abimilech in the vision; and to
Moses in the bush of fire; and also to Israel upon the Mount Sinai also in the
fire; and also to Elias in the fire and wind; where allwaies the rebuke of
Gods wrath is fore-signified, how God does bruise the hearts of men that they
may fear and tremble before him, as here Abimilech when the Lord appeared to
him by night in a vision, and threatened him by reason of Sarah, he was
astonished, and told the same in the ears of his people, and the people were
sore afraid, and Abimilech called Abraham, and made a Covenant with him.

36. This is an excellent figure, and pregnantly intimates, how God terrifieth
the Enemies, and comforts poor dejected nature when it quails for fear; and
turns its fear into Joy; and how the miserable, and afflicted if he be honest
is at last drawn out of misery and affliction; and how at last his Enemies who
before he thought to be his Enemies must serve him, and advance him; so
wonderfully does God lead his children, if they do but endure Temptation and
continue under the Cross of Christ in humility, and not look upon
Selfe-revenge, but put on Patience in hope and persevere steadfast in the faith;
at last all a man's adversaries must see and acknowledge that God is with the
man, and that the world has dealt wrongfully and unrighteously with him.

37. Also this is an excellent emphaticall figure how Abraham (when God would
punish Abimilech) did pray unto God for Abimilech, and made reconciliation,
that God did bless Abimilech; and this whole Hystory stands in the figure of
Christ, and holds forth how Adam and Christ are together; how Christ is come
into the Selfe-assumed Kingly own-hood or selfeness of man, and terrifieth Sin
and Death, and how the poor corrupt nature does turn it self in the horror,
and acknowledgement of Sin, to God, as here Abimilech turned unto Abraham; and
how it then gives the kingdom of nature for a possession unto Christ; and the
inward figure in the Spirit of Moses (who was the Type and figure of Christ,
who yet points, out of the Fathers property, upon the Son in the flesh, viz.
in the humanity) can be understood no otherwise, then even thus; It is the true
Ground.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Covenant of Abimilech and Abraham, showing what the same
is, in the spiritual figure; and what the Spirit in Moses under his vail, does
here point at.
A very precious and excellent Gate to the Children of God in Beer-sheba.
1. COurteous and friendly Reader, know, that if a man should write many
hundred Books of the history of Abraham, yet he could not sufficiently express
the abundant richness which lies hid under this figure, but we will afford a
little Service to the children of God in their weakness, and somewhat unvail
this figure, being otherwise it is not to be understood by the natural man;
and yet the Lord does thus lead us in Grace [to the understanding thereof;]
therefore I shall here lend and give him the hand thereto; observe it well,
there is couched under it a peerless matchless Pearl, which shall here stand
open, and yet also continue hidden, which cannot be purchased with the goods of
the whole world; it is hidden unto Reason.

The outward figure in the Text of Moses stands thus.
2. And it came to pass at that time, that Abimilech, Genesis XXI. v. 22. to the
last verse being 34.
and Pichol the chief Captain of his host, spoke unto Abraham, saying, God is
with thee in all that thou do; Now therefore Swear unto me here by God,
that thou will not deal Unkindly.
unfaithfully with me, nor with my children, nor Grandchildren; but according
to the kindness which I have don unto thee, thou shall also do unto me, and to
the Land wherein thou art a Stranger: And Abraham said, I will swear: And
Abraham reproved Abimilech, because of a well of water, which Abimilechs
Servants had violently taken away. And Abimilech answered, I know not who has
don this thing: neither did thou tell me; neither yet heard I of it, but to
day. And Abraham took sheep, and Oxen, and gave them unto Abimilech, and both
of them made a Covenant together; and Abraham set seven Ew-lambes of the flock
by themselves, and Abimilech said unto Abraham, what mean these Seven Ew-lambes
which thou have set apart by themselves? And he answered; Seven Lambs thou
shall take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me that I have dug
this Well: Whreupon he called that Place Beer-sheba, because they there swear
both of them; and thus they made a Covenant at Beer-sheba: then Abimilech rose
up, and Pichol the chief Captain of his host; and they returned into the Land
of the Philistines; And Abraham planted trees in Beer-sheba, and preached there
of the Name of the Lord the Eternal God; and was for a long time a Stranger in
the Land of the Philistines. This figure seems outwardly, as if Abimilech was
afraid of Abraham; being God had given him to understand in a vision, that
Abraham was a Prince of God; thereupon he desired a Covenant and Oath from
Abraham, least he should root out him, and his Posterity.

3. But the Spirit of Christ under the vail of Moses has ciphered out before
him far another figure, wherewith he alludes, and prophecieth; for under all
the Acts of Abraham which the Spirit of Moses has written down, we are to
understand, a twofold figure, viz. externally an history relating something
don; and under that same history, the Spirit of Christ in the Covenant, does so
aptly, and exactly set its figure, as if he played therewith.

4. For the place here mentioned, is even the same whither Hagar fled with
Ismael; it is even the same Beer-sheba, and the same fountain of water
signified, which the Angel showed Hagar; which Abraham, that is, Christ dug;
where afterward Christendom Or, called on.
preached of the Name of the Lord the Eternal God, in Christ, by this well of
water in Beer-sheba.

5. And the Covenant betwixt Abimilech and Abraham, is the Covenant of Christ
with the humanity, where Abraham, that is, Christ swear, that he would not
destroy the humanity; as he also said when he came into the flesh; that Joh.
3.17.
he was not come into this world to condemn the world, but to save the world,
that is, to bless and keep Covenant.

The inward holy figure stands thus.
6. Abimilech and Pichol, who spoke with Abraham concerning the Covenant, the
Spirit does here represent in the Type of God the Father, and then also of
nature: King Abimilech points at the Father in the souls property, and Pichol
his field-Captain points at nature, viz. Gods Officer; both these approach to
the Type of Christ, viz. to Abraham. For mankind was given to this Christ: he
should be a Prince of God in and over the humanity.

7. Now Nature had brought it self out of the Fathers property into false
lust, (understand in the humane nature) for it desired to manifest Sarah, viz.
the free woman, understand the heavenly virgin-like matrix, in the earthly
beastiall property, which came to pass in Adam when he brought his female
property into a beastiall lust; now the Spirit here in Moses does hint at this
figure, and represents under King Abimilech, Adam in the Fathers property and
nature.

8. As Adam lusted to manifest himself with his female property, viz. with the
mother of the holy birth in the earthly beastiall mother, or to prove, try, and
taste in the Tincture of Venus the root or the ground of the third Principle; So
here King Abimilech in the same nature (understand the masculine out of the
Fathers property) did lust after the mother of the Covenant which was now moved
in Sarah, to know the same; which the holy God would not have; and therefore
came unto Abimilech; and terrified this nature of lust, and threatened
punishment, and destruction to it.

9. Now understand in King Abimilech the Soul out of the Fathers property; and
by Pichol understand the outward nature, viz. the third Principle; which is the
field-Captain or Servant of the King, viz. of the Soul, and by Abraham
understand Christ in the humanity, or in the Ens of the faith of the Covenant,
as the Spirit signifies, and setts forth pregnantly by way of allusion in this
figure.

10. God the Father brings the poor Soul, viz. the King of the humane
property, unto Christ, after that it had given it self to lust with its
Servant, viz. the body of nature; and now the Soul speaks to Abraham in the
figure of Christ; Wherefore did thou not tell me, that God was in Sarah, viz.
in this Image? wherefore did thou not say unto me that she was thy wife,
understand Christ's wife, which is called the Woman's Seed in this mother; for I
had almost hainously offended toward her.

11. Understand, the Soul of Adam knew not Christ in its heavenly matrix in the
Tincture of Venus; it thought, that it was the fair pleasant child; therefore
it went with this holy Tincture into selfe-full lust, but now when God showed
the Soul this holy Tincture in the Covenant; then the Soul said, I did not know
it; viz. that this female property, as it was in me, was Gods wife, who
brings forth by it; and spoke by the field-Captain, viz. by the outward
nature to Abraham in Christ. Take now thy wife, viz. the heavenly matrix in me;
for, lo! God is with thee in all that thou do; that is, I will restore again
unto thee whatsoever I have taken into my Selfe-possession, viz. the matrix of
the divine worlds property, which is closed up in me, and now awakened in thee;
take it, it is thy wife; and when Abraham, understand Christ, took the same,
Genesis 20.17.
Then all the women, and maids of Abimilech, and his Servants, understand the
daughters of Eve, were healed in the Heavenly matrix through Christ's wife, viz.
through Sarah in the Covenant, that they again might bring forth Gods Children.

12. Now the Soul in the Fathers property, spoke to Abraham in Christ, being
Mat. 28.18.
all power over the humanity was given unto him, Swear unto me by God, that
thou will not show any Or, Vnfaithfullness.
un-kindness to me, nor my Children, nor my Nephews; but according to the
kindness that I have don unto thee; do thou also unto me, and to the Land
wherein thou art a Stranger; That is, as if God the Father in the Soul should
speak with Christ his Son, to whom he had given the whole That is, all
mankind.
humanity for a peculiar possession, and say thus; being I have given thee the
Power in the humane property which is mine, to be thy own, Swear now unto me by
God; that is, deeply bind thy self therewith into an essential Oath, or One
Eternal Covenant; that thou will not show any unkindness to my nature in the
humane property, nor to the children, viz. to the Branches which spring forth
anew out of their property; nor to their Nephews, or grandchildren; that is,
to those children who spring out from the wild property, where oftentimes a
wicked husband or a wicked wife are joined together, the one being ungodly, and
the other honest; but according to the kindness which I have don unto thee,
even unto thy Image; (in that I have restored unto thee again this heavenly
matrix, which in Adam was captivated in my wrath, and disappeared from thy
Image, in my Anger; thou shall do likewise to me; and unto the Land, that is,
unto the outward man, wherein Gods children bear the heavenly Image; that is,
unto the Land wherein thou sojournest.

13. For, Christ is a stranger in our earthly humanity, and our earthly
humanity does oftentimes make our children or grandchildren strangers to God:
there the Father of nature in the Souls property said unto Christ, he was a
Stranger in Our Land; as Christ also said, that his kingdom was not of this
world, that is, of the earthly man; but Christ should show kindness in this
Strange Land, understand the strange humanity, and not reject the children
which should be born therein, as the Father had don to his Image of the
heavenly humanity, which disappeared in Adam; this Christ should Swear unto
God; as he also swears in the Prophet Ezekiell; Ezekiel. 33.11.
As true as I live, I will not (or have no delight in) the death of the wicked
or sinner, but rather that he should turn and live: for Abraham in Christ, viz.
in the figure, said I will Swear, that is, I will do it.

14. And Abraham reproved Abimilech because of the well of water which the
Servants of Abimilech had taken away by force; that is, Christ reproved the
Soul, that the Souls servants, viz. the essence of nature, had taken away the
wellspring of the Essence from the heavenly corporality, viz. Christ's body in
Adam, whereupon the heavenly Image dyed or disappeared; for Christ's holy
fountain of water sprung up in the Souls fiery Essence, but the Souls Essence
had taken this fountain of divine Sweetness into its own Selfe-full power, and
changed the same in it self to another property.

15. And Abimilech answered, that is, the Soul, I wot not who has don this;
that is, I did not know that the Devil had deceived me, that the false lust
was arisen in the very Essence of my nature; and who has don this hurt; also
thou did not tell it unto me, that is, thou did not declare unto me that
thy Image was in me; that this holy divine fountain was thine* which my
Servants, viz. my Essences have Turned it to a selfish own-hood.
taken it to selfehood; moreover, I heard not of it, but to day; that is, thou
have not revealed to me that this fountain is thy Seat, save to day only, that
is, to day, where thou do again manifest thy self in me in Adam with a
Covenant of Grace, where now I heard thy voice in me.

16. And Abraham took sheep, and Oxen, and gave them to Abimilech, and they
both made a Covenant with each other; that is, then Christ took his sheep, that
is, children; and his Oxen are the Gentiles: the sheep are the children in whom
the Covenant was manifested, viz. the Jews, and gave them to the Father; and
made between Christ's Spirit and humanity, and between the Jews and Gentiles,
an eternal Covenant, that it should be one humanity and not two.

17. And Abraham set seven lambs apart by themselves. These seven lambs are
the seven properties of the natural humanity of Christ, which he did manifest
in our humanity; and in that the Spirit says, by themselves, signifies, that
Christ in his humanity of the seven properties is a distinct Person; so that
we men ( viz. Jews and Gentiles, who come to his Grace) ought not to say, we
are Christ, but we are his house in which he dwells: the Power of the holy
fountain of water is his; we are only branches on his tree: he is with the
seven lambs of the divine property Or, by himself.
apart in us; they belong not to man's selfehood.

18. Only in the Right Resignation Christ and man is wholly One, when man's
will wills nothing any more without Christ, but gives up it self wholly in
Christ, then it is dead to Self, and Christ only lives in it; also it does
signify that his creaturall Person with the seven properties of the humanity
shall dwell among us as a distinct Person, as eternal high Priest.

19. And Abimilech said, what mean these Seven Lambs which thou have set by
themselves; that is, God the Father made an allusion, through the Essence of
the Soul in this figure, with Christ's figure in Abraham, and said, what mean
thy seven properties of our divine nature by themselves? Wherefore being thou
should regenerate mankind and dwell in them, will thou also set forth thy
seven properties of our divine nature in a distinct humane person? and Christ
answered in the figure of Abraham; Thou shall take Seven Lambs from my hand,
that they may be an Eternal Testimony unto me, that I have dug this well;
that is to say, Christ speaks to his Father in man's Person; thou shall take
the figure, or the Image of my seven properties of the humane creature, for an
Everlasting Testimony, that I in my Suffering and death have again dug the
wellspring of Eternal Life in the humane property; that man's new-digged
fountain of life is mine.

20. And the Spirit in Moses speaks wholly under a vail; therefore, or from
hence, the place was called Beer-sheba: this is the very precious place where
God the Father and his Son in the humanity swear both of them together; the
place was called Beer-sheba; viz. a bruising of death by the will of him that
lives and sees in the disappeared humanity, where, in Christ's humanity,
(which he assumed from us men) death was bruised, and broken in pieces, and the
wellspring of Love did flow forth again out of the living God in our bruised
humanity of the heavenly part into the Souls creaturall-fountain: now the
spirit of Moses speaks here very pregnantly, that the place was called
Beer-sheba, where the Testimony of this Oath, ( viz. a fountain of Grace) was
eastablished.

21. And the place of God at Beer-sheba is shown to us poor men, where God the
Father has made an Everlasting Covenant with us in Christ Jesus; viz. in the
penitent Contrite Soul; when the poor Soul in this precious Covenant and Oath
does wholly give up it self with a broken and contrite heart to Repentance;
then the Oath of God in the Covenant of Jesus Christ, stands open to it in
Beer-sheba, viz. in the Souls Contrition; where God in Christ Jesus has
sworn, that he will not destroy the poor Soul, and its children, and
grandchildren; nor do any hurt to this Land of the Soul, viz. to the Body of
the humanity.

22. Thus now we ought steadfastly to trust our dear Immanuel Jesus Christ, who
has sworn a precious Oath to his Father, in our Souls property, that he will
not turn away his Mercy and love from us; we should but come to him in
Beer-sheba, and receive the Oath as our own; that is, with contrite penitent
hearts.

23. And Moses says further; When this was don; then Abimilech arose and
Pichol his field-Captain, and they returned into the Land of the Philistines;
that is to say; when God the Father had given over the humanity to his Son
Jesus Christ, with this Covenant and Oath; then he went with his regiment or
host; viz. with Pichol, that is, with the outward nature, again into the Land
of the Philistines; that is, into the dominion or Regiment of the outward and
inward nature, which is Or, Philistineall.
Philistrean, that is, inclined to Good and Evil: this denotes that the poor
Soul, although it has taken on it the Covenant and Oath of God; and sworn with
Christ to God, yet it must in this life time dwell in the earthly body; viz.
under the heathenish Or, Philistine.
philistrean essence of the flesh; which is a constant adversary to this King
Abimilech, viz. to the poor Soul, and only forsakes the Covenant and Oath;
and brings it self in its Or, Philistine.
philistrean selfish lustful concupiscence and desires, into selfehood, as
into its own Land.

24. And hereby it is signified to the poor Christians, that they must lodge
and lie with the new birth in this Philistine Land.
Philistrean land or house of flesh, as mere strangers, and cannot be wholly
freed in this life time; for Pichol the field-Captain of the Soul, viz. nature,
must have its rule and work in this time, in evil and good, and be an hard
Cross, and continual Temptation to the precious Image of Christ, viz. to the
new birth, by which cross the noble and dear Tree of Pearl is moved, stirred,
and caused to spring and grow; as a tree which comes out of the earth must grow
in heat and cold, in wind, rain and snow; so also must the precious little Tree
of Jesus Christ, which is a stranger with Abraham in Beer-sheba, viz. in the
Earthly Cottage.

25. And the Spirit in Moses speaks further; saying, Abraham planted trees at
Beer-sheba, and there preached of the Name of the Lord the Ever-living God; and
was a stranger in the Land of the Phylistins a long time: this is as much as if
he should have said; The spirit of Christ in Abraham, when the Soul has
received the Covenant, and Oath, that it is contrite in true repentance, does
plant trees in Beer-sheba, that is, it brings forth heavenly branches in this
penitent heart in the Strange Land the earthly man; and preaches, from these
new branches, of the Name of the Eternal God, and dwells a long time, viz.
the time of the whole earthly life, in this Philistine.
philistrean Cottage.

26. And this is a real figure of the poor penitent Sinner, which in Christ's
Spirit becomes a new creature according to the inward man; showing how he must
enter into repentance, and plant out of Christ's Spirit the little tree of
Christ in his contrite and truly broken mind, and dwell also with this little
Pearl-tree of Christ among a company of wicked men in a strange Land, viz. in
the evil corrupt flesh and blood; and there teach of the Name of God, and
instruct the heathenish, and Philistine.
Philistrean children, that they in his Preaching may come to him in
Beer-sheba, that is, into true and unfeighned repentance.

27. Thus very exactly does the Spirit in Moses play here with the type of
Christ under an external history in a simple child-like form; and shows us how
we must continually stand in temptation, trials, danger, and opposition; and
how God does thus wonderfully deliver his children, that even those of whom
they are afraid, and do also wish them no good, must at last make a Covenant of
peace with them in their conscience, and also how the poor Soul by reason of
great fears and horror has no rest in it self, unless that it come through
earnest repentance in Christ to God, and make a Covenant with Christ in God, so
that the poor dejected conscience and nature be comforted; without this, there
is mere distress, anguish, horror, unsettlement; as happened to Abimilech when he
was enkindled in false lust toward Sarah: then God terrified his Conscience,
that he went to Abraham, and humbled himself before him; and with great
recompense and gifts made a Covenant with him; thus also it goes with the
children of Christ when they endure temptation, and continue steadfast in the
faith; then at last their enemies must be ashamed, and return back, as it is to
be seen here in this figure.

CHAP. XLVIII. How God Tried Abraham, and set forth the figure of Christ's
Offering in his Suffering and Death.
AFter that the Spirit in Moses had deciphered the figure of the Covenant of
God, established in Christ Jesus with his children, Genesis XXII.
showing, how we poor children of Eve should and must depart out of this
earthly will of Selfness, and be born in Christ with a new will, and life; he
here now setts forth the figure, how the same should and must be brought to
pass; how Christ must again offer up our Soul and humanity to his Father, even
as he also was to be cast as an offering into the fire of Gods anger, and wholly
dye in the wrath of God to the humane Souls selfness and own will, and yet
spring forth powerfully with the divine Only will of God, through death, and
the Anger of God, and break in pieces and make a scorn of death which held the
humanity captive, and so bring the humane Soul again to God his Father into the
only Eternal divine will, and 1 Cor. 15.24.
deliver up again the kingdom unto him, which he had given him in the
humanity, so that afterward, and to all Eternity 1 Cor. 15.28:
God might be all in all, and the creature might not live any more to its own
will, but sound only as an Instrument of a divine Tune in a divine Harmony,
and the whole Humane tree might be only one in all its boughs, and branches.

2. The Spirit in Moses does set forth this figure very clearly, even to the
end of all his writings, and plays, under the outward figure, with the
inward, which shall remain for ever. I will therefore set down this figure of
Abraham's Temptation in respect of his Son Isaac, likewise in the spiritual
figure, and show what is thereby to be understood; for although the learned
have expounded it, that God tempted Abraham to see, if he would continue
steadfast in the faith upon him, yet it has far another meaning and
interpretation; Note.
for God knows well aforehand, what man will do; also man cannot without his
Grace stand in the Temptation, as may be seen here in Abraham, when he denied
his wife before King Abimilech as he came in to Gerar.

3. Abraham is here represented in Adams stead, and his Son Isaac is
represented in Christ's humanity, and the voice which came to Abraham is God the
Fathers, these three stand here in the figure of the process of the work of
man's redemption; showing how Abraham, that is, Adam should offer up his Text.
Image.
person in Isaac, that is, in Christ to the voice of God in the fire of God,
that so the humanity might be proved in the fire of God.

Genesis XXII. verse. 1.
4. Now the voice of God spoke to Abraham; and said; Abraham, and he answered
here am I; that is, God called to Adam in Abraham, viz to all men, Verse. 2.
and said, take thy Own Son Isaac whom thou love, and go into the Land of
Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offring upon a mountain which I will
tell thee of. Here the Spirit looks with Isaac upon Christ, for in Isaac lay
the Covenant, and the Ens of Abraham's faith, out of which Christ should come;
now said the voice of God to Adam in Abraham, take thy Son whom thou love,
and offer him for a burnt-offring upon the Mountain which I shall tell the off,
that is, the Jews, viz. Adams children should offer Christ for a
burnt-offring; that is, the divine Ens should give in it self into Adams Ens,
which the children of Adam should offer up one with another in the fire of God;
and it betokens, that every man when he has received the Ens of faith, must
offer up himself wholly unto God, and dye to his own will in the fire of God,
and in the divine Ens of faith be born anew through the offering in the fire of
God.

5. For said the Spirit in Moses: Thy Son whom thou love, viz. thy own will,
which has brought it self into Self-love: this Self-will must be offered up
to God, that it may leave the own selfish will in the fire of God, and wholly
give over its ownhood, and no more will, and live, to it self but to God; and
it rightly points out, how Christ in our humane will, which had broken off or
turned it self in Adam from God, should again wholly offer, and give up
himself in Adams person to God his Father; and how the wrath of God should
devour the will, viz. the will wherein Adam had introduced himself into
selfehood.

6. In which devoration of the fire of anger, the Love Ens, in the word of
faith, of divine power, viz. the true Man created in Adam must be formed, and
also preserved in this devouring fire as Gold or Silver in the Crucible; where
the Copper, and all that is impure Evaporates.
purges from it, and only the Gold or Silver subsists in the fire; so
likewise the humane assumed Own-hood, together with the assumed Ens of the
Serpent, and Beast; and all whatsoever subsists not in the divine fire, must be
consumed in the offering. And that we might have again, in Christ's person, an
wholly pure entrance, and open fountain of Grace, Christ must offer up our
humane will of Self to his Father, and resign it up to him wholly, and that
upon the Mount Moriah, that is, in his death, where he, for 2 Cor. 5.15.
all, and in all, should dye to the Humane Selfehood; Note. How Christ's Death
was effectual to All men.
even as when the Stock of a tree dies, then also all its branches in it do
dye; and as the tree does renew its youthful growth; it also introduces its
new power and strength into its branches, which indeed is not possible to the
outward nature, but in God it is very possible, as may be seen in the dry Rod
of Aaron, which was dead to its sap and life, and yet in one Night sprang forth
afresh, and bare fair Almonds.

7. Now said God; upon the mountain which I shall show thee; that is, it must
not be don according to Adams will; also it must not be don in us according to
our will, as if we should prescribe to our selves where and how we would offer
up our selves in Christ to the Father, as Babel does; no; but upon the
mountain; that is on the place, in the property, and in the death, as the Lord
appoints, orders, and sends it to us, we must be only Obedient with Abraham,
and give up our selves willingly thereunto when he will have us offer unto
himself; not whip, beat, and plague our selves, but only sinck with our will
into him, and wait till the Lord shows us the place, where and how he will
have us offer unto him: we must give up unto him our whole heart, and will,
with body and soul, and commit it to him what he will further do with us; where
he in the Image, or Likeness.
Type of Jesus Christ will offer us according to the body; and when the Lord
calls us to the offering with his Cross, or will offer us up to the Temporal
death, then we should say with Abraham; lo! here am I, Lord! do what thou
please.

8. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and Text, g^^t.
Sadled his Ass, Genesis 22.3.
and took with him two young men, and Isaac his Son, and clave wood for the
burnt-offring, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.

This figure stands thus.
When the voice of God calls us, then we should with Abraham go presently;
for early in the morning signifies here, when the voice breaks forth as the
Dawning of the day; when God in us calls us; when man has a Thought come
into him, saying, thou should return, amend, and truly repent; then it is
time; he must forthwith girt his Ass, viz. the Beastiall man with Power,
although he cries, stay yet a while, it is time enough to morrow; yet it should
be don presently in the first look of the will to God; for this is the Hind
which is hunted Early in the morning, as the prophetical Spirit prophecieth:
for Christ must girt this Ass early with the voice of God and go to the
Offering.

9. And the two young men which Abraham took along with him do betoken the Soul
from the first Principle, and the Soul of this world viz. the outward Spirit of
the outward life, these must go with Isaac, that is with Christ in the old
Abraham, that is, Adam, to the offering of God; and Abraham, that is, the man
Adam, in his children, must himself cleave the wood, upon which the offering
must be burnt, that is, when he confesses Christ, then he cleaves the hearts
of the wicked, who run with him to the death, and the Offering of God; for Adam
in his humanity clave Gods Love and Anger; and now also Abraham must cleave the
wood for the offering; for Christ should also cleave death and life asunder,
and offer up himself upon the cloven wood of death and life, unto Gods Anger.

10. And on the third day Abraham lift up his eyes, Genesis 22.4.
and saw the place a far off. Here the Spirit points at the sleep of Adam;
wherein he slept to the Angelical world; and on the third day after his
falling asleep, when as now the woman was made out of him, and the fall
effected; he saw Christ, viz. the place of God in the Covenant a far off; also
herein is included the Resurrection of Christ on the third day, where he saw
his place (where he would, and should offer, and give up man to God his Father)
viz. the last Judgment, and the final offering, a far off; also it signifies
that Abraham in the Spirit saw the offering of Christ a far off, viz. above
2000 years then to come: And that the Spirit says, Abraham lifted up his eyes
on the third day, and saw the place, is nothing else, but that Christ did again
lift up on the third day our humane eyes out of the Grave, from the dead, unto
God; and also that it was yet a far off in the days of Abraham* thus the
Spirit does allude with the outward figure, at that which was and is to come.

Genesis 22.5.
11. And Abraham said unto the two young men, which he took with him, Abide you
here with the Ass, and I, and the Lad will go yonder and worship, and come
again to you.

The figure of it internally stands thus.
The two young men must tarry there with the Ass, and not go, at this time,
unto the offering, only Abraham and Isaac must perform that; that is, we poor
children of Eve must abide with the first and third Principle of our life, this
our time with the Ass, viz. with the outward Body here in this world; but
Christ in Isaac and Abraham in Adam, must go forth to the offering, that is,
Christ stood in Abraham's, viz. Adams Person, and also in his heavenly humanity;
who should only go, and offer up the offering of his Body to the Anger-fire of
his Father, and worship for us, unto God his Father; therefore he said he would
go yonder, that is, when he should offer up his life, he would go yonder, that
is, to God, and worship for us, unto God.

12. This points at his Ascension according to the humanity, when he had
finished the Sacrifice, he went Yonder, or to that place.
thither, and worshipped in our assumed humanity* unto God his Father; that is,
our assumed Soul in divine power and property, does pray and intercede for our
weaknesses and ignorances, unto, and before God. Therefore says Abraham, we
will go yonder and worship; that is, we, God, and Man, and when we have
worshipped we will come again to you; that is, we poor children of Eve must in
the mean while tarry with the As^, until the time of its offering, and Prayer
be out; and then he comes again unto us; when we have finished the course of
the outward Asinine life.

13. Also it intimates very pregnantly, that he, (when the Time of the Offering
in Prayer is out) will certainly come again unto us, from the place whither he
is gone, and dwell visibly with the creaturall humanity among us; as the two
Angels said unto the men of Israel, Note, Jesuses coming again. Act. 1.11.
Ye shall see this Jesus come again in like manner as he is ascended; which
time is now near; and his voice to prepare the bride has already sounded; and
therefore hold not this for an uncertain fiction; the Morning Star, and
Messenger of the Annunciation is Appeared.

Genesis 22.6.
14. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it upon Isaac his
Son, and he took the fire in his hand, and the knife; and they went both of
them together.

The inward figure stands thus.
Adam had divided and rent asunder Gods Love, and Anger, in himself, and
brought himself with the creaturall life into the Anger, which had amassed the
earthly vanity to it self; now the Spirit of Moses does here point at this
figure; how Christ should take our introduced Sin upon himself, and carry it
to the burnt-offering.

15. And Abraham took the knife, and fire: Abraham denotes Adam, who took the
fire of Gods Anger into himself; and the knife, signifies Death, that Christ
should be killed, and offered up in Abraham's, that is, in Adams Anger-fire, to
the Father; and it clearly denotes, that Abraham, that is, Adam, should do it
to Christ; for Christ should be offered up of man: being the man Adam had taken
on himself the fuel ( viz. the Sin) for the offering; therefore also man,
viz. the Jews must offer it up to the Anger of God, that so man might be
Atoned by man, understand by the humanity of Christ.

16. And Isaac spoke unto Abraham his father, and said; My Father; Genesis 22.7, 8.
and Abraham answered, here am I, my Son, and he said, lo! here is the fire,
and the wood* but where is the Lamb for the burnt-offring? And Abraham said my
Son God will provide himself a Lamb for the burnt-offring; and so they went
both of them together.

The precious figure is thus.
The Spirit here plays in Christ's person, who was come in great humility into
Adams humanity, and presents himself to his father in Adams essence, with his
heavenly humanity; and says; behold my father! here I have taken on me the Sin
and death in the humanity; here is now the fire of thy Anger; viz. the divided
life's forms of man's property, Selfehood, and own will; in this now I have the
fuel; wherein thy fire of Anger burns; here now I have the wood, viz. the
Sins of all men; and also thy fire to the offering; where is now the Sheep.
Lamb, viz. the Patient Lamb which shall be offered up in this fire, and
Abraham answered from his strong faiths Ens, God will provide himself a Lamb
for the burnt-offering; and they went both of them together.

17. Here Christ does in Isaac's figure present himself in our assumed
humanity to his Father; and says, where is now the Lamb for the true Peace
offering? but the faith of Abraham had apprehended the patient Lamb, which lay
in Isaac, viz. the heavenly humanity, which God would open in the Ens of faith
in our disappeared and also heavenly humanity, and said God would provide
himself a Lamb for the right burnt-offering; and hereby he secretly points at
the heavenly humanity, which God would introduce into Christ's humanity, viz.
into our humanity, which should be the Patient Lamb, that God would provide for
himself, which Abraham had already apprehended in faith; and hints at.

18. And that the Spirit of Moses says; They went both of them together,
understand, unto the offering; betokens our Adamicall humanity, and Christ's
heavenly supernatural humanity of divine essentiality, that both these should
go together to the offering of God; as Christ offered on the Cross his heavenly
humanity in our humanity to the Father; and with the heavenly reconciled ours,
captivated in the Anger of God; and preserved it in the fire of Gods Anger, as
the Gold is preserved of the Tincture, in the fire.

19. And when they came to the place of which God had told him; Gen 22.9, 10.
Abraham built there an Altar, and laid the wood in order upon it; and bound
Isaac his Son and laid him on the Altar upon the wood; and Abraham stretched
forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his Son. This is now the right
Earnestness, viz. the figure, how God would bind his Son by Adams children,
viz. by Abraham's children, the Jews; that is, he would bind our Sin, and lay
it upon the wood; that is, hang it on the Cross; viz. on the figure of the holy
Trinity, which was become in man an wooden earthly Cross, whereas before the
life's cross, viz. the figure of the Deity, was spiritual, and holy in Adam;
but in the earthly lust it had made it self earthly, and as it were wooden;
thus also the death, viz. the dying of the holy Cross in man must be again
offered up to God upon a wooden earthly Cross; and be again changed out of the
earthly death into the holy spiritual figure.

20. Christ should not be slain, but hung up on the Cross, pierced through in
his hands and feet, for the Anger of God was awakened in the conversation and
works of our hands and feet; and therefore also Isaac in the figure of Christ
must not be slain; and also burnt; for he was not the right one, but the figure
only in our humanity; for he could not accomplish this offering in its powers;
and it denotes that we are indeed bound with Christ, and laid upon the wood,
and also must dye for Christ's sake, but with our death we cannot attain this
offering, as Isaac also could not effect that; but the Ens of faith in Abraham,
and Isaac, out of which, Christ arose, the same did effect it, and can yet now
in these days effect it in the Christians in Christ in his humanity in us.

21. And as Isaac was represented in Christ's figure as if he were to be the
Sacrifice; even so Every true Christian must with Isaac enter into Christ's
figure; he must willingly resign himself into Christ's death; and bind his
Sin with the will in the Spirit of Christ, and offer it upon the Altar of
Christ, and with a full and free will, dye wholly to Sin; then comes the voice
of God, as it came to Abraham, and to Hagar in the wilderness of Beer-sheba,
and says, Do not any thing to nature, viz. thy Son; now I know thou beleevest
God.

22. But it must come so far with the penitent Sinner, as here it did with
Abraham and Isaac, where Isaac was laid ready bound upon the wood, and Abraham
took the knife to slay him; There must be a very real sincere earnestness in
this matter; the sinful man must bind the Sin with all his thoughts and
mind, and give himself wholly into the process; that he will now dye unto
Sin, and offer it up in faith, and confidence, to God in Christ's death; he must
take the knife with Abraham into the hand; that is, he must wholly take and
fasten into his mind to Do the work of earnest Repentance in dying to Sin: It
must come to the real and effectual practice, and not only come before the
Altar and say, I am a Sinner, God has offered Christ for me, and yet keep the
sinful will; but he must bind sin in Christ's death, and lay himself wholly
with all power and strength on the burnt-offerings Altar upon the wood.

23. The evil earthly will must be bound, and resigned up with Earnestness,
and cast upon Gods Altar in Christ's death; and be also offered up in Christ's
dying; and not only comfort the sinful man, and flatter it with Christ's
death, saying; God takes away sin from us in Christ's satisfaction, and merit;
we need only comfort our selves therewith, and apply it from without to our
selves: no, no; but we also our selves must dye to sin in Christ's death, and
put on Christ's offering in his death, and as an obedient Isaac, we must cast
our selves on Gods mercy, in the spirit and will of Christ, and arise in
Christ, in and with him, that God may justify us from the Altar of
sin-offering, with Isaac, in Christ, which is the true offering in the figure
of Isaac.

24. Not as Babel teaches; There must be an entire and sincere earnestness,
and not only a comforting [and applying promises of consolation] but we must
with Abraham obey God, and then we put on Christ's suffering and death; and
Christ's death avails only in us, and here it is truly said; Ye are saved by
grace in Christ's merit; The will of Self attains it not, but that which
enters into Christ's death, and dies; it must come to the death and
mortification of the own self-will: the Souls will must be an utter
destroying enemy to Sin in the flesh, viz. to the lust of the flesh; there must
be an opposite enmity between them, else Christ's death is Note, To whom Christ's
death is not profitable. Genesis 22.11.
not at all profitable to any.

25. And Moses says; The Angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven and
said; Abraham, Abraham: that is; when man resigneth up his will wholly, and
willingly desires to obey the voice of the Lord; having given himself into
Christ's suffering, death, and reproach; that he now will in the cross and
suffering hold still, and steadfast to God, under Christ's Red Ensign.
Banner; then God calls man with a Twofold.
double voice, as here he did Abraham; where God said unto him; Abraham,
Abraham; that is, he calls to him in his own Voice in his word, and also in
the voice of the humane Essence; that is, he opens to him the divine hearing
in himself, so that he hears God from without in his word of his Servants,
and also from within in his own life's word, viz. in the SensVAll Voice, which
was divided in Babel by the children of Nimrod, and formed into the spirits of
letters, where the mental Tongue was then compacted; Here it arises again in
the uncompacted SensVAll Tongue, so that man hears what the Lord speaks in
him; of which Babel knows nothing, nor can know, nor will know, but climeth
up continually in the compacted tongue on the Tower of Babel into an Heaven of
humane Selfehood; and has put Christ's garment outwardly upon it self; but it
has not the twofold voice; therefore also it does not hear when God calls
Abraham.

26. And Abraham Answered; Here am I, and he said, Lay not thine hand upon the
Lad, neither do thou any thing unto him; Genesis 22.12.
for now I know that thou fear God; and have not spared thy only Son for my
sake. That is thus; when man has wholly resigned up his Self, viz. his own
will or Son; and put it wholly to the mortification in Christ's death; then the
nature of man falls into Sadness; for it has lost its right [its own law and
will] then says the Spirit of God by the Soul, do nothing to thy nature; now I
know that it is given up and resigned to me, and that the Soul has now
Plerophory.
an assurance of confidence in God; and is fully bold even to leave the outward
life, for Gods sake, and give over its will to me in Obedience; as here
Abraham had fully resigned up his will unto God; he would now do whatsoever God
commanded him.

27. And as Abraham did not spare his Son, and would have given him up unto
death; so also God did not spare his Son, and gave him to death for us; even so
should we also not spare even our own will, but rather be willing to leave all
whatsoever the own will has taken possession of, and delights in, and
willingly dye to all Temporalls for Gods sake; let it be Principality,
Dominion, or Kingdom, Temporal Honor, or Goods, or whatsoever it may be, that
is our dearly beloved Son; all this a Christian must give over, and resign up
in the mind; and account, and esteem himself only a Servant therein; yea
esteem his outward life not for his own; but in his Mind depart from, and
forsake every creature; and then he lies bound upon the wood of the Burnt
offerings Altar, and waits for the Voice of God from Heaven, which calls to
him; and becomes the Voice, and Mouth of his life; and this is truly with
Abraham, to believe God; where God believes in man; and then God says; Now I
know that thou fear God, and put thy trust in him alone, for the humane
will sincketh into the most pure Being of God.

28. And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and lo! a Ram was hung in a
thickett by his horns, Genesis 22.13, 14
and he went, and took the Ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offering in the
stead of his Son; and Abraham called the name of the place; Jehovah-jireth.
The Lord sees; as it is said to this day, upon the Mount where the Lord
Sees. This is the golden figure which shows; that the killing, death and
dying, does not reach the true man, but only the Ram with his Horns, which
sticks in the flesh and blood in the Thorns of Sin; and it chiefly denotes
that the true Text. Soules-man.
humane Soul in Christ, and his children, shall not dye in this burnt-offering
of God; but after that it has resigned up the will of Self, then God opens
its eyes, that it sees the Ram behind it, viz. it spieth the will of the
wild evil flesh, and learnes to know it, which will, sticks with its
pushing beasts-hornes, in the thorny Thickett of the Devil, in flesh and
blood, viz. in the desire of the vanity of the world in Selfefull Lust: This
the Resigned Soul sees and offers it up for a burnt-offering in the stead of
the true Nature; for the right nature is delivered in this burnt offering from
the Ram of the flesh: the Horns are the injections, oppositions, and assaults
of the Devil, and the thickett of Thorns is the Serpents Ens, which the lust
of Adam has introduced.

29. Thus we must understand in this figure, that the whole man in Christ's
person should not be given to the Anger of God; as if the Adamicall man should
be wholly consumed and devoured by it; no; but the wild Ram only; the Enmity,
the opposite will, the property of Apostasy and Rebellion; but the life's
Essence should remain forever: the same Adam, which God created unto Paradise*
the same shall remain eternally; but the division or dissonant disunion of the
life's forms, in that they are rent asunder and brought into the property of
Selfehood, whence strife and enmity is arisen in man; I say, this evil Ram;
viz. this introduced infection, vain desire, and adverse will, must be offered
up in Christ in the fire of Gods Anger: This was the Beast for the
burnt-offering: The Lamb of God in Adam shall not be consumed in the fire; but
it must only shed its blood; it must immerse and sinck it self wholly with
the humane nature into the One, viz. into the Eternal Nothing, without all
nature; and then this place is called here the Lord Sees; that is, when the
Ram is offered, then this place is afterward the Temple of God, where the Lord
Sees.

30. And the Spirit of Moses speaks very hiddenly hereof, and says, Hence it
is said still to this day, upon the Mount where the Lord Sees: the Mount is
the life's nature, where the Lord has seen not only in Abraham and Isaac; but
he sees in Christ's spirit, yet, at this day upon this Mount in the children of
God: when the Ram is offered up then the Spirit of God sees through nature, as
the Sun through-shineth a Glass, or as a fire through-heats an Iron.

31. Therefore a man ought not to be so foolish as to torment his whole life in
his repentance and conversion, and to offer it up in the fire of death without
Gods command; but he must only sacrifice the Sin, and Self-love of vanity; he
must offer up only the Ram, and not do any violence or mischief to nature;
not, strike, whip, and beat it; or creep into a corner, and suffer the Body to
Note.
starve for hunger; no, he must not out of his own purpose Give the Image of
God, to death; but the Ram he must; he meritts not any thing by plaguing,
martyring and torturing himself; for God has bestowed his heart to that end,
to redeem us from Pain and Torment.

32. When the Soul with the Right nature has tamed it self from the Ram of
the flesh; then it must Sacrifice the Ram to the death of Christ; but it must
remain steadfast in great humility, in the Resignation in God; and not any
further afflict and rack it self, either with doubts, or with any other
external inflicted tortures, and also give nature its necessary nourishment,
and not Enfeeble and distemper it self; for it is the Temple and the Image of
God; but it must daily and continually mortify the Ram in the flesh; viz. the
selfish lust of the evil flesh, and the will to the Selfehood [or ownhood] of
this world; and although the flesh be disquieted, being it must forsake what it
fain would have, yet the true nature and the Soul must not give heed to it;
Also it must not take care for the sake of the flesh, where that should have
its maintenance, but commit it to God, and go on in his calling as a
day-labourer in the Service of his Lord and Master, and let God take care for
the Ram, and give it what he please.

33. And the Angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of Heaven the second
time, and said, by my self have I sworn says the Lord, Genesis 22. v. 15. to the
19.
because thou have don this thing, and have not spared thy only Son, that I
will bless and multiply thy Seed as (...) ^tars of the Heaven and as the Sand
that is upon the Seashore; and thy Seed shall possess the Gate of his
enemies; and through thy Seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed;
because thou have obeyed my voice; and so Abraham returned to his young men,
and they rose up and went together to Beer-sheba, and dwelt there. This is now
the Seal of Faith; when man has wholly given himself up to God, then God
swears unto the humanity by him self; that he will bless man; that his
life's essence shall thence forward spread forth it self in his Power, and
grow unto a great Tree of divine Essence in the wisdom, whose fruit, and
knowledge shall be infinite and innumerable; as he swear unto Abraham, that out
of his body or life's essence many Nations should arise; also how his life's
essence should possess the Gates of the enemies, viz. of the Devil, and Death,
as here he gives a full and pregnant hint concerning Christ and his
Christendom; how they should destroy the Devils Kingdom, and break down his
Gate in man: This the faith in Gods children is able to do.

34. For so soon as the judgment of the earthly man has been held in the
penitent man; so that the Soul rejects the will of the evil flesh, viz. the
will of the Animal Soul, and brings it into judgment to the condemnation of
death, and resignes it self up wholly unto God; then God swears in Christ
Jesus, this Oath, unto the Soul, and setts it to be a Prince over the enemies;
viz. over the proud, and haughty Devils, even to judge them, and obtains full
power over them, and drives them out.

35. After these things Moses mentions how the blessing of Abraham did spread
forth it self, and he makes a relation of his brother Nahor, how Milcah bare
unto him eight Sons; from whom great Nations did arise; viz. the Assyrians; who
indeed did not spring forth out of the Ens of faith, viz. in the line of
Christ, as Abraham; but out of the natural Adam, upon whom also the blessing
of Abraham did Passed or went.
light; for the history is so exactly deciphered that a man may see, that God
has not only chosen the natural line of Christ, proceeding from Abraham and
Isaac, but also the lines of nature in the Adamicall Tree, which he would also
bring together, and manifest himself to them, and they who would believe in
God, should be engrafted into the line of Christ; that is, those who should be
capable of the divine Ens in the voice of the Lord, whose will should direct it
self to God.

36. As we may see again in this figure, how God has not rejected the
Kingdom of nature in man, but that he in Christ will deliver it out of the
Anguish and Enmity; and that a man should, and must continue in the Kingdom of
nature; as Abraham when he had finished this offering, he went with his Son and
two young men to Beer-sheba, and dwelt there; by which the Spirit of Moses
signifies, that when Abraham had performed this Calling in the figure of
Christ before the Lord, he returned again unto his natural affairs, viz. unto
the doing of this worlds business; he went to Beer-sheba; that is, into the
toil, and labor, whereinto Adam has brought us, where a child of God in the
cloven and broken nature, viz. in Beer-sheba, must work in God, with teaching,
and praying, and also in nature, with the labor of the hand to maintain the
outward man, and follow the wonders of the outward world in the formed word,
and help to form, manifest, and bring them forth in ^^^ure, to the
Contemplation of the wisdom of God.

37. Also hereby is hinted very clearly, that a child of God in this worlds
being, does not stand daily and hourly in the Operation of the spiritual
figure, that his Spirit can see and know that [onely]; but also in the
natural, where the Spirit of God goes also along working in the work of
nature, and manifests it self in another property in him; as it may be seen
here in Abraham, and all the Saints; that God did sometimes manifest himself
to them in the figure of Christ, and sometimes again in the Cross, and labor,
in the Temptation and contrariety of the nature of the corrupt Adam; so that
they have lived in weakness and infirmities, as all Adams children [have don
and do].

38. And we ought not to look upon, and consider this figure concerning Abraham
in all that the Spirit of Moses and Text. Ezra. Note concerning Esdras.
Esdras has written down, but as a Type of Christ and Adam; viz. of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Kingdom of nature; that hereby God has
represented the figure of Christ and his Christendom, how he would again
Redeem and deliver them from the Great Toil, and Labor.

39. Wherewith also the Kingdom of darkness in the Pain and Torment is
continually represented, and how the same does pant and reach after man, and
how man does stand, here in this life, as in a field, and grows; on Whom
sometimes the Sun of divine Love does eglimpse and shine; and sometimes again
Gods wrath and Anger, and how man must be purged, tried, and purified; and the
chiefest and most especial point herein is this; that a man must give up, and
resign himself to God, in faith, and full assurance, and hold still unto him,
and let him work in him as he please; and how also he must learn to bend and
bow his own nature, and lead it toward God; that it, in all things may desire
to be Gods instrument and Servant, and desire and will to work nothing but what
belongs to the divine manifestation in the wonders of nature, for the
Contemplation of Gods wisdom; and on the contrary reject the Own will of the
Devil, and all desire to Selfehood.

40. And we should not look upon the written History of Moses concerning the
Patriarchs, so blindly as the Jews, and Babel do; as if they were only a mere
History; no; the same is not only full of the types of Christ and Adam, viz.
of the old, and new man, but there are also secret and mysterious intimations,
and prophecies concerning the hidden spiritual world, showing what shall be
after this time.

41. Reason must know, that the Spirit of God has not labored in the work
only to set forth the histories of the Ancient, which for the most part seem
but simple and childlike; no; they are set forth for a Type and information.

42. The Spirit of God has represented the greatest wonders therein, which he
would accomplish in man, and that in a plain simple, and childlike manner, that
so the pride of the Devil, and the suttlety or wisdom of Reason might be
confounded and made foolish thereby.

43. For we must know, that the greatest power and virtue together with the
wonders does lie in the humility, and lowliness; and how God is so near unto
all things, and yet nothing apprehends him, unless it stand still unto him,
and give up the Own will, and then he works through all; as the Sun through
the whole world.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the death of Sarah, and the hereditary Sepulcher of Abraham:
What is understood, and signified thereby.
THe Spirit in Moses has set before him, the whole figure of man, by Abraham,
showing what his condition should be in this world; Genesis XXIII.
and what hereafter should become of him; for after he had first spoken of the
beginning, viz. of the Stock of the humane tree; showing whence it did spring;
he afterward declares its boughs, and branches, together with its power, and
virtue, and mentions how this tree is corrupted in its power and essence; and
that God has bestowed the highest Tincture upon it to tincture it again, and
renew it; and how the Poison in the essence of the tree Or, has been
with-stood.
is to be resisted.

2. Here he does now very wonderfully signify how this tree has stood in the
corrupt property in a strange field, and rooted it self with the root into a
strange or alienate own hood, wherein the root was not native; and how the root
of the humane tree must forsake the strange field, together with the strange
introduced essence; and wholly give it self freely out of its life's will and
desire.

3. Also hereby is signified, how the place whence the humane root did spring,
is between the holy spiritual world, and this earthly corrupt world; and that
man's propriety, from whence he is sprung, does stand in a double Our Text has
it, The Cave of Machpelah, which here in the Germane version is rendered a
double Cave or a twofold Pit.
cave, viz. in two Principles; and how he must be buried in this twofold pit,
as a kernel which is Sown into the ground; and how also [this cave of
Machpelah] this twofold pit, is man's propriety, of which essence or substance
he himself is, essentially.

4. The figure of this we see here in Abraham, that when he conversed in this
outward world; he possessed upon the earth no Land of his Own, but went from
one place unto another, and was every where a Stranger; but when his Sarah
dyed, then he would have a burying place for a certain possession for his wife,
himself also, and his children; and moreover he would not have it for nothing,
but buy it; all which is a very wonderful typification, and not only a bare
history, as the Jews have held it to be, before whose eyes the vail of Moses
is hung: but we will here also set forth the inward figure with the outward;
and see what the Spirit in Moses does here signify.

Genesis 23.2.
5. Moses says; Sarah dyed at Hebron in the Our Text, Kiriach-arba.
head City in the Land of Canaan: this may very well thus be, but the Spirit
has his figure under it; for he looks upon the Center, where the death of the
Saints is; and where the true man must dye; as namely in the Head-Citie Hebron,
that is, in the formed Word; where he has introduced the own hood, and selvish
lust, into the formed word of his life's property; and set himself up into a
selfefull Dominion and Regiment, as into an Head City, where the self-will
has framed, and contrived to it self a City, or propriety, in the formed
word, and built it up for its own peculiar Land of possession; where he indeed
supposes, he is a God, or Something of his Own, that he may do with and how he
please; now this self-will must dye in the Head-Citie, viz. in the formed Ens
of the Word in its Center, viz. in the City of its own-hood.

6. And this City Hebron lies right over against Mamre, viz. between the
eternal, and temporal nature; where [the cave of Machpelah,] the twofold Pit
is, viz. the Kingdom of God, and of nature; for in this twofold Pit, Abraham
would bury his Sarah, and have the Pit for his Own.

7. That is to say, when the children of the Saints in Hebron, viz. in the
City of humane own-hood, do dye unto the selfefull outward natural life or
Selfehood, then the true resigned life will no longer stand in a strange field
or strange essence, but in its own, from whence it is Originally arisen, but
being it has lost this same life's field in Adam, and rooted it self into a
strange field, viz. into the Serpents field of falsehood, the life cannot take
unto it self again, of due Right, the first true field, but it must buy it;
this is even the figure; that Christ has bought it for his Blood of the
heavenly essentiality, (for the holy Tincture) understand [he has thus
purchased it] of the eternal nature, wherein Gods Anger; viz. the wrath of God
in the Center of nature, was manifest, and had devoured this field in the
humane property into its self as its own; for out of the Center of nature the
Word of the humane property was brought into a formation; This, the children of
Self had taken into possession; therefore says the Spirit, the children of
Heth had this field for their own possession.

8. This signifies, that Gods children must wholly forsake the nature-Right in
this field of the formed life or word; for they have lost the natural Right in
it; but in Christ they must buy it again of the Father of nature: they must
take Christ for their Ransom; and give the Father four hundred shekells of
Silver for the same; and these are the four Centres in the spiritual body's
property, which are born in the holy Tincture, viz. in Christ's property.

9. The first shekell is the true magical fire; the Second is the Light; or
Love-desire: the third is the holy Sound of the mental tongue; the fourth is
the formed or conceived Ens out of the other properties, where the holy life is
formed, and stands in an Essence; this is the pure Silver without any spott or
foulness; under which the Spirit of Moses points, that, Abraham in Christ, has
given to the children of Heth, viz. to Ephron; understand to the Father or the
Fathers property [for his cave of Machpelah] for his twofold pit; viz. for the
center of the Fathers nature according to Eternity, and for the center of the
Temporal Nature; in both which the divine Or, Good will and Pleasure.
lubet has brought it self out of the property of both centres, into an Ens,
and into the creature of the humanity, which humane creature has broken it
self off from the universal being, and put it self into a selfishness;
therefore it must be again rooted into the universal; for which end it must be
tinctured with the most holy Ens, and engrafted in; which the Spirit does here
compare to pure Silver, and so secretly intimates in the figure.

10. When Abraham conversed upon the earth he desired to buy no field for his
own possession; but now when he was to bury his Sarah, he would have the
Sepulcher hereditary, and peculiar; Genesis 23.7*
and bowed himself before the children of the Land; and entreated them for it;
whereas they would freely have given him the field, and bowed themselves before
him also; but the Spirit of Moses has its figure here; for he has represented
Man to him in a very perfect model; for which cause also he plays in the
Process in the figure; showing, that the children which belong unto Christ must
bow themselves before God the Father, from whom all beings do originally come;
that he would sell unto them the The Cave of Machpelah the double Valley.
twofold Pit; viz. the Kingdom of nature, and the Kingdom of Grace, in
Christ's blood, for the same, with the four centres of humility and the
Love-birth, the Father takes for Payment.

11. And that the children of Heth, and Ephron, would freely give it to
Abraham, and yet at last upon the desire of Abraham, took money for the same,
intimates, unto us; that God the Father has indeed freely given us the
Kingdom of Grace; for he gave it freely to Christ his Son, in our humanity;
but Christ would have it for a natural due right; therefore he offers his
humility to his Father; that he would be pleased to take his payment for it;
viz. his humane property, of him; as here Abraham did in Christ's figure;
although he could have taken the field, yet he would not; for the cave of
Machpelah should not be taken but dearly purchased with the most precious
Substance: God took the Earnest or Ransom of Christ, for his Twofold Pit.
cave of Machpelah, for Payment; therefore Abraham must stand in Christ's
figure; for the body must be buried in the cave of Machpelah (in this twofold
Pit) viz. in the eternal and temporal nature, viz. in the formed Compacted
Word, if so be it shall arise again in the motion in the voice of this same
word, and Subsist in its Image which it first had.

Genesis 23.2.
12. For Moses says; Hebron is situate in the Land of Canaan, which God
promised to give unto Abraham, and understand by Canaan the holy Christalline
world, or earth; viz. the City of God; which shall hereafter be manifest;
wherein Hebron lies; viz. the head-Citie of the Land; whereby externally the
outward world with its figure is set forth; and internally the holy eternal
Land of Canaan.

13. And we see very clearly; what the spirit of Moses means in its figure;
for first it represents by Isaac Christ's figure with his offering and death;
and presently thereupon it sets forth also man's Own death, and where man must
dye, namely, in his City Hebron, the City of humane Self, and whereinto he
must be buried and put, namely, into the twofold Pit; viz. into the Kingdom
of God, and this world; and it is therefore called a twofold Cave, because
there are two mansions, viz. a twofold continent of life in two Principles,
whence man did originally arise; but if he be buried in the will of his
selfehood in the Serpents desire, then he does not reach this twofold Cave; and
though he should be therein, yet he lives only in the Apostate Essence in the
ownhood of the Devil, viz. in the introduced Serpents Ens in the dark worlds
property which is manifest and predominant in the Serpents Ens.

14. The chiefest piece in this figure is; that the Spirit of Moses does point
at the twofold life; how this world has a twofold life, and essence, which he
intimates by the twofold Cave, wherein Abraham would have his burying-place; to
signify that his twofold humanity, viz. One out of the divine Ens out of the
eternity, and heavenly spiritual essentiality* and the other which is out of
the time, even out of this worlds being and substance, should be buried and put
into an Eternal Sepulcher, where the substance of the twofold body shall lie
in its Original Mother; and leave the Own will in this Eternal Grave in
death, that so the Spirit of God might alone live, rule, and will, in the
spirit of the creature, viz. in the Soul: and the life of man might be only
his Instrument wherewith he might work and will, how and what he please.

15. For so it must be, that the humane will might be brought again into the
only will of the Deity, and Eternity; for it was, in the beginning, when God
breathed the Soul into the flesh, in the Eternal Living Word (John 1. Chap.)
and Gods Spirit did form it into a likeness of the Deity, viz. into a
creaturall Soul; which Soul had turned it self away from the only Eternal
Word of God into a Selfehood, that so it might be manifest in Evil and Good,
and Rule in the unlikeness or distemperature.

16. This un-likeness or distemperature should be buried or put again into the
Likeness or Temperature, viz. into the Essence out of which the soul and body
did a rise; that is, each Essence's property should return again into its
mother; and the mother is a twofold cave; viz. the inward spiritual and divine
Kingdom, and the outward visible, sensible, palpable Kingdom of the external
world, wherein Abraham would have his burying-place.

17. For the outward Kingdom remains for ever, for it is produced out of the
Eternal, as a model, platform, or visible Image of the inward spiritual
Kingdom; but the Dominion in the Stars and four Elements does not remain for
ever in such ownhood or propriety; but only One Element, wherein the four are
understood, but in equal Accord and Harmony, in just and equal weight,
number, and measure, in One Only Love will; where the ascending domineering
stirring Might, of the divided figure, four Elements, does no longer rule, but
the soft meek and still humility in a pleasant Lovely delightful Musical Air.
Air [or still harmonious Sound.]

18. The Compacted property of the Word, in the Soul of the outward world, viz.
in the Own-hood or selfness of the third Principle, does cease, the outward
spirit of the world is changed into the inward, that the inward might rule and
Govern wholly through the outward; which at present, the great motion of the
enkindled might of the dark world, does withhold, and carry in its dominion; in
which, [dark worlds property, which is now so predominant] the Devil is an
aspiring assaulting Prince; and all things work and tend to the Great
Severation; that so the properties of the three Principles, might each become
creaturall in themselves, to which End the Eternity has brought it self into
a Fiat, or desire, to the formation of the Essence, viz. of the Mysterij Magni.
Grand Mystery; that thus one might be manifest in the other; the Evil in the
Good, and the Good in the Evil; and each thing might have its Own Seat and
habitation.

CHAP. L. Of Abraham's sending forth his Servant to take a wife for his Son
Isaac: what we are to understand under this figure.
ABraham strongly engages his Servant; Genesis 24.2, 3.
who was the chief Ruler in his family Government, and laid an Oath upon him,
that he should not take a wife unto his Son of the daughters of the Cananites
among whom he dwelt, but go unto his kindred, and to his fathers house, and
take him a wife. Reason does look upon this figure, in a mean and simple
manner, as if Abraham did hate and abominate this people among whom he dwelt,
because of their evil conversation; but the Spirit of God in Moses who has
thus noted down this figure, has his Secret and mysterious meanings couched
herein; and plays with the whole written History of the Genesis.
first book of Moses, as with a most pleasant Interlude; and points
continually by the outward Act of the external man upon the spiritual figure
of the spiritual eternal man, in the Kingdom of Christ.

2. The Servant must swear unto Abraham an Oath, that he would take a wife
unto his Son out of his Family, Stock, and Kindred; wherefore did Abraham lay
an Oath upon him; whereas the Servant must obey his Master without taking an
Oath; and Isaac would not have taken a wife contrary to his Fathers mind and
will? but the spirit of Moses does look here into the internal figure. Isaac
stands here in the figure of Christ; and Abraham's Servant stands in the figure
of nature; and the Cananites do stand in the figure of the introduced Serpents
Ens, out of which, the rebellious selfish will of man's selfehood, is arisen;
viz. in the figure of the Beastiall man, which shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God, these three the spirit of Moses does set before him in the Type, and
thereby points at the true man which shall subsist Eternally.

The inward figure is thus.
3. Abraham requirs his Servant, who was the chief in his whole family.
Abraham here betokens God the Father, and the Servant, by whom he Governs,
betokens nature: nature must here in its might and strength swear unto God;
that is, deeply engage and essentially bind it self; that it will not take
unto Isaac, that is, to the Christians; viz. to Gods children, a wife, that is,
a matrix of the Cananites, viz. of the Serpents Ens; or associate with it to
the propagation of the Serpents Ens; that it will not assume, the Poison of the
dark worlds property, unto it; viz. the Cananitish property; and introduce it
into the children of Christ for their wife, viz. into the Tincture of Venus,
which is the true female matrix in men and women; but that it will join the
true Adamicall man, which God had created in his Image, ( viz. the true humane
Essence proceeding from the first Original tree out of the first root, viz.
from Abraham's Stock, who betokens Adam) unto the Ens of Christ; viz. to the
true Isaac in the children of Christ.

4. Understand this thus: Adam has introduced into our flesh and Soul the Ens
of the Serpent and the Devil, which nature has taken into Soul and body, and
has begotten and brought forth therein a selfish rebellious will, which is
disobedient unto God.

5. But now being that God had again introduced the holy Ens of his holy word
into Isaac, which Abraham apprehended in the desire of faith; and represented
the same here in Isaac, with a new twigg springing forth out of the corrupt
tree of the humane property, and born out of Christ's spirit; Thereupon Nature,
viz. Gods Officer must here deeply engage it self to God, and swear, that it
will no more take the Serpents Ens for a wife, viz. for its beloved companion
and yoke fellow; (understand that it will not take its consort out of the
poysonfull Serpentine property of the introduced iniquity of the adverse
opposite will) but Gods Officer, viz. Nature must take Essence and Substance
out of Abraham's true climate, where Abraham's home was, in Adam, viz. out of the
right humane Essence; and bring the same to Isaac, viz. to Christ's members in
their heavenly spiritual holy Ens of faith as a spiritual woman, with whom
the true man takes delight in himself, with the heavenly matrix, in pure
desire of Love, and loves his own nature in Gods Love, and not in the
Cananitish selfish Serpents Ens, in the Apostate rebellious ungodly will; that
so the new birth might be holy in its virginity as to the inward man.

6. For, Man in his Essence or being, does stand in a twofold Essence; viz. in
the natural and Supernatural; in the divine Ens of the formed word, and in
the natural Ens of the center of nature in the Fiat, viz. in the divine
Desire, in which desire, nature, and the bright-burning world, do take their
Original, which bright flaming nature should not any more take the false lust
of the beastiall Serpents property, into it self; of which the Spirit here
does prophecy in the inward figure.

7. And Abraham's Servant said; How, if the woman will not follow me, Genesis 24.5.
shall I bring thy Son again unto the Land from whence thou came? The meaning
hereof in the inward understanding is this: nature speaks to God, and says,
How, if the right humane Ens will not follow me, being it has a cleaving
affection to the Serpents poison; shall I then bring thy Son, viz. the holy
heavenly Ens again into the Land, viz. into the place from whence it came,
along with me; that is, when God betrusteth the Officer of nature with his
holy Ens, to bring the same into the humane property, and to take the humane
Ens for a wife of the heavenly man; then says nature, viz. Gods Officer, how
then, if the woman (understand the humane Ens) will not follow me and come with
this Isaac; that is, with the Ens of Christ, into the true humane Land, viz.
into the true Adamicall Paradisicall Tree, shall I bring thy Son again, viz.
thy holy Ens into the place of God?

8. And Abraham said, beware thou, that thou do not bring my Son thither
again: The Lord God of heaven which took me from my fathers house, Genesis 24.6.
to the 9.
and from the Land of my kindred; and that spoke unto me, and swear also unto
me, saying; unto thy Seed I will give this Land; he shall send his Angel
before thee, and thou shall there take a wife unto my Son; but if the woman
will not follow thee; then thou art clear from the Oath; only bring not my Son
thither again; and then the Servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his
Master, and swear unto him concerning this matter.

9. The inward meaning is thus: God says to his Officer Nature; have a care,
that thou do not go according to thy Reason, and conceive another will, and
bring my holy Ens again thither from whence it is come, for it must dwell in
man. The God of heaven, who has taken the humane Ens from the Eternal word,
from his Eternal native Country, which is the house of the Eternal Father,
who has promised man the Land of Canaan according to the Paradisicall
property, and moreover has Sworn to him; he shall send his Angel before thee;
that so thou may take a wife unto my Son there; even where the Angel, viz.
the divine will shall guide and direct thee; that is, when God will betroth and
bind himself with his Word and Power in his children, with an Eternal
Marriage, then he sends his Angel before, viz. his will, into the humane Ens;
that the same does convert and turn it self to God.

10. The nature of the mind must not in its will of Reason take upon it to
Lord and Master it, and doubt at what God will do, when the office or charge of
a Servant is laid upon it, it must not make it self its Looking-glass and
doubt, when it sees that the Soul lies captivated in the Ens of the Serpent,
it must not think with it self, I shall not here arrive with a prosperous
success with my divine Message, but it must leave that to God, and discharge
its Message according to Gods command, and commit it to God, how he will bring
the woman, viz. the humane spirit, and betroth and join it with the Son Isaac,
that is, with Christ in the divine Ens.

11. But if the woman will not follow thee, then thou art clear of the Oath,
that is, if the humane will, when I send my will before thee in man, will not
follow thee, then the Messenger, viz. Gods Officer, with the Sent heavens-Ens
is clear; only bring not my Son thither again; that is, bring not the heavenly
Ens again into that Essence out of which it is come, but stand still therewith,
and hear, whereunto God shall direct and incline thee; for the Rain from heaven
shall not ascend up again empty without fruit, so likewise Gods Word and
Command shall not return home empty, but work and bring forth fruit, in its
formed wisdom.

12. If one man will not, then the same word falls upon another which is
capable of it: therefore nature, viz. the Messenger, Officer, Advocate or
Petitioner of the heavenly Message, must not bring the word with the divine Ens
back again into that place, viz. into the inward divine voice; for what God
once speaks forth by his Word in Power, that shall, and must stand in a
divine form, to the divine Contemplation; Nature must go forward as a Messenger
his way, and declare, that the Lord has given Isaac all his Goods; that is, he
has given to Christ all his Goods; and desires now a wife; viz. Man, who
should give himself in marriage with Isaac in Christ.

Genesis 24.9.
13. And the Servant laid his hand under the thigh of Abraham his Master, and
swear unto him concerning this matter: That is, when God Did dive, immerse, or
baptize.
put his holy word with the heavenly Ens or Essence, viz. with the formed
wisdom into the natural Ens of Mary, as into Gods Servant, and God and Man
became One person: then the humane nature swear under the thigh of the Fathers
Eternal nature Or, in God.
unto God, that it would obey God, and hence forward go forth, and seek the
humane wife, and marry it to the divine Ens; All which is to be understood in
Christ's person, who in his assumed humanity, as Abraham's, or God his Fathers,
Servant, in the natural property, should go forth with his word, and seek this
Woman, viz. his Bride and Spouse, which the Angel of the Lord, viz. Gods will,
should bring unto him.

Genesis 24.10*
14. And the Servant took ten Camels of the Camels of his Master, and departed,
and had with him all sorts of his Masters Goods; and arose and went to
Mesopotamia the City of NAhOr. Here now the Spirit looks upon the process of
God; and intimates, how God sent his Angel, or Messenger Gabriel, with the
voice of nature to the humane nature in Nahor, viz. to Adams nature in the Ens
of Mary; in which voice the living holy word was hidden with the heavenly
living Ens; and gave also the Fathers nature Ten Camels; that is, the 10 forms.
Ten forms of the three Principles to the natural and Supernatural
fire-life; viz. 7 forms.
Seven forms of the Center of nature, and 3 forms.
three forms of the three distinctions of the Principles; all which are Gods
camels whereby he bears and carries all things.

15. And the goods of the Lord are the formed wisdom of the great wonders and
Powers: all these, Gods Officer took along with him when he had the divine
word in himself, and introduced the same into the humane natural Ens, even
into the Ens of Mary; or awakened opened or manifested the same therein; as a
man might express the great deeds and works of God; whereas indeed the outward
compacted, bound-up, SensVAll tongue, cannot give words sufficient enough to
the deep Mental understanding.

16. For here the spirit of Moses does take the Angels message along with
Isaac's figure, and plays externally in the figure, with Isaac and Rebecca,
as Christ's figure; and inwardly he plays with Mary, as Adams Essence, and
with Christ's, as the Virginlike divine Ens.

17. And the spirit of Moses says further; Genesis 24.11:
And the Servant caused the Camels to kneel down without the City by a well of
water at evening time, even about the time, that women use to go out to draw
water; This signifies and notes out internally, how the mystery of the nature
of the three Principles, being the bearers or carriers of the formed wisdom of
God, has laid it self down by the divine fountain without the City; the
City betokens the hidden mysteries of the divine holy Ens of the formed
wisdom; about which, the Or, the three Principles of nature.
nature of the three Principles has laid it self; for nature is external,
and a Carrier of the mysteries of God: it lies by the wellspring of God, viz.
by the birth of the holy Trinity.

The outward figure is thus explained.
18. At Evening; that is, in the last days of the world; or toward the
Evening time in man; when the Eternal night draws near; then God brings his
Or, Carrier.
Bearer, viz. the will of the Fathers nature, which lies down by the fountain
of the divine property in man, and will there give his camels, viz. his will,
drink; like as toward the Evening; that is, in the last time, he did lay his
will to the humane nature in the Ens of Mary, by the true wellspring of the
Covenant, and there gave the humane nature, drink.

19. And as the Servant of Abraham standing by the well of water in
Mesopotamia, did purpose, and endeavor to fulfill his Masters will, and yet
did not look upon himself [and cast about in his reason] how it should be,
but commended his cause to God, to do as he would please, and only set a Lot
before him, that he might see, what way God would lead and direct him; even so
also the spirit of Moses does here play in the figure of Christ; for nature in
the Ens or Seed of Mary was the Servant of God, which pitched down before the
Ens of the Covenant, as an Instrument of God, and gave God the honor, and
committed it unto him, how he would bring it to the holy virginity in the holy
Ens of the Covenant in Mary; as here Abraham's Servant commended it to God, when
he came before the fountain, how he would lead him and whither, or what he
should do; that God might bring him to the true virgin, whom God would give his
Masters Son.

20. So likewise it was not effected by and from the purpose, understanding, or
power, of nature, that nature was brought to the holy Ens in the Covenant, and
m^rried the divine Virgin in the Ens of the Word of God; nature understood
nothing of it, how it should be brought to pass, or what it should do to
purchase or accomplish the same; it knew not the holy virginity in the
Covenant; but when Gods Command did sound or speak unto it, by the Angel
Gabriel, then it gave God the honor, and committed it to him what he would do
and work through it; that God might espouse it to the virgin of wisdom; as
here Abraham's Servant prayed unto God, that he would bring the right virgin
which God had chosen for him, to the fountain of water.

21. For, by the well of God, nature shall know, what kind of virgin shall
come and give the camels, or the Bearer Nature drink; as Rebecca came forth by
Gods instigation, and gave the camels of Abraham's Servants drink; so likewise
the divine virginity in the Ens of Mary came and gave the Essence in the Seed
of Mary, drink, and took the humane nature for a Spouse and Consort.

22. And the humane nature in the Covenant, in the Seed of Abraham, in his Ens
of faith, (when he apprehended the word of promise in the faith, which was his
righteousness) had the fair Golden-fore-head- Or, Earrings.
Jewel in it self, and the two braceletts, which it hung on the word of God,
which moved it self in the Angels Message in Mary, where then the Ens of faith
was espoused or married with the now-moving voice; which Motion, beset and
embraced, nature; as here Abraham's servant, when he saw, that God had brought
to him the true Virgin, he drew forth the free gift of his Master Abraham, and
hung it on the virgin.

23. Thus also nature, in the Covenant, in the Seed of Mary, did put the fair
Jewel, which God promised Adam in Paradise, and opened in Abraham, which
Abraham apprehended in the spirit and faith, upon the voice of God, viz. on the
living moving word of God, which founded in the Angels message, in Abraham's Ens
of faith; and herewith also, it self.

24. For Abraham had laid hold on the word of the Covenant in faith; so that it
was formed into an Ens, but not wholly in to the humanity, and this Ens was the
fair Jewel, which nature bare as an hidden treasure in it self, until the
limitt of the Covenant, even toward the Evening of the world, and then Gods
living voice sounded into nature in the Seed of the Woman; and so nature, viz.
Gods Servant gave forth the hidden Pearl, and hung it on the forehead of the
virgin-like-Love of Jesus, which was moved in the Angels Message, and came now
to the fountain to draw forth the shut-up virginity, in man, from the divine
Ens; and there it obtained its bridegroom, viz. the Soul of man, with the
Fathers Jewels and great goods: with this, the spirit of Moses does here play,
and holds forth a Secrett intimation under the outward Act.

25. Abraham's Servant made him a Lot, to know the virgin by, which was this;
She that should come and give him, and all his Servants and Camells drink;
Genesis 24.14.
that even she should be the right one: thus also God has planted this Lot,
and put it into the nature of the Soul, and the Right humanity, that the
virgin, which should refresh the Soul with the true humanity out of Gods
Love-fountain, the same the Soul should desire for its eternal Spouse.

26. As it came to pass in Mary, when the Angel greeted her; he refreshed the
Soul, and also her seed of the Souls nature proceeding from the woman's
Tincture, whereby this Souls essence, brought its desire, toward the Sweet
spring water of the fountain of Jesus, and drank of this water of the Love of
Jesus; whereby, and wherein it was married to the sweet Love of Jesus, in
JEHOVA, so that in this Seed of Mary, in the limitt of the Covenant, a Manly
virgin of God was conceived, which is Christ Jesus in Our humanity, and in the
divine Ens, in the Power of the word of God, a formed God, according to the
creature; but according to the divine voice, God all in all; understand, a
formed God, according to the humane property, viz. a visible Image of the
Deity, and therein the whole invisible immense God in Trinity in Essence.

27. This whole figure stands in the process of the new Birth, and shows how
it should come to pass; for Abraham in his faith, stands in the figure of
Adam, viz. in God the Fathers figure; who created him in his very Image and
likeness; and Isaac his Son, stands in the figure of the humanity of Christ,
viz. in the Sons figure.

28. God the Father has given all his goods, understand, of the formed word,
viz all created, and procreated beings, in the Place of this world, unto his
Son, who manifested himself in the divine Image of the humanity; even as
Abraham gave all his goods to Isaac, who was the Type of Christ.

29. And as Abraham would take a wife unto his Son Isaac of his kindred, and
sent out his chief Officer to take a wife unto his Son, and yet did not
beforehand name the same unto him, and tell him who she should be; but bad
him go only to his fathers house, and to his kindred, and see what woman God
would bring unto him for his Son Isaac to take; so likewise God has sent his
Officer (who rules chief in his whole house, that is, Dominion, which is the
voice of his Revealed Word) into the world, to the Right Adamicall man, and not
to the Cananitish Serpents Ens; but to the disappeared virgin-like Image of
God, and to the living Soul, which is of God the Fathers house; that is,
property; and looks out, about a virgin, for a wife to his Son Jesus Christ;
viz. he wooes for the heavenly virginity in man, which disappeared in Adam;
for, this virgin, Gods Officer of nature, does woo, by his Servants, which he
sends forth, and bids them make suit for this virginity, for a wife to his
Son; and join it with him in marriage.

30. And as Abraham did not name aforehand the virgin unto his Officer, but
commanded him to go unto his fathers house, and there look up unto God, and
see, where he should bid him make suit, and take that virgin which God should
choose, and bring unto him; so likewise God has sent his Officer, viz. his
holy word by his Servants, into the world to the true man; not to the
Serpent-beasts, for these hear not Gods word, they have no hearing in them,
thereto; like as the Cananites in the Serpents Ens were even wholly beastiall,
and half dead, as to the divine Hearing, by reason of their iniquity, and
Self-will.

31. And he causes his Servants, viz. Officers, to sit down by the fountain of
his holy word; with command, that they should in their office and charge
committed unto them, call upon God, and pray, and teach his word, until God
draws the virgins heart, and brings her to the fountain of his word, to draw
water out of the wellspring of Gods word.

32. And when this virgin, understand the inward divine Image, which was
obscured in Adam, draws water in the fountain of the divine word: then the
Officer, Abraham's Servant, viz. the Fathers will, speaks in the Soul, saying,
Give me to drink of thy sweet water of the Eternal virginity; and the precious
virgin says, to the will of God, Drink my Lord; I will also draw [water] for
thy Camels; understand by the Camels the Essences of the humane nature
proceeding from the Fathers property; and by the virgin, understand the nature
and property of the light in the Love; viz. the Essence of the divine Ens of
the Angelical world, which disappeared in Adam, and now comes again to draw
water for its Bridegroom the Soul.

33. And now when the Officer ( viz. Gods will) with his Camels, viz. the
Essences of nature, is refreshed with drink by the virgin; then the forth-sent
will of the Father, in the Essence of nature, gives thanks unto the true
deity; that God has brought this virgin unto him; that he should take this
virgin of the Love and humanity of Jesus Christ, for a wife.

34. And forthwith the will of God the Father, takes the precious Jewels
which God did incorporate into Adams Soul, even into the light of his life, in
Paradise, with the precious Name Jesus; yea, which Jewels were incorporated in
the Center of the Soul Ephesians. 1.4.
before the foundation of the world was laid, which have been wholly hidden to
the Soul, which Jewels are the holy fire of the hidden Love-desire, and
hangs the same on the noble Virgin of the heavenly worlds Essence; as a
golden Or, jewel for the forehead.
ear-ring of half a shekell weight.

35. This golden jewel [or ear-ring] of Half a shekell.
half a shekell weight, is the new heavenly essentiality which came down or
proceeded from heaven; as Christ said, Joh. 3. That he was come from heaven;
there he means the Ens proceeding or coming from thence, which was the
halfe-holy humanity, viz. the holy Ens in the word, which did unite it self to
the disappeared heavenly Ens, in the humanity; so that this golden jewel of
half a shekell weight, belongs to the divine Sound or word, which comes into
the humanity, and is hung upon the heavenly virginity in man.

36. And now when the marriage is celebrated, and the virgin-like Ens betrothed
to this holy Ens, so that the virginity receives this jewel proffered unto it;
then it is an A whole shekell.
whole shekell of gold; half of the deity, and half of the humanity.

37. And the two Braceletts, which Abraham's Servants, viz. the will of the
Father in the Souls nature puts on the virgin, which are of Ten shekells.
Ten shekells weight of gold, they are the ten forms of the holy fire which
are hung with the new introduced humanity of Jesus Christ his divine Ens, on
the disappeared virginity; whereby it again receives its true life.

38. And when this virgin has thus received this Jewel and Braceletts, then
it rejoices, and runs to her brother Laban; viz. to the third Principle of
the outward humanity, proceeding from the limus of the earth; that is, to the
outward Soul; and tells this unto him; that is, when the virgins Image does
receive the Ens of Christ, viz. this fair and precious Jewel of half a
shekell, together with the holy fire of the word, then it penetrates, with its
voice of the divine Essence, through the outward man ( viz. its brother) and
declares the divine Power; whereby the outward man, understand the third
Principle, is glad, and exceedingly rejoices with the virgin of the inward
man, and runs also unto the fountain of the word of God, and prays God,
that he would be pleased to come in unto him with his word; as here Laban
prayed Abraham's Servant to come in to him; which Abraham's Servant, viz. Gods
will, does willingly, and turns in unto the outward man as Abraham's Servant
did.

39. Thus does the humane nature likewise, when it hears the voice of Christ
Sounding in the inward man, and sees the Ornament, which the holy Spirit has
put on the virgins Image; then Laban, viz. the brother of the inward Image does
earnestly entreat the will of God to come in.

40. And when the will of God (here typified by Abraham's Servant) is come in
unto Bethuel, and Laban, viz. into the third Principle of the humanity; then
the Officer of God, viz. the word of God which comes into Man; says; I will
not eat of thy food; (understand of the outward life's Essence) except I obtain
my Errand; that thou give my Master, viz. my Masters Son (that is, the
humanity of Jesus Christ) thy Sister, viz. the heavenly virginity to wife; and
he relates the Mission or Errand of God to the humane nature; that is; he
opens to it the divine understanding, so that even the natural man does
learn to understand the will of God, in which, before, it was blind.

41. And then the poor nature with the Soul gives up it self into Gods will;
and then thus speak Laban and Bethuel, This comes from the Lord; we shall not
speak any thing against it; behold here is thy place, do with me and with my
inward [ground] as thou please; Here is Rebecca, viz. the formed word of the
heavenly property; take it, and marry it to thy Masters Son, viz. to the
humanity of Jesus Christ, according to thy good-liking, as the Lord has spoken.

42. We see here very exactly, how the spirit of Moses does speak in the
figure, for he setts Laban, viz. Bethuels Son before the Father; viz. the
outward Soul before the inward fire-Soul, the Air-Soul before the Right
fire-Soul; albeit they are not two, but One, yet they are understood in two
Principles; for the fire-Soul gives answer through the air-Soul; the fire-Soul
uses the uncompacted tongue, but the Air-Soul uses the Compacted formed
Language.

43. Therefore the spirit of Moses does set Laban Rebecca's brother, first, as
if the business were don by Laban; to signify, that when Gods Officer, viz.
the will of God, in the *
Drawing of the Father, does come into man; and seeks a Lodging, and the
virgin, then the outward spirit of man must give its promise; for it is turned
away from God and the true resignation; now it must again give its will wholly
and fully into Gods will.

44. And when it comes to pass, that the outward Soul, with the inward
fire-Soul, does wholly consent unto this holy Match, and give up it self to
God; then the will of God, viz. the Officer, in the drawing of the Father, does
bow himself again toward the true deity; that is, he comes again unto its
seat and place; and brings forth out of Abraham's treasure; that is, out of God
the Fathers treasury of his formed wisdom, the Silver and Golden jewels, and
hangs them on Rebecca, viz. the heavenly virginity.

45. For these jewels do not belong to Laban, or Bethuel (understand to the
outward, or inward fire-Soul) while it is here in this earthly life, but to the
true virgin Rebecca, proceeding from the divine Ens of the formed holy word,
according to the Angelical worlds property; viz. according to the Second
Principle, viz. the inward spiritual new man, which is, with Rebecca, married
to the Right Isaac, Christ; and therefore the spirit of Moses setts down, Genesis
24.53.
how Abraham's Servant gave Rebecca the golden ear-ring and brace-letts with
silver and golden jewels and Raynient; but unto Laban, viz. unto Rebecca's
brother and her mother also, he gave Our Text, precious things.
Spices.

46. O thou wonderful God! how plainly do thou set forth the great
mysteries? the silver, and golden jewels are the Treasure of the divine
wisdom in the word of life, which treasure the divine word brings along with
it to the right virginity, which dyed in Adam, and is again brought in Christ
to its beloved; and gives it wholly and peculiarly for the Ornament of the
Banquett; and the Raiment is the New humanity, wherewith she comes before her
Bridegroom; and the Spices, which were given to Laban and the Mother, are the
power and virtues of the holy Spirit, which are freely given to the fire-Soul
and the Air-Soul, by the Coming in of the tender humanity of Jesus Christ.

47. For the outward Soul is not in this life time (being yet the Earthly body
adheers unto it) clothed with the new Raiment; neither is the Silver and
Golden jewel of the humanity of Jesus Christ given in this life time wholly
unto the peculiar possession and power of the fire-Soul; but the spices only;
that i^, the virtue and pleasant aspect of the holy Spirit; for the fire-Soul
might become proud and haughty again, if it should have this virgin in its Own
power, as Lucifer and Adam did, therefore the fire-Soul must here in this life
time remain in its Principle; and in the Air-soul, viz. in the third Principle,
where the earthly Evil man lives, it must take on it the Cross of Christ.

48. But virgin Rebecca or Sophia with her Bridegroom Christ, remains in their
own, viz. in the Second, Principle, in heaven; for Saint Paul says; *
Our conversation is in heaven; understand the conversation of the virgin [
Sophia], where she with her beloved Christ, stands in wedlock; and Christ and
virgin Sophia are one person; understand the true Manly Virgin of God, which
Adam was before his Eve, when he was man and woman, and yet neither of them,
but a Virgin of God.

Genesis 24.54.
49. And now when these Nuptials are celebrated; then Abraham's Servant with all
his Servants sits down with his obtained Bride and with father and brother at
the Table, and eat together the Marriage Feast; that is, when man, understand,
the inward virgin-like spiritual man, is married to Christ; then God eats of
man's will and words; and again man eats of Gods will and words; there they
sit at one feast, and then it is truly said, and applied; *
Whosoever hears you, he hears me; whosoever hears these men to teach
and speak of God, he hears God speak, for they speak in the power of the holy
Spirits spices, and eat together of the great Supper of Christ.

50. O what a very glorious, and sumptuous feast is there kept! where this
wedding day is celebrated in man, which no Cananitish Serpent man is worthy to
know, or taste of, yea he does not experimentally taste of it to all eternity;
neither knows he what Meat or food is there eaten; also what internal joy is
there, where Christ and virgin Sophia are Bride and Bridegroom; and the inward
and outward Soul sit by the Bride, and eat with her of this feast; which we
leave to the consideration of the children of Christ, who have been at this
wedding feast; no man else in this world understands it: none knows any thing
thereof but the right Laban and Bethuel.

51. But this Bridal does not last continually, but when Abraham's Servant had
obtained the virgin, and celebrated this feast and wedding day with the Father,
and Mother, and Laban; and had continued there all night, he arose up early in
the Morning, and said, let me go unto my Master. Genesis 24.54.


The inward figure stands thus.
52. When Christ has married himself with virgin Sophia, viz. with the inward
humanity, soon after, the voice of God Sounds in the Soul, and says, I will
go away from thee with the virgin, and it is continually as if he would force
away, and depart from man; then the poor Soul must make continual prayers and
supplications, that he would be pleased to tarry still longer with it; but the
voice oftentimes sounds, hinder me not, I must go, or make my journey, to my
Master, thou art vain, evil, and sinful, I may not tarry with thee any longer.

53. And then the poor Soul calls virgin Rebecca, viz. Christ with his Bride;
and puts him in mind of his precious word and promise, in that Mat. 28.20.
He has promised to remain with us even to the end of the world, and to make
his Abode in us; and thus one day upon another it is delayed, and yet Christ
goes with his Bride into his native Country, viz. into the Second Principle,
but the marriage is celebrated in all the three Principles.

54. A very excellent figure we have in this also; Genesis 24.61. to the 67.
That when Rebecca went home with Abraham's servant, and Isaac met her in the
field, and she asked him what man that was, and Abraham's servant told her,
that it was his Master Isaac; how she lighted off the Camel, and putt a vail
before her eyes, and was ashamed, and how Isaac took her and carried her into
his Mothers Tent.

The inward figure is this.
55. When the inward disappeared humanity, does again obtain the precious
Jewel, and is quickened in the spirit of Christ, and discovers its beloved
Christ in it self, then it falls down into the deepest humility before the
holiness of God, and is ashamed, that it has lain so long captive in the
beastiall man, and that it was a Queen, but has lost its Kingdom in Adam;
then it vaileth its own face before Gods glorious Clarity, and humbles it
self: but Christ takes her into his Arms, and leads her into his Mothers
Tent, viz. into the heavenly worlds Essence, from whence he is come with his
heavenly essence, and there she becomes his wife; and thus Isaac is truly
comforted for his Mother, viz. for the disappeared Matrix in the Tincture of
Venus which dyed in Adam, and which he again does now obtain in virgin-like
chastity for his Spouse; as here the history concerning Isaac sounds.

56. And we seriously admonish the Reader not to contem, scorn, or deride at
our exposition, it is the true ground; for when Isaac met his Bride, Genesis
24.62.
he came from the well Lahai-roi, [from the fountain of the living and Seeing
One]; as Moses says: if any desire to understand our meaning and knowledge, he
must then make toward this fountain, that so he may be received with Rebecca;
and then he will see, from what spirit this pen has written, and in what Seal,
Vial, or Trumpett.
Number and Voice [it is arisen.]

57. If any here see nothing, he may well blame himself for blind, and no man
else; the Jews, and Turckes, and also Babel, may here open their eyes wide,
and look upon the figures of the old Testament aright, they will even find
them so.

CHAP. LI. How Abraham took another wife of whom he begat six Sons, to which he
gave gifts; and unto his Son Isaac he gave all his goods; but the other he sent
away from his Son Isaac while he yet lived; and also how he dyed, and was
buried by his Sons Ismael and Isaac: what hereby is signified unto us.
Genesis XXV.1, 2.
MOses says; Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah, and she bare unto
him Zimran, Jochshan, Medan, Midian, Ishback, Shuah, from whom sprang forth six
generations; but of Sarah Abraham begat only one Son, at which the whole
history points; but of Keturah he begatt six Sons, concerning whom no
peculiar or especial thing is mentioned, but only their families or
generations.

This is thus to be understood in the inward figure.
Abraham and his Sarah must be first old, before he begatt Isaac, to signify,
that Christ should be manifested in the flesh in the Old Age of the world.

2. Isaac was begotten and conceived of Abraham's nature, and of the Ens of
faith in an old, and almost dead Matrix, as to the humane nature, that so the
divine Ens might have the pre-eminence; but when Sarah dyed, Abraham took unto
him Keturah; and soon begatt of her Six Sons: Kethurah does in its Name
express the Center of nature: when we form the SensVAl un-compacted spirits of
the letters in this word Keturah, then we understand, that KETVRAH is a formed
matrix of nature; which signifies to us, that Abraham after he had begotten
the Type of Christ in the Ens of faith, should now begett his own likeness as
to Adams nature out of the Six properties of the natural spirits life, and
also set forth and represent his own natural likeness; and therefore he must
also have such a vessel thereunto.

3. Sarah must bring forth but One Son, to signify, that the kingdom of
mankind is given but to one; and that they all do belong to this one; and
should in him become the same only one as branches on one tree; which [ one]
should be Christ in All.

4. But here Abraham did now with Keturah, begett Six Sons, according to the
Six properties of the formed nature, of the operation of the Six days works;
and Isaac, that is, Christ, is the Seventh; viz. the day of rest, or Sabbath,
wherein the Six Sons should enter into Rest; even as the six days of the
creation, understand the six properties of the Center of nature, ( viz. the
working Spirit-life) do rest in the Seventh; thus the Spirit of God does
represent the figure in Abraham.

5. And we have here a very excellent figure against the Reason-wise, who say,
that whosoever is not born by nature in the Ens of faith [that is naturally as
it were begotten of the Seed of the woman which works only by a particular
election of God as they feign) the same is hardened, and cannot attain to the
Adoption of God, he is not drawn by God, that he should come to the new birth:
this figure quite strikes down their fiction, and shows the true ground; and
first, it setts forth Isaac, viz. Christ; and declares plainly that to him
alone the kingdom of God is hereditary and peculiar, and that no man can have
it any more for, or from the Right of nature; and how we are altogether cast
out from thence with Adam, and have lost the same; as the children of Keturah
were all cast out from the inheritance of Abraham's goods, and Isaac only did
inheritt them.

6. And he setts down hereby, how Adams children were also begotten of Abraham,
and how he gave them Gifts of his goods; betokening, how free gifts were given
to Adams natural children, Genesis 25.6.
out of God the Fathers, and Christ's Goods; as Abraham's goods were given them
of grace as a free gift.

7. For Abraham did not cast out his natural children from him without gifts:
so likewise God did not cast Adam out of Paradise without his Note, where the
Free Grace of God was given to Mankind.
free Gift; he first gave him the bruiser of the Serpent in the word of the
Covenant; and afterward he cast Adam from the childlike inheritance of the
natural Right; and yet he received him again in the free Donation; as Abraham
also did not here reject his children and cast them out from the child-ship,
but from the natural Right of his goods; yet they were dear unto him in the
child-ship; therefore he freely gave them gifts of his goods, and thereby he
signifies to us, that the Kingdom of heaven does indeed belong only unto
Christ, viz. to the true Isaac: but as he freely of Grace gave the Covenant to
Adam; and as Abraham gave Gifts out of Isaac's Right to the Sons of the
Concubines; so God the Father does still to this day, give Adams, and Abraham's
natural children, the Covenant, and heritage of Christ as a free Gift of Grace.

8. And as Abraham's natural children were not disinherited from the Covenant,
but only from his Goods; so likewise no man is disinherited from the Covenant
of God, established in Adam, and Abraham, Every man receives the free given
Covenant in the womb, in which his free-given Covenant, he has power to turn
in unto Christ's goods.

9. But he has not the goods in the Right of nature, to take the same at or by
his own will, but as a free Gift; he shall and must resign himself up unto
the Covenant as a Servant, wholly giving up his own natural will in the
Covenant, and forsake the will to the Right of nature, and become wholly the
Covenants own; so that he does not any longer introduce his own natural will
into the Covenant and free Gift, but give up his will to the Covenant; and then
the free gift stands in the place of the own will; and the nature of Adam
lives in the free gift, and also enjoys the inheritance, but not in the
self-will, but in the true Resignation, where the will of the Covenant becomes
man's will.

10. For the will of the Covenant inheriteth the Sonship in the right of
nature, but the will of the natural Selfeness is cast out from it, the same
must dye unto the assuming own-hood; and when it is brought so to pass, it
arises in the Covenant in Christ, and possesses the free gift in the Right of
Grace; Christ has manifested himself in the Covenant in Adams freely given
gift in the humane nature, and is become the life, and will of the Covenant,
and fullfilled the same.

11. But now this free-given Covenant which God bestowed on Adam, lies in all
men, for as Sin passed as a birthright from one upon all, so also the Covenant
and the free gift of grace passes from one upon all; Every man has Christ in
him; but the own will does not apprehend him, but it crucifieth him, and will
not dye to its Selfness, that so it might enter into Christ's death, and arise
in the Covenant in the will of Christ.

12. The Own will desires only to be an outwardly assumed or adopted Son of
Grace, and yet it is cast out from the presence of God, as Abraham cast out his
natural children from his goods, and disinherited them, and gave the goods
only to Isaac; so likewise the kingdom of God belongs only to the will of
the Covenant.

13. Which indeed lies in all men, but no man can receive or see the Kingdom
of God, unless he become the child of the Covenant, so that he forsake the
natural forth-proceeded will, and put on the will of Christ in the Covenant;
so that his will in the Covenant be born anew in Christ; and then he is John
15.5.
a branch on the vine of Christ, and receives Christ's spirit, will, and life;
and becomes as to the Covenant Christus or one anointed; and thus Christ then
dwells in Adam and Adam in Christ; and this is that which the spirit of Moses
does represent in this figure.

14. But that Abraham did send the children of his Adamicall nature away out of
his house with Gifts, and did not keep them with him as Sojourners; betokens,
that the external man, will, while it is in this life, live in the will of
Self upon the earth, and that it cannot wholly put off the same according to
the earthly man; but this same earthly Self will is cast out of the holiness
of God, viz. from the Kingdom of heaven.

15. And although the free gift of the Covenant lies hid in him, yet the
outward earthly man is cast out from Paradise, and the Covenant of God, and
shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven (Joh. 6.) but he only shall inherit
it who is born of the free gift of the Covenant, not Adam but Christ in his
Members; not the Serpents Ens, and the selfish rebellious Ismalitish scoffing
false will; but the will of the Covenant in Ismaels circumcision, where the
mocker is cut off from the Covenant; and Ismael then becomes Isaac's brother.

16. The Own selfe-made gross earthly Adam, who by his own lust has made
himself a Beast, and received and taken in the Devils desire and will, into
the selfly assumed Beast, the same cannot be or remain in the Image of Christ:
he is cast out from thence, and walks in the world of vanity, and his own
lust, so that he is not capable of the free gift in the Covenant.

17. But the right Adamicall man, which God made out of the matrix of the
earth, out of which the Earth had its Original; in the same is the Covenant,
and the free gift; even as a tincture in the gross Lead, which does swallow up
in it self the grossness, viz. the gross Saturn in its own desire, and
mortifieth the Saturnine will; and advances or sublimeth its own (understand
the Tinctures will and propriety) in the Lead* whereby the Lead is changed into
Gold.

18. Thus likewise we are to understand, that the gross Saturnine Self-will,
proceeding from the dark worlds property, in man, cannot dwell in Gods house
(...) is without in the corrupt world; God has cast it forth out of Paradise;
as Abraham cast out his natural Adamicall children from Isaac's goods, so also
our earthly man as to its assumed grossnes^, and ownhood, is not at all fit
for, or profitable unto, the kingdom of heaven, it is only the Ax wherewith
the Carpenter builds in this life time, in heaven he has no need of this Ax,
for he shall not need build him an house for his propriety, but Christ, viz.
the formed word of God is his house.

19. For as Abraham cast out of his house the Sons of his Concubines with
gifts* so likewise the Adamicall man is cast out from God, whom Christ, viz.
the Fathers free gift, receives again unto himself; for when Christ was come
into our humanity* *
God suffered him to be hung upon the Cross, and be putt to death* but received
him again in his free favor, *
and set him at the right hand of the Power of God in heaven; and our humanity
also with and in him; but the humane self will, must dye on the Cross.

20. Thus likewise the spirit of Moses does here signify in the figure,
concerning Abraham and his natural children; that the outward natural man
shall not dwell in the Ens of Christ, for he is cast out of Paradise in Adam;
therefore also he cannot be received according to his Beastiall selfish
propriety unto the possession of Isaac's goods; that is, unto the Ens of faith,
viz. in Christ; and albeit Christ, viz. the free gift of the Father, does dwell
in the inward true man which God created in Adam; yet the gross Beast, viz. the
earthliness and vanity shall and trust in every respect be cast away from
Christ; yea Every man who desires to be a Christian, must cast out the earthly
will, which longs and breaths after vanity and Self ^^st.

21. As Abraham (in this figure) did not spare his own children, but cast them
out; so likewise a Christian must not spare or forbear his children; viz. his
own lust and vain desire; and all whatsoever does hang or depend thereon; but
daily and hourly cast them out by the understanding, out of the true Temple of
Christ; viz. out of Gods free gift, and crucify the old Adam; else if it be
not thus effected the old selfe-willed Adam crucifyeth Christ in him, and so
Christ indeed must hang on the Cross; and be putt to death.

22. And this figure also Concerning Abraham's casting out his natural
children, does signify, that, when Christ, viz. the true Isaac came into the
flesh, viz. into the humanity, Abraham's natural children, viz. the Jews,
should, under the kingdom of Christ, be cast out from the natural goods, viz.
from all Dominion, from Country and Kingdom; and their Rule and Dominion
should cease; for the Dominion belongs only unto Christ, viz. to Christendom;
for Christ brought an Eternal Kingdom with him: the goods were all his; as
Abraham's goods belonged to Isaac.

23. And although it has not dominion over all, as Isaac had possession and
rule of that only which his father left him; for the natural children of
Abraham, born of Kethura, became afterward heathen, and ruled over the outward
goods as children of the outward nature: yet Abraham's children, who were in the
Covenant under Circumcision, must when Christ did manifest himself, be cast
out, to signify, that the earthly man also, viz. Self in the Serpents Ens
which is on the children of the Covenant, must be cast away from God.

24. Thus in Abraham and his Son Isaac the figure of the Kingdom of Christ was
represented: but when Christ came into the flesh; God putt away the figure; and
took from the external children of Isaac the outward goods of the Land Canaan;
to intimate, that now the holy Land of Canaan is become manifest, where Isaac's
children shall take possession of the true promised inheritance in Christ, and
no longer have the figure only, but the Essence of the figure, viz. the
perfect substance, and now forsake the outward goods with the figure, and putt
on Christ in the flesh.

25. But that the Jews, viz. Isaac's and Abraham's children, viz. the children
in Christ's figure, did not all turn unto Christ, when he did manifest himself
in the flesh, has this meaning; God gave them the law of nature; where, in the
law, the Government of nature was understood externally, and internally Christ,
viz. the Covenant, and the promised free gift of God in Paradise; so that the
law of nature was to be Christ's Sojourner, and the true man also was to live
under the law of nature in a Note.
Right rationality, and yet bring his own nature into Christ's house; and thus
the figure of the law must continue among some of Abraham's children, viz.
amongst some of the Jews, to signify, that the law is Christ's Sojourner.

26. Understand, that the nature of man shall remain, for it is not so rejected
of God, as if clean another new man should arise out of the old; but the (new
man) shall arise out of Adam's nature, and property, and out of Gods, in
Christ's, nature and property; so that man is become an Adam-Christ, and Christ,
a Christ-Adam; a Man-God, and a God-Man; and therefore the figure continued
still among the Jews; and for this cause they were not all converted to
Christ; that so nature might keep its figure, and due right; for it shall
deliver up its children under the Law, viz. the figure of Christ, to God the
Father, in Christ, but its figure shall be proved in the fire of God, so that
it shall be known, who has been the true child of the natural Law in the
figure of Christ, that has been born in the spirit in the law out of the
figure of Christ, and who has not.

27. It is not he, that has the words and Title of the law, that is a Jew
born in the figure, and in the law, but he who is born of the promise in
Abraham's faith; he that lives in the figure of Christ, viz. in the law in
profession, and practice (with mouth and heart) the same, the law of God in
Christ's figure has comprehended, and will bring him into the fullfilling of
the figure.

28. For it does not only depend on man's knowing, that Christ has given
himself into the law, and is become the fullfilling in the law, as the Titular
Christian boasts; but it depends on Gods Ordinance.
Order, on the mercy of God; whosoever has been a true Jew, and has put on
Abraham's faith in the law, he has putt on the Ens of Christ, which Abraham
conceived or apprehended, which Ens of faith, the humanity of Christ has
fullfilled; and it is hidden to him what it is, for he works in the office of
nature in the law of God, which Christ has taken into himself and fullfilled;
so that he serves God in the office of nature, and the Office of nature
serves Christ, for it is become Christ's own propriety.

29. For unto him all power is given both in heaven and on earth (Matthew. 28.)
under which power, the office of nature also is, in the law; for God, in the
spirit of Christ, is Even the self same who gave the law and the office of
nature to do Righteousness, together with the figure of the kingdom of Christ,
with the Ens of faith, to Abraham and Moses; and he is also the very same who
fullfilled the Faith, and the law.

30. Thus the Jew works in his faith in Christ's office, viz. in the Law,
wherewith Christ governs in nature; and has putt on Christ in the Covenant,
and in the Ens of faith in Christ's figure, which Christ has fullfied.

31. For the Christian who confesses Christ in the flesh, works in his Faith
in the flesh of Christ, and has the Law of nature, viz. Gods officer, to do
uprightly, in his faith; for Christ rules in the Law of God, which he has
fullfilled and made a Servant, in his children, and kills the law of Sin
through the fullfilling of his Love in his blood and death, both in them who
live in the dominion of his Law, and also in them who live in the dominion of
his Conquest, as the Christians do.

32. For the faith which presses or comes in unto God in the law, in the
figure, in the Covenant, the same comes unto God in the Ens of Abraham's faith,
out of which, Christ was born; and he that comes in unto God in the
fullfilling of the same, does come or press in to God in the humanity of
Christ, viz. in the whole process of his suffering, death, and resurrection.

33. A Christian is Christ in the inward humanity, and a Jew is Christ in the
figure, and in the office of his law, viz. according to nature: but now Adam in
his nature and Christ in the divine nature, are but one person, one only Tree;
Romans 8.34.
Who now is here that judges.

34. Saint Paul says; Romans 2.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
There is no respect of persons before God; for as many as have sinned without
law, shall also perish without law, and they who have sinned in the law, shall
be judged by the Law; for not the hearers of the law are just before God, but
the doers of the law shall be justified; for when the Gentiles which have not
the law do by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the law
are a law unto themselves, which show that the work of the law is written in
their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness to them, and their thoughts
within themselves either accusing or excusing each other; That is, or
signifies, thus much.

35. When the Gentiles do apprehend Christ, then they do apprehend the Law of
nature to do uprightly, for Christ is the beginning and the fullfilling of the
law; but the Jews have the law; now whosoever transgresses, and sins,
either the Jew in the law of nature, or the Gentile who acknowledges Christ in
the law of the fullfilling each shall be punished or judged in his law; viz.
the Jew in the law of God the Father in Christ, and the Christian in the law of
the Gospel, viz. in the law of the Accomplishment.

36. For here is no respect of name, in that one says, I am a Jew, the other I
am a Christian, the name makes no difference in the Adoption of God, but the
spirit in the heart to do uprightly, to obey God; they all come in the Grace
under the obedience of Christ unto God; both the Jew and Christian.

37. For without Christ there is neither law nor Gospel, Christ is the
Righteousness which avails before God in the law, so that man, without
Christ, has no God; now let him run either in the Law or Gospel, if he runs
in the desire to obey God, then he runs in the law of the Accomplishment;
for Christ is the only obedience which avails before God, both in the law
and Gospel; all men who give up themselves in obedience unto God, they are
received in Christ's obedience, viz. in the fullfilling of the obedience, the
Jew and the Christian, and so likewise the heathen who has neither the law nor
Gospel.

38. For if the Gentile desire to obey the only God, and yet knows him not
according to the essence of his manifestation; but presses in to the obedience
of God, then he is a law unto himself; and declares indeed that God has
written his law in him, which he has fullfilled in his Son, as Paul says; for
he who knows the law and Gospel, knows the same only as a Gift of the
Giver, who has given him the knowledge; but he that does not know it, and yet
desires the power of the law and Gospel, in him, God in Christ, knows, what
he pleases.

39. For Grace does not only lie in knowing, that one knows the Grace in
Christ, but it lies in the pressing into that Grace, and in the mercy of God.
One presses in to mercy in the law, the other in the Gospel, and the third
without the law, and without the knowledge of the Gospel; he that has neither,
but hangs on the Grace of God, the same is freely given without his knowledge
of it.

40. Even as the branch on the tree does not know, whence the Stock does
introduce the sapp, and power into it, it only longs and gaspeth after the
power and virtue of the root, and draws with its desire the sap into its
self; even so likewise many an ignorant man does long after his eternal
mother, out of whom he is arisen with Adam, and comes in his ignorance [or
un-knowing condition] again unto the free gift of Grace which God freely
bestowed on Adam, in his fall, for the Covenant and Grace passed from Adam upon
all originally or by way of inheritance, even as Sin passed from one upon all:
whosoever desires the Grace of the only God, he obtains it in Christ, who
is the Grace it self.

41. The Jews will not believe the outward humanity of Christ, and do deny the
same; but the Christians do believe it, and yet defile the same, with ungodly
conversation, and the one is as the other before God, except the children of
Faith among the Jews and Christians, whose defiled garment is washed in the
blood of Christ.

42. We do not hereby confirm or speak for the unbeleef of the Jews, and
Gentiles, that they should or might remain in blindness, for the time of their
visitation is Text. born.
at hand, that they shall see, but we hereby disclose and lay open the wicked
Antichrist among the Jews, and Christians, in that every one boasts of his
Name, and condemns another; the Jew in the Law, and the Christian in the
Gospel, and the Heathen in his Superstition.

43. Each of them will be Gods child in his knowledge, and yet the disobedience
and unbeleef is as great among one people as another; and they are in the
knowledge, only as a figure before God, and none is saved by his knowledge
only; for, that I do believe and hold for a truth, that Christ was born, dyed
and arose again from death for me, does not make me a child of God; the Devil
knows it also, but it does not avail him; I must putt on Christ in the desire
of faith, and enter into his obedience, into his incarnation, suffering and
death, and arise again in him, and putt on the obedience of Christ, and then I
am a Christian and not before.

44. The judging censuring and condemning others without Gods Command is only
the Antichrist among the Jews, and among the Christians: without Gods mercy
none comes to the Sonship, we must all enter in through the free Mercy of
God; the Jew, and Christian, the knower, and he that knows not, our knowledge
must be filled and abound with the love of Christ effectually, so that we love
one another, else knowledge is not at all available: if I bring not my
knowledge with the desire into the Love of God wherewith he has loved us in
Christ, and love my neighbor in the love of God in Christ, with that love
wherewith God generally loves us, and loved us when we were his Enemies, then
I have not as yet the love of God dwelling in me.

45. But how will he Love his brother, who contemns him for his knowledge
sake: did not God Love us when we knew nothing of his Love; if a man has not
this Love of God in him, wherewith God loved us when we knew him not, why does
he boast then of Gods Sonship; if he be the child of God, then he has the free
love of God, wherewith he loves all things, if he has it not; he is not then
as yet capable of the Adoption: now then if any one contemns, and condemns
his brother, which has not as yet his knowledge, how can he boast of the Love
of God, wherewith God loved his Enemies in Christ, wherewith Christ prayed for
his Enemies.

46. O thou false cold Love of the titular Christendom, how does the Eternal
truth strike thee in the face of thy Conscience, in that thou only dependest
on thy knowing, and contendest about the mere knowledge, and have not Love;
thou judge thy Self only in thy judging others: One Sect and company
judges and condemns an other, and before God they are no other then the
natural children of Abraham, born of Kethura, one laying the blame upon
another that the father had cast them out from the inheritance, and yet they
could not see what was the fault, namely, that it was by reason of the evil
corrupt nature, which was not a true Heir.

47. So likewise your judging and censuring others does not Entitle you to the
goods of Christ: nay, the same is wholly cast out from the inheritance, both of
the Jews, Christians, and also of the Turks; all your contention is nothing
else but the Mocker Ismael who mocketh Christ in his members; ye do all abuse
the Name of God with your judging, and condem the manifold Gifts of the Spirit
of God among you, and judge only in Self, and not according to the Love of
Christ.

48. Your judging one another is only the hurt and wound of the world,
wherewith ye make the ignorant to Err, and bring them to blaspheam, ye teach
them the art of censuring and condemning, and ye your selves have not the true
knowledge in the spirit of God, ye do not teach your selves, and yet ye will
be teaching, and judging others; and in this way and course ye are all, one
with another, the disinherited children of Kethura; ye contend, bite and
devour one another about Abraham's, viz. Christ's goods, and yet ye have them
not; if ye had them then ye would have the Love of Christ, which is the true
goods.

49. No knowledge without the love of Christ is at all available to the
Sonship, it is only Babel, and fable, Teaching and yet an effecting and doing
nothing, save only honoring the Idol Maozim in it self; the knowledge of the
High Schools, and the knowledge of the Devil, without the spirit of Christ in
Love, do both of them bring only contention and desolation.

50. If the Devil had not known in Self, then he had been an Angel; and if
Adam had not desired the Selfe-knowledge without Gods Love, he had continued in
Paradise; if the high Schools did not know the sharp accute disputing, they
had continued in the simplicity of Christ, and had not brought the whole world
with their contention and disputings into Opinions, and judgings of one
another, so that now there is nothing but contemning, and condeming in
Christendom, and all Love, and truth is extinct; and men have set and putt
Salvation in opinions [in this or that way and form] and bound the Master to
the Servant, so that Antichrist domineereth over Christ, and yet pretends all
for Christ, but indeed her hereby only honoreth and minds his Lucifer, and
Belly-God Maozim, as it is plainly to be seen.

Genesis 25.6, 7, 8, 9.
51. Now after that Abraham had sent away all the children of the Concubines
from Isaacs goods with Gifts toward the East, as Moses says; they came into
the East Country; that is, into the Dominion and Government of nature, where
the Essence begins, and Abraham dyed in a quiet Age when he was old, and
full of years, and was buried by his Sarah in the Cave of Machpelah which is
before Mamre.

The inward figure is this.
52. Abraham's natural children of the Concubines went toward the East: here
the spirit points at the figure of the whole man, when Christ has manifested
himself in man, and possessed his goods, as here Isaac, then nature goes into
the Text. beginning.
East, viz. into the Fathers property, and works according to the soul in the
first and third Principle, and Christ sits in the midst, viz. in the second
Principle, and rules over that which nature in the Fathers property does form
and fashion in the divine wisdom.

53. Therefore Moses says here; that they went toward the East, and points
secretly in his figure at the property of man, signifying how nature does
possess the Text. morning.
East, viz. the beginning or rise of the Dominion; even as Christ also said,
that He was as a Vine-dresser who did glean. In Gods kingdom nature is Christ's
Servant, but in the kingdom of natures Self or propriety, Christ has given
himself with his humility to be a Servant, and an assistant, and serves the
Father in his natural manifestation, and continually picketh up or gleaneth;
what the Father forms through nature, that the wisdom brings into its
Treasure.

54. Therefore says Saint Paul, that 1 Cor. 14.32.
the spirit of God is subject to the children of God, and goes along with them
in the Searching even into the depths of the Deity: and when it comes thus far,
then man is in a quiet old age, and then all things stand in order in him; viz:
nature in the East.
Morning in the Fathers property, and Christ in the West.
Evening, in the humility, and then man has enough of the outward evil
sinful life, he longs continually to enter with his Essence into the Cave of
That is, the twofold pit, as the Dutch translation has it.
Machpelah, viz. into the Eternal Mother, as it is before In the 49. Chap.
mentioned.

55. And when he has brought his life's forms into the divine Order, as here
Abraham had set all things into Order, then he gives up himself wholly and
fully in One Essence into the Eternal Generatress, and with his own will he
resigneth up himself into mortification and death, and is wholly tired, and
weary of the life of Self, and so rests in his God.

CHAP. LII. Of the history of Isaac, and also of the Birth of Esau and Jacob,
and what has been acted concerning them; the meaning thereof is hinted to us
in this Chapter.
MOses says; After the death of Abraham God blessed his Son Isaac, Genesis XXV.
verse. 11.
and he dwelt by the well of the Laha^^^^.
Living and Seeing. Reason understands this externally of a place where Isaac
dwelt, but the spirit looks upon the figure of the life's form, showing, how
the humane nature and creature has dwelt by the wellspring of the divine Ens
in the Covenant, which Abraham laid hold of in faith; viz. the Soul of Isaac
dwelt by the wellspring of the holy Trinity, in which the Soul received its
light, and saw, and knew the will of God, out of which wellspring the highest
love of the Deity did manifest it self to the Soul; and out of which fountain,
afterward, in the fullness of time the holy Name Jesus out of Jehova did
manifest it self and espoused it self for a Bride unto the Soul.

2. The soul of Isaac dwelt by this fountain of the living and Seeing, until
the same fountain afterward did power forth, and open it self in the humanity
of Christ in the Soul; and then afterward the Soul dwelt in the fountain, when
it was exalted in Christ's person to the right hand of God; and then the
fountain of God did spring forth through the soul, where then it received the
divine might as a Prince of God, or as an Image or express likeness of God, or
as a formed word of the voice of God, through which voice God was made known
and manifest.

3. So likewise our Soul when it forsakes the earthly will of its assumed
Self, and apprehends the Ens of Christ in the Covenant, and turns it self
to God, then it dwells also by the fountain of the living and Seeing, that is,
by Gods Eye, which he has again with Christ manifested and opened in the
humanity: indeed our soul does not in this time of the earthly cottage dwell in
the wellspring of God, as if it did apprehend the wellspring in Self, but
like as the Sun through-shineth the Glass, and yet the Glass is not turned to
be Sun, but it dwells by the Luster, and virtue of the Sun, and suffers the
Sun to work and shine through it; even so is the soul in this time.

4. And further yet, As the Sun does give its Tincture into the Metalline Ens,
and the Metalline Ens gives its desire into the Suns Tincture, so that out of
them both the fair and precious Gold is generated, so likewise it is to be
understood concerning the Soul and the fountain of God; the Deity Or, dwells
through the soul.
inhabiteth the Soul, but the soul comprehends not the same as to its
creaturall power; but the Eye or light of God with the holy Love-tincture from
the lights luster, gives it self into the desire of the Soul.

Note what the Fiat is.
5. For the desire of the Soul is the Fiat, which takes the power of the holy
Love-tincture into it self, and makes it essential; so that the divine
tincture proceeding from the desire of the true Love-spring ( viz. from the
fountain of the living and Seeing) and the souls believing desire, do become
one Essence.

6. Understand a spiritual Essence, and this same spiritual Essence is the
inward new man, viz. a new house or habitation of the Soul, in which it
dwells according to the inward heavenly world: the name of which Essence is
Sophia, viz. the Bride of Christ, Christ's humanity, in which the glorious
Jacobs-Star of the dear and precious Name Jesus is a shining light, whereby the
Soul sees and knows God.

7. The Soul is not changed into the Deity, viz. into Lahai-roi, the fountain
of the living and Seeing, for it is the Eternal and Temporal natures; but the
Deity is not natures, but the will to nature, and manifests it self through
the Souls nature, as the fire manifests it self through the Iron, where
then the Iron seems as if it were mere fire, and yet it keeps its own nature,
and the fire also its own, and the one does only dwell in the other, and one
is the manifestation of the other. The Iron has no power over the fire, only
the fire gives it self to the Iron, and the Iron gives its Ens to the fire,
and so both are changed in to one, and yet remain two Essences, so likewise it
is to be understood with the Soul and the Deity.

8. And as the fiery property is different from the gross Iron, and has
another Source: so likewise the new spiritual humanity in the Ens of Christ in
the divine Love-fire is far another essence then the earthly body, albeit the
Soul is understood in the fire, and in the lights luster the body of Sophia,
for the power or virtue of the light is the tincture or the beginning to the
new spiritual body; which power, the Souls believing desire, takes, and
forms or brings it into an Essence: that is, it makes it essential: it
becomes an essence or spiritual body from the desire, which spiritual essence
is the Temple of God, of which the Scripture speaks.

9. But our Babylon will understand nothing hereof, but will be wholly blind
therein; for she will not know how Christ is born in the faith in us, and how
faith comes to essence, but she will downright make the halfe-Serpent man to be
an assumed and adopted child of Grace, and set it in Gods Temple: but it avails
not; shall the Devil sit at the right hand of God in the fountain of the
living and Seeing, he has been once cast away from thence, he shall not any
more possess the same: a Beast is not Sophia; the Scripture says; Matthew. 18.3.
Ye must be converted, and be born anew as children, else ye shall not see God.

10. The Soul cannot see God save only in its newborn Image, only through
and in virgin Sophia in Jacobs-Star, viz. in the Name of Jesus it Sees in
Jehova in the wellspring of the life of God; it is not its self this very
fountain, it gives only the fire to the manifestation of this fountain: but
the fountain is understood in the light, viz. in the meekness of the light.

11. Now the souls magic fire-source could not so be enkindled that a shining
luster of a light might arise in the Souls fire, if the divine Love-desire,
viz. the Love-Ens, had not given it self into the Souls fire; the Ens of
Christ out of the divine Love, gives it self into the Souls fire-Source,
which the souls fire eats into its fiery Essence, and thereupon the life of
the wrathfullness dies, and the fair precious light is thence generated; for
here Christ arises out of the consuming fire of the Fathers property,
according to his anger, from death, out of the fire of another life: here the
magical Souls fire becomes the precious Sophia's Bridegroom, and here are man
and wife; viz. both Tinctures of the fire and of the light become one person,
viz. an Angel of God.

12. Here Lucifer loses his throne, and the Serpent his viprous Seed, and
Christ sits at the right hand of God in man; and man then dwells truly by
the fountain of the living and seeing; and this is that which the spirit of
Moses setts forth by this figure concerning Isaacs habitation, if we would but
once become Seeing, and forsake the mere husk, and know our selves aright, not
according to the earthly Beast, but according to the inward spiritual heavenly
Man.

13. As to the part of the beastiall soul [of Man], that attains not the
precious Image, in this life time for propriety, the mortal soul either from
the Stars or four Elements attains it not, only the inward Soul, out of the
Eternal word of God, out of the Eternal Nature, out of the formed word, out
of Gods Essence according to Gods Love and Anger, viz. out of the Center of the
Eternal Nature, which has its Original out of the divine desire through the
eternal Word.
Verbum Fiat, whereby the divine Lubet forms and fashioneth the wisdom into
a Substance, to the Contemplation of the Deity: This [soul is that which] is
betrothed to Sophia.

14. The outward Soul is now betrothed and espoused to the Stars and four
Elements, to form and bring forth the wonders of Gods formed wisdom in
Figures, both in words and works: this outward Soul obtains sometimes only a
look from Sophia, for it has the death and mortality in it self, but it shall
after this time be changed again into the first Image, which God created in
Adam, and leave the Serpents Ens to the earth, which shall at the end of days
be tried in the fire of God, where the Serpents introduced desire shall
evaporate from it, and then the whole Image of God out of all the Three
Principles stands in One Essence, and even then Ephesians. 1.23.
God fills all in all; this is here to be understood by this figure.

15. Further the spirit of Moses describes the children of Ismael, and relates
how he begatt twelve Sons, Genesis 25.16.18
from whom twelve Princes arose in their Generations, and he setts down, at
last; He fell in the presence of all his brethren; here he means before
Isaacs generation; and yet he waxed great in worldly Dominion before them, and
potent Nations did arise from him; and Isaac with his children and posterity
were only as Pilgrims, and traveled up and down from one place to another,
until they were at last redeemed from the Egyptian Bondage, and possessed the
promised Land.

The inward figure.
12 Princes.
16. Ismael in his twelve Princes typifieth the kingdom of the Corrupt Nature
of man's property, which kingdom is twofold: viz. six numbers out of the inward
life's figure; 6 Inward.
and six numbers out of the earthly outward life's figure; 6 Outward.
viz. the outward visible palpable Man, and the inward spiritual Soulish man:
both these have twelve numbers in the figure, whence Twelve Princes arose,
according to the inward and outward natures property: these the spirit of Moses
puts in the figure and says, that they fell in the presence of all their
brethren, to signify, that the twelve dominions of the inward and outward
nature of the humane property in its corruption, fell before the twelve
dominions newborn of the Ens of faith in their corrupt Self; for the Devil
had set his dominion and power into these properties.

17. But when the promised Seed of faith was conceived in Abraham, it did
suppress and beat down the Devils power in the dominion of man's Self; and then
happened the spiritual fall in Ismaels line, wherein the Devil as an haughty
Prince had set himself to bear the chief sway and domination; for Christ
kills the pride of the Serpent in man.

18. Now says Moses; Ismael fell in the presence of all his brethren; this was
nothing else but a spiritual fall of the humane Selfness before God, for as to
this world they were famous renowned people, as their Princely dominions do
testify; whereas on the contrary Isaac's Generation were only strangers among
the Nations; which signifies, that Christ's kingdom and Dominion is not in
this worlds nature; and yet the kingdoms of this world shall fall before
Christ, and be in subjection to Christ.

19. Afterward the spirit of Moses describes Isaac's children by Rebecca, and
says, that she was barren, and Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife, and God
was entreated of him; and Rebecca conceived with two Sons, which strove
together in the womb. Here now the figure of the kingdom of nature, and also
of the kingdom of Christ in the new birth is clearly set forth: for Rebecca's
two sons which she brought forth, viz. Esau and Jacob, point at two lines: viz,
Esau proceeds from Abraham's own Adamicall corrupt nature; and Jacob arises in
the Ens of faith, in which Abraham's faiths Ens had incorporated it self into
his Adamicall nature, in which also the Covenant and the line of Christ stood,
who should bruise the Serpents head in the Adamicall nature.

20. And here is deciphered and held forth how the two kingdoms in the two
brothers; viz. the Devils kingdom in the corrupt nature of Esau in Adams own
nature, of the introduced Serpents Ens; and also the kingdom of Christ in
Jacob in the Ens of faith, did both strive together while they were children
even in the womb; where then the kingdom of nature in Esau began to fall
before the kingdom of Christ in Jacob; for here the woman's seed, already
bruised the head of the Serpents Ens, its might, in Esau, and the Serpent
already stung the woman's seed, viz. the Ens of faith in Jacob, on the heel, and
therefore they strugled together in the womb.

21. Also we have here a very emphaticall pregnant figure in Rebecca, in that
she was shutt up and could not be opened to conceive of Isaac's seed, until
Isaac had entreated the Lord, that he would open the Stop or strong bar.

Barrenness.


withholdment in the Covenant in Rebecca; where then the Lord was entreated in
the Covenant concerning the barrenness of Rebecca, so that he did open the
Tincture in the woman's seed to this Impregnation or conception.

The inward figure stands thus.
21. The seed of faith was in Isaac inherited from his father Abraham, but
Rebecca had not this Ens, indeed she was in the Covenant, but the Ens of faith
was not in her in the Essence, but only in the Covenant, and therefore her
matrix was shut up, and was not capable of the Ens of faith, so long, till
Isaac immersed his believing desire into the Lord, understand into the Center
of nature in Rebecca, so that the spirt of the Lord did move it self in the
Covenant in Rebecca, and moved also the Covenant together with her Adamicall
nature, so that the barrenness in her matrix was disclosed both in the shutt
up Ens in the Covenant, and then likewise the Adamicall Matrix, whereupon she
conceived two sons, of two kingdoms property.

23. And this is the meaning of the saying, The Lord was entreated; when Isaac
brought his faiths desire, through the Eternal and Temporal nature, into the
Lord, and therewith did earnestly press for his wife Rebecca, that the Lord
would be pleased to open her through his prayer and faiths-desire, that so she
might be with child by him, which faiths desire, together with the Adamicall
natures desire, gave in themselves into the barrenness of the matrix in
Rebecca, and opened her, whereupon she conceived both natures properties, from
a twofold seed of Isaac.

24. Not that we are to think or understand that Jacob was wholly conceived of
the Ens of faith, but as well of the Adamicall Sinful nature as Esau; only
the kingdom of Grace in the Covenant, set forth its figure in the Ens of faith
in him; and in Esau the kingdom of nature; viz. the right corrupt Adamicall
nature did set forth its figure; not as a separation, sundry partition or
Rejection: but to signify, that Christ should be conceived, and born, with his
holy divine Ens in the Adamicall corrupt nature, and destroy death, and the
strong hold of Sin, together with the self-raised desire to ownhood and
propriety in self, and mortify the same with the Love desire in the divine
Ens, and ruinate the Devils rampant fort of prey, which he has built up to
himself, therein; and change the wrath of God according to the eternal
nature, in the Center of the dark fiery worlds property, into divine love, and
joy, and Tincture the Adamicall nature with the holy Tincture of the Love-fire.

25. Therefore the corrupt Adamicall nature in its Type was represented in the
womb in Esau, with the type of Christ in Jacob, and they both must be formed
of one seed, to signify, that Christ should give in himself to our corrupt
nature, and redeem our corrupted right Adamicall nature from corruption, and
introduce it into his own holy nature in himself.

26. Also God did represent in Esau the figure of his wrath, and the Devils
Might, who had possessed the kingdom of nature in man, and shows how he would
fight, and exercise great enmity against the Ens of faith, and the kingdom of
Grace, which should deprive him of his strength.

27. Reason says, wherefore should God permit the Devil to fight against the
kingdom of his Grace: hear and hearken thou very blind and altogether ignorant
Reason: Learn the A. B. C. in the Center, how Gods Love, and the kingdom of
Grace and Mercy, would not, nor could not, be manifest, without Strife and
Enmity, and then thou have here no further Question; go forward into the center
of this Book, and thou find the ground.

28. And when the strife between the two kingdoms began in these children in
the womb, so that they strove or spurned against each other, Rebecca became
discontented and troubled at it, and said; Genesis 25.2^, 23.
If it should be thus with me, wherefore am I with child? and she went to
enquire of the Lord; and the Lord said unto her; two Nations are in thy womb,
and two manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels, and one people
shall be stronger then the other, and the greater shall serve the lesser.

29. These two Nations which were conceived of one seed in Rebecca, are on one
part the Man of the Adamicall selfish nature in Selfness, viz. the Original of
man; and on the other part the new spiritual man regenerated of the kingdom
of Grace in the Covenant, these came out of one seed; one out of the Adamicall
nature only, and he was the Greater or Elder, viz. the first man which God
created in his Image, which became corrupt and dyed as to God; the other came
indeed out of the same Adamicall nature, but the kingdom of Grace in the Ens
of Faith had given in it self unto it as a Conqueror, and this was as to the
Adamicall nature the younger, but God was manifest in him; therefore the
greater should serve, and be subject to the lesser, who was the Least according
to the humane property, but the greatest in God.

30. And yet we do not see that Esau was subject to Jacob, but it is the
spiritual figure, showing how the kingdom of nature in man, should be broken
by the children of God, and made subject to the kingdom of Grace, viz. to the
divine humility, and wholly dive it self into the divine humility, and be born
anew of the humility, thus the Spirit of God showed this, by the Answer to
Rebecca, saying, that it should be a striving or fighting kingdom, where
indeed the first corrupt man being the greater or elder in nature should strive
against the lesser, viz. the Spirit of Christ in his lowliness and humility,
and persecute him: but the Adamicall man must at last be obedient and subject
unto the humility of Christ, if he will be Abraham's child, and heir, but if
not, then he must be so long cast out from Abraham's and Christ's goods, till he
does humble himself and freely yield under Christ's humility, and forsake the
own-hood of the greater and elder Self, and Enmity, assumed in Adam.

31. By Rebecca's trouble, discontent, impatience and regrett, in that she
runs to enquire of the Lord, wherefore the strife was in her, that the
children did so struggle together, is signified thus much unto us: that when
Christ does manifest himself in the Adamicall nature, then begins and arises
the strife of both these kingdoms, viz. the Devils kingdom in Gods Anger in
the Serpents Ens, and also Christ's kingdom: when Christ bruiseth the Serpents
head, then arises great disquietness in the mind, for the Serpent stingeth
Christ, viz. the new birth on the heel, and then arises this kicking and
spurning, viz. a lamentable and woeful distress: and then says reason in the
mind with Rebecca; if it should be thus with me, wherefore am I entered into
the divine Impregnation, into Repentance? am not I thereby come only into
disquietness, and thereby become a Fool to the world, and to my reason also;
and then arises the combat, and Satan's bruising, in the mind, with Anguish
and grief, and then the mind knows not whither to betake it self, but
runs into Penitency, and asks the Lord, wherefore it goes so with it?

32. And then the Lord shows him in his language, that Christ now is in him in
hell, and assaulteth the Devils strong rampant fort of prey, whereupon there
is such contest and disquietness in him; and shows him how his reason, and the
Adamicall nature, viz. the greater part of his life, must be broken, and dive
it self wholly into Resignation, into the deepest humility, into the process
of Christ under his Cross, and become a stranger to it self, yea its own
Enemy, and go with the Reason, and the Greater Adamicall will, into its Nothing.

33. And when this is don, then Esau, viz. the Adamicall nature is indeed born,
and comes forth always first; but Jacob, viz. the spirit of Christ comes
soon after, and deprives Esau of the kingdom and power, and makes nature a
Servant; and then Esau, viz. nature must serve Jacob, viz. the spirit of
Christ; then it is even here, as the Son said unto the Father; John 17.6.
Father, the men were thine, and thou have given them me, Joh. 10.28.
and I give unto them Eternal life.

34. Understand, Nature is the Fathers property, for it is the strength and
might, viz. the fire-spirit: this fire-spirit was given to the light or
Love-spirit in Christ, viz. to the holy name Jesus, which introduced it self
in Abraham's believing desire into an Ens, out of which, Christ, and then the
new man out of Christ, is born, unto whom the kingdom of nature in the Fathers
fire-property was given; and he wholly gave his Love-ens for food unto the
Fathers fire-Source, viz. to the fiery Soul in the Fathers nature: and even
there Christ with Love took possession of the Fathers fire-strength, and
changed it into the Glory of the Triumphant kingdom of joy; and thus also it
is to be understood in the new birth of man.

Genesis 25.24, 25, 26.
35. And Moses says further: And now when the time came, that Rebecca should be
delivered, behold there were Twins in her womb; and the first which came out
was Red, and all over rough like an hairie hide; and they called his name Esau;
and presently after came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esaus Heel,
and they called him Jacob. Here now stands the figure so lively and so clearly
set forth, that Reason may even see it: that which before was hinted at with
words in the spiritual figure, that stands here in a lively Personal figure;
for Moses says; Esau came forth first, who was Red, and had a rough skin.

36. Red betokens the Fathers nature in the fire: Rough betokens the earthly
beastiall nature, which Adam with his lust introduced into him from the
earthliness. His Name is called ESAV from the SensVAll language, from the
property of the formation of his natures property; the same in its formation in
the language of nature stands thus: E. is the Original ex uno, viz. [ aus them
Einam
out of the One]: and is the true Angelical property created in Adam: ( Saw
signifies Sow, or the earthly swinish property.
SAU) is the formed beast of Selfe-lust, which has enclosed and shut up the E.
and obscured and slain the same in it self; that is, when it was extinct in it
as to the lights fire, yet the SAU, viz. the outward beastiall man who had
changed the E. viz. the[ Angelical Engels] Image into a Beast, did yet remain
in its form: therefore the spirit called his name ESAU, viz. a formed or
amassed Image of Lust turned from its fine pureness into grossness, wherein
notwithstanding the E. did still remain, but wholly encompassed and shut up
with the SAU.

37. After this Esau comes Jacob, viz. the type or Image of Christ conceived
in the Ens of faith, and holds Esau by the heel: this declares, that the
Adamicall Image which God created, shall and must be first born, for the same
is it, which shall live for ever, but not in its Rough beasts Hide: for in that
Jacob holds Esau, viz. the first man by the heel, signifies, that the Second
Adam, viz. Christ is born after the first Adam, and takes hold of him behind,
and brings him back again from the course of his own self-will, into the first
mother, from whence nature is arisen, viz. to another new birth.

38. But that Esau goes forward with his birth, and Jacob by holding him by
the heel cannot withhold him: betokens, that the earthly man in his Selfness
should go forward and not go wholly in this life time back again into the
mother of the new birth, but he would walk up and down with the beastiall man
through this time; for the beast, shall not be new born, but the Image of God,
which was lost or perished, in Adam.

39. And it further denotes, how Christ should take the true Adamicall created
man by his heel, that is, by the mind of his conversation, and put him back
again into the first mother, whence he did arise; and how the spirit of Christ
should follow after the earthly man in this life time; when as the Devil
should be the earthly man's chief guide in the anger of God, then Christ should
come after him, and take the inward property of the poor fallen and captivated
man, viz. the poor corrupt mind of the Soul into his Arms, and draw it back
again out of the Devils netts and snares, as Christ said, * That he was as a
Vine-dresser who gleaned: for in this life time the Adamicall natures Image
stands before, and the Image of Christ behind; therefore the natural man must
dye, and Christ must arise and put himself forth Eminently in him.

40. And it shows further, how the spirit of Christ in Jacobs line should take
Esau in this life time by his heel, and hold and rebuke him; and by his
children labor to hinder and suppress his evil conversation and wicked
walkings; but the Esauitish generation would contem despise and only trample
it underfoot; and lay about them as an evil malicious fiery beast; as it even
so comes to pass, when God sends his Prophets, that they must reprove and
rebuke men; then they even spurn them away from them as dogs, and will by no
means endure them; but Jacob, that is, the spirit of God holds them yet by the
heel, and makes them naked, and bare, so long, till Jacobs foot-step or
impression is known.

41. JACOB signifies in the formation of the Name in the high tongue, a strong
lubet or desire out of the mental Tongue, viz. out of the Name JEHOVA brought
into a compaction or Ens; where the (I) takes the (A), and exalts it self in
the (A) and takes the SensVAll tongue into the mental, viz. into the (COB) so
that the (O) is set for the Center of the word, where then the profound Name of
God is conceived or brought into the (O), and therein it is rightly understood,
how the Fathers nature, viz. the Spirit of Sense in (A) (C) and (B) does form
it self into the (I) and (O), for (I) is the Center of the highest Love, and
(O) is the Center of the perceptive word in the Deity, which is understood [to
be] without or beyond all nature.

42. This the spirit has understood in Isaac, therefore they call him JACOB,
so long till this Name was moved through the (I) in the Ens of faith, so that
the (I) opened the (C) and (B) and put forth the formed or conceived Ens in the
(O) (being the (I) had formed it self with the (O) in nature); through nature
as an holy blossom; and then the Name was called JESUS: for the (I) brought it
self again into the enclosed shutt-up [ Angels Engels] property in Adams
nature, and then the (A) was put into (E:) for the Father gave his nature in
the humanity to the Son, viz. to the (I) and the Son made again an [ Angel
Engel] of it through the (I) for the (I) entered into the deepest humility, and
lowliness, and then the figure stood thus (IE) out of which the fiery
love-spirit went forth, and made it self predominant; and set forth before it
its character with the (S) and (V) for the (S) is the character of the holy
fire, and the (V) is the character of the efflux, issuing forth, or Emanation,
out of the fire.

43. Thus the Name Jacob was in the fullness of time in the Ens of Mary changed
into the Name Jesus, which understanding has been as dumb and dead both to the
Jews and Christians; being no Nation does any more understand its own
language; and contend only about the Compaction of the formed nature of the
outward name, and understanding; the Mental Tongue, none will learn to
understand, how the same has formed, imprinted, and Modelized.
Ideafied it self in the words, and Names in the sensual tongue; and yet the
whole understanding lies therein without opinions: if we were not so very
blind and shut up in ignorance, suffering self in pride, to rule and govern
us, we should soon attain to the deepest understanding, but the Antichrist
bears the supremacy, therefore Esau only rules in the understanding.

Genesis 25.27, 28.
44. And Moses says further; And when the children were grown up, Esau was a
cunning Hunter, and a man of the field, and Jacob was a Honest.
plain man and dwelt in Tents, and Isaac loved Esau, and loved to eat of his
venison; but Rebecca loved Jacob. O thou wonderful God, how very simply and
plainly are the greatest Mysteries typifyed and deciphered: who can be able to
understand without thy Spirit, from whence it was, that the precious man Isaac
in the Type of Christ loved the natural man in Adams corrupt Image, Esau, more
then Jacob in the Type of Christ in his figure: if thou had not in thy
knowledge, vouchsafed me to understand the same, I must be here even stark
blind; but it is thy Counsel O Lord, that we know thee; and thy time is born,
that thou revealest the Secrets.

45. Moses says; that Esau was an hunter, and a man of the field, and the
Father loved to eat of his venison, and loved him above Jacob; here stands an
external figure, as if Isaac loved Esau for his Activeness, cunning skill or
worldly exercise, and loved him more then Jacob: so wholly has the Lord the
heart of the wise and of his children in his hand; that his children must not
in their will do what they please, and oftentimes well understand, but what
God wills.

46. Also we herein see how oftentimes God withdrawes the Mysteries from the
most holy, that they must be even children in them; and although they bear the
divine play in their Hands, and it is their work and exercise, yet they must have
a child-like Heart in the understanding thereof, as it may be seen here in
Isaac.

47. He loved Esau more then Jacob; why so? the Ens of Christ lay in him, which
ruled him; for Christ should love his Enemies, viz. the corrupt Esau, and his
natural children; him he loved more then his divine nature; for he brought his
divine nature into the death of the corrupt Adam, and loved Not his sin in the
nature, but his poor undon nature by sin, which he by death freed from sin and
death.
Adams corrupted nature more then his holy Ens, which he for man's corrupt
natures sake gave into the fire of Gods Anger, that so he might redeem it in
his Love; of this, Isaac was here a figure in the Image of Christ, who loved
his Hunter in his Evil nature more then Jacob; he did not love his iniquity,
but his child-like nature, to which he would do much good, as Christ loved us
in our Adamicall nature, and did us good: he did not Love us according to the
will of Sin in us; as Isaac also did not therein Love his Son Esau, but
according to the Fathers nature, and property, according to the child-like
filial nature.

The inward figure stands thus.
48. When Isaac entreated the Lord, that his Rebecca might conceive, his
natural desire with the Earnest longing.
lubet of the divine Ens of faith entered into Rebecca, whereby Rebecca was
opened; and so the natural Love of Isaac, which was environed with faith, was
propagated in his seed, and opened it self in Esau: Isaac's love did not open
it self in Esau as to his corrupt nature; (I say) not according to the
kingdom of the nature of this world, but according to the Covenant, according
to the Second Principle, viz. according to Gods kingdom, which the external
nature in him had not as yet apprehended; as, the divine Ens in Abraham, did
open and manifest it self according to the Second Principle, and not in the
mortal corrupt Adamicall nature of the outward world: the like also is here to
be understood in the figure in Esau.

49. Not that Esau did receive the Ens of Christ in the Covenant as Jacob, but
his Fathers Love-desire, in which the hidden Covenant stood unmovable; now
there was thus a Conjunction with his Fathers natural Love, for Every property
loves its own likeness, especially if the likeness be proceeded forth from the
Essence or thing Loving, as Esau was conceived in Rebecca of his Father through
his Love-desire.

50. And it even denotes, that the divine Ens in Gods Love in Isaac loved the
miserable humane nature, to redeem it: therefore God manifested his Love in
Abraham's faith, and introduced the same into an Ens; so that this same Love
which God gave to redeem mankind, should Love the humane nature in its shut up
abandoned condition; as in very truth the true real Adamicall nature ordained
by God, was shut up in Esau, and on the contrary the kingdom of the wrath had
the outward dominion: Now to redeem this, the spirit in the Covenant through
Isaac's nature, Loved his Son Esau, viz. the filial nature, and not only
because that he was an Hunter of the creatures.

51. Yet here also by this Hunter we are even to understand the same as is set
down before concerning Genesis 10.9.
Nimrod, who was a mighty Hunter before the Lord: for this whole description of
the first book of Moses, is Gods Spirits figure, type, or representation, where
he Or, Sets forth as in a Map.
plays with the kingdom of nature, and then also with Christ's kingdom; and
he has so pourtrayed delineated and typifyed the Acts of the holy Patriarchs
under his figure; that we may clearly see in all the histories, the glance or
allusion of Gods Spirit, how he has delineated and set forth to the life, the
kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of nature, and also the Devils kingdom
in the wrath of the Eternal nature; and neither the Jews or Christians
hitherto have had a right understanding of the same, which among the Patriarchs
was rightly understood in its true meaning.

52. But afterward when their children and posterity gave no heed unto the
same, but disregarded the true understanding, and loved their Evil nature more
then the spirit in the Covenant; then the understanding was Or, quenched.
putt out among them; until they at last also Esdras wrote the Book of the Law
and Histories again after they were lost.
lost the Book of the Law, with the holy Histories, and Esdras wrote for them
again, the figure, and History, in the spirit of God; and that very short,
brief, and exactly, according to the spiritual figure; in which they were more
blind then seeing; as to this day their eyes are blinded; and that because they
abused the knowledge of the true God; and served the nature of this world, and
honored their Evil will above God; therefore also God has withdrawn himself
from them, with his Mysteries; and has suffered them to run up and down as
children full of ignorance with the figure; until the Gentiles time in the
manifestation of Grace (in which they also have only abused the time of Grace,
and the open Seal in their evil nature) does also come to its end and limitt:
and then the figure shall be fully manifest in the Substantially. Declaring the
very thing it self, unclothing it of its figures and parables.
Essence Mat 24.14.
for a witness to all Nations; and after that the Judgment.

53. And the spirit of Moses says further; Genesis 25.27.
Jacob was a plain man and dwelt in tents, and Rebecca loved Jacob; Reason
understands this figure of a woman-like, motherly, natural love; but the
spirit has not written this figure for that; for Rebecca pressed earnestly,
that Jacob might receive the blessing of Abraham and Isaac; she loved Jacob as
to his Original, which although she might not so well understand externally
and rationally, yet the spirit in the Covenant understood it in her, which
moved her also to bear such a Love toward Jacob; for there was also a
conjunction between the Mother and Son.

54. For Rebecca was shutt up and barren, but when Isaac did bring his prayer
and earnest desire to God for her, then the Ens in the Covenant gave it self
into his faith in his desire and so forth in the opening of Rebecca into the
Conception, for herewith also the barren or shutt up mother was opened, so that
her fruit (viz. Jacob) and she, came into one degree of nature, and received
one and the same Love from Isaacs desire; for the Ens of faith was conceived in
the Tincture of Venus in Rebecca, and as it is said of Mary Christ's mother
after the humanity, that * she was blessed among all women; so also Rebecca did
here receive the blessing from the divine Ens, indeed not in the high degree as
Mary, but yet according to the property of the Covenant; and hence it was that
the love of the Covenant was manifest in her; as the Ens of faith was also in
Jacob, wherein the Love of God burned, so that she loved Jacob more then Esau:
for the Love-desire in the Mother and Son was from one Original, and therefore
her desire inclined it self more toward Jacob, then Esau; and also because,
that the heavenly holy matrix, disappeared in Adam, was moved in her Image,
disappeared or dead as to the heavenly worlds Essence, which matrix afterward
was wholly opened in Mary; now this matrix did long to receive the Ens of
Christ which was manifest in Jacob, which first was to be effected in Mary; and
yet the spirit in the Covenant did take its Love-sport, and delight herewith.

55. But that the spirit of Moses says; Jacob was a plain [honest] man, and
remained in Tents, he understands thereby, that the true Jacob in the Ens of
faith remained in the Tents of the outward nature; that the Ens of faith
remained in his nature which is only a Tent thereto; that he did not give
himself wholly to the Tent as Adam did, but he remained therein in his
principle, till God in the fullness of time brought him forth in Christ's
humanity through the Tents of nature.

CHAP. LIII. How Esau contemned his birthright, and sold it for a Mess of
Lentil-Pottage; what we are to understand by this figure.
WHen the spirit of Moses had set down the birth of Esau, and Jacob, Genesis XXV.
verse. 29.
he proceeds to relate presently how the natural Adamicall man would but
little or nothing regard this High gift in the Covenant, and would only seek
after the Belly-filling of the earthly life, as Esau, who gave his birthright
for Pottage of Lentil, that he might but serve his belly.

The figure of Moses stands thus.
2. And Jacob sod Pottage, and Esau came from the field, and he was faint; Genesis
25.29. to the 34.
and Esau said to Jacob, feed me I pray thee, with that same red Pottage, for I
am faint; and hence his name was called Edom: but Jacob, said, Sell me this
day thy birthright: and Esau answered, Lo! I must even dye, and what profit
will this birthright be to me? And Jacob said, swear to me this day, and he
swear unto him; and so he sold his birthright to Jacob: then Jacob gave Esau
bread, and pottage of Lentils; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went
his way; thus Esau despised his birthright.

This figure externally has but a plain and child-like semblance; but yet it
is a figure of the greatest mysteries; for Esau betokens the first power of the
natural created Adam; and Jacob betokens the power of the other Adam Christ;
thus does the spirit here play with the figure.

3. For Adams nature came from the field, and was faint and longed to eat of
the Pottage which Jacob had: Adam was a Limus of the earth, and a Limus of
heaven; but being he dyed to the Limus of heaven, the earthly nature had
wearied him in its strife; and in this figure (of faint Adam) ^sau stood here.

4. The red Lentil pottage, which Jacob had, after which the faint Adam in Esau
longed, was the Ens of faith, viz. the Ens of Christ; the Adamicall nature in
Esau in its Anguish and toilsome labor, in its corruption and misery, longed
after this Pottage, which was in Jacob; yet the Earthly nature of Esau
understood it not, but the Souls nature* which also longed after Christ's Ens,
which was strange [or a far off hidden] to Reason.

5. Esaus soulish nature said in its Longing to Jacob, let me I pray thee taste
of the red pottage; for I am weary and faint by reason of the Driver or
fomenter of the Anxious birth, and from this longing or lust he was called
EDOM, which signifies in the compaction of the word in the formation of the
Tongue of Sense as much as a dipping or immersing of the captivate Angelical
property, into the pottage; as if there the Souls longing or lubet in which
the Angels Character did yet stand (although captivated) did dip or plunge it
self with the desire into the holy Ens, and would take the holy Ens in the
divine Pottage, viz. the heavenly essentiality into the lust of Self:
therefore the figure calls him in the high tongue Edom.

6. For, the desire of Esaus soul, said to the divine Ens in Jacob: Give me thy
taste, into the Essence of my creaturall selfehood; but Jacob, that is, the
spirit of Christ in the Ens of Faith said; Sell me thy birthright for the
pottage; that is, give me for it the Souls life's form, viz. the Center of
the Souls nature, that so thy Or, Birthright.
first birth, viz. the Souls Center, may be my own, and then I will give thee
the Ens of God.

7. For Esau inherited the first Soulish power from his father, and had the
Souls Center for a natural due right; after this came the Ens of Christ, as a
divine Free Gift with a Soulish Center; for the holy Ens should receive the
Soulish Center, from the Adamicall nature: now here the Adamicall Soulish
nature did woo for the Ens of Christ, and the spirit in Christ's Ens wooed for
the Soulish nature; and the spirit of Christ in Jacob would not give the taste
of the divine Ens to the Souls nature in Esau, unless it did give him the fiery
Center to the beginning of the Soulish creature for a propriety, that is,
unless it did wholly resign and give up it self in the natural selfeness,
into Gods will, and forsake the firstbirth of the creature, and esteem of it
self in its selfeness, as dead; and give over the dominion and will of life,
to the spirit of Christ in this heavenly pottage.

8. But being Esaus reason did not understand this; he said to Jacob: Lo: I
must even dye, what then is this first Birth to me: so very lightly did reason
pass over it, and knew not what the poor Soul stood in need of; but the spirit
of Moses played here in the inward figure, and does secretly hint hereby, at
what, this, externally signified.

9. And Jacob said: Swear unto me this day: that is, the life of Adam in Esau
should freely give it self out of the fiery might, and wholly give it self up
to the divine Ens, and forsake the fiery Right of Own-hood; and it should do it
this day, that is, from henceforward for ever: and this is said, to swear in
God, viz. wholly, deeply, and fully to cast, immerse, give up, and resign
one's self into the divine power, and not resist upon pain of Gods rejection.

10. And he swear unto him; and when as he had sworn he was called Edom: for
the fiery souls nature did dive and immerse it self into the lubet of the
divine Ens; whence this Lentil-pottage is said to be reddish; for here in this
Oath the fiery Essence entered into the lubet of the divine Ens; and thus the
lights Ens received the fires Ens: and the spirit of Moses plays here in the
figure, alluding, how the souls property in the fires Essence must wholly
resign up, and eternally immerse it self, into the Incarnation of Christ, in
the divine lights and Love-Ens in the Covenant, viz. into the divine Lubet, and
how the lights Ens would receive and take pity on the corrupted miserable
fiery Souls nature, and cause it to Repent and quit it self of its lust; and
also how the poor Soul would give up its natural right, for this red pottage.

11. For this is even a figure, shewing-how God the Father gives his Nature,
viz. the Soul, to his Son Christ, in the Love- Ens, wholly for his own
propriety, where the fiery Right is made subject to the Love in the light, for
thus it goes also in our New Birth: the Soul longs after this pottage; but
if it will taste it, it must give its birthright for it; and moreover it must
swear to God this day, that is, for ever, to forsake and quit its
natures-Right: which the outward Reason looks upon as ridiculous and foolish,
I mean the children of the earthly lust, that when a man gives honor, goods,
and also the Temporal life, for this pottage, they even call him a fool as
here they do Esau.

12. There is in this figure a twofold understanding; viz. inwardly it is the
figure of Christ and Adam, as it is abovementioned; and outwardly it is the
figure of the earthly man, showing how carelessly, and slightly he passes over
it, and sells and gives away the heavenly substance, to fill his carnal
Belly, and to satiate his lustful will: the poor soul indeed longs in its
Essence after this red pottage, but the earthly reason desires only a
Lentil-pottage for the l^sting Belly; as the like also is here to be understood
in Esau*

13. The soul of Esau longed after Jacobs heavenly Ens; but the earthly Esau
according to the outward soul minded only the ^ar^hly power; the kingdom of
nature was so very strong and earthly in him, that he neither understood or
regarded the Eternal* but said; Gen 25.32* 34.
What profit shall this birthright do unto me, seeing I iuust even dye; and he
sat down, and did eat and drink the earthly food for the heavenly.

14. And Moses says, that when he had eat and drunk, he rose up and went away;
that is, he filled his belly with the pottage of Lentiles, and sold Jacob his
nature-Right, and went with the earthly man away from the divine Enjoyment.

The inward divine figure is thus.
15. Abraham received the divine Ens in his faiths desire, and the same was the
stock and the root of Israel, but he was not Israel, for the kingdom of the
corrupted nature, and the kingdom of Grace, viz. the conceived Ens of faith,
were not as yet One in him, as when a kernel is sown into the earth, the
kernel has as yet no root, upon which the stalk, branches, and fruits should
grow, but the kernells power draws the Essence of the earth into it self; and
of both these, viz. of the kernel and of the earths power, grows the root,
and then the stalk, and above again the manifold fruit.

16. The like also is here to be understood, the divine holy Ens is not
natures; but the soul is natures: now if the divine Ens shall be made manifest,
then it must be don through a natural Essence or Mean, wherein the invisible
may come into a visible Essence.

17. The divine faiths Ens, which Abraham received was of the invisible
spiritual property, the same desired to introduce it self through the humane
nature into a visible, substantial, creaturall, and natural Essence for a
working life, wherein the holy lights natural Ens, and the Souls fiery
natural Ens might work and bring forth fruit, in one In one substance or body.
Essence, for the Adamicall nature was gone forth from the holy Ens, which was
disappeared in it; and here now was the ground or foundation of the union; and
as it is with the kernel in the ground, where the power in the kernel did mix
it self with the Ens of the earth, and afterward leaves its shell and husk,
when the earths Ens, and the kernells Ens is changed into one Ens; so likewise
it is here to be understood.

18. Abraham received the divine Faiths Ens, wherein stood his Justification;
but his life's nature had not as yet laid hold of it to its own power and
strength, for the divine Essence does not give it self into natures own power:
indeed it gives it self into the Essence of nature; but the divine desire does
not incline and yield it self unto natures own self-will, so that nature
should have the predominancy; a similitude whereof we have in the Corn which is
sown into the Earth.

19. The earthly nature cannot, in its own power, make another Corn, and though
it draws the Corns Ens into self, yet it brings forth only a stalk, in
which stalk the Corns Ens grows up, and brings it self into a bloom, and
again into Kernells seeds.
Corn, whereunto the earthly nature, with its Ens, must be only a Servant.

20. And as the earthly nature of the earth does always first show its child
visibly in the growth, and the Corns Ens does therein hide it self; the like
also is to be understood here by Abraham; the Adamicall nature in Abraham did
first manifest it self with its fruit, and that was Ismael; but the divine Ens
lay still hidden in his nature, and sprang forth with Isaac; and by Isaac the
earthly and also the heavenly nature did again spring forth together, albeit in
One Seed.

21. But as the earthly Ens in the stalk, and the Corns Ens in the internal
ground, do grow up in and with one another, and yet each setts forth its fruit,
viz. the earth the stalk and the Corns Mansion, and the Corn or kernel the
Blooms, and fruits, and yet the one without the other could not come to
Essence; the like also is here to be understood.

22. Abraham was the field, into which God sowed his Corn, Ismael was the Root,
viz. the first birth: Isaac was the fruit, which grew from the seed of God,
understand out of the Ens of Grace; and Ismael grew from the Ens of nature out
of the Fathers property: for the Ens of Grace had given it self into the Ens
of nature; now each did set forth its own figure; with Ismael, the kingdom of
nature, and with Isaac the kingdom of Grace was represented: Isaac was the
twigg which sprung up out of the field of faith; viz. in the line of Christ;
and from him came Jacob; viz. the Branch forth-spreading and displaying it
self into a tree with many boughs and branches.

23. Not that we are to understand that Jacob did only grow and spring forth
out of the kingdom of Grace; for, the kingdom of nature, in which Ismael and
Esau stood, was also his Ground as to the creature, but the Ens of Faith, had
given it self thereinto, and Tinctured nature; and advanced its power, viz.
the line of the Covenant of God, in nature.

24. As a Blossom upon the stalk, has far a more pure subtle property, then
the stalk, and Root; and as out of the Blossom first the fruit, and a new seed
proceeds, viz. out of the subtle; so likewise in Jacob the Blossom of the
kingdom of Israel first came forth; and no more in the division, as it is to
be understood with Ismael and Isaac; but both kingdoms together, viz. the
kingdom of Nature, and the kingdom of Grace, not any more each kingdom by it
self or apart in the figure; but in the type of the new regeneration, showing
how God in his Love had given himself again into Man, viz. into the kingdom
of nature, and how through his power the wicked Ens of the Serpent, sown by the
Devil into the kingdom of nature, should be broken and killed.

25. Therefore God called Jacob, Israel, viz. a flourishing forth-spreading
Tree of many Boughs, and Branches; or as it is understood in the formation of
the word in the high Tongue; a flourishing, or fresh springing of Paradise;
where the (I) gives it self into the Root, to a new Center, and springs
forth powerfully through the root, with which the word of the Covenant is
understood in the Name JESUS; for this (I) is the character of the unius, viz.
of the Eternal One in the divine lubet, which Adam lost, when he departed from
the (I) viz. from the only will of God, and entered into Self, and into the
various multiplicity of the properties in their disharmony, un-equallity, and
discord, to try, prove, and taste good and evil, in the five Senses.

26. This (I) brought it self of Grace again into the divided rent and torn
properties of the Adamicall humane Tree; and sprang forth through, and with the
Adamicall Tree; and hence he had his name Israel: being, as, a great number and
power of such branches, all which do spring and grow forth in the new Tincture;
in which also the Ens of the corrupt nature grew up all along; even as the
Suns and the earths power, do work and grow together, in the fruit of the
Tree, and are always in contest one with another, until the fruit be ripe;
and a new kernel for another fruit be produced and also ripe, and then the
tree leaves the fruit, and sowes the new kernel for another young Tree.

27. In this nature and manner also, arose the strife, and combat with Esau
and Jacob in the womb; to signify, that the corrupt nature with the Serpents
Ens should be rejected, and cast off; as the tree does let fall its ripe
fruit, and only desires the kernel [to propagate its like] so it was here
when the Ens of Christ did stir it self up in Jacob, then arose the strife and
enmity; for the Ens of Christ should rule; and the wrath in the Serpents Ens
that would also rule; and hence came the Contest about the Dominion and
kingdom; the Ens of Christ set it self aloft in Jacob, and bruised the head
of the Essence of the Serpents Ens in Esau, and even there the Serpent stung
Christ on the heel, and thence it came that both the children did strive and
struggle together, in the womb.

28. Not that we are to understand, that Esau was wholly out of the Serpents
Ens; no; he was of the right Adamicall nature, from his father Isaac and
Abraham; only God did here set forth the figure of the kingdom of nature,
which was poisoned in Man, and then also the figure of the kingdom of Grace;
showing, that the natural man must forsake his own evil will, and therewith
also wholly immerse and give up himself into the kingdom of Grace; and the
figure which was here represented in Esau, was to show that the Jocobs evil
nature was as rejected of God, as Esaus, only the figure was set in Esau; not
that he was personally, and wholly from all Eternity predestined to
damnation, as Babel falsely teaches.
Evil Adamicall man did not at all avail in Gods sight, that it was not
profitable (for the kingdom of God) but it was cast away and rejected from
God, and that he must wholly forsake his natural Right of Selfeness, and
wholly give in himself into Gods will.

CHAP. LIVE. How Isaac by reason of the famine went down to Abimilech King of
the Philistines at Gerar, and how the Lord appeared there to him, and commanded
him to stay there, and renewed there the Covenant of his father with him: of
the meaning of this in its spiritual figure.
Genesis XXVI.
THe 26 Chap. of Genesis does farther relate the history touching Isaac; how God
did so very wonderfully guide him, and renewed the covenant of his father
Abraham with him, and preserved and blessed him and his wife with him; for
being the kingdom of Grace in the Covenant of God was now manifest in him; the
Blessing of God did now spring forth effectually in his purpose through the
kingdom of Nature.

2. And on the contrary, how the Devil was an utter enraged Enemy to this
Blessing, and desired to sift and search the kingdom of nature in Isaac, and
his wife Rebecca (in whom as yet the Serpents Ens lay in the earthly flesh)
through the lust of King Abimilech.

3. And this again is a figure of Adam in Paradise, and also of Christ in the
new Regeneration; showing, how Adam went into King Abimilechs Land that is,
into a strange kingdom, viz. into the four Elements, where he has denied his
wife; viz. the matrix of the heavenly Generatress in him, in that he introduced
his lust into the beastiall property.

4. As here Isaac did stand in fear of his life before King Abimilech, by
reason of his wife; even so Adam in his strange lust in the kingdom of the
four Elements, and the Stars, did also stand in fear before the strange King,
viz. before the kingdom of this world, and denied his heavenly birth out of
fear of the kingdom of this world, and gave his Eternal will to the King of
this world, that it might the better fare with him in his strange Lust, as
Isaac thought to do with his wife, who stood herewith in the figure of Adam.

5. Which figure, the divine Imagination did represent unto it self in Isaac,
and set down withal the Covenant of the new birth, viz. his promised truth,
how he would lead and guide the children of his Grace in the presence of the
strange King; viz. in the kingdom of this world; and preserve them Before.
from the lust and desire of this King, and would lay hold of this King with
his power, and change his lust and desire, viz. the lust of the Stars and four
Elements into another will of the essential desire; so that the sharp and
severe might of the Astrum in flesh and blood should be changed into a Covenant
of peace; and do no hurt to the children of Grace in the Covenant; but it
should serve them to bring forth the blessing, and fruits, that they might grow
greatly, as here Isaac with King Abimilech stood surrounded in the mere
Blessing of God, and his possession of Goods and Cattle grew so great, that
King Abimilech thought, he would be too potent and mighty for him, and
therefore commanded him to go out of his Land.

6. Which is a figure of the new birth in the kingdom of Nature; that if the
inward spiritual Man does in divine power outgrow or overtop the kingdom of
nature, then the kingdom of the outward nature in flesh and blood in the In
spiritu mundi in the Cosmick spirit.
spirit of the world, is sore afraid and astonished at it; for it sees, and
feels its ruin, and decrease, and would fain preserve its own-hood and
propriety in the outward life.

7. And then comes the spiritual man in the Covenant of the new birth, and
reproves King Abimilech, viz. the outward life in the spirit of the outward
world, for the wells of water which the divine thoughts, viz. the Servants of
the new man had dug in the Souls ground, viz. in the Eternal Center:
because Abimilech with his Servants, viz. the evil earthly thoughts,
Imaginations and senses had filled them up with the vain lust of the flesh:
This sets forth and represents the wells of water which Abraham's servants, viz.
Abraham's faiths desire had dug in the Ens of faith; about which wells,
Abimilechs Servants, viz. the desires of the flesh have contended for, and
continually filled them [ up with earth] which Isaacs Servants do again open in
the root of Israel, and at last, digg up a well wherein they find of the
living water, and there they did pitch their tent, which well, signified
Christ: for they called the place Beer-sheba, viz. an opening, or a contrition;
which signifies the Repentance, breaking up or contrition of the earthly will,
in which Repentance the water of life, viz. Christ flows forth.

8. This whole 26 Chap. of Genesis is a figure of the poor fallen man in the
corrupt kingdom of nature, signifying how he does swim therein, and how the
poor soul is tossed too and fro therein, and seeks it self in outward things,
and labors to advance its strength and power, and yet finds no where any
abiding place therein, but wandreth from one thing into another, and works
now in this, and then in that, and soon in another, and seeks rest, but
finds none, until it comes unto Beer-sheba, viz. into humility before God;
and then the well of living water springs forth to it, out of Gods Covenant.

9. Now although the words in this Text of the 26 Chap. do seem to treat only
of external things, yet it is nothing else, but the spirit in Moses, alluding
or playing under the external history, with a spiritual figure of the
kingdom of nature, and of the kingdom of Christ; for he begins and speaks
of a great famine which was come into the Land, for which distress-sake Isaac
went down to Abimilech King of the Philistines at Gerar.

The inward spiritual figure is this.
10. When God had created Adam, he came into the Famine; viz. into the
Temptation, wherein the soul ought not to eat of the outward kingdom, but of
the inward, but being it turned it self with its will into the outward
kingdom, it did live in the famine, viz. in the hunger after the outward
worlds substance; and therefore it turned it self unto Abimilech King of the
Philistines at Gerar, that is, to the corrupt kingdom in Gods Anger; viz. to
the heathenish King, and was subject to it.

11. And then the Lord appeared unto it, as here he did to Isaac and said; Gen
26.2.
Go not into Egypt; that is; thou poor depraved soul go not into the beastiall
lust, but remain in the Land which I shall tell thee of, and be thou a stranger
in this Land, that is, remain in my Covenant, and be with the soul a stranger
in this house of flesh, wherein the Soul is not at home, Genesis 26.3.
And ^o I will be with thee, and bless thee, for unto thee and unto thy seed I
will give all these Countries, and I will perform the Oath which I swear unto
Abraham thy father; that is:

12. Remain but steadfast in my will, and then I will give thee after this
[life-time] the kingdom of nature according to its inward good ground, for
possession and propriety, and I will perform and ratify my Oath ( viz. Jesus
Christ whom I promised thee in thy fall, and whom I introduced into Abraham's
faith) unto thee for ever; and I will, in the kingdom of nature, wherein thou
must in this Time stand, work, labor, toil, and be in need and distress; even
Genesis 26.4.
multiply thy seed as the Stars in heaven; and give thy seed all the wrought
powers and works to an eternal propriety, and through thy seed all the
Nations of the earth shall be blessed: that is.

13. Through thy Ens of faith, which in Christ, viz. in the Aim and limitt of
the Covenant, shall be manifested in the kingdom of thy nature, and creaturall
property, and become man in thee; all nations, viz. the whole Adamicall tree
shall be blessed; and therefore Genesis 26.5.
because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, commandments, ways, and
laws; that is, Abraham has received my working word into his Souls desire,
and obeyed my voice in its operation; which divine operation is the Command,
law, and form: out of which operation also God showed Abraham, by the
Circumcision, the figure of the kingdom of Christ, that the same should cut
off the Sin, and vanity; which figure God called his charge, law in the
Covenant, and his Statute.

14. The spirit of Moses does now proceed further in the relation of this
figure, and signifies under the outward history of King Abimilech; how that
Abimilechs servants, Gen^ 26.18, 19, 20, 21.
and Isaacs servants contended about the wells of water, and that Abraham's and
Isaacs servants dug the wells of water, which wells were continually stopped
up by the envy and enmity of the Philistims; by which figure the spirit
secretly signifies, how the children of the Saints, viz. the Patriarchs
Abraham and Isaac, have always dug in their Ens of faith, for the
wellspring of life in the Covenant, and have also obtained the knowledge of the
Messiah.

15. But these wells were continually covered, and obscured by the Devil in
Gods Anger, and by their earthly Reason, until they apprehended, and laid h^ld
of the promise of the Messiah in faith; and then they said we have dug a
well, Genesis 26.32, 33.
and have found of the water of life: the same Isaac called Or, Saba.
Sheba, and therein hinteth at the Sabbath, Christ, as he also forthwith says,
that thereupon, the place was called Beer-sheba, viz. a contrition, and
breaking of the Anger and envy of the Devil in Man's property; to signify,
that the SABBATH, Christ, viz. the spiritual wellspring is truly called
BEER-SHEBA, viz. a contrition of death, where the Sabbath introduces it self
into death, and brings forth the fountain of life through death.

16. At which fountain, the children of Gods Covenant did pitch their tent, and
waited upon the promise, until the same fountain was opened in the humanity,
and flowed forth out of Christ's blood and death, of which the poor Soul drank,
and thereby was brought into the Eternal Sabbath, where it was redeemed and
freed from the strife of the Philistims, viz. from the contention of the Anger
of God and of the Devil, as the History in this Text does clearly signify
thus much in the High Tongue; which the spirit of Moses has thus represented
in the figure; and does play with the description of this figure.

17. As indeed the whole Old Testament is a figure of the New, and the New a
figure of the future Eternal world, wherein the figure shall stand in divine
Power, and the Spirit of God shall in Eternity play with his deeds of wonder,
to which end also he has created Man; and Or, inspoken.
inspired the power of his voice, viz. the living word, into him, that so he
might be an Image of the Eternal word, with which Image, the Eternal Spirit
will play, and work wonders, that so there may be a joy and knowledge in the
Eternal wisdom.

18. Now when as the spirit of Moses had pointed out the figure of Adam and
Christ under an history, he proceeds, and further Relates, how it must go with
the children of God in this time, showing in what desire the poor soul in flesh
and blood lies captive, and is continually vexed, and tormented, as here Isaac
and Rebecca; for the Text says; Genesis 26.34, 35.
When Esau was forty years old he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri
the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite, which were a grief
of mind to Isaac and to Rebecca; and in this place he speaks no further of
these wives, or their children, to signify, that it is a figure, whereby he
alludes at something else; which Reason looks upon as very strange, and
wonders, that God should yet permit two evil women, to be with holy Isaac,
through his Son Esau; with whom he and his fair, blessed Rebecca must live in
trouble, vexation, and opposition: so very secretly does the spirit of Moses
set forth his figure, that Reason must even be blind in it.

The spiritual figure is thus.
19. The 40 years of Esau.
forty years of the Age of Esau, or of Isaac after he begatt Esau, signifies,
that Adam with his Eve, when as he was man and woman, and yet neither of them,
did stand in Paradise Adam 40 Days in Temptation.
forty days in the Temptation or Proba, and had joy with his fair Eve, viz.
with his Or, feminine.
female property in himself.

20. But Abimilech, viz. the King of this world had introduced his lust into
this fair Or, feminine.
female Rose-Garden, viz. into the Tincture of Venus; understand into the holy
life of Love in Adam; and stirred the Center of the Souls nature, whereupon
Adam became lusting and longing to take to him in his property yet two wives,
viz. the beastiall wife, according to the beast-like property out of the four
Elements; and the Astrall [Sydereall or Starrie] wife from the Constellation
[or Astrum of this world] which wicked woman did awaken in Adams female
property, which he took up to wife for his lust; as Esau did the wives of scorn
and mockery, with whom he caused mere grief of mind and lamentable perplexity
to himself and his Right female property; and we indeed do still suffer and
endure the same, and must consume our time with them in misery and lamentation.

21. Further, this figure denotes the Israel 40 years in the Wilderness.
Forty years of Israel in the wilderness, when they did eat Manna, and
Rejoiced with Rebecca under a strange King, where they lived in the kingdom of
this world, and yet were led, preserved and nourished in the divine Arm; and
therefore they grew great before the world, as Isaac under King Abimilech, and
when Israel after Forty years pitched their Tent at Beer sheba, viz. in the
promised Land, they yet took these two wives to them in their fleshly lust,
which caused mere grief of heart to them, for which two wives sake, they were
sorely punished of God, and were at last for their sake, driven from Beer-sheba.

22. Thirdly, this figure denotes the hard combat of Christ in the wilderness
in Adams stead, where Christ in our humanity took these two wives, (which were
manifest in Adam through his strange Son, or will) unto his heavenly
essentiality, and suffered them to hunger Christ 40 days in the Wilderness.
forty days, so that they must resign and give in their desire to the divine
Essence, and learn to eat heavenly Manna, to signify, that this earthly lust
[in us] from the Stars and four Elements, should be broken in Christ's death and
cease.

23. Fourthly, it denotes the Christ 40 Hours in the Grave.
Forty hours of Christ in the Grave, where these two wives of unquietnes in
the humane property were changed again into one Eternal wife; viz. into the
true Rebecca, and Right Adamicall Eve, which was in Adam before his Eve.

24. Fifthly, it points at the Christ 40 days after his Resurrection.
Forty days of Christ after his Resurrection, when the two wives of Adam and
Esau were again changed into a Manly virgin, when this virgin, viz. Christ in
our male and female property did rightly stand out the Forty days of Adam in
Paradise, when he was tried, and therefore he set himself by divine might into
the Royal throne of ejected Lucifer, as a Judge; and with these two wives in
one virginity, and one only person or Image, would rule over Viz. Lucifer.
him, as the causer of man's misery, being he was the great cause, that Adam,
viz. the Image of God, did manifest by his Son of the new will, yet two wives
in his virginity.

25. This, the spirit in Moses and Note Esdras.
Esdras have mystically and secretly hinted at under an outward figure, showing
how it should afterward fall out: and although it is very likely that Reason
will not believe us, we care not for that, and it matters not much; seeing we
have not disclosed this, for its sake, but for the sake of the understanding
children. However, we know very well in what vision we write; [we know from
what spirits illumination and knowledge we have set down some glances of the
great mysteries signified by this short divine history of Moses.]

CHAP. LV. Showing what we are to understand by Isaacs blessing Jacob
unknowingly when he was old, and ready to dye.
The Gates of the Great Mysteries of the whole Bible.
WHen Reason reads this history of the 27 Chapter of Genesis, Genesis XXVII.
it has a twofold conjecture upon the same; one is, as if Rebecca only loved
Jacob more then Esau, and therefore brought him by craft to obtain the blessing
of his father; and again it conceives, that indeed it was from the appointment
and providence of God, because Esau was not worthy of the blessing, and
therefore it will take upon it wholly to condem Esau, whereupon also it has
set the Predestination; and yet it understands nothing at all of this
wonderful figure.

2. Now if we would rightly understand and interpret this figure; then we must
set here in the figure the Patriarch Isaac, in God the Fathers stead, who alone
can bless, who also blessed Isaac in Abraham's seed, that Isaac should again
bless his Seed in the Covenants Line.

3. And Esau was set in the place of the depraved nature, viz. in the kingdom
of the corrupt nature, in man's property, apprehended in the Anger of God.

4. And Jacob we set in the new birth, in the humanity of Christ, which God the
Father blessed in stead of the depraved Adam, when he brought forth a new
Generation out of our humanity in this Line.

5. And we see here how Adam has fooled away, and lost the blessing and divine
Unction, and how he was rejected in the Earthly Image, from God; and how he
has lost his Right of the divine Unction, as here Esau, the first birth, and
also the blessing.

The inward spiritual figure stands thus.
6. Isaac was old, and expected to dye, Genesis 27.1. to the 4.
and called Esau his firstborn Son that he might bless him with the blessing
of Abraham, and bad him go take some Venison, and dress it for him, that he
might eat gladly thereof, that his soul might be refreshed, and the blessing of
the Lord might put forth it self in him, that he might bless Esau, and Esau
went and did as his father would have him, that so he might be blessed; this,
in the inward understanding in the figure, is thus.

7. When Isaac was ready to dye, the Blessing in God the Fathers property,
moved it self in him, and would bless the natural Seed of the Adamicall
nature, viz. the kingdom of nature in Esau: for Isaac longed after venison,
viz. after the kingdom of nature in the beastiall property; viz. after the
depraved Adamicall man, as to the first creation.

8. For the Fathers blessing would cast it self upon Adam, in whose stead Esau
stood, but the heavenly Ens was extinct in the first Adam, and therefore the
natural man might not be helped and remedied only with a blessing; but there
must be another Serious Earnestness; the Blessing must become a Substance, viz.
Man, in the kingdom of nature; of which [substantiall blessing] the kingdom
of nature was not capable in its own power, and might, as here Esau in his
kingdom of nature was not capable of the Fathers Blessing.

9. For the kingdom of man's nature was so poisoned that it must be dissolved;
therefore the Blessing of God the Father turned it self upon the woman's
Tincture, viz. upon the Adamicall female Tincture, understand the lights
Tincture: for the fiery Tincture in Adam was awakened in the wrath, viz. in the
kingdom of darkness, and was made an Earthly Image, and herein the heavenly
was swallowed up and mortified: Now the Blessing would come to help this
heavenly disappeared Image, that so it might be quickened again in the blessing;
and so the kingdom of nature with which it was incorporated should be blessed,
Tinctured, and Regenerated.

10. Being then two lines went forth in Abraham's, and Isaacs Seed; viz. in
Ismael, and Esau, the right depraved Adamicall Image, and in Isaac and Jacob
the Line of the Covenant in the Free given Grace; the Blessing of God the
Father which was manifested in Isaac, turned it self upon Jacob, viz. upon the
line of Christ whom God has anointed, that he should again anoint the
firstborn Esau, viz. the first Adamicall depraved man; for the first Adam had
lost his first birth given him out of the divine Word in the creation, and
could not any more be blessed out of his Center.

11. For the Souls will was broken off from the Eternal word of divine
holiness, and had given it self into the Center of the first Principle, viz.
into the wrath of the Eternal nature, into the SeVeration of the speaking
word, viz. into the opposition, and contentious Contrariety; whence also, Isaac
blessed Esau with the word of Strife, when he said unto him in the blessing;
Thou shall live by thy sword, and break thy brothers yoke from off thy neck;
signifying, that now the depraved nature in him was become a Servant of Gods
Anger, and should now bear and manage the Combat which Adam had raised up in
the life's properties, and be a Servant of the same.

12. But that Isaac did not understand this thing, and would have blessed Esau
with the blessing of the Covenant, and given him the Scepter in Zion; does show
unto us, that Isaac, and all the holy children of God, although they be born
again of the New Birth in the line of the Covenant, do not apprehend and
understand the internal ground of their Essence, wherein the kingdom of God
works and is in power, so as to be able to do any thing thereby in
Self-will; but God turns this internal ground of the place of God, as he
pleases; and the Soul must see to what he does; as here Isaac must see to what
the Lord had blessed, by him.

Genesis 27.4.
13. For Isaac said to Esau; That he should make him ready Savory meat such as
he loved to eat; and then his Soul would bless him: but now this blessing stood
in the Line of the Covenant, in which, Christ should spring forth; not in the
Souls might, but in Gods might; for the soul of Isaac, and of all the children
of Adam were as yet with the Souls root, on the band of Gods Anger, which
Anger, this internal incorporated Line of Grace, should destroy in Christ's
death, and wholly incorporate and unite it into the Line of the Covenant.

14. Therefore the Souls will in Isaac should not propagate the blessing of
this Covenants line; and give it to the kingdom of the Or, souls.
Soul-like nature, viz. to the firstborn Esau, and first Adam; for the soul
was a cause of the destruction: the fires-tincture received not the might and
strength of the new virtue, for its might should be broken; viz. its proud
Lucifer, who likewise is the very same; but the lights tincture, which
disappeared in Adam, when the fires might introduced dark earthliness
thereinto, which Tincture sprang forth again afresh in this Covenants line in
the power of the in-spoken and promised, incorporated word of Grace, the same
had the might and power of the Blessing.

15. The seed of the woman, viz. the lights tincture and virtue, should bruise
the head of the fiery Serpent, and change the souls fiery might into a meek
Love: fire, the fiery Souls will, shall and must be wholly transmuted and
turned into meekness.

16. As this disappeared lights tincture was brought from Adam into the woman,
viz. in to Eve, which when it was in Adam was his fair Paradisicall Rose garden
of peculiar Love, wherein God was manifest; and being now the figure of the new
birth was represented in Isaacs Blessing; therefore also his wife; viz. the
blessed Rebecca must come, as one, who also stood in the Line of the Covenant;
and set forth the right figure of Christ, viz. Jacob in the place of the
blessing; to signify, that Christ should be manifested in this Covenants Line
in the Seed of the woman, viz. in the lights and fires-Tincture, and assume the
souls nature from the power of the light, that so he might rule over the fiery
nature of the soul, and change the same into the power of the light.

17. Now Rebecca Isaacs wife was here in this place a figure of the virgin
Mary, who brought forth Christ, viz. the blessed of God, who should bless Esau,
and all the Adamicall children; and it was so ordered by the Lord, that Rebecca
should so carry it, for she understood, that the blessing, viz. the scepter of
Israel did rest in Jacob.

18. For being the scepter in Zion lay in the seed of the woman, viz. in the
virginity; the same scepter was here also stirred in the seed of the woman; so
that a woman must bring forth the Covenants line to the place of God, the
Fathers blessing, which was in Isaac; and the man's will, viz. the Souls
natural fire-will, must come behind, and be a servant of Gods wonders, and
see what God has don with him.

19. But that it appears to be as a deceit or cunning Suttlety, in that
Rebecca did so instruct, and put on Jacob to take away the blessing from Esau,
as if she Loved Jacob far above Esau, therein Reason has blind eyes; for
through the Devils cunning the curse came into the world, and through the
divine cunning in the Love, the destruction of death and hell, came again into
the Soul: the divine cunning killed the Devils cunning.

20. Understand it aright; all cunning arises from the lubet or desire; the
Devils cunning arose from the false lubet or lust: so likewise Gods lubet came
again into the woman's seed, (into which heavenly matrix, the Devil had
insinuated his lust) and destroyed the devils lust.

21. It was of God that Jacob obtained the blessing, wholly contrary to the
mind and will of Reason; for he stood in the figure of Christ, and Esau stood
in the figure of the depraved Adam.

22. Therefore Esau was an hairy or rugged man, signifying the monstrous
beastiall property, which had awaked in the Fall, through lust. Now when Adams
lust had brought it self to substance, then the flesh became gross and
beastiall; Thus the beastiall part swallowed up the heavenly in it self, and
death was manifested in the flesh, and we see here in this figure very clearly
typified how it should be.

23. Isaac would bless the beastiall man in Esau, this God would not: the
divine blessing belonged to Christ; but the depraved Adam could not be capable
of receiving the blessing of God, unless Christ take this rugged beastiall skin
[or form] which Adam had put on, as here Jacob could not be blessed unless he
had on him the hairy Beast-like skin.

24. God the Father set before him our misery in his Covenant in Christ in our
humanity which he assumed; for Christ must enter into our humanity, Note.
and walk in our hairy form, and destroy our death of the beastiall property;
as it is written; Isa. 53.4 Matthew. 8.17. 1 Pet. 2.24.
He took on him our sickness; and laid on himself our Grief.

25. For as Isaac took hold of his son Jacob in his hairy skin, and felt
whether he was his firstborn Son to whom the blessing belonged, so God the
Father reached into the Essence of his Son Christ, and felt whether the
humanity of Christ were the first Image created in Adam; Note the cause of the
Bloudy-sweat.
whence the Agony seized on him in the Mount of Olivet, that he sweat bloody
sweat, of which Esaias speaks plainly; He took on him our grief.

26. And as Isaac found outwardly only Esaus skin on Jacob, and inwardly heard
Jacobs voice, and yet blessed him in stead of Esau, as if he were Esau; so
likewise God the Father found our rugged humane property on Christ; and yet
inwardly he heard, that the voice of God sounded in him; that the divine
heavenly Ens was within under his assumed humanity; therefore also his voice
did in his Baptism in Jordan rest upon him, when he blessed our humanity, in
that he said, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him.

27. So likewise Isaac heard indeed the voice of Jacob under the hairy skin,
and understood that it was not Esau; but the spirit in his blessing did yet
forcibly pass upon him; for he proved in him the incorporated ground of the
Covenant, viz. the Line of the new humanity; for he said; Genesis 27.22.
The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau; in which the
spirit intimates, that in Jacob, and all the children of God in flesh and
blood, there is even the first depraved beastiall Adamicall man, with his hairy
skin, which God does not look upon, but only the divine voice, which is one
spirit with God, does inhabit in the inward Soulish-Man.

28. And then we see in this figure, that our beasts skin in flesh and blood,
wherewith we do so pride our selves, and make devout shows before God, is
only a deceit; as Jacob in this beasts hide stood as a deceiver before his
father, and would blind his father with the beasts skin; so likewise the
earthly man comes in his beastiall property before God, and desires Gods
blessing; but he may not obtain it unless he has Jacobs, viz. Christ's voice in
him, under this beasts skin.

29. For, as Jacob was smooth, and pure, under this beasts skin, so must we be
smooth, pure, and holy, in our inward ground Of the heart and soul.
, under this our beasts skin, if we will have the Blessing of God to light and
rest upon us; for we see very well in this figure, that the blessing would not
rest upon Esau, who had by nature a rugged hairy beasts skin in his essence,
although he was the firstborn to whom the blessing belonged by right of
Inheritance; for, the first Man was become depraved in his nature, and had lost
the inheritance of God, the blessing, and the filial inheritance, rests only
upon the Second new Adam.

30. Further this figure denotes, that the new man in Christ should take away
the scepter and might from the Devil, and also from the Man of Sin, and in
this blessing, rule over him, in power, as Jacob was made Lord over his
Enemies: this figure points wholly at Christ.

31. For as Jacob took a strange form on him, and came in strange attire before
his father, and desired the blessing of him, and also obtained it; so Christ,
viz. the Eternal word took on him also a strange form, viz. our humanity and
brought the same before his father to bless it.

32. And as Genesis 27.28.
Isaac blessed his Son Jacob, with the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the
earth; with Corn and wine: even so God the Father blessed our humanity, in
Christ; for our humanity was also in its original out of the limus of the
Earth, and was nourished, and brought up by the dew of heaven, even by corn and
wine; this, God blessed to the new birth and Resurrection of the dead upon the
life to come.

33. And as Isaac set Jacob to Genesis 27.29.
be Lord over his brethren of the natural property; so God has set the new
birth in the blessing of Christ to be Lord over the Adamicall nature in flesh
and blood; so that the new man, born of Gods Blessing, must rule over all the
members of his natural body, and they must be subject to the new man.

34. And as Isaac set the curse between them; Genesis 27.29.
That whosoever should curse Jacob he should be accursed, and whosoever should
bless him he should also be blessed; so God has set the curse upon the corrupt
Adamicall kingdom, that whosoever should not be found in the blessing of
Christ, he must be Eternally in the curse of God, but whosoever should bring
his mind and will into this Jacobs, viz. Christ's blessing, he should be for
Ever in the blessing.

35. Further, we see in this type how it goes with the children of God; for
Genesis 27.30, 31, 32, 33.
when Isaac had blessed Jacob, then came Esau with his venison, and his father
Isaac was astonished and said, why? who art thou? and he was dismayed at it,
that he had unknowingly blessed Jacob: which typifieth, how that the Adamicall
man understands nothing at all of Gods ways; and how God does oftentimes
wonderfully lead him according to the inward ground, and that although he be
carried on in the way of God, yet he looks much at the outward Reason, and
often stumbleth at external Rational things, at Temporal orders and goods,
and suffers fear to surprise him; and would fain that the will of his Reason
be done; as here Isaac trembled exceedingly when he saw that the will of his
reason was broken.

36. And herein we acknowledge the misery* and ignorance of the children of
God, in that reason enters into its own dominion, and will not wholly leave
it self to God, and is astonished, when it goes otherwise then it has
imagined to it self.

37. And then we see how God at last does break forth with his light, in the
understanding, and shows man his way, that he is satisfied, as he did here to
Isaac, in that he said; Genesis 27.33.
This Jacob is blessed, and he shall also remain blessed; for now he understood
Gods will.

38. Further we see in this history, how Gen 27.34. to the 34.
Esau weepeth lamentably before his father for the blessing, and says to his
father, bless me also my father, have thou but one blessing, have thou not
reserved one blessing for me; but his father said, I have made him thy Lord,
and all his brethren I have given to him for Servants, with corn and wine I
have enriched him; What shall I do now unto thee my Son? This typifieth out
the kingdom of Christ, showing how God has made it Lord over the kingdom of
nature, as Christ said; Matthew. 28.18
All power both in heaven and upon earth is given to me of my Father.

39. Furthermore, it denotes, that the corrupt Adamicall nature in Esau and all
men, cannot receive the blessing, unless they first dye unto their own
selfe-Right and will: as Esau could not be blessed of his father with the holy
blessing; for he was the type of the corrupt Adam according to the kingdom of
nature; so likewise the earthly nature cannot be capable of the holy Spirit in
its Essence; of which Christ John 6 Chap. said; * Flesh and blood shall not
inheritt the kingdom of God; unless it falls into the earth, and enter again
into its first womb, as Grain that is sown, and resign its nature to the
first mother.

40. And then we see here how Isaac gives his Son Esau a temporal blessing,
and intimates to him, that the natural man is lead by the spirit of this
world: for to Jacob he said; Genesis 27.28.
God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and of
corn and wine abundance; but to Esau he said only; Genesis 27.28.
Behold! thou will have a fatt dwelling upon the earth, and of the dew of
heaven from above, thou will live by thy sword, and serve thy brethren, and it
will come to pass, when thou shall have the dominion, that thou will break his
yoke from off thy Neck.

41. And hereby he signifies, in what dominion the outward natural man is
lead, driven, and nourished, and what his desire, and endeavor should be;
namely, he would be in his Mind only a Robber, Murderer, and an evil
malicious beast, that should desire to bear down all under it with power,
force, and murder.

42. For Isaac does not say, Live thou by thy sword, but thou will do it, viz.
Gods wrath in the kingdom of the corrupt nature with the devils will, will
move thee thereunto; that thou will draw the fatness of the earth unto thy
self, and wilt be ruled and driven by the Stars above, and wilt in thy
natural power drive away from thee the children of God, who rule in Gods
power; that is, when the holy Spirit in Gods children does Reprove them by
reason of their Tyranny, they then kill and slay them, and tear the sword of
the holy Ghost from off their Neck, as here Isaac said thou will do it.

43. As indeed Esau soon did, and would have killed Jacob, so that Jacob in
Gods blessing was fain to sly from him; and here he pulled off the yoke of the
holy Spirit from his neck; and this prophecy of the Patriarch is a figure, how
the Esauites, and Tyrants, viz. the fleshly brethren of the Christians would
dwell among the Christians; and be born as to their natural brotherhood of the
same Parents; as Esau, and Jacob; and yet they would persecute them with sword,
and torments; and thrust them away, and yet stand themselves as if they were
the only true Christians, and desire the blessing of God, as Esau stood and
wept bitterly for the blessing, and he did not mind the kingdom of God, but
that he might be a Lord upon the earth over his brethren and other men; and
might have riches, and fullness of the Belly.

44. This Esau in his blessing is a true type of Antichrist, who draws near
to God with the lips, and gives himself to an external seeming service and
worship of Christ; and sets himself forth as if he did it to God, and stands
and makes mighty holy shows in his hypocrisy and glistering verballities,
setts forth himself with zeal and devotion, that so he might be honored of
man; and that his God Mammon and Maozim may be fat, and does even mourn and
lament for malice, when men will not do that for him which he will have; when
he cannot get enough of the Belly-blessing, according to the will of his God
Maozim; and whosoever does but reprove or touch him, and speaks to him of the
Blessing of God; him he will slay, and cannot endure a true Servant of Christ
under him.

45. Reason supposes; that being Isaac said to Esau, Thou shall live by thy
sword; that God has commanded him so to do, and here it props up [its
murdering malice, and bloodthirsty villany] but it is far otherwise; God
wills not any war; but the kingdom of nature in Gods Anger wills it; and
whosoever is born only of the kingdom of nature, he lives also to the same.

46. Therefore said Isaac, thou will do it; as if he should have said, thou
through thy Anger wilt serve the Anger of God, and wilt be a Lord in the
kingdom of nature in this world; even as the rich and wealthy ones do bring
themselves into power and authority, and do it through the kingdom of nature,
in the wrath.

47. And we see further, how that Genesis 27.^1.
Esau did deadly hate his brother Jacob for the blessings sake, of which
notwithstanding he was not capable as to the kingdom of nature, to signify,
that the true children of Christ should for this blessings sake, be hated,
persecuted, and slain of the children in the kingdom of nature; and that
because, the kingdom of Grace Note when Grace shall rule.
shall rule over the kingdom of nature, and destroy the same at the end of
days, and change it into its might, and therefore there is strife between both
Kingdoms.

48. For the children of Christ in this life time as to the outward man live in
the kingdom of the depraved humane nature, viz. in the kingdom of the
Esauites, and are, as to the spirit, only strangers, and pilgrims therein; as
Christ said; My kingdom is not of this world; and therefore the children of
this world are Enemies to them, and persecute them, as Esau his brother Jacob.

49. For where the kingdom of Christ begins to flourish, there presently the
kingdom of the Devil begins to storm and rage; and therefore, because the
kingdom of Christ shall and will take away and ruin his might and Princely
throne; hence is the strife in this world between the children of Jacob, and
Esau.

50. For as soon as Jacob had obtained the blessing, Genesis 27.41.
Esau purposed in his mind to kill Jacob, which is a figure of Christ,
showing, how that Gods anger would kill Him, in this blessing in our assumed
humanity, as to the kingdom of nature; and that the children of God also
should be killed in Gods Anger as to the kingdom of nature, and shed their
blood into this murdering spirit, that thereby Gods Anger might be blotted out
and changed into Love.

CHAP. LVI. How Isaac and Rebecca sent away Jacob because of Esau into another
Country; and how the Lord appeared to him in a Vision upon the Ladder, which
reached even into heaven; and how Esau carried himself afterward toward his
Parents.
Upon the 28: Chapter of Genesis.
Genesis XXVIII.
WHen Jacob had received the blessing, then he must depart from his native home,
from father and mother, and fly from the wrath of Esau: this is now a figure
of Christ, showing how that he after that he had assumed, and anointed our
humanity, should flee with our humanity out of its fathers Adamicall house
again into the first Paradisicall house.

2. And it further denotes, that the children of Christ, (after they have
received the Unction and Blessing, and the new birth begins to spring forth in
them, in the blessing;) shall and must forthwith flee with their thoughts and
mind from their father Adams house of the depraved nature; and it shows that
the Devil and the world do soon hate them, and they must forthwith give
themselves to the pilgrims-path of Christ, and live under the worlds slavish
yoke, in misery, and oppression; in disfavour and disrespect; for God brings
them forth with their thoughts and mind out of their fathers house, viz. out
of the desire in flesh, and blood, so that they do nothing at all regard the
pleasure of the world, and flee from it, as Jacob from his fathers house.

3. And then we see how wonderfully God guides his children, and defends them
from their Enemies, that the Devil in Gods Anger cannot kill them, unless it
be Gods will; as he defended Jacob from the fury of Esau, and lead him away
from him; and we have here an excellent example on Jacob; in that he forsook
his native home, also father and mother for this blessings sake, and loved God
more then all temporal goods, and willingly left all to Esau; that so he might
but be the blessed of God.

4. And we see, that when he had left the riches of the world in his fathers
house, the Lord appeared to him with the Eternal goods, and showed him a
Ladder, Genesis 28.12.
whereupon he could ascend into Gods Eternal Kingdom: which ladder was no
other then Christ whom he had put on in the line of the Covenant, and here now
the type was represented to him, showing him what Person Christ should be.

5. For this Genesis 28.12.
Ladder (as to his apprehension) was upon the earth, and the top of it reached
into heaven; and thereon the Angels of God did ascend and descend; which
signifies that Gods eternal word with the power of heaven, viz. with the
Angelical divine worlds Essence should descend or immerse it self into our
Essence, departed from God, and blind, as to God; and assume our humanity: and
so unite the heaven with the world in man; that the humanity, through this
entrance of the Deity into the humanity might have a Ladder unto God.

6. And it shows that mankind should come through Christ's humanity into the
Society of the Angels, Matthew. 13. v. 22. And this is clearly signified here in
that the Angels of God do ascend and descend on this ladder; also that the
heaven in man should be again opened through this entrance of the divine
essence into the humanity, and that the children of God should have the Angels
for companions in this world; which God showed to Jacob, in that the Angels
came up and down to him on this ladder.

7. Which shall be a very great comfort to the children of God, who turn
themselves from their fathers house, viz. from this worlds vanity, to this
Jacobs Ladder; for they shall certainly know that Gods Angels do come unto them
upon this ladder to which they have turned themselves, and are willingly about
them to serve them.

8. For this ladder signifies properly the pilgrims path of Christ through
this world into Gods kingdom, in that the kingdom of the corrupt Adamicall
nature does always yet cleave unto the children of God, and hinders them in
flesh and blood in the spirit of this world; and therefore they must according
to the inward man in Christ's spirit continually ascend up in much crosses and
tribulation on this ladder, and follow Christ under his Cross, and Red-Banner.

9. On the contrary the world lives in the pleasure of their father Adams
house, in scorn, jeering, and mocking, in envy, spite, and malice; whatsoever
they can do to cross and vex these Jacobs children, that they joy and take
delight in, and laugh and fleer at them; as we have an example of it in Esau;
how that he took, in contempt, disdain, and spite to his father and mother,
Ismaelitish wives, who were of the Line of mockery or reviling, which were mere
bitterness of spirit, and grief of heart both to Isaac and Rebecca.

10. Where we clearly see that the Devil has his power in the kingdom of
this world in the corrupt humane property, and does continually resist Gods
children, and vexes, and plagueth them, and fights with them for his kingdom,
which he has lost, and does not willingly beteem it them.

11. And we see very finely, how the Lord stands above upon this Ladder of
the Pilgrimage of Christ, as with Jacob, and without ceasing calls the
Children of Christ, and comfort them, that they should cheerfully ascend
upon it; He will not leave them, but come to them and bless them, so that
their Genesis 28*14.
Seed and fruit shall grow, increase, and be as the Dust upon the Earth, that
is, that they in their Toil, Labor, and Anxiety, shall spring up and flourish
in the Inward divine Kingdom.

12. For, so much as the Children of Christ go out from this world, and
forsake it in their Mind, so much they spring up in the Inward kingdom of
Christ, where then God stands above upon this Ladder, and continually
inspireth or inspeaketh his Blessing and power into them, so that they grow as
Joh. 15.5.
Branches on his Vine, Psalm 80.15.
which he has planted again in our Humanity, in this Jacobs Blessing, in
Christ.

13. And we hereby clearly see, that this whole type, from Abraham to Jacob,
contains mere figures of the Kingdom and Person of Christ, and his Children;
for here God renews the Promised Covenant of Abraham concerning the seed of
the Woman, with Jacob also; that Genesis 28.14.
out of his seed, as out of the Line of the Covenant He should come, who
should Bless all Nations; for which cause also Jacob was led from his Fathers
House, God having set before him outwardly the kingdom of Christ in the
figure, for whose sake he caused his wrath to cease from the children of
unbeleefe, and did not destroy them, but afforded them time to Repent, and so
appeased his wrath in this Type, which pointed at the fulfilling which was to
come.

14. We have here also, a firm Ground and assurance that Christ has truly
taken upon him our Adamicall Soul and Humanity in the Body of Mary, and has
destroyed Death, Hell, and the Anger of God in our Humanity which he assumed,
and has set up this Ladder of Jacob; for, God said to Jacob; Genesis 28.14.
Through thee and thy seed shall all the Generations of the Earth be Blessed;
through Thee Jacob, through thine own seed, which is God and Man, viz. the
Heavenly divine Ens and substance, and the humane Ens and Substance, in the
power of the Eternal word.

15. In which word, the Holy Name Jesus, viz. the highest Love of the Deity,
has unfolded and manifested it self in our humanity which he has assumed,
which sole Love of God, in the Name Jesus, has overcome the wrath of the
Eternal Nature in our souls [which is] from the Fathers property in the
Anger, and has changed it into the Love of the Divine Joy, and has broken the
still Death, which has severed us from the life of God, and has manifested
the Divine life of the highest holy Tincture in the Eternal speaking Word of
the Divine power, in Death, and has made Death to be Life, and so our Soul,
in this Divine power, is together penetrated and pressed through, Death and the
Anger of God.

16. And it is in no wise to be so taken, as some say; that the substance
wherein the Word is become Man, proceeded not from Adam; but (as some
Erroneously say) the virgin Mary proceeded not from Mankind, she has
outwardly only taken upon her a humane Body from Anna, and is not of the seed
of Joachim, but is an Eternal virgin chosen by God for this purpose before the
world was.

17. This Text teaches us otherwise, where God says, Through Thee, and thy
seed, not through a strange Divine seed only, but through thee and thy
seed, with the entrance of the Divine substance, Christ should break Death in
Adams Soul and Body, and destroy Hell in Adams soul and body, which was
manifested or revealed in Paradise.

18. For here lay our Sickness and Misery, which Christ took upon him as a
yoke: Christ sacrificed his Fathers wrath, which was kindled in our humanity,
and awakened his highest Love, in our humane and his holy Blood; his holy
Tincture, entered into our humane Death, and Tinctured our (in Adam) faded
heavenly substantiality; (which faded in Adam, when he brought earthlinesse and
the false will thereinto) and raised up our faded heavenly substance with his
heavenly living substance, so that Life sprung up through Death; and this was
signified by the Dry Rod of Aaron.

19. Therefore that is not the true meaning, as some say; Christ has assumed a
soul from the Word in the Eternal virgin Mary, so that, Christ, as one come
from God, and his soul in the Humanity of Christ, has one and the same
beginning.

20. They were indeed united in the Incarnation, or the becoming Man, so that
they are inseparable, but the true Ens of the soul, which the word assumed in
the Name Jesus, was of us Men from the female Tincture, viz. from the true
Adamicall soul, yet, from the property of the Light, which was severed from
Adam, and put into the woman, that this property of the Light, might transmute
or change the fiery Masculine property, again into the Love and Divine
Humility, and that the Masculine and feminine property might be quite changed
into One Image again, as Adam was before his Eve, when he was neither Man nor
woman, but a Masculine Virgin.

21. Therefore Christ took his soul from a Woman, viz. from a virgin, and yet
was a Man, so that he rightly stood in the Adamicall Image, and brought the
averted severed properties of Life, in which our will had broken it self off
from God, again into the Temperature and union, viz. into that ONE.

22. For Adam turned his will from the only will of God, and Jesus Christ
took our soul again into the only will of God, and turned the will of our
soul in our Humanity which he assumed, into the only will of God again.

23. But that the Reader may be thoroughly and fundamentally informed what our
soul, and what the Word that became Man is, compare one with the other, it is
thus; Our soul, before the beginning of the humane Soulish.
souls creature, was an Ens of the Word of God, in the Word, (Joh. 1.) and yet
it was inspired or inspoken from the speaking word of God, into the humane
Image in a Natural and creaturely Life, and formed in an Image of the Eternal
speaking Word. This Creaturely Life of the soul, turned it self in Adam away
from the divine speaking, into an own will and speaking, and was in this
respect, broken off from the most unsearchable Substance, and separated from
God.

24. Into this Separated Word, viz. into the soul; The only Eternal divine
speaking word, gave it self in again, and turned the will of the soul again
into the Eternal one, viz. into Gods Eternal speaking; Therefore the soul is
indeed from the Eternal word, but Christ, viz. the highest Love of the Deity,
did not take a new soul out of the Eternal speaking; but our soul, viz. the
word which was once spoken or formed in Adam, viz. our humane Soul, into his
Love-speaking in the Grace and union of the Deity.

25. God spoke again, into our poor fallen soul in Paradise immediately after
the Fall, the Covenant and Root of his highest Love and Grace through the
Word, as a Center of Grace to Conception, and to the New Regeneration.

26. And in Abraham he Manifested the Covenant, which Abraham laid hold on with
his desire, and received it after a spiritual manner, as an Ens to the Tree,
but it lay without Substance in Man, only as a spiritual Form and Model or
Idea of the Powerful Word.

27. Which word in its spiritual Figure in the virgin Mary, was at the Limitt,
viz. at the End of the spiritual form, where that same spiritual form of
the Word of God was comprehended in a Substantial Ens, and therewith also in
like manner Our humane substance as to the soul was comprised, in the Image of
the Word, and as to the substance of the Body, in a humane Frame, or Formation,
Building.
form; and was a self subsisting God-Man.

28. This comprised Spiritual Image, which was the Seed of Faith which
Abraham laid hold on in the Faith, was invested on Isaac, and from Isaac on
Jacob, and to Jacob said God, Gen 28.14.
Through thee and thy seed shall all the People of the Earth be blessed; viz.
through this seed of Faith which Jacob had received from his father Isaac in
this Line of the Covenant, which Line of Faith, had incorporated it self in
the Humane Property according to the inward ground of the second Principle,
viz. in that Image of the Heavenly worlds substance Extinguished in Adam.

29. In which incorporated Ground, the limitt of Gods Covenant remained, in a
spiritual form till Mary, and was propagated from Man to Man, as from Adam
and Eve along to Mary, and there the Word of the Divine Power was moved, and
Essentially assumed our humane Flesh and Blood together with the soul, and
quickened the Extinguished heavenly Ens in the seed of Mary as to our Part,
which manifestation penetrated and pressed also into Mary's heavenly
substantiality, so that she became living as to that heavenly virginity which
disappeared in Eve, and in this living virginity, viz. in Adams heavenly
Matrix, God became Man.

30. And this is the Luke 1.42.
Blessing of Mary above all other women, that she is the first from Adam, in
whom the Heavenly Matrix became Opened, in which the Dry Rod of Aaron rightly
budded, viz. the kingdom of God: she is the first in whom the hidden virtue
was manifested, for in her the Limitt of the Covenant in the spiritual Image
or Type was at an End, and in her it was fullfilled In, or by.
with our Humanity.

31. Nevertheless she is truly the daughter of Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, both as to the Humanity, and as to the Covenant of the Spiritual
Figure; and in her Conception, when the Inward incorporated Image or Type of
the Inspired or Inspoken Covenant of Grace, which was laid hold on in the
Faith, did assume our humane property, then was the kingdom of Christ 1 Timothy
3.15.
Manifested in the Flesh.

32. Wherein afterward the faithful put on Christ, in the flesh, in their
Faith, yet only as to that heavenly Image Extinguished in Adam, as Mary [did],
where Christ Embraces the poor soul in his Arms, and encompasseth them with
the Power of God, and infuseth, and flows in with his Love, into them, which
Love preserves and defends them from the Anger of God, from Sin, Death, the
Devil, and Hell.

33. This is a brief summary of the true Ground, what the Spirit of God has
prefigured and Typified by the Patriarchs, in that he has lead them so
wonderfully and has thus alluded with the figure of Christ, how it would come
to pass afterward.

34. For Jacob was now the stock, out of which the Great and wide Tree of
Israel, should spread abroad in the dividing of its Branches, as a Genealogy;
therefore must he go away from his Fathers house, and take wives of his
fathers Genealogy, viz. of Abraham's brothers son, that the People Israel,
viz. the Line of the Covenant might come of One stock.

35. Now when Genesis 28.16, 17.
Jacob awaked from the Dream of the Divine Vision, where the Lord appeared to
him and Established the Covenant, He said, Surely the Lord is in this Place and
I knew it not, and was afraid and said, how Holy is this place, here is no
other then the house of God, here is the Gate of Heaven. This is a Figure,
showing how it would go with Gods children, when God were manifest in them,
that they continue to be in fear and trembling, and suppose God is a far off
and has forsaken them.

36. For where God withdrawes himself in Man, there will always sin and the
Anger of God be first manifested in that Man, so that he will acknowledge and
tremble at his sin, and enter into Repentance, then appears to him Gods
friendly countenance and comfort him: for, if the soul goes forth from
sin, then Gods Grace enters into it; and then it says, surely the Lord was
with me in my Anxiety, and I knew it not; now I see that the Lord is with the
troubled Heart, which is troubled in a Divine zeal or jealousy, There is the
place of God and the Gate of Heaven.

37. Further it signifies, how the highest Love of God in this Covenant in
Christ, would be immersed into our humanity; and how the humanity of Christ
would be conversant in trouble, in that he took upon him all our trouble and
misery, and how, the humanity of Christ would be astonished before the Anger of
God and Hell; Luke 22.39.44.
as was in the Mount of Olives, where in his Agony he sweat a bloody sweat, and
Christ in his humanity said; Mat. 26.39.
Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me; where instantly the
Gates of God appeared and comforted the humanity. As here to Jacob, when he
must in trouble depart from his fathers house, in fear and trembling at his
Brother Esau, who lay in wait to murder him, all which is a figure concerning
Christ, when Gods Anger in our humanity did lie in wait to murder him, that
he would be in an Agony, heaviness and distress, and how he would pray to his
Father, and how his Father would Comfort him, all which, was done before Or,
his Passion.
he was crucified, especially in the Mount of Olives, in which place this
Figure of Jacob was fullfilled.

38. And as Genesis 28.18.
Jacob took the stone, which he had laid under his head, and set it up for a
Remembrance, and powered Oil thereupon; so has Christ set up his anguish or
Agony for a remembrance to us poor Men, and powered forth his Oil of joy and
Victory upon it in our troubled terrified hearts; and of that same Agony, and a
troubled heart, because of sin.
stone has Erected his Church for a continual remembrance; of all which this
Type of Jacob was a prefiguration.

39. Which Jacob signifies in plain words where he says; Genesis 28.20, 21, 22.
If God will be with me and defend me in the way which I travail, and give me
bread to eat and Clothes to put on, and bring me home with peace to my
Father, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone, which I have set up for
a Pillar, shall be Gods house, and of all which thou give unto me I will
give the Tenth to thee; where he clearly under this figure, signifies the
Leviticall and afterward the Evangelicall Priesthood, as it would be hereafter.

CHAP. LVII. How Jacob came to Laban, and kept his sheep for him fourteen
years for his two Daughters; what the Spiritual Figure of Christ's Bride
contained under it, signifies, how God sets Jacob in Christ's figure, and so
sporteth with the Type of Christ.
Upon the 29: Chapter of Genesis.
Genesis XXIX.
1. WHen Jacob must now in sorrow go away from his Parents, and so avoid his
Brother Esau, and commit himself to God in the blessing of him, then God
brought him to his beloved Bride, with whom he spent a while in Joy with
Patience, till he returned again with Great Riches to his Father.

2. This is first a Worldly History and Or, President.
Example, under which the spiritual figure of the kingdom of Christ is
represented, for if the poor Sinner turn to God, then he attaineth, first of
all the Blessing, viz. the Baptism of Christ, whereby the Holy Ghost Baptizeth
him in the Inward Ground; and Secondly.
then it sets him in the process of Christ under the Banner of his Cross,
and bids him go forth from his Fathers Adamicall house of sin, and make
toward the Path of Christ's Pilgrimage.

3. And there he must lay the hard stone of Reason under his Head, and rest and
sleep upon this Stone of Reason, that is, Reason must stand still, and the
Mind must in it self turn into the Grace of God in the most inward ground in
highest humility, and most willingly enter upon the Pilgrimage of Christ, as
Jacob here did; and then meets him his most amiable Bride, and Beautiful
Rachell, viz. the Noble Virgin Sophia of the Divine Or, amorousnesse*
wedlock enjoyment in the Love and humanity of Christ.

4. First he comes to the Genesis 29.2.
Well, where the Noble Sophia gives her Sheep drink, that is, the Soul is
lead to Christ's Fountain, out of which the Water of Eternal Life does spring,
there he first sees and demands of the Shepherds, where the Noble Sophia
feeds her stock. The Shepherds signify the Children of Christ, viz.
Teachers of the Word of Christ, in whom the Spirit of Christ is, who also feed
his Sheep, there the Penitent Man, asks for his Eternal kindred and
friends, viz for the Paradisicall Or, family.
house, wherein his Grand Father Adam dwelt, then those Shepherds show him
that house, and also the Beautiful Rachell, which is borne in this House, viz.
the Noble Sophia.

5. Who, (when the poor Soul discovers these things) looks amiably upon
the Soul, whence the Soul is kindled in great Love, and Genesis 29.10.
rolleth away the Great stone from the Well, and gives the Sheep of Noble
Sophia drink, that is, the Soul rolleth away all its Earthly Lusts, which were
a Cover upon the Wellspring of Eternal Life, and gives drink, and food, to
the poor Needy Sheep of Christ, the Sheep of this Noble Sophia, and kisseth
the Noble Sophia with its burning desire to the Love of Christ.

6. And when the Noble Virgin Sophia, sees this, and that the poor soul
discovers all its perils that it has under taken for her, then she runs
to her Father, and tells him, that her beloved Suitor and friend is abroad
with the Sheep of Christ, and helps to give them drink, that is, the Love of
Christ presses with the poor soules-desire into God the Father, and says;
This Soul is my friend* my Bridegroom, then God the Father commands that he
be brought into his house; as here Genesis 29.12.
Rachell, did to Jacob, and told it to her Father, who Jacob was, and what his
purpose was, and so also Christ shows his Father, what the poor troubled
perplexed souls purpose is, when it comes to him.

7. And as Jacob was Genesis 29.19, 20.
promised this Rachell for a Spouse, for which he consented to keep the Sheep
7 yeares^
seven years, and loved her At his heart.
dearly, and yet afterward at the wedding, the other Sister with her tender
Eyes was laid by him, which he desired not; so it goes also with Christ's
children, when they turn to God, and apply themselves to be Shepherds of
Christ's sheep, to Or, provide for them.
take care of them, then is the most amiable and Beautiful Sophia promised and
presented to them, whereat they find Joy within them.

8. But when it comes to pass, that the soul thinks it will embrace this
Bride in its Arms, and have perfect joy with her, then the other sister, viz.
Lea, that is, the Cross of Christ, is laid by it, and the Beautiful Sophia
hides her self, and it must first take the Cross of Christ for a Spouse, and
keep the sheep of Christ 7 years more.
seven years more for Rachel, viz. for the Noble Sophia, before he obtein her
for his Spouse.

9. For, the Humanity of Christ does not presently give it self to the fiery
Soul for its own; but stays indeed in the Or, promise of Marriage.
betrothing in the Inward Ground, in the Image of the Heavenly worlds
substance, which disappeared in Adam; But God the Father gives the soul
instead thereof, the other Sister, viz. Tenderness of Heart, that the Soul in
this Time, may not Sport in the Garden of Roses, but be in trouble and
Calamity, that it may be tried and humble, and always keep the sheep of
Christ, and not in this Marriage solace themselves in pleasures and Pride, as
Lucifer did.

10. And though it be so, that this Noble Genesis 29.28.31.
Rachel or Sophia, be given in Marriage to the Soul, as is done to the stable
Children of Christ, so that the Soul keeps this Great wedding of Joy with this
Bride, which they only understand who have been Guests at this wedding, yet
afterward the Noble Sophia is as it were Barren, the wedding Joy passes away,
and the Soul is as if the Love of this Bride were taken from it.

11. In the mean while Genesis 29.31. etc.
Lea under the Cross of Christ breaks forth, and bears fruit; that is as
much as to say, when the Soul As a conception.
receives the Spirit of Christ, then begins the Great Joy of this Marriage,
concerning which Christ says; Luke 15.7.
There is more Joy in Heaven for One Sinner that repents, then for Ninety
Nine Righteous that need not this Repentance.

12. For, that is the Rev. 19.7.
wedding of the Lamb, that God and Man is married, and Christ is Borne, and
then he stands in our poor and simple Condition or disposition.
form in our most inward Ground, and hides his great sweetness, which the
Soul tasted in the Marriage, and covers it with his Cross, and then must
the poor Soul in the mean while take the tender Lea, viz. Patience, and
Labor with her for fruit in the Vineyard of Christ.

13. And it is very well, that the Soul faultereth with this Lea, and then
this Rachel in the inward Ground of the Soul is a stranger, and is as a
stranger toward it, as Genesis 30.1.
Rachel toward Jacob, when she said to him, Create.
Give me children or else I dye; so also the Noble Sophia says indeed to the
Soul, work [or bring forth] in my Love desire, divine fruit, or else I will
depart from thee, whereas yet the Soul Note, the soul cannot do good by its
own power.
cannot do it in its own power.

14. But this is therefore done, that the Soul may the more earnestly apply it
self to prayer, and pray to God for the Divine working of the Divine fruit; as
Jacob prayed to God, so that Genesis 30.22, 23, 24.
Rachel was fruitful, and did bear unto him Joseph, the Prince of all the
Land of Egypt, who preserved, fed, and nourished them in the Famine.

15. So also when the Noble Sophia seems Barren to the soul, as if it could
not bring forth the power of God in the soul, and yet the soul mourns to
God in Patience, [praying] that he would work in it and bless it, whereupon
the soul often converteth in very Great Repentance, and casts it self upon
Gods Mercy, till this Noble Sophia become stirring, fruitful, and pregnant,
and so it certainly generateth the true Joseph, viz. a lowly, humble, chaste,
temperate, and Modest Soul, which afterward becomes a Prince over the
Egyptian house of flesh and Blood, in which house the Heathenish Pharaoh
dwells, viz. the Beastiall Spirit, over that, is this Joseph set for a Ruler
and Governor, and is a Ruler over Reason, and Governs it, with Joseph's, viz.
with Gods Spirit.

16. This is thus, as to one Part, the Spiritual figure of Jacob, wherewith
the Spirit alludeth to the future kingdom of Christ, where now at present in
the fulfilling it alludeth thus also in the Children of Christ, and does yet so
always lead them.

17. But we see especially in this Figure, the way of God, how Gods Mind is
far other then Man's; what Man loves, in that, God hides himself, for that
pleases him well, which in the Eye of the world is simple and despised, which
only depends on him and fears him.

18. Jacob loves the beautiful Rachell, and desires her, but the Line of the
Covenant in which Christ should be borne, would not pass through Rachell but
Lea, also Rachell could not conceive till Lea had brought forth the Root or
Line of the kingly Priesthood and Principality.
Princedome, viz. Levi and Juda.

19. For, the Priesthood came from Levi, and out of Juda came the Scepter of
the kingdom, and the Prince Christ according to the Humanity, to signify,
that Christ will be borne and manifested in these Men alone, and brings and
works his Note, the Priesthood of the Holy Ghost.
Priesthood of the Holy Ghost in them, who go forth from the Love of
themselves, and the pleasure of the Flesh, and are in the Eye of the world,
softly, bashful, simple, and despised, who esteem themselves unworthy of such
honor, and do not account such divine working to be their own, and pride
themselves therewith, as the proud Pharisees did, and still do.

20. For this Lea only desires to bear children for Jacob, that she might
be acceptable to him, seeing otherwise in respect of her Or, Tender Eyednesse.
bleareydnesse she was disregarded: thus also the true children of God desire
therefore only to walk in the Divine power with Inst^ucting.
teaching and a simple life in the ways of God, that they may please God and
serve him.

21. And again we see here by Jacobs seed, that the Line of Christ would not
manifest it self in his first seed with Lea, that Christ might not be
manifested in humane pleasure or Lasciviousness of fleshly Lust, for Gen 29.32.
Lea first bare Reuben, Marriage ^ed. Genesis 49.4.
who defiled the Marriage ^ed. Genesis 49.4.
Bed of his Father, to signify, that this Root sprung from humane Lust.

22. But when Lea was discouraged, because she was despised, and would feign
go out of that contempt, then she bare Simeon, who was of an A strict severe
man Text, a sharp piercing mind.
acute wit, of whom Jacob said when he was to dye, when he prophesied
concerning all his children, from what Root each of them was; Genesis 49.56.
The Brethren Simeon and Levi, their swords are murdering weapons, my soul,
come not into their Council, and let not my honor be in their Churches or
Assemblies, to signify, that he was sprung from the Line of Zeal or
Jealousy, wherein Lea was Jealous and discontented that she was thus
disesteemed, as she then said; Genesis 29 33.
The Lord has heard that I was thus disesteemed, and has given me this [son]
also.

23. But when she cried unto the Lord in her Zeal for Deliverance from her
disesteeme, then Genesis 29.34.
she was pregnant and bare Levi, viz. the Root of the Leviticall Priesthood,
a Type of the kingdom of Christ, for she cried to God, that her husband might
be again joined to her in Love, as she speaks after this manner; Now will
my husband be joined to me again, to signify, that God, with the Leviticall
Priesthood, in a Type, would be joined again to Man, and would in a Type of
the kingdom of Paradise dwell among them again, as was done in the time of
Moses.

24. But the Spirit of God said, by Jacob, when he was about to dye; Let not
mine honor come in their Churches or Assemblies, that is, they are of
Murtherous Cainicall Minds, and serve me only in a Figure pointing at the
future kingdom of Christ; But the Spirit of my Love and Grace is not with them
in their Sacrifices and worship of God; which Love and Grace he calls his
honor, which he would manifest through the Line of Juda in Christ.

25. Which honor was, that he should break Death in pieces, and destroy Hell,
and take away the Throne of the Devil in Man; this the Holy Ghost calls his
honor, and that was not in the Leviticall Priesthood, nor among the Titulary
Priests in their Churches. But when Lea gave up her will wholly into the will
of God, and said; Genesis 29.35.
Now will I give thanks unto the Lord, who has delivered me from the disgrace
of the Devil, and of the World, then she bare Juda, viz. the Line of Christ.

26. So here now the Spirit says very secretly and covertly under a veil, *
And she left off from Bearing, to signify, that Christ was the Last, who was
the End and fulfilling of the Leviticall Law; under which, the Spirit
signifies, that Men would not find Christ in the Priests Churches, Laws, and
Ordinances of Preaching, He would not dwell in their Churches with his honor
of victory, nor suffer himself and his honor to be tied to the houses of
Stone, where they exercise as hypocritical show, and have within them only
murdering proud hearts, and with the murdering swords of Levi, disgrace and
slay one another with words.

27. But in the souls of Men, when they give thanks and praise the Lord in
great Humility, as Lea did, when she bare Juda, the Line of Christ; there will
he dwell, and not be at all in the Council of these Priests and Levits the
Titulary Priests, who contrive only specious glistering ways for their Honor
and voluptuousness, and forget the true thanksgiving in Humility, and honor
and love themselves only, and so give that honor to their feigned or supposed
Office, which belongs to God alone, and to the Love of our Neighbor in great
humility.

28. We see clearly by this Figure, that God will not manifest himself in the
fleshly love of our selves; for Genesis ^9.30.
Jacob loved Rachell more then Lea, and would have Rachel only in the
Beginning; but his seed must continue shut up with her, till Rachel humbled
her self before God, and that Jacob prayed for her, to show also, that God
will not work in the love of our selves, in that we love and honor one
another according to fleshly lust, worldly honor and Riches, where Men flock
together, associate and love one another, according to their Greatness, State,
Riches, Glory, Beauty, Bravery and Pleasure of this World.

29. But the Spirit of God requires humble, faithful, and sincere love, where
the soul is resigned up into God, and seeks not its own pleasure or
self-love, but looks upon the way of God, and joyneth it self to the humble
children, who love God and constantly give him thanks, there God manifests
himself and works in them, that they bear fruit to the Lord.

30. Jacob first served seven years for Rachell, which himself had chosen in
his own Love, yet she was not given to him for the first seven years
service, but Lea was, unknown to him, laid by him; Jacob desired Rachel as
wages for his service: yet seeing the Covenant of the Lord lay in the Line of
Christ in him, therefore he first received the spiritual wages of the Grace of
God.

31. For Christ is the wages of Gods children, as they must serve their Lord
for worldly wages, so God first pays them with his Covenant of Grace, and
then afterward they receive also Temporal wages; As Jacob must first receive
the Gift of God, as God appoints it for him, though it went very ill, as to
Reason, afterward he also received the wages according to his will, for which
he must serve yet seven years more.

32. Which seven years in the inward Ground in this Figure, signify, the
seven properties of the Natural Life, which must be given up to the service
of God, into which God gives himself for wages in a co-working power, where
the seven forms of Life first help the Lord to bear a spiritual Figure and
Image or Type, and to manifest the Line of Christ, then afterward that same
spiritual form discovers also the Natural form, and bears a Prince in
the Natural Life, in whom God works, and through whom he rules the world,
as is to be seen by Jacob.

33. He served seven years for Rachell, but being he feared God, the divine
wages, viz. the Line of Christ was first given him; afterward God blessed also
the humane Self-love according to the kingdom of Nature in him, so that of
Rachel whom he had taken in natural Self-love, he begat a Prince and wise
Man, even Joseph, by whom the Spirit of God ruled, and made him a Lord and
Governor.

34. And this figure presents to us, that first Christ should be borne in us,
and so then Christ in us bears also the Natural Man with understanding and
wisdom, and appoints him to his service in the kingdom of Nature, and also
in the kingdom of Grace, as he did Joseph.

CHAP. LVIII. How Jacob served his Stepfather.
Father in Law Twenty years, and begat Twelve Sons and One Daughter, and how
God blessed him, that he gat great Riches, and how Laban often changed his
wages, and yet could not hurt him, what is to be understood thereby.
Upon the 30 Chapter of Genesis.
1. WE see in this History especially, Genesis XXX.
how it goes with the Children of God in this world, how they must live in
mere Crosses and adversity, as Jacob did with his wives: for Genesis 30.1.
when Rachel saw that she was barren, she envied Lea her sister, to signify,
that Man's own Love seeks not the honor of God but it self, as now Rachel
envied Lea, because she had a Name that God had blessed her, and said to
Jacob, Genesis 30.1.
Give me Children also, if not, I die.

2. Where we see, how the ways of God are quite hidden to Reason, although
Reason stands in the figure of the divine wonders, as here Rachell, which
here signifies, the own Adamicall Nature, which desires of Jacob the life's
power from the blessing of God, and if it get not the same, it must die; which
indeed the Spirit of zeal in her desire, does very well signify according to
her inward Ground in the Covenant of God: but her Reason understood it not, but
only desired Children, that she might be delivered from disgrace; but her
inward Ground stood hidden, and panted through the humane Nature, to manifest
it self in the humane Essence: Therefore the inward Ground in the Covenant of
Grace signifies through its own Adamicall Essence, that if the inward ground
should not be manifested through the humane Essence, it must then die
Eternally; Therefore says Reason; Give me children or else I die, which
seems outwardly to be an Opposition and discouragement: But the Spirit of God
has here its figure, under which it has its signification.

3. And then we see in both these Sisters, who yet were Daughters of Gods
Covenant in the Promise, how the Poison of the Serpent in the wrath of God in
flesh and blood, so vehemently sets against the Line of Christ in the Covenant,
and always despises the same, and as a proud Lucifer, elevates and puffs up
the Rational humane ownhood of self-will, and would have the Dominion.

4. As here Rachel despises her sister because she was outwardly fairer and
more beautiful then Lea, in that Lea in the sight of the world was simple and
bleareyd, and Rachell had the Spirit of the world in Reason Elegantly as an
Ornament, and so the Adamicall Nature in Rachell ruled over the Manifested
blessing of the Covenant in Lea; to signify, that the Line of Christ in this
world would be manifested in a mean simple and despised form in Men of such
like dispositions, which Men would, by the Reason pomp and beauty of the world,
be esteemed fools and bleareyd; who in such scorn and disregard would go
away and Psalm 125.5.
sow in Tears, but in their inward Ground in the Line of Christ would bear,
and at the End reap in Joy: to signify, that John 18.36.
Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, that in this world it must be thrown
into Gods Anger and disdain, and into death, and by this throwing in, satiate
the Anger of God with Love and Meekness, and with Love, spring forth through
the Anger and Death, and bring the proud Lucifer in the humane own will and
fleshly Lust to scorn and to naught, as an unstable Life, which Life cannot
overpower the Divine humility.

5. Which humility Springs under all scorn, and also breaks through death
and the anger of God, and makes Death to be Life, and takes from Hell the
victory, and changes, the sting of the false Serpents Essence, with sweet
Love, as we see here by Lea, who although she was envied by her sister; as, by
Reason; yet the Line of Christ in the Covenant springs forth in her under all
scorn, and makes her fruitful, and Rachell Barren, till she gave her Maid
to her Husband for a Wife, which signifies the Adamicall, viz. the servile
Line, which in the Kingdom of Christ attaineth the Marriage of the Line of
Christ, in the manner of a servant.

6. For, Adam has negligently forfeited the Line, the Right of Nature in the
kingdom of God was lost in Adam, and attaineth in the manner of a servant to
the Marriage, as Jacobs wives Maids did, whereby we then see, that Rachell,
viz. the right self Nature could not work or bring forth fruit, till the Line
of servitude under the yoke of the Adamicall Nature of Self-love did first
become fruitful, to signify, that the humane Nature must give it self up to
be a servant under the Line of Christ, if it will be married in the Line of
Christ, and be ingrafted as an heir of God.

7. And then first springs forth the kingdom of Nature in the kingdom of
God, and in the blessing becomes fruitful, as Rachell was first fruitful
when her Maid had brought forth, to signify, that Rachell also must be an
handmayd to the Covenant of God, and the Line of Christ, and that the Line of
Christ in her also be her Lord, so that she also attaineth the Marriage of
Christ's Line in the manner of a handmayd, and that she had not the Line of
Christ in her in selfe-Power by the Light of Nature, but as a Gift bestowed of
Grace, that stands in another Principle.

8. And signifies under it, that the Line of Christ was not propagated in
humane selfe-ability, but that it self does press into their Branches, and
that the Great or high Name or Stock, Family, or Genealogy.
stock or Tribe of Men is not respected, but it presses as soon upon the
meanest and most miserable in the world, which are but servants and handmayds,
as upon the most high and Noble.

9. As we have a powerful example of this in Jacob, who must be in a servile
condition Twenty years as a servant, till the Twelve Stocks of the Tribes of
Israel were begotten by him, to signify, That a Christian must be borne under
the servile yoke of the corrupt Domineering selfe-willed Adamicall Nature, but
if any should as a Christian be borne of the Line of Christ, then must the
Mother.
Parent be given up as a servant to God, and be in the kingdom of Nature,
only as a servant of God, who in his heart forsakes all temporal things, and
accounts nothing his own, and in his condition and employment esteems
himself but as a servant, who serves his Lord therein.

10. As Jacob, who under this service of his, begatt the Stocks or Tribes of
Israel, signifies that they should be strange Guests in this world, and serve
God their Lord in the kingdom of Nature therein, who himself would Promise or
appoint.
vote them their Wages, that they should with Great Riches go out of this
world and enter into the Kingdom of Christ, viz. into their first Adamicall
Paradisicall Native Country, as Jacob in his service got his stepfathers Goods
with great Blessing.

The Inward Spiritual Figure stands thus.
12. When Adam was fallen, he must go forth out of Paradise, and yield up
himself to be a servant under the Spirit of the world in the Kingdom of this
world, and be subject to the Stars and the four Elements, and serve them in
their Dominion, and provide for and take care of their children, viz. the
Creatures of this world, as we see before our Eyes.

13. But when he was to go out of Paradise, as Jacob out of his Fathers house,
the Lord meets him, and shows him the Entrance in again into Paradise
through the seed of the woman, and destroyer of the Serpent; as he showed the
same also to Jacob, by Genesis 28.12.
the Ladder which reached to Heaven.

14. And when Adam was gone out of Paradise, then he must submit himself to be
a servant under a strange yoke, and serve the kingdom of Nature in its
wonders, and provide for or take care of the Children of Nature, which kingdom
of Nature in the Fall became strange to him, in that it now holds him by
constraint, and vexes him with heat and cold, sickness and misery, and
holds him Captive in it self, and uses him in its service, which before was
his best friend and Grandfather.
Patron.

15. And as Jacob in this Figure, must fly to his friend his Mothers brother,
and serve him, whom he kept as a servant, and yet also in respect of his
Daughter as a son in Law; so also must Adam serve under the servile yoke of
his Great Grand-Father^
Father, viz. the kingdom of Nature, which kingdom gave him its daughter to
wife; of whom under this yoke he begat the children of God in the Blessing of
God, and also places his children as ministering servants in his Fathers house,
viz in the kingdom of this world.

16. And as Jacob, obtained Great Riches in the Blessing of God, and acquired
the Goods of his Master with subtilty, Genesis 30 37, 38, 39, etc.
in that he subtly used the half peeled streaked sticks before the drinking
Troughs, where the sheep drank, upon which they conceived, and brought forth
Pied or sp^tted.
ring-straked sheep parti-colored; so also when Adam was come under the
servile yoke of the kingdom of Nature, wherein also the Envy and subtilty of
the Devil domineered according to the kingdom of Wrath, God showed him, that
he should with suttlety acquire to himself the kingdom of Nature, viz. the
working of Nature, with its wonders, and procure the Power of Nature for an
Eternal propriety, that his works, which he Operates in the kingdom of
Nature, must follow him into his Eternal Native Country, and be his own.

17. Which subtilty was that which God showed him, viz. the Destroyer of the
Serpent, which Adam put on in the Covenant, which put on the kingdom of Nature
[assumed] from us Men, and with divine subtilty, took away the strength and
power of our Lord and Master, viz. of the kingdom of Gods wrath, which held us
captive under its yoke, and put on all humane power, and took away our Lord
and Masters own Power, viz. the kingdom of Natures own power, as Jacob took
his Lord and Masters Goods.

18. And as the Spirit of Genesis 31.10.
God showed Jacob in the vision, that the Hee-Goates and Rams that leaped upon
the Goats and Sheep were ring-straked speckled and grisled: so was Adam also
showed in the Spirit of the Covenant of Promise, how the Spirit of Grace in the
Covenant, came upon the streaked parti-colored humane Nature, and blessed it,
so that it became pregnant of the spirit of the Covenant.

19. Which Humane streaked or parti-colored Nature is no other than the half
earthy corrupt, and again in the Covenant Newborn Heavenly Nature, upon this
came the Spirit of God as to the heavenly part, and made it fruitful, so that
under the earthly yoke it drew the power of Nature in the divine power into
the heavenly, and so was his Masters or Lords, viz. the kingdom of Natures
goods, taken away, and the heavenly Man in the Covenant gat them to himself
with the divine wit and subtilty, and returned therewith from his Lord and
Master, viz. the kingdom of the Outward Nature, again into his Fathers house,
viz. into Paradise, as Jacob into his fathers house.

The Figure is fundamentally thus.
20. In Adam the kingdom of Nature lay in the Temperature, that is, all
properties were of equal weight, but when the will of the soul went with
subtilty into the Separation, then the properties were stirred up, and the
Temperature was broken, and then the Separation was his Lord and Master, and
held the will captive as a servant, who now must serve this Master.

21. But when God spoke or inspired again his Grace with the Covenant of Love,
thereinto, then the inward in spoken or inspired ground of Grace, drew the
kingdom of Nature with its wonders to it, and came away with the Riches and
selfe-Might, and brought them again with the inward new Man, into Paradise.

22. For, the Riches of the Natural Outward Mortal Man, in that it brings
forth the Wonders of God with its Exercise, does not belong to the kingdom of
Nature as its proper own, but to the inward spiritual new Man borne of
Christ, he shall draw these wonders to him, and take them with him to be an
Eternal Vision and Contemplation of the wonders of God.

23. When the Body of the outward Nature falls a way, then shall the works
follow the New Man as a Treasure, which he has gotten to himself by divine
wit and subtilty, and put off the Evil Adamicall Natures house of Selfe-rule
and Dominion, as Jacob, who stood in the figure of the New Spiritual Man, with
whom the Spirit of God alludeth in the prefiguration to the future kingdom of
Christ, showing how Christ would obtain all the Goods of this world, and all
the Riches of the Power and Might of Nature, in the formed Or, Outspoken.
Expressed Word of God under his servitude, wherein he yielded himself up to
be a servant of God in the kingdom of Nature, and so make himself Lord and
Master over it; and bring it with him into his Eternal kingdom in our assumed
Humanity, and lastly manifest it at the End of the Day of this world, and give
it us again in our Fathers first house.

24. Thus we should not at all look upon this Figure in Jacob, as if God had
bidden Jacob to deceive his Father in Law with subtilty, and bereave him of
that which was his, as if God had pleasure in the Natural false subtilty of
Man; No, the spiritual subtilty is only represented in the figure, showing
how we shall obtain in the kingdom of Christ Luk 16.9.11
the unrighteeus Mammon, which we have not as by a Natural Right, but obtain
it by the divine wit, and then Mat. 11.12.
the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and they that use violence Tear
and snatch it.
take it by force, with such wit of Divine science, knowledge or skill, as Jacob
did in the figure of Christ's kingdom.

25. And it is shown to the Jews, who with this figure help themselves in
their subtilty and Earthly Fraud and treachery; that this subtilty of Jacob
prefigureth a Spiritual Type, and does not at all cover their wickedness and
falsehood.

26. For he that says, Exodus 20.17.
Thou shall not Covet or lust after that which is thy Neighbors, has
forbidden all outward subtilty fraud and deceit; but in the Stam li^ien^
Geneologies, the Spirit of God has thus, with the kingdom of Christ,
signified and alluded in the figure, at the inward Ground of the New Man with
an Outward Figure.

27. As with Ismael Abraham's first son, from whom the Goods also were taken
away, to signify, that they belonged not to Adam in the Corruption and
perdition, but to Ghrist, as the second Adam, which he took with divine wit
and subtilty from the kingdom of Gods wrath in Man, where he must first be
subject to the wrath of God, and serve in the assumed humane Nature, yet so he
obtained the Goods and took away all its Goods, and that is it which this
Figure of Jacob signifies.

28. The Spirit presents here a Most wonderful Figure in Jacob, showing how
10 Times. Genesis 31.7.
Laban changed his wages Ten Times, and yet could not hurt him, to signify,
how it is with the Children of God in this service, that under the yoke of
Nature, they shall acquire the Goods of the kingdom of Nature in the Divine
wit in the inward New Man, thence happens such great alteration to Man in
his purposes, so that when he has resolved upon the course that he will take,
the Devil comes with his Envy, and hinders him of his purpose by evil Men,
that it goes not forward; As Jacob, when he thought, the speckled sheep and
Goats shall be my wages, then his Master disappointed him of his wages.

29. So it is also with the Children of God in their labor and travail, when
they think, now they shall reap the blessing of God, now they will apply
themselves to the Children of God, with whom they may work and bring forth
fruit, and there they will Do good.
effect their good purposes, and comprehend this work in their Faiths desire,
that it Rev. 14.13.
may follow after them: then will every where all his work and purposes be
broken, so that it goes not according to his meaning and will, he must now
only trust and rely upon God, as Jacob did, and so no enemy can hurt him; and
though it seems as if it would hurt him, and that his work should be in vain,
yet thus they work and bear fruit, incomprehensible to Reason, and in the End,
that Man departs with much Goods out of the kingdom of this world, and
returns again into his Native Country, as Jacob.

30. For the Scripture says, Rev. 14.13.
the Works of the Children of God follow after their Faith, they take them with
them, they are the Wages of their Faith; The Faith takes Christ into it self,
and Christ takes the Works of Faith with him; and thus a true Christian
returns home again into his Native Country, with much Goods, which he has
introduced and laid up in hope with his Faiths desire.

31. Which Hope God fills for him in Christ with the heavenly Ens, and takes
also herewith his works of Nature, and draws them to it self for an Eternal
Wages, which, is Christ, with the Or, Outspoken.
Expressed word, viz. the kingdom of Nature, wherein lies the Wonders and
Essence and Substance.
being of Man, kept, to Gods Great Day of Separation, wherein Gala. 6.7.
Every one shall reap what he has here sown.

32. When we rightly view and consider this History, how God did begin the
kingdom of Israel with a servile Shepherd, and exalted him before all the
Potent rich Men on Earth even to Eternity, and Consider that the Twelve Stocks
or Tribes of Israel were begotten under a servile yoke as servants, out of
which Stock Christ according to the Humanity was to be borne; So we see, that
all Highness of the world, also all Art and wit of Nature, is foolish in the
sight of God, wherewith yet men so boast, and esteem their worldly matters
doings or pomp, and their high state, for Great things, and yet in the sight of
God, are not by far, Like unto an honest Shepherd.
so acceptable as an honest Shepherd.

33. A Shepherd in whom the Spirit of God works, is more highly esteemed
before God, then the wisest and most potent in selfe-witt, without the Divine
Dominion; and we see very well, how God erecteth his kingdom in simple lowly
and mean Men, who are not esteemed by the world, but are accounted no better
then Heardsmen in the Eye of the world; As Christ also chose such for his
Apostles who were but poor mean contemptible people, by whom he manifested
the kingdom of Israel in divine Power.

34. Where are the Learned and worldly wise Men? Again, where are the Potent
Lords, who contemn the simple? Where is their Might, strength, Art, and Wit?
They must all come in dust and ashes, and fall down to the simplicity of such
Shepherds, and bow their hearts in servitude under Christ's yoke, if they will
be partakers of the Note the true Line, Lineage, or Succession.
Line of these Or, Pastors.
Shepherds, yea they must be as Jacobs wives Maids, if they will come to this
Marriage.

35. For the Line of Christ in the beginning was manifested in Abel a
Shepherd, so also afterward in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses and David,
they were all but Shepherds when the Line of Christ was manifested: There is
no Potentate, Noble, Rich, Learned, or High worldly wise, has attained it, but
mean people of no account, who have put their trust in God.

36. Where are now the high Priests, Schools, and Universities, who ascribe to
themselves and assume the authority and power of these Mysteries, and often
tread underfoote the Gifts of the Holy Ghost in such Shepherds, and laugh at
them and count them Fools? Are they not all of them, Cain, Ismael, and Esau,
of the left Line, from the kingdom of this worlds Nature in the Hypocrisy of
self- Reason? which in the sight of God is not so acceptable as a Shepherd.

37. O ye poor blind Men in Adam, cast your Eyes down from above, and lay
your selves low under the simplicity of Christ in the Or, true succession.
Line of these Shepherds, and look not upon the Pomp of Art and Loftiness,
or you will be miserably deceived; If you will be capable of this Line, you
must not attain it from Loftiness, which boasts it self in Hypocrisy in
this Office of a Pastor or Shepherd, but in humility and mean simplicity,
where the soul submits it self under Christ's yoke, there will the poor
soul, blind as to God, get root in this Marriage and be capable of this Line.

38. The 12 Children.
Twelve Children of Jacob are even the Lines, which the Spirit of God from Adam
to Noah and his children, signified, which sprung from the Line of the Covenant
in Paradise, and pressed from Adam to Abel, and so on to the Children of Noah,
and there also twelve Lines or Stocks or Tribes were manifested; here the same
Tree opens it self again out of One Stock, which was Jacob, and signifies,
how those Lines should all be sanctified in one Stock, which Stock is Christ,
who also chose him 12 Apostles.
Twelve Apostles to manifest this Tree, which was grown out of the Line of the
Covenant.

39. And as Jacob begat these Twelve sons, Genesis 30.21.
he begat also a Daughter, Dina by name, Genesis 34.1.
who went out to see the Daughters of the Land, and thereby lost her honor and
Virginity; and he begat her of Lea, in whom the Line was manifested out of the
Stock or Tribe of Juda, to signify that the Line of Christ at this time as yet
stood hidden in the woman's Tincture, and yet was manifest through the
Masculine, viz. the fiery Tincture, till Mary the Mother of Christ, as we see
in the Covenant of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that the Covenant pressed forward
in their seed; we see it also in the Circumcision, which was given only to
the Man or Male.

40. And much more do we see in the Law on Mount Sinai, which was also given
in a way of Fire, to signify, that Men before Christ were lead in the Fathers
Property, which held us captive in the Wrath, till his Love, viz. his Son
through the wrath manifested himself in the Woman's Tincture, and changed the
Man's and Woman's Tincture into One again, therefore the Line of Christ with the
Fathers, sprung forth in the Woman's Tincture through the Man's.

41. In the Man's Tincture it was stirring in the Covenant of Faith in Abraham,
and was manifest out of the Man's Tincture in the Woman; But in the Fulfilling.
fullness of Time, it was manifest in Mary in the Woman's Tincture, viz. in the
highest Love, in which Love Adam loved himself before his Eve [was] for God
was manifest therein.

42. There we see here in Dina a figure of Eve, for after Lea had borne Six
Sons, she bare a Daughter, which signifies the Female Tincture, which in
her vain Curiosity Or, trifled.
squandred away her honor; as Eve would see and know the Daughters of the
world, viz. the Beastiall Creaturely Lust, and in this Lust lost the
Paradisicall Virginity.

43. Thus the Spirit of God here in Dina sets a figure of Eve near the Line of
the Covenant, seeing he should come out of the Line of the Covenant who should
seek and save the poor children of Eve.

44. For Lea did bear six sons, which signify the six properties of the
Natural Life, and the Seventh is the Substance or Corpore^ty of the six, in
which spiritual Substance Adam dyed or was extinguished as to the kingdom of
God, when his will brake it self off from God; and that same seventh property
of Nature is now even the Woman, viz. the Mother wherein the other six are
continually borne, which rightly signifies the Adamicall Eve, when Eve was yet
in an Image or Type.

45. The figure whereof the Spirit of God represents in Dina with Jacob,
signifying, how that seventh property of Nature in Adam is become a Whore,
perfidious to God, and sets this Figure near the Line of Christ, [signifying]
that Christ should come, and change this whore, viz. the seventh property of
the humane Life, into the virginity again.

46. Therefore was Christ borne of a virgin, that he might sanctify the
Woman's Tincture again, and change it into the Man's Tincture, that the Man and
the Woman might be One Image of God, again, and no more Man and Woman, but
Masculine Virgins, as Christ was.

47. In Rachel we see now the self-love of the kingdom of Nature, where both
Tinctures, the Masculine and Feminine, according to the kingdom of Nature in
self-love, bind themselves in Conjunction, as Jacob loved Rachel according to
the kingdom of Nature, according to the Tincture of self-love, and on the
other side so did Rachel love Jacob; therefore must these Tinctures of Natural
self-love, be so long shutt up and bring forth no Life, till Genesis 30.22.
the Lord remembered Rachel and heard her, as the Text in Moses says: that is,
till the Lord stirred up the Tinctures of the kingdom of Nature with his
blessing, then she bare a Prince in the kingdom of Nature, viz. JOSEPH, in
whom we see by his great Chastity and fear of God, that the blessing of God
stirred up the Tinctures of the kingdom of Nature, which lay shut up in the
Seeds, and manifested the Covenant of Grace therein.

48. For Christ should deliver the kingdom of Nature in Man from wrath,
therefore also the Spirit in this figure presents an Image or Type in Joseph,
which it sets down also in the figure of Christ's humanity, how it would go in
the future with Christ's humanity, which he took from us Men.

49. In Lea Christ was represented according to his heavenly hidden humanity,
showing, how the heavenly worlds Substance would be hidden in our humanity
under the yoke of Gods Anger, and how Christ must appear in a servile and
contemptible form.

50. In Rachel with Joseph now the figure is represented, which shows, how he
would Overcome, and in our humane Nature should be a Lord and Prince over all
his Enemies, who have held us poor Men in flesh and blood Captive, and how he
would bring us forth out of the Misery and Famine of Adam, into a Good Land,
and not remember how we in this world have cast him into the Pit, as Joseph's
brethren did him.

51. The Spirit of God presents this figure in the Twelve Patriarchs as a
Glass, to see by whom God was attoned in his Anger, poynting at the future
fullfilling, for the Text in Moses speaks very hiddenly, in this Figure and
says; Genesis 30.25, 26.
Now when Rachel had borne Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, let me depart and
travail to my own Place, and into my Country, give me my wives and my
children for which I have served thee, that I may go.

The inward Spiritual figure is thus.
52. When the Blessing of Jacob, viz. Christ, in the kingdom of the humane
Nature, was manifest, so that Man stood in Christ's Image, then he desires to
return from the servitude of this House wherein he must serve, and go again
to his fathers first house, and desires to take with him his fruits, viz. his
children, brethren, and sisters, and all the children of this Birth; he has a
great longing after that, as Jacob had after his fathers house: But the Lord
says to him stay and serve here a while and feed my sheep, Genesis 30.28.
appoint the wages that I shall give thee, that is, ask of me, so will I give
it thee as Christ says; Joh. 16.23.
Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you.

53. Thus then this Jacob demerseth himself in Humility, and keeps the
sheep of Christ, in hope of the Eternal wages, which follows after him: For
in Joseph, that is, in Christ, the wages will be firct given him; as Joseph was
the wages of Jacob in the Outward kingdom, and preserved and nourished him and
his house in the famine, which signifies, Christ, who will Eternally nourish
us in himself, and bring us home with him into his Fathers house, as Joseph
brought his Father and Children into his Lords Country.

CHAP. LIX. How Jacob departed from Laban, what this Figure signifies, and
what is to be understood thereby.
Genesis the 31.
IN this Chapter for the most part is the Outward History set forth, Genesis XXXI.
under which yet the Spirit has its secret Figure wherewith it plays, for,
the Text says; Genesis 31.1, 2^
And the words of the Children of Laban came before Jacob, saying, Jacob has
gotten all our Fathers Goods to himself, and of our Fathers Goods has he
procured this Riches; And Jacob looked upon Labans Countenance, and saw that it
was not toward him as formerly.

2. This is a figure represented in the Spirit of Christ; when the Spirit of
Christ in Man has gotten the kingdom of the humane Nature to himself, then
the Envy of the Serpent in the wrath of Nature in flesh and blood, awaketh,
understanding and feeling that the power of Nature in Man is taken away from
him, and opposes the Spirit of Christ in the power of Nature.

3. Then proceeds the opposite will in Man, so that the poor soul is every
where faint and in an agony, perceiving that it dwells among strange Goods,
and that the Devil is its Neighbor, and has a continual access to its own
Nature, and opposes the soul, because it has in Christ's Spirit taken away
from him the kingdom of Nature, viz. the Land and Country which he had for his
possession, and therefore the mortal Nature in the wrath of God sets its
desire and endeavor against the poor soul, as a stranger unfriendly, when it
sees, that it loses its voluptuous Earthly Inheritance, (which Right is
intimated in the Children of Laban, where Reason looks to get temporal
Honor and pleasure) that all its natural right is taken away, as Jacob by
subtilty took away Labans Goods.

4. Then thus says God to the soul, as here he did to Jacob; Genesis 31.3.
Return again into thy fathers Country, to thy kindred, I will be with thee:
that is, the poor soul should enter again into its first Country of its
father, viz. into the Eternal Word, out of which it proceeded, and therein God
blesses it, and therein it can also call its children and Members and bring
them along out of the servile House of Gods Anger in the kingdom of Nature, as
Genesis 31.4.
Jacob called his wives and his Children, and brought them out of the Servitude
of his Father; Thus also the Enlightened soul brings the power of its Life
in the kingdom of Nature together with its fellow members out of the servile
house of flesh and blood again into the first house, viz. into Gods Word.

5. And as Genesis 31.21.23.
Jacob did flee from the servile house of his Stepfather, and Laban pursued
after and would hurt him; so also in like manner is done to the children of
Christ, when they begin to flee out of the servile house of Satan, viz. out
from fleshly pleasure and voluptuousness, and would again enter into its
first Land of its father, viz. into righteousness and the fear of God, then
instantly the fleshly Crew of the wicked world, with rage and folly pursue
after it and would slay it, and take away with evil and false Tongues, all its
Riches and Goods in Gods righteousness.

6. But the Lord aweth them, that they cannot do it, as was done to Laban,
though they stand up and reprove the Children of God as unrighteous, because
they turn away from their Idols and abominations, and follow their hypocrisy
no more, neither will they bear their Evil yoke any more, and serve them in
their unrighteousness, and call their falsehood Good, as the present world
plays the hypocrite under this yoke and serves their wickedness, only
that their God Ma^z^m may ^ive and be Fatt.

7. The Spirit of God here also presents a Figure, showing, how Christ would
for a while put himself under this servile yoke in the kingdom of Nature,
and would betroth to him Adams daughter, that is, our flesh and blood, and
acquire to himself Adams possessions, Goods and Riches, viz. the Kingdom or
Dominion of the humane Nature, that is, Draw many Men to him, and in the End
go there with out of this servile House of this world again into his Fathers
Eternal House, in which departure to his Father, would the Devil and the
wicked world, scorn him and quite slay him, and would take away, and rob him
of, his Goods, as also of his Children, which he has here begotten, even as
the Devil, by the Pharisees and wicked Jews did, who would take away, and rob
Christ of all his Faithful Children, as Laban pursued and hunted after Jacob,
and would take away his purchased Goods from him again.

8. But as Genesis 31.7.
God would not suffer Laban to hurt Jacob, so God would not suffer the Devil
and the wicked High Priests, to rob Christ of his purchased Goods, although
they slew his outward Humanity, yet he rose again from the Dead, and brought
his purchased Goods into his Fathers Country.

9. The Spirit of Moses represents in this Chapter a wonderful Figure, which
ought well to be Observed, because he intimates a secret Mystery under it: For
he says, Genesis 31.19, 20.30.33, 34.
When Jacob did flee away from Laban, Rachel had stolen away her Fathers Idol
Gods: and further says; Thus Jacob stole away the Heart of Laban the Syrian,
in that he told him not that he fled: and we see further, how Laban when he
came to Jacob, was eager after his Idol Gods, and searched all Jacobs
housholdstuffe for his Idol Gods; also we see in this Text, how Rachel was
she that loved those Idol Gods, and sat upon them, and so hid them that her
Father could not get them again.

10. In these words there is represented to us an Outward and an inward Figure,
showing, how it would go with Israel in the future; for these Idol Gods were
not Heathenish Idols, according to the Constellation or Star Acts 7.43.
Molech, as the Heathens had, but as we read, they made Images, Monuments,
Statues, or Pictures of their friends that were dead, as a Pattern for
Instruction, which Images among the Heathen afterward were turned to Idols,
and these might well be such Images of his kindred that were dead, which Laban
was loath to loose, because they were Patterns of Instruction, and Memorialls
to him of his Ancestors and deceased kindred whom he loved.

11. But the true Figure under which the Spirit points at the Future, is
this: First, That Israel would not continually cleave to God with their whole
Heart, but would always take these Idol Gods of fleshly self-love along with
them, and love themselves and their Images, viz. Genealogies of Humane
Greatness, State, High Birth, and Noble Pedigrees of Gentility, more then God,
even as it came to pass.

12. Especially this departure of Jacob intimates, the departure of Israel out
of Egypt into the promised Land, when they took with them also their fleshly
Idol Gods, and presently after 1 Samuel 8.8.
served their own Idol Gods viz. Humane Greatness; and forsook their God,
and regarded their Mammon, and would have 19.
Kings among them according to the Custom of the Heathen, and forsook their
right King, who had brought them out of Egypt.

13. Secondly, it intimates, how Christ, in whose figure Jacob stood, would
take to him this Rachel in our flesh and blood, viz. these, in Adam Idol wills
of the soul turned away from God, which has acquired to it self Images and
Idols, and possessed them as Rachel; and would bring the averted wills of the
soul, with their acquired Idols and Images out of the Idols house or Temple,
which Idols, viz. Idoll-wills and desires must afterward be all broken to
pieces in the Death of Christ.

14. As presently ( Genesis 35 Chapter) the figure is represented to us, when
God said to Jacob: Gen 35.1, 2.
Arise and go to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an Altar to God, who
appeared to thee when thou steddest from thy Brother Esau: Then said Jacob to
his household, and to all that were with him, put away from you the strange Gods
that are among you, and cleanse you and change your Garments, and let us arise
and go to Bethel, that I may there make an Altar, to God that heard me in the
time of my trouble, and has been with me in the way which I have gone.

15. Which History of Jacob, signifies nothing else but this, viz. when Christ
would with this Rachels Idol Gods, viz. our flesh and blood, depart from this
servile house, and go to his Father, then he would by his going forth, when he
should build the High Altar before God, which Altar is himself, lay off these
our Idols in humane self-will, viz. every Imagination of self-love, before
the Altar of God in his Death, and cleanse our Hearts, viz. our souls Will,
and change our Garments, viz. our flesh and blood; as this Text in the 35
Chapter clearly signifies, and wholly entendeth it, that Christ would offer us
up upon that same Altar of his New Testament, to the God who appeared to us
again in Our trouble and Misery after the Fall, in his Covenant of Grace.

16. But, that the Text of Moses Genesis 31. says; Genesis 31.20, 21.
Jacob stole away the Heart of Laban the Syrian, in that he secretly fled away
with his Daughters: it has the very same inward spiritual Figure contained in
it; for, the Word became Man, and took Labans, viz. the earthly Adams
daughters, and brought them by divine subtilty away out of Adams house into
Gods house, which in that place is called Stealing, in that the children of
Adam are thus stolen from the kingdom of Gods wrath, that is, brought away in
the divine wit and subtilty.

17. For, the Anger of God had possessed Men in the right of Nature, but Christ
came and married with them, and stole them together with the Idol Gods away
from the Anger, and offered them up to God upon his Altar, which is himself,
and laid off the Images of Man's self-love, and cleansed our Garments before
God, that we might serve him at this Altar.

18. This is properly understood concerning Rachels Idol Gods, the Figure
indeed sets down only the Outward History, but the Spirit of God has its
figure under it; for the whole History of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, stands
inwardly in the figure of Christ; for, the Covenant between Laban and Jacob,
and all that happened therein, is a figure of Christ, for Laban here stands
in the figure of the kingdom of Nature, and Jacob in the figure of Christ.

19. Genesis 31.27, 28.
Laban upbraids Jacob, that he fled from him and did not suffer him first to
kiss his Children, and that he might conduct them on their way with Mirth and
with ^abretts: Thus also does Nature with the children of Christ, when they
secretly flee from it, and forsake the Idols house or Temple, then the
children of Natures kingdom upbraid these children of Christ, for fickle
forsworn people, for Heretics, Novellists, New Lights, Enthusiasts, or
whatsoever sect can be named, and say unto them; When you will depart from your
wicked way and enter into another Life, why do you not tell it to our High
Priests, that they may lead you onwards with their Ceremonies, viz. Confession,
Sacraments, Intercessions? Why do you not observe the usage of the Churches,
where the kingdom of Christ is in Mirth, with Roaring, Organs and Pipes? Why
do you steal away from us secretly, and go another way, then our Ordinances
and decrees prescribe, and therefore are enemies unto them, persecute them, and
hunt them with censurings and disgraces, as evil children and forsworn, which
had robbed them of their Idoll-Gods, and will not honor their hypocrisies for
Gods; as Laban pursued after Jacob and upbraideth him, because he had not first
kept that Pagintry and solemnity, and told him beforehand that he would
travail and begone.

20. Thus Babel also would feign have it, that the children of Christ should
only enter in to God, through their pagintries and Solemnities, and
Belly-Ordinances, and whosoever will enter in to God, otherwise then through
their Ordinances, and flee from this Servile house [of Bondage] he is damned
and cannot come to God.

21. But Jacob can well go to his Father without Labans Pagintry and
Solemnity; and though he upbraid Jacob and calls his way wrong, yet his way
was right in the sight of God. For God had commanded him so, and Laban could
not withhold him at all; so also Christ's children, when the Spirit of Christ in
them commands them to flee out from Babel, cannot be withheld, also it does
not hurt them, though the world blames them never so for it, and scorn,
deride, disgrace, and upbraideth them for fools, Heretics, and Enthusiasts.

22. Yet the Most High reproves and charge Laban, that he speak not
otherwise to Jacob then Courteously and kindly.
friendly; that is, the Blasphemies, reproach, misusage.
disdain of Babel toward the children of Christ, must in the End turn to
their mere joy and kindness, and now Laban must let them depart with their
Goods and riches: for God commands his children to Rev. 18.4.
flee from Babel, and to go into the first Country of their Father, out of
which they are departed with Adam, not through the Solemnity and Pagintry of
Babel, but through the Conversion of the Mind and will: viz. New Obedience.

23. For God has as much pleasure in the Solemnity and Pagintry of Babel, as
in Labans Tabrett and Pyping: He requires a Penitent Converting Heart, which
in highest simplicity and humility without any Solemnity or Pagintry draws
near unto him and departs from Babel, with such a one he goes along and
blesses him.

24. For, Genesis 32.1, 2.
when Jacob was gone forth without Solemnity and Pagintry, then the Angels of
God met him, whom he called Gods Host, which signifies, that when the
children of God go forth from humane Trifles, fables, Chime^^es, fantasies.
Inventions and Imaginations, and account all Earthly things as nothing, and
slip away from the hypocrisy of all their Titulary Brethren, then they get the
Angels of God for a Guard, who go along with them and lead them on their way
in their going out from Babel, as here was done to Jacob.

25. For as soon as Christ is borne in a Man, so that the Mind goes forth
out of the Adamicall servile house of Or, Imaginary Conceits.
Images, then the Angels of God are appointed his Guardians.

CHAP. LX. How Esaw went to Meet Jacob with four hundred Men, Soldiers, what
this signifies, And how Jacob sent a Present to his Brother Esaw, and how a
Man wrestled with him the whole Night. What all this means. Genesis 32.
For the Reader highly to Consider of.
MOses says; Genesis XXXII. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
And Jacob sent Messengers before him to his Brother Esaw into the Land of Seir
in the Borders of Edom, and commanded them, saying, tell my Lord Esaw thus, Thy
servant Jacob says thus, I have been long abroad with Laban until this time,
and I have Oxen and Asses, sheep, Menservants and women-servants, and I have
sent forth to thee my Lord to tell thee, that I might find Grace in thine
Eyes; The Messengers returned again to Jacob and said, We came to thy Brother
Esaw, and he also comes to meet thee with 400 Men.
four hundred Men, then Jacob feared very much, and was in distress, and
divided the people that were with him, and the Sheep and Oxen, and the
Camells, into two Companyes, and said; if Esaw come upon one Company and
smites it, the rest will escape.

2. This whole Chapter stands eminently in the figure of Christ: For, when the
Word was become Man, and would now go forth from this world and with our
humanity possess his Eternal Mansion, then meets him this host of Soldiers
in the kingdom of Nature in the Anger of God.

3. For the kingdom of Nature, viz. the Natural Adam, was the firstborn
Esau, which was angry with Jacob, that is, with Christ, for the blessing and
heavenly Inheritance, viz. for the Eternal Life; because it must dye and loose
its Right; in which kingdom the Anger of God had gotten the Dominion, that
same Anger of God came to meet Christ, when he was about to bring his acquired
Goods into the Eternal Country of his Father, viz. into the Love of God; as
Esaw did Jacob in the Type or Image of the Figure; and Christ was astonished at
this Warrier, viz. the Anger of God, as may be seen on the Mount of Olives; as
Jacob was astonished at the Anger of Esaw.

4. And as Jacob divided the Herds into two Parts, because of the wrath of
Esaw, that if Esaw should smite one Company, the other might Escape: so also
was the humanity of Christ divided into two Substances, viz. into a Heavenly,
whereof he speaks John, 3. saying, Joh. 13.13.
He was come from Heaven, and was then in Heaven; and also into an Earthly,
from our flesh and blood; that if the Anger of God did smite the one Part, viz.
our Humanity, with Death, yet the Heavenly Part, should escape the wrath and
penetrate through Death, and therein make our humanity living; for, the
Messengers which Jacob sent to Esaw, are nothing else but the Prayers of
Christ, which he sent through the Anger of God, into his Love, viz. into the
Mercy, that our humanity might find Grace and favor with God.

5. For, as Jacob sent to Esaw, saying, he had been long abroad with Laban,
even till this time, and had with him Menservants and women-servants, and
Camells, with other Cattle; that he might with all this, find Grace and favor
with his Lord Esaw: so also Christ says to his Father, in our Humanity (viz.
in Adam) which he has assumed; he has been long abroad absent from the
kingdom of God, and has Borne, Generated, or begotten.
brought forth in the kingdom of this world in Gods works of wonder, many
Images out of the divine wisdom through the formation of Nature, that he might
with these formations of wonders find Grace and favor with God, seeing these
wonders were brought forth through the Nature of his manifested wrath, that so
they might come to the Eternal divine vision and Contemplation.

6. But the Anger went to meet him in the 4 Elements.
four Elements, and would devour the Earthlines and Evil of them; for Esawes
four hundred Men, signify nothing else but the wrath of Nature in the four
Elements of the Body, and they went to meet the Humanity of Christ; when
Christ was bringing the Created Image of Adam in Our Humanity, into God, viz.
into Paradise; then would the wrath of God first kill the Adamicall Image, that
it might no more live in the kingdom of Anger, seeing it was to live in God.

7. Genesis 32.9, 10, 11.
And as Jacob humbled himself before God, and said; O God of my Father
Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, Lord, thou who have said unto me,
return again into thy Country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with
thee; I am unworthy of the least of all thy Mercy, and all thy faithfulness
and truth, which thou have afforded unto thy servant; for I had no more but
this Staff with which I went over this Jordan, and now I am become two Bands:
Deliver me from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esaw, for I am afraid
of him, least he cone and smite me, with the Mother and the Children; so also
Christ humbles himself in our assumed humanity before God; and though God in
the Prophet David, in our assumed humanity Psalm. 110.1.
has bidden him sit at his Right hand until he has laid all his Enemies
under his footstool; yet he humbles himself; even as Jacob did before the
Anger of Esaw, so also did Christ before the Anger of his Father.

8. And as Jacob said: When I went over this Jordan I had only this staff, but
now am become two Bands; so also when Christ, viz. the Eternal Word of Divine
Love came to us in our humanity, then it was only the staff of divine Grace;
but in our humanity in the servile house of Adam, he was enriched with two
Bands, viz, a twofold humanity, the Heavenly extinguished in Adam, and the
Earthly from the Limus of the Earth; therefore he says in this twofold
humanity, as Jacob said to God; O God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac, O Lord, thou have said unto me, return again into thy
Country, and to thy first kindred; I am less then the least of all these
mercies, which thou have bestowed on thy servant; to signify, that it was
only in Divine Mercy, that these two Bands, viz. the twofold humanity returned
home again into its first Country of Paradise to the Angelical kindred.

9. And when Jacob had humbled himself before God and his brother Esaw, Gen
32.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
He stayed there all night, and took of that which came to his hand, for a
present to his brother Esaw, two hundred Shee-Goates and twenty Hee-Goates, two
hundred Ewes and twenty Rams, and thirty Milch Camells with their foales, forty
Cowes and ten Bulls, twenty Shee-Asses with ten foales, and put them under the
hand of his servants, every heard by it self, and said to them; go on before
me, and leave room for one heard after another; and he commanded the foremost
and said; when my brother Esaw meets thee, and asks thee to whom do thou
belong? whither go thou? and whose these are that thou drivest? thou shall
then say, they are thy servant Jacobs, who sends them for a present to his
Lord Esaw, and he follows behind after us.

10. This Type is now the great Earnestnes, whereby the Spirit of God in the
figure poynteth at the future; for, this Present of Jacob, to his angry Brother
Esaw, poynteth at the Place and condition of Christ, when he should appease the
Anger of his Father, then he must first send these Beasts in our implanted
Humanity for an atonement, which should be presented to the Anger of God.

11. But these Beasts, which Christ sent to the Anger of God before his passion
and Death, were our implanted Beasts; viz. Pride, Covetousness, Envy,
wickedness, Lying, whereby one Man slandereth, disparageth, disgraceth,
shamefully censureth with words, discourageth, suppresseth, and exclaimeth
against, as wicked and ungodly, and summarily, all abominations of the Devil
and the wicked World.

12. These Evil Beasts are in Adam in sin, all awakened and become living;
These very Forms or Conditions of Life, wherein Adam generated his Evil
Beasts, wherein the Temperature of Nature was rent asunder, Christ took all
upon him in our humanity, as they are well intimated in the figure of Jacob by
five hundred and Eighty; 580.
and sent them to the Anger of God for an Atonement, when he was redeeming the
Humanity from these Beasts.

13. And these Beasts were, as to Christ, his being despised, scorned, spit
upon, whatsoever the Jewish Priests did to him, were all our Beasts, which,
Christ, in his Body, gave up to the Anger of God as if himself were the
Transgressour, and yet had generated none of these Beasts in his will; But Adam
had generated them, and Christ took them on him as a Lamb, and presented them
to the Anger of God on his body and Life, and did it as if himself were the
Transgressor, so that the Anger of God devoured them on his body and Life, viz.
his inheritance, which he had in Man, as a Natural Right, whereby the Anger of
God laid hold of its own, and his wrath and hunger after this vanity to
devour these Beasts, was appeased.

14. And the Spirit of Moses speaks further in the Figure of Christ and
says; thus, Genesis 32.21, 22, 23, 24. 2 Wives. 2 Women servants 11 Children.
The Present of Jacob, went before him, but he stayed that Night with the
Company, and arose in the Night, and took his two wives and handmaides, and
his eleaven Children, and went over the Ford Jabock, and he took them and sent
them over the water, and sent over that which he had, and stayed alone.

The Figure of Christ stands thus.
15. When Christ had sent this Present, before to the Anger of God, he stayed
with his Company, viz. with his Disciples, and arose in the Night of the Great
Darkness in Our Prison of Misery, and took his two wives, viz. the twofold
Spirit of Man, viz. the soul and the Spiritus Mundi, the spirit of this world,
the Outward soul, and the Inward Eternal soul, together with the two
handmaydes, viz. the twofold humanity of the Body, and the eleaven children,
which are the Eleaven Apostles; 11 Apostles.
and passed over the Ford Jabock, that is, he went over the Brook Kidron, in
the dark of the Night over the water, as here Jacob, with all whatsoever he
was, or had assumed from us Men.

16. For the right Twelfe Apostle of Christ, 12 th Apostle.
was not yet chosen in Judas his stead, as here with Jacob, the Twelfe son
lay yet in the Mothers womb unborne: and as Jacob with his Eleven sons went
over the water in the Great Night or Darkness: so went Christ with his Eleven
Disciples, in this Night of Jacob, over the Brook Kidron into the Garden, and
wrestled with the Anger of God, so that he sweat a bloody sweat, till he
overcame.

17. And as in this Night Genesis 32.24.
a Man wrestled with Jacob till the Day break; so also the Spirit of God, viz.
the love of God in our assumed humanity, wrestled with Gods anger in our
humanity, till the Love of Grace brake through the Anger, and the 2 Pet. 1.19.
Day Star of Divine Love arose in the soul, and overcame the Anger, as the
Text in Moses has here very secretly, and yet very clearly, signified in
this figure, saying;

18. When Jacob in this Night was passed over with h^s Eleven Children, Genesis
3^.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
and both his wives and the handmaydes, and all his Company, and afterward was
alone, there wrestled a Man with him till the break of Day appeared; and when
he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the Or, h^llow.
Ham of his Thigh; and the Ham of his Thigh was displaced with the wrestling
with him; and he said, let me Go, for the Day breaks; but he answered, I
will not let thee go except thou bless me; and he said what is thy Name, and
he answered, Jacob; and he said thou shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel,
for thou have striven with God and Man and have prevailed.

19. This Text stands wholly in the figure of Christ; for, this Man who
wrestled with Jacob this whole Night, is nothing else but Gods righteousness
and Truth, in which righteousness, in Adam, and in all Men, the severe
Judgment of God was awakened, and it signifies the same Man, who on Mount
Sinai gave the Law to the people of Israel, in sire and Terror, where he
appeared in his righteousness, in the Type of the Judgment, and commanded Man
to keep the Law of righteousness under pain of the Eternal Curse, where he
required the possibility and ability from Man, viz. from the Image of God that
he had created in Adam.

20. But Man having not stood in the Proba or Temptation.
Trial, therefore God inspake or inspired into him the Ground, viz. the
fountain of his most in ward hidden Love, in the Promise of the
Serpent-Destroyer, viz. the Holy Name JESUS. This Name JESUS stood now as a
Covenant of Grace in Gods severe righteousness, hidden in the most in ward
Ground of the humane Soul; and opened it self in the Holy Patriarchs.
Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in their Faiths Ens.

21. But Jacob at present standing in the figure with his brother Esaw, viz.
Jacob in the Type or Image of Christ, and Esaw in the Type or Image of Gods
righteousness in the Anger according to the kingdom of Nature, so at present
in this Night, when Jacob was in great anxiety, this figure was manifested to
him, that he perceived how Gods Love in the Covenant of Grace in the
incorporated Name JESUS, wrestled with God the Fathers righteousness in the
Anger of the Judgment, viz. in the great Night of the Darkness of Gods Anger,
wherein the poor soul lay captive, and was so hard Coarcted.
tied and bound and put thereinto, and that the Anger in the righteousness
will not give over unless it give it self into the Love of Grace, that the
Love may break through the anger, as the shining of Light does out of the
Fire; or as the Morning breaks out of the dark Night, and changes the dark
Night into day.

22. For, the Covenant of Grace in the Love, and the soul, stood at present in
one Person, therefore at present the soul of Jacob must in Christ's figure and
Type, wrestle with Gods righteousness about the heavenly Ens, viz. about the
substantial Wisdom, which the Name Jesus brought along with the poor soul
in its heavenly Substantiality, which faded in Adam; whereby Adams faded
Substantiality sprung forth again in this living Substantiality, as a New
Birth.

23. Therefore the Spirit of God says to Jacob; thou have wrestled with God
and Man, viz. with Gods Love in the Covenant, and with the future heavenly
Substantiality, which Substantiality became Man in the Seed of Mary, and have
prevailed: for, Christ, in whose figure Jacob stood, should thus in our assumed
humanity wrestle with Gods righteousness and conquer.

24. And the Spirit in Moses says here; And when he saw that he prevailed not
against him (understand, Gods righteousness in the Anger of the Judgment
prevailed not against the Grace) then he touched the Ham of his Thigh, and the
Ham of his Thigh was displaced by the wrestling with him.

25. This signifies the destruction and displacing of the Adamicall humanity,
that when Christ would stand out this victory, then would the humane
selfe-Might and own will, be displaced, and broken and killed; but as Jacob
dyed not by this wrestling, though the Ham of his Thigh was indeed displaced;
so also our humanity should not die Eternally, but be only displaced, that is,
be changed.

26. This signifies especially, how the Repentant Man must enter upon this
Combat of Jacob, and so wrestle with God and Man in the Spirit of Christ in
Gods righteousness, in the Anger; And when he overcomes, then will the Ham of
his fleshly self-will be broken, that he must go up and down in this world
as one half Lame, that cannot well walk in the way of the world, but goes
halting, as if his limbs were half broken, with which the wantonness and
vanity of this world is driven on; for the Spirit in the victory of Christ,
touches his Thigh, that he is half lame in the Pride and Malice of this
world, and never regards it more; but goes up and down as a despised lame
Man, who in the Pride of the world in their hail or frolic Jollity little
regard, but hold him for a lame halting Man, who cannot follow the Garb of the
Antic tricks, conceited jests and lasciviousness of this world: but he has
wrestled with God and Man, and is with this victory touched and Marked.

27. This, the Pride and wantonness of this world understands not, for it
goes up and down still in Gods severe righteousness, in the kingdom of
Nature, in the might of the Fire, in self-will, and thinks it self very well,
till the Judgment possesses its place, then must the poor soul stand in the
Eternal Judgment, and live in pain and Torment.

28. And as Jacob stood in the wrestling, and had his Thigh touched that he
halted, then the Man said to him; Let me go; for the Day-breake dawneth; but
he answered, I will not let thee go except thou bless me.

29. This is first the figure of Christ, when he yielded himself up in the
righteousness of God in the Fathers Anger, so that the Anger according to our
humanity slew him; then said the righteousness: Now let me go; for at
present, the Eternal Morning breaks forth in me; But Christ had taken hold
of the righteousness and said; I will not let thee go except thou bless the
humanity again; that the Judgment may cease; except thou bring the Morning of
thy inward power, forth through the humanity, that the Curse may cease, and
that Man may wholly stand in the divine working again, in the Blessing.

30. Secondly, It is the fair Type or Image, showing how it goes with the
Repentant Man, when he gives himself up through earnest Repentance into this
Combat of Christ; in Christ's suffering and Death in his victory, and in the
Spirit of Christ wrestleth with Gods severe righteousness, which continually
assayleth him in his Conscience.

31. For, Gods righteousness in the Conscience says; let me go; thou art
dead in sin, and have no part in the divine Grace; thou have purposely and
wilfully sinned, and set the Grace behind thy back, now thou art mine, praying
will not avail thee, I will not let thee in thy conscience attain the Grace,
thou will obtain no comfort more from God, the morning will no more rise to
thee in thy conscience, for thou art a child of Death: Now leave off and let
me alone, that I may shutt thee up below in the dungeon or chamber of death.

32. When this comes to pass, then the poor soul wholly immerseth it self
into the death of Christ, and gives it self up to the severe righteousness
of God, into the judgment, for the judgment lays hold on it: But the soul
catches hold of the incorporated Grace in the death of Christ, and diveth
therewith into the most inward ground of the judgment of God, in which ground,
God's Love is broken forth through the righteousness, and through the
judgment, viz. through the eternal night, and has made that same night in
man to be day.

33. Into this day, viz. into the Abyss without all humane possibility or
ability, it diveth as a child, that neither can nor will do any more, that is
too unworthy of all Grace, and must indeed give it self up to the judgment;
but with this diving, the soul yeedeth all its utmost will and ability, and is
in it self as it were void of nature and creature, and falls again into the
Word, wherein it stood in the eternal speaking, before its creaturely nature.

34. For Gods righteousness and judgment, has no deeper ground, then merely
the creaturely life; but when the will of the soul yields it self up in
going forth from the creature, and sinketh into the Abyss, then is it again as
a new child; for the Abyss in the eternal speaking word, out of which the
highest Love and Grace of God has manifested it self, lays hold on it, and
penetrateth into it, as the Sun does into the Ens of an herb, whence the herb
becomes half Solar, or of the nature of the Sun: Thus in this diving, the
soul in its will, is half divine, and then it wrestleth with God's severe
righteousness in flesh and blood, and will overpower the Anger of God.

35. Then says God's righteousness in the conscience; let me alone, that is,
leave off, and slay me not, for thou see very well, that the Divine morning
arises in me, cease from striving against the judgment of God: But in the
right combat the soul says to God's righteousness, I will not leave thee
except thou bless me, that is, except thou give me the promised Grace, out
of the Death of Christ in his conquest, that I may put on my Savior Christ,
that he may be mine and I his: And then thus says God's righteousness; as to
Jacob; What is thy name? And then the poor soul names it self according to
its own creaturely name, As Jacob did here, when he called himself Jacob:
But as the Lord said to Jacob; Thou shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel,
that is, a Tree of life. Thus also says God to the soul: Thou shall no more
have self-names in me, but thou shall be called a Christian in Christ, viz. A
branch in the Tree of Israel, Joh. 15.5.
A sprout on the vine Christ; For thou have fought with God and man, and have
prevailed: Thou have overcome Gods righteousness in the wrath of the Anger, in
thy Combat in the Spirit of Christ, and art now an essential Christian, and no
more a titulary and verbal or Mouth-Christian, from whom Grace is yet far off.

36. And Moses says further; Genesis 32.29, 30.
And Jacob asked him and said; Tell me I pray thee, what is thy name? But he
said, wherefore ask thou what is my name? And he blessed him there, And
Jacob called the place Pennel, For I have seen God face to face, and my soul
is Healed.
preserved.

The inward holy Figure stands thus.
37. When Jacob with the desire of faith in his wrestling, apprehended the
morning or Day-breake of God in the Spirit of Christ, and Joh. 8.56.
saw Christ a far off, without the creaturely humanity, Then he said, What is
thy name? But Christ said, Wherefore ask thou what is my name? that is, I am
no stranger, But am even the Israel in thy self, I have no other name, but thy
name and my name shall be one.

38. For God, without nature and Creature has no name, but is called only the
eternal GOOD, viz. the eternal ONE, The abyss and Or, Ground.
profundity of all beings: There is no place found for him, therefore can no
creature Rightly name him; for, all names stand in the formed word of Power:
But God is, himself, the root of all power, without beginning and names,
Therefore says he to Jacob, Wherefore ask thou what is my name? And blessed
him.

39. As the creatures and also all vegetables of the earth cannot know how the
Sun's power is named, but they stand still for the Sun, and the Sun gives them
power and warmth and blesses them, that they grow and bear fruit: so also
here is to be understood concerning Jacob and all men. When Jacob saw and felt
the morning or daybreak of God in his soul, then the Divine Sun in the Name
JESUS blessed him through an essential working.

40. And this must thereby signify, as it went with Jacob and all the children
of God, and yet still goes with them in this Sunshine. When the Sun of grace
with it is working power arises in the soul, then the soul rejoices, and
would always feign behold the countenance of God after a creaturely manner; as
also Moses desired, and always thinks God is of some form, they look not
yet rightly upon God, but will know God in Imagery: thus hard lies the
creaturely Imagery upon us, in the departed apostate self-will in the mind,
that we cannot at all understand what God is, viz. that he himself is the
abyss of all nature and creature, viz. the eternal ONE, that dwells in
nothing but only in himself, and has no form, nor any thing.

41. And it were very well and good, that we were not so lead by the Masters
of the Letter in an Imaginary form, when they Teach and speak of the only
God, as has been done hitherto, where Men have lead us on in vain Images Or,
in.
of the Essential will, as if the only God did will this or that, whereas
himself is the sole will to the [being of] Nature and Creature, and the whole
Creation lies only and alone, in the formation of his Expressed word and
will, and the severation of the only will in the Expression; and is understood
in the impression of.
to Nature.

42. If the Pride of Lucifer might be torn out of the hearts and eyes of these
Masters, then Men would soon see the countenance of God; But the Babylonish
Tower, upon which men will climb, and in Opinions climb up to God into a
Severed Heaven, where God sitts cooped up; this withholdeth the true knowledge
and understanding; and makes us always ask, what is the Name of God? where is
God? what is the will of God? Also, they say God wills Good and Evil, from
which they make a multitude of Or, Determinations and Conclusions.
Decrees in the Divine Purpose; as a Prince in his Land makes Laws; and they
have as much understanding of God and his will, as the Pott understands of the
Potter.

43. It is to be lamented, that we are so blindly lead, and the Truth
withheld, in Imaginary Conceits.
Images, for, if the Divine Power in the inward Ground of the soul, were
manifest and working with its luster, and that men did desire to go forth from
their ungodly ways, and give up themselves to God, then is the whole Tri-une
God present in the Life and Will of the Soul; and the Heaven, wherein God
dwells, is opened in the soul, and there, in the soul, is the place of God,
where the Father begets his Son, and where the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father and the Son.

44. For God makes use of no circumscribed place, He dwells even in the
Abyss of the wicked Soul, but incomprehensible to it, as to his Love; but as
to his Anger he is manifest and comprehensible in the wicked Soul.

45. For, the Eternal Or, Expression.
speaking of the Word, incomprehensible to Nature and Creature, becomes
Conceivable, or perceptible, or getts an Idea.
Imaged in the will of the Soul; of which the Scripture says; Psalm. 18.25, 26.
With the holy thou art holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse; Also,
such as the People is, such a God they have.

46. For in the Thrones of the Holy Angels, God is manifest in his Love, and
in the Thrones of the Devils he is manifest with his Wrath, viz. according to
the darkness and Torment; and yet there is but one only God, and not two;
according to the Tormentive Nature he wills Torment, and according to the
Love he wills Love, as a burning fire, desires hard brimston like it self,
and the Light of the Fire desires only an open place where it may shine: It
takes away nothing, but gives it self for the Joy of Life, it suffers it
self to be taken, it has no other Will in it self, but to give forth it
self, and work, that which is Good; so God, as to his Holiness, has no other
Will, but to Manifest the power of his Love and shining luster, in a Creaturely
Or, manner.
Form, as the Sun manifests it self in an herb, and tinctureth it and
makes it wholesome and good, so also is to be understood concerning God.

47. Therefore all is but vain jangling, babbling, and a Creaturely Or, Imagery.
Imagination, for men to ask, what is God called? or what is Gods name? or for
men to talk much and say, God wills this or that Evil and Good, and know
not how to say upon good ground, how he wills Evil and Good, and how a man
shall understand the Or, sayings.
Texts of Scripture to that purpose.

48. This Contention and Strife about the Letter, is indeed the very confused
divided Tongue or Language on the high Tower of the children of Nimrod in
Babel; for that high Tower is a figure of the Facultaeten. Disputations in the
High Schools.
Exercises in the Universities, where the One Divine Language is divided or
confounded and wrested into many Perverted in Phrases and expressions.
Speeches, that one People does not understand another, and that Men contend
about the only God, in whom we live and subsist, and whereby even the kingdom
of Nature in its wonders is manifested, and Fashioned wonderfully. Psalm. 139.14.
brought into figured wonders.

49. But the true ground, what God is, and how he is, what the Being of all
Beeings is, remains as blind to them, as the visibility of this world is to
one that is borne blind: and though they are called Masters of the Letters, V:
Vowells.
yet they have lost the Five Vowells, which are the power of all words; which
is much to be lamented, that men understand nothing at all more of the Holy
Ghosts Language, what the Spirit of God has spoken in Moses and the Prophets,
and how he has in his speech, declared and poynted at that which is future,
Eternal: Men cleave merely to an historical Act or thing done.
Action, and see not what is signified by this or that Action.

50. For, Gods Spirit has not done such wonders, for the History sake of a
plain simple Shepherd, as it stands in the outward form of it, and has so
exactly expressed those things in writing, as if he were so much concerned in a
History, that he has preserved it among all people, and suffered it to be
proclaimed for his word; no sure, but for this cause; that under such plain
simple historical relations, is signified, and wherewith Gods Spirit in the
figure alludeth at, that which is future, Eternal: Therefore should men look
upon the Scripture of the Old Testament with cleerer eyes, for the whole New
Testament is couched under it in the figure of the plain simple Apostel
Geschich^. The Acts of the Apostles.
Acts or Actions.

51. Genesis 32.29.30.
When God had blessed Jacob, then Jacob called the place Penuel, that is, Gods
inspection into the soul, where God is manifest in the soul; then says the
Soul; I have seen God face to face in Me, and my soul is preserved in this
inspection; and when he passed over Penuel, the Sun arose to him, that is, when
Gods Sun, viz. his power is manifest in the soul, then the Essence of the Soul
carries the power in it self, and then the divine Sun arises in the Souls
Essence, and then the Father has there begotten his Son in the soul, which
is the Sun of righteousness, as also the Divine Love and Joy, and then
selfe-Nature halte^h, for the Sinew of its Natural will is displaced, so that
the self-will is lame in its ability, as here Jacob. And the Text of Moses
says; Hereupon the Children of Israel eat not of the sinew upon the Ham of
the Thigh, to this Day; because the sinew of the Ham of Jacobs Thigh was
touched.

52. This shows clearly, that Jacob and his children understood this
Mystery, and have instituted a memorial in this Sinew: for what does that
which was done to Jacob, concern a Beast? The Sinew of a Beast is not
therefore displaced or venomed, only the children of the Saints looked upon
the Ground of the Divine Mystery.

53. Concerning which the present Jews are very blind, and hang only on the
Law: if they did so eagerly seek after Jacobs Sun as they cleave fast to the
Law, then would that Sinew in them also be displaced, and they would not so
hunt after Covetousness and Gain, but Mat. 23 25. Luke 11.39.
they wash the outside of their Cups and dishes, and inwardly remain foul.

54. Even as Christendom cleaves to the history, viz. to the purple Mantle of
Christ, and hunt away Christ in power from them, and will not with Jacob have
the Sinew of the wild beastiall properties of the voluptuous will of flesh,
displaced and lamed, but walk nimbly with the beast, under the Mantle of
Christ.

55. This displaced Sinew signifies, that Adam in his innocence before his
Eve, was not such a Gross Beast, as afterward; therefore when the Spirit of
Christ in the Covenant was manifested in Jacob, then it touched the Beastiall
Ham of his Thigh, to signify, that in Christ it should be broken and cease, so
that a spiritual Man should arise from Death, and not such a gross Beastiall
Man.

CHAP. LXI. The Excellent and Wonderful Figure, Showing, how Jacob and Esaw
met, and how all heart-burning and Evill-will, was changed into great Joy,
Kindness, and Compassion. What is to be understood thereby.
Genesis 33.
Blind Reason should better open its Eyes, at this Text, Genesis XXXIII.
then hitherto it has done, and better consider the figure of Jacob and Esaw,
and learn rightly to understand the Decree concerning Jacob and Esaw; where
the Scripture says; Mal. 1.2.3. Romans 9.13.
Jacob have I loved and Esaw have I hated, when the children lay yet in the
Mothers womb, and had done neither good nor Evil, that the purpose of God
might stand.

2. Here men should rightly look upon the Purpose of God, what the Spirit of
God means thereby, for Esaw stood in the Type or Image of the corrupted Adam,
and Jacob in the Type of Christ, which came to help poor Adam: therefore must
these two Brothers come of one Seed, to signify that God would become Man,
and that Gods Seed, viz. his word, and Adams seed in its own Nature, should be
manifested in one Person, and become Man; and that Gods seed should overcome
the corrupted Adams seed with great divine Love, and quench the Fathers Anger,
with Love, and the Love should wholly give it self into the Anger of the
soul, that Gods Grace, Compassion and Mercy in the Love, may pass through the
Anger, and also change the Anger into Compassion; as here Jacob, with his
present and great submission and humility, yielded himself to his brother Esaw,
and changed his Anger whch he bare toward Jacob, in respect of the Natural
right of the firstborn, and of the Blessing, into such great Compassion, that
Esaw fell about his neck and wept in great Compassion, and his anger in him was
turned into Love; even as Christ with his great love and humility in our
assumed humanity in our fiery burning Anger soul.
Angry-soule, changed his Fathers Anger into such great Mercy and Compassion,
that the divine righteousness in the Anger, ceased and departed from our
souls.

3. For as Jacob appeased his brother Esaw with the Present and humility, when
he gave up himself into the Anger of Esaw, so also Christ appeased the Anger
of God, when he gave up his heavenly Blood with the great Tincture of Love into
the Anger of God, to be devoured, then was the Anger, viz. the Nature of the
dark world, which was manifested in Adam, turned again into the divine Light
of Love, viz. into a Love-fire.

Genesis 33.1, 2, 3.
4. Moses says; Jacob lift up his Eyes and saw his brother Esaw coming with 400
men.
four hundred Men, and he divided his children to Lea and to Rachel and to
both the Handmayds, and set the handmayds with their children foremost, and Lea
with her children next, and Rachel with Joseph last, and he passed over before
them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, till he came to his
brother.

The inward precious figure stands thus.
When Christ, in our assumed humanity, entered into his suffering, then the
Anger of God in the 4 Elements.
four Elements of the Body, came to meet him; and then Christ divided his
Deity and his humanity, viz. the heavenly worlds substance, which he brought
from God in Our humanity, and the kingdom of the Natural humanity from Adam,
into two several Principles: for the Deity, as to the Omnipotency, stood yet
still: therefore says the Humanity on the Cross, Mat. 27.46. Mark. 15.34.
Psalm. 22.1.
My God, why have thou forsaken me?

5. The two wives of Jacob with their children, signify here, in Christ's
state and condition, the twofold soul, viz. that from Time and that from
Eternity, and the two handmaydes with their children, signifi^ here, in this
state and condition of his, the Heavenly and the Earthly corporeity, viz. Lea
in her bleereydness signifies the The spirit of the world in the Dust of the
Earth^
Spiritus Mundi in Limo terrae, wherein the Corruption in Adam was effected,
wherein God promised the destroyer of the Serpent; and wherein Christ should be
manifested; and therefore in Lea, the Line of Christ, viz. the destroyer of the
Serpent in the type and prefiguration, was borne, viz. Judah; and Rachel
signifies the Extinguished Ens of the heavenly worlds Substance, wherein the
true soul dwells, which faded in Adams Fall and became unfruitful, as
Rachel; till God in the Spirit of Christ made her fruitful; as was done to
Rachel.

6. And as Jacob set the handmayds with their children foremost, so was the
Earthly Image in the humane Nature, set foremost in the suffering of Christ,
which should pass through the sharpnes of Death, next after would Lea, that
is, the Body out of the Limus of the Earth, wherein the Destroyer of the
Serpent lay, in the suffering of Christ, follow; and after that, Rachel, viz.
the heavenly Limus with the Prince Joseph, that is, with the true Adamicall
Image of the Divine worlds Substance, and the Name JESUS passed into the
suffering of Christ before, as Jacob before his wives and childrens.

7. And as the Name and power JESU, viz. Gods Sweetness and Love, saw and felt
the wrath of God in the humane flesh and soul, then the Name JESUS bowed it
self through all the Seven Forms of Natures Life, wherein the Anger of God
was become manifest, that is, he then pressed Essentially through the Center of
Nature, through all the Seven Forms of Nature, quite through the wrathful
fire-source.

8. As Jacob bowed himself seven times to the Earth before the Anger of Esaw,
and appeased Esaw in this humility; so also here the Love in the Name JESU,
appeaseth the anger of the Fathers property in the fire, in soul and body:
for, the Natural Life from the Spirit of the world, viz. the soul from time,
which was breathed into Adams Nostrills, must yield up its natural Right and
dye; as Jacob yielded up his riches and also his outward Life to his brother,
to do what he would with him; thus also Christ yielded up our Life to the anger
of God, and left it willingly; but the Name JESUS went before, and brought our
Natural Life quite through death, and took it to himself again, and
triumphed with our Natural Life, over and through Death.

9. And as Esau his brother, in this humility and submission, ran to meet him,
and fell about his neck and kissed him, and in great compassion wept upon his
neck: So also in like manner, when the essence of the anger of God [kissed and]
tasted the sweet love in the Name JESU in the blood of Christ, then it was
transmuted and converted into such great compassion toward mankind, as
Jeremiah in the Spirit declares where he speaks in this figure; Jer. 31.20.
Ephraim my dear child, my heart is troubled, I must have compassion on him.
Where he speaks concerning this compassion.

10. And when Esaw wept upon Jacobs neck, Genesis 33.5, 6, 7.
He lift up his eyes, and behold the women with the children, and said; Whose
are these with thee? Jacob answered: They are the children which God has
bestowed upon thy servant, And the handmayds drew near with their children,
and bowed themselves before him: Lea also drew near with her children, and
bowed themselves before him; afterward Joseph and Rachel drew near and bowed
themselves before him.

The inward Figure stands thus.
When the anger of God held man captive in the darkness, then was he not, in
the anger, known to God's holy Image: but when the love in the suffering of
Christ in the humanity, brake through the anger, so that the anger was changed,
then the only God looked on it again in his Image, and spoke to the Name
JESU, saying, Who are these that are with thee? And JESUS answered God and
said: They are the children which God has vouchsafed and bestowed upon his
servant.

11. For here Christ presents himself as a Servant of God, with his children,
that are borne in him, in the Faith, viz with us poor children of Eve: and
there passed through the death of Christ, and were presented before the
countenance of God; first the handmaids with their children, that is, man that
had been sinful, he sets him first in Gods countenance, which Jacobs handmaids
do signify.

12. Afterward there pressed forward the line of the Covenant, with the
spiritual Lea, viz, the first created Image out of the Limus of the earth,
wherein the The 5 wounds of Christ.
five Prints of the Nails, the wounds of Christ stood, they should be shown
to the only God, that therein he should receive the handmaids children, who
all bowed themselves before God.

13. Then afterward came Joseph with his Mother, viz. the Image of the
heavenly world's substance, and bowed before the only God which had been angry
with him.

14. Men should not understand this in divided figures, types, or Images, but
as the properties of the humanity are manifested before God through the
suffering of Christ in one only Image, viz. in Christ's humanity in the
kingdom of the Restoration or Redemption, viz. in the kingdom of heaven. The
reader should understand our sense properly: for we write here in the vision
of all the Three Principles, how it went, and still to this day goes, with the
new birth: Our exposition will not bear any dividing of the figure or
Creature, we understand it in one creature.

15. Our earnest and hearty consideration is this, that we may see and
understand, how we poor children of Eve were brought through Christ's suffering
and death, and set before Gods countenance, and how first the soul with the
body of sin must pass through death, and in the Resurrection come again with
the body before God, where the body from the Limus of the earth is esteemed
strange in the presence of God: Therefore it is prefigured in the type in the
condition of a handmaid, and then presently in that body the Prints of the
Nails and the suffering of Christ is set before God, Out of which death of
Christ, the fair Image created in Adam, appears again, as the whole figure
together, of Jacob, thus fairly typifieth, and as the Spirit has signified
thereby.

16. Genesis 33 8, 9, 10, 11.
And Esaw said farther to Jacob; What meanest thou by all this herd which I
met? He answered; that I might find grace in the sight of my Lord; Esaw said,
I have enough my Brother, keep what thou have; Jacob answered, O no, if I have
found grace in thy sight, then receive my Present at my hand; for I have seen
thy Face, as if I had seen the Face of God; and let it please thee from me:
take I pray thee the Blessing from me, which I have brought thee for God has
bestowed it upon me, and I have enough; thus he constrained him, that he took
it; This now is the fair figure wherewith the Spirit alludeth, how Christ
appears before God, with his Christendom, viz. with his purchased Goods,
then says the Father to the Son, Whither will thou go with these thy
Children, who meet me daily, in that they come to thee? And Christ says; O
Lord, that I might find Grace from thee with them. And the Father says; they
are thy purchased goods, keep what thou have, I have without them enough, even
all things.

17. But Christ says O no my Lord, receive I pray thee the blessing which God
has bestowed upon me in my children, which I have brought to thee; for God
has bestowed them on me and I have enough, and he constrained God his Father
that he received the kingdom again from him: And it is a true figure
[shewing], how Christ after he sits at the right hand of God, and rules over
his enemies 1 Cor. 15.24.28.
would deliver up the kingdom again to his Father: And then also will the Son
be subject to the Father together with his Christendom, as the Scripture
says: Which the Spirit in this figure powerfully prefigureth, and represents
in a Type or Image.

18. This is an excellent figure, where Jacob comes to his brother Esaw that
had been angry, and perceives how Esaw falls about his neck and weepeth,
that Jacob says, I saw thy face as if I saw the face of God: Which signifies
to us that the wrath of God in the kingdom of nature was become an enemy in
Adam's Soul and Body, viz. the fiery Soul it self, which stands in the
Fathers property in the eternal nature.

19. But when this great love and humility pressed through in the blood of
Christ, then was this wrath, viz. the fiery soul converted again into Gods
most clear countenance, and attained again the Eye of God's love; Thus also we
are to undestand concerning Esau, when the Covenant of Grace in the figure of
Christ, in Jacob's humility was discovered to him, then was his curse and
malice, through the Spirit of Christ, turned into love, that he was no more
he, of whom the Scripture says: Romans 9.13.
Esaw have I hated: for in the kingdom of the Adamicall nature, was God's
hatred manifested in him, and he was himself that hatred, and of that says the
Scripture: Romans 9.13.
Esaw have I hated: Now so long as the hatred in him had the dominion, so long
he was in God's hatred, and was himself the hatred, but when the Covenant of
Grace in Jacob discovered it self to him, and that Jacobs humility pressed
into his hatred, then began he to lament and weep, and Gods clear countenance
was manifested in his hatred, so that in great compassion he fell upon Jacobs
neck and wept.

20. Which denotes the repentance of poor sinners, when the malicious wicked
soul which lies captive in the hatred of God turns to God, then begins
first this compassion and repentance and sorrow for its former Sin. When the
Spirit of Christ afflicts the soul, then it weepeth, and sorrrweth, that it
has been so wicked, and then instantly the Sun rises upon it, and the hatred
of God is turned into the countenance of Love; where, of an hateful spirit, he
is made an Angel.

21. And though clearly the Scripture says in a certain place: Heb. 12.17.
Esaw sought repentance with tears, and yet found it not; but this Text gives
us to understand much otherwise, namely, that indeed Esaw and all the children
of corrupt Adam, do not find repentance in their own willing going, and
running, else would it stand in the ability of man to attain Grace, but the
grace and divine mercy and compassion works repentance: Yet man must give up
his will to the Divine working.

22. The Souls will must incline it self toward the promised Grace; And then
will the divine Sun, shine into it is will, and dissipate the Or, the hatred in
wickedness.
hatred of wickedness, and then the soul graspeth after the Sun of Grace, and
so begins the working of repentance in the power of Grace, and then the
Anger of God in the soul gives it is severe righteousness to the Spirit of
Christ; and so Christ then says to his Father; Joh. 6.39.
I have lost none of them that thou have given to me.

23. The Scripture says; 1 Timothy 2.4.
God wills that all men should be saved; And Mat. 18.11.
Christ is come to seek and save that which is lost; and Ezekiel. 33.11.
He has no pleasure in the death of a Sinner: Then says Reason: If God will
that all men should be saved, and wills not the evil; can he not then save
all? Why do they remain hardened, if he wills not their hardening?

24. Answer. The Soul stands in the Vnfathomable.
unsearchable will of God in the eternal speaking word: It is a spark from
the divine Speaking, whereby the Abyss, viz. the eternal one expresses or
speaks forth it self in the science, understanding, and knowledge of the
Seperability.
Severation; it is in the speaking come into nature and creature, and has now
the ability to express again, viz. an Image of it self.

Note.
25. Also in its knowledge it speaks forth the wonders of the divine
possibility in good and evil; It speaks it self in its essential speaking,
out of the eternal science it self, in evil: Where it should speak God, it
speake's in it self, want: where it should speak in its science, into the
eternal one, viz. into Gods love and wisdom; there it speake's into
severation, viz. into multiplicity; and brings the science of its ability,
which stands in the eternal speaking word, out of the temperament, into a
self-will, which breaks off from the only will of God and enters into self.

26. Therefore then it changes the eternal will of the unity in it, into the
center of severation, wherein the only God introduces his only will, in the
speaking forth of the word, into nature and painfulness, to the Divine
perception and feeling; viz. into an essential spiritual fire, and out of the
fire into a light, whereby the abyss becomes majestic and working; Thus the
false or wicked soul speaks it self only into a source of fire.

27. For it is will to the speaking, which in God stands in the abyss, which
brings it self, through the desire, into the fire-speaking, viz. into
properties; which go not easily back again into the abyss, viz. into the
eternal One: But if it go back again, viz. into the eternal one, viz. into
God; then the fiery science becomes majestic and light, and then is the Soul
an Angel of God, viz. an Image of the eternal divine science.

28. But if the will continue in the fire as a magical fire source, then is the
soul that very fire-source: Who shall now advise and persuade this
fire-source? seeing it has its ground in the abyss, and is it self its ground:
The power of the majesty shines through it, but the desire shutts it up, and
makes it dark, so that the light cannot be manifest therein. As it stands John
1. Joh. 1.5.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not. They
dwell one in another, as day and night; the soul in its imprinted desire
makes it self darkness.

29. The eternal one, viz. God, is in it, and it comprehends him not, it
makes an angry God to it self; where Gods word in the anger speaks and
forms it self into nature and creature, there it works in it self, evil:
But if it stood still from its working, the twinkling of an eye, then it would
dive again into the eternal one, viz. into God, and so the Divine science in
the light, would begin to work in it, and so it would come to repentance, even
as it comes to pass with the Penitent. Concerning which Christ says; Matthew
18.3.
Except ye be converted and become as a child, you will not see God.

30. The soul's will, which has it is ground and rise in the Divine
revelation, whence it is become a working life; should and must turn again into
it is mother out of which it proceeded, and then it is as a child in the mothers
womb; and so in its mother it beholds God; viz. the abyss of all beings; and
is newborn in its mother; that is, the mother gives it the light's power,
and in that power it attaineth the ability to work Repentance, and then the
eternal unsearchable will of God, which is called the Father of all beings,
begets his only Son, viz his power of love, in and through the Or, Root.
science of the soul, as in the particular or parcel of the whole will of God;
for, the ground of the soul and God's eternal speaking word, is one only
ground, undivided.

31. And as we know that the same only eternal begetting and speaking word,
expresses it self in heaven, viz. in the power of the light, in holiness, viz.
the holy wisdom: So also the same only word expresses it self in the Hell of
darkness, in flames of Torment, viz. in hellish Essences, according to which
God calls himself, Deuteronomy 4.24. Heb. 12.29.
An angry God, and a consuming fire; for without and beyond the only word, or
speaking, of God, there is nothing; So also it is to be understood concerning
Souls, as also Angels and Devils.

32. In the resigned Soul God the Father expresses the holy name JESU, viz.
the Grace, Mercy, and Compassion, that is, he begets Christ in it, and
brings the Adamical evil innate will, through the suffering and death of
Christ, again into the eternal ONE, where 1 Cor. 15.24
the Son delivers up the kingdom of the soul's nature again to the Father.

33. But if the soul will not stand still from its working of wickedness, then
the Father, through the word, speaks Hell torment in the soul, and the
desire of the soul imprinteth and fixes it self therein, and its impression
makes the eternal gross darkness, viz a Gulf, between God and it, and yet no
strange Forins^k.
foraigne speaker must be here understod, which from without shall speak into
the soul, but the word, that is, the soul it self, speaks it self, thus,
into wickedness.

34. But it has lost in Adam the good speaking [or expression of good] viz.
the Divine ability, but, of God's mercy, it is inspoken, or inspired again, of
Grace, in Paradise, as a self-centre of the soul, and it stands now at present
in the soul as a self-centre or principle; and speaks continually into the
soul; [saying,] It should stand still from its false and wicked Imagination,
and then will that Good speaking, motion, or inclination of the Spirit in the
Mind.
good, manifest it self again in the soul; but if the soul will not stand
still from its ungodly speaking, then cannot the good inspeaking or inspiration
manifest it self in the soul; and so it cannot be converted.

35. Therefore this is the conclusion, that God in the false and wicked soul's
speaking, cannot be good, and in the resigned soul's will, he cannot be evil;
in himself he is indeed good, but not in that soul.

36. God is only called God, where his love is expressed, and known and
manifest operatively and feelingly; of which the Scripture also says, Deuteronomy.
30.14. Romans 10.8.
The word, John 1.1.
which is God, is nigh thee, namely, in thy mouth and heart: Also Luke 17.21.
the kingdom of God is within you: Psalm. 18.26.
with the holy thou art holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse.

37. In Heaven he is called God, and in Hell he is called Anger, and yet he is
in the abyss, both in Heaven and in Hell the Eternal one, viz. the only good.

38. And man can speak no farther, or deeper concerning Gods will, but merely
and only as in his manifestation through the word; where the word brings it
self into nature and creature, There God wills through the expressed word of
evil and good; as the Science of every thing is in the formed word, so also is
Gods will therein: That same expressed word is in the Angels, Angelical, in
the Devils, Diabolical, in man, humane, in beasts, bestial; and yet in it self
in it is eternal speaking, in the one, is only God, viz. one only holy word, a
ground and Root of all beings.

Note the Grace of God.
39. Therefore salvation lies not in the will of the soul, whether it will
suffer it self to be saved, or whether it will stand still in its will; not
that it can take salvation to it self: no, it is given of Grace, only the
Divine Sun shines into it, in the abyss; and it lies in The soul.
it, whether, with its will, which it has from God, it will again for the
twinkling of an eye dive down in its mother, viz. in Gods unsearchable will,
and so it will attain the ability.

40. For the ability has opened its mouth to the soul and says, Mat. 11.28.
Come ye to me; as the Sun shines the whole day into all plants, and gives
them power, and the Sun is not in fault that the thistle is a Thistle, but the
first Ens is the cause whence it is a Thistle.

41. So also a false and wicked soul from the Ens of Gods anger, in the curse,
and from the inherited wickedness, as also from the actual wickedness;
becomes a thistle; in that the will, viz. the science of the soul speaks,
in [the quality] a thistle; and from such a false and wicked ground there grow
more thistles; as God in Moses says; Exodus 20.5.
He will visit or reprove the sins of the father upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation; and Christ says; Matthew. 7.18.
a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit.

42. Thus we see that perdition comes from the soul, and we see that Gods
holy will cannot be manifest in false and wicked working, so long as the souls
will works evil, so long God's speaking, forms it self therein, in anger:
But when it begins to stand still from such working, then is God's power of
Love manifest therein: for if it works no more, then works, in it, the
abyss, viz. the ONE.

43. For God works from eternity to eternity, but no other then his word, and
John 1.1.
that word is God, viz. a manifestation of the abyss: now if the soul
speaks no more its own will, then is the unsearchable will, speaking, in it;
Where the creature stands still, there God works.

44. Now if the creature will work with God, then must its will enter into God,
and then God works with and through the creature, for the whole creation,
both heavenly, hellish, and earthly, is no other then the working word, the
word it self is All.

45. The Creature is a compacted, coagulated vapor and exhalation from the
word, and as the word is exhaled out of the free will, where the free will
brings it self out of the abyss into the profundity: So also, the free will
of the Angels and souls, brings the word into a profundity, and that
profundity is the creature, viz. a fire source to its re-speaking-forth, and
out of that re-speaking-forth proceeds evil and good, and according to that
re-spoken-forth substance and power, the soul has its Judgment and sentence.

46. For that is the Judgment that the evil be separated from the good, and
that every thing possess its own principle. Whatsoever soul now speaks forth
hellish source, viz. the curse, it must into death, that it no more bring Gods
word into evil and good, but the evil alone, that every thing may remain with
its own.

47. And therefore because in the place of this world, through the word, evil
and good is spoken forth, therefore in that place is a final day of separation
appointed, when good and evil shall cease to be spoken in any place; and the
wicked shall have their place prepared, where evil shall be spoken in its
Eternity, that the good may be known, and in the good, the joy be manifest;
Also that it may be known what evil and what good are; also what life and
death are, and that the children of God may rejoice.

48. For if evil were not known, joy would not be manifest: but if joy be
manifest, then is the eternal word spoken in joy, to which end the word, with
nature, has brought it self into a Creation.

49. And this is the true ground wherein all conceits and opinions are known,
and all Sophistry thrown to the ground, also all strife and contention has an
end. Whosoever rightly sees and understands this, has no further question
about any thing, for he sees that he lives and subsisteth in God, and he
gives himself up to God, that he may further know and will through him, and
speak what and how he will, this party seeks only the estate of lowliness,
that God in him may alone be high.

50. But so long as Lucifer has his dominion in man, so long the creature
presses forward to advance it self, and will be its own God, and that is also
a wonder, as Gods wisdom stands in the wonders in the Love, so it is also in
self and in the appropriation of the creature.

51. Every thing is good in its own principle wherein it lives, but to another
it is opposite: Yet it must be so that one may be manifest in the other, and
the hidden wisdom may be known, and be a sport in the severation, wherewith
the profundity, viz. the eternal one, may sport with it self, before it self.

52. We should therefore learn to understand the Scriptures aright, how God
wills good and evil, namely, the determination is not in his very self, but
in his expressed word, viz. in nature and creature: God hates Esaw in the
corrupt nature* in Esaw's self nature: Esaw was the type of hatred it self; but
in Gods self, viz. in the impressed or inspired Covenant of Grace, he loves
him.

53. Therefore he presents the type of Christ, viz. his brother Jacob, together
with him, and lets them both come out of one Seed, to signify that Christ
should call Esaw in the corrupted Adamical nature in the hatred of God, to
repentance, and beget him anew, as Jacob brought Esaw to repentance, so that he
let his malice fall, and wept bitterly, and departed from his evil will toward
Jacob.

54. This therefore is the understanding of the Scripture, that the earthly
Adam in the kingdom of corrupt nature, in his own will, finds not, nor can
find repentance, for there is no ability therein to good, but the incorporated
grace in him awakeneth or stirs up the ability, when the will turns to it:
for it self-will could work repentance and become good, honest, and virtuous,
it needed not Grace.

55. The decrees in Scripture point only at two kingdoms, viz. the hardening
respects the false and wicked will; the false will hardneth it self, Gods anger
in the wills own substance, hardens it; this hardening does not enter in from
without, but is manifested in the wills own substance. The will is from God,
and the same God in the will introduces himself into the hardening, in that
manner, as he introduces himself into hell in darkness and torment; the same
is also to be understood concerning the kingdom of Grace.

56. God wills in man only that which is Good in the kingdom of his Grace,
where the free will yields it self up into the Grace, there God wills that
which is good, in the will, through the Grace.

57. But when a man will say, man cannot turn his will toward that which is
good, viz. toward Grace, that is groundless: grace indeed stands in the
abyss of the creature in all wicked men, and the will need only stand still
from wicked working, and then it begins as to its self-will, to dive down
into the abyss.

58. For that which stands still, stands still together with the eternal
one, and becomes one substance therewith, for it goes into its nothing. Must
not the false will or desire for a worldly Law's sake, for fear of punishment,
forbear or stand still from unrighteous works; Wherefore then not also for the
sake of the commandment of God? Can it be obedient to a worldly Lord and
Master, and for that end stand still for which he would have him, wherefore not
also to God? especially when the ability is as soon given, as a Man does but
incline his will to stand still.

59. But the cause why the total false wicked will does not stand still, and
incline it self to Grace, is this, that it is clearly a Thistle borne, wherein
Grace lies too deeply hidden; and the wrath of God is too strong in nature.
Grace draws it, and shows to it, its own falsehood, and wickedness; but it
contemns Grace, and works as a Thistle does in the power of the Sun; Such a
one is to God 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.
a good savor, of death to the damnation in hell, that Grace may be severed
from the false and wicked will.

60. But the conclusions of reason which pronounces that God in himself, so
far as he is called God, has determined, that one part of men, and indeed the
greatest number, shall and must be damned, and that of his own purposed will he
hardens them; is false; and has no ground either in the Scripture, or in the
light of nature, If a man but rightly consider the Scripture, and does not
blindly look upon it.

61. For in God so far as he is called God, there is no purpose, nor beginning
to will, he is himself the will of the profundity, viz. one alone, and himself
wills nothing but good, and therefore is himself also that same good will, or
willing of good, For the good that he wills, is the birth of his power, viz.
his Son.

62. God wills in himself nothing but to manifest his own good, that himself
is, and that could not be done if the only good power did not introduce it self
with the exhalation into the desire to nature, and in a severation, viz. into
the science; for if the good did remain alone, there would be no knowledge or
skill.

63. But now the good, viz. God in himself, makes not evil or separation, but
the science, viz. the Fiat, or the desire to severation brings it self into
nature and creature, and from the science springs evil and good, and not
from God, or in God, in his Trinity.

64. For there is no decree but there is a consultation therein, and then there
must also be a cause of that consultation therein, and then again there must
be a cause of that also and so there must be something before God or after God
wherefore he so consults and determines.

65. But he is himself the profundity, and the one, and is one only will, that
is, himself, and that is only go^d, for one only thing cannot be opposite to it
self, for it is but one, and has no quarrel with any thing.

66. Therefore it is the folly of Reason, that they speak of compulsion and
inevitable necessity, and understand not the The Great Mystery.
Mysterium Magnum: Or that they say God of his purpose wills the evil desire
or will, which he has hardened, that it should not attain the Grace.

67. I show to this blind Reason a Thistle to consider of, which the Sun for a
whole day touches, and gives it light and power, yet it remains a Thistle,
so also the wicked will: The Divine Sun shines to it, the day of its whole
life, but its ground is an Ens of a Thistle.

68. Otherwise it God did of purpose harden it, the righteousness could have no
judgment therein, for that which does what it must do, lives according to
the will of its Lord: but if Psalm. 5.4.
God wills not that which is wicked: as in Psalm 5. then the evil comes out
of the root; And in the root of knowledge, out of natures ground to the
creature, and by accident; And for that cause has God manifested his will, and
given his Law and Gospel, that is, has manifested his threatenings and his
grace, that a day of separation might be kept with righteousness, and that no
creature might have Excuse.

69. And the History says further; Genesis 33.12, 13, 14.
After Esaw had received the Present of Jacob, he spoke unto his brother Jacob,
saying, Let us take our journey, and go forward, I will go with thee: but
Jacob said to him, My Lord, thou know that I have with me tender children,
and moreover cattle that are great with young, and sucking Ca^ves, if they be
over-driven for one day, the whole flock would dye; Let my Lord pass over
before his servant, and I will follow on softly, as the cattle and the children
are able to go, until I come to my Lord into Seir. This Text appears to be
only an outward History, but the Spirit has also its inward figure under it,
for Jacob stands in that figure of Christ.

And the figure is thus.
70. When Christ through his suffering and death appeased his Fathers anger in
the kingdom of nature, thus said the appeased anger: Now will we arise, and
take our journey together, understand in the life of man; but the Love said,
man is too tender, feeble and impotent, and can scarce go in Gods ways, Mat.
28.20.
I will remain with them even to the end of the world, Mat. 28. And lead them
Gently and moderately.
slowly as they are able to go, least they fall into temptation and error, and
be blind as to Grace. Go thou before my Lord, I will lead them on softly
under my yoke of the Cross, that they die not, for if they should now
presently be led in the Fathers severe righteousness, they would not be able to
go: though they are indeed redeemed, yet they live still in flesh and blood, I
will come after with them to thee into Seir, that is, into Gods righteousness.

71. Genesis 33.15.
And Esaw said; Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me.
He answered, what needs it? let me but find Grace in the sight of my Lord:
that is, God the Father said, let me leave some of my severe righteousness,
commandments and Laws with thee: but Christ said, What needs it? Let me
with these redeemed children, only find Grace with thee, for they cannot
fulfill the Law.

72. Genesis 33.16.
Thus Esaw went his way again that day toward Seir: that is, thus God's
righteousness pressed into it is own principle, 17.
And Jacob went to Succoth, and built him an house, from whence the place is
called Succoth. This in the figure is as much as to say; Christ led his
Christendom, viz. his children, not to Seir, that is, into the proof or trial
of Gods righteousness: though indeed Grace was manifested in them, but he
erected a house, viz. the Christian Church upon earth, and made his children
Tabernacles, Boothes.
Tents, that is, Christian Ordinances, wherein they might dwell, and hence it
is called Christendom, as Jacobs City is called SVCCOTH: so also the place or
City of Christendom is called Matthew. 7 7. Luke 11.9.
seek, SVCHET so shall you find Mat. 28.20.
Christ who is always in these Tents with his children, to the End of the
World.

73. And the Text in Moses says further; Genesis 33.18, 19, 20.
Afterward Jacob went to Salem, the City of Sichem, which lies in the Land of
Canaan, when he came from Padan Aran.
Mesopotamia, and set up his Station before the City, and bought a piece of
ground of the children of Hemor, the Father of Sichem, for a hundred pieces of
money, and there he set his Tent up, and erected an Altar, and called on the
name of the strong God of Israel. In this Text, the Spirit aludeth rightly to
the future Christendom; For Christ led his children after his Resurrection, to
Salem, that is, into salvation, or the anointing or Unction of the Holy Ghost,
as Jacob led his children to Salem, but it was to the City of Sichem, that is,
among the Heathen.

74. And set his Station before the City, That is, Christ should have his
habitation by the Heathen, and set his Temple and Doctrine, near the Idols
Temples of the Heathen, and purchase the City of his holy Christian Church from
the Heathen, that is, with his blood purchase it from Gods Righteousness, even
as it is come to pass; And there erect his Altar among the Heathen, and preach
the name of the God of Israel, that is, Christ.

75. For, the name Sichem signifies, that the Christian Church must be in
misery and trouble: As Jacob builds his habitation before the City Sichem, so
must also the children of Christ be but strange guests* in this world, and be
but as household servants to the Heathen, Potentates, and children of this
world, though indeed they have their habitation, viz. the Temple of Christ in
them, which Christ has purchased for them, with his blood, yet they are
outwardly but strange guests and pilgrims, and dwell without, before the City
of this world, viz. in an earthly Tabernacle and Tent, in flesh and blood.

CHAP. LXII. Of Dinah Jacobs Daughter, which he begat of Lea, how she was
deflowred by Hemor's Son, and how Jacobs Son's slew Sichem for it, and all the
males that were in that City; and took Dinah again, and what is to be
understood by this figure.
Genesis 34.
The Gates of Christians war, for the Babylonish Whoredom; now highly to be
Considered.
1. MOses says; Put Dinah the Daughter of Lea, which she had borne to Jacob,
went out to see the Daughters of the Land, Genesis XXXIV. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and when Sichem the Son of Hemor the Hevite, the Lord of the Country saw her,
he took her and lay with her, and deflowred her, and his heart cleaved to her,
and he loved the Damsel, and spoke kindly to her: And Sichem said to his Father
Hemor, get me this Damsel to wife. The Reader should very seriously consider
this figure, and rightly meditate on the Text in Moses, and look Into the Face
of it.
thoroughly into it, then he will w^ll understand our sense and meaning and most
precious apprehension, opened to us by the Divine Grace, and learn to look
upon the Scriptures of the first Book of Moses, with clear eyes.

2. Leah the wife of Jacob bare to him six Sons, viz. the half Stock of Israel,
and of her came Juda^ viz the root of David, of whom Christ was manifested
according to our humanity; Afterward she bare this Dina, a daughter, by which
figure the Spirit powerfully prefigureth Christendom, that after Christ's
ascension into heaven, after the work of humane Redemption the true
Christendom should be borne; As Jacob first begat the Twelve Patriarchs, but
afterward of Leah, that is, of the mother of Christendom, a daughter of
fleshly self-love would be borne, which daughter would go a gadding to see
the daughters of the Land, among whom she should be a stranger.

That is thus much in the figure.
3. When Christendom would be borne, that its number might be great, it would
go forth in self-love and seek the pleasure of the flesh, and would set it^
heart upon the customs and behaviors of the people, and depart from lowliness
and humility, and would look after the wantonness and pride of the daughters of
the Land, that is, of the people, and then they would beget this daughter
Dinah, and appear before God in fleshly voluptuousness of spiritual whoredom,
and would play the whore with the heathenish customs, but yet would present it
self beautiful and trimly dres^^, as an amorous virgin which runs abroad to
be seen that she might take Lovers, as Dinah did, which went thus forth a
gadding.

4. Thus also would Christendom trimm it self, and dress it self with great
ostentation and solemnity, with Churches and Schools, and put on glittering
sumptuous appearing holy Garments, that they might have respect, with the
daughters of the Land, as with strange people, and yet would be full of flames
of self love and fleshly menstruous polution under such habits, and have a
whorish heart, as a whore outwardly flatters, beautifies and trims her self,
and will throughout be called a chaste virgin: Thus also would this trim
Christendom be called holy; but her heart would only play the whore with
fleshly voluptuousness.

5. She would feign see the dress of the daughters of the Land, which dress is
no other then the heathenish wisdom and Philosophy, and would draw the same
into Christ's kingdom, and would live under Christ's purple mantle, in those
Rites and customs, and trim her self therewith, and thereby quite forget that
her tents and habitations are without the City of these peoples customs, as
Gen 33.18.
Jacob dwelt without before the City of Hemor; and also Christ said, Joh. 18.36.
His kingdom was not of this world.

6. But this Christendom would set her heart upon the kingdom of this world,
and so in the dress of a virgin trim her self with many Churches, Priests and
Ceremonies, under the habit of a virgin, but in this departure from the
simplicity and humility of Christ, she would but gad abroad in the world, and
look after fleshly whoredom; as Dinah did, which is a type of fleshly
Christendom, which is always borne after the true Children of Christ, as
Dinah was borne after the 12 Patriarchs.
Twelve Patriarchs. That is;

7. When Christendom is borne and manifested among a people, it begets in
that place, first the 12 Patriarchs.
Twelve Patriarchs, viz. the ground of the Apostolic Doctrine: but when she
mixeth again with the heathenish wise men, and with the lust of the flesh, then
that place, begets a Dinah, viz. a whoredom with Christ; that is, a seeming
Christian, yet the heart is but a whore, and then this whore goes abroad
gadding to find the habitations of that People. That is:

8. She seeks again the heathenish ground, and mixeth her self with the
heathens, and is with child by the heathenish Philosophy, and brings forth a
bastard, half Christian and half heathenish, viz. a new sect or Doctrine, which
does not fully agree in form with the first customs of that people, among
whom it did spring forth; And yet in her heart is no whit better then they.

9. And then this People raise themselves up against that strange opinion, and
cry out in Anger, these have deflowred our sister Dinah, and have made her a
whore, and are enraged against the new found opinion, as the sons of Jacob
against Sichem, and with fighting, and the sword, with storming and cursing,
run on against the deflowrer of their sister Dinah, and murder him, and not
only him, but all the males that are with him, as Jacob's sons did the
Hemorites: And then the innocent must thus suffer with the guilty, to signify,
that they all of them, both the one and the other live in such Religious
whoredom: For the whore for whose sake they take vengeance, is their sister,
and borne of their stock, as Dinah their sister was, and they came of one
Mother.

10. We see here eminently the type of contentions Christendom; how
Christendom would be headstrong and furious in opinions, and that in great
blindness, and not know wherefore, and would not see themselves, that they thus
rage in their own whoredom, and strive not about the power of true
Christianity, as about the true Christian life, but about their contrived
opinions, as about their sister Dinah, which goes abroad gadding from them, and
gazeth upon the strange opinions, and cry out upon the opinion for a whore, and
yet see not how they should help their sisters heart, wherein sticks the lust
of whoredom, As Jacob's sons did not see how to help the evil, that their
sister might save her credit; And though Hemor and Sichem sent to them to give
her a Dowry, and would marry their sister, and love her, and be circumcised,
and become one People with them, and would perform all love, faithfulness and
friendship toward them, yet all this did not help.

11. And although they told them, that if they would be circumcised, and be one
people with them, they would give them their sister, yet they were furious in
killing and slaying, to signify, that this is a figure of future Christendom,
which would arise out of this Stock; As we see that it so comes to pass before
our eyes, that men strive about the gadding separated opinions, and kill and
murder one another for them, and yet this is but for the opinion sake of false
whoredom, which the titulary Christendom has taken up, wherein they trim
themselves in hypocrisy and whoredom, and look not how their sister might be
helped, who is gone astray in a strange opinion, but they take their swords,
and would slay the new opinion, and snatch their sister who is with child with
another opinion, forcibly again with her bastard out of Hemor's house, and
slay Hemor and Sichem and all their males.

12. And though they would unite themselves with them, as with the true
Christian ground, viz. with the chief Articles of Christian Doctrine, yet it
availes not, they will against all faith and promise slay and kill, and keep
their opinions, which they have contrived in their ease and pampered jollity,
with their fat bellies, and heathenish festivalls, as it is seen at this day
in the contentions and opinions.

13. Men of self-love have introduced their Christianity into a fleshly
kingdom, and finely trimmed it with Laws, Ceremonies, and Opinions, and have
covered it with Christ's purple Mantle, and yet live in mere spiritual
whoredom under it, with an hypocritical show: But their hearts constantly
beget this lustful Dinah, which runs abroad from the simplicity and humility
of Christ, and plays the whore with the Idols of fleshly lust, viz. with Pride
and Covetousness, merely with their own Honor and Reputation, and a voluptuous
life, quite contrary to the true Christian ground.

14. But seeing the Spirit of Christ dwells yet always in his Christendom,
he often stirs up men which do thus acknowledge and see the sleep and
whoredom of the titulary Christendom in their Sodomitical life, and turn away
from them, and search in the Scriptures, and also in the light of nature,
whether this their fleshly ground, can subsist in the presence of God, and when
they see that it is false, then they fall upon some other ground, and reprove
the whoredom of the titulary Christendom.

15. And when the hypocrites in their voluptuous glory, hear and see these
things, that thereby they are blemished and defiled, and that their God Maosim
is made manifest; then they cry; O there is a Heretic, he deflowreth our sister
Dinah, viz. our Opinion, and makes the Church a whore, and though some should
offer to give a good account of his ground and opinion, and reconcile and marry
himself with the true Christian ground, and marry with their sister Dinah, viz.
to espouse the first true virgin Christian ground, and to be of one and the
same heart and will with them in the Christian ground; all this availes, not,
they snatch their sister, viz. the name of a Christian from them, and had
rather keep the deflowred Damsel with her bastard by them, whose shame the
truth has discovered; that they may see how to help their sisters shame, that
she may attain the wedlock with Christ.

16. They suppose when they can with power rescue and keep their opinions, and
though indeed the whoredom in their opinion is laid naked, that it is weakened
and blemished, yet they will have their Dinah to be taken for a virgin, and
though her shame of whoredom, be open to the daylight; yet they will defend
the same with the sword, and with slaughter. As we see before our eyes, and the
present strife intimates no less, but that it is manifest that Dinah is become
a whore, viz. titulary Christendom that plays the whore in the presence of
God, and has lost her virgin chastity, and the purity of her conscience, and
so at present the brethren of this Dinah fight for her, and will preserve her
honor and reputation with the sword and with killing: And will murder all
those who do deflowre and defame their Dinah.

17. This Dinah is at present nothing else but the stone Churches, and great
Colleges of their Ministers, wherein men use the name of Christ, but seek
thereby only their own honor, voluptuousness, and Fa^^ days.
good days, how a man may be honored in the world.

18. For the true Apostolic Temple is the Temple of Jesus Christ; viz. the new
man, who lives in Righteousness and purity before God, who walks in humility
and in the simplicity of Christ; And his Ministers are such as do declare the
peace in the love of Jesus Christ, who labor that the deflowred Dinah might be
married with Sichem, and that Hemor and Sichem with their males might also
become Christians, who leave the sword in its sheath, and teach with the meek
and gentle Spirit of Jesus Christ; And show instead of the murdering sword the
Spirit of cleansing, how this defloured Dinah might get Christian honor again,
and be married to her Bridegroom.

19. Behold, O Christendom, the Spirit has set this before thee in the figure
of the Twelve Patriarchs, and signifies, that thou would do thus, Not that
thou should do it: Though this Strife must come, that the true children of
Christ might be exercised and made manifest, otherwise if no Strife did arise
among the Christians, all wicked men could appear as Christians, but the
Strife makes it manifest that the false ground of verbal Christians is brought
to light, and they are distinguished from the true children of Christ; which
will be also a witness against them at the Last day of Judgment.

20. Man's true Christianity stands in the inward ground of the Soul in the
ground of man, not in the ostentation and fashions of this world, but in the
power of well-doing in the spirit and Conscience.

21. The strife wherewith a true Christian striveth, is only the Spirit of
Righteousness, which casts away from it, the falsehood and wickedness in flesh
and blood, and suffers and indureth all things willingly for Christ's sake who
dwells in it, that it may not live to it self, and please it self, and have
satisfaction in it self, and Triumph with the earthly Lucifer, but that he
please God his Creator in Christ Jesus.

22. He has nothing in this world to strive for, for nothing is his own: for
in Christ he is not of this world, but as the Scripture says, Phil. 3.20.
Our conversation is in heaven; all things for which and wherewith he striveth,
is about the earthly voluptuous, fleshly Lucifer, in the mortal flesh and
blood: for Christ says; Joh. 18.36.
His Kingdom is not of this world; so also a Christians Kingdom, so far as
he is a Christian, is not of this world, But in Christ, in God.

23. Therefore now all the strife of Christians is only about their Dinah,
viz. about their fleshly whoredom: A Christian ought not to strive otherwise
then in Spirit and power against the ways of unrighteousness and falsehood.

24. Outward war that Christians make, is Heathenish, and is done for the
beastial mortal man's sake: for immortality cannot be attained or kept with the
sword and forces, but with Prayer and with entering into the fear of God: But
the earthly Lucifer striveth about the Belly, and about worldly honor and
pleasure, wherein Christ is not; but it is the defloured Dinah, where men make
wars about the houses of stone, and temporal goods, and thereby declare that
the spiritual virginity in the Spirit of Christ is made a whore, who plays the
harlot for the kingdom of this world.

25. Hearken all ye who call your selves Apostles of Christ, has Christ sent
you to fight, and to make war, that you should strive about temporary goods
and outward power and glory? Is that your authority? John 20. When he gave you
the sword of the Spirit, did he command you that? Has he not sent you to make
known the peace, which he has brought us? What will he say to you, when he
shall see, that your Apostolic heart has put on Armor, and that you have
instigated your worldly Kings and Princes to the sword and wars, and have
allowed them that, as of Christian liberty: Will he find you thus, in his
Ministry? do you that, as the Disciples, of Christ?

26. Are you not the Apostles of the Anger of God? Whither will you go with
your Reproach? do you not see that as to Christ who has taught you peace, you
are become forsworn or perjured Harlots? Where is your Christian virginity,
have you not with Dinah squandred it away in worldly pleasure? What will Christ
say to you, when he shall come again, Mat. 8.20. Luke 9.58.
Who on earth had not whereon to lay his head, when he shall see your pomp,
state, and glory, in such Palaces and Colleges, which you have built in his
Name, for which upon earth you have made wars?

27. When have you striven about the Temple of Jesus Christ? Have you not
always striven about your Colleges or Palaces, and about your own Laws,
wherein you have lived in Opinions, and disputed about those Opinions? What
need has Christ thereof? Christ bestows himself upon his children,
substantially, in a living manner, to dwell in them, and will give them his
flesh for food, and his blood for drink; What needs he opinions, that men
should strive about him, who and what he is?

28. When I consider a true Christian, then I understand that Christ is and
dwells in him; what means then your outward worship of God? Wherefore do
you not serve him in your hearts and consciences? He is present within you, and
not in the solemnity and ostentation of outward things: ye have the sword of
the Holy Ghost by right, with that you should strive; Use you the Power of the
true Apostolic Churches, and not the sword of Man's hand.

29. The Excommunication is your sword, but yet it must be used in the power of
the Holy Ghost, in Divine zeal against the wicked and ungodly, and not for
that purpose to maintain humane Inventions and fictions, that a man must call
your spiritual whoredom in opinions a chaste virgin, as for a long time the
Babylonish Church has used it to such a Power.

30. All outward Ceremonies without the inward ground, that is, without
Christ's Spirit and cooperation is whoredom in the sight of God, that a Man
will approach to God without Christ the Mediator: for none can serve Christ
but a Christian, where the Spirit of Christ it self co-operateth in the
Service; but how will he serve Christ, that holds in one hand the Cup of
Christ, and in the other hand the sword of selfe-Revenge? Christ must, in a
Christian, overthrow sin by his Spirit, and not the Fathers fiery sword in the
Law of severe Righteousness.

31. O ye children of Simeon and Levi, the Spirit at Jacobs End, has signified
concerning you, that your swords were murtherous, that Christ is not in your
Councills, as Jacob says; My soul, that is, the Covenant and Grace of Christ,
be thou not in their Churches and Congregations, nor in their Council; Read
the 49th of Genesis, where the Council of the Pharisees and Scribes; who
institute themselves Pastors without the Divine Calling; is thereby signified.

32. All spiritual whoredom proceeds from hence, that Christ's Ministers
possess worldly Power and Authority, and so one plays the hypocrite with
another, the inferior that is without power and authority, plays the
hypocrite with the potent, that he may advance him also, and bring him to
honor and plenty, to deliciousness and fat days, whereby the Spirit of
Zeal, declines and falls to the Ground, and the truth is turned into a lie,
and the Spirit of Zeal of the mouth is stopped with Power, and Man is honored
in God's stead.

33. This History relating how Genesis 34.25.
Simeon and Levi went into the City to Hemor and his children and People, and
slew all the males in this City, may well be understood to be a figure, whereby
the Spirit signifies that he declares in the figure concerning the future
time, and is so written as a figure.

34. Also the History is clear, that Genesis 34.24, 25, 26.
Hemor and his son Sichem, and all the males of the whole City, were
circumcised and became Or, Israelites.
Jews, and then presently were slain by these two brethren Simeon and Levi,
which indeed is a hard figure to be understood, seeing Reason questioneth
whether it were so done or no, that two men should slay a whole City? But
seeing it is a figure and was done even by Simeon and Levi, viz. by the Stock
and Root of the Levitical Priesthood, and signifies the future Christendom;
This therefore is to be understood under it.

35. These two Brethren required first and proposed, that if they would be
circumcised, and receive their Law, they would give them their Sister, and
afterward as it came to pass, they slew them all both the innocent and the
guilty: This is that which Christ said to the Pharisees; Mat. 23.15.
Woe unto you Pharisees, ye compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte; And when
he is one, you make him twofold more a child of Hell then your selves.

36. This also may be said of the Christian Levites, they persuade People to be
Baptized, and called Christians, and when that is done, they stick their
murdering sword into their hearts, that they learn to slay other People with
words, which are not called after their name, and are not of their Opinion;
They curse and damn them, and they give occasion that one Brother persecutes
another, slanders, condemns, hates, and becomes his malicious enemy, and yet
understands not wherefore. Here it is rightly said, these Levites have
promised me their sister to wife, so that I am become a Christian, and now
they slay me with false Doctrine, and not only me but all my generation, who
hear them and receive their blasphemy, for Divine Truth, and believe them that
it is right, that one man should thus judge and condemn another, which yet
Christ has earnestly forbidden, and thereby now, that man judges himself,
since he does that himself, which he judges in another.

37. Thus is the murdering sword stuck into many innocents hearts, so that
they are guiltlesly slain by the Levites; But seeing Simeon and Levi are placed
together, and Jacob also when he was at his end Prophesied concerning them, and
puts them together, calling them murdering swords, it has this
signification, that they will not only slay them with the sword of the mouth,
but they would also set themselves up in worldly power and authority, and for
the truths sake kill their bodies, and would do it even to them which are
under the Circumcision or under the Gospel, whom first they had persuaded to be
Circumcised or to be Baptized.

38. As it is also come to pass among the Christians, when men have first
persuaded them unto Baptism, afterward when they have for a while seen their
abominations, that they live worse then the Heathen, and will not in all
things give their consent and approbation, then they begin persecution with
fire and sword, and slay them, with their innocent children, both in soul and
body, which is powerfully prefigured in this type of Simeon and Levi; else that
were a grievous gross murder of the children of the Saints, for them to
persuade People to their Faith, and give them their promise, and then
afterward under such hypocrisy to slay all both innocent and guilty, when
they had so deeply humbled themselves before them.

39. Therefore men should carefully and accurately look upon the old
Testament, especially the first book of Moses: for the vail of Moses hangs
before it, there is always somewhat more signified under the Text: Although
we will have the Text left also standing as a History, and doubt not at all
thereof, which is known to God, who has thus suffered it be described.

40. For the Text says, Genesis 34.25.29.
They fell upon the City, and slew all the males, and took all their children
and wives captive, and plundered, and spoild all that was in their houses. Which
though it does indeed seem that these two men were not able to do it, yet even
Jacob himself witnesses, that there were no more then these two, when Genesis
34.30.
He said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have raised mischief unto me, that I stink
before the Inhabitants of this Land; which stands very right in the figure,
that the murdering sword of the Levites has raised such disturbance in the
world, that Christendom for their base murdering practices, stinketh before
the strange Nations, so that they say, if they were God's People they would not
be such Tyrants, and outrageous scorners; and they hate them for that very
cause; and slay and kill them as a turbulent evil people, that contend only
about Religion, and kill one another for it: Therefore there can be no
certainty among them, and their Divine service and worship of God must needs be
false, say they; For which cause the potent Countries of the East are departed
from them, and have subjected themselves to a Doctrine of Reason; as is to be
seen by the Turks, which ought farther to be considered of.

CHAP. LXIII. How God called Jacob to depart from Sichem, and what happened upon
it; and how afterward Rachell bare Benjamin, and dyed in the Birth; also how
Isaak dyed, and what is to be understood thereby.
Upon the 35th Chapter of Genesis.
WHen Simeon and Levi had committed that Murder, God said to Jacob: Genesis
XXXV.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Get thee up and go to Bethel, and dwell there, and make there an Altar to God,
who appeared unto thee when thou did flee from thy brother Esau. Then said
Jacob unto his Household, and to all that were with him, Put away from you the
strange Gods which are among you, and cleanse your selves, and change your
Garments, and let us arise, and go to Bethel, that I may there make an Altar to
God, who has heard me in the time of my trouble, and has been with me in
the way which I have gone: Then they gave unto him all the strange Gods which
were in their hands, and their earrings, und he buried them under an Oak
which was by Sichem; And they went forth, and the fear of the Lord came upon
the Cities which lay round about them, that they did not pursue after the Sons
of Jacob. Thus Jacob came to Luz in the Land of Canaan, which is called Bethel,
with all the People that were with him, and built there an Altar, and called
the place El-Bethel, because God there appeared to him when he fled from his
brother. This History once again prefigureth powerfully the future times, how
it would go both with Israel and also with Christendom: For when Levi and
Simeon had committed that murder, and slain all the males of Sichem, and
taken captive all their wives and children, having plundered and spoiled all,
then Jacob was afraid of the People of the Land, and then God called him from
thence to go to Bethel, and make an Altar there.

The inward Figure stands thus.
2. When men, both the Jews, and afterward the Christians, were grown up in
fleshly whoredom and unchaste life, and became wicked, then would God's Spirit
depart from them, and then they began a spiritual whoredom and Idolatry and
were erroneous in their opinions, and would fall together by the ears, and say
one to another, he defloureth his sister Dinah, that is, his worship and
service of God, and would fall one upon another, and murder, kill, plunder,
spoil, and rob one another with wars, and bring their Country to desolation
and misery; And then when they should stick in such misery and trouble, they
would attain the fear and trembling, as here Jacob upon the murder which
his children committed, for the Lord would touch their evil consciences, and
call them again to Repentance, as he did Jacob and his children, when he
commanded them to come away from the place of this murder, and commanded Jacob
to make an Altar to him, viz. to the Lord, that is, in the lowliness of the
fear of God.

3. So the Spirit here signifies, that God would then again send them
Prophets and Teachers, who would dissuade them from their Idolatry and wicked
life, as here Jacob exhorted his family that they should put away the strange
Gods, and the Pride of their earrings from them, and then when they had thus
seen the anger of the Lord, which destroyed their Land, and exceedingly
devoured them for their Whoredom, Pride, and Idolatrous life, then would they
follow, and obey the Prophets who reproved them for it; and bring their Idols
and strange Gods, viz. their Idolatry, before God, and put it away from them,
and would again seek the Temple of God within them, and then would God again
build up his Altar in them, and they would again rightly offer sacrifice to
him, viz. offer up their souls, and would cleanse their garments, that is,
their hearts, as Jacob here commanded his People, this also would the
Prophets, and among the Christians the true Apostles and Teachers, command, and
direct.

4. And we see further here a powerful figure how Jacob took their Idols and
Earrings, and buried them under an Oak by Sichem, where the murder was done.
O thou great and wonderful God! What does this signify? Nothing else, but
that these their errors and Idolatry, together with their wars and
contentions, should thus for a long time lie buried in the anger of God

5. And seeing the Spirit mentions an Oak, under which these Idols, and
Pride are buried, the figure is clear to us; for an Oak is of a magnetic
attractive kind, and makes a Tougle*
tenacious hardness in its property, moreover blackness, duskiness and
darkness. This signifies that the former Idolatry, Sins, and Blasphemies, which
they have committed, shall there in the hungry wrath of the anger of God in
Turba Magna, viz. under the great Oak in Spiritu Mundi, viz. in the hidden
mystery, stand still a long while.

6. And what sin they shall commit anew, all that will this magnetic Oak,
draw to it, and bring it to the treasure of the former Idolatry and Pride, till
they become so great that the earth under the Oak can cover them no more: Then
shall these their old and new whoredoms and Idolatries, together, be naked
before the anger and judgment of God, and their Genesis 15.16.
measure be full.

7. And they would stink before God for these abominations, for the sake of
which the Spirit of God would hide it is countenance from them, and take away
from them the light of his countenance, so that they would run on in vain
errors, and enter again upon the way of such whoredom, and with their evil
zeal for Dinah their sister, which yet is but a deflowrd whore, trample all
under with Murder and Robbery.

8. As is come to pass among the Jews and Christians, that afterward in the
zeal of their Idolatry and whoredom they have slain and murdered the
Prophets and Ministers of Jesus Christ which are Rom, 10.15.
sent from God, that they might live in their Pride and Sodomitical whoredom,
till Romans 1.28.
God has given them up to a perverse mind in their hearts, that they are
become wholly evil before him, Genesis 15.16.
Then is their measure full, and the horrible punishment follows, as may be
seen by the cast away Jews, which for such abominations sake were driven out
of their Country and Kingdom, as also by the Christians, who in the fair
Country of the East were the best Christians, and now must have the Alcoran
instead of Christ, and their Country horribly wasted in the anger of God.

9. Thus it goes now also with thee, thou warring Babylon, and titulary
Christendom, full of Idolatry and Earrings of Pride, which have lien for a
long time under the Oak, and the Magnet of that Oak has drawn to it all thy
abominations, Idolatry, and proud evil life, that the earth can cover them no
longer, but they now stand naked before the face of God, therefore also thy
Judgment is near at hand.

10. The Prophets call thee and reprove thee, but thou ravest for thy sister
Dinah, viz. for thy fleshly kingdom full of Pride which thou have built, with
thy Idolatry and fleshly love, and murtherest thy Brethren for thy sister's
whoredom sake, viz. for the Pharisaical whoredom sake, and do not discern
how thou should remedy thy sisters whoredom, that she may be married, and
thou take thy sister with her bastard, which, in the presence of God and all
the world, stand in shame, to thee, again, and wilt have her called a virgin;
If thou did give her to Sichem for a wife, and let him be circumcised, and
would live with him in peace, then would thy sisters whoredom be covered.

11. But thy wrath O Lord makes it to be thus, for the misdeed is too much,
and the earth can no more cover it under the Oak in Spiritu Mundi, it stands
naked before thy face: therefore ye wise children, flee out of Jerusalem, the
overthrow thereof, and the earnest judgment draws near, the measure is
full, the anger burns, Sin has killed the understanding, that they Have no
more sense or understanding.
no more perceive or feel the understanding, and these children are blind
concerning it, and always say; this is a golden Time, it will be good for us,
and not so come to pass: thy Prophets among thee are esteemed fools and mad
men, till that be done unto thee, and till thou thy self do, what they have
said unto thee.

12. Beware now and leave off to war about the whore, that the Lord may call
thee with Jacob, and bring thee again to his holy Altar in Christ Jesus. Put
away the Idols, viz. the opinions, and build thine heart to be an Altar in the
Temple of Jesus Christ, then will thou be brought away from the murders, and
the fear of God will come upon those men who would pursue thee, as is to be
seen by Jacob. But if thou will not leave off to make war about the whore,
then will thou together with the whore come to shame and desolation.

13. But learn to know her, she gives Sichem occasion to uncleanness, for
she runs out of her house, and seeks lovers; Behold her Pride, tear her
Earrings from her neck, wherewith she boasts, and then she will no more
thus show her folly; bereave her of her Idols, bury them, with Jacob: build thy
self an Altar in thee, and bring thy children to the offering; Bid them not
strive for Dinah, but leave Dinah to the man with whom she has bedded, else
it is in vain to make war for her virginity, for it is manifest to all people
that she has played the whore.

14. Mark what is told thee, it is high-time, her shame can no more be
covered, for she has brought forth the Bastard: do thou not see it? and
do thou not know the whore with her child? then thou art blind.

15. She sits in high honor among men, and cries all hail to her self;
This is she to whom thou prostitutest thy self, and forsakest thy God and his
Altar, Jesus Christ, in thee, take pity on thy self, and behold the misery, how
this whore has sat in stead of the Altar of God in thy soul, and has taken
thy body and soul in possession, and rides upon thee as upon her Beast; she
leads thee with her Reigns, and thou see it not, thou say likewise it
is right. O thou evil beast, full of thy whores Pride! how will the Lord throw
thee, together with the whore, to the ground, as is to be seen in the
Apocalypse.
Revelations?

16. The Spirit here further sets down an excellent fair figure, showing
how God manifested himself to Jacob after he made the Altar in Bethel, and
called the place El-Bethel, viz. an Angelical Engelische dwelling, Genesis 35.7.
where God conversed with Jacob in the form of an Angel, Engel as the high
tongue renders it, that God spoke with him in vision in an Angels form, viz.
in the Angels form of the future humanity of Christ, and signified to him,
that Genesis 35, 10, 11, 12.
he should no more be called Jacob, but Israel, that is, a Great Tree, or
company of Nations, him has God thus blessed, that he should possess all this
Country, and he shall be so great, that even Kings should proceed out of his
Loins, whereby he signifies concerning the future Kingdom, of Israel, and of
Christ, how it would come to pass.

17. Gen^ 35.14.
And when the Lord had spoken with Jacob, in that very place Jacob set up a
Pillar of Stone; which signifies the Temple of Christ, as also the Temple at
Jerusalem in a Type prefiguring Christ, also the true Christian Church among
the Christians, that from the word of the Lord Men would build a Place and
Pillar, where they would assemble and declare the Wonders of the Great God, and
call upon him there, and offer up the drink offering of Prayer there.

18. And the Spirit says further; Genesis 35.13.
So God went up from him, when he had spoken with him, that is, when he had
appeared in a visible Form in the Image and Type of Christ, he withdrew and
hid himself again in that Royal place, from whence afterward he would
manifest and make himself visible in his Seed in this Figure in the Humanity.

19. Genesis 35.15.
And Jacob called the place Bethel, viz. an Or, Condiscention.
humiliation of the Deity in the Humanity, so that the Divine Altar becomes
manifest, where a Man offers praise and thankesgiving, to God; And the Spirit
by Jacob concerning this Bethel points at the future Bethlehem, where Christ
should be borne Man, as this place Bethel was exceeding highly esteemed by the
Patriarchs, which all points at the Future Bethlehem, where the true Altar
Christ should be erected and built, upon which, Jacob and his Fathers and
Children had offered in the Faith and prefiguring Type, and under it God led
them in the visible Type from thenceforth, till the appointed Time, that this
Altar was erected at Bethlehem by the Birth of Christ.

20. And the Spirit in Moses speaks instantly very darkly thereof in this
Figure, and says; Genesis 35.16.
And they went from Bethel; whereby he points at the going forth from the
figure of Christ, that Men should go forth from this figure to the Birth of
Christ, and says: Genesis 35.16.
And it was a field breadth from Ephrath: where Rachel brought forth, and she
was in hard Labor at the Birth.

21. This Field breadth signifies the time that is between that and the Altar
of Christ, as, Adam was gone a field breadth from the Altar of God, that is,
out of the Spiritual world into the Earthly, where, it goes very hard with
Rachel, viz. with the humane Nature, as to the Patriarch Benjamin, that is, to
bring forth a Christian, that even the Old Adam must dye and perish in this
Birth, as Rachel dyed when she bare Benjamin.

22. Which Benjamin, signifies, that when we erect Gods Altar in us, so that
Christ dwells in us, then is Benjamin, that is, our Last Man (or second Adam)
borne, then dies the Old Mother, who has generated the kingdom of Nature in
Man, and the New Spiritual Man is manifested.

23. This Benjamin is borne, after Jacob is first gone out of Mesopotamia, as
the Spirit has prefigured the Type of Christ's Passion and Victory, by Esaw and
Jacob in their Meeting; and it was a figure of the Apostle Mathias, who was
Elected to be an Apostle in the stead of Judas, after Christ had first
consummated his Passion and Ascension into Heaven.

24. And it is a figure, showing, how Man must first enter into Christ's Passion
and Death, and that the Altar of Christ must first be erected in him, before
the Humane Nature from Christ can be borne: for, Matthew. 27.5.
Judas must first in his falsehood and Treachery in the old Adam with sorrow for
his committed sin, hang himself, and as to his own ability despair and
dye, and then will Benjamin, viz. the new Creature in Christ, first be borne,
and Acts 1.26.
Mathias, viz. the first Created Adam be Elected an Apostle.

25. For Mathias was indeed borne before the Passion of Christ and was with
Christ, but he was then first an Apostle when Christ in him was dead from
sin, and Judas had hanged himself; thus also the Adamicall Man, which shall
be an Apostle or Christian, is indeed borne aforehand, before Christ suffers
in him; but Christ must first arise from the Dead in him, and Judas, viz. the
Serpents will, must hang himself and dye to his own evil will in the Death
of Christ, and then first is the Adams Man a Christ.
Adamicall Man a Christian; It is not the Historical Man by an imputed Grace,
wherein Judas still lives under the Purple Mantle of Christ, that is a
Christian, as Babell plays finely under the veil concerning the virginity of
her Daughter Dinah, that the fair dainty Damsel may play the whore, and
finely sleep with her Pandor Judas, and lie with her Lovers in the Bed of
Fornication.

26. Great things are prefigured in this Text; for the Text says: Gen 35.17,
18.
When she was in sore Labor in the Birth of Benjamin, the Midwife said to
her; Fear not, for thou shall have this son also; But her soul being ready
to depart that she must die, she called him Benoni; that is, she looked upon
the inward ground, upon the New Birth, what he would be in Christ, and regarded
not the Name of the outward Creature.

27. For, Benoni is altogether a Spiritual Name after an Angelical kind and
manner; for, she said in Spirit, (when the Midwife comforted her concerning
it, that she should have this son also) I have him no more in the world, the
outward passes away; and it points at the Angelical New Name; Genesis 35.18.
but his Father called him Benjamin, as with the Name of this world, that he
should represent how a Christian must be borne under the Cross of Christ in
smart pain, at which also his Mother looked, as if she should say; through
smart pain and sorrow we come to Life, as this son of my smart and sorrow.

28. Then says the Spirit; Genesis 35.19, 20.
Thus Rachel dyed and was buried in the way toward Ephrath, which is now
called Bethlehem. And Jacob set up a Pillar upon her Grave, and that is the
Pillar of Rachels Grave unto this Day. This is a secret mystical Figure, that
Rachel dyed and is buried at the City Bethlehem; and it signifies, that she
shall there rise again through the Birth of Christ, for Christ should there be
borne.

29. And it is signified, that when we shall fly to Bethlehem to the Birth of
Christ, then shall Benjamin, viz. the New spiritual Man be borne of Rachell,
viz. of the Mother of the Old Adamicall Man in the Spirit of Christ: and then
presently will the Mother yield up her birthright to the Spirit of Christ, and
die to her right of Nature, and then will the Spiritual Eternal Birth begin,
and Eve pass away; for there Jacob sets up the Gravestone or Pillar, and
the Spirit says, it is her Gravestone unto this Day, to signify, that it
poynteth at the future, and that this Gravestone should continue, and Christ
be borne there where Rachel died.

30. In this History of the Acts of Jacob, we see clearly, that the Spirit
has, in this description, a figure, under which it signifies. For Rachel was
big with Benjamin when Jacob departed from Laban, when Genesis 31^34, 35.
she sat upon the Idol-Gods, when her Father sought for them, and she said,
it is with me after the manner of Women, so that I cannot rise up before thee.
But now the Text relates, how Jacob first pitched his Tents before Sichem and
dwelt there, and afterward went first to Bethel, and then Rachel brought
forth, so that it appears that the Spirit speaks wholly in the figure, for
the Acts do all follow very Orderly one after another in the figure of Christ,
as it has come to pass with Christ, which ought well to be Observed.

31. The Spirit of Moses says further; Genesis 35.20, 21, 22.
And Israel went forth and spread his Tents on the otherside of the Tower of
Edar; And it came to pass when Israel dwelt in that Land, that Reuben went
and slept with Bilha his Fathers Concubine; and it came before Israel: What
manner of figure is this which is very deeply hidden? but the Circumstances
make it as clear as the Sun.

32. Israel went on the other side of the Great Babylonicall Tower, and dwelt
there with the Children of that People, which may well be a pretty way from
Ephrath Bethlehem, but the Spirit has here its figure under which it
signifies; that is, when Jacob had taken away the strange Gods from his
people, and also their Earrings, and buried them, and built the Altar of the
Lord, Converting to God, and were sitting in Rest and Ease, then the natural
fleshly Man turned again to the Lust of the children of Babel, even as the
Text says.

33. Jacob went and dwelt there, and then Reuben lay with his fathers
Concubine; viz. with Bilha Rachels handmayd, the Mother of Dan and Naphthali,
and committed Blutschande
Incest, which was worse then that of Sichem with Dinah; but the Spirit has
thus with this action presented a figure pointing at the future how it would
come to pass, how Israel would turn away from the Divine Ordinance from the
Altar of their God, and mix their fathers Worship and service of God, with
Natural whoredom, viz. with heathenish Sacrificing to Idols, as is to be
seen by Jeroboam; and the Spirit signifies thereby, that the first Adamicall
Man would have only fleshly desires and Lusts.

34. For Reuben was the first son of Jacob by Lea, viz. by her, of whom also
sprang the Line of Christ, to signify, that every one that would be called
Jews, or Christians, and are Generated out of those stocks, would forsake God,
and lie with their fathers Concubines, viz. commit fornication with the
Idolatry, humane Inventions, and bablings of the Pharisees and Scribes, and
with their Laws and Cannons, and forget the Truth of God and of his
Commandments, in their Hearts, and Einbilden, make to themselves Images of
these.
imprint those whoredoms in their Hearts Lusts.

35. For Reuben was indeed Jacobs first son, as Adam also was the first Man,
but the Line of Christ was not manifested in Reuben, as also not in Adam but it
was manifested in Abel and in Judah, and as Adam, in Spiritu Mundi, in the
spirit of the world, committed adultery with Gods Concubine, through whom God.
he brings forth his fruit, and gave up himself to the Woman, viz. to the
Mother of the Outward Nature, and lay with her, and committed whoredom with
her, and defiled the holy heavenly Marriage Bed of Chastity; thus also stood
this figure of Reuben with his Fathers Concubine pourtrayed before the figure
of Christ; for Christ should bring this Adamicall whoredom into the heavenly
Marriage Bed again, and cover the Incest of Man, and therefore it is here
prefigured together with the figure of Rachel, viz. with the New Regeneration.

The figure of Christendom Or, is th^^ to be understood.
stands thus.
36. This Concubine in Christendom signifies nothing else but the Or, Temples
built with Materials.
Stone Churches, which are indeed Gods Concubine, wherein his Word and
Testaments are handled, in which God generateth his children, in which a Man
should work together with God, and turn his heart to God: But Reuben, viz. the
Adamicall Man, forsakth God, and commits fornication and whoredom with the
Stone Churches, and has embraced her in his Arms of Love, and goes in unto
her, and plays the hypocrite with her, and thinks it is enough if he do
but go thither and hear Sermons Preached, and make use of Absolution and the
Sacraments, and believe that all is true which is there taught, and comforts
himself with this, that he goes cheerfully, willingly, and constantly thither,
and esteems that for right and good, and approves and assenteth to all, that
is there performed, thus covering himself with the purple Mantle of Christ, and
goes out of the Church just as he entered in, and goes twenty or thirty years
together, and so to his very End, and commits whoredom with the Churches,
and thinks he does God good service, when he appears there among others,
sitting and hearing the Preachers Sermons, and when he comes forth knows
nothing of what has been don there.

37. Also in that Auditory he had his heart at Home, or about his trade and
business, or casts his Eyes upon the Beauty of fair Women and Men, and upon
their brave clothes and fine fashions of Pride, and fills his heart with
Imaginations of Lascivious Lust, and broadly commits whoredom with these, or
in these Concubines the Churches.

38. And that which is yet more, when the Preacher often reproves sins and
abominations, and often indeed out of passion sows Thorns, that is catched
up presently, and he tickleth himself the whole week therewith, and
contriveth how to find fault with and Censure others, and to backbite and
blemish them, how they may scoff at people, and gall them with cutting and
stinging words, pricking like Thistles and Thorns, and holds that, for the
best of what he has heard, and so sets this Lucifer in the place of God,
and constantly commits fornication in the whoredom, viz. in the burning
Lust of these Concubines.

39. And the greatest whoredom of all in this Concubine is this, that Men so
quite take their hearts off from God, and set them upon the Ministers of these
Concubines, and commit whoredom with them, and honor them with presents and
Gifts, so that they many times in their Encomiums, praise evil malicious proud
wicked covetous people, who do but squeese the miserable and oppress them
with power and authority, they make great Epitaphes and Elogies, and give them
high and stately Titles, with high respect and reverence, ascribing to them
great devotion, with the fear and love of God, and do highly advance their
Or, Pedigree.
Genealogy and Stock, and so set up the trade of Juggling for money as a common
Juggler, and so reproach the Concubine of God, viz. the Church, with hypocrisy
and lies. Of this it is rightly said; Reuben is climbed up to his fathers
Concubine, and has committed whoredom with her; for they are they that dwell
by this Concubine, and are her Curates and Bishops or Overseers: but they fill
this Concubine full of their false fleshly seed, and generate Bastards in Gods
Concubine, that so the false lust of the flesh may wholly bring their heart
into her, and think, it avails before God, and is very right: their sins
are thus covered by the venom and poison of money, and this hypocrisy fills
their Imagination, so that they think they are better then others, and live
thus in such proud lofty thoughts, continually, in such Church whoredom.

40. And thus Ruben begets, of his Fathers Concubine the Churches, a Company of
Bastards, proud stately boasting covetous people, which defile the poor Mother
of the Humility and simplicity of JESUS CHRIST, viz. the Line of Christ which
lies hid in this Concubine, and shall be generated and manifested: and cast
the whoredom upon her: and thus Gods Concubine, viz. the Church is made to be
a whore, and so very much deflowred that her reproach is come before Israel,
viz. before the Eyes of all the Children of God, who cry fie upon her, and
account her for an unclean deflowred whore, wherein such whoredom, as also
all pomp, pride, and pagintry is exercised, that the Devil with the
Imagination and false Lust, does more teach and govern in such Lust, then the
Spirit of Christ, and it is more a proud whore and a dark valley and Dungeon
then a Temple of JESUS CHRIST.

41. And that which is yet more abominable, many very vain affectations
scornings and derisions are therein managed and taught, where for an Opinions
sake which every one frames to himself they disgrace and persecute one
another, and cry out against one another for Heretics, and sow abroad such
poison and venom in this Concubine the Church, whereby simplicity is seduced,
and such poison of defamation rises up and grows in their hearts, that in
the Churches, nothing but contention disputation scorn and blasphemy is
exercised and taught, that one brother despises the other, calls him
heretic, and damneth him to Hellfire for an Opinions sake, whereby all Love,
Truth, Unity and Concord is vanished.

42. The Grossest Impudence, at which the Heavens and the Elements at present
stand amazed, which is practiced in this Concubine, is this; that Men take the
writings of the Holy children of God, viz. of the Prophets and Apostles, and
their Successors, and make use of them falsely, putting them on for a Cloak,
to cover such whoredom, corrupting and embittering them, and making mere
Sects and Swarms of Schisms of them, and thereby reproach, slander and
persecute one another, giving thereby cause of Wars and Bloodshed, and so they
make a mere impudent whore of the Bible, wherewith every one exercises and
manageth their whoredom, and sucketh Opinions out of it, and therewith despise
the Opinion of another, and scorneth and condemns it, and yet take all their
matters out of the Bible, thus they make their fathers Concubine, viz. the holy
Prophets and Apostles all whores, and falsely commit whoredom with them,
practice impudence, unchastity, and pride with their writings, and teach the
Lay people their unchastity and scorn, so that one Christian learneth to
scorn another out of the holy Scripture, and trim their scorn with the
writings of the Holy Men*
Saints; Of this it is rightly said, Reuben, thou art my first strength, but
thou have climed up upon my Bed, and defiled it with unchastity, thou have used
my Concubine, viz. my formed Word, to thy whoredom, and have made of the
Churches of my Children, a whore-house, and have defiled my Marriage Bed, which
I have in the Churches, where I beget my children.

43. This the Spirit of God signifies clearly, by the declaration of the
Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 49. where he says thus concerning these Churches and
their sacrifices; Genesis 49.3, 4.
Ruben, thou art my first son, thou art my first power, and my first might,
the chief in the Offering, and the chief in the kingdom; he was unstable
therein as water; thou shall not be the chief: for thou have climed up upen
thy fathers bed, and there have thou defiled my bed by thy climing up.

44. The Spirit speaks clearly in this Text: for Ruben signifies the
Ordnance of the first Churches, viz. the power out of which it was built, that
is the first power of the Christian Church or Congregation, and is Gods
Concubine by which he dwells; but their Ministers are climed up into Gods
Marriage Bed, and have gotten the Concubine to themselves, and taken her into
their power, and have gotten her with child with humane fictions, fleshly
honor and voluptuousness; and it says clearly; Thou art the chief in the
Offering, and in the kingdom: for so it must needs be when the whoredom is
committed: but seeing Reuben exercises whoredom with the Churches, it says
thus; Thou shall not be the chief; for he was unstable therein as water, and
signifies thereby, that he would give himself to fleshly Lust, and
Self-love, and that in unstability, and in that regard is rejected of God.

45. Thus the Spirit signifies under this figure, how this Concubine, viz. the
Church, would be reproached with its first power, viz. of its own children, so
that it will be said by the Churches, it is a spiritual whore-house, which a
Man must distinguish from the Temple of JESUS CHRIST; for the Spirit says,
thou shall not be the chief, neither in the offering, nor in the kingdom: and
thus she has lost the true Jus Divinum.
Divine power by the whoredom of her Ministers, and stands at present
rightly as a deflowred one that is made a whore, which is despised of Israel
for her unchastity, which is practiced by her; which is cried out upon by
almost every one, each party crying out against the Church of the other, for a
whore-house, as is enough manifest, and all Libraries are full of such a Cry,
and Men at present are ready to storm and fall in upon the whore-house.

46. But let this be said to the children of God, that the Churches hurt no
man, and they were instituted out of a Good meaning by the first Christian
power; and were very good and profitable, and they need not be thrown down and
demolished, if Ruben would but leave his whoredom whereby he reproacheth them;
that her Ministers might be renewed, and not give forth that they are the
Ministers of this Concubine of God, without the Unction of the Holy Ghost, as
is now done only for temporary honor and pleasure sake, which are as
profitable to the Church, as a fifth wheel is to a Wagon, unless they go with
five wheels to their Wagon, where the fifth moves in the Air, and enters
with their Contention into the Abyss of Hell.

47. The Stone-houses of the Churches, have no greater holiness in them then
other houses, for they are built of Stone and such Materials as other houses
are, and God is no more powerful in them then in other houses, but the Church
or Congregation that enters thereinto, and there meets together, and there
bind themselves with their prayer into one body in Christ, whose Type and
Resemblance the Church is, that has the holy Temple of JESUS Christ in it.

48. Their Songs of praise and thanksgiving are the Cradle of the child JESUS
CHRIST, in which the child Jesus is rocked with unanimus consent in the Hearts
of Men, and not within the bounds of the Church which is a dumb and dead Thing.

49. Its Ministers are no more then all other Men, but the power and virtue
that is powered forth in the Unction of the Holy Ghost, has the power in the
offering, and is the Key.

50. Whosoever will worthily enter into the Church, must bring with him the
Temple of Jesus Christ within him, or at least he must fully take such a
resolution and purpose, that he will bring it out with him in his Heart,
otherwise his going in and coming out is but a committing of Spiritual seeming
holy, but indeed Hypocritical, whoredom, and is no whit the holier when he
comes out, and had as good have been standing in the Market showing his pride
in his fine clothes, for the people to see him, and then perhaps he had not
caused many honest hearts to Err.

51. This we had a purpose to signify, by the knowing of this Figure, that a
Christian should not look upon the show of Churches, but consider that the
Church is but a F^^bild.
Type and Resemblance of Christ, and that he is not a Christian that enters
into the resemblance and approves of that, but he is a Christian that wholly
gives himself up into Christ's Incarnation, Suffering, and Death, and dies to
his hypocrisy in the Death of Christ, and rises from the Death of Christ, in
a New Will and Obedience, and who according to his inward ground, is and lives
in Christ, who himself becomes the Temple of Christ, wherein Christ works
with his power and virtue, and thereby kills sin in the flesh; such a one
is a Christian in Christ, and may rightly enter into the Or, Type.
Resemblance of Christ, and exercise his Christianity therein, such a one will
hear Gods Word and keep and ponder it in his heart.

52. And though a Cowes Lowing, in its sound, should declare the Name of God,
yet Christ preaches in himself, but none that is dead can awaken another that
is dead, nor Mat. ^5.14. Luk 6.39.
one that is blind show the way to another, but both will fall into the Pit,
says Christ.

53. Further, the Spirit of Moses sets down in its figure the Death of the
Patriarch Isaac, and says: Genesis 35.27, 28, 29.
And Jacob came to his Father Isaac to the Head City in Mamre, called Hebron,
where Abraham and Isaac were strangers, and Isaac was an hundred and eighty
years old, and gave up the Ghost and dyed, and was gathered unto his people.
This is a figure, showing, that the children of Christ in this Pilgrimage are
but strange children, and have nothing for their own in the world, and come
all again in the End to their father who has created them; as Jacob came
again to his father before his End; thus also are we in this Pilgrimage in
these Earthly Churches but household servants and strange children, for we must
in the End go into our fathers right Country, viz. into the Angelical Church
of Christ.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Esaw's Genealogy: and of the very excellent, and emphaticall
Figure, which is signified by Joseph the Son of Jacob. And what is thereby to
be understood.
Upon the 36 of Genesis.
1. THe thirty-sixt Chapter of Genesis, Genesis XXXVI.
is the Genealogy of the Potent and Princely Family of Esau, showing, how God
gave him much wealth and many children, and childrens children, and the Spirit
sets down a great Register in describing his children, and childrens
children, relating what great Princes and Dukes were descended of him, and
possessed the Glory of the World: Whereas on the other side, when he speaks
of Jacob, he does not mention any present worldly Glory; but only speaks in
the Figure of Christ concerning the kingdom to come.

2. Whereby we see very clearly, that Esau does stand in the figure of the
Kingdom of nature, and that the Glory of Nature fell to be his lo^t; and that
he became a Great Prince, and begatt many Princely Families, also we see how
God blessed him, and made him great, and how the Holy Spirit with especial
Care and diligence.
Observation has Recorded and specified his posterity, to signify, that we
should learn rightly to understand the Figure of Jacob and Esau, and not go
on so blindly, as to condemn Esau into the bottomless pit of hell, as too too
frequently is done: for we see how his Father Isaac did appoint and assign
unto him a very rich and wealthy habitation upon the Earth, and that to him God
would give many Temporal blessings, but his figure in Adams Nature must
perish; and Christ must arise in him, so that from ESAV the The swinish
beastiall earthy property.
SAV might be done away, and he remain steadfast in the The Angelical eternal
property.
E, as An Angel, Ein Engel whereunto Christ in Jacobs Figure would help him.

3. The Spirit of Moses gives also to Esau a name, and calls him Genesis 36.^.
Edom, who dwelt upon Mount Seir, under which a very secret understanding is
coucht: for EDOM, does signify, in the In the Hebrew.
High tongue, one red colored, who in his hard, strong, and Text. Mountanous.
rough Nature, should be Tinctured Red by the Red Blood of JESUS CHRIST.

Genesis 36.6.
4. And the Spirit says further: That the two brothers did separate themselves
one from another, which signifies, the Natural Adamicall Esau, who must be
separated with his [ Evill] will from Jacob, that is, from Christ, for the
natural self-will shall not see God; Moreover, it signifies, how Evil and
Good should separate themselves in the Kingdom of this world, and each
possess its own principle.

5. These NAMES of the children of Esau do in the Language of Nature contain
their worldly Kingdoms and Dominions, intimating how they have divided
themselves, even unto the Ends of the world, whereof in Note, another place in
other writings of his.
Another place, seeing it would take up too much room, and the time also of the
clear signifying of it, is not yet fully at hand; Enough to those that are our
School-fellowes.

Note.
THe Third Part of the Mysterium Magnum was published in Germany as a Complete
Treatise of it self under the Name of Josephus Redivivus.

But when the whole Book came to be printed together, there was only the
first Part, and the Second Part, which comprehended the Third Part also as one
with the Second.

Yet because the History of Joseph, being an Exposition of the last 14 Chapters
of Genesis, is so excellent and entire a piece, it may well go as a Third Part
of the Mysterium Magnum, as it is here distinctly divided and Printed by it
self, with a several Title Page, as follows.

THE THIRD PART OF THE Mysterium Magnum: BEING THE MOST EXCELLENT HISTORY OF
JOSEPH, WHICH IS The Cleerest Figure of the New-Man Regenerated out of the
Earthly Old ADAM.

AND IS A Looking Glass, wherein Every one may try, examine, and discern what
Spirits Child himself is.

Written by JACOB BEHM, Teutonicus.

Beginning at the XXXVII Chapter of Genesis, and the 64 of this Mysterium
Magnum, and at the 6 Verse, and ending at the L. and last Chapter of Genesis,
and the 78 and last Chapter of the Mysterium Magnum.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1654.

6. THe Thirty-Seventh Chapter, concerning Joseph, Genesis XXXVII
is indeed the most pleasant, and excellent figure of the New Man Regenerate
out of the old Adam; Which [New Regenerate Man] is become a Prince over the
Kingdom of Nature, and also a Lord over all his Adamicall Members, being the
brethren of the little child Jesus in him; as Genesis 42.6.
Joseph became a Prince in the whole Land of Egypt, and a Lord over all his
brothers, and whole kindred and family; and it shows us very emphatically and
pregnantly in its figure in the history, how a man must become such a Joseph;
also how it then goes with him, and how the world deals with him, before he
be made a Prince over the Adamicall Kingdom of his nature, and that the New
Man may obtain the Government and power over his earthly Members: How the
Devil in the wrath of God does Assault the precious Lilly-twigg in the power
of God, out of which the chaste Joseph springs, grows, and is brought forth,
and first casts him down into the Pit of darkness in flesh and blood, and
there hides him, that so he might be destitute of all help, comfort, and
assistance, and be even forced to perish.

7. As Joseph's brethren did to Joseph, even so the Earthly members of the old
Adam do likewise to this Lilly-twigg of the new birth, in the chastity of
Christ's Spirit, whereat the Devil is also busy, and continually stirs up
the evil Beasts, full of carnal, greedy, and burning lust, in flesh and
blood, so that they strive to domineer and have the upperhand.

8. Externally, or from without, the Devil also brings Potiphars wife, viz.
unchaste lewd people, to him, who would fain defile the chaste countenance of the
inward Ground, and Egg on the Earthly flesh to feed upon the whoredom of the
world, and all lascivious lewdness, wantonness, and vanity, and draw the same
unto it with the Imagination; and bring the new Joseph to commit Adultery with
Potiphars wife; but he must so violently and resolvedly break through, and
force his way from thence, that he must be fain to leave his Garment, that is,
his All whatsoever he has, or is.
Substance; and fly from thence nakedly, and resignedly in spirit and power,
that his chaste virginity may abide steadfast before God.

9. And if Joseph does thus wrestle, and suffers not flesh and blood, nor the
base world to hinder or over-master him; then it will become his utter enemy,
and betray him to death; because he will not commit lewdness and whoredom
with her; and then Joseph, viz. the The real earnest conflicting Christian.
wrestling man, is cast into prison, viz. into reproach and contempt for the
sake of his chastity and fear of God; and he must hide himself under Christ's
Cross, under his yoke in his suffering and death, and live as a Prisoner in
misery; the world rejecting him as one not at all worthy to tread upon the
Earth; Accounting him as a prisoner, that is imprisoned, and despised for
whoredoms sake; desiring to have no converse nor intercourse with him; being
that the chief Masters, and Great Ones (viz. Potiphars wife) do revile him,
and accuse him of unchastity.

10. Which wife does also signify the false [ Babylonish] hypocritical whore
with all her dissemblers and flatterers in the fine Adorned house of
Christendom; who when they cannot catch Joseph with their whoredom and hold
him, but that he does strongly get away from them, then they exclaim out
against him falsely, and keep his Garment for a Sign, accusing him of
unchastity, viz. of Idolatry, and One, of dangerous Principles or opinions.
heresy, and call him a dreamer, a A whimsicall fellow.
fantastical fellow, and a scismatick, as happened to Joseph.

11. And when the Master hears it, then he believes this Potiphars wife,
viz. the painted, and fine accomplished hypocrite, in the house of hypocrisy;
and so Joseph comes to be suspected of the Master, and is rejected of him, and
cast into the prison of Affliction, and there he must live in misery and scorn
as a guilty person, and yet not guilty.

12. But this contempt, banishment and affliction is good for him, for thereby
he is drawn from the pride and whoredom of the world, and all its falsehoods,
which might assault his flesh and blood, and hinder the new birth; and thus the
precious Pearle-plant grows under Christ's Cross in the disrespect, and
tribulation of the world, and becomes great and strong.

13. But in the mean time God does send honest people to such a Joseph, who
take pity and care of him, and maintain him, and acknowledge his innocence,
and show themselves friendly and kind toward him, and consider his chastity
and fear of God, and do also respect him, and provide for him, till the inward
Prince in Gods power be fit for the Government, and then God brings him out
of prison, and gives him the Scepter of Government to be a Prince in his
Wonders, and to rule and govern in Divine Knowledge over Gods wonderful
Works, as Joseph over the Land of Egypt; In which In such a condition.
type and figure this Pen is likewise born, and indeed no otherwise; which yet
is hidden unto reason.

14. This is now the Sum of the Exposition of the History of Joseph; but
seeing it is so very rich and full, we will make a fundamental explanation upon
the Text; for a direction, and manuduction to the loving reader, who also
intends to become a Joseph; if he shall be in Earnest, and learn to observe,
and know himself in this figure; he will see what Spirits child has made
these writings, for he will find this That Pen of Iron or point of a Diamond
is that engraveth in the heart. Jer. 17.1 Genesis 37.1, 2, 3, 4.
Pen [ Engraving or writing] in his Heart.

15. The Text says; Jacob dwelt in the Land wherein his Father was a stranger,
namely, in the Land of Canaan. These are the Generations of Jacob: Joseph being
Seventeen years old was feeding the flock with his brethren, and the Ladd was
with the Sons of Bilhah, and with the Sons of Zilpah his fathers wives; and
Joseph brought unto his Father their evil report. Now Israel loved Joseph more
then all his Children; because he had begotten him in his old age; and he made
him a Coat of many Colors. And when his brethren saw that their Father Loved
him more then all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak friendly to
him.

The inward Figure is this.
16. Jacob had cast his fleshly natural Love upon Rachel, being she was fair;
and seeing that the line of Christ in the Covenant did lie in Jacob Rachel was
shutt up, so that his seed was not manifested in her in the natural manner of
the flesh; until Jacob and Rachel were grown old, and neither of them loved
each other so any more according to fleshly love, but only desired a fruit of
their seed; wherefore also Jacob and Rachel prayed unto God, that he would open
her, and make her fruitful; and when this was brought to pass, out of this
seed of Jacob sprang forth a Line, which did set forth and represent a figure
of the pure natural and right Adamicall humanity, which birth, in the figure,
typifieth, how Christ would again beget the Adamicall humanity Unto.
in its primitive chastity, purity, and fear of God.

17. For in Lea (viz in the simplicity and lowliness) the line of Christ
arose, and sprang forth, and in Rachel the line of the first Adamicall man in
his Innocence, viz. a figure of the same; which figure did represent, how a
Christian should stand at once both in Christ's Image and in Adams Image; and
what a Christian in this world should be inwardly and outwardly, and how he
must become a Christian: therefore says the Text; Genesis 37.4.
Jacob Loved Joseph more then all his children: the cause was this: Joseph was
sprung forth out of Jacobs own natural line, of his peculiar natural Love to
Rachel, wherein the line in Christ's Love in the Covenant had also imprinted and
manifested it self; and it was a punctual representation in the Figure of a
new Regeneration, how a true Christian should stand, after that Christ should
be revealed in the flesh of the humane nature.

18. And therefore Joseph was so inclined in his Mind, that he could not
conceal any falsehood, but when he heard any evil of his brethren, he told the
same to his father: this his brethren could not brook, and therefore they
called him a betrayer, and envied him; for the spirit which reproves
wickedness and falsehood was revealed in him: for Joh. 16.8.
Christ should reprove the world for Sin; but being he now did represent a
Christian, he told it his father, out of whom HE should come, who should
reprove the world, and we see very clearly, how flesh and blood [viz. Joseph's
natural brethren] in the Type of Christendom, became an utter enemy to the
type [ viz. to the true Christian Joseph] and they could not speak a friendly
peaceable word unto him; for it does sorely vex, and offend the Serpent in
flesh and blood, when Christ comes and will bruise its head.

19. Moreover we see very evidently, how the Spirit of God did manifest it
self in Joseph, and signified to him, the figure of his Constellation, so that
he could understand Dreams and Visions after the same manner as the Prophets
in the Spirit of Christ saw visions, and could expound them; so also Joseph.

20. As it was showed unto him in a vision how he should be a Prince over his
father and all his brethren, which does directly point out the inward man in
the Spirit of Christ, who becomes Prince over his Fathers Adamicall house; in
the Type and figure whereof Joseph stood outwardly, and therefore the external
figure was set forth and personated in him by the hatred of his brethren
toward him; signifying how the multitude of the world would be hateful,
scornful, and opposite Enemies to the New child in Christ's Spirit; and also
how it would be done by those who were Christians, and did boast of Christ, and
were also such in the inward ground, and how the Adamicall man would not know
and acknowledge Christ in a true outward and manifest manner, but ignorantly
despise, and contem him in his brethren and members.

21. To signify, that Christ in this world has taken on himself, the
Reproach, in the Righteousness of God, and that he would not only in his own
humane Person suffer scorn, and bear Adams reproach, seeing he departed from the
Image of God, but that he would also suffer himself to be reproached in all
his members, and children, so that he would also bear Adams reproach in them,
and Romans 8.29.
make them like to his Image.

22. Therefore must Jacobs children, who also were in Christ's line, according
to their natural Adamicall Man, reproach, revile, and hate the Image of a true
Christian Man in Joseph, to show how one Christian would exercise, provoke [and
persecute] another in zeal, and despise his fellow-Christian, for a natural
Opinions sake, as it now is and ever has been practiced in Christendom,
namely, that the one party has despised contemned and hated the other, because
of natural Laws [Rights or priviledges] and the Opinions of a supposed
service of God.

23. As Joseph was hated of his brethren Or, for the knowledge of his visions.
because he had visions, so is now adays the divine wisdom (which reveals
it self in Gods children) vilified, and hated of the natural Adam; which
scorn and enmity does wholly proceed and arise from the Pharisaicall Laws and
Canons, from the Concubine of Christ, the Stone-Churches, and their Ministers,
which do disgrace and vilify the Concubine of Christ, themselves, as it
appears very evidently, and thereby they contemn and despise the children of
Christ.

24. For by the Concubine of Christ, the Churches; the Babylonish Tower of the
high Schools, and Universities is built; and from thence come the confused The
confusion of several Opinions and conceits in Men's Minds.
Languages, so that Christ is not understood in his children, when they in the
simplicity of Christ, declare and expound the visions of Joseph [the mysteries
of Christ's Kingdome] then these strange Languages despise it, for they have
gotten, upon the Tower, other Languages, from the Compaction of the sensual
Tongues, where every sense, of the literal Spirits, has brought it self into
a form of a several peculiar Tongue or Speech.

25. And the height of the Tower gives the difference or distinction of speech
to this sensual Tongue; so that they do not understand one another in their
understanding, [or ground of their meaning] which height signifies the pride
of Self-love, from which the five vowells do hide themselves, so that they
understand Mat 22.29.
not the power of God in Gods children, in the simplicity of Joseph, but call
him a Dreamer, an expounder of Signs, a Scismatick, a fantastical fellow, an
Enthusiast, a Fool, etc.

26. Thus in the room and place of our Adamicall Guilt and Crime, Christ is
despised in his children; and thus Mat. 3.15.
Christ fullfilleth the righteousness of God in his children, and hereby the
old man is also mortifyed; and it is well for the Christian Joseph that it goes
thus with him, for otherwise he would not be thrown into the Worlds pit, and
be sold to the Midianites, that he might come to Pharaoh, and there become a
Prince.

27. Therefore a Christian must not be grieved, and perplexed at the hatred of
his brethren (in that they hate Joseph) but rather think with himself; O! that
thou also were cast into Joseph's Pit, that thou might thereby be brought
away from the house of Sin, and come likewise into Joseph's Prison, that so
thou might have cause to fly from the world; and that this Prince (that
gives Joseph to understand the divine visions in his word of power) might be
also manifest and born under the Banner of Christ's Cross; that in thee also
the divine chastity of Joseph (the pure Christian virginity) might be
manifested, that thou likewise might obtain such a godly chaste heart; this
ought to be the wish and will of a Christian, and not that he may become great
by means of the Tower of Babel in the Strange Languages; of whose difference
and several variety, the height [of the Tower,] viz. Pride, is the author and
cause; so that men will not understand one another in Love, meekness,
humility, and in the simplicity of Christ, Acts 17.28.
in whom notwithstanding we live and have our being.

28. Therefore, O thou poor confused, and distracted Christendom, thou art
bidden and entreated by the affliction of Joseph, to see, from whence thy
affliction and misery comes; from no whither else, save only from the hatred
of thy brethren, which also are in Christ's Line, as Joseph's brethren: observe
it aright; thy wound, and hurt, thy misery and affliction, does come only from
the Tower of Babel, from the Titles, Dignities, and Preferments of thy
brethren; who in their pride of the Confused Tongues are entered into
Self-love; observe it I beseech thee, all strife, division and contention in
the world arises from thence.

29. But thou say; this Tower does advance me to honor and esteem, and
makes me high and rich; so that I by means of the strange Languages (of my
literal endowments, and Scholastique Learning) can ride over Joseph, and am
able to bind him, so, that he must lie in the pit, and thus I am Lord in
Christ's kingdom upon the Earth.

30. Hearken, and mark it, we have heard a watchman say; the Midianites come
and take Joseph with them, and bring him unto Pharaoh, and there thine
unfaithfullnesse, and unrighteousness shall be discovered; how will thou then
stand before the face of Joseph? The time is nigh at hand.

31. Or do thou think that the affliction of Joseph shall not be avenged,
behold in thy miserable Famine, and distress, when thou shall hunger and
thirst, even then thou must make thy Adresse, and supplication to him: the high
Tower will give thee neither comfort nor deliverance: the Time is come about
that Joseph's Affliction is to be Avenged, and Reubens whoredom with Jacobs
Concubine is come before Israel.

32. Why make thou such long delay, and flatterest thy self, playing the
Hypocrite, and say, not yet a good while, behold! it is come before the Eyes
of Israel, that thou have committed whoredom a long time with the Concubine,
and defiled the line of Christ: Israel will no longer endure it: thou shall
with Reuben be cast out of the high Office of Sacrificing and Governing; This
is the voice which the watchmen have pronounced.

33. Genesis 37.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
When Joseph had had the two Dreams; the one of his sheaf standing upright,
before which the sheafes of his brethren bowed; the other of the Sun, Moon, and
Eleven Stars, which had done obeisance to Joseph: Envy forthwith arose amongst
them, and they supposed he would be their Lord; and being that they were the
Eldest they desired to rule over Him.

34. Whereby we see, how the outward man has only sought, and aimed at the
Kingdom of this world; which was even the bane and undoing of Adam; in that he
forsook the inward, and sought after the outward.

35. Genesis 37.3.
Joseph's party-colored Coat which his father made, signifies how the inward
power of God would again be revealed through the outward man, whereby the
humane nature would be variously colored (that is, mixed with God) as the
inward spiritual Kingdom with the outward.

The Spiritual Christian figure, is thus [to be understood.]
36. Joseph with his Coat of many colors was as yet a Ladd both tender and
young, and had not yet the wit, craft, and suttlety of the world, but spoke the
truth in simplicity; for his soul was not yet defiled from without with the
craft of lying, and the Spirit of God began to Work, act, or move in him.
drive him forward, for his Coat of many colors was a figure of the inward.

37. This figure prefigureth, and represents to us the Image of a true young
Scholar, and beginner in Christianity, how he must be when the Spirit of God
shall drive, and act him; namely, he must turn his heart to God his Father,
and learn to love him heartily; As Joseph loved to be with his father, and told
him the evil that was committed among his children; so must a beginner in
Christianity daily bring before God all his own miseries, and the miseries, and
sins of all that belong to him; yea of all Christendom: As Daniel confessed
the sins of the People of Israel before God; and Joseph the evils of his
brethren before his father; so also a true Christian does daily confess the
misery and sin of his People and Nation in hearty Compassion, that God would be
merciful to them and preserve them from Great Evils and Sins.

38. And when this is brought to pass, his heart becomes very simple, honest,
and upright, for he desires no craft, but would fain have all things proceed
righteously and justly; and he cannot abide any unrighteousness, or subtle
dealings; for he always confesses the peoples unrighteousness before God;
and thus his mind becomes altogether simple, and seeks no kind of craft or
suttlety; but puts his hope and confidence in God, and lives in the
simplicity, and lowliness of heart before God and the world; and he is as the
tender young ladd Joseph; for he hops for good continually from God his
Father.

39. Now when a man is come so far, then Joseph [viz. the chaste virgin child
of Sophia] is even born; then God his father clothes his soul with the
party-colored coat, viz. with the divine power; and forth with the Spirit of
God in him begins to play with the soul, as he did with Joseph; for the
Spirit of God sees through the soul, and with the soul (as Joseph in the Type
saw things which were to come, represented to him in the vision of dreams,
whereby the Spirit did also play with the soul) even so the Spirit of God does
forthwith take delightful communion with the soul of a new Joseph, viz. with
the inward spiritual world; so that the soul understands divine mysteries,
and sees into the Eternal life, and knows the hidden world, which yet is to
be revealed in man; as this Pen has found by Experience, from whence it has
received its Spirit of knowledge.

40. Now when this man begins to speak of divine things and visions, of the
hidden worlds divine mysteries, and speaks forth the wonders of God, and that
his brethren, ( viz. the children of the outward world in whom the hidden
spiritual world is not yet manifest) do hear it; they count it a mere fable,
and a melancholy Chimera, and whimsey, and esteem him foolish, in that he
speaks of those things, which they cannot understand, and comprehend; they
make a mere Fancy and Fiction of it; also they account it some Astrall
instigation or false Enthusiasm, or the like; especially, if he reveals, and
reproves their evil works, and ways, as Joseph did; then they turn his open
Enemies, and grudge him his very life, as happened to Joseph.

41. Now when it is thus; Reason beholds it self at a stand, as if it were
confounded, and knows not the ways of God; viz. that it must be thus with
the children of God: it thinks, thou seek God, and he brings thee into
distress and misery: thus this man does now wander up and down; as Joseph
wandered in the Or, Field.
Wilderness when his father sent him to his brethren to see how it was with
them.

42. So it goes likewise with Gods new children, when Gods Spirit sends them
to be zealous about the affliction of Joseph; and the world does every way hate
and persecute them for it; then they think in the Reason of this world; do
thou not go in the ways of God; wherefore then does it go so with thee, that
thou art but the fool of the world; and then the Mind begins to be
troubled, and knows not how it is with it; for he hears, that he is every
where accused for a frantic wicked person, and hated; for the young mind in
flesh and blood understands not the divine process; viz. how reason must
become a fool, and how Christ does very willingly take upon himself, in man,
the reproach and scorn of the Devil, and of the world; and how Gods
righteousness, and Adams propagated Guilt must be always fullfilled with
suffering, how a Christian must stand in Christ's figure.

43. And now when it comes to be thus, then Reason goes truly a wandering in
great sorrow and desertion with Joseph in the wilderness; and is every way in
distress; and yet he must perform his fathers Commandment, and Will: but God
forsakes not his Joseph; but sends him a man to comfort him, and show him
the way to his brethren; as happened to Joseph, when he was a wandering in the
Wilderness.

44. That is; he sends to him also a truly zealous Christian* who knows
his ways, and comfort him, exhorting him to persevere constantly in the
ways of God; whereby this new Joseph does again receive courage, and strength,
and com^th into the right way, and goes readily and boldly to his brethren,
and sees what they do, and what they intend.

45. That is; he sets the command and will of God before them (as Joseph did
the Command of his father;) and when they see, that he will reprove them with
Gods Word, then they cry out; lo! Genesis 37.1^.
There is a Dreamer, and a frantic fellow; he will come and make us believe
strange things; he inveigheth against our good Customs, wherein we have honor
and good days; What? shall this fellow reprove us? He is not come from the
high Schools and Universities; and yet will take upon him to teach, and
reprove us; let us consult how we may take him out of the way, and slay him;
What, shall we endure this poor silly fellow to teach and reprove us? What is
he? he is but a Layman; and shall he control us? Moreover, he is not called;
and it is none of his vocation; he putts himself forth only that he might be
taken notice off, and get himself some Name and fame among the people: but we
will so silence him that he shall be the fool of all the world: we will lay his
honor in prison, and make him be scorned, hated, and persecuted, for an
Example to others that shall offer to assault or trouble us; that so he may
learn to tarry at home, and attend his worldly Vocation, and leave it to us to
judge of divine matters, who are appointed and authorized by the Magistrate,
and have studied in the Universities, and there have learned such things.

46. Thus they take the poor Joseph, which comes to them by his Fathers
command, and bind him with reproach, and shame, and exclaim against him
falsely, and rob him of his Coat of many colors in the sight of all his
brethren, which coat God his Father has made him; as Jacobs Sons did to
Joseph, and continually Genesis 37.^8.20.
consult how to kill him, and take him wholly out of the way, as Joseph's
brethren did.

47. But as Reuben the eldest brother did hinder it, and would not suffer them
to kill Joseph; and yet that he might not be wholly against their Counsel, he
said, Genesis 37.22.
Behold here is a pit in the Wilderness, into that we will cast him, and send
his Coat of many Colors to his father, that he may think some evil Beast has
devoured him. So God raises in their counsel, Reuben the eldest brother, who
has power to hinder the counsels and decrees of the false Pharisees; viz.
Some honest pious Man in Authority who resists the murdering counsel of the
Pharisees.

48. And although he does not wholly oppose their counsels, yet he resists
and stops the actual execution of their wills, and says; Kill him not;
cast him only into the pit, and strip him of his coat of many colors, that
he may have no more Dreams; and this he does that he may deliver him from the
murdering Sword.

49. Genesis 37.23, 24.3^, 32.
But they take him (as Joseph's brethren did Joseph), and strip him of his Coat
of many colors, and cast him into the pit in the wilderness, and take his
Coat of many colors, and dip it in Goates-bloud, and send it so to his Father;
that is to say, they deprive and bereave him of his honor and good name by
their slanderings, and take his words and doctrine, and make false
constructions and conclusions thereof, and bedawb them in Goats blood; that
is, with false understanding and sense, and send forth such reproaching
Pamphletts and Libells among the people, and before his Father; viz. before the
whole Church and Commonwealth, and cry out, lo! this defiled Coat is this
man's; and thus they murder the Spirit of his father, in the Coat; that is, in
his Name they scandallize, slander and reproach him falsely, and say of him,
that he does vilify the Blood of Christ with his Coat of many colors; and
thus they deceive his Father; viz. the whole Congregation with the false
Goates-Bloud, wherein they have dipped his Coat; so that the people think, Genesis
37.33.
A wild beast has torn Joseph in pieces, that is, they think the Devil has
possessed this man, and that he is a false [ wicked] man.

50. Thus the Father, viz. the people, and the Magistrates are, by this defiled
coat, deceived by the sleight of Joseph's brethren; that is, by those who
themselves are to teach the way of God, so that they think that the Devil
has devoured this man, and has possessed his heart: and thus the poor Joseph
is thrown down into the Desolate pit, and lies in misery, as Zech. 9.11.
in a pit wherein there is no water, and wherein he can neither be drowned,
nor receive any refreshment; but sits as wholly forsaken of all the world;
and waits now what God will do with him, since he thus rejects him by men.

51. Here now he has no help or succor from any man; his best friends also
account him mad and foolish; his Name is as an Owl among the birds; for thus
he must pass through the Judgment of God, and be even the scorn of all men:
If he shall attain to the Contemplation of the divine Mysteries, then he must
first be judged, and come under the censure and judgment of the world; that
they may judge his inbred Sins, and Sacrifice them before God, that he, in the
Or, as a follower of Christ.
figure of Christ may force through the judgment of God, and come to the
Divine vision within himself.

52. Thus a right true Christian (before he attains the Science of the divine
Mysteries) must be wholly severed from the pleasure and honor of the world,
and become altogether foolish, and a child to his own Reason in himself; and
also outwardly be accounted a fool, as the world likewise, esteems him a
foolish silly fellow when he forsakes temporal honor and Goods for the Hope
of the Eternal Good which he sees not.

53. And when it goes thus with poor Joseph, that he must lie in the miserable
pit, his brethren are not yet content, that they have cast him into the pit,
but Genesis 37, 28.
they draw him out from thence, and sell him to the Midianites, that he may be
carried from them into a strange and foreign Country; that is, they take his
Name, and Doctrine, and send them into foreign Countries, whereby Joseph's Coat
of many Colors does by divine appointment and providence come to be known.

54. But they intend treacherously and falsely toward him, and so sell Joseph
to Reproach, Derision, and Servitude, to serve the world and to be their
footstool, and scorn; as happened to Joseph from his brethren, and has also
happened to this Pen.

55. Thus Genesis 37.36.
Joseph is brought into Egypt, and sold for a Slave, Gen 38.1, 2, 3, 4.
but God. is with him, and gives him understanding, and wisdom, that he is
made his Masters Steward, so that his Master Or, undertakes.
does nothing without him, but entrusteth him with all things: So also when the
Spirit of Joseph (though in a spiteful manner) is sold into strange Countries,
where his Person is not known; yet the wise do take especall notice of the
Spirit [of his sense and meaning] and know him, and see that God has given him
his wisdom, and Spirit, and receive his Writings and Doctrine, and Order their
whole life according to it; and thus Joseph comes to sit in the chief office
of Pharaoh's Steward, and Governs his whole house.

56. But for all this Joseph is not yet passed through the Judgment, for even
in this Government he first meets with the greatest danger of his life; for
there Genesis 38.7.
the Stewards wife burns in lust toward him; that is, the false Sects, who
would fain woo and wed themselves into his Spirit, and therewith Adorn their
Doctrine and Doings; for Temporal Honor, Art, and Science; and if this
Joseph's Spirit will not mix it self with their humane fiction and fables,
then they exclaim against him, and say all manner of evil of him, and accuse
him of unchastity, viz. of false Doctrine; and appeal him before the Steward,
that is, the Magistrate.

57. And then Gen 38.20.
Joseph must be cast into prison, and lie there captive, and be tried to
purpose; till God shall bring him out again from thence, and set him before
Pharaoh, and then his wisdom and fear of God is revealed, that it is plainly
discerned and known that his understanding is given him of God, and so his
understanding is made Ruler over the Land of Egypt; so that he rules not
only strange Nations, but his own brethren must at length also come unto him
in their famine, when the right understanding of the divine manifestation (and
mystery) is scarce and rare with them, and he nourishes them also by his
wisdom; thus God has sent him aforehand to be their father, that they
afterward must be fain to come and seek and enjoy their brother Joseph's
wisdom among Or, Strange.
other Nations.

58. For so also did Matthew. 5.12.
Israel persecute the Prophets, till they were brought into darkness and
Idolatry in the Lust of their flesh; and all those things came upon them of
which the Prophets told them; and then, when they sat in hunger, and misery,
and their Land was full of Abomination; they sought out the writings of the
Prophets, and even then they acknowledged that, what they had spoken was true,
and that they had don them wrong, and Matthew. 23.29, 30.
Adorned their Graves, and said, Had we lived in our forefathers time, we
would not have killed them; but the Most High does so order his Judgment that
it begins at the House of Israel; and he extinguisheth his Anger and
Indignation in the children of Grace; for the Blood of the Saints in the power
of Christ has at all times resisted the Anger, so that Mal. 3.6.
Israel has not been consumed.

59. Genesis 37.28. 20 pieces of silver.
Joseph was sold for Twenty pieces of Silver, and Mat. 26 15* 30 pieces of
silver.
Christ for Thirty, to signify, that the humanity of Christ is higher, and
perfecter then the humanity of others which are his children, being he was not
conceived of the Seed of man, but sprung forth in the Natural Tincture in the
lights property; but the Adamicall Soul is from the fires property, from whence
the light receives its Original, and manifestation; so that the lights
property in Christ assumed the fires; viz. the Adamicall Soul; and the inward
hidden [divine, and heavenly being] which was sealed up, and quite faded as to
the Light's life, in Adam, did again open and putt forth it self afresh.

60. Therefore seeing a Christian is under Christ, and in Christ becomes again
manifest in God; the figure of Christ is represented here in this figure in the
Number of 30. and that of a Christian in the Number of 20: for a Christian is
sold into the hands of men to suffer; but Christ must not only suffer in the
hands of men, but give himself up also to the wrath of God, whereupon he sweat
blood.

61. And this whole history of Joseph does excellently decipher to us, how a
Christian stands in his figure before God and the world: for the Or, History.
whole Acts of Joseph do paint out, how Adam comes to be a Christian; how he
must in the process of Christ be putt into Christ's figure, and become an Image
of Christ; and how God does in Christ's process exalt him again in the
Kingdom of Christ, and sets him at the right hand of God; as Joseph was
set at the right hand of King Pharaoh after that he had continued in the
process of Christ, and was brought through it.

CHAP. LXV. Of Juda and Thamar, being a Mystical Figure of Adam and Christ, in
which the New Birth is excellently prefigured.
Upon the 38 Chapter of Genesis.
WHen we consider the History of Joseph according to outward Reason, then
Reason demands; Ge. XXXVIII
Wherefore Joseph's history is not set down together in the Bible (without any
interruption) whereas One Act followed so upon another? Why does Moses putt
this typical figure of Judah and Thamar between? But if we look upon, examine,
and consider this History of Juda and Thamar, and likewise the figure of Joseph
with a Right understanding, we find, and see that the Holy Ghost has of set
purpose so ordered and disposed them in their Right and true Order.

2. For, Joseph represents a true Christian, showing how he must behave
himself before God, and the world, and how he is putt in the process and
figure of Christ; but this History of Juda and Thamar is a figure of a
Christians growth out of Adams Image, according to the humanity in the Kingdom
of Nature: showing how he must spring forth out o^ the first Adamicall Image,
and how this same Adamicall Image is evil and must dye, which the Anger of God
kills, and yet that the first right must stand; that a Christian according to
the humane Nature and property is only the Adamicall Image, and no new or
strange thing, and how Christ manifests himself in this Adamicall evil
Image, and kills the evil; and yet during the time of this life outwardly it
hangs to a Christian; this the Spirit here powerfully prefigureth.

3. Here we see a powerful figure in Judah, in whom stood the line of Christ
in the Order of the Genealogy, out of which Christ was to be manifested; Genesis
38.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
This Judah went away from his brethren, and applied himself to a Man of
Odoliam, called Hira, and there Juda saw a Cananitish Man's daughter, called
Suha, and he took her and went in unto her, so she conceived and bare a
son, and he called his Name Er, and she conceived again and bare a son,
whose Name she called Onan, and she conceived once more and bare another
son, whose name she called Selah, and she was at Chesib when she bare him;
and Judah gave his son Er a wife, whose name was Thamar: but he was evil in
the sight of the Lord, and therefore the Lord slew him; then said Judah to
Onan, Lie thou with thy brothers wife, and take her in Marriage, that thou
may raise up seed to thy Brother; But Onan knowing that the seed should
not be his own, when he should lie with his brothers wife, he let it fall to
the ground and destroyed it, lest he should give seed to his brother, and it
was displeasing in the sight of the Lord, which he did, and the Lord slew him
also.

This Figure Or, is thus to be understood.
stands thus.
4. Judah stands here in the figure of Adam, in that condition as when the
Covenant of Grace concerning the seed of the Woman was again inspired or
inspoken into Adam, just so he stands in that same figure, showing, that the
Covenant of Grace stood in the Evil Adam, as Adam then was: for as in Judah
the time of Christ, viz. the Covenant of Grace was in Motion, as a boundary
reaching to Mary, so also it was in Adam, and so along to and in Judah.

5. And Thamar stands in the figure of Eve, into whom God had inspired or
inspoken his Promise, the Word of Regeneration, that the seed of the Woman, in
the power of the Word, should break the Serpents head, so she stands as an
Earthly Eve, in whom inwardly the Covenant of Grace stood, and outwardly there
was the Corrupt Eve, which in this figure stands outwardly as a whore, out of
whom yet the Line of Christ sprang in Perez her son; as Abel out of Eve,
though Eve were indeed become Earthly: and we see here the Type very plainly,
how the Spirit plays and takes delight in this figure with the Old and New
Adam, as also with the Old and New Eve.

6. For Adam was, in his Lust, gone forth from his fathers house, as Judah to
the Cananites, and had taken to him in his Lustful desire the Cananitish
Woman, the four Elements, of whom he begat Three sons, the first called Er,
or Ger, viz. self-will or desire, wherein the Kingdom of the Nature of Man
stood in selfe-desire or own will, and this son was the first world before
the Deluge or Flood, to this the father gave him his Name, to signify, that he
lived in the Fathers Nature.

7. The second son she called Onan, whom the Mother called so, which pointed
at the second world after the Flood, for the Nature of the Father in Man said
to God, O no O nein my Lord, drown me no more, and the Mother, viz. the Woman
of this world in Spiritu Mundi, in the Spirit of the world, in the Expressed or
out-spoken Word and Life, gave her son this Name; for God had inspired his
Grace again into her, that this her second son, viz. the Other world, should
not be drowned with Water; therefore this Name stands thus in the high
figure, and is called ONAN, for the Spirit hides it in the High Tongue, and
calls him Onan, or O nein, O no.

8. The Third son she called Selah, and she was at Chesib, when she bare
him. CHESIB signifies in the Either the Hebrew is here meant or rather the
Language of Nature.
High Tongue an Exhaling in, and recomprehension, that is, this Selah
signifies the time of the Manifestation of the Law, wherein the Divine Will in
the Word, has manifested it self through the Expressed Word, and comprised it
in a Law or Commandment.

9. These three sons signify the Three Times from Adam to Christ: Er is the
Time before the Flood in self-will, Lust and desire; Onan is the second Time
after the Flood; This son, viz. the World after the Flood, has known Gods
Judgment and punishment, which began to Weep and Lament before God, saying; O
nein, O no Lord, punish us no more thus.

10. The Third Time, is the Time of the Law, viz. a manifesting and laying open
of sin, and is justly called Selah: for this son says, I have found my
soul again in the Lord, but it was not he yet, which Thamar, that is, the
hidden Eve, in whom the Covenant of Grace lay, could marry, he could not raise
up the seed of the Woman: for Christ was as yet hidden in the Law, therefore
Thamar must wait till Selah be grown up, that is, the Law must wait till the
fullness of Time, yet nevertheless, Thamar, that is, the New Eve, which lay
hid under the veil of sin, must conceive through the Spirit in the Covenant,
and bear the Line of Christ, hidden to the outward Thamar or Eve; as this
Figure of Judah and Thamar shows it.

The inward Figure stands thus:
11. Judah gave his first son a wife, called Thamar, but he was evil in the
sight of the Lord, therefore the Lord slew him; That is in the inward
understanding as much as to say, God gave to the first world, viz. to the first
son Er, this Thamar, viz. the promised incorporated Covenant in the seed of
the Woman; but they looked only upon the outward Eve, and committed whoredom
with her, so Thamar remained unfruitful by this son, and bare only the
outward Eve in her whoredom; and thus Er, viz. the fleshly desire, was evil
in the sight of the Lord, therefore the Lord slew him with the Deluge.

12. When this son was slain, the Spirit of God said to the Second son
after the Deluge; take thou thy brothers wife, and raise up in Thamar a seed
out of the Line of the Covenant, that is, enter thou into the first Covenant of
the Woman's seed, and bring thy will into the Obedience of God, and work in the
promised Grace; but the second son, viz. the second world would not marry
with the divine Will neither, nor work in the Grace, but spilt their seed upon
the Earth, that is, they set their desire^ upon Earthly things, and would raise
up no seed in the inward Eve in the Covenant of Grace, but introduced their
seed into earthly vessels, and bare children of fleshly voluptuousness, as is
to be seen in the children of Nimrod, and presently after in Sodom and
Gomorrha.

13. But God having signified his Covenant of Grace to them by Noah, that he
would no more slay them with water, when they said, O nein, O no, Lord, slay us
thus no more; and they had promised to walk before him, and bring forth fruit
to him, but they brought their seed into vanity, and spilt it before the Lord,
and would not marry Thamar, viz. the Inward Covenant of Grace, but committed
adultery with the Earthly Eve, and spilt the seed of their soul, before the
inward Eve in the Covenant, then the Lord slew this Onan also, viz. Sodom and
Gomorrha, and the Heathen, when Israel drove them out of their Land, and slew
them; for those Heathens would not marry the woman in the Covenant, but they
wedded themselves to.
married their Own Reason, and made them Idols, and spilt the seed of their
Faith before them upon the Earth, and therefore the Lord slew them also, as he
did Onan.

14. And the Spirit speaks further in the figure under an Outward Act done,
and says; Gen 38.11.
Then spoke Juda to Thamar his daughter in Law, saying, remain a widow in thy
fathers house, till my son Selah he grown up, for he thought perhaps he may
die also as his brethren, so Thamar went home and remained in her fathers
house. In the first world before the Flood, as also in the second world after
the Flood, the world lived free, without the divine Law; for they were married
with the Covenant of Grace, and should have lived under the Covenant of Grace,
viz. under the Promise of the Woman's seed; this Woman's seed married her self
with them, as Judahs son with Thamar; but they only committed adultery with
the Earthly Eve, and so the true woman in the Covenant remained unfruitful in
them.

15. But when God gave the Law, then he promised this woman in the Covenant of
Grace under the Law, the true Selah; but she, viz. the woman's seed in the
Covenant, should remain a widow, under the Law, till Selah grew up, that is,
till the Law had attained its time and limitt, in that, should the woman in the
Covenant remain in her fathers house, hidden under the Law, as a widow in her
state and condition: for the Law should govern under it: but she, viz. the
holy woman of Grace should be still and quiet, that the wrath of God, (for the
sake of this high Grace, which he gave to Man, when they regarded it not, nor
did not receive it and live therein) should not slay Israel also, as Judah
thought the Lord would slay Selah also.

16. And we rightly see in this figure, that this woman in the Covenant was
not given to Selah, viz. to the Law, though the Law waited long for it; yet
Selah might not marry this woman in the Covenant of Grace, but Judah, that is,
Gods word and power must again lie with this woman's seed in the Covenant, and
raise it up, that this woman conceived and bare the woman's seed, which was
fullfilled in Mary, as we see by the figure of Judah and Thamar, how Judah,
when she sat before the door, and waited for his promise that he would give
her Selah, did get her with child himself; for the Law could not get the
right Thamar in the Covenant with child, but the word in the Covenant must
move it self and get Thamar with child.

17. For we see here the most powerful figure of the whole Old Testament;
where Judah stands in the figure in the Line of the Covenant; as his father
Jacob declares concerning him; and Thamar his daughter in Law, of whom the
children of the Covenant should raise up seed in the time of Judah, stands
in the figure of the inward and outward Eve; Inwardly she signifies the
Mother of the Covenant of Grace, in which stood the Incorporated Word of Grace,
and outwardly she stood in the figure of Corrupted Eve, in whom the Covenant
lay inwardly.

18. And now the Line that was sprung up out of this Covenant, should sow
divine seed, and bring forth fruit in Gods kingdom; and that they could not
do for, their own selfe-power and Might was lost: therefore the first Eternal
Speaking Word, that had inspired or inspoken the woman's seed into Eve, must
again move it self, in this incorporated Covenant of Grace in the woman's
seed, and it self get this woman with child, that she may bring forth
Christ, as Judah gat his daughter in Law with child in this Type.

19. The Text of Moses says clearly thus; Genesis 38.12, 13, 14.
When many days were overpassed, Shuahs daughter, Judahs wife, died, and after
Judahs time of mourning was out, he went up to sheare his sheep at Timnath,
with his Shepherd, Hirah of Odollam: Then it was told Thamar, behold thy
father in Law, goes up to Timnath to sheare his sheep; then she put off her
widows apparel that she wore, and cast a Mantle over her for a veil, and
sat without far from the door in the way to Timnath; for she saw that Selah
was grown up, and she was not given unto him to wife.

The Inward figure Is thus to be understood.
stands thus.
20. In Judah lay the root of the Covenant, which pressed on to the Limit,
where it should be manifested in Christ; and so stood Judah here in this
figure in the place or stead of the divine Word; which Word, God inspired or
inspake into Adam for an understanding Life, John 1. therefore the Text says
here, Judahs wife the daughter of Shuah, died: This woman died to Adam: for it
was the Mother of the heavenly Birth, in the heavenly worlds substance, for
which, Adam mourned, and when God had ordered him for this world, then his
mourning ceased; for he thought he was now at home, and went forth out of
Paradise, to eat Earthly fruit, like the Beasts, or living creatures,
therefore says the Spirit here; He sheared his sheep; which might well be
done so by Judah; but the Spirit has here the most secret figure under which
Adam is comprised: for the Spirit says; Judah took his Shepherd Hirah of
Odollam along with him.

21. In the figure this Hirah is the Cherubine, which sticks in the earthly
desire and beastiall clothing of Man; which Adam took with him, when he went
out of Paradise, to sheare the sheep of this world, for the same, viz. the
Earthly desire was his shepherd: for that now keeps the beasts and sheep,
and did sheare them also, so that Adam had Clothes and things necessary.

22. And the Spirit calls the place Timnath, where Judah had his sheep; In
the high Tongue this understanding lies very clear in the sense; for TIMNATH
is nothing else but the Expressed word, in its powerful re-expression, and it
signifies the Spirit of this world in the Elements, wherein the outward
mortal Life consists, wherein Adam had his sheep, and now also, therein has
them, in his children.

23. For in this place, Selah is borne, viz. the Law of Nature, which offers
righteousness to Man; for which Law, Thamar, viz. the Covenant of Grace waited
a long time during Selahs youth, to see whether the Law could be married with
the Covenant of Grace; but it could not be, that Gods righteousness could be
fully performed by the Law, and that Thamar, viz. the Grace in the Covenant,
and the Law, might enter into marriage.

24. Now the Spirit here signifies clearly, that when Gods Word had
manifested it self in the world by the Law; that Thamar, that is, the Covenant
of Grace, laid aside her widows apparel, and had set her self in the way
of the Word in the Law, where, under the Law the Spirit of the Prophets out of
the Line of Judah, went onward concerning the Kingdom of Christ; this Spirit,
would have the Covenant of Grace for a Spouse, for it was the right [Spirit]
from which the Prophets under the Law pointed at Christ.

25. But Thamar, that is, the Covenant of Grace, veiled her beautiful
Countenance, from the Earthly Adam, and was ashamed of the deformity of the
Earthly Man, in that the children of the Law, as also the Prophets were
outwardly so earthly; even as Thamar vayled her countenance from Judah; but
when the time was come, that the Covenant should be manifested; then the Spirit
of the Covenant sets its self before Selah, viz before the Law, for the Grace
should receive Adam into it self again, as Thamar received seed from Judah
her father in Law, and suffered her self to be gotten with child.

26. But the holy Countenance of the Covenant of Grace in its power remained
yet hidden to Adam in the Law, as also to the Prophets till Christ; as Thamar
veyled her Countenance from Judah her father in Law, that he knew her not; so
also the Covenant of Grace stood in the Law, but with a veyled Countenance. And
the Spirit speaks further in Moses and says.

27. Now when Judah saw her, he supposed she was a whore, for she had covered
her Countenance; that is, when the children in the Law heard the Prophetical
Spirit speak of Christ; they supposed it was in their Law, and of the Law, but
it had veyled its countenance like Thamar, and Judah went toward her on the
way, and said; Prithee let me lie with thee, for he knew not that she was his
daughter in Law, that is, Adams Nature in the Law, said to the Prophetical
Spirit of Grace, pray let me come in unto thee, lie with me, I will give thee
seed of my Nature, and it knew not that God was in this Spirit, and desired to
mix with him after a creaturely manner; neither knew it, that this
Prophetical Spirit, was the incorporated Spirit in the Covenant, in Man
himself: so very blind was the Adamicall Nature concerning the Covenant.

28. The Adamicall Nature thought, it was a whore, that sets it self forth
so in the Prophetical Spirit before it, therefore have the Jews so often
slain the Prophets; for they supposed they heard a false whores Spirit speak:
but here the figure of Judah shows, that the first Adamical Nature should
mix with the Covenant of Grace, that the heavenly Ens would receive the
Adamicall humane Ens again into it self; and Man himself would not
understand, what God would do with him.

29. The Adamicall Nature would indeed in its lust, long after the heavenly
Ens, but would not know it; although it should see the same, yet it would
think, that is like unto me, I will commit whoredom therewith, so strange a
thing is Paradise become to Adam.

30. And Genesis 38.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
when Thamar with her face covered, presented her self before Judah in the
way, and that he said to her* Lie with me; th^n said Thamar to Judah, What
will thou give me to lie with me; He said I will send thee a kid from the
stock; she answered, and said, then give me a Pledge till thou send it; and he
said, what will thou have me give thee for a Pledge? she answered, and said;
Thy Ring, and thy Bracelet, and thy staff, which thou have in thy hand: and he
gave them to her, and lay with her, and she was with child by him; and she
arose and went away, and laid off her Mantle, and put her widows apparel on
again.

31. Here the Spirit alludeth very finely in the figure, how Adams Nature
lies with the presented new Eve in the Covenant, and yet knows her not; also
how the Covenant lies with Adams first right Nature, and how they meet
together in strange apparel, when Adams Nature says, Lie with me, and would
have this Eve in the Covenant only for a little pleasure sake, as the
Adamicall Nature does in its selfehood, that it might only in its false
seeming holiness lie with the New Eve, and its heart is far from the true
wedlock Marriage, and only draws near her in an hypocritical whoredom, as
is done in the Office of the Pharisees: then says this Eve to the Adamicall
Nature, what will thou give me; then this Adamicall Nature promised her a kid,
that is, a Beastiall desire and will, full of the burning Lust of flattery and
Hypocrisy.

32. But this Eve, viz. Thamar, says; give me for a Pledge thereof, thy
Seal, Ring, or Signet.
Ring, Staff, and Bracelet: the Ring is the soul, which came from the Word of
God: the Bracelet is the Spiritus Mundi, the Spirit of the world, viz. the
Outward Spirit; and the Staff is the Body: these, will the New Eve, viz. the
Line of Christ in the Covenant, have for a Pledge; these Habiliments or
precious Jewels.
Ornaments must Adam give for a Pledge to the Covenant of Grace, viz. of the
woman's inward seed in the incorporated Grace of the heavenly worlds substance.

33. When this dear Eve in the seed of Mary should lie with Adam, and receive
Adams seed into her holy Birth; as Judah, in whom lay the line of the
Covenant, must give Thamar, who stood in the Image and Type of the New Eve,
viz. of the Heavenly worlds substance; these Ornaments and Jewels, viz. his
Ring, Bracelet, and Staff: Both which stood in the figure, showing, how Christ
should be manifested out of Adams Nature in Mary, wherein lay and was
manifested the right Thamar, or New Eve.

34. And when Thamar had gotten the Ring Bracelet and Staff for a Pledge, she
took them and laid them up, and asked not after the kid, but kept these Jewels
and went from thence, with them, and changed her self again into her former
widows Estate, and hid her self from Judah, that he knew not who she was,
nor whence she came.

35. This now is the most excellent figure, showing, how the Spirit in the
Covenant mingleth and uniteth it self again with the heavenly worlds
substance, viz. with the New Wedlock or Eve, viz. with Adams faded substance,
which is from the heavenly worlds substance, which substance faded or vanished
in the Fall; viz. how God becomes Man, and Man becomes God, and how this
Image or Type (conceived in the New divine seed) even then again hides it
self from the Earthly One Copy says, Eve.
Adam, that Eve must put on and wear her widows apparel again, that the
Noble seed might not be known in this world, as is to be seen by the
children of Christ, who are conceived of Christ according to the inward ground,
how they must, after the wedding of the Lamb, viz. this Divine wedlock or
Coition, which is indeed done in the soul with great joy; enter again into the
state of mourning, and be forsaken in this world as a poor widow.

36. And as Thamar inquired not after the kid, but would have an eminent
Pledge; so the Spirit of Christ in the Covenant inquireth not after the outward
solemnity and Pagintry; wherein Men will Offer Gifts to it: It will have the
Body, Soul, and Spirit for a Pledge.

37. In this figure it represents the Jewish Offerings, as a whoredom in the
sight of God, for as Judah committed whoredom with Thamar, and intended only
the whoredom, and would give a kid for it: so also stood the Priests of the
Law, and in seeming holiness and hypocrisy play the Harlots with God, with
the Blood and flesh of Beasts, which indeed was a figure of the Inward, and God
was pleased to bear with it; but he would not accept their Offerings, neither
did he mix himself with the Offering, but with the Faith in the Body, Soul
and Spirit of Man, whereof we have an excellent example.

38. Judah had begotten three sons of the Cananitish Woman; but the Line of
the Covenant which lay in him, would not pass on in the Cananitish Woman and
her children, but Opened it self in this whoredom of Judah with Thamar, in
Perez; whom Thamar conceived of Judah by this Coition or lying together, with
which figure God represents the misery of Man, and presents his Covenant of
Grace with the Opening of this precious Line of the Covenant, which pressed on
to the Limit, Christ; in this whoredom of Judah and Thamar, viz. in the
Earthly Adam, and in the Earthly Eve; but in the inward ground of its Essence:
to signify, that even the children of God in their corrupt Nature, do but
commit whoredom in the presence of God, and that their state of wedlock is but
whoredom and a defiled beastiall thing in the presence of God; and has
nothing at all therein chaste or pure in the sight of God: Therefore the Line of
the Covenant manifested it self in this whoredom of Judah and Thamar, to
signify, that Christ should come out of this Line of the Covenant, and enter
into the middle of this whoredom as a Mediator, and break the head of the
false whorish desire and earthly Serpent, and purify our fleshly impure
beastiall Conception with his heavenly virgin seed, and in himself change it
into the Paradisicall Image again.

39. Also God does therefore manifest the Line of his Covenant in this whoredom
of Judah and Thamar, that his wrath in our humane impurity might not burn up
and devour body and soul, but that the Covenant of Grace might withstand the
Anger in our impurity, least God should devour Israel in their Abominations and
impurity in his wrath.

40. Now seeing the Line of the Covenant as to its manifestation and propagation
lay in Judah and that Israel also was impure according to the Adamicall Nature,
therefore God did represent his Covenant of Grace at the first propagation from
the stock of Israel in such a figure; that the Faith of Abraham, of Isaac and
of Jacob, in the first branch from them, viz. in Judah and his Children, might
withstand his wrath, and that continually the Faith of Abraham, viz. the Spirit
of Christ in Abraham's Faith, might be a Mediator between God, and the impurity
of Man.

41. We see also such a figure in the Royal Prophet David with Bethsheba,
upon whom also the Line of the Covenant pressed on in Solomon, and though
clearly David caused her Husband Vriah to be slain, and used deceit that he
might get Bethsheba to wife, which in the humane Nature was an Abomination and
great sin, before the face of God; yet the Spirit has its figure in David
thus, seeing God had renewed his Covenant of Grace with him concerning Christ,
therefore God set the line of his Covenant in David's unrighteousness in the
woman that he had gotten to himself with unrighteousness in whoredom by
murdering her husband, to signify, that all humane matters and doings are
vain and evil in the sight of God, and that he will come himself with his
Grace to help our sins and impurity, and introduce his Grace into our sin
and slay it with the Grace, therefore God represents this Image and Type in
David, for an Atonement, pointing at the coming of Christ, who when he rendered
himself into this figure, took on him the sins of all Men, and cleansed
again the whoredom of Judah and Thamar, as also of David and Bethsheba; and
of Adam and Eve, and laid himself in the Marriage Bed with them, as he did
with Judah and Thamar, and with David and Bethsheba, in whom the Line of the
Covenant was manifested in their evil purposes and doings.

42. For here the Old Proverb was fullfilled; Where God erects a Church, there
also the Devil builds a Chapel. God had built a Church of his Covenant in
Judah and David, close by also the Devil in Gods anger builds his Chapel
in Man's Lust; but the Church of God always resisted the Devils Chapel.

43. For, here in this figure the seed of the Woman presents it self,
showing, how it would break the head of the Serpent in Man's impurity: and so
the Type of Gods Anger, and the Type of Grace were represented in one figure,
viz. Adams fleshly whoredom with his Eve, and all her Daughters, and then the
woman's holy seed of the heavenly worlds substance, which, with the Word of
Grace, mediated, interceded, and set it self in the Middle.

44. A much more excellent figure we see in the Most wise King, Solomon, who
stood just in the figure of Judah, as Judah was the son of Jacob, who
received and embraced the Promise; and Jacob stood wholly in the figure of
Christ: so David also received and embraced the renewing of the Covenant of the
first Promise; and David begat this Solomon also of an unrighteous Marriage,
though he took her to wife, yet the unrighteousness and Murder Lay under the
green leaf.
stood behind the Door.

45. This Solomon was endued with high Divine wisdom, and the Line of the
Covenant pressed and passed through him, but at length he became such an
unsatiable Vxorious, Luster after women; Lecherous person.
Luxurious Person* that the Scripture says of him, he had 700* Concubines.
seven hundred Concubines, and 300 Wives*
Three hundred Wives, and mixed himself with the daughters of Heathenish
Kings, and took them to wife, and allowed his Heathenish Women to set up their
Idols Images for Idolatry in the high places at Jerusalem.

46. In this eminent figure, the Spirit signifies, that Man is fallen away
from God, and merely Idolatrous; that Adam and all his children in their own
Nature, are such a beastiall adulterous and Idolatrous Generation: and in this
King Solomon, represents the Line of the Covenant subjoyned with these
heathenish Idolatrous adulterous Concubines, who in their own nature were but
an abomination in the presence of God, to signify, that Christ out of this
Line of the Covenant should set himself in the midst amongst the Heathen,
and tear Idolatry out of their Hearts, and Convert them all to Christ.

47. Also to signify, that God did bear with the wise Heathens under the
Patience of the figure of Christ, and that he did represent by the Jews only
a prefiguration or Type of the Temple of Christ; and that the Jews in their
Nature were but Idolatrous adulterers as well as the Heathens, only that in
their Law they had the Type and prefiguration of Christ in their Sacrifices and
Offerings, at which the Covenant had respect, showing, how God would redeem
and purify both Jews and Heathens, from Adams abominations and Idolatry, and
that the one people in his sight were as the other, and no whit better, but
every one of them were the evil Adam; Therefore the Spirit represents them
perspicuously in the figure of Solomon in the Line of the Covenant, Romans 11.32.
that he may have mercy and compassion upon all for Christ's sake, who should
fulfill and accomplish this Line.

48. And hereby is signified to the Teachers in Babell, part of whom account
Solomon damned in regard of those Heathenish Idols; that they themselves lie
under the veil, as the Jews did under the Type of Christ, and do really
understand the Scripture as little as the Jews, and stand in Contentious
Idolatrous whoredom in the presence of God, as Solomon with his Concubines
did, and the Jews.

49. For Solomon had the Law, but at length with his heart he committed
whoredom with the Heathenish Women's Idols; and so does Babell, who calls
her self a pure child, pretending the Name of Christ, and striveth zealously
and vehemently about it in Opinions, and all the Opinions about which she
contendeth are Salomons Heathenish Women and Idols, and no Polemick or
Contentious Opinion is any whit better.

50. For, Christ sticks in no Contentious Opinion, but in the Line of his
Grace he is entered into the midst amongst us, and if we receive him, then he
takes us also in it to himself, and there needs no strife or Opinion about
it, but this one thing he requires of us, that we continue in him, and then he
will continue in us, and that we love our selves in him, as he loves us in
himself, that all of us may be cleansed from the wrath of God in his Love, and
that his Grace and Love may wash all of us that come to him from our sins and
Idolatrous abominations, and make of Judah, Thamar, David, Solomon, and all the
children of the Jews, Heathens, and Christians, a pure Virgin, prepared for
himself by his love in his Blood, which he has bestowed upon us in his Grace,
that we may acknowledge and put on him in that love, and be one Spirit and body
with him, and then Adam is helped and restored again.

51. The Spirit of Moses in the Text says further thus. Genesis 38.24, 25, 26.
After three Months it was told Judah, saying, Thamar thy Daughter in Law,
has played the Harlot; moreover, behold she is with child by whoredom; and
Judah said, bring her hither that she may be burned; and when they brought her
forth, she sent to her Father in Law, and said; from the Man whose these are I
am with child, and said; Do thou know whose this Ring, these Braceletts and
this staff is? Judah acknowledged it and said; she is more righteous then I;
for I gave her not my son Selah, yet he lay with her no more. This is a
powerful figure, showing, that whoredom is an Abomination in Gods sight, and
how God sets man's sins before his eyes, and here it signifies this to us,
that the Adamicall whoredom and Abomination are manifest before this Covenant
of Grace, and that, Man in such abominations is guilty of Hellfire, as Judah
judged his Daughter in Law Thamar to be condemned to the fire, and knew not
that he himself was the whoremonger, who stood in the like condemnation.

52. And here in this figure the Spirit presents Men's false Judgment, that
they even do the same thing which they condemn, as here Judah condemned the
whoredom of Thamar to the fire, and saw not his fall, that he himself was
guilty, to signify, that Christ also had set himself in the Judgment of the
world in this Line of the Covenant, as a righteous Judge, who would separate
right from wrong, and condemn the whoredom and Idolatry of the world: But on
the other side, we see in this figure, how Thamar presented the pledge, viz.
the Ring, Bracelett and staff before the Judgment, and before the severe
sentence of Judah, and therewith did overthrow Judahs determinate sentence, and
still his wrath, that he must take compassion on her, and justify her.

53. Thus also stood this figure before God in the Inward Ground in Judah and
Thamar, with Adam and Eve; for Adam had brought himself into fleshly earthly
Lust, and committed whoredom with his feminine property through his
Imagination in a beastiall manner, and had forsaken the heavenly Magic way of
the divine wedlock: therefore also the heavenly woman dyed as to him, and in
the stead thereof the earthly beastiall one awaked, with whom he now uses the
beastiall manner in whoredom. This God presents in him, viz. in Adam himself,
in his Judgment, and would condemn Adam to Death, as indeed Gods
righteousness then condemned him.

54. But the re-incorporated Eve in the Covenant of Grace, which has
incorporated it self in Eve, viz. in the faded seed of the Woman from the
heavenly worlds substance, presented it self before the severe Judgment of
God, and said to Gods righteousness; behold I am with child from the Man
whose these are; that is, behold, I have taken Adams Soul, Spirit, and Body,
for a pledge, when I joined my self with him, and am betrothed to him, and
have received the Fathers Nature in the awakened anger into my Love, and am now
with child of the Humane Nature, and shall bring forth a God-Man.

55. And when the Fathers Property in the Souls Nature in the Anger knew, that
the Father had sown himself again into the Grace, viz. into the New Eve in
the Covenant, then said the Anger of the Father in the Soul, when this Grace
went to meet it, to this new Eve; Thou art more righteous then I, for I have
caused Adams impurity, that he is become earthly, and has committed whoredom
before me, and I have not given Selah for a husband to the New Eve, that is, I
have not given the Word of the New Regeneration by and in the Law; therefore
has Thamar, that is, the New Eve, under the time of the Law, layne and
Copulated with Judah and his children, for and about the soulish or animale and
humane Nature; and left, Selah, viz. the Law standing in the figure; and the
Grace of the New Eve in the Covenant, has always joined and mixed it self
with Gods children, as is to be seen in the Saints, especially in the
Prophets, who outwardly lived under the Law, and exercised themselves therein,
and yet always joined and mixed themselves with the New Eve in the Grace, and
yet lived not to the Law, but to Grace.

56. And this is the powerful figure in this place, showing, how the Covenant
of Promise in Judah, and the awakening of the Covenant in the Woman's seed
stand always set one opposite to the other, and lie and Copulate one with the
other in the Love, pointing at the future manifestation in the flesh, in Christ.

57. For this figure of Judah and Thamar in the inward Ground, is nothing else
but this, that outwardly the adulterous evil Adam with his fleshly Eve, is
represented in the figure, viz. outwardly the Man of sin with a sinful
figure, and inwardly the betrothing of the New Eve in Regeneration.

58. And the Spirit speaks further in Moses, and says; Genesis 38.27, 28, 29,
30.
And when Thamar was about to bring forth: behold Twins were found in her
womb, and as she was upon the Birth, one of them put forth a hand: then the
Midwife took a Red Third and tied about it and said: This is the first that
comes forth; but when he pulled back his hand his brother came forth, and she
said; Wherefore have thou for thy will made this breach, and his name was
called Pharez.
Perez: Afterward his brother came forth, who had the Red Third about his
hand, and his Name was called Zarah.
Serah.

59. O thou wonderful great God, who art so high and deep: how simply, and to
the capacity of a child, do thou modellize thy wisdom to us? What is all
Art and Wit of humane Greatness before thee, who do so very much
condescend, bow down, and humble thy self, and presentest thy deepest wisdom
and highest profundity in a childish simplicity, which may justly shame all
humane State and selfe-wit, when they see so great Mysteries of God stand in
such Childishness.

60. O World, how foolish art thou? that thou Elevatest thy self in a blind
life, and still cleavest to the husk, and see not what thou art, and
understandest not the Divine Simplicity, and then how will thou apprehend the
Divine Depth? O leave off thy wit, and cleave to simplicity, that thou may
yet obtein a childs understanding, and be not accounted in the sight of God
more unwise then the Beasts, which remain in their clothing and condition, as
God has Created them; O thou World, why sleep thou in the Devils Arms,
who succles and dandles thee in himself, and brings thee to his will and
life by his might. O do but see it.

61. This potent figure in these Twins, one of which put forth the hand,
which the Midwife bound a red Third about, and thought it would be the first,
but it drew the hand back again, and his brother came forth: prefigureth this
to us; how Christ in this Line of the Covenant assumed the humane Nature, and
so the humane Nature according to Adams right and self-will, in this world,
first puts forth and manifests it self, about which Adamicall Nature in the
humanity of Christ, must this red Third, with the shedding of his Blood, be
bound.

62. When this is done, then must the humane Nature with its right, draw back
again, that is, Adams will that was gone forth, must again return into the
Mothers womb, viz. be turned in to the Word, and then comes the inward New
Adam forth, after which follows the Adamicall Nature with the Red Third; then
says the Mother to the New Adam in Christ, why have thou for thy will made
this Breach, for thy will says the Mother, not for thy will sake, but for the
sake of that which drives thy will forth, and Adams will goes back; thus has
the will in the Covenant of Grace powerfully broken through the strong Bar
and enclosure of the first Principle, viz. of the Kingdom of Gods Anger; for,
the Good Will in Adam was shut up in Death, and in Hell, and in Christ, he rent
that powerful Rent, and brake through Death and Hell back again into the
Kingdom of the Eternal Nature, and turned it self forth again into the
Natural Life, so that the Kingdom of God was again manifested in the Humane
Life.

63. This the Spirit represents by Thamar in the Line of the Covenant, and
modelizeth Christ's breach through Death and Hell, how that should be; and by
this premodelling was the whorish will of Thamar and Judah healed, and their
children of whoredom in the Line of Christ were Espoused into the Covenant of
Grace.

64. In Esaw and Jacob stood the figure, how according to Nature Adam had the
right of the Kingdom, and how he squandered it, and is therefore in his
Natural Will thrust out from the Kingdom of God, and how Christ came to help
him. Here now stands the figure, showing how Christ has gotten the Kingdom,
and turned Adam back again, and in Adam turned himself forth, so that now
Adam is called Christ, and presents himself very excellently in the figure of
Joseph, and this stands fitly and rightly between, in the intervale of
Joseph's history.

65. For Joseph is the figure of a Christian; and this of Judah and Thamar is a
figure, showing how a Christian springs out of Adams Nature, and how Adams
Nature is turned in again, and Christ turned forth, and how this Image of a
Christian Man in this world, is covered outwardly with the Earthly Adam, so
that men cannot know it; also how thus Christ in Adam took his Guilt upon him,
and how Adam must be marked with this Red Third, which Mark is rightly the
Pledge that Judah gave to Thamar; And I would have the Reader of this
admonished in Love, not to reject our Exposition of this Text, but to consider
it and look narrowly and perspicuously into it, and then he will well perceive
who was the Expositour, if he be worthy of it.

CHAP. LXVI. The Most Excellent History of Joseph: how he was sold to Potiphar;
what befell Joseph, and of Joseph's Chastity, and fear of God.
Upon the 39 Chapter of Genesis.
JOseph was brought down into Egypt, and Potiphar an Egyptian, Genesis XXXIX.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Pharaohs Officer, Captain of his Guard, bought him of the Ismaelites, who
brought him thither; and the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous Man,
and was in his Masters the Egyptians house; and his Master saw that the Lord
was with him; and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand, so
that he found Grace and favor in the sight of his Master, and was his Servant
which he set over his house, and all that he had, he put under his hand; and
from the time that he set him over his house, and over all his Goods, the Lord
blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of the Lord was
every way upon all that he had in the house, and in the field, therefore he
left all that he had under the hands of Joseph, and he meddled with nothing
while he had him, but what he did eat and drink, and Joseph was a goodly
person and fair of feature.

2. The History prefigureth to us a true Christian Man, what he is, and how he
is, in this world, and what his Office is, that is, when Christ is manifested
in him, he is no more his own, to do what he will, also in this world he has
nothing for his own, of which he can in truth say, this is mine, or I, I am
he, that has it, I possess it, it is mine own, I may do therewith what my
flesh and my own will lists, I may use it for my honor and pleasure, that I
may thereby be Or, high.
aloft in the world: No, a true Christian has none of that in his power.

3. He indeed rules of right over that which he has and possesses with truth
and righteousness, but yet as a servant of his Lord Christ. For a Christian is
a Christian in Christ, and is bought to a Christian Life, and to the obedience
of Faith, by the blood of Christ, with Christ's Thirty pieces of silver.
thirty pieces of silver: whereof his Lord Christ has committed to him,
Joseph's Twenty pieces of silver.
twenty pieces of silver, and set him as a Steward over it, that he may trade
therewith and employ it, till he make it come to thirty pieces of silver, which
he should wear in him and about him as a Mark or Badg of his Lord Christ, as a
Treasure of his Christianity.

4. But seeing his Lord Christ was sold and betrayed to Death for thirty pieces
of silver, and Joseph was sold by his Brethren to be a Over whom the Master
has power of Life, and all he has.
Bondslave for twenty pieces of silver; in both these numbers stands the
figure of a Christian, viz. Christ when he is manifested in a Man, shows him
the thirty pieces of silver, for which he was sold to Suffering and Death, and
this his suffering and Death he puts upon him, in which is founded the
figure of the thirty pieces of silver, viz. that he was sold and betrayed: and
therein man becomes such a Christian as is founded, implanted, Eingeatzed
Etching of plates with Aqua fortis.
engraven upon, and into Christ's sufferings and Death; and therein a Man
becomes a Christian in Christ's sufferings and Death, and stands in the
figure of Christ, and loses the right of his natural self-will, as also the
kingdom of this world.

5. For in Christ's Death, as to his inward spiritual Man, he dies from this
world, and according to that inward Man, is no more in this world, but in
Christ in God, viz. in the Kingdom of God, as it is written; Luke 17.21.
The Kingdom of God is inwardly within you: Also; Gal. 4.19.
Examine your selves, whether Christ have gotten a form in you; Also, 1 Cor.
3.16.
Ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost who dwells in you. Also, Col. 4.12.
Ye are the servants of Christ, and Joh. 6 53.
should eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and so Joh. 15.7.
he abides in you and you in him: and Joh. 6.53.
without him ye have no Life; as an herb or grass, and all earthly things,
without the power and virtue of the Sun, have no life, growth or vegetation
and operation in them; so Man, without the Divine Sun, which through Christ
has manifested it self in his Christians, has no life or happiness or
salvation without Christ in him.

6. And as Christ was sold for thirty pieces of silver, to suffering and death,
which thirty pieces of silver signify the Luk 3.23.
thirty years of Christ before his Baptism, ere he entered into his Office and
divine Government, according to the humanity, when he gave up his humane Will
to God, and the Creaturely self-will ceased in him: so also must a Christian,
when he is in truth in his own natural will, sold for twenty pieces of the
thirty pieces of silver, to be a servant of God in Christ, to be a Minister or
Officer, and Obedient to his Lord who lives in him; then his by past years of
the Adamicall Natural time of this world, are sold, in and with Christ, for
twenty pieces of silver; and so the Adamicall time of his natural will, in
this being sold, cease in Christ's suffering and Death; and he is, by his
Lord, (who is arisen from Death in him, and rules and reigns over Death; set
to be an Officer over Christ's Goods) to dispose of them through the Spirit of
Christ, viz. in the power and virtue of his Lord, who is in him, in this world
As to the Dominion of Christ.
according to the Kingdom of Christ.

7. As Joseph was taken away from his Fathers house, and was first cast into
the Pit, wherein he should have perished, and was afterward sold by his
brethren for twenty pieces of silver, to serve as a Bondslave; so also a
Christian, is first taken away from his Fathers house, viz. from the Adamicall
Nature, and is cast into the Pit, viz. into Christ's suffering and Death, and
then loses the Adamicall inheritance of the Kingdom of this world, and is
with his Will and Mind brought away from it, then he must yield up his Fathers
house, viz. all his selfehood, together with his natural Life, to his brethren
in his fathers house, that is, to the power of God in the Government of this
world, and suffer himself to be cast into the Pit of the Death of his Natural
will, and therein give up himself to the Death of Christ, and willingly die to
the will of this world, viz. to his own Adamicall house, and willingly suffer
all whatsoever his brethren of this world do to him.

8. And then if he thus lie in the Pit or Grave of Christ, and has given
himself up to the Death of Christ, that he willingly would forsake all for
Christ's sake, and dye the death of his own will, then Christ his Lord puts
on him, his resurrection from the Dead, and makes him living with his power,
and draws him with Joseph out of the Pit and Grave of Death, and brings him
into his service, as Joseph into the service of Pharaohs Captain of the Guard,
and then all goes prosperously in and with him, for the Divine power rules
him, and now he attaineth Divine understanding and wisdom, and knows how to
manage his Masters Goods, that, in the Christian figure, is as much as to say.

9. When a man is thus a Christian in such a process and way, then he has
given up all whatsoever he has of Temporal Goods, or is able to do, as also
his own will, to God, who brings him first into Christ's Image, and makes him
conformable to Christ, and takes nothing away from him of that which he had
before of natural right, viz. the disposal of Temporary Goods, but he takes
away the authority and power of his own Nature, viz. his evil self will,
which Adam had brought away from God, and introduced into a Creaturely
selfenesse of his own willing and working, in earthly things, whereby Adam
bereaved God his Lord of the Government in him, and made the Essence and things
of this world his own; as if he had made it, and would not be Gods servant
therein, and be his fellow-Branches Guardian, and Nourisher, and give them his
virtue, will, Essence, and substance, but says; it is Mine, that is, it is
mine own, I will keep it only for my self, and it shall remain with me,
and would not work therewith in the Life of his brethren, and give them also of
his life and power; and bereave them also (through that appropriation of it to
be Mine,) of the power in the Kingdom of Nature, viz. of the growth and fruits
of the Earth, which God gave in Common, and would only fill his own Body, and
thereby be accounted Great, and a Lord of his miserable despised
fellow-branches, whom he wickedly bereaveth of the sap, wherewith they should
strengthen their life, and brings it into a propriety, calling it Mine; this
authority God takes away from a Christian, and makes him a Guardian and
Nourisher of his brethren again, viz. a Steward of his Lord: He lets him
possess the Temporary Goods which he had, so far as he possessed them in a
Natural right with righteousness and Truth, and makes him a Joseph therein.

10. This Joseph now says not, this is Mine, that Village, City, Country,
Principality, Kingdom, Empire; Also that House, Land, Field, Money, those
Goods, those Cattle, that Woman, that Child is mine; but he says with his
whole heart and Conscience from a New good Christian will, it is all my Gods
and his Childrens; he has set me as a Ruler, disposer, and Steward of it:
that I should manage it to that purpose which he will have me, I should
sustein my self and his children, the needy, with it, and I should be their
Curatour, or Guardian, and give them also my power, virtue, and understanding
of the Divine Gift, and instruct, tutour, or take care of them for their good:
and as God Governs me with his Spirit, so also should I that am his Officer
in this world, with my understanding and Office, govern my fellow members in
such power and virtue, and take care of them, for all that I rule over, is not
mine, but Gods and theirs, but I should do to them as God does to me.

11. To such a one God gives Joseph's understanding and wisdom, and governs
the house of this world by him, be he in what state and condition soever,
therein he sits in the Office of God, he is only a servant or Minister of the
Office, and a Guardian, over Divine Creatures; For the right Christian
Government of his will, is in Heaven, his conversation is alike in Heaven and
on Earth; as the Scripture says; Phil. 3.20.
Our conversation is in heaven: for according to the inward ground of his Soul
and Spirit he is in Christ in God: viz. in the Eternal Speaking Word, from
which Adams will had turned it self away, and turned it self out into this
world, which will, Christ has turned in again into the Eternal Word; and so
now he governs with that re-inturned will through and in the outward
Substance and Matters of this world, viz. in the formed outspoken or expressed
Word, as a Servant, Minister, and Instrument, of the Eternal Speaking Word in
its secret Mystery of wisdom, viz. in the visible Creaturely Word.

12. Therefore to thee, O thou Governor in the Office of the Joseph of this
world, in every state, condition, and degree, this is told thee, and set before
thy Eyes; that though thou call thy self a Joseph, thou do not yet
Govern as a Joseph, that is, not as a Christian, but as a child of the
Stars and Elements, thou governest no otherwise then the brethren of Joseph,
who will not, that God should choose Joseph for a Governor; they will be
Governors themselves, and will rather kill Joseph, then wait to try what God
would do with Joseph's Dream or Vision; they would not suffer that Joseph
should tell their injury to his father; but would do what they thought fit:
for they said among themselves, we are the Eldest, and should Govern, what
will the least and youngest persuade us to? we possess the Government in a
just way by the right of Nature; the power and authority is ours, we will
dispatch Joseph out of the way, and cast him into the Pit, and then we shall
do what we will.

13. Thus do thou also, thou governest Christendom in all states and
degrees; The Stars and the Evil averted Adam in his own will governs
through thee in Gods Office in the Kingdom of this world, thou have only cast
the Mantle of Christ over it, that men should not know thee, that thou art the
Evil Adam, and Governest with the Starry Wit and Ingenuity, and through the
Subtlety and Policy of the Devil, in mere selfe-willed ways of thine own,
to advance thy own Ostentation, Pomp, Might, Authority, and stately proud
Glory.

14. O hearken! art thou ^ Christian? then art thou dead with Christ to the
wicked false will of Adam, and of the Devils Pride; but if thy Will and Life
be heathenish, why do thou then boast thy self to be a Christian? why do
thou make Wars, for Lands, Countries, Cities and Villages; If thou be not
with Joseph called and instituted of God to be a Governor? Why do thou in
Christ's Kingdom enslave the Country, if thou art a Prince and Minister in Gods
Office, and servest him?

15. Art thou thy Own Lord upon Earth, and do what thy own will lists?
then thou do not what God will, also thou Governest not from Heaven, but
from the world, and with the worlds Might; but whence have thou that in Christ's
Kingdom, and from what Power and Authority, that thou in Gods Office drawest
to thy self the sweat of the poor and miserable, and take away his
strength and virtue, and let him starve in want? Also, that thou squeezest
or crushest him down with thy burden, that thou may but possess much
riches, and heap up much for thy self, with which thou make thy self
potent; and lif^est up thy mind into Pride: whence have thou that in Christ's
Kingdom, that thou will be better then the Members of thy own body, and
whereas in Christ we are one, viz. one Tree with many twiggs and Branches, and
Christ alone is our sap and virtue, and takes care for us a^l in common, for
the Officer as well as the Branch; no otherwise then the Twig upon which the
fruit grows.

16. Thou Potentate in Gods Office, do thou not know that in thy Office,
thou art a Branch in the Tree of Christ, and that fruit should grow upon thy
Twigs; now if thou withdrawest thy sap from the Twiggs, and with thy rubbing
breakest them off, what fruit can they bear to thee? they must needs wither in
thee, and bring forth no fruit, of which thou art guilty, that the Branch, thou
being in Gods Office, stands without fruit; What do thou profit thy Lord,
who has planted thee? shall thou not be Mat. 3 10. Luke 3.9.
hewn down, and cast into the fire of Gods Anger, as a dry piece of wood? Are
ye not the Great Tree in the field of the world, standing in your Twiggs
without fruit? What fruit do you bear? nothing but leaves, which fall off by
the wind, and rott and go to the Earth again without fruit; and now what
profit to Life is a Tree without fruit? no other but for the fire, or for the
building of an habitation.

17. Thus also thou art only in thy Office a building and habitation, wherein
Gods children are to dwell; but they grow not out of thy stock, thou art only
an Officer of or belonging unto a Constellation and Asterisme, and servest the
Kingdom of separation in Evil and Good; as that pulls down and builds
up, so do thou also; what one Officer builds up, another teareth down to
the ground; but he that serves in Christ's Spirit in this Office, he works
with Joseph, the Blessing is every where in his Office, so that his Twigs bring
forth much fruit in Christ's Kingdom.

18. Ye Nobles and Potentates under the Name of Christ; whence comes it to
you in Christ's Kingdom, that ye are such, under a Christian Name? your Office
is Gods, if ye govern therein as a Joseph, as a Minister of Christ, then it is
right, and pleasing to God; But whence comes it in the Kingdom of Christ, that
there is Nobility and slavery? Is not that Heathenish? wherein stands the
Ground thereof? it proceeds from nothing else but from the Pride of the Devil
and self-will.

19. Who planted you in the beginning? your Princes and Kings, whom ye have
served; to what end are they? That Pride might be arrayed in brave apparel,
and that men might not say of the high Offices of God; they are clothed with
common apparel, but that they might be distinguished from the lowly and
simple; and that was even Lucifers Fall.

20. Mat. 8.20.
But Christ on Earth had not whereon to lay his head, neither house, nor any
thing else; so also a Christian has nothing for his own, but what he has, he
has it for his Office sake, and serves his Lord therein; but he that serves
otherwise, he serves the Adamicall self, and not, Christ; and is no
Christian, but a mere Titulary Christian; but he is a child of Nature, of the
Kingdom of this world, in whose inward Ground Hell stands, and serves the
Kingdom of Darkness: Outwardly he serves indeed the Type of God according to
Love and Anger, where all things together stand in strife, till the day of
separation, and the Restoration of that which was before such doings.

21. For in this world all goes on in free will, that which has no Law, has
also no Judgment; but that which has a Law, that has its Judgment in it
self: therefore seeing Man, especially a Christian, has a Law, viz. that he
is no more his own, in that he is given up to another, viz. to Christ, and yet
will not be subject to him, then is the Judgment in the Law, and Condemns
the own will and self.

22. We do not disallow of the Offices, which are Gods, as also the Officers
are Gods Servants, we distinguish only what a Minister of Christ is, and what a
Minister of Nature in humane selfehood is: if any one be in a Noble Office in
the Kingdom of Christ, then is his Office Noble; but he is a Minister or
Servant under this Noble Office, and is justly honored in respect of the
Office, we detract not from his honor, which his Office deserves; but all
selfehood in the Kingdom of Christ is the Evil Adamicall Nature, which is
departed from God; for in Christ there is no Nobility, but we are all only
Children and Ministers or Servants.

23. Our Adamicall Nobility is lost in Adam, but who Ever in this world in the
Kingdom of Christ, is Noble, he is Noble in respect of his Office; as a King
and Prince is Noble in respect of his Office, in which he serves; but if he
serves not Christ therein, but only the Nobility of his Office, and his
selfehood, and says, the Power and the Kingdom is mine, he bereaveth God of
his Power, and makes it appropriate to himself, and becomes a Lucifer under
the Office of God.

24. Even as Lucifer, who also was a Prince of a Throne, and a King in Gods
Office, but when he appropriated the Office to self, then he Isa. 14.19.
was thrust out, and another got the Office which he had in the Kingdom of
God: but he remained indeed a Prince in his own Office, but not in Gods Love,
but in his wrath, wherein he must now also serve him: as also is to be
understood concerning the Offices in this world.

25. For a wicked Prince and Nobleman, remains indeed in the Office, but he
serves not Gods Love, but his Anger, as is done at present; where the Princes
serve the Anger of God with murdering and wasting Countries and People, as in
vengeance, and in the power of selfehood, wherein Gods Anger also becomes
Creaturely: but they do not that to Christ in Christ's Office, but to the Anger
of God, who thereby punishes the false and wicked Titulary Christendom with
his Office of Anger.

26. For in Christ's Office there is only Love and righteousness, as also
Humility and fear of God in self; But the Office has the power to separate
the Evil from the Good as a Diaconissa Ministresse.
Minister of God, yet with righteousness, and not with self-will; He who
says, Thou shall not kill, says also to the Officer, that without the
Authority of his Office he should kill none, neither should he do injury to
any, though by virtue of his Office.

27. For the Office requires a just Judgment, and then the Office kills the
Wicked thing or substance.
wickedness, and severs it from the Good, and the Officer is free from the
Commandment of Death; but if he has any evil intent in his will, there the
Judgment passes upon the Officer himself.

28. In Potiphar Pharaohs Officer, we have a powerful figure; who set Joseph
over his whole House, and gave him full power to rule in his Government;
showing how God has set his Officers in his house of this world, that they
should do and direct, Judge and manage things in a Creaturely manner, as God
does in them after a Spiritual manner.

29. For Potiphar took upon him no disposal of any thing, but let Joseph
manage the Government; thus also are all Officers instituted in the Kingdom of
this world, that they should outwardly manage Gods Government; as Christ gives
a Similitude or Parable of Matthew 25. from the 14 to the 31. Luke 19. from the
12. to the 28.
Stewards, whom a Lord appointed over all his Goods, and went into a far
Country, and after a long time returned again to require an ccompt of his
Stewards, where he distributed to the Officers, and gave one of them five
Talents, and the other four Talents, to the third three Talents, to the fourth
two, to the fifth, one Talent, wherewith every one should trade and get gain;
and then when he that had but one Talent had gained nothing, he commanded him
to be bound hand and foot, and to be cast out into Darkness; and commanded
also to destroy those murderers, and to burn their Cities, who after their
Lord was gone away, and had committed his goods to them, and they presently in
his house began to fight, and beat their fellow servants, and to be drunken,
and play, and kill his Messengers, which he sent to them. All which are
Similitudes and Parables concerning his Officers in the house of this world,
showing how he will punish the evil Householders with hell fire, and burn
their Cities, viz. their Kingdom which they have built, in their own
voluptuousness to their own glory and honor, and shut them out from his face
for Ever: Luke 19 17.
But the other who were faithful in his Ministry and service, he gave full
power over his house, and gave them also the Government Luke 19.24.
and Talent of him that had buried it in the Earth, and would not execute his
office that was appointed him.

30. Thus all Potentates and Magistrates in Offices ought well to Consider
this, that they ought to work in Gods office, and have a care of his house, and
not think, only to look after Nobility and High Estate, and think how to fill
their Belly, and satisfy their pleasures with gurmundizing and gusling,
Gluttony and Drunkenness, and to wrest the sweat of the miserable with
unrighteousness, and lay it out upon their Pride and bravery, and constrain
and press upon the miserable and inferior with power. All these, one with
another, are the evil and wicked Officers, and the Murderers, which the Lord
commands to be destroyed, and their Cities to be burned with the fire of Gods
Anger.

31. But at present the world is full of such Officers, to whom the Lord
clearly for a long time sent many Messengers, but they have vilified and
contemned them; therefore now is the time of the Lords Coming; for they have
even now Mat. 21.39.
also killed his son, viz. the plain Truth of his Word, and turned it into
mere selfe-lust and wantonness; therefore these householders must Luke 16.2.
give an account of their Offices.

32. Moses speaks further concerning Joseph, and says; Genesis 39.7, 8, 9, 10.
And it came to pass after this was done, that his Masters wife cast her Eyes
upon Joseph, and said, Lie with me. But he refused and said to her: Behold my
Master takes no notice what is with me in the House; and whatsoever he has,
he has committed it under my hand and charge; and there is nothing so great in
the House which he has withholden from me but thee, because thou art his
wife; how should I then do so great an Evil and sin against God; and she
pressed such words upon Joseph daily, but he obeyed her not to lie with her, or
to be near about her. This is now the mighty Or, Image.
Type, showing how it goes with the children of God, when they have attained
the Divine Government in the New Regeneration, in that they must now converse
in this house of flesh and Adamicall Prison, with their holy blessed
Government; Also how the soul has taken in Marriage this unchaste
whorish-woman in the Spirit of this World in the beastiall desire in flesh and
blood; which whorish Woman now sets upon the chaste Joseph, and continually
would urge and draw him to her amorous lust* that the New Virgin child might
lie with the beastiall whore again, as Adam did, from which lustful bed the
Earthly Eve proceeded, with whom afterward he copulated in his Lust, as all
Beasts do.

33. This Lecherous Eve sticks yet to the children of God in flesh and blood,
and it is the Animal Soul, viz. the Mortal Spirit, full of Evil Lust and
Impurity, whereinto the Devil has yet stuck his Serpents-sting; for which
cause the Body must dye, and rott, also this beastiall Spirit must be Or,
corrupt.
destroyed, and go quite into its mother again, out of which it proceeded in
the beginning.

34. In this whore, the Devil assaulteth the Noble Virgin-childe, Daily, viz.
the chaste Joseph in Christ's Spirit, encompassed with heavenly Spiritual
corporeity, viz. with Christ's flesh and blood. This virgin child is Revel 12.1.
the woman in the Or, Revelations.
Apocalypse, that stands upon the Moon, viz. upon this earthly whore, and
has Twelve Stars in the Crown upon her head, which woman the Verse 4.
Dragon in the Earthly whore would continually devour, when she brings forth
the holy child, viz. the Noble Joseph, viz. the chaste and divine purity, which
causes woe to the Dragon in flesh and blood, that it must resign its
Kingdom, and in that respect 15 Verse.
powereth forth the Great Flood or water stream.
Deluge of Earthlinesse upon her, to slay the Child together with its Mother.

35. 16 Verse.
But the Earth comes to help this woman, that is, the Earthly desire in flesh
and blood, opens its Throat wide and swalloweth this Dragons flood into its
self, seeing it is its like, that it may not hurt the Virgin Child; as
Potiphars wives unchaste Dragons whorish floods and streams, did not hurt
Joseph, in that he fled from her, and did not yield his will to her.

36. And this is first, the most powerful Proba or Trial of the children of
God; that as soon as they attain the New Birth, then the Devil comes and
stirs up the fleshly whore in flesh and blood, and all false and wicked
desires and Imaginations, and then injecteth and frames in this whore, the
Honor and Glory of the world; also Riches and the pleasure of this Life; also
he modelleth and represents the Great misery and desolation, wherein the poor
soul, in this world, must stand in shame and scorn; also, the great
unworthiness of the soul; also he represents Covetousness, to think, all
temporal good things and necessaries will fail, and so it should come into
great Misery.

37. To the Potent and Rich, the Devil modelleth and represents in this their
fleshly Serpentine whore, their Nobility and Highness, their Great Honor,
Might, and Power; also voluptuous eating and drinking of dainty fare, and how
they may acquire it with power and subtle policy; also he represents unchastity
and wantonness: and to think, that if they should walk in humility and
lowliness, they should loose the respect and reputation of the world; for who
would fear and honor them, if they did not put themselves forward with
ostentation?

38. All these are the words of Potiphars whore in flesh and blood, which the
Devil stirs up in the Serpents insinuated poison, with his Imagination,
wherewith he plagueth the poor imprisoned soul in flesh and blood, and
provokes it to such and the like unchastity and sins: and this whore in the
flesh says continually to the soul, lie with me, copulate with me, thou will be blessed, happy, and saved well enough, use thy lust with me; and this
she does daily, that she might bring Joseph into Lust, viz. the New child,
that the soul might bite at that bait, and defile the New child, and its
fair Crown.

39. For, this whore is ashamed before this New child, she resembles a dirty
Swine compared with the Sun: when she hears mention made of the
wantonness of the world, she rejoices at it, but when Men speak of such
chastity and purity, she is ashamed of it, and then bespattereth or sullyeth
the Speech of the holy child, with the abovesaid abominations, and despises
it; for she knows, that if Joseph holds the Government, she must dye.

40. But honest, virtuous, and chaste Joseph; viz. the inward New Man; says to
this whore; behold, my Lord and Master has trusted me with all his Eternal
Goods and the whole Kingdom of Christ, how shall I then do so evilly before
him, I will not lie with thee, thou art thy Lords wife, viz. the wife of the
Spirit of this world, I will not lie with thee, nor be near thee.

41. And Moses says further: Genesis 39.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
It came to pass on a Day, that Joseph went into the House to do his
employment, and there was none of the people in the House, and she caught him
by his Garment, and said, lie with me, but he left the Garment in her hand and
fled, and ran forth out of the House: but when she perceived that he left his
Garment in her hand and was fled forth, she called the People of the House and
said; behold, he has brought in an Hebrew Man to us to defame us; he came in
unto me and would have lain with me, but I cried with a loud voice, and when
he heard that I cried out, and called, he left his Garment with me, and fled
and ran forth. This now is the figure, showing, how the Devil through this
whorish Woman strongly sets upon the soul, especially when the Devil
observes that the soul is alone, that the Spirit of God stirs not in it,
then he falls a storming of it, and lays hold of it in its life's Essence, and
will force it in such whoredom, that the Precious Virgin-childe might be
defiled, and that she might with the Serpents power copulate with the soul.

42. This also is a powerful figure of the whorish and unchaste world, showing,
how the fair Daughters of Eve, in the instigation of the Devil run after the
tender Youths, and allure them with flattering hypocritical behavior, with
wicked burning Lust, which trim and adorn themselves, as if an Angel sat
under their dress; and have drawn many an honest virtuous child, that never
desired it, to themselves, and bound them with the Devils chains, and have
bereaved them of their honor and chastity.

43. And if there were an honest and chaste Joseph, who would not go into these
Hogsstyes and Jakes of the Devil, they cry out against such a one, and accuse
him of unchastity, as willing to betray him and rob him of his honor, and yet
are even the lustful Panders, which strew sugar, and give Gall to Eat, which
strange people strew sugar so long, as he has money in his Purse, till they
bereave him of his livelihood, honor, and Goods, that he have no more to give
them, and then they scorn him and leave him without a Garment, as Potiphars
wife did Joseph, as he was going out of the house; so the Devil has the
soul, and the whore the Garment for a Pledge; in which whore, nothing else
governs, but the Serpent with its brood of young ones, and he that joins
himself unto them, is poisoned by the Serpent: for the Serpent sheds its
spawne into body and soul, and poysoneth him so exceedingly, that his heart
cleaves to the whore, and runs after her, as if he were fast tied to her.

44. At present the world is full of these vermin, among high and low, and
therefore also at present the Serpent it self is pregnant and will shed forth
its spawne, which the Zeal of God will consume: for Joseph with his
Governing-Office lies as yet in Prison, and Potiphars wife governs in her
burning Lust, which she bare to Joseph: but since she could not betray
Joseph, she set her self in Joseph's Government, and governs the house of
this world, and accordingly has generated many Bastards, which now govern in
her stead; and therefore the Judgment comes upon her whoredom, and breaks
her to pieces; that men will say; She is fallen, she is fallen; Babell the
Mother of the Great Whoredom, and is become a habitation of all Devils and
unclean Spirits, she is for Ever sealed up in the Abyss.

45. On the Contrary, we here see in this Image and Type, also the great
Chastity and Purity of Joseph, who when he was drawn and held with power, yet
fled from this whore, and had rather leave his Garment and good Name at Stake,
that he might but keep a good Conscience.

The Holy Figure stands thus:
46. When this chaste New virgin child in the Spirit of Christ, sees this
whore in flesh and blood draw near it, that her desire lays hold on this
Chastity, then it flies out of the house, that is, this virgin child hides
it self in its own Principle, and may not come near the soul, seeing the
soul is defiled by this whores Poison, so that it is brought into Lust; thus
strongly the divine purity shields it self from the Devils vanity.

47. For, in this New child there stands the fair Carbuncle-Stone of the
highest Love of God in the Name JESUS, which suffers it self to be sullyed no
more, for it once passed through Death and Hell in Man, it will be pure and
possess the Throne of God, whereupon the Scripture speaks strongly, that,
Heb. 6.4, 5.
Whosoever has once tasted the sweetness of the world to come, and departs
from it again, that this soul has no forgiveness more for Ever; that is no
other, then where the Noble Virgin child is borne a new again out of the
soul in its substance that faded in Adam, and the soul departs quite from
it again, and severeth it self from it with its will, so that it fades
again once more; there is no remedy for it more Eternally: For in the Birth of
this virgin child, the foretast of the Eternal Joy is given to the soul, and
that is done in the Wedding of the Lamb; known to Those of our society.
our School-fellowes.

48. Therefore, this Noble Virgin with her fair Or, Star.
Stone hides it self frequently from the soul, but she breaks not off
from the Marriage, except the soul breaks it self off from her; and there
is great weeping and lamentation toward the soul, if it defile it self
again, as in the little book of Repentance is set forth, and cannot easily
befall Joseph; for the soul is hugged, Embraced and kept in Christ's Arms, as
it is John 10. Joh. 10.28.
My sheep are in my hand.

49. This we understand in this figure, how very chaste modest and pure hearts
are given to the children of God in their inward Ground, and how they must be
strongly proved and tried, before the Government of Divine Vision will be given
them, to be able to see the Mysterium Magnum, the Great Mystery.

50. And Moses says further: Genesis 39.16, 17.
And Potiphars wife laid up his Garment by her until his Master came home, and
told him those very words. We see in this figure the perfidious treacherous
dealings of the world, how wickedly they recompense and reward their Christian
faithful Servants and Ministers: Joseph carried himself faithfully in the
sight of their whole house, and all succeeded happily that went through his
hand: but when he would not lie with this whore, to pollute himself with her,
then she persecuteth him in his Body and Life, and studyeth how to steal away
his honor from him by falsehood and wickedness; when she cannot take it away
with subtilty and devilish plotts.

51. This now is a figure, showing, how grievous Enemies a true Christian has,
and that he is every where encompassed with Enemies; and though perhaps he
stands in temporal felicity, and have the favor and good will of many Men,
yet he ought not to be secure* for the Devil continually hunteth after him to
find how to make him fall; for, what the Devil cannot do by himself, to
Gods children in flesh and blood, that he attempts by his instruments, falsely
to betray the children of God, and that even for their fear of God, their
honesty and virtue.

52. For, if the New heavenly Eve be borne in Gods Children, then the Devil in
the Earthly Eve will not endure it; for a whore and a modest Virgin will very
ill stand together.

53. And thus the children of God, have no greater danger, then when they are
exalted to worldly honor, for the Devil is a Spirit of Pride, and sets
himself with his Lust in worldly highness and magnificence, in Or, High
Places. Ephesians. 6.12.
High Offices: for, he will always still be a Joh. 14.30.
Prince of this world, as Christ also calls him; and he is so indeed
according to the property of vanity, falsehood, and wickedness, and always
sets his Throne and stool readily there, where Great Offices and Honor are,
where Might, Power, and Authority is administered and put in Execution, there he
Insinuates or wraps up himself.
involves himself, so that he might be sure to sit for one in the Government
of the world.

54. Therefore he will not readily endure that a Joseph should sit near him,
but those that are Rich, Noble, lofty, and stately, honoring themselves, which
hunt only after worldly honor, pleasure, and voluptuousness, who fill their
Bellyes daily, and are bold, stout, furious, and full with plenty, and hunt
only after suttlety and Policy, seeking how they may wrest from the miserable
his sweat, and convert it into pride, who trim and set themselves forward in
every place, taking pleasure in themselves in such Dresses and Ornaments,
giving one another great Complements, and Courtship, and ascribe great titles
of honor to them; where the house is stuck full of such trimmed dressed whores
under a modest and chaste show and appearance, there is the Devil a frolic
Guest, for it goes according to his Property and condition.
own hearts desire and will.

55. But if God send a Joseph thither, who would feign live and do according
to the will of God, then it happens to him as to Joseph; and to Daniell, whom
they wickedly and with falsehood brought to the Lions Den; and Joseph they
brought into Prison; but in the End the Devils Kingdom is put to shame, as in
Joseph and Daniell.

56. Therefore if any will be a Joseph, and also sit in worldly Offices and
honor, he must do it with great earnest sincerity and humility of his heart,
and resist the Devil, that he may not be able with his stool of Pride to
dwell with him; if not, let him stay without it, or else he will fall to the
ground in such Offices. If Joseph be not armed with Christ, who has overcome
the Devil, let him let the high Offices alone; for the Devil will not endure
him in it, while he is against him: He must either be a right Joseph and
Daniell, or must have the Mind of the world, if he will govern the world.

57. For, this world has a Twofold Office, viz. Gods and Satan's Office; the
one in Gods Love, the other in Gods Wrath, viz. according to the property of
Light, and of Darkness, which in the Nature of this world rule near and in
one another, and are two Kingdoms, as the one is Christ's Kingdom, the other
is Satan's.

58. Therefore if thou art not armed and wholly resigned to God, that thou
can upon occasion, with Joseph leave thy Garment, also thy honor and
welfare, for the sake of God, and for righteousness, and overcome the Devil
with Divine power and strength; if not, press into no Office except thou be
rightly, duly, and orderly called thereunto, and then also thou stands
either in the Throne of Joseph or of the world.

59. Thou must in an Office, either serve God or the Devil, for thou can not
serve two Masters alike; for self and Resignation are two distinct; he that
serves God is Resigned up into him, and in all things has respect to Truth and
Righteousness, and will promote that; But he that serves Self, has respect
to favor, and the Highness and Magnificence of the World, that he may have it
all at his disposing; This Officer is in the Ministry and Service of the Evil
Adam, in whom the Devil has his Throne, and helps him to pronounce the
Sentence of Justice.

60. O thou worldly Judge, rely not thou upon the Tower of Babell, upon
worldly Determinations, Ordinances, and Conclusions, upon humane Institutions,
Statutes, Laws and Decrees: the Top thereof reaches not into heaven; that is
only the height of the Confusion of Strife, and a Or, Mistake^
miss-understanding: God sees thee in thy very heart, he proves and tries
thy will and desire; the Law pleads not for thee before God, though thou
orderest thy self according to that, when thy heart knows it ought to be
quite otherwise; and then think no otherwise with thy self, but that thou
pronouncest the sentence of Justice for the Devil, and servest him under an
hypecriticall Mantle or Cloak; The Justice and right is Gods, and it is God
himself, 1.^
but Or, unrighteousness.
wrong is the Devils, and it is the Devil himself: that Master which thou
servest, is he that will reward thee and pay thee thy wages, he himself will
be thy wages; and this, thou art to expect in thy Office.

61. And Moses says further; Genesis 39.20, 21, 22, 23.
Then his Master took him and put him into Prison, where the Kings Prisoners
lay: and he lay there in Prison; but the Lord was with him, and vouchsafed
protection toward him, and caused him to find favor in the Eyes of the
Officer of the Prison, that he committed all the Prisoners in the Prison, under
his hand, that whatsoever was done there must be done by him; for the Officer
of the Prison took not any thing upon him: for the Lord was with Joseph, and
what he did the Lord made it successful: In this figure we see the final and
last proof and Trial of Gods Children, how they must leave their honor and
welfare, and also put their life in hazard, and resign themselves wholly to
God, to do whatsoever he will with them, for they must forsake all for Gods
sake and leave the World, and be as a Prisoner who expects Death, and relyeth
no more upon any Man; and knows not how to get any Comfort from any Creature,
but relyeth barely and merely upon God and his Grace, and then is a Man passed
through all proofs and Trialls, and now stands waiting the Commands of his
Lord, what he will have him to be.

62. For, he says very inwardly to God: Lord, will thou have me in Prison and
in misery, that I shall sit in Darkness, then I will willingly dwell there; if
thou bring me into Hell, I will go along; for thou art my heaven; If I
have but thee, I enquire not after heaven and earth, and if body and soul
should Or, be famished.
fail, yet thou art my Comfort; let me be where I will, yet I am in thee and
thou in me, I have fully enough when I have thee, use me for what thou will.

63. In this last proof and Trial Man becomes the Image of God again, for
all things become one and the same, and are alike to him; He is all one with
prosperity and adversity, with poverty and Riches, with Joy and sorrow, with
Light and darkness, with Life and Death; He is as nothing to himself, for in
his will he is dead to all things, and he stands in a figure, representing
how God is in and through all, and yet is as a Nothing to all things, for they
comprehend not him, and yet all is Manifested by him; and he himself is all,
and yet has Nothing, for any thing is to him in the apprehension of it even as
nothing, for it comprehends him not; He is as it were dead to all things, and
yet himself is the Life of all things; He is ONE and yet NOTHING and ALL: thus
also a Man becomes according to his resigned will, when he yields himself
wholly to God, and then his will falls again into the unsearchable will of
God, out of which he came in the beginning, and then stands in the form as
an Image of the unsearchable will of God, wherein God dwells and wills.

64. For, if the Creature wills no more then what God wills through it,
then it is dead to it self, and stands again in the first Image, viz. in
that wherein God formed it in a Life; for, what is the life of the Creature?
nothing else but a spark of the will of God, which Creature now stands still
to the will of God, whose Life and will is Gods, who drives and governs it.

65. But that which Romans 9.16.
wills and runs of it self, that rendeth it self from the entire will of
God, and brings it self into selfehood, wherein yet there is no rest, for it
must live and run on in self will, and is a mere unquietness; for unquietness
is the life of self-will; for, when the will wills it self no more, then
nothing can torment it more, its willing is its own Life; and whatsoever
Wills or desires that which God wills or desires.
wills in and with God, that is one Life with God.

66. It is better to know nothing, then to will according to self; for that
which knows nothing, the will of that passes away with the Creaturely Life,
and its Strife has an End, and has no more source or torment, as we may
understand in Or, Sensitive
irrational Creatures.

67. For it is the Source and Torment of all the Damned that they Creatures.
Have a longing desire, and yet cannot attain the least satisfaction
are wishing and woulding, viz. they would that which is self, and in their
woulding they generate Representations in their thoughts.
Idea's, Species, and Formations, viz. Contrary wills and desires, the will
being at strife, so that one thing is Manifested in Multiplicity, wherein it is
at Enmity with it self, but when it is one with the Eternal One, then can no
Enmity be therein, and there is also no possibility of Enmity therein.

68. Therefore it is Man's Last proof or trial, when he stands still to God
in all things; then in him, light proceeds out of Darkness, life out of Death,
and Joy out of Sorrow; for God is in and with him in all things, and blesses
him; as was done to Joseph in the Prison, his Prison became Joy to him: for he
became also a Governor over the Prison in the Prison; he was as a Prisoner,
and yet as a Master of the Prisoners, he governed the Prison, and the
Prisoners, and was a Patron, Fosterer, and Guardian to the distressed, his
Master took nothing upon him, and was well pleased with what Joseph did, for
all was very pleasing and right in his sight.

69. Thus, understand us here according to its precious worth; when Man is
entirely resigned to God, then, is God, his will, and God takes nothing upon
him, about what Man does, nothing is against him: for Gods will does it in
himself, and all sin cease, and although Gods will of Anger stirs in
him, and brings fire from heaven from the Lord; as was done by Elias; yet all
is right in the sight of God, for the party does it not, but God through him,
he is the Instrument through which God speaks and acts.

70. Now as God, in so much as he is God, can will nothing but that which is
Good, or else he were not God, if he himself would any thing that were Evil;
so also there can be nothing in such a Man's will but blessing only, and the
will of God; as was said of Joseph, God was with him in all his doings, and
blessed all things through his hand; thus to the honest and virtuous, a light
arises in the darkness, and the Night is turned into Day to him; and
adversity is turned into prosperity, and the Curse, wickedness, and malice of
the world is turned into Paradise; and it is with him as Saint Paul says; Romans
8.28.
All things must serve to the best to them that love God.

71. For Joseph's Prison brought him before King Pharaoh, and set him upon the
Throne over that Land and People; and made him Lord over his Father and
brethren, and to be a Steward.
Guardian, and Officer, of the King, and to be Gods Regent and Governor,
through whom God ruled great Countries and Kingdoms, as the like may be seen
also in Daniell.

72. Therefore a Christian should learn to bear the Affliction.
Temptation, when God casts him into Joseph's Pit and Prison, and rely upon
God in all his doings, and entirely resign himself into God, and then God
would be more potent in him, then the world and hell is; for all those, would
at length, after he has stood out all the trials, be put to scorn, in him.

CHAP. LXVII. How Joseph in Prison Expounded King Pharaohs Chief Butlers and
Bakers Dream to each of them; and what is to be understood thereby.
Upon the 40 Chapter of Genesis.
Genesis XL.
IN this Chapter the Spirit represents a figure, showing how the Spirit of God
sees through Man's Spirit, and brings Man's Spirit into his seeing, or vision,
so that it can understand hidden secret things; for, to Expound Dreams, is
nothing else, but to see and understand the figure, how the Spiritus Mundi, the
Spirit of the World in the Constellation of Man, frames it self into a
figure, with those things, which in the humane Life are clearly in working, or
indeed are framed in a figure in the Constellation by a Great Conjunction, the
working not being yet begun, and yet is Modelli^ed Naturally, where the Spirit
of Man, by divine power knows in the prefiguration, what working and effect
it has; also it may be underhood by the diligent consideration of By an
Astronomicall figure of the outward Heavens, in a Scheme thus, and a judgment
of the Effects by Astrology: predicting before the stars be in that posture
in the Heavens, or before the Effect be wrought by the Stars.
Astronomy Or, in.
according to Astrology; wherein the Natural effect and working is
prefigured, what naturally is wrought and represented by this power.

2. But while Joseph was a child, and did not outwardly buisie himself in
this Art, therefore it is to be understood, that the Spirit of God with his
seeing or vision brought him into the Image or Idea of the Dream, and that the
Spirit of God explained the Dream through the Spirit of Joseph; as was done
also by Daniell; for, to expound Dreams, is nothing else but to understand a
Magic Image or representation of the Astrum, Aspect, or Constellation in the
humane property.

3. For, every Man bears the Image of his Constellation, viz. a Magic As
Orion, the Pleia^es, Amos 5.8. Mazzaroth, the 12 signs. Or, A^cturus Job
38.31, 32 Ursa Minor or Ursa Major, or any other Constellation that consists
of many Stars together Or a figure of the whole Heavens erected upon a point
of Time.
Asterisme in himself, and when the Time comes, that such Magic Image, of
the superior Constellation is kindled, then it enters upon its working; and
then the Astrall Spirit beholds it self in the Elements, and sees what figure
it has.

4. But the Elements being Inanimate.
void of understanding, and affording only a Animale Body.
Beastiall Body in their figure, therefore the Astrall Spirit can discern
nothing else, but the form of some such earthly Creature; except the Or,
Spirit of the Soul.
soulish Spirit be concomitant in the working of the Astrall Spirit, then is it
premodelled in a humane form, and in a true natural way, and manner of
figure; for the Soul only has true humane Eyes, but the Astrall Spirit has
only a beastiall appearance, and sees after the manner of a Beast.

5. Yet seeing there is a great difference between a false and wicked soul,
(which daily Imagines in a Beastiall manner of figure, and wills and
desires beastiall things) and a pious divine soul, wherein the Spirit of God
is manifest; so also are the Magical Imaginations and representations in the
Astrall Spirit, different; for a Beast, Dreameth Or, From Fancy.
according to Fancy, and so does a Beastiall or animal Man, though indeed
the Or, figure, the Schema Coeli.
Image or Idea of the Constellation does certainly co-modellise it self,
whether in Evil or in Good, according as the Astrall Spirit eagerly longs or
lusts in it self, when it so vieweth what stands naturally as a working in
it; but seeing it is a Beast, therefore it introduces in its Image with its
desire commonly, the Model Or, in.
of a Fantastic Image; and turns it from Joy to sorrow, from sorrow to Joy,
but the soul is faint and sick in such a Spectacle or Glass and
prefiguration, whence oftentimes there arises great unquietness to the Body.

6. But where a true Vision is seen in Man, that is done by the souls
modelising, when it co-Imageth or co-modelleth it self in the figure through
its Imagination; then the Image or representation stands in the right humane
understanding, though indeed the Astrall Spirit continually Imageth or frames
it self in Earthly forms, so that very seldom an entire perfect vision
appears as the work or effect in it self shall be; also Man's own
Imagination it self does often alter it, what a Man thinks or Imagines in the
day, viz. that Magic form, makes it so, that the figure is according to his
Imagination.

7. Yet the right visions are, when Man's will rests in God, and then is Gods
will manifest in Man's will, and then the soul sees with Gods Eyes from its
most inward Ground, where it stands in the word of God, and then the Speaking
Word goes with the Souls, into the Magic Image of the Constellation, and
then the Astrall Spirit cannot Image or fashion it self in the Fancy, but
must stand in the Image in the figure as the Constellation is, and then the
soul sees what the Most High has prefigured, and what shall come to pass:
and then the Word of God, viz. the ground of the soul expresses the figure in
the soul, so that the soul understands it; as here Joseph and also Daniell
Expressed and Expounded; As soon, now, as the figure of the vision was told
before Joseph, the Spirit of God was together in the voice of the relatour, and
in Joseph Expounded the vision, for so also are the Magic visions of all the
Prophets.

8. For, after God has once appeared to a Prophet in an audible voice, and
called them to be Prophets, as to 1 Samuel 3.4, 6.8.10.
Samuel; then afterward he appeared to them in Magic visions, and answered
them upon their Questions.

9. The right Prophetic Ground of the Magical seeing and understanding is
thus; Every Prophet is a limitt wherein a Time is included, or an Age
Comprehended; and he is the Mouth of that Kingdom or Dominion, that is, when
that Kingdom, has awakened and generated the Turba in it, then is he the
Mouth of the Inward Ground, which declares and expresses the vanity in the
Turba, and also the Grace of God, which has taken compassion on the humane
misery, and opposed the wrath of the Turba, and reproves that Kingdom for
their vanity and Idolatry, and comfort them with the introverted Grace
again.

10. For, his Spirit stands in the figure, in the Eternal Speaking Word of
God, from which the Life was expressed or Spoken forth, and became a Creature,
introverted again as an Instrument of the Spirit of God, whereby the Spirit of
God speaks and intimates; for the Prophetic Spirit could not in its own
might and power declare future hidden things, if the Spirit of God did not see
through it, and that the Word of God did also go together through his Word
into the Magic figure which the Prophet sees.

11. For, the Brophet knows not any thing beforehand in his own power and
authority, which he declares, but when the Word moddelleth it self together
in the figure, then the Prophetic Spirit sees through Gods seeing, how the
Word of God goes also together upon the figure: and then the Word expresses,
declares, and Expounds the figure through the Prophetic Spirit, as here
was done by Joseph; when the Kings Officers told their Dreams, then the Word
set the figure in Joseph's understanding how it should come to pass, so that
Joseph knew what their visions meant.

12. But he knew it not beforehand; but in the telling of the Dream, the word
of understanding modelled it self in Joseph's understanding, that he knew it;
for Joseph's Spirit stood in a Magic figure, Re-introverted the the word.
introverted again into the Word, after the manner, as the New Birth in the
Spirit of Christ stands introverted again: so also the other Prophets
through whose Mouth, Gods Word, Expounded and expressed from the Inward Ground,
through their Mouth, the Wonders of God in Nature, viz. in the formed
Creaturely Word.

13. By this figure of Joseph, in that he obtained Divine knowledge and skill,
and could expound hidden things; we see, how the introverted Spirit of Man
resigned up into God, when he forsakes all that is his own, does attain the
Divine Eye to see and understand; so that he gets much more again then he
forsook, and that he is much richer, then when he enjoyed his own; for in his
own will he had and possessed only a Particular; but in the Resignation he
gets into the Total, viz. into the universal, into All; for ALL is, from the
Word of God.

14. Therefore if he comes into that, he comes into the Ground, wherein all
lies in the Eternity, and from being poor becomes rich, as Joseph's figure
declares, that a poor Prisoner became a Prince, and that only by the Divine
Word, that had manifested it self in him, when the Word in his submissive
dereliction and forsaking all, Expressed or spoke forth it self again, and so
spoke or pronounced Joseph into a Regal Government, and Dominion, through whom
the Word of God would rule in Egypt, and give the understanding for such a
Kingly Government.

15. We see further in this figure of Joseph, Romans 8.28.
How at the length all must serve for the best to Gods Children, all the wrong
they must suffer, that will turn to mere Joy in the Issue; for in trouble and
affliction they learn to know what they are, how very weak and miserable they
are in their own selves, and how near, Death and Misery attend them, and how
all the Trust, confidence, and expectation they have of Men, in that they will
rely upon Man, and trust to the favor of Man, is a very fickle uncertain
thing; also how Man should turn his Hope toward God, when he expects to be
delivered out of trouble by the favor of Man, yet so at length the favor and
Council of Man Must.
must stand him in stead.

16. But if a Man will expect the favor and Council of Man, he must set his
hope upon God, and look whether God will give him comfort, by humane means,
and release him from misery, and not set his hope upon the favor of Man, but
look upon God, to see what he will work by means; and though it seem as if
God had forgotten, as here with Joseph, who must remain Two years in Prison,
then he must consider with himself that God will have him here, but if he
will through means have him in another Place, then he will afford means for
it, and send it in due time, as is to be seen here.

17. The mishap, of the Kings Officers, in that they were put into Prison to
Joseph, was a means whereby God would bring Joseph before the King; but it was
not done suddenly, because Joseph hoped the Kings Butler would speak a Good
word for him to the King, and tell his Innocence; but the Butler forgot him,
and left Joseph lying in the Dungeon, that Joseph might wholly despair of
humane means, and fly to God, and when he does that, and despaires of all
humane means, and barely relyeth on God, then must even that means, in which
Joseph had hoped, and yet also had long despaired of any help from it, break
forth again, and stand him in stead.

18. By this, a child of God should learn, that all which he prays to God
for, that it should stand him in stead by Man, that he should not set his hope
upon Man, but upon God, then at length every thing is done which he has prayed
to God for, that should stand him in stead, by humane means, when the Mind
despaires of humane means, and diveth down into God again, then Gods help
breaks forth through humane means. Thus the Mind is instructed, to learn to
trust in God.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of the Dreams of King Pharaoh; how Joseph is fetch out of
Prison, and presented before the King, and Comes to Great Honor.
Upon the 41 of Genesis.
MOses says; After Two years Pharaoh had a Dream, Genesis XLI.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8.
that he stood by the water, and saw seven fair fatt Kine arise out of the
water, and went to feed in the Meadow; after this he saw other seven Kine
arise out of the water, which were ill favored, lean, and Meager, and drew
near the Kine that were by the water side, and the lean Meager and ill
favored devoured the seven fair fatt Kine; then Pharaoh awaked: and he slept
again, and dreamed once more, and saw seven Ears grow out of one stalk,
full and thick; But afterward he saw seven thin blasted Ears spring up,
and the seven thin and black Ears devoured the seven full and thick
Ears: then Pharaoh awaked and observed that it was a Dream; and when it was
Morning, his Spirit was troubled, and he sent forth to call all the
Truth-sellers, South-sayers.
Magicians of Egypt, and all the Wise men, and related to them his Dreams:
but there was none that could interpret them to Pharaoh.

2. These Dreams of Pharaoh were represented to him from God, therefore no
Magus, and Skillful in Nature.
Naturalist could interpret them; for, the Natural Magus has power only in
Nature, only in that which Nature frames in its working; he cannot apprehend
that, nor advise in that, which the word of God modelleth and frames; but a
Prophet has power to interpret that; for he is a Divine Magus, as here Joseph.

3. With the Egyptians the Magic Art and skill was Common; but when it was
misused to Witchcraft, it was extirpate, although it remained among the Heathen
till the Kingdom of Christ, till the Divine Magia sprung up, then the Natural
Magia was suppressed among the Christians, which in the beginning was well that
it was suppressed, for the Heathenish Or, Religion.
Faith was thereby allayed and quenched; and the Magic Images of Nature, which
they honored for Gods, were rooted out of Men's hearts.

4. But when the Christian Faith was common, then came other Magi up, viz. the
Sects in Christendom, which they set up for Gods instead of the Images of
Heathen Idols, and drive on greater Delusions, then the Heathen with their
Magic Idols.

5. For, the Heathen looked upon the Ground of the possibility and working of
Nature: but these set themselves above the ground of Nature, merely in an
Historical Faith, and say that men ought to believe that which they contrive.

6. As at this very Day Titulary Christendom is full of such Magi, as have no
Natural understanding, either of God or of Nature more among them, but only
an Empty Babbling of a supernatural Magic Ground, wherein they have set up
themselves for Idoll-Gods, and understand neither the Divine nor Natural
Magia, so that the world is made stock-blind by them, whence the Contention and
Strife in Faith and Religion is arisen, that men talk much of Faith, one
drawing this way another that way, and make a multitude of Opinions, which are
altogether worse then the Heathenish Images, which indeed had their ground and
foundation in Nature; but these Images have no ground either in Nature, or in
the supernatural Divine Faith, but are dumb Idols, and their Ministers are
Baals Ministers.

7. And as it was highly necessary and good, that the Natural Magia was
discontinued amongst the Christians, where the Faith of Christ was manifest: so
now at present it is much more necessary that the Natural Magia were again
manifest, that indeed Titulary Christendomes Idols which it makes to it
self, might through Nature be made manifest and known, that Man might know in
Nature the Outspoken or expressed formed Word of God, as also the New
Regeneration, and also the Fall and Perdition, that thereby the Contrived
supernatural Idols might be suppressed, that men might at length in Nature
learn to understand the Scriptures, seeing Men will not confide in the Spirit
of God in the Divine Magia of true Faith, but lay their foundation upon the
Tower of Babell, in the Contention and Contrived Idol Opinions, viz. in the
Edicts and Traditions of Men.

8. I do not say that Men should seek and preach the Heathenish Magia again,
and take up Heathen Idols again, but that it is needful to learn to search
the Ground of Nature, viz. the formed Word of God in Love and Anger, with its
re-expression, that Men might not be so blind concerning the Essence of all
Essences.

9. For the Fathers of the first Faith, were not so blind concerning the
Kingdom and Dominion of Nature, but did know in and by Nature, that there was
a hidden God, who had made himself visible, by the Word of his Exhalation and
Information of the Created World, and have known Gods Word by the Creation,
which is now at present much the more necessary, that the Opinion Idols might
come to light and be known; that Man might at length see, what Faith is, that
it is not an Opinion and Conceit, but a Divine Heb. 11.1.
Substance or Essence, which Substance or Essence in the visible Man, is hidden
to outward Eyes, as the Invisible God is hidden in the visible substance of
this World.

10. But that the Magi Naturales, the Natural Magicians, could not Expound
Pharaohs Dreams, this was the cause, Pharaohs Dreams sprang from the Center
of Nature, which the Heathenish Magicians understood not; for their Magic
Ground in their understanding, was only in the working and Or, Scheme.
Figure of the Constellation or Asterisme, and in the Elements;
they understood not the Ground of the Eternal Nature, out of which the Nature
of this world had its Original, and wherein it stands: but the Dreams of
Pharaoh had their Original out of the Eternal Nature, and were represented in
a visible Image in the outward Nature of Time, and in the outward figure Or,
representation to the outward Man.
of Man.

11. For the 7 fatt Kine.
seven fat Kine in the Pasture, signify, in the inward Ground, the 7 Holy
Properties.
seven properties of the Eternal Nature, in the Holy good Substance or
Essence; viz. in the Kingdom of Heaven, where the Divine power is
Substantial; and the 7 lean Kine
seven lean ill favored meager Kine, signify, in the inward Ground, the 7
wrathful properties.
seven properties of the Eternal Nature, in the wrath of God, viz. in the
Kingdom of Hunger and Thirst, where Nature is without the Divine Substance of
the Good Power of God; and the 7 blasted Ears.
seven thick fatt and full Ears, and also the 7 full Ears.
seven dry blasted Ears, signify the same also.

12. But that this Dream appeared twofold to Pharaoh, it signifies in this
figure, first the ground of the Eternal Nature in its seven properties, what
God would show thereby; Secondly, as to the second appearance, it signifies
the humane Ground, which in its Substance has its Creaturely Original out of
the seven properties; Moreover it denotes the twofold Man, according to the
Outward Body, and the outward Spirit, and then according to the Inward Soulish
or animal Spirit, and according to the inward holy Substance of the Divine
Substantial power; and stands in the Condition, quality, or property.
figure of a Holy Divine Man, who is fair and full of divine power and virtue,
who walks and feeds in the true heavenly Pasture of the Substance of the
Substantial wisdom of God.

13. And it denotes secondly, a wicked and ungodly Man, who is withered,
meager, lean, and ill-favored as to that Divine Substance, and yet is even
the same Natures property as the Divine is: but he is withered and corrupted as
to its good Substance; the Wrath of the Eternal Nature in the seven
properties has consumed its Substance, so that it is now as a hungry
fire-Spirit.

14. Thus the great God represents before Pharaoh, what at this time stood in
the figure of the Egyptians, for he would visit them: first, he shows them
his great Grace, in giving them Joseph a Prophet and wise Prince to Govern
them: also he shows them in this vision, that in his Grace in the Kingdom of
the inward and outward Nature in the seven properties, there is mere Blessing
and good things; if they would walk therein, they would be as the seven fatt
Kine and Ears.

15. But if not, then his wrath would come upon them, and consume their good
things in Body and Soul, and make them lean, dry, and withered; as was done
to the Devils, when of Angels they became Devils, then their good things,
viz. the Substantial Divine Wisdom in them, faded, and their seven
properties of the Eternal Nature became so ill-favored lean and dry, as the
seven withered Kine, and the seven blasted Ears, wherein was no more power
and virtue.

16. And as the seven withered Kine, and the seven dry Ears devoured the
good fatt Kine and Ears, and were yet more lean and ill-favored then before,
that a man could not discern that they had devoured them: Thereby the great
God also signifies, that the wicked Man with his seven properties of Nature
enkindled in the Anger of God, devoureth the Good and fair Image of God in
him, by introducing himself into selfe-desire, in which self and wicked
desire, Nature becomes painful, and falls into unquietness and disturbance of
its peace, and yet afterward is still ill-favored, abominable, loathsome, and
dry; as a Covetous churlish hungry Dog, though he devour much, his Covetous
Nature in his Envy consumes him, even his flesh, so that he has not that
which he will not afford to other Dogs.

17. Thus the great God represents by this, before the Egyptians, seven Good
fatt years and seven dry barren years which devoured the other seven, so
that a Man could not know the good any more, under which yet very powerful
things are prefigured, as shall be mentioned hereafter.

18. But that Pharaoh was troubled at this vision, and yet understood it not,
neither could his wise Men interpret it; this signifies, that God himself
would interpret it by his power and virtue in Joseph, and that the Time of this
visitation was at hand, therefore was Pharaoh so moved in himself that he
would feign know it.

19. But that the Wisemen in the Light of Nature, could not interpret it,
signifies, that the Works of God are hidden to the Natural Man without
Grace, and that he knows or understands nothing of the ways of God,
unless God reveal or manifest them thereby in and through him, for this was a
Motion of the Eternal Nature through the outward Nature, therefore the
Natural Wisemen could not understand it.

20. And when none could interpret it to the King, the Kings Butler thought on
Joseph, that he had interpreted his Dreams for him, and told it to Pharaoh;
And here in this vision of Pharaohs, God called Joseph, and that which he had
desired two years ago through man's help was fulfilled and granted unto him.

Genesis 41.14, 15, 16.
21. Then Pharaoh sent and commanded Joseph to be called, and they brought him
speedily out of the Dungeon, and he was shaved and put on other Garments, and
came into Pharaoh; Then said Pharaoh to him, I have dreamed a Dream, and there
is none that can interpret it, but I have heard of thee, that when thou hear
a Dream, thou can interpret it: and Joseph answered Pharaoh and said, that
is not In my power.
of me, yet God will prophecy good to Pharooh, and Pharaoh related his Dream
to him.

22. This figure, that Joseph put on other Garments and was shaved, when he was
to enter in before Pharaoh, signifies this to us, that God at present had put
off the Garment of his Misery, and had now put on him the Garment of Wisdom,
and would have him now in another place then he was in before; and set him
before Pharaoh with the Garment of Wisdom, and would give him for a Guardian
to Pharaoh; for the Spirit of Moses sets down the figure Excellently
accurately and properly, as if he had a great desire to play and delight
himself therein.

23. And we see further, that Joseph said to the King, that it stood not in
his natural power and Might, to know such hidden things, but that God alone
gave him to know it, so that he needed neither Art nor Magic Images about it,
but God would interpret good to Pharaoh through him.

24. Therefore should a Magus give up his will to God, and fix his Magic
Faith, (wherewith he will search the figure of Nature in its forms and Or,
qualities.
Conditions,) in God, that he may apprehend the Word of God, and introduce it
into the figure of Nature, and then he is a right true Divine Magus, and may
master the inward Ground with Divine power and virtue, and bring Nature into a
Type or representation.
figure; he that practices otherwise herein, he is a false and wicked Magus,
as the Devil and his Witches are.

25. And it is no way to be thought, as if a Christian ought not to dare to
meddle with the ground of Nature, but that he must be a Clod and Dumb Image, in
the knowledge and skill of the secret Mysteries of Nature; as Babell says, Man
ought not to dare to search and know it, it were sin; which all of them one
and other understand as much of the Ground of sin, as the Pott does of the
Potter.

26. When they should tell how sin is sin, and how Man does cause God to be
Angry and in wrath, then they have no other way to turn themselves to evade
it, but Images or conceits of Opinions, which shutt up the Conscience in such
Images and Conceits, so that the Conscience is afraid of their Images, and the
Ground of sin, according to the seven Properties of Nature; (how their fatt
Kine are made lean and dry) they know not.

27. O ye Makers of Images, how does the Anger of God in the inward Ground of
your own Nature, threaten you with the seven barren Kine and Ears: Joseph is
out of Prison, and declares the Council of God to Pharaoh.

28. The time is even at hand, wherein the figure of Pharaoh shall be brought
to Effect, your Images of false and wicked Magic shall be manifested to the
whole world by Joseph's Exposition of the Vision; break off from the Images, and
pray to God, that he would give you the understanding of Pharaohs visions, and
then you may be partakers of the seven good Kine and Ears within you.

29. If not, then must all your Images of false and wicked Magic be turned
into such Barren Kine and Ears, as they are indeed for the most part already
in the inward ground, and outwardly at present are devouring, and always
devour the Good times and years; for they have almost quite devoured and
swallowed up into the Abyss, all Love, Faith, Truth, Righteousness, Humility,
and fear of God; and at present also they devour all outward food and
sustenance: they have devoured the Silver, and there is nothing left but meager
and base Copper, and yet they are so hungry and greedy, that they lie gnawing
at the Copper, as a Dog at a hard Bone, and would feign have more to devour,
and yet there is no more for them.

30. Therefore they are so hungry, that they themselves worry and devour one
another for hunger, and bring their Land and Country into dearth and famine;
But hereby they are made Bondslaves to the Anger of God in the seven
properties of Nature, as the whole Land of Egypt was made King Pharaohs own
in the Dear time of Joseph.

31. This Anger of God will hereafter give you seed, that you must sow Images
and Idols* and devour them again your selves, as you have clearly done for a
long time, and must be its boneslave servants, as Egypt was to Pharaoh.

32. Let this be told thee, O Egypt of Christendom, by Joseph's interpretation
in the Spirit of Wonder of the sixth Number of the Seals: it concerns thee,
awake and behold, the great famine of body and soul is at hand, or else thou
must be famished.

33. Thou stand at present in no other Or, Resemblance.
figure in the sight of God, but that of the seven ill-favored, hungry,
withered, lean Kine and Ears: the Blessing of God in Body and Soul is
departed from thee, that now thou huntest after Good things and temporal
sustenance, and yet art not satisfied with it: and the more that thou do
hunger and suck upon bones, thou will be still the more hungry, till thou have
devoured all thy good Kine in Conscience, both in Body and Soul, as also Land
and People, and thy form and feature is so ill-favored, that the Princes of
the inward and the outward Heaven cannot endure to behold thee, but help to
judge thee to the damnation of Death, says the Spirit of Wonders in Joseph's
interpretation.

34. Behold thy self now aright, art thou not thus ill-favored and hungry,
consider all thy Powers, virtues, and abilities.
faculties, thou art raving blind with great hunger, for thou have swallowed
that up into the Abyss which should bless thee and make thee happy, and set
up the Hypocrisy of thy Idol Ministers in stead thereof; Righteousness,
Truth, Love, Faith, Humility, Chastity, and the fear of God were thy Blessing
by which thou would become fatt again, but thou have swallowed up all these
properties, and set thine Idols in their stead, and covered them with Christ's
purple Mantle, and now the Evil hungry form feature and properties of a
Devourer are awakened in thee.

35. The first devouring Property Covered with Christ's Mantle is Pride, viz. a
Desire of Selfe-Might, under the lowly humble Mantle of Christ, resolving to be
potent and splendid, as Lucifer under his black Hood, who yet always supposes
he is the most potent, when yet in the presence of God he is but a Lord in
Fantasy.

36. The second property of thy hunger Covered with Christ's Mantle, is
Covetousness, viz. the Devourer, who devoureth himself, and gets from
others their sweat and flesh from their bones and devoureth it, and yet has
nothing, but always lies like Poison sucking out it self: this has devoured
all Truth, Righteousness, Patience, Love, Hope, Faith, and the fear of God,
and yet is but a mere hunger: at present it has eaten all Silver from the
Copper, and yet looks as if it had devoured nothing, for nothing is to be
seen in it; but that it is hungryer then before; it has devoured all good
times into it self, and still always devoureth all provisions, which God of
his Grace bestows, and yet is every day hungryer with devouring, and though
he could devour Heaven, he would devour Hell also, and yet remains a mere
hunger still.

37. The Third property of this Hunger Covered with Christ's Mantle, is Envy,
viz. the son of Covetousness, and Pride is his Grandfather, this stingeth
and pricketh and rages in the hunger, as poison in the flesh, it stingeth in
words and works, and poysoneth all, it lies and cheateth, and is never quiet:
the more greedy Covetousness is to devour, the greater is this its son Envy,
it will possess all alone to it self, and yet has no place of rest, either
in Heaven, this world, or Hell: It can remain neither in Heaven, nor in Hell,
it stands only in the hunger of Covetousness, and is the life of
Covetousness.

38. The Fourth property of Hunger Covered under Christ's Mantle, is Anger,
which is the son of Envy, and Covetousness is its Grandfather, what Envy
cannot sting to death, that will Anger strike and fell to death: It is so evil
and wicked that it breaks and shatters the Bones to pieces: It always
thirsts after Murder, only that its Father and Grandfather, viz.
Covetousness, Envy and Pride may have room enough, it destroys body and
soul in their kind of fattnes, and wastes Country and City, and is further
so wicked that it would destroy Heaven and Hell, and yet has no where any rest.

39. These are the four Elements of Hunger which devour and swallow up the
seven fatt Kine and Ears of Pharaoh, and yet are as they were before, and at
present Joseph has seen and manifested them in Pharaohs Dream, so that they
are become manifest in the World, and are set before the Eyes of the Watchmen
who sit in Council for Judgment, what is to be done more with these dry
ill-favored Kine, for God has given them the seven fatt Kine of the
Manifestation of his Grace, but they devour all, and yet are so very hungry,
that Hell dwells in their four Elements, and the Kingdom of the Devil
Consists in that which their posture, condition or quality does represent and
express.
stands in their figure.

40. O Egypt of Christendom, thou hopest for Good, and yet desire only to
work wickedness; No Good shall come to thee; except thou dyest from this
Hunger, thou will burst thy self asunder in this Hunger: whence shall good be
interpreted to thee by Joseph, when thou thus hungerest the more? Nature
generateth in thee such a thing as thy hunger and desire is, thou ought to
hope for nothing, except thou convertest and put on Joseph's New Garment,
and then the Lord will give thee his Spirit, so that thou will see and
understand thy Images, and put them away, and stand with Joseph before the Face
of God, as Joseph before the Face of Pharaoh, and wilt be able to see and
interpret the Wonders of God.

41. And then the Lord will set thee with Joseph over the Kingdom of his
Mysteries, that thou will rightly understand the Magic ground of Faith, and
wilt search no more in the Images of the outward Natural Magic, as thou have
done for a long time, but thou will see the inward Ground, and with Joseph rule
over Egypt, that is, over the Mysteries, and wilt therein praise the Lord, and
draw in his fountain, and drink water of Life.

42. For Romans 10.8. Deuteronomy. 30.14.
the Word which thou shall now learn and understand, is nigh thee, namely in
thy Mouth and heart, thou art Gods formed Word, thou must learn to read thy
own Book, which is thy self, and then thou will be free from all Images, and
thou see the Place, of which it is said, Genesis 28.16.
The Lord is here: and then thou will attain the Life of power and virtue
again, and become fatt, and put away the Mantle of Christ, and say; Here is
the Man that will walk in the footsteps of Christ, and will follow and imitate
him, and be like and Phil. 3.10.
Conformable to him in his Life and Image.

43. This whole History of the Dreams of Pharaoh are an Image, whereby the
Spirit under an outward Action, pourtrayeth and Typifieth the humane Ground,
how Good, God Created him, and set him in his fattnes, and how he is thus
destroyed by Satan's Envy and Poison, and changed into so ill-favored an Image.

44. But in Joseph the Spirit represents a figure, showing* how a Man must
again spring up through the New Birth out of this Poison, and how he should be
set before God again, and how God gives him his Spirit, and makes him Ruler
in his House, how he shall gather in heavenly fruits in Faith and a good
Conscience against the time of Temptation, when the Dearth or Famine, viz. Gods
Anger sifteth the soul.

45. In which sifting then, that fruit which is for food, which stands by the
soul in Repentance, and in which its little Pearle-Plant with its branches
grows, it takes along, and bears good fruit.

46. Those fruits are then Joseph's interpretation; as he declared Gods Counsel
and taught it to Pharaoh; so the New Birth brings forth such good fruit and
doctrine, which makes known the way of God to Mankind, and stands hefore
him with wisdom, as Joseph before Pharaoh; And this we see in Joseph's
Council, after he had interpreted his Dream, he said to Pharaoh; Genesis 41.33.
to the 36.
Let the King look out for a wise and prudent Man, who may build Granaries for
Pharaoh, where prov^sion may be laid up, that Men may have Necessary sustenance
in the Famine; which the Spirit secretly represents in the Or, Condition of
such a Man: the Man Christ, or a Christian Man.
figure of Man, that a Man should look out for Exodus 18.21.
Wise Men fearing God, which should help to gather in the Divine Treasury and
provision with wisdom and understanding, with Doctrine, life, and prayer; that
thereby the Divine Treasure and provision might be gathered in.

47. And then when the time of trial, sifting, and hunger comes, that Gods
Anger might be thereby kept back and prevented, and not so suddenly make both
body and soul Land and people lean, and devour them, but that there may be
something for Provision; Concerning which God says, he will do well to them
that fear God unto a 1000 Generations. Exodus 20.6.
Thousand Generations; and this Provion shall continue to a Thousand
Generations.

48. And Moses says further; Genesis 41.37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.
This saying of Joseph pleased Pharaoh, and all his servants well; and Pharaoh
said to his servants; how can we find such a Man, in whom the Spirit of God
is, and said to Joseph; seeing God has made all this known to thee, there is
none so understanding and wise as thou, thou shall be over my house, and all my
People shall be obedient to thy Word, only in the Regal Throne I will be
higher then thee. And further Pharaoh said to Joseph, behold I have set thee
over the whole Land of Egypt, and took his Ring off his own hand, and gave
it to Joseph into his hand, and clothed him with white silk Garments, and
hung a Golden Chain upon his Neck, and caused him to go in his second
Chariot, and caused it to be proclaimed before him, this is the father of the
Land, and set him over the whole Land of Egypt; and Pharaoh said to Joseph; I
am Pharaoh, and without thy will shall no Man stir his hand or his foot in
the whole Land of Egypt, and he called him his secret Council, and gave him a
wife named Asnath the Daughter of Potiphar Priest of ON.

49. This now is the Most excellent figure in the whole Bible, that there is no
where the like to it of any Man, and he stands in the figure of an approved
tried Christian, who has out-stood all trials: whom the Spirit of Christ has
lead with himself quite through his sufferings, Death, Hell, Prison, and
Misery, as the Only God, viz. the Great King set him before him, and tried his
wisdom, which he had received in the process or imitation of Christ, when he
received him with Joy, and gives this Testimony of him; there is none so wise
as thou, who would so hiddenly introduce his Life in Patience, through Death
and Hell, to God, as thou.

50. And as God gives him full power over his Kingdom, and in his Love makes
him his helper and assistant, as a Council of a King helps and assisteth a
King to govern his Kingdom; so also God sets him in his Kingdom, and rules
by him, and gives him his Seale^Ring, viz. the humanity and Deity, in the Love
of Jesus Christ, to his soul, and causes him to ride in the second Chariott
after him, that is, where Gods Spirit goes, there always goes such a Man
after it, and the Devil, Death, and Hell dare not touch him any more, for thus
he gets power over the Devil, Death, and Hell, and also over his mortal
flesh and Blood, as Joseph over the Land of Egypt.

51. And as Joseph quickly withdrew and built the King Granaryes to lay up
provisions; so also such a Man, who according to his inward Ground sits in
the Kingdom of God, builds for God his Lord, many such Humane- Houses, viz.
Men's souls, in which he lays up in store the Divine overplus, which God
gives him in Christ Jesus, viz. the Divine knowledge and wisdom, with good
Instruction, Doctrine, and Life, so that his Doctrine spreads abroad and
multiplieth as sands in the Sea; so innumerable spreading branches his
Pearle-Plant puts forth, that many hundred thousand souls Eat thereof; as
of Joseph's provision in the Famine.

52. And then Potiphars Daughter, that is, the Daughter of the Priest of ON,
viz* the true Christianity is given him for a Spouse, which he is to cherish
and Love, and Genesis 41.50.
begets of her these Two Sons, as always travailing in this way, and then
they walk with washed hearts; as Joseph before the time of the Famine in
Egypt begat of his wife, Manasseh and Ephraim; and so it was represented to
him with these Names, how God had in the house of his mis^ry caused him to grow
great and gave him much.

53. And then also a child of God sets open his Chists of Treasure, when the
famine comes, that the Anger of God sifteth the world, as Joseph did his
Granaryes, and imparted to his fellow Twiggs therewith out of his Chists of
Treasure, that they perish not in that Famine.

CHAP. LXIX. How this Famine went through all Lands, and how Jacob sent his
sons into the Land of Egypt for Corn, and how they came before Joseph, and
how he showed himself to them. What is thereby to be understood.
Upon the 42 of Genesis.
Genesis XLII.
THis fowrty second Chapter of Genesis, concerning Joseph and his brethren, is a
figure, showing how such a Converted Christian, which has already entered with
Christ into his process, and has now overcome, in the end also forgiveth and
rewards his Enemies with bounty, who have brought him into Christ's process
with their persecution and wicked devices and Council, and how also their
sins are set before them, and how they are brought into Anxiety and
Necessity, and how in the End, of Mere Grace they are released from pain and
punishment, and how God is so gracious to them upon their conversion, that he
not only releaseth the punishment, but blesses them with his Gifts and
Benefitts, as here Joseph did to his Brethren.

2. But then next is also represented in this figure, how Earnestly and
severely God shows himself against sin, as here Joseph against his
brethren, and yet God is not earnest to punish the repenting sinner according
to the sharpest severity, but he setts himself strictly against the soul in
its Conscience, that sin may awake and be acknowledged, and that Repentance
may be the greater, that Man in such terror may be humbled for sin, and
quite depart from sin, and be angry with it, and utterly hate it; when he
knows, that sin has so terrible a Judgment in it.

The History says thus.
3. Genesis 42.1, 2, 3, 4.
But when Jacob saw, that there was plenty of Corn in Egypt, he said to his
sons, Why do you look so long about you, behold I hear, there is plenty of
Corn in Egypt, go down thither, and buy us Corn, that we may live and not
dye: Then the 10 Brethren.
Ten Brethren of Joseph went down, that they might buy Corn in Egypt; But
Jacob would not suffer Joseph's brother Benjamin to go; for he said, some
mishap may befall him.

4. Now this is a figure, first, showing, that when Man finds himself in the
Divine Anger in this Famine, that as to Righteousness he is in want, as Jacob
and his children in the Famine; then the Father says in the Conscience to the
Soul; why ling^rest thou so long looking about thee? Go down into
Repentance, where there is plenty of Righteousness in the Death of Christ,
where Christ gives righteousness for and instead of thy sins, if thou
heartily turnest to him: And thus the Father bestows his will and introduces
it in to the Sinners Repentance and Conversation.

5. But Benjamin, Joseph's Brother, that is, the humanity of Christ, he gives
not to it presently therewith; He first bestows upon it its sinful
Brethren, that is, He gives it first his terrors into its Conscience, and
hides his Comfort in his Grace, viz. the true Benjamin, Joseph's brother, from
the Sinful affections.
properties of sins, and sends the properties of sins, viz. those,
wherein sins have been wrought and Committed after Grace, to buy this Corn
of Joseph, viz. of Christ.

6. The sinner must himself enter upon it, and with Earnestness enter into
the Suffering and Death of Christ, and dye from his sins in the presence of
Grace, in the Prison of Gods Anger, and cast himself upon Joseph's, viz.
Christ's Mercy and Grace, and not stay without and say: with Christ there is
plenty of Grace, and so tickle and comfort himself with Grace: No, that
quickneth not the poor soul, thou must go down into Egypt to thy injured
brother, whom thou have cast into the Pit, by thy sins within thee, and must
in great humility come into his presence, though thou will not suddenly know
it, till he in his Mercy shall give thee to know it, and then thou must in
Christ's Power, Might and Glory, which he gat in his resurrection, buy Corn for
the poor soul, that it may live and not dye; as Jacob said to his Children.

7. And Moses says further; Genesis 42.5, 6, 7, 8.
Thus the Children of Israel and others with them came to buy Corn; for the
Famine was also in Canaan; but Joseph was the Ruler of the Land, and sold Corn
to all the people in the Land; Now when his Brethren came to him, they fell
down with their faces to the Earth before him, and he saw them and knew them,
and carried himself strangely toward them, and spoke roughly with them, and
said to them; Whence come ye? They said, out of the Land of Canaan to buy
food: but though he knew them, they knew not him yet.

8. This now is the first state and Condition of the poor soul when it
turns to Christ, to fetch food from him, then he looks upon the soul in
its will, totally in its Essence, to see whether the free will had set it
self toward him, and now if the soul be Converted, then he knows it, but
first he terrifieth the Conscience, and sets himself roughly, and seems
strange toward the soul, as he did toward Mat. 15.26.
the Cananitish woman, and hides his Grace from the soul, till it shed forth
its Repentance, and boweth its face in the presence of Christ, and acknowledge
its transgressions, and totally bow down it self to the Pit of Judgment, and
yield it self into Gods Anger and punishment, and to the Dying of it self.

9. And then Christ looks into it, and lays fast hold upon it with the
strict hand of Gods Anger, but his Love and Grace hides it self therein, and
that is it, which stirs up the sins of the poor soul, and disturbeth
them, so that it is terrified and afraid in the presence of God; when the soul
stands and cries to God, then says Christ in the Conscience, who art thou?
behold thy self now, whether thou art worthy of me? as Joseph did here, when
he said, who are ye, and set himself roughly and strangely toward them.

10. Genesis 42.9.
And Joseph thought on the Dream, which he had dreamed concerning them, and
said to them: ye are spies, and are come to see where the Land is open; that
is, Christ thinks on his Mercy, and on his bitter Passion and Death, and
says to the soul; thou art a spy, and come to me, only to see, where the
Gate of my Grace is open: but that shall not help thee, thou must do
otherwise, thou must first Enter into the Gate of my Suffering and Death, or
else thou art but a spy, and wilt see the Gate of my Grace stand open, that
thou may cover thy self with it as with a Mantle; thou must be in Earnest,
or else thou will be but treacherous to me, and take my Grace into thy Mouth.

11. Genesis 42.10.11.
And Joseph's Brethren answered him and said, No, my Lord, thy servants are come
to buy food; we are all one Man's sons, we are honest and true Men, we thy
servants were never spies: That is thus much in the Figure, before the
properties of the soul in their vanity rightly know themselves when the Anger
of God is presented before their Eyes, viz. passes into their Essence, then
the soul thinks, it is wrong that is done to it, for it thinks, if it
comfort it self with the Merits of Jesus Christ, and beleiveth on Christ, that
he is the Son of God, and has satisfied for the soul, then it ought not to be
blamed for a Divine spy and unrighteous Hypocrite, it is righteous through the
Justification of Christ, seeing it believes the same, that it is applied to it
for its benefit.

12. But, as Genesis 42.12.
Joseph said to his Brethren: No; but ye are come to see where the Land is
Open: thus also the Spirit of Christ blames the Essences of the soul; for it
proves them, that they are not yet broken, and have still selfe-desires in
them, and will instantly lay hold on Grace, viz. the Open Gate, which avails
not the soul, it must first enter into Christ's suffering and Death, and put
them on first through earnest repentance and conversion of its will, and then
it may enter through the Open Gate, through Christ's wounds and Death, into his
Resurrection.

13. Further, Genesis 42.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Joseph's Brethren say, we thy servants, are 12 Brethren.
Twelve brethren, sons of one Man in the Land of Canaan, and the youngest is
still with our Father, but one is not in Being: Joseph said to them; that is it
which I told you; ye are Spies: in this will I prove you by the Life of
Pharaoh: Ye shall not go from hence except your youngest brother come hither,
send one of you hence, that may fetch your brother, but ye shall be prisoners:
so will I prove your saying, whether your ways be in truth or not; for if not
then are ye spies by the Life of Pharaoh, and they put them together in Ward
for the space of Three Days.

The inward precious Figure stands thus.
14. When the soul does thus draw near to Christ, and will instantly put on
his Resurrection, then says the Spirit of Christ in the Souls Essence, this
is that which I told thee, thy Essences are spies by the Life of God, in this
will I prove them whether they come to me in a faithful and right Path, and
whether they bring with them to me their youngest brother, viz. the true
Joseph's brother, that is, the Incorporated line of the Covenant of Grace, in
their, in Adam, faded heavenly Substantiality, viz. the Incorporated ground of
Grace which was effected in Paradise, so that the Souls Essences with their
most inward Ground, turn in, to me, and in me, else they come but as
Hypocrites and spies of the Gate of Grace.

15. This is rightly called fetching the youngest brother, for, that same
Incorporated Grace in the Promise, Effected in Paradise, is the souls youngest
brother, which it hides and covers with sin, and in the beginning of its
Repentance it leaves him at home Or, with.
by the Life of God.

16. Therefore says the Text of Moses very secretly; He will prove them by
the Life of Pharaoh, which is as much as to say in the figure, by the Life of
God, with whom this youngest son stayed behind, him must the repenting Man
bring along with him to the Port of Grace, or else he must lie 3 Days.
Three Days shut up in Prison, till he bring him, as Joseph's brethren did;
that is, else must the 3 Principles.
Three Principles in Man lie so long in Prison in the Anger of God, and cannot
buy divine food, unless they have this their youngest brother, with them; that
is, the Gate, wherein Christ in Man, in that same Image, of the heavenly worlds
substance which faded in Adam, arises from Death, wherein he may have his
dwelling place.

17. Thus a Man is proved by the Life of God, when he turns to God, to try
whether he turn wholly and altogether to him, and bring this incorporated
ground of Grace with him, wherein Christ will and shall manifest himself; If
not, then says Joseph, that is, Christ, to the souls Essences, ye are but
spies to the Life of God, and search only for the Justification of Man from
the sufferings and Merits of Christ, that is, ye learn only the History,
and take the precious Covenant of God in your Mouths, and flatter your selves
with Christ's satisfaction, and remain still only as spies of Grace; but that
shall nothing avayle you or help you, though likely you may spy out the
Kingdom of Christ, my Anger and Righteousness in my Zeal and Jealousy,
shall yet hold you in Prison with all the Three Principles, as long as you
bring not the most inward ground of your Substance along with you, (this is
called, setting all the Twelve sons of Jacob before Joseph, that is, before
Jesus,) and fall at his feet with body and soul, inwardly and outwardly with
all your faculties and powers, and yield them up into his Grace.

18. For it is not said that they can take the Grace, but that they should sink
down into Grace, that Grace may give it self to them; for Man's ability to
take it, is lost, self-will it rent off from God, it must wholly sinck down
into God, and leave off willing, that God may receive it again into his Grace.

19. O Babell! how home does this hitt thee? Thou art by or before the Life of
God, with thy hypocrisy but a spy of the Grace of God, thou do but seek
for the Gate of Grace, and how thou might with thy own will without thy
inward Benjamin enter into the Kingdom of Christ, yes thou will be outwardly
an adopted child of Grace, whose sins are forgiven through the Merits of
Christ, and yet continuest to be Babell and a Fable, and wilt not be a
Christian in Christ, thou will needs pass into Heaven, but that will not
avayle thee; Joseph, that is, Christ holds thee imprisoned in the Anger of
God both in Body and Soul, unless thou give him Benjamin, viz. thy inward
Ground, and then Heaven goes into thee, and Christ stands up in thee out of
the Grave, so that thy self art risen from Death, and then thy spying and
prying, has an End.

20. O ye high Schools, and Universities, and all ye that will be accounted
the Ministers of God, and to teach the way of God, and contend and dispute
about it; what are ye? look upon your selves in this Figure; you appear to be
no other then Spies, you always search, and yet you lie still in Prison; God
will have it so no more; for he himself tries the Thoughts of Man, and is
himself present in all things, his is the understanding, his is the knowledge
of the Kingdom of God, without him ye know nothing.

21. Your spying and knowing helps you not into the Kingdom of God, you cannot
enter therein, except, that go forth in your Life, that is, except it be
manifested in your Life, that ye are Gods children in Christ, in his
Sufferings, Death, and Resurrection, in himself, not through an acquired
Historical seeming Faith, but Essentially as a Branch on the Vine, ye must be
a Twig on the Tree, you must have Christ's Life flesh and Blood operatively and
substantially in the Inward Ground in you, and you must become Christ, else ye
are all one and other but spies searchers and historical Christians, and no
better then Jews Turks and Heathens.

22. O ye simple Men, let it be made known to you; go but forth from the
Tower of the Confounded Languages, then may you soon come to the right, seek
Mat. 26.64. Act. 7^55, 56. Col. 3.1.
Christ at the right hand of God within you, he sits there, unlock your
wills, that is, give them up to him, and he will unlock them well enough, your
repentance must be earnest, or else ye are all one and other, but Spies.

23. Gaze about no more, it is high Time; Rev. 1.3.22.^0.
the time is truly borne, or at hand, Luke 21.28.
your Redemption draws near: Rev. 21.^.
The Bridegroom calls his Bride; you must indeed into the Prison of Joseph in
this Famine, if you will not [bring your inward ground of your hearts into
Repentance with you] Amen, be it so.

Genesis 42.18, 19, 20.
24. And Moses says further: But on the Third Day he said to them, if you will
live then do thus, for I fear God; if you be honest and true Men, let one of
your brethren lie captive in your Prison, but as for you go your ways and
carry home, what ye have bought for your hunger; and bring your youngest
brother to me, and so I shall believe your words, that ye may not die, and
they did so.

The Figure stands thus.
25. When the soul draws near to God and will work repentance, and that its
inward Ground, is yet wholly shut up in vanity, so that the Mind is still
hanging to self, yet if it will not give over Repentance, and for all that
cannot be free from the Earthly desires, but continues in Prayer, then indeed
God the Father lets the Souls Essences out of the Prison of his Anger, that
the Mind is well eased again, like one that is released out of Prison, then
says the Mind thus; I am very well eased in my Prayer in this Repentance.

26. For, Gods Anger has released Nature out of its Prison, that it should
with greater labor and industry press in to God, for in its Prison it cannot
do so, for it is in anguish, and beholds only its committed sins which
continually drive it back, that it is afraid Abashed.
ashamed and daunted in the presence of God, but when the Anger lets it loose,
then it gets power and virtue of Prayer, and the work of Repentance.

27. But the Anger of God holds it continually with one Band; as Joseph held
one Brother in Prison, till they brought the last brother also; and thus must
the poor soul remain tied with one band of the Prison of Death, till it shed
forth the last brother, viz. the inward ground, and come before God and say;
Lord I will forsake all for Christ's and my salvations sake, and give up my will
wholly to thee, cast me into Death or into Life, into derision or scorn, into
poverty or misery, as thou will, I will cleave to thee, I will not play the
hypocrite before thee, and give thee but half my will any more, as I have done.

28. And then if the Earnestnes proceed to practice, that God perceives that
it is in Earnest, then will also the last brother be let loose, that is, then
will also the last Band of the Anger of God be loosed: but in the mean time,
ere it thus come to pass, the soul must lie captive in one Band.

29. But nevertheless God says to the other released Or, faculties.
forms of Life: Now go your way with that which you have at present in this
Repentance bought or gotten of me, and carry it home, that is, defile it not
again, live of it, and partake of this present Grace bestowed, and carry it
in, to the Honor of God, that it may come before God with the Operation of it.

30. Moses says further; But they said one among another, Gen 42, 21, 22, 23,
24.
we trespassed against our Brother, that we saw the anguish of his Soul,
when he wept to us, and we would not hear him, therefore now this Trouble
comes upon us; Reuben answered them and said, did I not tell you as much when
I said; Sin not against the Lad, and ye would not hear; and now is his
blood required; but they knew not that Joseph understood it; for he spoke to
them by an Interpreter, and he turned himself from them and wept, and when he
turned himself to them again, and spoke with them, he took Simeon from among
them and bound him before their Eyes.

31. This Figure now is the Earnestnes of Repentance, when Man in his
repentance stands before God, when he seeks to God, and weepeth to him,
when his Conscience and sins awake, as here the brethren of Joseph did, then
he says in himself, this I have merited and deserved by my sins, that I
have helped to deride, scorn, and Crucify Christ within me, and without me
in my Fellow Members, and have not regarded the entreaties and beseechings in
my Fellow Christians, but have scorned, derided, and judged them to damnation,
at present it touches me home, when I will turn to God by Repentance, now
his sobbs and Tears withhold me, in that I have driven him away, for my
voluptuousness, Jesting, sport, and wantonness, now I stand here, and the
Heaven in me in my Conscience is become as Iron.

32. Then says God in the Conscience, have thou not known well enough,
moreover have I not caused my Word to be told unto thee, thou kn^west well that
thou did wrong, but thy evil stubborn self-will must reign; and now
thou would have Grace; and the Devil says; it is to no purpose, Grace is
gone, Heaven is shutt up, Hell is open, leave off, thou will not attain it.

33. But the great Mercifullnes in the Grace of Christ in the inward Ground,
presses in with his Pity, and great Compassion, although at present, he still
hides his countenance of Love from it, that the soul does not know it, and
makes the troubled soul full of misery, that in self it beseeches and
weepeth before God, and accompteth it self guilty of all Evil and wickedness,
and begins in such kindled Lamentation, bitterly to complain of its sins,
and to be sorry, and is also so full of shame in the presence of Christ, that
it hides its countenance before God, and knows not what to do for
Lamentation; For it sees in it self with its own Eyes, that the severe
righteousness of God, holds and binds it in its Life, as the Brethren of
Joseph must see, that their Brother was bound for their sins before their
Eyes.

34. For though Christ be stirring in the Souls Essence in the inward ground
of the Incorporated Grace, and shattereth it, that it sees and bewaileth its
sins, yet he sets himself very strangely against the soul, and will not
touch it with any Beam of Love; as Joseph set himself strangely, as if he
understood not their Speech, and spoke to them by an Interpreter.

35. This same Interpreter is even that which brings the soul into such
Repentance, Note, Note, the ability of the Soul to attain Grace.
which otherwise could not be; for it has nothing more in its own power but
this, that it may turn its abyssall unfathomable supernatural will toward
God, viz. that, out of which it is proceeded, and there stand still, which yet
is very hard for it, and yet possible; unless its will have quite broken off
it self, from the incorporated Gate of Grace, and given it self up to the
Poison and infection of the Devil, so that the will of the Abyss of the
soul, is entered into The condition, posture, and quality.
a Figure of a false or wicked Thistle, and be wholly poisonous, then it is
hard, for then it asks not after repentance, at all, but is careless and
negligent, and obdurate, and desires at no time to Convert, neither is it
sorry for any evil or wickedness, but takes delight therein and rejoices at
it, so long as it carreth the Body about it; and then it is quite lost: but
where there is yet a little spark of divine desire left, there is Remedy.

36. And Moses says further: Genesis 42.25, 26, 27, 28.
And Joseph commanded to fill their Sacks with Corn, and to put every ones
Money into their Sack again, also Provision for their Journey, and they did so
to them. And they Laded their burdens upon their Asses, and went their way;
but when one of them opened his Sack to give his Ass provender in the Inn, he
perceived his Money that lay uppermost in the Sack, and said to his Brethren,
my Money is restored to me, see, it is in my Sack; then their hearts failed
them, and they were affaid, one with another, and said; Wherefore has God done
this unto us?

37. This now is the Most Lovely rich figure, showing, how God takes nothing
away from the Repentant Sinner, when he in his will gives up all, and
resolves to cleave steadfastly to God, he takes no reward or bounty from him,
or any thing else; neither does he take away his temporal Good things, when he
does yield up all to God, and forsakes selfishnes; and then God fills his
sack and restores him all that Money which he gives to the poor and
miserable, in his blessing again, and lays it aloft in his provision, that
the Man sees, that God has afforded it to him again in his wonderful
Blessing.

38. At which a Man often wondereth how it comes to pass, that Temporal
Maintenance befalls him in such a wonderful manner, when he has not sought
it, or known any thing of it, and likely stands amazed at it, questioning
whether he should receive it or no, and thinks verily, it is done for a
Temptation to him, as here Joseph's brethren thought that Joseph tempted them
thus, that he might have an occasion against them.

39. And this signifies the inward Bounty of Christ, that when the poor
sinner powereth forth his heart before God, for payment to the Grace, and
returns what he has to God, then God fills the sack of his heart full with
the Grace of Christ, and gives him still good Provision, viz. understanding
and wisdom in the way of his Pilgrimage, wherein he is to Journey through this
valley of Misery home again into his Fathers Country.

40. But by this Journey and Pilgrimage, wherein the Adamicall Man's sack is
filled with heavenly good things, the Kingdom of Gods Anger, as also the
Earthlinesse is robbed of that which they have in Man, as is to be seen in
this Figure.

41. For Genesis 42.35, 36.
when Jacobs sons came home to their Father and told him how it happened to
them, and powered out their sacks and found the Money again, and would have
Benjamin also into Egypt: then said Jacob ye have robbed me of my children,
Joseph is no more in being, nor Simeon is not, and you would take away
Benjamin, all this goes against me.

42. Here Jacob their Father stands in the figure of the outward Natures
self, showing, how Nature complains, when it is bereaved and robbed of its
right, and of that which it has begotten and brought to light; and stands
very excellently in the figure; for the outward Nature says, when it sees the
Divine Gifts in it self, whereby it loses the right of its selfehood I am
bereaved of my might and strength; Joseph, viz. the inward ground of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which I had in Paradise, that is no more, and so will also
these Gifts of my Power and authority, viz. my children, that is, the
properties of my Nature, be taken away, it all goes against me, I must suffer
my self to be bereaved.

43. Genesis 42.37.
But Reuben said to his Father; If I bring not Benjamin to thee again, then
slay my 2 Sons.
Two Sons, give him into my hand, I will bring him to thee again; that is,
God Comfort Nature and says; Give me thy forms, Quality, and Condition,
viz. thy Children, into my hand, I will but bring them to Joseph, that is, to
Jesus, and will give them to thee again, thou shall loose nothing, if I do
not, then slay my two sons with thee, that is, slay the first and second
Principle,

44. Which is even done, if Nature be bereaved of its forms and Condition,
then must cease in the Nature of Man, the Kingdom of God in Love, and also the
Kingdom of God in the might of the fire, so very secretly does the Spirit of
God delight to play in the figure of Regeneration; which Exposition will seem
strange to Reason, but we know what we write here, which is anderstood by
those of our Society.

45. Genesis 42.38.
And Jacob said, my son Benjamin shall not go down with you, for his
Brother is dead, and he is left alone, if any mishap befall him in the way that
you travail, ye will bring my Gray hayres with sorrow of heart into the
Grave; That is, Nature is faint, when it must enter into the Death of Christ,
and is afraid of Dying, and will by no means come to it; it excuses it self
concerning its heavenly Joseph which it had, viz. the heavenly Image, which
while it cannot comprehend it, it says, it is Dead; now when these my forms
and qualities of Life in this way shall get mishap again, then must I perish
with sorrow of heart, and my Life has an End.

CHAP. LXX. How Jacobs Sons went into Egypt again because of the Famine, to
Joseph to buy Corn, and take Benjamin with them; How Joseph caused them to be
brought into his House, and to Eat at his Table. What is thereby to be
understood.
Upon the 43* of Genesis.
NOw this whole Chapter prefigureth to us, the most excellent Image, Genesis XLIII.
representing, how first the outward Nature, in this process, when it shall
give up its will thereinto, that its Life's Essences shall go into Egypt, that
is, into the Death of Christ; is very fearful, timorous, abashed and daunted,
and yet in the End is willing and ready, that all its forms and Conditions of
Life might enter into the dying of Self, viz. into the true Egypt, upon
divine confidence, that it brings the will of God with it thereinto.

2. And then secondly, how the forms and Powers or Faculties.
Conditions of Life are afraid before Joseph, that is, before the Face of God,
seeing they feel in them an Evil Conscience, as Jac^bs sons were afraid
before Joseph, for they thought continually God would punish them for Joseph's
sake, at which they trembled.

3. And thirdly, how God, with the forms of the soulish Nature carries
himself first so friendly, and first gives them heavenly bread of his own
substance, and yet but in a strange form; as Joseph invited his brethren for
Guests, and fed them at his Table, that they eat and drank plentifully, and
were merry, and afterward let them go in Peace, but presently after came with
a terrible Trial, in that he caused his Cup to be laid into Benjamins sack,
and pursued after them and fetched them back again, all which stands
powerfully in the figure of a repenting sinner, showing, how it goes with him,
till God in his Love gives him to know him.

4. Moses words follow thus; Genesis 43.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
This Famine was sore in the Land, and when the Corn was spent which they had
brought out of Egypt, their father said to them; go again and buy us a
little food: then Judah answered and said: The Man obliged and charged us
strictly and said: Ye shall not see my face, except your Brother be with you:
Now if thou will send our brother with us, then we will go down and buy for
thee to Eat: but if thou sendest him not, we will not go down, for the Man
has said to us, ye shall not see my Face, unless your brother be with you.

This figure stands thus.
5. The Soul of Man stands in Three Principles; viz. in the Eternal fires
Nature, and in the Eternal Lights Nature, viz. in the Love-fire, which
extinguished in Adam, for which cause at present the Strife is: and thirdly it
stands in Spiritu Mundi, in the Spirit of the World, in the Kingdom of this
world, viz. in Mortality and Restoration.

6. Therefore now understand us aright thus, when the Inward Soulish Ground,
viz. the Eternal Soul from the Fathers Property of the Word of God, turns
back again, and looks about after its Little Pearl, viz. after the Second
Principle of the Angelical worlds property, then it will perceive that it was
lost in Adam; from whence arises its Misery and Return again, and as soon
as it returns again, God gives his Grace into it again, but unknown and
not understood by it, and God.
he desires, that the Inward fire-soule, viz. the Center of the Eternal
Nature, should, with the voice of Grace in spoken or inspired in Paradise which
was wholly incorporated, turn to God again.

7* In which Divine desire, this great unquietness arises in the soul, that
it thus goes into Repentance, when it sees that it has lost its ability,
neither may nor shall nor can it, in any other way again attain its first
Pearl which is had, and come to divine salvation, unless it turn with its
fires-might wholly again into the Ground of the incorporated Grace, and give
it self up thereto.

8. And now when the outward Mortal Soul, viz. the Nature of the third
Principle of the Kingdom of this world, sees this, then it is afraid, as
Jacob was of his children, and always thinks they will loose body and Life,
Goods and Honor, and their forms or faculties of Life will be bereaved of
their outward Might and Authority, which they have in this world.

9. And then also the inward fiery soul cannot stir up its inward Ground,
viz. the true Benjamin, and bring it along with it into Egypt, into the
presence of Joseph, into Earnest Repentance, into the presence of Jesus:
unless the Outward Soul from the Spirit of the world be brought down and
quite tamed and overwhelmed, that it also may in the End willingly submit to
it, that the fiery inward great soul might thus move it self in all the Three
Principles, and stir up the most inward ground, viz. Joseph's Brother, viz.
the incorporated Gate of Grace, together with all outward Essences or faculties
of the outward soul, and bring them along into the work of Repentance, into
the presence of the right Joseph or Jesus.

10. For, the fiery Soul is threatened by Joseph, that is, by Jesus, that if,
in its drawing near, it bring not along with it the most inward ground, viz.
the brother of Joseph or Christ, which in its Manifestation becomes the Temple
of Christ, then shall its Band of Gods Anger not be loosed, its brother Simeon
shall remain in Prison, till it also stir up and bring with it Joseph's
Brother, viz. the most inward Ground.

11. Neither shall its Sack be filled with Rev. 2.17.
Heavenly Manna for its food, that is, its Faiths desire shall remain hungry
and Empty, and not be filled with divine power and virtue, unless it bring the
Temple of Christ, viz. the right Sack with it, whereinto the heavenly Joseph
fills his Food.

12. This now in the Text stands in a figure, showing, how the Old Adamicall
Man, viz. the Old Jacob, thinks it to be very hard, that he should let all
the powers of his Life be carried along into Egypt, that is, into Repentance,
into the presence of Joseph or Jesus; especially when he sees that he must
break his will, and part with all temporal things for it; as Old Jacob must
part with all his children for this food.

13. It went hard with him, and yet the famine and hunger did so press upon
him that in the end he must yield and be willing that all his sons should go
into Egypt, and his youngest son went along, and he was alone as one who had
no children: so wholly must the Outward Nature leave whatsoever it has or is
in it self; as having no more power and ability as to Earthly things, and give
up the selfehood of its inward soul, which stands in the Drawing of God,
that the inward soul may take the outward souls will along with it into
Conversion, and then the Old Jacob, that is, the Old earthly Adamicall Body
remains alone in its house of Sorrow, and knows not now what will become of
it, when its Spirit must go along into conversion, then thinks the Earthly
Lucifer in it, viz. the fleshly desire; hereby thou will loose temporal
honor and good things, and be the fool of the world; this will not serve thy
turn and Lust.

14. But the Great Famine, viz. Sin presses the poor life in all the Three
Principles, that it must make ready and go into Egypt, that is, into
Repentance, and seek divine food, and pray for it and desire it, from the
true householder Joseph or JESUS, and in such Prayer and desire fall on his
face of great humility before Joseph or Jesus, and desire food of him.

15. But that Jacobs sons must go twice into Egypt for Corn, and at the
first time receive Corn Enough, and yet they came into danger thereby, Were
kept in pawn, or Custody.
and were kept as a pledge, has inwardly this figure: when Man at first
turns into repentance, then first the terrible figure or aspect of his sins
stands before him, for they rouse him up, and the Conscience stands in the
Anger of God.

16. As the Brethren of Joseph, stood the first time before Joseph, when he
held them for Spies: so also Man stands before God as a Spy of Divine Grace;
for he thinks he will this once enter into Repentance, that his old sins
may be forgiven him, but he has not yet so strongly tamed his will, that the
will should think all days of its life while the body lasts, to remain in
such begun Repentance, but it thinks only for once thus to destroy Sin in
the Conscience, and to drown the old sins in Repentance and Sorrow.

17. And it comes also to that pass, that his Conscience, though perhaps at
first it be terrified, is in the End appeased, and divine food is given to him
from the heavenly Joseph, into the Sack of his desire, so that the Anger of God
lets him go; But the Anger of God in his righteousness, takes a Or, Pawn.
Pledge from the Conscience, and keeps it, to see whether Man would continue
to rest satisfied with this burden of food, if not, then the Anger of God has
its first right in soul and body.

18. As it happens to us poor Men, that we very slightly and lavishly spend
the first food which the heavenly Joseph gives us in Repentance, and come
again with great hunger, want and misery of Conscience, and must come to be
poor again, and even therefore, because we did not the first time bring along
with us our Benjamin, viz. the most inward Ground; in that our will was not
quite broken, and that we suppose we shall continue till our End, in
Repentance, and divine Resignation: But if it were done in the first
Repentance, then could not Gods righteousness in the Anger take any pledge,
but must leave us quite free.

19. This figure now, that Jacobs children must go down into Egypt for food
twice, and at the second time Joseph was first manifested unto them, and the
third time they took along with them their wives and children, and all that
they had, together with their father; prefigureth; that when Man through sin
has spent and consumed the first divine food, that he must hunger again and
be in want in his Conscience, so that his conscience presses him and
complains, as a hungry Belly complains for food, then he thinks on the
first repentance again, how Grace happened to him before.

20. But his most inward Ground, viz. the Band of Gods Anger complains
against him and condemns him, that he did not preserve Grace, it blames him
for an unfaithful perjured Man, who has tasted Gods Grace, and how it was
bestowed on him of mere Mercy, and that he has for the Lusts sake of the
flesh spoiled and lost all again, and then he stands as one that is not
worthy of any thing, so much as to look up to Heaven, or that the Earth should
bear him, that he has for such base Lusts sake of the flesh squandred so
precious a thing again, and thinks yet with the poor Publican and sinner,
and with the lost son the keeper of swine, he will turn again and come to
the salvation of God; and then first it is in right true Earnest, and then
goes Jacobs sons all one and other the second time into Egypt into
Repentance, to buy heavenly Corn, and then must the Old Adamicall Jacob, viz.
the Body, stay at home in Calamity.

21. In this Earnest it is, that Benjamin, viz. the inward Ground is first
taken along; and now the first will is broken, and goes no more in and with
such a purpose as at the first time, and they come now no more as spies before
Joseph, but as earnest hungry Men, viz. with an Earnest hungry Life, which from
all its powers and virtues, hungereth after Gods Mercy, after the food of Jesus
Christ.

22. Here now begins the earnestness in fear and Trembling, and this is
the true going forth after heavenly food, wherein the Conscience stands in
anxiety, and Reason despaires of its own ability, and thinks, alas, God is
angry with me: where shall I seek for Grace, I am not worthy of it; I have
trampled it underfoote, I must stand ashamed before God; Into what Deep shall
I go, where I may dare to lift up my face to God, and bewail my wants to him.

23. Then comes the poor Conscience, in need, and with trembling, before God,
and has not many Confessions or words, for it accounts it self too unworthy
to speak one word before God, but sets it self before his face, and boweth
down to the Ground, and thus in it self demerseth it self into the Most
mere and deepest Mercy of God, into Christ's wounds, suffering, and death, and
begins from its most inward Ground, to sigh, and to fly into Grace, and
wholly give up it self thereto, as Joseph's brethren came thus the second time
before Joseph, and fell down before him.

24. And when Joseph saw them thus, that they were all there and stood so
humbly before him, he had so great Compassion upon them, that he could not
speak a word neither: but turned him and wept: And this is the state and
condition, wherein the inward ground of the heavenly worlds substance which
faded in Adam, into which God aagaine inspoke or inspired his Word of Grace in
Paradise, for an Ensign, Banner, Mark, and Limitt, became living again in
this Compassion, wherein Christ is assuredly borne in Man in this ground, and
now instantly arises through his sufferings, from Death in Man, and there
sits at the right hand of his Father; which right hand, is the fiery soul
from the Fathers property in the word of the Eternal Nature, and presents
the soul in this ground before the Anger of God, and satisfies and fills it
with Love.

25. And here a Christian begins to be a Christian, for he is one, in
Christ, and is no more a spy and verbal or Mouth-Christian, but that is in
the most inward Ground; and here Simeon is loosed, and Romans 8.1.
there is no more Condemnation to those that are thus in Christ Jesus: although
perhaps the Outward body is in this world and subjected to vanity, yet it
hurts it now no more, but every failing which it now commits, in the
flesh, must turn to serve for the best to it; For now it begins to kill the
works and contrivance of the flesh, and continually to Crucify the Old Adam,
for its whole life is now a mere repentance, and Christ in it does help it to
work repentance, and brings it now to his Glorious feast or Banquett, as
Joseph did his brethren when they came again to him, when he commanded to make
ready and gave them of his Table.

26. Thus now Christ feeds the Converted soul, with his flesh and blood, and
in this feast or Banquett is the Rev. 19.7.9
Wedding of the Lamb; whosoever has been a Guest here, he understands our
sense and mind, and no other does, they are all of them but Spies, though
perhaps they suppose they understand it, yet there is no right understanding of
this feast or Banquett in any Man, unless he has been at it and tasted of it
himself, for it is a very impossible thing for Reason to apprehend it without
Christ's spirit in himself, who is himself the food, at this feast or Banquet
of Joseph.

27. And it is told thee Babell, in thy spying by Joseph's feast or Banquett,
that thou deludest Christendom; in that by this feast thou pointest them to
the Resurrection of the Dead, thou Errest: a Christian must John 6.53.
eat the flesh of the son of Man here, or he has no life in him: 1 Cor. 15
28
In the Resurrection God will be all in all. Col. 3.1.
Christ sits at the right hand of God in Man here, and presents him with
his Body and with his Innocent Blood that was shed, and that, he covers the
soul withal, and flows into it with the same, when Gods Anger will stir,
being instigated by the desire of the flesh.

28. O thou poor old Jacob of Or, inspecting
Spying Christendom, let thy hungry sons, who are very lean for great
hunger in the Conscience, go to Joseph, keep them no longer back in thy fear:
what I pray thee is thy fear? thou supposest, that if this Ground should come
to light in the world, thou should loose thy sons whom thou love; but who
are thy sons? there is thy own honor, in that thou think to sit in the
Stead of Christ upon Earth; Also, there is thy Lucifer of fleshly honor, which
thou take care for, and thy countenance is dejected about it, if a man should
require an Apostolic Life from thee, and seek thee in the Process and
Imitation of Christ; it pleases thee better, that thou live in honor and
voluptuousness of flesh in Spying, and honor thy Belly, and so bring
thy poor Christianity under a veil.

29. O thou poor old Jacob, trouble not thy self so about temporal momentany
things; see how it went with old Jacob, when he let all his sons go from him
to Joseph, how Joseph caused him to be fetched to him, and did so much Good to
him and his children, and nourished them in the famine, and placed them in a
better Land; and so it will go also with thee, if thou will let thy sons go
to Joseph; but if thou will henceforth keep them back longer, then thou must
starve, thou and thy children, and be famished in Misery, says the Spirit of
Wonders, by Joseph's feast or Banquett.

30. O Israel Mark this Text very well, it concerns thee, and has clearly
concerned thee, but that thou art yet blind in thy hungry misery, and waitest
for the sword of the Turba, that shall awaken thee, since thou will needs have
it.

31. Every one thinks, if three parts of Men were destroyed, then I should
have good days with those that remain, and then we would be honest and
virtuous, and lead an upright honest life: Also, men gaze about to see whence
that Salvation will come, which is so much written off; and say and think,
Salvation will enter into the Lust of the flesh from without, Men always gape
for an Earthly Kingdom of Christ.

32. O Israel, if thou knew these present times wherein thou live in
blindness, thou would repent in Sackcloath and Ashes; thou look for the
Signall-Star, such a Star as lead the Wisemen to Christ. Matthew. 2.2.
Signall-Starre, and it has appeared, it shines, whosoever has Eyes may see
it, it is indeed as big as the world is, and yet Men will be blind. Enough
to those that are Ours.

33. And as Jacobs children spoke much with their father concerning Benjamin,
and promised to bring him again, he said at last: Genesis 43.11, 12, 13, 14.
If it must be so, let it be so, and take of the best fruit of the Country, in
your Sacks, and carry down a Present to the Man, a little Balsam and Honey;
and Spices and Mirrhe Dates and Almonds; take also other Money with you and the
Money that was put above in your Sacks again, carry with you, it may be it was
done by mistake; moreover, take your brother, arise, go again to the Man, and
the Almighty God give you Mercy, before the Man, that he may let your other
brother and Benjamin go; but I must be as one quite bereft of his children.

34. This now is the figure that is above explained, and we see a very
Excellent clear Type and Image therein, showing, that Jacob commanded his
sons to take with them of the most precious rich and costly fruit of the
Land, and carry it with them to Joseph, in which the Spirit pourtrayeth in the
figure, how the Christian Church, when it sees it self in such Trouble, and
spiritual Famine, hunger, and want, and now is on the way of Repentance,
should carry these good fruits with it before God, viz. Hope, Faith and divine
affiance, and not wild fruit, as Covetousness, Selfe-willed Lust, and
Hypocrisy, but a purpose and resolution toward Truth, Righteousness,
Chastity, Love and Meekness.

35. Thus must the Old Man take a resolution, to go in such a purpose to
Joseph, that is, to Christ; and then he yields up all his sons for the
Journey of this Pilgrimage, and says; Now I am bereaved of all my Sons, I
have nothing more in the desire of fleshly voluptuousness, I have yielded them
altogether into the will of God.

36. Also, we see in this figure, how Jacob commanded them to take with them
again, the unrighteous money, that they had brought back in their Sacks, and
restore it again; thus also must a Man who will be or is a Christian, put away
from him all unrighteous things; all that he has gotten to himself by
subtilty, craft, and wrong, that, he should repay again, or, else indeed give
it to the Poor.

37. For that which he gives to the needy and miserable that suffer want, he
gives to the hungry brethren of Joseph, and the heavenly Joseph receives it
in his hungry brethren and Fellow Members, and returns it to him again
manifold, as Joseph's Steward gave them again the Money which they carried home
in their Sacks the first time and brought it again, and said, Peace be to you,
your fathers God, has bestowed Treasure on you.

38. A man must put away all unrighteousness from him, if he will enter in to
the Wedding of Jesus Christ; Hypocrisy and flattery in comforting ones self,
avayleth nothing; it must be Earnestnes; and this is that which keeps Men
back from the ways of God, even their walking upon the ways of Hypocrisy,
and flattering themselves; whereas they should leave off and forsake
unrighteousness and Extortion, and restore that which is gotten by falsehood:
thus they have cast the Purple Mantle of Christ over the crafty wretch, and
covered him with the satisfaction and merits, only that the Thief may live
under that Cloak.

39. O thou poor Christendom, how has Antichrist deluded thee with this
Cloak and Covering; O flee away from him it is time: The Covering will not
avayle any wicked and unrighteous person, so long as any is such a one he is
the Devils Servant.

40. A Christian is a New Creature in the Ground of his Heart, his Mind is
bent only to well-doing, not to steal, Else were Christ [by Consequence
accounted] a Thief in Man. Let but the Mantle of Christ fall off, and restore
what thou have stolen, and gained and extorted with unrighterusnesse and
injury, and cast away the old Quarrels, strivings, and Lawsuits.
Litigations, from thy soul, and go naked and empty under the Cross, to
which Christ hangs, and look upon his fresh bleeding wounds, and take his
blood into thy hungry soul, and then thou will be healed and redeemed and
released from all want, else no comfort of Satisfaction and Merit will help
thee. All true Comfort is but this, that a Christian comfort himself that
he shall in this Repentance in Christ Jesus obtain a Gracious God and that
shall even be his Comfort that he may not despair.

41. The satisfaction wherewith the unrighteous comfort himself; and says,
My works avayle nothing, Christ has done all, I can do nothing; and
continues under such Comfort in sins, that is the Devils fishhooke, whereby
he catches his fish with Christ's Mantle.

42. Christ had his Purple Mantle on him, when he was in his suffering; but
when he hung on the Cross, he had it no more, much less in his Resurrection:
so also should a Man take this Mantle about him, only when he goes into
Christ's Suffering and Death in Repentance, in Repentance it is only avaylable,
and no way else, that a soul should wrap it self up in it when it is ashamed
in its sins, before the face of God.

43. All that is taught and believed otherwise, is deceit, a fable, and
Babell. All teachers that teach otherwise, are but servants and slaves of the
Belly, and the fishermen, and a Deceit of the world, of these let Men beware:
for he that will be a Teacher, must also be a true Christian, that so he may
also thus live in Christ; Else John 10.
he is a Thief and a Murderer, that climeth up some other way into the
sheepfold, of whom Christ speaks.

44. And Moses says further; Genesis 43.15, 16, 17.
Then they took their Present and the double money with them and Benjamin, and
arose and went into Egypt, and presented themselves before Joseph; and when
Joseph saw them with Benjamin, he said to his Steward, bring these Men to my
House, and stay and make ready, for they shall eat with me at Noone, and the
Man did as Joseph said unto him, and brought the Men into Joseph's house.

45. This now signifies thus, that he that hides himself under the Mantle
must come forth, and bring his unrighteous wrong gotten Goods again, and come
before the face of the heavenly Joseph, and come naked and empty of his, I hood
or own ability, and bring the right Benjamin that is in him, along with him,
then Joseph draws near him, and sees him, and commands his Steward, viz.
the Spirit of Power, to bring these Men into his house, viz. into his Humanity;
and then the Lamb of God shall be made ready, and these Men or the Life's
Essences of the right soul, shall eat at Joseph's Table with him at Noone,
(then it is Noone when the high Light of Grace, shines as at Noone or Midday
in the soul) and here Joseph's brethren are reconciled, when they eat with
Joseph, that is, with Christ, of his Food.

46. This Now is the Supper Apocalypse Rev. 19.9.
19. Here a Man casts away the Mantle, and becomes a Brother of Joseph, and
needs no more flattery or comforting of himself, but becomes a Christian in
Christ, who is dead with Christ to his sins and is become living in him, and
is risen again in him, and lives with him, eats with him at his Table, and
is no more a servant of sin, who must fear again, but who is Gal. 4.7.
a son in the House to whom the Inheritance belongs, according to the
Scriptures.

Genesis 43. from 17. to the 25.
47. And when Joseph's Steward had brought them into Joseph's house, they were
still afraid, and spoke to him before the door concerning the Money, which
they had found in their Sacks; but he comforted them and said, I found your
money and have had it; your God has bestowed Treasure in your Sacks; and he
brought Simeon out to them, and brought them into Joseph's house, and gave them
water to wash their feet, and gave their Asses Provender, but they prepared
their Present against Joseph should come at Noone; for they had heard that they
should Eat bread there.

48. This now is the figure and representation of a Troubled Man, who now
enters into Joseph's house, and gives again the unrighteous thing; for he
had done much unrighteousness and wrong, because he had nothing to give, he
gives it again with his heart before the house of Joseph in true Confession
and acknowledgement, and would feign give it back again with his hand, if he
were but able to do it; to such a one says Joseph's Steward, fear no more, I
have clearly received it in your Repentance, Christ has paid and restored it
for you in his blood, so that all is done away and nothing remaining, and you
are in poverty and misery, therefore keep that little which you have, to
cherish your life, though indeed you have it of wrong, and should have nothing
in this world for your own, yet God has given you Treasure; Take water and
wash your feet; that is, cleanse the Conversation of your hands and feet, and
do evil no more, keep not that which is unrighteous, but only that little,
which you have of right, wherewith you cannot repay the wrong.

49. Not so to understand it, that he should not restore again that which is
of wrong, of his own which he has rightly gotten besides Extortion, if he be
able; we speak of the poor, which has nothing but a piece of bread left to
sustain Life; no excuse avayleth before God, the Conscience must become pure,
or else thou art a Thief: for the figure here adds, that the Steward gave
their Asses provender, which signifies the Earthly Body, that Christ will by
his Steward cause provender and food to be given to it.

50. These Stewards here, are honest and virtuous people in the world, which
shall help to take care of it, that it may live, and though he were formerly a
wicked Man, if he were now honest from his heart.

51. Not as the false wicked world judges, who know a fault in a Converted
Man, which he has had, and still always upbraid him and condemn him for an
unrighteous Man, which Devillishnes the world is full of, that if they see a
Man, who is Converted, they cast all faylings and infirmities which every one
has in flesh and blood, upon him and judge him for it, and look upon what he
has been, and not upon what he now is. Here says Christ: Matthew. 7.1.
Judge not, and then you shall not be judged.

52. Genesis 43.26, 27, 28.
Now when Joseph entered into the house, they brought him the Present in their
hands, and fell down before him to the Earth; but he saluted them friendly and
said; is it well with your father the old Man, whom ye told me of, does he yet
live; and they answered: it is well with thy servant our father, and he yet
lives: and so they bowed and fell down before him.

53. This now is the State and Condition of the Soul when it comes plainly
before the Eyes of God, and has wrapped its Present up in the Sufferings and
Death of Christ, and bears it in its hands with the figure of the
Nayle-Prints of Christ, in the presence of God: that is to say, the will to
Righteousness, Truth, Chastity, Love, Patience, Hope, Faith, Meeknes; these
are now in the will of the soul, and these the soul gives to the heavenly
Joseph, and falls down before him in humility.

54. But this Joseph Saluteth the soul, that is, he speaks or inspireth his
word of Grace into it, and parlyeth friendly in the Conscience with it,
concerning the old Adamicall Jacob of its Life, and says: does he yet live,
that is, if he be still living and not quite dead, there shall well be a Remedy
for him; at which the soul rejoices and says; it is well with thy servant my
father, and he yet Lives.

55. Genesis 43.29, 30, 31.
And Joseph lift up his Eyes and saw his brother Benjamin, his Mothers son
and said; is that your youngest Brother that you have told me of, and said
further: God be gracious to thee my son; and Joseph made have away; for his
heart burnt within him toward his brother, and sought where to weep, so he
went into his Chamber and wept there; and when he had washed his Face, he went
forth and carried himself boldly and said: Set bread on the Table.

56. This now is that Excellent Type or Image, as is abovementioned; when
Benjamin, that is the most Inward Ground, wherein lie the Grace-Gates of
Paradise, is manifested before the eyes of Christ, in whom the great Compassion
kindles it self; then God in Christ Speaks in or inspireth the Living
Compassion, as here Joseph into Benjamin when he said; God be gracious to thee
my son: This weeping of the heavenly Joseph, kindles this faded Paradisicall
Image again with this weeping humility of Christ, so that, from Christ's
weeping into this Image the Eternal Joy rises up: and then Christ sets
Bread upon the Table, that this Image may Eat with him.

57. And Moses says further; And they served Joseph apart, Genesis 43.32.
and them apart; and the Egyptians that did Eat with him, apart also; for the
Egyptians dare not eat bread with the Hebrews, for it is an Abomination to
them, and they placed them before him, the first according to his priority of
Birth, and the youngest according to his youth, and they Marvailed amongst
themselves, and they carried them Or, Messes.
food from his Table: but Benjamines was five times as much as the other, and
they drank and were merry in drinking plentifully with him.

58. This figure is now the secretest Ground and highest Mystery of all between
God and Man, although it appear outwardly as if Joseph would thus hide
himself before his brethren, as if he were not an Hebrew of their Progeny;
yet the Spirit has here set down so deep a Mystery, that no Reason can
discern it.

59. For Joseph in this place stands in the figure of Christ, who has food
apart, John 4.32.34.
whereof they know nothing, as it is to be seen at Jacobs well, when his
Disciples called him to Eat; then said he; I have food which you know nothing
of, which is to do the will of him that sent me: for the Heathen Woman's Faith
was his Food.

60. Christ according to the Eternal Word of the Deity eats not of the
substance of Heaven, as a Creature, but of the humane Faith and earnest Prayer,
and the souls of Men Praising God, are his Food, which the Eternal Word that
became Man, eats, as apart, which appertains to no Man or any other
Creature, neither can they eat it, and when he eats the Faith and Prayer,
together with the praise of God, from our souls, then the Humane Faith
together with the Prayer and praising God, becomes Substantial in the word of
power, and is of one and the same Substance with the Substance of the heavenly
corporeity of Christ, all alike to the only Body of Christ, God and Substance,
viz. God, Man, and Substance, all one.

61. This Substance, (which is one and the same Substance with the assumed,
humanity, from us, wherein he has shed his Blood, which is alike of a Divine
and humane Substantiality, viz. Supernatural flesh and Blood, and then also of
the humane Creatures flesh and Blood except the Earthlines of our humanity) he
gives this now to the humane Faith again to be eaten and drunk.

62. For, Faith in the desire of its hunger, is the Mouth, which sucketh and
receives it in, in which impression catching and receiving, Faith eats and
drinks Christ's flesh and Blood, which eating and drinking is apprehended and
kept in the inward Paradisicall Image, which faded in Adam, and became living
again in Christ, wherein the humane Paradisicall Substance and Christ's flesh
and Blood, are entirely one Substance, and continues so Eternally; which
inward Man, is now no more called Adam, but Christ, viz. being a Member of the
Body and Substance of Christ, wherein is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and Gods
holy Word is therein Substantially, and it is a Resemblance of the
unconceiveable or non-imagible Deity.
form or Image of the Imagelesse Deity; viz. the Imaged Word of God, an
Answering exactly as a Man's face does in a Glass.
Express reflex Image of God.

63. And this now is the signification of the figure, that they served Joseph
apart, and his brethren also apart; that still there is a difference between
Christ and his Eating, and Man and his Eating, the difference is not as to the
Creaturely humanity of Christ from us, but between the un-formed Eternal Word
in him, wherein the Total God is operatively and generatively, not shut up and
separated, but Expressive in full Omnipotence, not creaturely but Divine.

64. But in us Men, so far as Man in his participation has any thing of God
and Christ in his own Substance, the Word is formed and Substantial, and this
formed Substantial Word eats again of the formed word of God, viz. of
Christ's flesh and Blood, Col. 2.9.
wherein yet also the un-formed Word together with the whole fulness of the
Deity dwells.

65. But the humane Creature, has it not in his own participation or
possession of self, as it is in Christ Jesus, but as a vessel and habitation
of God, after that manner by way of similitude, as fire possesses Iron and
Makes it all of a light fire.
illustrateth it, that it come to be all of a fire, and yet it has not the
Fire in its own power or authority, for if the fire go out, the Iron then
remains to be dark Iron, or as the Sun presses and penetrateth through an
herb, and puts forth it self together in the herb and becomes Substantial,
and yet the Suns Spirit remains to be only a power and virtue in the
herb, and the Corpus or Body of the herb, does not come to be Sun, thus
also is it to be understood between God, and Man.

66. But that Moses says: And they served the Egyptians also apart, for the
Egyptians dare not eat Bread with the Hebrews, has also its figure; though
it might well be so outwardly in it self, that they have not dared to Eat
with them, which we leave unquestionably in its own worth, as also all other
things, we leave it standing in a History, but we would only clear and
explain the meaning and understanding, wherefore the Spirit of God has caused
it to be deciphered so narrowly, curiously, exactly, and punctually.

67. Now when we will search out this, we must take into Consideration, a
Natural Adamicall Man, of what kind Progeny or Name soever he is, whether
Heathen, Turk, Or Mouth-Christian.
verbal or Titulary Christian, or Jew, here they are all alike and no
otherwise: all these dare not Eat with a right true Christian, as, viz. with
Joseph's Brethren; But why? because they have not a Mouth to eat such food
withal, their Mouth is yet shut up to them, and they cannot eat the Food of
Christ's Body, they are an Abomination to it, and have a loathing against it: as
we see that it is an Abomination to the Jews, Turks and Heathens, that a
Christian says; Joh. 6.53.
He eats Christ's flesh and drinks his Blood.

68. So also it is an abomination to the Titulary Christendom, one part of
which believes not the Substantial participation and feeding upon the Body of
Christ, but will have it merely Spiritual; The other part will have the Mouth
of the Adamicall Mortal Man full of it, and therewith comprehend and receive
it: And so there is no right knowledge or understanding in either part: and they
sit at Table, but without knowing any thing as the Brethren of Joseph did, who
knew not Joseph, where indeed their Faith feeds, but their understanding
knows not Joseph in his Or, Mess of food.
feast or Banquett.

69. Now then says Reason: seeing the Jews Turks and Ignorant unknowing
Heathen have no Mouth to eat such food with, and that Christ says: Joh. 6.53.
Whosoever Eats not the flesh of the Son of Man, he has no life in him;
therefore they must all of them be Damned: O Israel, how blind art thou
here, and know as little as they, or as Joseph's Brethren knew of Joseph.

70. The Turks Jews and Strange Nations, whose desire and prayer goes to the
Only God, have indeed a Mouth but not so as a Christian has; for as the
Desire, viz. the Mouth, is, such is also the Food in the Mouth; They desire
the Spirit of God, and such is also their Eating, in that manner as before
Christ's humanity, in the Father and the Son, viz. in the Word.

71. But a Christian has an incarnate Mouth: for the Or, Soulish.
Souls Desire, or much more the Substantial Christ or Christus, viz. the
Virgin Sophia has a Mouth from the Substantial Word; but the other have one
from the un-substantiall Word; they desire Or, to be like God the Father: our
heavenly Father.
the property of God the Father, viz. of the Only God, and they do apprehend
it also. But here Grace is not manifest.

72. But seeing Joh. 6.37.
the Father has given Man to his Son Christ, as Christ says, and has
manifested the Grace in Christ, and inviteth them all in Christ, and that there
is no Salvation Or, out of him
without Christ; therefore he gives to them also the Earnest crying prayer,
which Christ receives from his Father, and apprehends it in himself and
eats it, and fills them with his Humanity, Suffering, Death, and shedding
of his Blood, and so they are with their spirit in Christ Substantially, but in
themselves as hidden to them.

73. For they desire not any way the flesh of the Son of Man, and therefore
they have not in their Selfhood any Mouth for Christ's flesh and Blood, for they
have no desire to it, but with their Spirit they are Substantially in Christ:
But their inward in Adam faded Paradisicall Humanity, wherein the incorporated
Grace in Paradise, lies, remains hidden in them and without a stirring Life.

74. For Christ dwells not Substantially therein, as in a true Christian: But
their Faiths Substance is hidden in Christ to the Day of the Restoration of
that which is lost in Adam, when their Paradisicall Image, which is not
manifested in this Time, will put on their Faiths Substance, in Gods bestowed
Grace, which proceeds from one upon all, out of Christ's Spirit; for that
Incorporated Grace, viz. the inspoken or inspired Word stands also in them,
and pants after Christ's Substantiality.

75. But seeing their Substantiality is in the Word, without this place, state
and Condition, in Christ, where Christ in himself fullfilleth their Faith to
God, therefore also will their substantial Faith in God put on that
incorporated word in the Paradisicall Image, together with the same at the
Revelation or Manifestation of Jesus Christ; Note, how Salvation is not of our
selves, but of Grace in us.
and heerewith also the whole Man.

76. For the Scripture says; Ephesians. 2.8.
Of Grace are ye saved, and that not of your selves, not by your knowing, but
through Gods Mercy and Compassion. It lies not in knowing, as if the knowing
could receive Christ, but it lies in the Gift, viz. in the Grace, which Christ
gives to the unknowing into their Faith in God, as well as to the knowing into
their Desire, it is done to both, of Grace.

77. For Adam went forth from the Only God into self, into ignorance, and
lead us all with him into that Ignorance, but Grace came again from that only
God, and offers it self to all Ignorant unknowing persons, Heathens as well
as Jews.

78. Among the Jews stood the Image or Type of Grace in the Figure,
signifying, how Grace would receive Man again. But now the Fathers of the
figure, viz. the Jews had no more part in the Grace, viz. those among whom the
Image or Type had not manifested it self, for the prefiguration and Type
pointed at Christ; The Jews pressed with their Faith and Prayer, through the
Prefiguration into the only Grace, which was in God, which God bestowed upon
Adam and his children; But the Heathen, which had not the Law, and yet believed
without Circumcision, in the only promised Grace of God, they pressed without
the Type or Prefiguration into the Grace.

79. For the Ability was given to the one People as well as to the other, no
People could of themselves, but the Grace took the Will for the Ability, and
gave them ability and power alike, the Jews and the faithful Heathen: But
Infidelity and not willing was both with the Jews and Heathen, their
Damnation, in that they withheld their wills in self and in Hardening, and went
a whoring after other Gods: thus, the Circumcision and Sacrifices were not the
Jews Salvation, but Grace, which they represented in such figures pointing at
the Humanity of Christ, when the Grace would fulfill the future; the future
fullfilling was their Salvation.

80. Thus also at present the Christians have the figure of Grace under the
Gospel in the fullfilling: not that they can receive the fullfilling in
selfe-power and ability, but the fullfilling of the Grace tendereth it to them,
if they will give up themselves thereinto, and the Mouth is given to them in
the Grace.

81. But the other bend their wills toward the Grace of God, which is even the
same Grace with the Christians, and no more; but the Substantial Grace in the
Image of the fullfilling, they know not; But the Grace takes their willing
with the desire into it, and gives the desire in the Grace, a Mouth, which is
hidden to the Creature, till the day of the Revelation of JESUS Christ.

82. Therefore there is no other difference between them, but the Substantial
Stirring in the Paradisicall Image, the Paradisicall Image not having yet put
on Christ in Substance, as it is with the true Christians, and yet their Faith
in the Grace of God in Christ, is Substantial, yet not in the humane own
possession of self, but in God who fullfilleth all things, and is and dwells
through all things; thus the Substantial Grace is near the faithful or
Believing Jews and Turks, and in them, but as to the Creature not apprehended.

83. They have Christ in them, but they apprehend him not, unless their will
enter into the Substantial Grace of Christ, and then Christ manifests
himself in their Creature, as well as in Christians; But the Grace in Christ
is laid by the faithful believing Jews and other People, for it moves
through them, and their will to God is in it, and walks therein.

84. A Titulary Christian without the Divine Will is further from it, then a
Believing Jew, Turk, and Heathen, or whosoever he be that puts his trust in
God, and gives up his will to God; such a one is nearer, and will Condemn the
Titulary Christian, in that he boasts of knowing and comfort himself with
the Grace, but continues in his evil will and desire without Grace, and will
set the wicked man up in the Grace of God.

85. Thou say thus: The strange Nations are not Baptized into Christ,
therefore they are not Children to the Grace of the Covenant, neither. Answer.
If Circumcision were alone salvation, then were Baptism so also, for the one
is as the other, but God requires that a Jew should be Circumcised inwardly in
Heart. Circumcision was but the Type or Image, showing how Christ would Cut off
sin, which Type Christ has fullfilled: Thus also the Spirit of Christ
Batheth, Steepeth or soaketh into the Grace and quickneth a Sprout.
Baptizeth with this Covenant in the Paradisicall Image, in the Incorporated
Grace, and kindles an Ember.

86. But it requires an Ens of Faith, which is capable of the Or, Steeping.
Baptism, which comes from the Parents, and through the Earnest Prayer of
those which are conversant about the work, else the Covenant is despised, and
there is no Circumcision of the Heart and Spirit: for the power and authority
wherewith the Holy Ghost baptizeth consists not in Man, but in God; whosoever
despises his Covenant and manageth it not with earnest and with Circumcised
hearts, those he baptiseth into his Anger; as Saint Paul says concerning the
Supper of Christ, that the wicked receive it to Judgment.

87. A wicked Priest has not power and authority to Baptize with the Holy
Ghost, he has only the Water, and is himself incapable of the Office; but
the Ens of the Child, and the Believing Parents, and those who require and
promote the work, their Earnestness and Prayer reach forth the Covenant with
their Faiths desire to the Baptized Infant.

88. But the wicked Priest is no more profitable in it, then the Funtstone that
holds the Water; thus he brings only the Water and the Ceremonies, which a
Turk can do, without Faith or Believing.

89. But a stranger that has not the Baptism, and knows nothing thereof,
becomes in his Faith, Circumcised in Heart, and the Holy Ghost soaketh into
his Faiths desire, and baptizeth him unto the Revelation of JESUS Christ, when
his Faith shall also put on the Substantial Covenant in the Grace.

90. O Babell, how blind art thou? How have thy Clergy or Men Ordained and in
Orders set themselves in Christ's Stead; but they all serve not Christ, but
themselves to their fleshly honor. O Babell convert, the Door is open, else
thou will be spewed out; the Time is borne, else thou will be set before the
Light and proved, and then thou will stand in shame before all people.

91. Further, the Spirit of God has yet a powerful figure in this Text, in
that Joseph caused his brethren to be set before him according to the order of
their Birth, and caused his Brother Benjamin to be served with five times more
then the other. This prefigureth to us first, the difference in the Kingdom of
Christ, showing how they shall be unlike in the regeneration, as St Paul says
concerning it, 1 Cor. 15.41.
They shall Excel one another in Clarity.
Glory, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars do.

92. For there it will avayle nothing to have been a King, Prince, Lord, Noble
or Learned, but he that has had the Greatest power and virtue in him, who
shall have attained Grace in the Name of Jesus the Most clearly in his
wrestling of Repentance, he will be greatest there: for these Orders and
Degrees, signify to us, that they will be unlike in the Divine Exaltation,
viz. in the power and virtue, as the Angels excel one another in power,
virtue, beauty, and brightness.

93. But that Benjamin had five times more food served to him, points in the
figure at the inward Man, for Benjamin stands in the Figure thereof, being he
is Joseph's Brother, and Joseph here stands in the figure of Christ:
therefore it belongs to the Inward Man to Eat of his brother Christ's food
from his five wounds: this is that which this precious figure signifies here,
as may be seen.

94. But that the Spirit says, they drank and were all filled with drinking,
signifies that in the Kingdom of Christ there is an universal Common
participation and Joy, and in that there is no difference, because in such
difference they shall all rejoice in one God; for their drinking fully
signifies here, the Eternal Joy, where, in this Joy we shall be as it were
drunk, and then will the inward Man, drink and Eat of the sweet Grace which
is manifested in Christ's five wounds, and h^ereby give it into the fiery soul,
which in its fiery Essence, will in this sweetness awaken the Triumph of
divine Joyfulnes, and heerwith will the Noble Sophia* the divine wisdom.
Bride refresh its Bridegroom, viz. the soul.

CHAP. LXXI. How Joseph caused his Brethrens Sacks to be filled, and the Money
to be laid uppermost in their Sacks, as also his Cup in Benjamins Sack, and
Caused them to be pursued and charged with Theft: What is thereby to be
understood.
Upon the 44 Chapter of Genesis.
MOses says: And Joseph commanded his Steward and said, fill the Men's Sacks
with food, as much as they can carry, Genesis XLIV. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and lay every one his Money uppermost in his Sack, and lay my silver Cup
uppermost in the Sack of the youngest, with the Money for the Corn: And the
Steward did as Joseph had said unto him. On the morrow when it was light, he
let the Men go with their Asses, and when they were not come far out from the
City, Joseph said to his Steward; up and pursue after the Men, and when you
have overtaken them, say thus unto them: Why have you requited Evil for Good,
is it not that out of which my Lord drinks, and wherewith he Or, Divineth.
prophesies; Ye have done ill* and when he overtooke them, he spoke such words
to them.

2. Now a Christian stands in this figure, signifying, that when he is come
to this in right Earnestnes into the Image in the Trial on the path of Christ's
Pilgrimage, in this world, how God exercises and purges him, for this is the
way and process on the path of Christ's Pilgrimage, and how God carries
himself, and the world also, toward the Creaturely Reason of Man; for we see
in this Image, how God, when the Repentant Man is in the true earnestnes,
fills his Sack, viz. the Mind and Conscience in the life's properties with
his Grace, and lays Psalm. 116.13
the Cup of salvation, viz. the true and right silver Cup, viz. the John 18.11.
Cup of Christ, out of which he drank in his Suffering, uppermost in the Sack
of the filled Grace, out of which a Christian must drink also, and follow
Christ in his contempt.

3. For Joseph's Cup, out of which he drank, with which he Prophesies or
Divineth; is in this figure no other, but the Cup of the Testament of Christ
before his suffering, of which he drank with his Disciples, and whereby he
divined or prophesied concerning his Eternal Kingdom, and that whosoever
would drink of this Cup, should with him divine and prophecy Upon, into o^
concerning.
to the Eternal Life.

4. But this figure shows the Great Earnestnes, signifying how this Cup
should be bestowed upon Gods children, and what that Wine is, which they must
drink of out of it; for first Joseph sends his Steward after them, and bids
him tell them, they had stolen his Cup, and was churlish toward them, when as
yet they were not Guilty: so also when a Christian has his Sack filled with
this food, then will Christ's Cup be laid in for him: These now the wrath of God
sifteth in the humane Nature, as to their souls and as to the mortal Body,
and says to the Conscience; thou have not rightly gotten this Cup, by the
right of Nature; thou have stolen it out of Gods house from his Grace and
power; Mat. 11.12.
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence heerin, and thou have done violence
and gotten this Cup to thee into thy Sack, thou have not Grace by the right of
Nature, thou will needs walk back with this Cup in peace on these Paths.

5. But no, it will not avayle thee, if thou will take Christ's Grace in thee
along, then thou must take on thee also his Suffering, Dying, Scorn,
Persecution and Misery, and suffer thy self to be continually reproached in
the world for a false wicked man, and to suffer thy self to be accounted a Or,
Knave.
wicked person by the Pharisaicall Hypocrisy, as one that has stolen their
Cup and taken it away by violence, in that he will no more kneel down before
the Great Babylonish Whore, who has presented a Cup full of Hypocrisy and
Blasphemy, and quaffe of their Cup; and then reproach they him for a wicked
person, who has stolen their Cup and Authority from them, and run after him
and would murder him, and damn him to temporal and Eternal Death, and
reproach him without ceasing for a treacherous person, who has stolen their
Cup.

6. That is, when a true Christian obteineth the Cup of Christ, and drinks
out of it, then comes the Anger of God in the fleshly Evil Nature, as also
the Devil and the Evil world, and set upon him on every side, because he has
this Cup in his Habitation, and Prophesies or Divineth against them, that they
have the Cup of Whoredom and Abomination in them, and because he reveals it,
and will not quaffe with them in their Cup of Hypocrisy and Blasphemy.

7. And then must a Christian lay down his Sack of Gods Grace at their Feet,
and suffer himself to be bound and captivated in their Scorning and
Contemning, and then they oftentimes bereave him of Body and Life, honor and
welfare, and set him with his Cup before their Judgment; and there a Christian
must drink out of their Cup, the derision, Cross, Suffering, and Death of
Christ, and Imitate and follow Christ in this Cup, and not go home again so
in Peace with his filled Sack of the Grace of Christ, through this world, into
his Eternal Or, Native Country.
Country of his Father, he must be Phil. 3.10. Romans 8.29.
conformable to Christ's Image, and follow him in his way which he has walked
in this world: this is powerfully prefigured in this figure.

8. For Joseph's Brethren stood now in the figure of a Converted Christian, whom
God has clothed with Christ, and also, laid in the Cup of the Cross,
together with Grace, and moreover uppermost, in the Sack; to signify, that,
when the Grace of Christ, which is bestowed on a Christian, shall work and
bring forth fruit, that it is not done in standing still, in peace and
quietness, but in the Strife about this Cup, for it lies uppermost in the
Sack of Grace, and the Strife about the Cup must always be the forerunner of
it.

9. For Christ says; Mat. 10.34: Luke 12.51.
The Son of Man is not come to establish peace on the Earth, but strife and
persecution, that one be against another and persecute him. Also, Luke 12.49.
He has kindled a fire, and desires it should Burn. And this is it, that a
true Christian must always be spoken against, even Mich. 7.6.
Those of his own family in flesh and Blood must be his Enemies, that the
sown and planted Tree of Pearl, may stir and bring forth fruit.

10. As an Earthly Tree, must stand in Heat, Cold and Wind, and have great
Strokes and opposition, whereby the sap is drawn out of the Earth into the
Tree, so that it blossometh and bears fruit: thus also the poor soul, in
such smitings and opposition, in scorn and misery must draw power and virtue
into it self out of the bestowed and entrusted Grace, viz. out of the soil
and field of the word of God with earnest prayer and working, and thereby bear
the fruit of Faith, viz. Good Doctrine, Instruction and Conversation.

11. For thereby the Soul feeds the Spirit of Christ, and Christ feeds the
soul again out of the Sack of the Substantial Grace, viz. with his flesh of
the Substantial Wisdom of God; and thus they give themselves one to another,
to a perpetual working.

12. And we see heerby, how even the wicked must serve God in the working of
his Grace, for he is its stormy wind; and his Cursing and Blasphemy against
Gods Children, is the heat and cold, wherewith God stirs his little plant
of Pearl in his Children, so that it hungreth after heavenly Sap, and draws
it into it self and grows; and this is that which Christ said, Luke 12.49.
He came to set up Strife on the Earth: for Christ's Kingdom is a Strife
against Hell and the Devil, Christ striveth without ceasing in his Children
and Members, with Satan, about the Kingdom.

13. For in the Earthly Man lies yet the Ground of the Serpent, viz. a
Habitation of Satan, wherein Satan withstandeth the Kingdom of Christ: So
also on the Contrary the Kingdom of Christ in Grace withstandeth the Kingdom
of Satan, with the Cup of Christ, and this Strife continues always while the
Earthly Body continues.

14. For thus Gods Anger works in the Love, that the Love, viz. the Eternal
One, and Eternal Good, might be distinguishable, perceptible, and discernible;
for in Strife and opposite will, the Profundity or Abyss, viz. the Eternal
One, which is without Nature and Creature, is Manifest.

15. And therefore God has introduced himself with his holy Word of Powers
into Nature and Creature, as also into Pain and Torment, into Light and
Darkness, that the Eternal power of his Word in the Wisdom, together with
the Expressed Word, might be distinguishable and perceptible, that knowledge
might be.

16. For without this, the knowledge of the Eternal One would not be manifest,
neither would there be any Joy; and though it were in being, yet it would not
be manifest to it self; thus it manifests it self through the introduction
into Nature, through the Seperability or Distinguibility of the Speaking;
whereby the Speaking brings it self into properties, and the properties into
opposition or Contrariety of will, and so through the Opposition, the Eternal
Good, which brings it self along in the Word of the Speaking, into
distinguibility, becomes distinguishable, Creaturely and Imagible, Imaginable,
or Comprehensible.
Conceivable.

17. Else if the Evil in the contrary will were not profitable, God, viz. the
Eternal only Good, would not endure it, but Or, make (...) to be Nothing.
annihilate it: but thus it serves to the Manifestation of the Glory of God,
and the Kingdom of rejoicing, and it is an Instrument of God, whereby he
makes his Good Imagible, Representable, or discernable.
Conceivable, that the Good may be known: for if there were no Evil, then the
Good would not be known.

18. If there were no Anger-Fire, there could be also no Light-Fire, and the
Eternal Love would be hidden, for there would be nothing that could be Loved;
thus the Love of God has an occasion of Love, for it loves the dereliction of
that which is forsaken, viz. the weakness; that The Love it self.
it also might be Great.

19. For, Gods Love comes only to help the weak, lowly, humble, destitute,
forlorn, and forsaken, and not those that go on in the might and strength of
the Fire, not the Might of self, but the Impotency and that which is forsaken;
whatsoever is lowly, disregarded, humble and destitute, in that, Love works
and dwells therein.

20. For Love in its own property is nothing else, but the Divine humility out
of the profundity or ground of the Eternal One; Love seeks nor desires any
thing but the One, for it self is the One; viz. the Eternal Nothing, and yet
is through All, and in All, but the appropriation of self-will, is a Nothing
to it.

21. Therefore all is foolish and esteemed evil and base, in the sight of Gods
Love, whatsoever wills in its own self Ability: though it may well be
profitable, as whereby the willing of nothing manifests it self, yet it is
in the fight of the willing of Nothing, only a Phantasey, viz. a Sport of its
own driving on, and tormenting it self.

22. For that which wills nothing, but only that out of which it is
proceeded, that has no torment in it self; for that, to it self, is Nothing,
but is, only to that, out of which it is proceeded, it stands submissive to
its Maker that made it, he may cause it to be Something or Nothing: and thus it
is one and the same thing with the Eternal One: for it tormenteth not it
self, it loves not it self, it feels not it self in its own will: for it
has no will of its own, but is given up to the Total or universal.

23. As we see, that the four Elements stand in such a will; they are four,
and yet but one; for the four stand in one Ground, and the Ground is neither
hot nor cold, neither moist nor dry: it is that One Element, an unperceptible
Life: but thus it would not be manifested to it self; Therefore God has
stirred it up, and exhaled and unfolded it out of himself, that there might be
opposition to it self, and might perpetually stand in strife, that the One
might be manifested in Multiplicity.

24. But heerin neither of them destroys the other that it should cease to
be, and be nothing, but that which is overpowered stands still to that which
has overpowered it, the heat to the cold, or the cold to the heat, and there
is no self possession or willing, but one Element wills the other, that the
other may be manifest, and when it it manifest, then it gives it self to the
strongest in the Stirring, and so there is a strife, and yet the greatest Love
between them: for, in regard of the Love struggling, it is, that the strife and
willing or stirring arises.

25. Therefore Man in respect of his own willing, is an Enemy to himself: if
he did give his will to God, and did yield to him, then God would will through
him, and with him, and his willing were Gods willing: But seeing he loves his
own willing, and not that which has given him the williing; it is a twofold
Injury.

26. One in respect of the own willing, that he will not hold still to the
Original and Ground of his willing, and be one and the same thing with it, as
the four Elements do all give up their willing into the Ground, out of which
they proceed; and move, and will according to the same.

27. A second is, that he breaks off his Love from the Love of the Abyss,
and loves himself, and forsakes the Love that has given him his Love; and
himself wills, goes, runs, cares, and looks after many things, and
breaks himself off from the Unity: therefore he runs on in his own will
in the forms or qualities of Nature and the four Elements; as also in the
Multiplicity of the Essences of the Or, Positures of the Stars.
Constellations in mere unquietnes.

28. And the unquietnes brings into Anxiety, and the Anxiety stands in the
desire of his will, and the desire includes and over-shadoweth it self, so
that it is dark in it self, and cannot see it self: therefore the self-will
runs on in mere dark Anxiety, and vexes it self in the desire, and
seeks the Love in the Desire, and yet finds nothing therein, but the Form,
quality, or condition.
Image of the four Elements which the desire it self makes; thus the will
serves its Images, and loves the Image in it self, and that is the greatest
folly which Nature has brought forth, and yet it is the Instrument, whereby
the highest Wisdom is made Manifest.

29. O ye Men, who count your selves wise, and receive honor one from another,
in respect of your Self-love and your own will; how Mad are ye in the sight
of Heaven! your own honor which your selves seek, is a stink in the presence
of the only Love of God; But he that seeks another and honors and loves
him, he is one thing with the Total: For when he seeks and loves his
Brother, then he introduces his love into the Members of his Body, and is
Loved, sought, and found of him, who made the first Man out of his Word, and is
but one Man with all Men, viz. with the first Adam, but one in all his Members;
as also with the second Adam, Christ, but one.

30. For, God gave Man but one will, that he should will only what God would;
God would have the World and the Creatures to be, and that he would by and out
of his Word, this should Man also will through that same Word, as that Word
would have it, so also should Man also will to have it be; God Created all
things in its own similitude or Image, by the Word and out of the Word; that
one should love another; so should Man also love his likeness and similitude.

31. For All Men are but the One Man Adam, God Created only him, and the other
Or, procreating which was farther to be done.
creating, he left to Man, that he should leave his will to God, and with God,
generate the other Men out of himself in that likeness; but when that was not
done, God cursed the power that was given to Man, so that the will of the
Creatures is opposite to him, seeing he would have them, to misuse them, and
would no more be a Lord of the Creatures, but mingleth his Love also with them,
whereupon the four Elements captivated him, and made him also a Beast as to
the Body: and thus now he runs on in the will of the Curse.

32. For he is Gods Image, but he Imageth, modelleth, o^ figureth.
fashioneth his will into a beastiall Image, and disturbeth the Order of God,
from what it was in the word of Creation: he suppresseth the right true will of
God, and sets his own will in the place; he is with his will, an Enemy to
all Creatures, and all Creatures are his Enemies.

33. And therefore must the divine will in Man be now borne again in such
anguish in the Opposite will, and the right divine will of the New Birth must
suffer it self to have the Enmity of all Creatures: and therefore, because Man
bears in his Body a Beastiall will, wherein the beastiall Opposite will,
together with the Curse, is manifested; and so now the Life in the Curse, is at
Enmity with the Life in the Peace, and will not suffer it in it self.

34. But if the Beastiall will in the flesh could be wholly broken and killed,
then the Curse would cease, and so no Creature could be at Enmity more.

35. But seeing this cannot be, therefore must Man stand in Strife, and endure
much evil to will in him from without, and to will much evil out from
himself, in and toward that which is without him, and so stands in strife
between evil and good, and in evil and good, and lives in the Strife of the
Elements, and also in the strife of his own willing that God gave him.

36. For he complains always, that wrong is done him, and yet himself is a
wrong will, and the right will which he obtains in the Regeneration, is not
his own natural willing, but it is the willing of the Grace of God, which is
manifested in his willing, which willing daily kills his natural willing,
and blames Man by Gods instrument with the children of the Anger openly.

37. Moses speaks further and says; Genesis 44.7, 8, 9, 10.
They answered him, and said, Wherefore speaks my Lord such words? It is far
from thy servants to do such a thing: Behold, the Money which we found aloft
in the Sack we have brought to thee again out of the Land of Canaan, how
should we then have stolen out of thy Lords house either Silver or Gold? He
with whom it is found among us thy servants, let him be put to Death; and
moreover, we will be the servants of my Lord: He said, let it be as ye have
spoken; He with whom it is found shall be my servant; but ye shall be quitt.

38. This Figure now shows, how the Conscience desires to Justify it self,
when it is apprehended by the wrath of Gods Anger, that either, when God with
his plagues in Nature, also many times in the hiding of his Graces, or through
the evil World, blames it, and represents it unrighteous, then it will
always Justify it self, that wrong is done it.

39. For if it have once turned toward Grace, and broken it self off from
ungodly Courses, then it thinks no Evil at all shall happen, God is bound to
protect it, and the world does it wrong, when it reproacheth it as wicked, it
ought no more to be subject to plagues and punishments, and it accounts that
honesty and Righteousness, whereby it steals Grace from God, and reckons it
for its own, as if it were no more Guilty of Sins.

40. Also it excuses it self toward the world, when the world will impute
Sins and Blasphemies to it, as if it were guilty, then it will needs dye, or
be put to death, or the like, as Joseph's brethren did who knew nothing of the
Theft, and did not understand neither, that all their unrighteousnes, and their
stealing of Joseph, when they stole him from their Father and sold him, stood
in the Sacks of Joseph's gifts, viz. were manifest before the Eyes of Joseph, so
that Joseph knew and understood their Theft, and therefore caused them to be
held for Thieves, and caused them to be pursued as Thieves, and fetched them
back again, and set them before the Judgment.

41. But in stead of their Theevery of their committed Sins, whereby they had
forfeited their Lives, Joseph caused his Silver Cup to be laid to the Gift in
their Sack, and caused them to be blamed for the Cup: which they would not
confess.

The Figure stands thus.
42. When a Man, as is abovementioned, becomes a true Christian, so that God
gives him his Grace, then he lays his Grace hiddenly in the Sack of his Body
in the Essences of Life; and moreover lays therein the Cup of the Cross, and
blames it no more in Conscience in respect of its manifold committed sins,
for he has utterly destroyed them with the Grace of forgiveness, and filled
the Sack of his sins with Grace for the hunger of the poor soul; but it
lays now the Cup of Christ to its Charge, that it is Guilty of that, viz. of
Christ's being scorned, also of his Suffering and Death, that he has brought
Christ to the Cross with his sins, that it is verily Guilty of the Cup of
Christ's Cross, and not wholly righteous.

43. For when God by his Grace forgiveth him the Mortal, deadly, or killing
sins.
sins unto Death, then he causes this Cup of Christ to be laid aloft in the
Sack; seeing Christ himself has the Guilt of these sins laid upon him, and
has taken them upon him, therefore now this Man is guilty of the Cup of
Christ's Cross, (in which Christ must taste and drink out the Anger of God in
Man) and Gods righteousness, requires of him, to enter into the suffering,
scorn, and Death of Christ, that he should dye with Christ, and give himself
up to his scorn, and suffer with Christ.

44. But seeing he cannot do that, and is too weak to enter into such
sufferings in the Anger of God, therefore has Grace put this Cup also into
him, that he might drink of Christ's victory, and Prophecy or Divine of Christ's
suffering and Death, and make them known.

45. But Gods righteousness, which now requires Man to be in the process of
Christ, viz. in Christ's Sufferings and Death, and yet finds him not always,
in his Conversation, and Will, therein; accuses him for a Thief* who carries
the Cup of Christ's Cross but as a Thief in the Sack of his Life's Essences,
and charge him of Theft, if he walk otherwise then in the Process and
Imitation of Christ.

46. For Christ has received Man into his Sufferings and Death, and turned
away the righteousness of Gods Anger, and introduced him with his Guilt of
Eternal Death, into his innocent Death; and is dead from the sins and
wickedness in himself, and in this dying of Christ, Gods righteousness in
the Anger, requires a Christian Man to be.

47. But if he walk out of this path and not in it, then says righteousness;
thou art a Thief, and have wrongfully got this Cup of Christ in thy Sack, I
will set thee before my Judgment and Sentence, as Joseph did to his brethren,
when he caused them to be fetched back to the sentence of his Judgment.

48. Therefore has a Christian who walks under the Banner of Christ's Cross,
no Excuse, when God by his Steward, viz. by the Children of this world causes
him to be laid hold on in the righteousness of his Anger, and charge him for
a Thief, and an unrighteous person; also for a Stranger, Innovator, Novice.
Novellist, Enthusiast, Fool, and the like, when Men load him with all his
faults, and the infirmities of natural sinful flesh, and without ceasing
blame him as wicked and unrighteous, and condemn him to the damnation of the
temporal and Eternal Death; and though he is not in the sight of the world,
nor as to the world, Guilty, yet he is liable to bear the scorn, suffering,
and death of Christ after him, as a Christian, and is liable to take upon him
the whole process in the footsteps of Christ, and to follow Christ therein,
and to suffer all, in Christ, and wholly to put on Christ in his derision,
contempt, suffering, and death, and to bear his Cross and scorn after him,
that he may enter into Christ's Kingdom, as a Member of the body of Christ,
that has suffered with him, and has daily dyed to the Anger of God in the
Death of Christ, from his actual sins.

49. For, All Sins, Blasphemies, and untruths, which are imputed to him
wrongfully from the world, which he is not outwardly Guilty of in the fact,
that, he suffers in the process of Christ, as a Christian, and therein
drinks out of the Cup of Christ's Cross, who has innocently suffered for his
sins.

50. For if he be not guilty of them in his Life, yet he is guilty of them in
the inherited sin, and has inherited them also in the seed out of which he
is proceeded, they lie in his Ground of his Nature and Heart.
Ground; he cannot excuse himself before God, in the process of Christ, he is
guilty of all Adamicall sins.

51. But this is his Comfort that God manifests them by the children of his
Anger in this world, and so, as a Curse, by the Children of Anger, fastneth
them to the Cross of Christ, and in this Manifestation drowneth them in him in
the Blood and Death of Christ, in that he still cleaves to God, as Christ to
his Father, and suffered himself to be accused of sins which he had not
committed, but had only inherited them, and so they were taken from him, and
given to the Anger of God in his Judgment that he might condemn them.

52. For thus also Joseph in this figure appeased his just Anger, toward his
Brethren; they were all Guilty toward him, but he charged them not with their
Guilt, but charged them only with his Cup, for he had clearly forgiven them
all their Trespasses: but only concerning the Cup he would not hold them
Guiltless, and yet of right they were not Guilty of it; but he had laid it in,
as his bounty, and made them guilty of it.

53. Thus also has God given us his Grace of mere Love, after that we were
clearly guilty of Eternal Judgment, and has laid Christ and Grace in the
Sack of our Life, with his Suffering and Death, with his Cup of the Cross,
concerning which he does not hold us Guiltless, we are all Guilty thereof,
and have not this by a Natural right, but it is laid into us without our
knowledge; therefore we cannot release our selves of it, except we cast
Christ wholly from us, and give our selves again to the Anger of God, and then
Death, Hell, and the Anger of God make us Guilty, and hold us captive in them;
but at present Man may lay hold on which he will.

54. But that Joseph caused the Cup to be thrust into his Brother Benjamins
Sack, it has this figure; that Christ dwells in the inward Man, viz. in his
Paradisicall brother, and has this Cup of the Cross in his Hand, out of which
the guilty soul and the Body must drink, he thrusts it into his brothers
sack, for that inward ground is his Brother, but the other brethren must drink
of it, this brother of Christ holds it in him, for he is Christ's Member and
habitation.

55. Therefore says Joseph's Steward, by whomsoever the Cup is found, he shall
be my servant, but ye shall be quitt; viz. the inward ground, the true Joseph's,
viz. Christ's brother, he is Christ's servant, who serves his Lord and brother,
and must hold the Cup in his Sack: the other Conditions or qualities,
forms of Life of Nature are free, and cannot hold the Cup for Christ.

56. For they are not the right Sack to put it in, but the Ground of the
Heavenly Worlds Substance is the Sack to which the Holy Cup of Christ does
belong, which powers the Ground of Nature out of it: therefore must Joseph's
Brother be made guilty of the Cup, because he stood in the figure of the inward
Man, wherein Christ would manifest himself with his Cup of the Cross, and so
the other brethren, viz. the poor soul together with the body be quitt and
released from the Guilt.

57. Therefore says Joseph's Steward, he is my servant who has the Cup, he
shall serve me, but ye shall be quitt; that is, Christ is in this inward
Benjamin Joseph's Brother, and serves God with overcoming of Death, and the
Anger of God in Man, and so all the other brethren, viz. the Natural Life,
shall be quitt from Guilt and Pain: and it stands excellently in the Figure.

58. Moses says further; Genesis 44.11, 12, 13.
And they hastened, and laid every one his sack off on to the Earth, and every
one took his Sack off, and searched, and began at the Eldest and so to the
youngest; and there they found the Cup in Benjamins Sack: and then they rent
their Clothes, and loaded every one his Ass, and went again into the City.

59. When Adam was fallen into sin, then the Law and Command fetched him back
again, and charged him with the sin and Theft, that he had eaten of the
wrong fruit with a wicked mouth, therefore must he return again into the
City, viz. into the Earth, out of which the body was proceeded, and there lay
down his Sack into the Earth, and there Gods righteousness searches into all
the natural Properties, viz. Truth and righteousness, which avails before
God, viz. the Image of Heaven; and began from the first form of Nature, and so
on to the youngest and last, viz. to the incorporated Ground of Grace after the
Fall, and cannot find this Cup of Salvation in any natural property, although
the Body goes quite to powder in the Searching, all but the youngest brother in
the inspoken or inspired Word of Grace; in that lies the Cup of Joseph and of
Christ; this the Spirit prefigureth powerfully in this figure.

60. Moses says further; Genesis 44.14, 15, 16, 17.
And Judah went with his brethren into Joseph's house, for he was there still,
and they fell down before him on the earth: But Joseph said to them: How have
ye dared to do this thing, know ye not that such a man as I am can find it
out; Judah spoke and said, what shall we say unto my Lord? How shall we
speak? and wherein can we justify our selves? God has found out the
Misdeede of thy servants: behold here, we and he with whom the Cup is found,
are the servants of my Lord: but he said; that be far from me to do such a
thing, the Man with whom the Cup is found, he shall be my servant, but go ye
up in peace to your Father.

The inward Figure stands thus.
61. When God blamed and charged Man with Guilt by reason of sin, and
presented this to him in his Anger by the Deluge or flood, also by Sodom and
Gomorrha, before their Eyes, that they had robbed in the house of Joseph, that
is, in the Covenant of Grace, and transgressed the Covenant, then went Judah
with his Brethren, that is, Moses, with the Children of Juda and Israel in the
Manifestation of the Law, when their sins were manifested, and that God
required the Cup back again into Joseph's house, that is, the Law went back
into Joseph's house; then Judah and Israel could not keep it, and so it went
into the Grace, and there the Covenant of Grace, viz. the right Joseph,
presented it self before their Eyes and said; while you are robbers and evil,
do you suppose I cannot find you out? But they could not answer him, but must
yield themselves to his sentence.

62. For Israel could neither keep the Covenant nor the Law, and therefore
must now fall down before him and yield themselves to his Mercy and
Compassion; Israel would now give up himself to be Gods own servant, but he
would not have them Minister to him with their Law, but would have that to be
his servant, wherein the Cup lay; He would not have only an outward worship
and service of God, in the figure of Christ, with the Law, but he would have
Benjamin, viz. the inward Ground of the heavenly worlds Substance, for a
servant; but the Minister or servant of the Law, viz. the Natural Man, should
go home again in peace into his fathers Country, and take the bestowed Grace
along with him in his Life for food; this the Spirit of God sets thus in a
figure under these Acts, pointing at the future.

63. Under this figure now the Spirit intimates, by Juda, who was surety for
Benjamin, very secretly and mystically, that the poor soul could not thus
with the Grace go home again to its fathers Country, unless it had Benjamin,
that is, Christ in substance in it: For Juda pleaded exceeding hard, that he
durst not go home, unless he brought Benjamin along with him, or else he
would himself remain there a servant.

64. Thus the poor soul gives it self up to God, when Gods righteousness
calls it to go back again home with the Covenant, then it will by no means
go back, except it have Benjamin, that is, Christ Substantially with it, else
it cannot see God; as here Juda in this Image and Type excuses Genesis 44.30, 31.
himself, and says, If he came back and brought not Benjamin with him, then
he should bring his Fathers gray Hairs under the earth, seeing his soul clave
to Benjamins soul.

65. That is, if the Adamicall Man should go into Paradise again, without
Christ's Life and Substance, then would he bring his father, the Life's Nature
into the Eternal Divine Or, hiddennesse.
forgetfullnesse, for the Life of the humane Nature would not be Manifest
according to the divine property; that is, it could not live in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

66. Indeed God calls the soul to go home with the Law into Paradise, but
that cannot be, unless it have Christ in Life and Substance in it, and then it
dares go home again into its first Native Country of its Father.

CHAP. LXXII. How Joseph Manifested himself before his Brethren. And what is
to be understood thereby.
Upon the 45 Chapter of Genesis.
MOses says further; Genesis XLV.1, 2, 3.
Then Joseph could no longer withhold himself before all those that stood
about him, and he cried: Let every one go forth from me, and none were with
him, when Joseph made himself known to his Brethren, and he wept aloud: so
that the Egyptians and Pharaohs people heard; and he said to his Brethren, I
am Joseph, does my father yet live? And his Brethren could not answer him, they
were so terrified in his presence.

The inward Figure stands thus.
2. God gave Israel the Law, and commanded them thereby to go home again
into Paradise, even as the figure of the Promised Land, (into which they were
to go, but could not for a long time, till Joshua led them in) was as a Type
and prefiguration, of the true Leading in by Jesus; and under the Law they had
also the Paradisicall Covenant of Grace, as also the Prophets, who lead them to
Gods Mercy and Compassion.

3. But they could not by any of these come again into their first Adamicall
Paradisicall Country of their Father, to rest: Gods righteousness blamed them
without ceasing, and required the power and ability; that they should give full
obedience to the Law and Covenant.

4. But seeing that could not be, and that, neither the Law nor the Covenant
could bring them in, back again, then the Heavenly Joseph manifested himself
out of the Covenant, for he could no longer withhold, in regard of Man's misery,
and brings his great Mercy and Compassion, through the Covenant, into the
Law; which Compassion is signified by Joseph's great weeping, when he could no
more withhold from his Brethren, and he wept so that even the Egyptians and
the people of Pharaohs house heard, which signifies, that this weeping, viz.
the Mercy and Compassion of God through Christ, the Egyptians also, that is,
all Heathen and People, should hear and receive it, even as it came to pass,
when Christ's weeping and Compassion sounded among all Nations, so that they all
received it into their hearts, and turned themselves to this Joseph, who
received them all, and fullfilled the Law, together with the Covenant.

5. But that Joseph cried, let every one go forth from me, when he made
himself known to his brethren, that none should stay with him; it signifies
this; when Jesus Christ, viz. the highest Mercy and Compassion of God*
manifested it self out of the Covenant, then must the Law with all Ceremonies
together with the Covenant, cease and be gone, also all Man's ability and power,
as also all willing, going, and running must go forth and depart.

6. For, that, presented it self out of the Covenant and the Law, which,
fullfilled both the Covenant and the Law, and set it self in the stead of the
Covenant and the Law, in the Middle as a Mediator between and in God and Man,
as a God-Man, and Man-God, who alone should bring Adam into Paradise, and
destroy sin; none should be with him, he alone would and should manifest
himself John 8.
for a Light (John 8) and for a new Life, to the Humanity.

7. And it is the figure, which shows how the Repentant Man must come to God:
for he must cast away all things from himself; all his works and doings cannot
reach the Top and point of this, he must wholly enter into Resignation and
dereliction, and turn himself away from the Comfort and help of every
Creature, that he may stand naked and alone before the most clear and meerest
Mercy and Compassion of God in Jesus Christ.

8. No hypocrisy or humane Comfort, wherewith Men please and tickle the heart,
will avail, in this presence of Joseph, but a total forsaking of Every
Creature, wherein Every thing is left, to the naked soul, and that must in it
self sink down in the presence of the heavenly Joseph, in its will and whole
desires, and totally leave it self to him, and will nothing without his will,
and set no other means or Medium aloft in Esteem, for all will avail nothing.

9. The whole Creaturely Life must be resigned and forsake its will and
desires, that the Creaturely will may be received and purified again by the
un-creaturely will, that Gods will and Man's will may be one will, and then God
is all in all in him according to the inward and the Outward World, in each
world according to its property, viz. according to the Eternal Speaking Word,
in the soul: and according to the animale soul, in Spiritu Mundi, in the
Spirit of the world, in all, as an instrument of God.

10. Now when this is done, then says the heavenly Joseph in his Mercy and
Compassion, I am JESUS in thee, and opens the inward Eye in the soul, that
it knows him in a Moment, and he speaks friendly into the soul, and says:
Does my father yet live, that is, is the fathers Nature yet in the soul, is
there yet a Breath of the divine Life in it.

11. Before this Manifestation now the souls own will is terrified, so that
it has in its own power no word more to speak, nor can it, in self, speak;
for in this terror the self of the will goes to the Ground: for with this
aspect arises the will of God up, and slays the souls own will, as Joseph's
brethren were so very much terrified before his Face, that they could not
speak a word more, all their ability failed them as if they had been dumb: and
thus also will the wicked and ungodly at the last Judgment be dumb before the
face of God, and terrified to Eternal Death, that his life will be a mere
anguish and terror of an evil Conscience, which will be an Eternal gnawing.

12. Gen 45.4, 5.
But Joseph said to his Brethren: Draw near to me; and they drew near, and
he said: I am Joseph your Brother, whom ye sold into Egypt, and now be not
careful, nor think, that I am angry for it, that ye have sold me hither, for
to preserve your life has God sent me hither before you.

The holy Figure stands thus.
13. When Christ with his revelation or Manifestation thus terrifieth the
soul, that the souls own will is terrified into the death of its willing and
ability, then he speaks in or inspireth his word of Grace into it, and gives
it power and virtue, and says in the Soulish Essence, Draw near to me, and
raise up thy countenance from the terror of Death, go in my power to me and
into my will, I am no more angry with thee, that I have been sold into thy
death, God has sent me hither before thee, that I might nourish thee in thy
hunger of Misery, viz. in the hunger of Gods anger, till thou art fr^ed from
thy earthly Body, in which lies the great hunger and Divine Famine in the
Anger of God.

14. For to preserve thy Life has God sent me into thy humanity and soul,
Genesis 45.6.
for there will yet be five years of dearth, in thy flesh, that is, the Divine
hunger will yet remain in thy five senses of the Earthly Reason, therefore
has God sent me before hither, ere this world cease to be, to thee, and into
thee, that he might deliver thee in thy earthly five senses, with a powerful
deliverance, that my power and virtue of the famine in the five earthly senses
may deliver, and feed the poor soul; God has set me as a Lord and Prince,
and made me a father of thy Nature, that I should rule, as Joseph over the
Land of Egypt: I am become Lord over all thy house, and all that thou have and
art, that I should nourish thee in thy famine with the Divine food of my flesh
and Blood: be no more afraid, I am with thee in the Necessity of the earthly
Life, I will deliver thee and bring thee to Glory and honor.

15. And Joseph said further: Genesis 45.9, 10, 11.
Make have now and go up to my father and to your father, and tell him; Thus
says Joseph thy son, God has set me as Lord over all Egypt; come away to
me, delay not, thou shall dwell in the Land of Goshen, and be near by me,
and thy children and thy childrens children, thy small and great cattle, and
all that thou have; I will there provide for thee, for there are still five
years of Dearth and Famine: that thou may not perish, with thy house, and
all that which thou have.

16. Behold, your Eyes see, and the Eyes of my Brother Benjamin that I speak
to you with my own Mouth, make known to my father all my Glory in Egypt,
Verse 12, 13, 14, 15.
and all that ye have seen, make have and come with my father down hither:
and he fell about his Brother Benjamins neck and wept, and Benjamin also wept
upon his neck, and he kissed all his Brethren and wept over them: and
afterward his Brethren parlyed with him.

17. This now is a figure representing, that when the soul has seen the
Countenance of the heavenly Joseph, that he has comforted and refreshed it
again; then says the Divine word in it, make have now and bring also thy
Father, that is, thy Nature and thy whole Life with all thy conversation and
doings in thy state and condition, to me, and thou shall dwell near by me
with thy outward Life, and I will nourish thee and provide for thee, and all
that, over which thou art set: Come away with all thy Thoughts and works into
Egypt, that is, into lowliness and humility, to me, that very Land will I
give into thee, to dwell in, that is, in Lowliness and humility shall thy
dwelling be; and there in thy temporal state and condition thou may with
Temporal Nourishment, in temporal Good things, dwell by me; your Eyes shall
there see my Goodness and Bounty, that I will do well to you in the Famine of
your Earthlinesse.

18. For the Land of Goshen, signifies, a fatnes of the Blessing of God in
this Earthlines; and therein your Eyes see, and also the Eyes of my brother
Benjamin, viz. of the inward New Man, that I speak to you with my own Mouth,
that is, Essentially within you: For if a Man comes to the New Birth, then
Christ speaks Essentially, that is, actually or operatively in him: and the
Eyes of the soul together with the most inward Ground, wherein Christ, viz.
the word is, Essentially, see and find the same.

19. But the outward five senses cannot in this Earthlinesse wholly comprehend
it, but they dwell near by it; the inward Eyes see through the outward senses,
as the Sun shines through transparent Glass, and the Glass remains
Glass still; so also the outward Nature of this time of the five following
dear years, of the Earthly Essence, continue in their right, till the soul
forsakes the Body, and then at the Last Judgment Day, also, the right
Adamicall Body of the five senses, shall come again to the soul, but the
Grossenes or Dross of the Earthly Body has no more place: for all temporal
things separate themselves in Mysterium Magnum, into the Great Mystery, out of
which they proceeded.

20. But that Joseph fell about his Brother Benjamins neck and wept, and kissed
them all, it signifies this in the figure: when Christ in the inward Benjamin,
viz. in the Image and Substance of the heavenly worlds Substance, which faded
in Adam, is manifested again, then the Holy Name JESUS, viz. Gods great Love,
kisseth the incorporated Ground of Grace, and penetrateth or presses through
this Image, with his weeping Love, viz. with Gods great sweetness, viz. the
Temple of Christ, and heerby kisseth the Creaturely Souls Essences, and
presses also with the weeping Love through it, and then it obtains its life
again, and speaks with God, in Christ Jesus.

21. For, in this Speech or voice only, the soul is heard of God, for in this
Kiss the soul has its hearing given to it again, so that it hears and
teaches Gods Word; for the Senses or Thoughts of the Soul stand now in the
Word of Life, and hear what the Lord speaks in them through Christ, out of
the inward Ground; and that is it that Christ said; John 8.47.
He that is of God hears Gods Word; and to the Pharisees he said; Therefore
ye hear not, for ye are not of God.

22. If the present Contending Babell had, in it, the Kiss of Christ, then it
would with Joseph's Brethren turn to the heavenly Joseph, and in great humility
and lowliness speak with Joseph, and would hear Gods Word in Joseph's Love,
and speak humbly with him, they would not contend for temporal honor and fat
Or, Benifices.
Bellyes, and about Dominion, and Wast the Land of Goshen in a Or, Barbarous.
Heathenish manner.

23. O Babell! Thy shame and reproach is set in judgment before the Most High,
thou art that same Antichrist of whom St. Paul has spoken: thou boastest of
Gods Word in Teaching and hearing, and thy Ground is not of God, but from the
Tower of Babell; thou will teach Gods word with the Letter without the living
Word in thee, but the Sheep hear not thy voice, for it proceeds not from
Joseph's Kiss.

24. And Moses says further; Genesis 45.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
And the report came into Pharaohs house, that Joseph's Brethren were come, and
it pleased Pharaoh well and all his Servants; and Pharaoh said to Joseph, say
to thy Brethren do thus, load your Beasts and go up, and when ye come into
the Land of Canaan, then take your Father and your Families and come to me,
and I will give you the Good of the Land of Egypt, that ye shall eat the
Marrow of the Land; and command them to do thus; take you from the Land of
Egypt Chariots for your wives, and for your children, and bring your Father and
come, and regard not your housholdstuffe, for the Good of the whole Land of
Egypt shall be yours.

The Figure stands thus.
25. When Joseph's, viz. Christ's voice sounds in the soul, then this report
presses into God the Fathers property; for the soul in its Nature, is from
the Eternal Nature, in the Word, out of the Fathers property of Fire; and so
is manifest again in the Father, from whom the will had broken off it self,
and he speaks or inspireth himself into its Life's Essence, for it pleases
him well, that the soul is become manifested in Christ, and bids the soul
with all its properties, through Joseph's, viz. Christ's Efficiency, to come into
Paradise again: he gives it Chariots and all necessaries, which Chariots are
his Spirit in the Word which brings it, and gives it the whole Land of
Egypt; that is, the whole Paradise, or Kingdom of Heaven, for its own; this
the Spirit of God powerfully prefigureth under this History.

26. Genesis 45.21, 22, 23, 24.
And the Children of Israel did so, and Joseph gave them Chariots, according
to the command of Pharaoh, and provision to spend by the way, and gave each of
them all, sumptuous apparel, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of
silver, and five suits of sumptuous apparel, and to his Father he sent
besides, Ten Asses laden with the choice Good things of the Land of Egypt, and
ten she Asses with Corn and Bread, and food for his father upon the Way; thus
he sent his brethren away and they departed, and he said to them, contend not
upon the way.

The Figure stands thus.
27. Christ takes the provision, as also the Chariots, viz. the Holy Ghost
from the father, which he sends to his children, as Joseph took the Chariots
and Present, from Pharaoh, and gives them provision to spend upon the way of
their Pilgrimage, viz. his Body and Blood for meat and drink.

28. The sumptuous apparel which Joseph gave to every one of his brethren,
signify the Temple of Christ, wherein the Soul feasteth and rests; and
Joseph's five suits of sumptuous apparel which he gave to his brother Benjamin,
are the five wounds of Christ, wherein the inward Man feasteth in Gods Love;
but the Three hundred pieces of silver which he gave to Benjamin, are the Gifts
of the Word out of this great Love, wherewith this Benjamin should trade and
get increase, and gain much for his Lord and Brother, the Heavenly Joseph,
for, with Money Men trade: so also should the inward Benjamin trade with his
Gifts of the three hundred pieces of silver; viz. with the Gifts of Christ,
that is, teach and make known Gods wonders, for he is Christ's servant and
assistant, yea his true Brother.

29. But the Ten Asses laden with the choice Good things of the Land of Egypt,
which Joseph sent to his Father, signifies in the figure, the Ten
Commandments in the Law of Nature, which Joseph had laden with Good things,
that is, Christ has laden them with his Grace, and sent them to Gods
righteousness in the Conscience, whereof poor Nature has to make Expenses.

30. But the Ten she Asses with Corn, signify the Ten forms of the Soulish
and Natural fire-Life, upon which Christ loadeth the Souls food, when they
go in his process in the imitation of him; The Bread and the food upon the
way, signify the Word of God, of which the poor old Adam must eat that he
may live.

31. These Christ gives his children and brethren on the way of their
Pilgrimage, when they go home again in the process of Christ, that they may
have provision to spend; and thereon, Nature, viz. the Old Father, eats, and
commands them that they should not contend one with another upon this way,
but in Love and Peace go home into Paradise.

32. O Israel! where is now thy Peace? It seems as if thou had consumed
all the provision of Joseph, and must at present, want, seeing thou so very
much contendest about this food, and have raised such murdering about it.
Truly thou have murdered thy brother Benjamin by the way, and therefore thou
art in Strife and wilt not go home, thou art afraid, but the famine will drive
thee forth, or else thou will be hungry and starved.

33. Genesis 45.25, 26, 27, 28.
Thus they went up from Egypt and came into the Land of Canaan to their father
Jacob, and made it known to him and said, Joseph is alive and is Lord of the
whole Land of Egypt, but his heart thought much otherwise, for he believed them
not: then they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said to them, and
when he saw the Chariotts, which Joseph had sent to bring him, the spirit of
Jacob their father revived, and Israel said, I have enough, that my son
Joseph yet lives, I will go down and see him, ere I die.

This figure stands thus.
34. When Christ's Apostles were laden with this Present, they went therewith
into their fathers house, viz. among the Brethren in the Kingdom of Nature in
their unbeleefe, and made known to them the great Glory and the present of
JESUS Christ, which he had given them, that they should bring it to them, but
their heart believed it not, that these simple Men the Apostles of God, laden
with such great Good things, were sent by Joseph, till they saw the Chariotts
of the Holy Ghost, which brought the Present in great power and works of
wonder, and heard the powerful Word of JESUS Christ, with deeds and wonders
out of their Mouth; then said Israel; Now I have enough, now I can believe; I
will also go along with you to Christ, that I may see him; as Old Jacob said;
I have enough that my son Joseph yet lives, I will go up that I may see him
before I dye.

35. Thus also these Chariotts go out from Gods children among the
unbeleevers, which at first will not believe: but when they feel these
Chariotts, and the Present, in them, then they also say, I have enough, I will
go along into Egypt into Repentance, that I may see and know my Savior; for
their Spirit is also revived, as Jacobs spirit was.

36. Where are now these Chariotts in the Teachers Mouths, upon which the Holy
Ghost rides and touches the heart of Israel, that his spirit is revived.
Indeed says Babell, the Spirit of Christ at present works not so powerfully
in our words, we have now the knowledge of the Kingdom of Christ, that need
not be, we should only believe the Word, which Christ's Apostles have left
behind them, and that is enough.

37. Else if we should teach so powerfully, we must then be also of so simple
and poor a life as Christ's Apostles lead, and forsake the world: that needs
not be, Christ's Kingdom must now be stately in Pomp and Glory.

38. O how will poor Christ, who on Earth had not whereon to lay his head,
reprove this to thee, before thy face, that thou have taken his Covenant into a
false and wicked Mouth; Earnestness was never more necessary then at this
present, when all the Chariotts are overthrone and in great Confusion.

CHAP. LXXIII. How Jacob and all his Children, and all that were belonging to
him, and all their Cattle went into Egypt.
Upon the 46 Chapter of Genesis.
MOses says: Genesis XLVI.1, 2, 3, 4.
Israel went with all that he had, and when he came to Bersheba, he offered
sacrifice to the God of his father Isaac, and God said to him that night in a
vision: Jacob, Jacob; and he answered, here am I: and he said, I am God, the
God of thy father Isaac, fear not to go down into Egypt: for I will there
make thee a great people; I will go down with thee into Egypt, and bring thee
up hither again: and Joseph shall lay his hand upon thine Eyes.

The inward Figure stands thus.
2. Jacob must go into Egypt in the great famine and strait hunger with all
the Company he had, and he went up, when he heard of Joseph, when Joseph caused
him to be fetched by his sons, when he saw the Present and the Chariotts of
Joseph, then his spirit was revived, and he went up; thus it is also in the
figure of the New Birth, when the Adamicall Man hears the voice of the
heavenly Joseph, sounding in him, and sees the Chariots of the Holy Ghost in
him, then he goes up with all his powers, and goes into the Egypt of
Repentance.

3. And when he comes to Bersheba, that is, into the sounding noise of his
heart and soul, then he sacrifices his body and soul, with all that he has,
to the God of his father, that is, he gives himself up with his Life and all
whatsoever he is, into the Word, which created it, in Adam, and made it, out of
it self; which is the God of his father: then that divine Word speaks or
inspireth into him, that is, it speaks actually operatively and powerfully in
him: that Night in a vision, which is as much as to say here, in the secret
hiddennesse of Man, where God hides himself from Reason and the Creature, and
out of his principle speaks or inspireth Comfort and power or virtue into the
Life; and calls him by his Name, as he did Jacob, that is, he compriseth his
Name in the word of his speaking, which is Rev. 20.12. to the 15.
the Book of Life, wherein the Names of the Children of God are Comprised or
written.

4 And when Man perceives him in the power, then he speaks again into the
Word, and says: Here am I Lord, make me what thou will, I stand before thee;
and that same inward Word of God says in power, I am God, the God of thy
Father, that is, it gives to Man in this Speaking power, Divine knowledge, so
that Man learneth to understand, that God works in him, and what God is.

5. But seeing the Body is a dark valley, and moreover an unrighteous
inclination, therefore the Word speaks into the poor soul thus, and says;
Be not affrayd when thou entrest into Egypt, viz. into Repentance, and go
forth out of the Land of Canaan, viz. from the pleasure and voluptuousness of
the world, falsehood, wickedness, and unrighteousness; although likely they
become thy Enemies, and persecute thee, yet fear not, I will go along with
thee, into Egypt, that is, into thy conversion and Divine Obedience, I will
help thee to work Repentance, and bless thee in thy Egypt, viz. in thy working
of Repentance, and make thy New Birth grow to a great Tree, which shall bring
forth much good fruit in the Kingdom of God, as he said to Jacob; I will make
thee a great people in Egypt, and will bring thee out from thence again; that
is, thou shall not remain as one dead or departed from this world; although
indeed thou go into Repentance, and forsakest the world in thy mind, yet I
will bring thee out of Anxiety, and trouble again, and leave thee in thy state
and condition, if it be right and honest, which is done thus.

6. When Man goes into this Egypt, he must leave all his Land, viz. all his
temporal pleasure and Lust of the flesh, and give up all to God, and hold
nothing more for his own, but think that it is not his own, but that he is a
Minister and servant in it, that he should serve God and his fellow Members
therein, and so regulate his heart as a Pilgrim in his Journey, who is no where
at home in this world; He must with Jacob sit in Joseph's, that is, in the Holy
Ghosts Chariott, and go whither soever the same, in this Famine, will bring
him, then God goes in and with him, and blesses him, so that he works and
brings forth much divine fruit, and his Name becomes very great in the Word
of God.

7. But God does not for all that cast him out of his temporal possession, he
brings his Spirit up again into the Works and Labor of his hands, viz. into
his worldly state, condition, and employment, that he may serve Gods deeds of
Wonder, also himself, and the Members of his body, viz. his Neighbors,
therein: Nothing will be taken away from him, but only the unrighteousness
falsehood, and untruth, God makes him now his servant in his state and
condition, he may well keep and take along with him his Cattle and his Goods
for his necessity, as Jacob did, but that which is false and wicked he must
put away.

8. And when he does thus, then says God; Joseph shall lay his hand upon thine
Eyes that thou may see, that is, Christ shall with his hand of Grace lay
hold on thy sight, blind as to God, and lay his hand of the divine Sun upon
thine Eyes, and then thou will come into divine vision and knowledge in thy
self, so that thy Reason will wonder, whence such Light, and deep knowledge
comes to thee.

9. Genesis 46.6, 7* 26, 27.
Jacob came with Seaventy souls in All, with all his children, and childrens
children, of which Sixty six were proceeded out of his Loins, which went with
him, for Joseph had begotten two sons in Egypt.

10. This Number Sixty six, is a great and Mystical Number; 70 The number of
Babell. 66 Of the Beast and the Whore.
as also the Number Seaventy, which is the Number of the great Babell: and the
Number Sixty six, is the Number of the Beast and of the Whore, from which,
Israel and every child of God, must go forth.

11. This going forth of Israel, is a true figure and Image of the last exit
and going forth of the children of Israel, viz. the right true Christian,
which shall also go forth out of this Canaan, viz. out of Babell, in the Note.
End of the Beasts and the Whores Number, which Signal Star with the
Chariott of Joseph are clearly appeared.

12. For the great Famine in the Time of Jacob, wherein is the great hunger and
want of heavenly food, is at hand, and not only a hunger of the soul after
the bread of heaven, but also a great vehement unheard of, formerly, from the
beginning of the world, hitherto, impression, of desire to selfehood, viz. to
Covetousness, Extortion, and Pride.

13. The hunger, in the wrath of God, after vanity, to devour it, is so great,
that at present the powers of Heaven do imprint their influence so, that all
provision and blessing, is consumed, and the Mind of Man is so hungry after
vanity, that there is no rest at all upon Earth, for this Desire.

14. Also the Third Principle, viz. the spirit of the world, of the Dominion in
the four Elements impresseth with its power, from whence all bl^ssing is
consumed, and in stead thereof an unsatiable hunger of Covetousness is risen
up; so that the Beast and the Whore together with their worshippers are so
hungry after Pride, covetousness, Envy, anger, unchastity, whoredom and
beastiall voluptuousness, and so hard imprinted or impressed in such desire,
that the Time is already, that this Beast together with the Whore must burst to
pieces.

15. And then Jacobs spirit reviveth, and believes that Joseph is a Prince in
the Land of Egypt, viz. in the Convertion: and there will Joseph be manifested
to his Brethren, and then they must be ashamed of their falsehood and wickedness,
that they have suppressed Joseph and sold him, with lying, into misery.

16. For, Joseph's face in the Truth, shall behold all Israel and Egypt; for
Israel must go forth out of Canaan, and leave Babell in the Number seaventy:
but the hunger in Babell says: I will first fill my sack that I may have
provision in the way: and knows not that Joseph has given Israel provision
for Expenses, and moreover Chariotts and apparel, so that they shall only take
their Cattle along with them, and leave their dwellings and housholdstuffe
behind.

17. The provision for Expenses, which at present Israel gathers together in
Babell, belongs all to the wrathful Impression of Gods Anger, which shall
devour it all when his fire burns; God has clearly sent his children
provision for Expenses beforehand, by Joseph, they will have fully enough, if
they do not Contend upon this way; sumptuous apparel is prepared for them,
that they may be at rest from this disquietnes of the driver.

18. But Babell thinks, it is a long time yet; Israll must serve me, I will
plague them sure enough; but the Deluge or Flood, and the fire of Sodom falls
suddenly down upon them, so that there is no escaping; he that waketh let him
watch and take care that he does not sleep; for the Bridegroom calls every
where, afterward the foolish Virgins will trim their Lamps: but it is too late,
the hunger of Babell lays hold and devoureth them in its Jaws.

19. Moses says further: Genesis 46.28, 29, 30.
And he sent Judah before him to Joseph, that he might direct him to Goshen,
and they came into the Land of Goshen, and Joseph made ready his Chariott and
went up toward Goshen, to meet his father Israel: and when he saw him, he
fell about his neck and wept a long while upon his neck; then said Israel to
Joseph; I will now readily dye, now I have seen thy Face, that thou yet live.

This Figure stands thus.
20. Judah signifies the incorporated Covenant of God in Man, viz. the Divine
Grace in Christ, Israel sends this, that is, the whole Man before to the
heavenly Joseph, and uniteth it with him, so that the heavenly Joseph in the
incorporated Grace leads the Kingdom of Nature in Man, viz. the Old Jacob
and Adam into Goshen, viz. on the way of Conversion, into the Rest of Christ;
that he comes to the right Goal or Mark, where he finds food for the
hungry Conscience, viz. the right way to Salvation; where there is right
Teaching, and Instruction, there Goshen is near at hand, where the
soulesitteth in fatnes, and feeds in the fatt pasture of Christ.

21. And when the heavenly Joseph, viz. Christ sees, that the Old Jacob, that
is, the Adamicall Man has sent his Judah to him, and afterward comes
himself, then he makes ready his Chariott; that is, his Operation with a
powerful affection to entertainment, and goes to meet the Natural Man, and
when they draw near together, then this Joseph falls about the Neck of this
Jacobs-Adam, that is, he lays hold on his desire and Longing, and fills it
with his Tears, which he shed in his sufferings, and in his victory brought
through death into Eternal Joy.

22. With these Tears of Joy, he kindles the soul of the Old Jacobs-Adam, so
that Jacob for great Joy, weepeth a long while on Joseph's neck, viz. in Christ's
Tears of Joy, and mingleth his inward Joy with the Tears of Christ: with
which tears of Joy, the soul of the Old Jacobs-Adam, is mightily comforted,
quickened, and strengthened in himself, in that he finds that his heavenly
Joseph in him yet lives, that he is not dead in the famine of sins, or quite
departed from him.

23. Then says the Natural Man: Now I would willingly dye and give up all my
right, and willing; now having seen and known my loving son Joseph, that
is, seeing I find that the New Man in Christ is become manifest in me,
therefore now I would willingly dye to my willing of vanity in his power of
Love, as Jacob said to Joseph.

24. And Joseph said to his Brethren and his Fathers house, Genesis 46.31, 32, 33,
34.
I will go up and tell Pharaoh, My brethren and my fathers house are come to
me out of the Land of Canaan, and are Shepherds, or Pastors.
heardsmen, for they are people that are conversant about Cattle, and have
brought with them their small and great Cattle, and all that they have: and now
when Pharaoh shall call ye to him, and say: What is your employment and
business? then shall ye say, thy servants are people that are conversant about
Cattle, from our youth up unto this time, both we and our Father, that you may
dwell in the Land of Goshen, for those which are heardsmen and keepers of
Cattle are an abomination to the Egyptians.

The inward Figure stands thus.
25. When the Heavenly Joseph, Christ, has manifested himself to the Soul
and Adamicall Man, so that they are come together, and that they have received
and embraced one another, then that same powerful word in the Spirit of
Christ, which has Manifested it self in Man, presses and penetrateth again
into the Eternal Fathers Property* viz. into the Eternal Speaking of the
Father; which here is as much as to say: I will tell Pharaoh, that my
brethren, together with all my fathers house are come to me.

26. For Pharaoh stands here in the figure of God the Father, who is the
Eternal King, to whom says Christ, viz. the word of Love and Grace; that his
brethren, viz. the properties of the Humane Life, from and with all its powers
and virtues, are come to him, that is, the Word Christ, which is come from the
Father into our Humanity through his power and virtue, speaks the Word of the
Natural humane Life, into the Eternal Word of the Father: which is here
called, telling the King.

27. For Christ is even the Fathers Steward over Man, as Joseph was Pharaohs:
For, Man is then manifested again in God, when Christ speaks, tells, and
inspireth him, into the word of the Father, else man could not attain God; for
the humane life is also proceeded from God the Fathers word: for the Spirit of
God spoke and inspired it self from and by the word of the Father, into Man,
Joh. the 1.

28. But after it came into a Creature, and became Natural, John 1.4*
it turned it self away from Gods Love-speaking, or inspiration of Love, and
manifested it self in the speaking of Anger, the power of Love speaking, was
extinguished in it, viz. the Second Principle, the holy generating or working
of the divine power; and was not able in its own power and strength to enter
again into the Love-speaking, that it might be able to speak or Generate the
Divine Love-power; it had rent it self off from Gods Love, and brought it
self into a Natural speaking of self and vanity.

29. And this did move Gods pity and compassion, and introduced his
Love-speaking word again into the Creaturely Imaged, framed, or Created.
formed word of the Soul and humanity, and that now is this Joseph, whom God
has sent before, that he should inspeake or introduce the humane life again,
into the Eternal speaking word, and make it manifest therein before the
Eternal King, he brings the humane word in the Fathers property, into the
Word of God, and reconcileth the rent and severed humane word in the Fathers
Anger-speaking, with his Love, that is, he changes the Anger in the word of
the humane Life in his Tears of Love, into the divine Kingdom of Joy, and
manifests the humane Life actually and workingly in God, and that here, is,
as Joseph said: I will tell Pharaoh, that my brethren and my fathers whole
house are come to me out of the Land of Canaan.

30. For, Christ is become our brother; John 1.14.
The word of Love became Man and dwelt in us; and took Adams Nature upon him;
and therefore in this figure it is called, his fathers house, viz. the first
Adam, and his children he calls his brethren; so very secretly and mystically
the Spirit of Moses speaks in the figure of Christ, else in this place he had
said enough, in saying my father is come to me, if he had not had another
figure under it.

31. He says, Out of the Land of Canaan, and they are heardsmen, thus he
would tell Pharaoh, that they might dwell in the Land of Goshen; That, in the
Figure, is thus much; Christ shows with his inspeaking of Love into the word
of his Father, that his brethren are come to him out of the vanity of the
Canaanites, out of the wild beastiall property, and that they from their youth
up, from the time of Adam hitherto, have been only heardsmen; that is, the
word of the humane Life, ought to have dwelt in this fleshly Canaan in flesh
and blood, and must and ought to have the Keeping and Ordering of the beastiall
property of the flesh.

32. For, the Animale soul in Spiritu Mundi, in the Spirit of the World in
Man, has many hundred Beasts, which it has awakened and manifested in it
self, with the false and wicked Lust; these Beasts now, must the word of the
humane Life keep, always, from Adam, to this time, and must be conversant with
such Cattle, and manage these beasts, and take care of them; therefore now said
Joseph, that they might dwell with their Cattle in the Land of Goshen, that is,
in a peculiar place by it self, and not with Pharaoh; for Heardsmen, says the
Spirit, were an abomination to the Egyptians, that is, the beastiall property
in Man is an abomination to God, therefore Christ brings only the inward
Paradisicall Ground, (this, time of the Beast,) before the face of God: but he
brings the Beast into Goshen, that is, into the outspoken or Expressed
substance of this world, into a place blessed of God.

33. The Beastiall Man cannot dwell with Pharaoh, that is, in Gods Majesty and
holy power and virtue: Joseph, or JESUS leaves him in the outward Nature, in
the Kingdom of this world, and sets him in a Blessing, that he should dwell
near God, but a principle is the distinction, as between Time and Eternity.

34. And Joseph said circumspectly; he would say, they had brought along with
them their small and great Cattle, to signify, that the whole Man with all his
works were brought into the Grace and fat blessed habitation before God, that
Christ's children with all their earthly works were placed in Goshen, viz. in a
state and condition of Grace.

35. And he said to his brethren, when Pharaoh shall ask, what is your Trade
and employment, then shall ye say, thy servants have been heardsmen from our
youth up, that is thus much, when Gods Spirit shall search and try what ye are
in Mind and Thought, whether ye be Angels and Ministers of God, then humble
your selves before God, and say not concerning your selves before the Face of
God, we sit in thy Office, and are Lords, or Potentates and Rulers of the
World, or Rich, Noble, excellent, Learned, understanding persons, or such like,
do not esteem your selves good in the sight of God, say not we are thy dear
Ministers and Servants in thy Power; but say; we thy Servants are Heardsmen
from Adam to this time, we keep and manage our Beastiall property, viz. the
works of thy wonders which thou have made, we cannot subsist before thee, O
holy God; for we are unfitt unworthy and ignorant heardsmen of thy wonders,
let us but find Grace in thy sight, that we may dwell before thee in this
Goshen; O Lord! we know not what we shall do before thee, do thou direct
and teach us, how we shall manage these thy herds, for, we are thy Servants,
and will serve before thee as thy heardsmen.

36. In this Glass behold thy self thou fair world, what thou art in thy
high State, places, and Offices, even all of you from the Emperor to the
beggar, and him that is least and lowest of all, are but heardsmen: every one
is but a heardsman, for their authority is but an Office of the Beastiall Man,
and has under his Command and management but to rule over Beasts and no more,
for no worldly Office can rule over the inward divine Man, he must in his
Office manage only a heard of Beasts or Cattle, and Govern, take care, and
tutor them, and they Tutour him again.

37. With these Offices of heardsmen, now the Earthly Lucifer prideth and
boasts himself, as if he had an Angelical Government, and yet in the
presence of God, is but a heardsman or keeper of Beasts, and no more.

38. And therefore has God typified and prefigured his Mysteries by such
simple heardsmen, that Man should see what he is in his Office, State, and
Condition, also that his wrath may not lift up it self and destroy these
shepherds and heardsmen; and so he has always in his prefiguration
premodeled them only as heardsmen, that he might power out his Grace upon Man's
ignorance and want of understanding.

39. Heerin behold your selves ye Potent, Noble, Rich, Learned people, all of
you one and other, how the Spirit of God, represents you by the dear
Patriarchs in the manner of the heardsmans Office, in the revelation of his
Mysteries, ye are all one and other before him no other then his heardsmen, the
Emperors as well as his Ministers and servants, the Noble as well as his
inferior, one as well as another, one in this beastiall Office orders and
manageth another in another beastiall Office.

40. But the Pharisee will say, I keep the sheep of Christ* woe be to him that
commits his sheep to a Wolf: if he teaches that which is Good from the
Spirit of Christ, then it is not from his own authority and power, but the
Arch-shepheard does it through him: But he manageth Beasts only, and himself
takes one Beast of the heard to himself, which must also be kept and cared
for, or else the Wolf will devour it.

41. Thus has God placed all offices in the Office of a Shepherd, so that one
should manage and take care of another, and yet they are all but shepherds
before him, which keep Beasts and Cattle; Christ only is the shepherd of
Souls and no other.

42. None should trust the sheep of Christ which he has in him, to any
earthly Shepherd, but only to the Shepherd Christ, for there are Wolves in
all the outward offices of Shepherds, which take and devour the sheep of
Christ; he may pass well for one, in the Office of a Shepherd, but let him
have a care of the Shepherds Dogs, that they do not bite him.

43. O World in thy high State and Condition! O that thou did but consider
what thou art in thy State and Condition in the sight of heaven, and did not
set thy State and Condition so aloft in Gods Love, for it stands only in his
deeds of Wonder, in evil and good.

44. When God would have a worldly State and Condition prefigured in his Love,
then he set Shepherds in it, or else mean poor despised and unesteemed
people: see Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses,
David: also the Prophets and Apostles, and all Holy Men or Saints, through whom
God once manifested himself; and then thou will see, that no highness avails
any thing before him, that is but a Glass of wonders in evil and good, also a
sport of Gods Love and Anger, a premodeling or representation of the Angelical
Dominions in Light and Darkness, in Heaven and Hell.

CHAP. LXXIV. How Jacob was set before Pharaoh with the five youngest brothers
of Joseph, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh, also how Joseph bought all the Land of
Egypt for Pharaohs own: What is hereby to be understood.
Upon the 47 Chapter of Genesis.
MOses says; Genesis XLVII.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Then came Joseph and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brother with
their small and great Cattle, and all that they have, are come to me out of
the Land of Canaan, and behold they are in the Land of Goshen; and he took
five of his youngest brethren and set them before Pharaoh; then said Pharaoh
to his brethren: What is your employment, and trade? and they answered, thy
servants are heardsmen, we and our Father; and said further to Pharaoh, we
are come to dwell by you in the Land, for thy servants have not pasture for
their Cattle, the famine does so hard press the Land of Canaan, now therefore
let thy Servants dwell in the Land of Goshen: and Pharaoh said to Joseph: is
this thy Father, and are these thy Brethren, who are come to thee, the Land of
Egypt stands open for thee, let them dwell in the best place of the Land, let
them dwell in the Land of Goshen, and if thou know any among them that are
fit and expert, set them over my Beasts and Cattle.

The inward Figure stands thus.
2. When Christ manifests his brethren, and the Old Father Adam, in the power
and virtue of God, that they are with all their substance come to him, and have
wholly given up themselves to him, then he takes five of the youngest brethren
in the properties of life, and sets them before God, that is, he takes the
five Senses of Man, which always are and continue to be the youngest in the
Life's property, for they are continually generated anew, and sets these,
with the power and virtue of their Life, before God.

3. For these are they, that shall be Gods Ministers and Servants in the Love:
to these Christ gives in, his Council and says; when ye come before the Face
of God, so that the Spirit of God in you proceeds upon you, and proves and
sifteth what your office and work is, in the presence of God, then humble your
selves and say in the presence of God; thy servants are but heardsmen, and are
come to thee in the famine of Misery in our great Hunger, to dwell near thee
in the Land of God, for in our own powers and virtues in the Adamicall
Kingdom of Nature, we have not pasture and food for the poor miserable
Life; therefore now O Lord suffer thy servants to dwell in the Land of Goshen,
viz. in thy Courts, that we may eat of the dew of Heaven, and live to thee,
and serve thee in our Office.

4. Then says the Eternal Father to Christ, viz. to his Steward; behold, is
that thy Father Adam, and are these thy brethren according to the humanity,
which are come to thee: the Land of Egypt stands open for thee, that is the
Kingdom of heaven together with the Kingdom of Nature stands open to thee,
thou art my Steward in the Kingdom of Grace, and also in the Kingdom of the
Nature of the humane Property, let them dwell in the best place in the Kingdom
of Grace, and in the Kingdom of Nature; and if thou see that there are Men
among them fit for it, set them over my Cattle, that is, those among them that
are fit and expert, make them Officers in the Kingdom of Nature, that they may
rule over my Creatures, that is, set them in the Apostolic Office, that they
may feed my flock, whom thou leadest inwardly in them with thy Staff or
Crook; let them be Note the true Ministers, Pastors and Teachers in the
Church of Christ Jure Divino, who they are.
outwardly Shephheards, and lead and govern the properties of Nature, viz. my
sheep or Beasts.

5. All Spiritual Shepherds in this world, do sit in the Office of the
Father, as also the worldly Shepherds, which are instituted only by Christ,
through whom Christ himself inwardly rules and governs, and they are all of
them Gods Officers.

6. But whosoever are instituted in an Office without the Or, Archbishop.
chief Shepherd Christ, they all of them are but in the Land of Canaan in the
famine of Gods Anger, and are but devouring Wolves, both one and other, be they
spiritual or worldly Officers, be they noble or ignoble, Prince or Protector
or Guardian, Priest or Sexton, one as well as another: All that rules in an
Office without Gods Spirit, that rules of self, and to the Judgment of God;
he that thinks not in his Office to serve God, and to manage his Office as a
Shepherd of God, he is a Minister and Servant of Lucifer and serves him.

7. Moses says further; Genesis 47.7.
Also Joseph brought his father Jacob, and presented him before Pharaoh; and
Jacob blessed Pharaoh; that is, Christ set also the Adamicall Image before God,
not only the five Senses but the whole Man, and he blesses God, that is, he
thanketh God and brings him fruit, to the praise of God as a Blessing: then
says God in his acting and working. Verse. 8, 9, 10
How old art thou? and he answers, one hundred and thirty years is the time
of my Pilgrimage, few and evil are my days in the time of my life, and they
reach not to the time of my fathers in their Pilgrimage; so Jacob blessed
Pharaoh, and went forth from him.

8. Thus the Adamicall Man acknowledges and confesses before God his evil
time, in the earthly desire, and says, it is but a Pilgrimage, viz. a
continual wandering and anxiety in continual cares and disquietnes, whereby
Man works and effects Gods wonders.

9. And Moses says further; Genesis 47.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
There was no bread in all the Land, for the Famine was very sore and hard, so
that the Land of Egypt and Canaan were famished by reason of the Famine; and
Joseph gathered all the Money that was found in Egypt and Canaan for the Corn
that they bought, and he put all the Money in the house of Pharaoh; Now when
the Money in Egypt and Canaan was brought, all Egypt came to Joseph and said;
Give us Bread; wherefore must we dye in thy presence, being without Money? And
Joseph said, fetch me your Beasts and Cattle, and I will give you for them,
being you are without Money: then they brought their Cattle to Joseph, and he
gave them bread for their horses and sheep, for their heifers and Asses; and
so he nourished them with bread this year for all their Beasts and Cattle.

10. This figure is very powerful and contains great and deep
understanding, although the Beastiall Man full of Covetousness and extortion
imagines to himself, as if this made for him, yet the true figure is quite
against him, as also is the parable or similitude in the Gospel, of the unjust
Steward, which says; Luke 16.8.
The Lord commended him that he had done so prudently.

11. This Famine in Egypt and Canaan, when all the Land was famished,
prefigureth the poor fallen Man in Body and Soul, which the anger of God has
dried up and caused to wither, so that it is famished. For Egypt signifies the
Souls Nature, and Canan the Bodies Nature. The great provision of Corn which
Joseph gathered together and sold in the Famine, signifies the Divine Word of
Grace. The Money of the Egyptians and Canaanites, for which they bought Corn
of Joseph, signifies Gods Creaturely Word of the humane Life. The Beasts which
they there gave also for bread, when there was no more Money, signifies the
Imaged or Created.
Imagelike property in the life of Man.

The figure stands thus.
12. When Man in soul and body in this famine and in this starving hunger
comes into Gods anger and withering, then he has no refreshment nor Comfort,
for his Conscience withers so quite in Gods Anger, that he must go to the
heavenly Joseph, and buy this food of Grace.

13. First, while the Soul together with the Body, find yet a little power
and comfort in them, though indeed the Conscience gnaweth; this Steward gives
Jesus Christ good words, and prays to him, and, for the Creaturely Imagelike,
Imaginary fictitious.
framed or conceived Word, buyeth food of Joseph; and this now is that which
is signified by the Money, while these words will in the Imagination give the
Conscience a little virtue and Comfort, the Nature of the soul and of the body
continually buyeth Grace for such Money, and gives this Joseph good store of
Babbling, with an imaginary matter and some framed or Conceited, contrived, or
set form of Prayer.
figured prayer out of Custom: and thus lives of this food, in Hope.

14. But when the anguish of the Conscience withers up this Hope, and that
such cold Prayer and historical Faith will no more avayle, so that the
Conscience cries out, that thou must be famished in the Anger of God, no
prayer more will avayle before God; then comes the poor Soul to this Joseph
and says: Why will thou suffer me to perish, because I cannot bring my Prayer
and Faith before thee; by which I might attain food for my Life; behold my
power is gone, Note how Man is able to do nothing.
I am able to do nothing, I have no more words wherewith to attain thy Grace.

15. Then says the heavenly Joseph to the Soul, bring thy Beasts, viz.
Horses, Oxen and Asses hither to me, and I will give thee food, for them,
that is, bring all thy earthly natural desires and Or, Images.
Imaginations, and thy false Confidence in the Creatures, viz. in thy own Wit
and subtilty in falsehood and wickedness, to me, and give them up all to me,
that thou may be quitt of them, and then I will give thee food that thou
may live, and will also feed the Imaginations of thy Thoughts: and this is
the entrance of this figure.

16. And Moses says further, Genesis 47.18, 19.
When that year was Ended they came to him in the second year, and said to
him: We will not hide from our Lord, that not only the Money, but also all
the Beasts are gone from us to our Lord, and there is no more left for our
Lord, but our Bodies and our fields; Why will thou suffer us and our fields to
dye in thy presence, buy us and our Land for Bread, that our Land and we may
be Pharaohs Bondslaves, give us seed that we may live and not dye, and the
fields not lie wast. This is now the true Earnestness when Man wholly gives
up all, and quite gives up himself.

This Figure stands thus.
17. When Man stands thus in the famine of Conscience, so that not only the
words which he speaks in the presence of God, will no more avayle, that he
might receive Comfort, but that in the End those also fail, when he has beat
down all Imaged, feigned, or Imaginary.
fictitious desires, and forsaken this world in the desire; then says the
poor soul to the heavenly Joseph, alas my Lord, what shall I bring before
thee that I may attain thy Grace: behold, my Prayer finds no power and
virtue, and though I have forsaken the world, and have given up my Beastiall
will, yet I stand still in great hunger before thee, I have no more left but
only my body and soul: My Lord take even this of me, I give my self wholly
to be thy own: Give me thy Grace, that I may live in thee, I will give my
self wholly up to thee with Body and Life, and will be thy obedient servant.
Give thou me but seed only, that is, Give thou me but a Will, Thought, Mind
and desire, and sow the Land of my Nature, and let my Life be thy Servant, that
I may be no more without thy will, but that I may be thy Servant and thy
Bondslave.

18. Thus then it is enough, when he has given up Body and Soul Will and
Thoughts, and all that he has and is, wholly to this Joseph, that he is as it
were a Bondslave-servant to God, that hops and expects only what his Lord
will give him, when all trust and confidence in his own self is quite yielded
up; then is Reason rightly killed, and the Devil has lost his stool and
Throne in Man: for in Resignation he has nothing for his own, and the Devil
can no other way come at Man but in the Desire of Selfhood, in appropriating
any thing for his own self.

19. And Moses says further; Genesis 47.20, 21, 22.
Thus Joseph bought the whole Land of Egypt for Pharaoh, for the Egyptians sold
every one their Ground; for the famine was so sore, sharp and strong upon them;
and so the Land became Pharaohs own, and he distributed the People into the
Cities from one place of Egypt to the other, except the Land of the Priests,
which he bought not, for it was appointed for the Priests by Pharaoh, that they
should provide for themselves out of that Portion which he had given them,
therefore they dared not to sell their Lands.

The Figure stands thus.
20. In such a manner, Christ, when Man in this pinching hunger draws near
to him, buyeth for his Grace, his whole Nature with all the Affections,
properties, or faculties.
forms, conditions, and qualities thereof, and brings all whatsoever is in
Man again into the house of the Great Pharaoh, that is, of God, and makes it
a subject to God his Father again.

21. For in Adam all Men are become untrusty and perfidious, and are entered
into the Selfishnes of the Will, but Christ has bought this humane own self
to be his own again, and gives this up again to God his Father, and it
points directly at Christendom, which Christ has bought with his Grace by
the Treasure of his precious Blood, and made it his own, and has now
distributed his Offices, wherein the Christians serve him, and are his own.

22. But that the Priests fields were not sold, and that Pharaoh would not buy
them, but leave them for their own, points at the inward Man, who is the
Priestly Temple of Christ; this God buyeth not back again, he wills that Man
should have it for his own, he desires only to have the Kingdom of Nature
for his own servant; but the incorporated ground of Grace, viz. the Temple of
Christ he leaves to the Soul for a Dowry, for it is the place and City of
God, wherein God dwells in Man: No Man can sell it again, pawn it or engage
it by oaths, for it belongs to the Eternal One, and not to the possession of
the Creature, but it is a bestowed Ground of Grace, wherein Christ manageth his
Office, it is his habitation and dwelling house.

23. Genesis 47.23, 24, 25, 26.
Then said Joseph unto the People: Behold I have this day bought you and your
fields for Pharaoh, behold, there you have seed, sow your fields, and of your
Corn you shall give the fifth to Pharaoh; four parts shall be yours to sow
your field for your food for your house and Children: and they said now let us
live and find Grace before thee, we shall willingly be Pharaohs bondslaves:
Thus Joseph made them a Law unto this day concerning the fields, to give the
fifth to Pharaoh, except the Priests fields, which were not Pharaohs own.

24. This figure is a true Type and Image of Christendom, which Christ has
bought with his Love in his Blood, having proffered to give Christendom his
Grace and righteousness for their Earthly Images, Imagibility or Phansies.
Imaginations, that it should give them only up to him, and when that is done,
then says Christ, behold, I have this day, that is, from this time forth to
Eternity, bought all your Earthly Images, Imagibility or Phansies.
Images, as also Body and Soul, I have bought you for my Eternal Bondslave
Servants, and Ministers, with my Grace, from the hunger of Gods Anger, behold,
there you have seed, that is, there you have my Word, wherewith you may sow
the Ground of your Conscience in Body and Soul, that this seed may bring
forth fruit, and of this fruit you shall return the fifth to Pharaoh, that is,
to God: for four parts shall be your food, that is, this seed shall quicken
and cherish the four Elements of the Body, as also the four properties of the
Souls fire-Life, and ye shall keep this seed of the divine Word fowerfold
for the cherishing of your Life, but the fifth ye shall give to God.

25. The fifth signifies here very secretly and Mystically, the fifth form of
the Natural Life, viz. the Love-fire in the Light, which is borne out of the
four properties, and Manifest, wherein the uncreaturely and Supernatural God
is manifested; This form generateth now the divine Joy, and the Praise of God,
wherein the Soul is an Angel, and thanketh and praises God, because he has
delivered it out of the Fire-Source of Torment, and has given himself with
this Love and Grace into its Fire-source, and changed it into a Love-fire and
divine Light.

26. This Source of Love, viz. the fifth property of Life, wherein the Soul is
an Angel, it gives now to God again with great praise and thanksgiving, for
it gives this fifth form to Christ again for a habitation; for that is the
habitation of his Word, wherein Or, consists. Luke 17.21.
is the Kingdom of God in us, and wherein we are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, who dwells in us, and this fifth form, in the praise of God, Christ
requires again from his Christendom, that it should give this to him, that
he may gather in the praise of God, that is, the fruit of Love, for his Father,
into the house of the Divine power.

27. But the Priests fields, that is, the inward Ground of the heavenly Worlds
Substance, he buyeth not with his blood, for that never received the Turba of
destruction, but in the fall of Adam it went out and faded and went into the
Abyss, so that the soul had it no more in its own possession, for it was in
the soul as it were dead, although in God nothing dies; but the soul was
blind concerning it, in that manner as God, viz. the Eternal one, is in and
through all things, and yet nothing apprehends it, but that, which
introduces it self into its substance, wherein he will manifest himself.

28. This faded Image or Substance is the Priestly Ground, whereinto God again
in spoke or did sow his Word and Seed again in Paradise, that, is not bought
with Christ's Blood, as the averted soul is, but it is filled with the heavenly
Ens, with Christ's flesh and blood, so that it is or becomes Christ's flesh and
blood, wherein the High Priest Christ, dwells; it is his Eternal seat and
possession, wherein God is manifested in Man, for it is the branch on Christ's
vine, which is Gods proper own, and not Man's.

29. It is indeed in Man, but not in the possession of the fiery Souls
Essence; it has another Principle then the soul, and yet is in the soul, and
through the soul, and from the soul, after the manner as the light is from
the fire, which is through the fire, and in the fire, and has its
manifestation from the fire, out of which fire and light, Air proceeds, and
out of which air, dewy water proceeds; and that same dewy water denotes,
the substance of this inward Ground, which gives to the fire again,
Nourishment, food, luster, and life.

30. So also it is to be considered and understood concerning the soul; when
it extinguished as to the Divine Light, then this substance was generated no
more from it, nor in it, but remained faded, extinguished, or quenched; and
then the soul had no divine food more for its source of fire, for it had
turned its desire forth into the third Principle, and was overcome by the
Earthly Lucifer, and by Satan, viz. by the property of the wrath, of the dark
worlds property in the place of this world.

31. This Grace, came to help this averted soul; which was bought through
Christ's blood; for the buyer entered with his Money of Grace, into this faded
Image, and took it to himself, and set the soul therein for a High Priest
and Teacher.

32. And this Image now was the Priests fields, which he bought not, for it was
Gods beforehand; God only set his High Priest Christ therein, that he should
therein feed and teach the poor soul, that it should not eat of the vanity,
and fully darken and bring to nothing, this Image again.

33. And this is also the same in the figure of Joseph, in that he bought not
the Priests fields, and so is the figure concerning Moses and the Levites, that
they kept their fields and Ground, and yet possessed them as Tenants, all which
denotes the inward Man of the heavenly worlds substance, which is Gods Ground,
wherein God sows his word of Grace, viz. Christ's Spirit, which Ground or
Substance belongs only to the High Priest, Christ, for a possession, and not
to the Creaturely Life, but the Creaturely Life receives power and virtue from
it, it has it indeed in it self, but it is not one and the same thing with
Nature, as the Light and the painful source of the fire, is not one and the
same thing.

34. This figure of Joseph, in that he bought the Egyptians to be Pharaohs
proper own, and made them his own servants, signifies nothing else, but that
Christ should buy us from the Anger of God in the famine of our destruction,
through his Grace, to be his obliged servants, through his blood and death, and
would give us his word for seed, that we might sow his purchased Or,
possessions.
Goods, viz. our Natural Life, therewith.

35. And for this Cause now should we give him again the fifth part of this
fruit, viz. the Birth of Love, the fifth property of Life; for, in the fifth
property stands Faith, and that, his children should give to him again, and
this, he gathers into his fathers Barnes, for an Eternal praise, and to the
divine Manifestation of his wonders.

36. But that Earthly Men have made such Or, Bondslavery.
Bondage, and keep one another for Bondslaves, and vex, torment, and misuse
one another therein, and squeeze out their sweat for their pomp and pride, this
is an Image of the Anger of God, which Imageth or modelleth it self.
represents it self also according to the heavenly Figure.

37. For every thing must Imageth or modelleth it self.
fashion it self, according to the Ordinance or appointment of the Word of
God, whether a thing Imageth or modelleth it self.
fashion it self in Evil, viz. in Gods anger according to the property of
Hell, or in Good, in Heaven in the Kingdom of Christ; for with the Holy, Psa.
18.25, 26.
the Word is Holy, and with the perverse and froward it is manifest in Gods
wrath; as the People is, such is their God also, says the Scripture.

38. Earthly Men, represent the Image in the anger of God, in that they vex,
torment, squeeze and plague them with Bondslavery.
Bondage, and hold it for just and right, and it is right in the wrath of
Nature in Gods anger, and it is a figure of Hell, and it is also a figure of
the Kingdom of Christ in the heavenly Bondslavery.
Bondage; For all whatsoever the Earthly Man does with pain and torment, that
does Christ in his Kingdom with his children, in Joy, Love, humility and power.

39. The Earthly Man takes away his brothers Labor, also his will and
desires, his sweat and Trade, profession, and sustenance: Christ also takes
away his childrens evil will and desires, also their labor, working in God,
when with great pain and anguish they press thereinto; these labors Christ
takes all from them, and gathers them into his Chists of Treasure, and
searches through and through his childrens body and soul, to see whether
there be yet a little Sparkle that can and will administer to him and work for
him, that, he drives and necessitateth into the Divine Ministration of Gods
Court, viz. into the vineyard of Christ.

40. He often also withdraws the food of Grace, and lets them afterward
hunger and lament for it, and lets them sit in misery, and afflicts them,
so that they must work in great anguish, in lamentation, fear and trembling,
before him in Divine Labor; for the old Adams Ass is unwilling and untoward
to labor in that which is divine.

41. And therefore it is often compelled, so that the punishment and threatening
is always behind it, where Christ's Spirit in the Conscience threatens it
with Hell and the Anger of God; as also the Earthly Lords upon Earth do with
their Subjects; which stand indeed in the figure of Christ, but the Office is
altogether unlike.

42. Christ gathers in, for his father, by the works of his children, much
heavenly fruit, which, Man will obtain again, and enjoy the same for Ever;
but a worldly Lord, gathers in, by the labor and sweat of the poor, only
Money and Goods into his Chists, to his own honor, which labor the poor Man
can no more enjoy in this world, but Christ is his wages, in that he must serve
the figure of Gods anger here in Misery.

43. But in the End, when the Earthly Offices shall be also gathered into their
Barnes, into the Treasure Chists of their hearts, for whom they have served and
ministered, then there will be unlike and different reservatories, many will
have very much gathered into the Kingdom of Gods anger, and from that, will
his food be given to him again in Eternity, viz. the Curse of the oppressed,
also the affliction, fear, pain and molestation of the poor, which they have
here with their agitation wrought by the inferiors, that will be given them
for food also after this time to Eternity: for Gal. 6.7.
what any sows here, that they will find in Barnes in the Eternal Life.

44. All Offices of this world are Gods, and all Officers from the Emperor to
the least and meanest, are Gods Officers; but they serve him much unlike and
differently, one serves him in Love as a Minister of Christ, and the other
serves him in his anger as a Minister of Hell.

45. All that seek their own in these Offices, and not regard God and his
Ordinance, and so serve Man therein, they serve the anger of God, and gather
up, into Hell.

46. For all the Treasure of Princes and Potentates should be gathered in, for
the Common profit of brethren, and for the supporting of Good Orders and
Offices, also of the miserable and impotent, even as an Or, householder.
Innkeeper labors and works with those that are under him, and draws
the profit to himself, and yet therewith he provideth for, feeds and
nourishes all his servants, Ministers, and assistants, and the overplus he
uses for common necessaries of himself, his wife and children, and what he
might else stand in need of, or lays it by for poor people: such is the
Officers gathering together: it should all be gathered together for common
benefit, else it is a Treasure of the anger of God, and must expect Gods
Judgment.

47. But that the present Potentates do thus gather together for their own
honor, for voluptuousnes and pride, and in that regard do the more hardly
oppress and squeeze, that they may only therewith exercise their pride, and
keep under the poor as Dogs, and say in their hearts, they are bound to do
so for me, I have bought or inherited it as a privilege. I have it of right;
all this, one and other is done in the anger of God, they all now in this
property, serve only Satan; viz. in the figure of Gods anger, and no better.

48. All selfe-owning belongs to Hell, make what thou will of it; no seeming
Rhetoric will avayle before God; thou gatherest together into Hell: God
requires the Ground of the Heart, and will have trusty Officers.

49. But the Miserable is to know, that in such restraint and service, if he
endure it without murmuring and grudging in faithfulness, he serves even his
Lord Christ; for God thereby draws him away from this world, so that he sets
his hope upon that which is to come, and in this servility of his hands he
gathers to him with his prayer into this house of Lamentation, his heavenly
Treasure, whereas if he for this time of his restraint stood in the
voluptuousnes of the flesh, he would gather no good thing; therefore Romans 8.28.
all things must serve to the best of them that love God.

50. Thus a Man ought to understand the figure under the history and acts of
Joseph; for indeed the history is described with great diligence according to
the inward figure, according to the Eingebung, Inward suggestion.
inspiration of the Spirit of God, which always more respects Christ's
Kingdom, then any History of a slight and simple Act.

51. For the Acts of the Bible are not set down therefore because Men should
see the Life and Deeds of the Old Holy Men or Saints, as Babell supposes: No,
the Kingdom of Christ above all, is thereby deciphered, as also the Kingdom
of Hell: the visible figure continually points at the invisible, which shall
be manifested in the Spiritual Man.

52. Moses here finisheth the figure of the New Regeneration, under the
history of Joseph, and says further: Genesis 47.27, 28.
Thus Israel dwelt in Egypt in the Land of Goshen, and possessed it, and grew
and multiplied very much, and Jacob lived seaventeen years in Egypt, so that
his whole age was one hundred forty and seven years.

53. Verse. 29, 30, 31.
And when the time was come that Israel was to dye, he called his son Joseph,
and said to him, If I have found Grace before thee, then lay thy hand under my
Thigh, that thou will be loving and faithful to me, and not bury me in
Egypt, but I will lie with my fathers, and thou shall carry me out of the Land
of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place: He said I will do as thou have
said, but he answered, and said, swear to me, and he swear to him, then
Israel bowed himself sitting up at the head of the Bed.

54. This now is a very M^sticall figure, and points at the Resurrection of
the Dead, when the Soul shall come to the Body again; and the Body will be
pure and holy: For, the Land of Canaan, which was also full of the abominations
of the Heathen, signifies the Earthly Body; and Egypt where Pharaoh dwelt, and
Joseph was Steward, signifies the Soul, which dwells in Gods Word, viz. by
or near the Eternal King.

55. And we see it very finely pourtrayed in this figure, how Adams Soul
turned it self with Lust into the Earthly Canaan of the Earthly Body, and
turned away from God, therefore now the Soul must go again into Egypt, into
Repentance to Joseph, viz. to Christ, and to King Pharaoh, viz. to God; and
there it will be received as a child of Grace, to be a Bond servant, so that
it will be obedient to God, and be his servant and Minister, and must forsake
the Earthly Canaan, viz. the Evil body with its will and Contrivances, as
Israel must leave and forsake Canaan.

56. But after he should be dead, he would then have his body into the Land of
Canaan, that it should be buried there: which signifies, that the Earthly body
must be buried in its Mother the Earth, and come into its first Mother again;
and it signifies that the Soul shall come again out of Egypt, viz. out of
the Bondage of the affliction of Repentance to the Body into Rest: for the
Heathen must be driven out of Canaan, when Israel enters thereinto: so also
must the Abominations in the property and Or, quality.
condition of the Body, be consumed, and all false and wicked desires be
killed, ere the Soul come to the Body again, and dwell therein.

57. And it is powerfully represented, how the will of the Soul shall and must
in this life time break off from the Earthly Canaan, viz. from the Lusts of
the Body, and press into God again by earnest Repentance, where then the
soul must rightly be in Egypt, viz. a poor Bond servant, in much anxiety and
affliction; but in the End, when the Body shall dye, then it also desires to
go along out of the house of Bondage, viz. out of the torment of Repentance,
and will go again into the first Adamicall pure Image which God Created, as
Jacob would lie by his fathers, when as he might have lain as well in Egypt:
But the Spirit stood in the figure of the Resurrection, showing, how the whole
Man should go again into the first Image created by God.

58. But, that Jacob required an Oath from Joseph, that he would bury him in
Canaan with his Fathers; it denotes the Oath, which God in Christ made with
Man, that God has with his word of Love incorporated himself with Man, and
engaged, as by an Eternal Oath to him. Jacob requires this Oath from Joseph,
as from the figure of Christ, and desires he should lay his hand under his
Thigh and swear.

59. This is a figure, signifying, how Christ should lay his hand, that is, his
power and might, viz. the Eternal Word, which is the hand that has made all
things, into the humane Essence in Body and Soul, and not only into that, but
under the Thigh, as under the humane power, and to give himself to Man for his
own, and swear therein, that is, bind himself to it, that he will bring the
whole Man when he is here dead in the Temporal Death, again into the first
Land of Inheritance wherein Adam in Innocence dwelt, viz. into Paradise, and
bury the body and soul, with his Oath, in God, as in the Divine Rest.

60. This is signified by the figure of Jacob; where the Text says; Israel
dwelt a long time in Egypt, and multiplied there. And when Jacob was to dye, he
had a desire to be carried, after his death, again into the Land of Canaan, to
his fathers; this, I say, signifies, that a Christian, or child of God, must
go into this Egypt; viz. into Repentance and into the exit from the Earthly
Will, and continue therein the whole time of his temporal life, and bring
forth much good fruit in that Land, and then Christ, viz. the heavenly Joseph
shall bring him into the right Country of his father to Rest again, viz. into
the right promised Exodus 3.8.
Land, wherein the Milk and Honey of divine power, flows.

61. And the whole History of all the 5 Books of Moses.
five Books of Moses, is even this in the figure: the Exit out of Canaan, and
the going into Canaan again is only this; representing how the right
Adamicall Man should with great Hoasts and Armies and much purchased Goods,
effected in the divine operation, enter again into the Eternal Promised Land,
and how in this life time he must be a Bond-servant of Gods anger, in this
Egypt, which would through its Ministers and servants, afflict, persecute and
torment him in his Office of anger, and continually keep him for a Bondslave,
till the right Joseph shall bring him through the Temporal Death, again into
Paradise into Rest.

CHAP. LXXV. How Jacob before his End, blessed the two sons of Joseph, and
preferred the Youngest before the Eldest. And what is thereby to be understood.
Upon the 48 Chapter of Genesis.
1. MOses says: Afterward it was told Joseph, behold thy father is sick; Genesis
XLVIII.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and he took with him both his sons, Manasseh and Ephraim: and then it was
told Jacob: behold thy son Joseph comes to thee, and Israel strengthened
himself and sat up in the Bed, and said to Joseph; The Almighty God appeared
to me at Luz in the Land of Canaan and blessed me, and said to me; behold, I
will cause thee to increase and multiply, and will make thee a multitude of
people, and will give this Land for a possession to thy Seed after thee for
Ever, and now thy two Sons Ephraim and Manasseh, which were borne unto thee
in the Land of Egypt before I came in hither to thee, shall be Mine as Reuben
and Simeon, but those which thou shall beget after them, shall be thine, and
shall be named according to their Brethren in their Inheritance.

2. In this figure now the Patriarch Jacob stands again in the limit of the
Covenant, whereto God had ordained him in the Mothers womb; when he had
finished his course in the World with the figure of the Kingdom of Christ and
his Christendom, then his Spirit Frames, Modelleth, or Imageth.
figureth it self again in the limit of the Covenant, and through the limit
of the Covenant, blesses his children and his childrens children, and points
at the future Time, how it would go with them, that is, he speaks from the
Root, and intimates concerning the branches and twiggs of this Tree, which
God in Paradise planted again after the defection and fall, and had made it
manifest in Abraham, and so Jacob stood in the same stock, and intimates from
the Spirit of this Tree concerning his Branches and Twiggs, but Especially in
both Joseph's Sons, both which he grafted back again into his root, that
they should be his sons as Reuben and Simeon.

This Figure stands thus.
3. And Jacob said to Joseph; the Almighty God appeared to me at Luz in the
Land of Canaan and blessed me, and said to me; behold I will cause thee to
increase and multiply, and will make thee a Great People, and will give this
Land for a possession to thy seed for Ever; In this figure, the Spirit
speaks not only of the Inheritance of the outward Land of Canaan, but also
of the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Christ, understood and signified under
this Canaan; for he says: God has given him and his children this Land for an
Eternal possession, which for a long time after that, they had no Inheritance
in, therefore then in this, the Kingdom of Christ is understood, which shall
endure for Ever.

4. Thus Jacob, took the two sons of Joseph, and set them in his Root in
the Inheritance of this Kingdom, and moreover in his first power and virtue,
as Reuben and Simeon his first sons, which signifies, how Joseph's, that is,
Christ's, children in the Faith and Spirit, whose nature yet is come from the
Seed of corrupted Adam, shall be through Faith planted again in the first
Root of Gods Covenant; for Adam has set his Twiggs and children with himself
in the Kingdom of Gods anger; But the Covenant and Grace takes these
Adamicall twiggs and puts them back again into the Image of God, whose figure
Jacob here represents with Joseph's Sons.

5. Gen 48.8, 9.
And Israel saw the Sons of Joseph and said, who are these? Joseph answered
his father, and said: they are my Sons which God has given me; that is, the
Covenant of Grace was strange to the corrupt nature; and said: Who are these
children of Nature in self, have they not broken themselves off from God: But
Joseph in the figure of Christ's humanity said: they are my children which God
has given me in the Kingdom of this world, and the Covenant of Grace in
Jacob said; Verse 9.
Bring them to me that I may bless them, that is, that I may anoint them with
Grace, that is, Christ shall bring them to God, that he may bless them again.

6. And Moses says; Verse. 10.
For the Eyes of Israel were dim with age, that is, Nature in the fathers
property in the Soulish Creature, was grown dim and old, and that because
the souls Ens had Imaged, or framed.
modelled it self in the Temporarynes.
Time, for all that lives in the Temporarynes.
Time grows old and dim: But the Covenant in Jacob grows not old; The
Covenant was that which should bless the Sons of Joseph, with the future
revelation or Manifestation of the Power in the Name JESUS, and Joseph who
stood in the Image or Type of the Humanity of Christ, should bring them to this
Blessing: For, the humanity of Christ brings Adams children to the blessing
of God, as here Joseph brings his Sons, to the Covenant of God, in Jacob.

7. Moses says further; Vers^ 10, 11, 12.
But he kissed them, and encouraged them, and said to Joseph: behold, I have
seen thy Face, which I had not thought to have done, and behold, God has let
me see thy Seed; and Joseph took them from Jacobs.
his Boosom, and bowed himself toward the Earth before his Countenance: which
is as much as to say, in the figure thus; when Joseph in the Image or Type of
the humanity of Christ, brought his sons to his Father, viz. before the
Covenant of God, then the Covenant took them in the Arms, or into the Boosom
of his desire, viz. into Gods Essence, and kissed them with the kiss of Love,
which God would manifest in Christ; and the Fathers righteousness in the Word
of might and power says to the Souls Essences, behold thou art dim to my
sight, and now I have seen thy Countenance again, through the Love and Grace
of God, which I thought not to have done; for I thought to have kept the soul
in the strong and severe Might of Gods anger, for Gods Eye was departed in it,
with its turning away from him, and so as to Gods righteousness, it was rent
off from God; But now I have seen the Countenance of the Soul, again,
through Gods Love in the Grace of God, and Gods Love has let me see The
Souls Essences, powers or faculties.
them in the seed, of the Covenant of Grace.

8. And the Spirit of Moses says; And Joseph took them from his fathers
Boosom, and bowed himself to the Earth before his face, that is, when the Word
became Man, then Christ took the soul from the fathers Boosom, viz. from the
fathers Nature in to himself, and in a Creaturely manner presented himself
with the assumed humanity before God the father, and bowed, that is, humbled
himself with the assumed soul, viz. God and Man in one Person, to the Earth,
that is, even into Death, and entered before the Face of God, with our, assumed
Soul, that is, he brought the Souls will through the introduced power of the
Deity, back again into the resigned humility before the Eyes of God.

9. And Moses says further: Then Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right
hand toward Israells left hand, Genesis 48.13.
and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israells right hand, and brought them to
him; This now is the precious figure of the Great earnestnes of God, showing
how Man is blessed again; for, Ephraim was not the firstborn, but Manasseh:
and Jacob laid his right hand upon the head of the Youngest; but Joseph took
Ephraim in his right hand and Manasseh in his left hand, that he might stand
with the firstborn before Jacobs right hand and with the other before Jacobs
left hand, but Jacob inverted the will of Joseph.

The Figure stands thus.
10. John 1.14.
The Word became Man, understand, the not-naturall un-creaturely word of God,
manifested it self in Gods Creaturely word of Man's Soul, and took on him the
faded lights Image, and quickened or made it living in it self, and put it
into Gods left hand, viz. into the fathers Anger, which is here expressed by
setting the youngest Son, viz. Ephraim, before Jacobs, viz. Gods, left hand,
but took it in his right hand.

11. For Christ took the incorporated Covenant of Grace in the faded heavenly
Image, which incorporated Covenant of Grace in Man was the youngest, viz. the
New Man, in his right hand, viz. into the highest Love in the Name JESUS, and
entered with this New Man from the Covenant of Grace, before Gods left hand,
viz. before Gods strict righteousness in the Anger, that he might atone the
soul, viz. the first-birth; and the soul, viz. the firstborn, Christ took
in his left hand, that is, he took the first Principle, which beforehand had
the superior Jurisdiction, authority, and power, and put it under, that its
power, viz. the self-will, should go back and enter into humility, before
Gods right hand.

12. For, these two Sons of Joseph here, rightly signify the inward
Spiritual Man, viz. the fiery Soul, which is the Eldest Son; also the
Spirit of the Soul* viz. the Lights power, which signifies the other or
second Son, viz. the Two Principles: these did Joseph, that is, Christ set
before God, and took the Spirit, viz. the second Principle in his right hand,
viz. in his Love, and set it with his Love before Gods left hand, viz. before
his anger; for he should break the Serpents head; and the soul he sets
before Gods right hand, that it should receive the blessing from God, that is,
that Gods Love should manifest it self out of the soul, but that might not
be; For Moses says: Genesis 48.14.
But Israel streached forth his right hand, and laid it upon the head of
Ephraim the youngest, and his left hand upon Manassehs head, and did so with
his hands knowingly, for Manasseh was the firstborn.

13. That is thus much in the figure; God would no more give the Dominion or
Government to the first Birth, viz. to the fiery Soul, seeing it had turned
away its will from God, but laid his hand of power and Omnipotency upon the
second, viz. upon the Image of the Light, which in Christ in his Love became
living again: to this he gave now the power of the divine virtue, that the
soul might be under Christ; for in the Lights Image is Christ understood, and
upon it God laid the hand of his Omnipotence and Grace; and upon the soul, he
laid his left hand, that it should be a Servant and a Minister of Grace.

14. Thus the first Birth was set behind, viz. in subjection, and the second
Birth foremost and uppermost in the Dominion; and here is that figure
concerning which Christ says; John 17.6.
Father, the Men were thine; that is, they were of thy Natures property, but
thou have given them to me; for the Father gave to Christ the highest blessing
and power, whereby the fiery soul lost its Dominion of self-will.

15. And Moses says: Jacob did thus knowingly, that is, the Covenant of God
knew it in Jacob, that God would have it so: Jacob could not with his bodily
Eyes for Age well know these two Ladds, but with the Eyes of Gods Covenant, he
saw and knew them, for Gods Spirit in him did this.

16. Genesis 48.15, 16.
And he blessed Joseph and said: God, before whom my fathers, Abraham and
Isaac have walked, God, who has preserved me all my Life long even to this
day; the Angel that has released me from all evil, bless these Ladds, that
they may be called after my Name, and after the Names of my fathers Abraham and
Isaac, that they may increase and multiply on Earth.

This figure stands thus.
17. The God of Love blessed the incorporated Covenant of Grace, out of which
should come, Christ, viz. the heavenly Joseph, as here Jacob with his blessing
began at Joseph, and blessed Joseph's sons through Joseph: thus God also
through the Name JESUS blesses the soul and the spirit, for God has
appointed, the Name Jesus to be a Throne of Grace, and through that Throne of
Grace he blesses Christ's children and Members according to the humanity, and
here in the words of the blessing makes no difference beween the children, to
signify, that the soul and the spirit shall in Christ enjoy like Graces and
Gifts; only the power he gave to the New Regeneration out of the faded
heavenly Image, that the soul should through the power of the New
Regeneration, work, and flourish, spread forth and be great, therewith, that
is, that the soulish-Tree with its branches should grow out of this blessing.

18. In the words of this blessing there is this understanding or meaning; viz.
The Incorporated ground of grace in the power and virtue of the Word spoke
forth the power, and comprised in Jacob, his body, soul, and Spirit, in One,
and thereby spoke it self forth upon the children of Joseph; God, before whom
my fathers Abraham and Isaac have walked, that is, through the wills and
desires, which my fathers have inclined to God, with which, they have walked
before God: also, through the power of God who has sustained me my life long,
even unto this day; also the Angel who has delivered me from all Evil,
bless these Ladds, that is* he blesses them through the divine and humane
power, through the Angel of the great Council in Christ Jesus, which Angel
has delivered Men from all Evil, that they should according to these Names be
called children of the Covenant, and in this power, increase and grow great.

19. But when Joseph saw, that his father laid his right hand upon Ephraims
head, it pleased him not well, and he laid hold on his fathers hand, Genesis 48.17.
that he should turn it from Ephrams head upon Manassehs head, and said to
him, not so my father; this is the first borne, lay thy right hand upon his
head: but his father refused and said, I know it well my son, I know it well,
this shall also be a people, and be great, but his younger Brother shall be
greater then he, and his seed shall be a multitude of people.

20. By the outward figure the Spirit points at their Offsprings, which Stock
or Tribe should excel the other in greatness and Might; but by the Inward
figure of Man's conversion and New Birth, it points at the inward Ground;
signifying, how the inward and youngest ground of the incorporated Grace in
Christ, would be greater then the ground of the first Created Adamicall Man.

21. But that Joseph disliked it and would not willingly that the youngest
should be preferred before the Eldest; in the figure, it signifies this:
Joseph stood in the figure of the New Regeneration, signifying, how the inward
ground, viz. the Eternal Speaking Word in the humanity of Christ, should turn
it self forth through our soul, and take away the power of self-will, from
the soul, and that the Creaturely soul would not, that it should loose its
power, it would not willingly dye to its own will, but keep its first Natural
right.

22. As we see in Christ's humanity, viz. in the humane Soul, when it was to
dye to self and yield up its Natural right; Mat. 26.36. Luke 22.39.
Then said Christ on the Mount of Olives, father, if it be possible, that is,
the humane soul in him from the Fathers property in the Word, said, Father, if
it be possiblle let this Cup pass from me, but if it be not possible, and
that I must drink it, thy will be done; as Joseph here in this figure was
loath to come to it, and would not willingly that the last, should be preferred
before the first.

23. The Text says, it pleased him not well, the Natural Man is not well
pleased, to give up his natural right and let the Kingdom of humility reign
in him, he would rather be Lord himself, but his own will has squandred that
away, so that he is set behind, for it is not possible, that he should become
the child of God, unless he drink the Cup, whereby he dies to his own
natural will: Therefore says Christ; Father, thy will be done, and not my
Natural Adamicall humane will, but let Gods will in my inward ground be done,
and not my Adamicall souls will: It shall and must be resigned into God, the
first natural right must go backward behind, and Christ forward, else there
is no salvation.

24. In this Type and Image, the Spirit of God sporteth with the children of
the Saints; signifying, how the new incorporated Kingdom of Grace would spread
it self forth aloft, and how the Kingdom of Nature should be set back
behind, for, if Christ arise and be borne in Man, then must Adam be Servant
and Minister.

25. And it declares besides, that the Kingdom of Nature would also be great,
but the Kingdom of Grace yet greater; of which we have a similitude in a
great Tree of many branches, which through Nature generateth many twiggs and
Branches, and wherein Nature is powerful, but the virtue and power of the Sun
is much more powerful; for if this does not cooperate, then the Tree cannot
grow nor bear any fruit: and we clearly see thereby, that the virtue and
power of the Sun must get aloft, if the Tree grow and its fruit come to be
ripe and profitable; so also is it in Man.

26. Man is Nature, and Nature begets him that he may come into the forms
and Conditions of the Creatures, but the understanding must come forth in him,
which governs and takes care of Nature; Nature wills indeed that its
desire be fullfilled, but the understanding rules over Nature.

27. But now Nature is sooner and Earlyar then the understanding; Nature goes
foremost; but when the understanding comes, then it must follow behind; thus
it is to be understood also in this figure of Jacob and Joseph, concerning the
New Regeneration, that, when the divine understanding shall again be
manifested in Man, then shall Nature follow behind.

28. Gen 48.20.
Thus he blessed them that day and said: He that will bless any in Israel
let him say; God set thee as Ephraim and Manasseh; In this Text what the Spirit
declares in this figure is as clear as the Sun; for Ephraim and Manasseh
were re-inoculated back into the Root of Jacob, that is, into the Covenant of
Grace, which God had manifested in him, and were transplanted with the Birth of
the Natural right, when the youngest was preferred before the Eldest; thus
also should all blessing and wishing be, among the children of God; that God
would set them back from the Evil Adamicall will of self, and set them into
the Paradisicall Covenant again, and make them grow therein and bring forth
the Kingdom of Grace in them, and set it above the Kingdom of Nature of the
first Adamicall Birth: when this is done in Man, then he is a child of God
again in Christ, and stands in the blessing of God.

29. Courteous Rabbis and Masters of Literature.
Criticismes upon every letter, learn I pray to understand the figures of the
Old and New Testament, and dispute not about the outward shell of words; look
upon the chief Ground, why the Spirit of God thus speaks, and why it sets
down such Types and Images, and consider what this signifies, that the Holy
Ghost in all the figures of Christ, always sets the youngest before the
Eldest; begin at Cain and Abell, and go quite through, and then you will come
to Rest, and your Strife has an End.

30. The Time of Strife is at an End, Ephraim shall rule over Manasseh, if you
do not so, then will the Sun dazzle and blind you with its rising, that ye
must for Ever be blind. Ye would verily see with the Eye of the Kingdom of
Nature, and yet ye contemn the Eye of Grace; but Ephraim attaineth the
Natural right of the first Birth; why will ye Strive against your father
Jacob? as if he did not rightly bless; for ye set Manasseh before and Ephraim
following behind, it is made manifest before the Eyes of the Most high, who
has set Ephraim foremost again; the kingdom of Nature in humane self should
be the Servant, and that ye would not, but the purpose of the Most high goes
forward, and ye are all therefore like to go to the Ground, there is no
preventing of it more.

31. Now when Jacob had blessed Joseph and his sons, then he represented a
very secret Type or Image of Christendom upon Earth; for thus says Moses:
Genesis 48.21, 22.
And Israel said to Joseph, behold, I dye, and God will be with you, and will
bring you again into the Land of your fathers, I have given thee a piece of
Land beyond thy brethren that I took with my sword and with my Bow out of the
hand of the Amorites.

32. Although there may well be an outward figure herein, which indeed is
always so, yet this is much more an inward figure of Christendom: for what
could Jacob give away, of that, which he had not in his possession; he had not
Sichem in possession, as the Glosses upon this Text will have it expounded,
which look only at some outward thing, so he could not give it severally to
Joseph, for Joseph dwelt not there, but he and all his children and childrens
children dyed in Egypt.

33. Besides Jacob said, he had taken it with his sword and with his Bow out of
the hand of the Amorites, which is no wh^re to be shown, and yet may well be
outwardly done so, seeing he says, he has given it to Joseph, as to the Type
of Christendom, and took it with the sword, therefore it is a figure and
secret Speech.

34. For, Jacob says, behold I die, and ye shall come again into this Land,
God will bring you thereinto: this first points at Christ, who should come
out of Jacobs Covenant which God had in him; when that should die according to
our humanity, then would God bring Israel again into the Land of Gods
Covenant, and the Covenant has a piece of Land in this world, that at all
times would be a dwelling for Christendom upon Earth; although that piece of
Land, would be often turned with Manasseh and Ephraim from one place to another.

35. That same piece of Land or Christian Habitation has Christ taken with his
Bow and sword of the Spirit, and subdued the Princes of this world in his
victory, that Christendom should have this at all times upon Earth; whereby
then we see, that Christendom should have the smallest victory upon Earth, so
that its Kingdom is like a remaining overplus piece of Land; that so the Name
of Christ might therein be outwardly known and acknowledged.

36. Further, it is the Most Excellent figure concerning Israel, which with
Jacob, that is, with the rising of the Kingdom of Christ, would die, that is,
the Jewish Polity and Government would be suppressed, but God would in the
last time bring them into this Land, viz. into the true Covenant in Christ; for
he has reserved this piece of Land beforehand, that they should possess the
same again; which Babell believes not, but their time is near, for the
fullnes of the Heathens is at an End.

CHAP. LXXVI. How Jacob called all his Sons before his End, and signified and
prophesied to them, how their Generations would rise up, and what each of their
State and Condition would be, whereby he Expressed the Root of Abraham's Tree,
together with its Branches and fruit; What the State and Office of each of them
would be, and how they would behave themselves, and how Christ would be borne
of the Stock of Judah: also how long their Kingdom would continue under the
Law.
Genesis 49. from the first to the 12th verse.
Gen XLIX.1, 2.
1. MOses says; And Jacob called his sons and said, Gather your selves
together, that I may make known unto you what will happen to you in the future
Times: come together and hearken ye children of Jacob, and hear your father
Israel. In this Chapter lies the whole understanding and knowledge, how it
would go with the children of Israel in the future time under the Law, as
also afterward with Christendom; for in this Chapter, the Spirit has
expressed and figuratively represented the tree of Israel, with its Branches,
twiggs, and fruit, both according to the Kingdom of Nature, and according to
the Kingdom of Grace, and under that signifies concerning all States,
Conditions, Orders, and Offices, among both Jews and Christians, especially
the Antichristian Kingdom among Jews and Christians, is powerfully prefigured
under it, whence it arises, and how it must fall to the ground again, and yet
would continue a long time, even till the Manifestation or Revelation of Jesus
Christ.

2. For, Israel here under this Exposition, declares concerning the whole
Adamicall tree, how it was good in the beginning, and how it perished, also how
it would be helped again, and how the Kingdom of Nature would outwardly
Govern in Gods wrath, and yet the Kingdom of Grace cooperate through the
wrath; whereby the natural Evil Man would outwardly seem, as if he would
serve God and minister to him, but would only be a false flattery and show of
Hypocrisy, so long till Christ would break forth out of Gods Covenant, and
destroy Satan's hypocritical Kingdom.

3. And he begins at Reuben, viz. from the first power of the humane Life,
and reaches to Benjamin the last, under whom Christendom is powerfully
prefigured, and what its properties would be, so also are the times and Ages of
the World powerfully pourtrayed under it: If the reader will Observe it and
gather the sense thereof, then he will find our Exposition in the true and
right Ground.

I. The Testament of Reuben.
4. He began at Reuben and said: Reuben my first son, Genesis 49.3, 4.
thou art my power and virtue, and my first might and strength: the chiefest in
the sacrifice, and the Chiefest in the Kingdom and Government; he was vain
and fickle therein as water: thou shall not be the Chiefest, thou did climb
up into thy fathers Couch, and there have defiled my bed with thy climing up.

In the Figure it stands thus.
5. The Spirit in the Covenant Speaks forth the humane Nature of Adam, viz.
the first power of the first seed to a re-propagation, as indeed Reuben also
was the first power of Jacob; and signifies that the Natural first Adamicall
Man should be the chiefest in Gods Sacrifice, that is, he should bring forth
right fruit to him, which might be to the pra^se of God, and in the virtue
thereof increase the heavenly Joy: he should generate virtue to him and a
re-expression through the implanted Word of God; and that is called Sacrificing
to God, when the Creaturely humane Word, which God formed into a Creature, viz.
the humane understanding Life, re-expresseth Gods Word out of it self, and
forms it self in Holy Images, thoughts, or Imaginations.

6. Which formation is effected in the Generating of the heavenly Mercuriall
Harmony, viz. after that manner as when the implanted Word in Man, imageth or
frames it self into a Song of Divine Joyfulnesse, and sporteth in the holy
pure Element before God; in which Frameing, Figuring, or Imaging.
modelling or holy desire, the holy wisdom of God Co-modelleth, and becomes
figured in Wonders; whereby the Eternal One becomes formable and distinct,
viz. is known in different varieties, this is called Sacrificing to God, in
that manner as twiggs and branches bear fair fruit to the Tree, whereby the
tree is known and Manifested to be Good; thus also the Creaturely formed Word,
viz. Man, should, to the Eternal Speaking holy Word of God, which Word is the
Stock; Generate or bear to the Stock, Good fruit, viz. the praise of God.

7. This is as much as to say, Adam was the chiefest in the Sacrifice, for he
was the first out-spoken or Expressed Word that God spoke in his Image, and was
also the chiefest in the Kingdom or Government; for to him belonged the
Eternal Dominion: he was created out of the Eternal, in and to the Eternal,
he was the Image of God, wherein the word of God according to Time and Eternit^
was Imaged or framed.

8. Therefore now the Spirit in the Covenant represents this before him by
the Stock of Israel, out of which the new tree should spring out of the Old,
and points at both the Adamicall and also the New Tree of Regeneration, and
speaks further concerning the first power in Adam and Jacob, viz. concerning
the Kingdom of Nature, of the first Image.

9. He was unstable or fickle therein as water, as we experiment that, in
Adam and all natural Men, as Adam suddenly and unstablely therein, departed
from his Glory, both from the Divine Kingdom, and also from the sacrifice of
God, and Entered into self-will, and forsook Gods will, and brought himself
from the Divine Imaging or modelling.
formation into a Earthly formation, with the desire and lust, whence he became
Beastiall and Evil.

10. Whence now the Spirit in the Covenant says, through Jacob: thou shall not
be the chiefest; that is, the first Image shall not keep the Government,
neither in the Dominion of the Kingdom, viz. of the natural power and
authority; nor in the sacrifice of God; but the second Adam, Christ, out of
Judah shall be he; and therefore, because thou have climed up upon thy fathers
Couch, and there, have defiled my Bed with thy climing up.

This Figure stands thus.
11. Adam had his fathers chaste Marriage Bed in him, when his Eve was yet
un-made, he was Man and Woman, and yet neither of them, but a true and right
Marriage Bed of God, wherein Gods word in his Marriage in both Tinctures, viz.
of the fire and light, works in power, for he stood in the Image of God, in
which God wrought, as in the holy Angels. The propagation stood in one single
Image, as God is in one Eternal Substance, so also was he, who was out of that
same Substance of all Substances, created in one only Image; for the
spermatick nature and kind was in him the Verbum Fiat, the word Fiat, which
had formed him into the Image of God, wherein the Self-love lay, viz. in the
perpetual Conjunction of both properties of the only Tincture, viz. the power
of the holy Magic fire and Light, which is spiritual, and the true Life.

12. In this Image, he was the chiefest in the Sacrifice and in the Kingdom;
for he could sacrifice to God, both spiritually and Creaturally, in that manner
as a Tree without the interposition or supply from another, does it self bring
forth its branches and fruit, and thrusts forth from it self the fair
blossoms in a lovely smell and virtue, with fair Colors according to its
kind, and that as Gods Word had ejected and generated it out of it self; all
this power lay also in him.

13. But the self-will was unstable and fickle therein, and brought it self
into a Beastiall property; into false and wicked lust and desire, and climed
with the Beastiall Lust and desire, into this holy Marriage Bed, into which
Lust, Satan brought it, viz. the Ground of the dark world according to the
Imaging or representation of Fancy, as also the Devil with the holding forth
of the monstrous beastiall property, together with the subtilty and Wit of the
Serpent, viz. of the Ground of the first Principle, so that the selfe^will
plunged it self therein, and was infected therewith, and made its power of
Imaging or thinking, according to Soul and Body, Monstrous, whence the
Beastiall Imagination in Adam awaked and began.

14. And here he climed up upon his fathers, viz. upon Gods, Marriage Bed, and
defiled it with beastiall, as also devilish, false, and wicked Imaginations,
which Lust he introduced into Gods Concubine, viz. into the heavenly sperme or
seed of the heavenly worlds Substance, upon which, Gods Spirit, viz. the holy
Word in this heavenly Substance, departed from him; that is, the self-will of
Man rent it self off from the Will of the Word; and now it was unstable in the
Devils poison, and lost the Kingdom and the Priesthood, viz. the Princely
Throne, and was thereupon weak and blind as to God, and fell down into
sleep, and lay, between God and the Kingdom of this world, in impotency and
weakness.

15. Now thus says Moses: and God suffered or Genesis 2.21.
caused him to fall into a deep sleep, and framed a Or, woman.
wife out of him, and brought her to him, and gave him a beastiall Marriage Bed
for a heavenly: where he may now Copulate in selfe-Lust, which in the presence
of heaven is but a defiled Marriage Bed, but is borne withal, under Gods Mercy
in divine Patience, seeing that the vessel of this Marriage Bed must consume,
rott, and dye, and Christ has given in himself in this Marriage Bed into the
Middle as a Mediator, and Redeemer, from this monstrous Image, which he will
regenerate a new in himself.

16. This powerful Type or Image, the Spirit of God also represents by Reuben,
who was Jacobs first virtue and power, wherein, the desire of Reuben also
modelled it self in the Adamicall Image, and went back and lay with his
fathers Concubine, and in falsehood and wickedness copulated with her, as the
free will of the soul in Adam, copulated with Gods Concubine in him, by false
and wicked Lust, and became a breaker of Wedlock to God, as Reuben did.

17. And for the sake of this, has Adam, viz. the first power of the Natural
Man, in all Men, lost the Kingly Priesthood, so that the Natural Man in his
own power and virtue, can no more offer sacrifice to God; also he
understands nothing more of Gods Word or Kingdom, 1 Cor. 2.14.
It is foolishnes unto him, and he cannot apprehend it any more; for he
stands in a poisonous monstrous Image, which in this Adamicall property
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and has lost the Kingdom of God, and is
now but a figure or similitude of this World and of Hell, a Monster [instead]
of the Image of God, and shall no more be the chief in the Sacrifice and
Kingdom, but Christ in the New birth in him, has attained the Kingdom, in
the sacrifice and Government.

18. The Natural Man, viz. the first power and virtue must be Servant, and lay
off the Monstrous whorish Image, and be newborn again: the Soul through the
Spirit of Christ, and the Body through the putrefaction of the Earth, from
which, at the End of the Last Judgment Day.
Day, he shall be severed and be formed again into the Image of God.

II. and III. The Testament of Simeon and Levi.
19. Genesis 49.5, 6, 7.
^he brethren, Simeon and Levi, their swords are Murdering Weapons; my soul
come not into their Council, and my honor be not thou in their Churches,
Assemblies, or Congregations; for in their Anger they have slain a Man, and in
their stubborn selfe-willednes, they have destroyed Oxen: Cursed be their
Anger, because it was so vehement and fierce, and their Wrath, because it was
so raging, I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them abroad in Israel.

20. In this Testament the Spirit very wonderfully takes the two brethren
together, and represents their figure accordingly, which ought well to be
observed; as also the Spirit of Moses in the 34th Chapter takes them together;
where he says; Genesis 34.25, 26, 27.29.
Simeon and Levi took their swords and went boysterously into the City, and
slew Sichem together with Hemor his father, and all the Males that were in the
whole City, and took the Women and children captive, and spoiled all; which
might indeed be the Action and Robbery of two stout young Men; but the Spirit
has in that place, as also in this, its figure, according as Jacob says; He
would tell them, how it would go with them in after times.

21. In Reuben the Spirit represents before the Adamicall corrupt Nature,
that the first virtue and power of Man, squandred away Gods Priesthood and
Kingdom, viz. the Kingdom of Heaven, and defiled Gods Marriage Bed, and made
a Bed of whoredom thereof: but now in this figure the Spirit of God
represents a powerful figure, signifying, how the first power of Man, would
nevertheless, desire to keep, its Priesthood and Dominion, and what kind of
Priests and Rulers would be in this world, in the Kingdom of Selfe-Nature.

22. For, out of the Stock of Levi came the Priesthood under the Law, and of
this the Spirit here speaks, and joyneth Simeon to him, viz. the worldly
Dominion, and says of them both as of one, Your swords are Murdering weapons,
my soul come thou not into their Council, and my honor be not thou in their
Churches; that is, Gods Living Word, which he calls his Soul, shall not be
in the Dominion of this Earthly World, viz. in Man's first Natural Selfe-power,
his holy Word shall not be in their Councills and determinations, wherein they
seek only temporal voluptuousnes and riches: neither shall it be in their
Churches and Priesthood, because they do but flatter with the Mouth: for he
says; My honor be not thou in their Churches.

23. But his Church, is the true Image of God from the heavenly Worlds
Substance, which, in their Murder, by the introduced poison of the Serpent,
faded in Adam, and is borne again in Christ; but seeing they would only play
the hypocrite before God in the Monster of the Serpent, and had not the Church
of God, in them; therefore says the Spirit; My honor be not thou therein.

24. For, Gods honor together with Christ Jesus, shall not come from the
Natural Adam, but from God and his holy Word; these should be the Holy Church
of God in Man, viz. the Image of the heavenly Worlds Substance, which dyed in
Adam, and budded forth again in Christ, in this should Gods honor appear; as
when Life buddeth forth through death, this was Gods honor: but the self
Adamicall will which was a Murtherour, and murdered the heavenly Image in him,
shall not have, this honor, this honor shall not appear in his Murtherous
Will.

25. In this Image, the figure stands clearly, which is pourtrayed in the
Revel. 17.
Apocalypse, of the Great Seven headed Dragon, upon which the Babylonish Whore
rides, where the Dragon and Whore are prefigured as one Image, and it is even
the same with this of Simeon and Levi, and it signifies, in the Adamicall
Corrupt power in the Monstrous Image, the Government of Nature in self will,
together with the Sectarian hypocritical Priesthood.

26. The seven heads of the Beast are the 7 properties.
seven properties of Nature, which are departed from the Temperature, and have
attained 7 heads.
seven heads, viz. a seavenfold will, whence the Life, is come to be in
Strife, misery, sickness and Corruption; and the Whore, upon this Beast, is the
Soul, which is defiled as a Whore, and enters before God with this Whores
Image, and plays the hypocrite in his presence.

27. But the Will of the seaven-headed Beast, gives its power and strength to
the Whore, viz. to the Soul, so that the soul sticks full of Murder,
Pride, whorish Lust, and selfe-honour; and in this Church and Den of Murder,
Gods honor will not be.

28. This Figure and Magic Exposition concerning Simeon and Levi, prefigureth
to us, the spiritual and worldly Dominion; first in every Man, whereby he
governs himself both in spiritual and Natural things; and secondly, the
Management and authority of spiritual and worldly Offices, both in the Church
and worldly matters; whatsoever rules therein in self Adamicall power,
without the New Regeneration, that bears this Image in it, viz. the
Murdering sword, where Men Condemn and slay one another with words.

29. All scurrilous, slanderous, libellous books, wherein Men reproach and
kill one another with words for the sake of the Divine Gift and knowledge; are
the Murtherous swords of Simeon and Levi: also all unrighteous Sentences of
worldly Judgment, are the same, and Gods honor and will, is not therein.

30. The Spirit takes them both together in one figure, because both these
Offices govern the Adamicall Nature: They govern the world, viz. the formed
outspoken word of God, to them is given the power and authority of the Kingdom
of Nature, but they shall give an account of this Government: for the Judgment
of God is set in this figure, and the Rev. 19.20.
Apocalypse casts the falsehood and wickedness of this Image down into the
fiery Lake that burns with brimstone, and seals up the Beast and the whore
in Eternity, and gives the Kingdom the power and authority, together with the
Priesthood, to Christ and his children borne of him.

31. The Spirit of Moses says: Gen 49.6.
In their anger they have slain a Man, and in their self will they have
destroyed Oxen. The Man, signifies, the inward Spiritual Man, viz. the true
Image of God, which Adam Murdered, in all his children, through his anger,
viz. through the first Principle, the Kingdom of Gods Anger; which Adam
awakened with his desire and Lust; and it signifies further, Christ that
should come, whom the Levites with the Simeonites, viz. Worldly Dominion, viz.
the Pharisees, and Heathenish Government, would kill: for Jacob said, he would
make known to them, what would befall them in the future times.

32. Therefore this figure looks at the future Man Christ, whom the Levites
would slay in their Envy and anger, as is also come to pass, and for that
cause shall his honor be no more in their Churches; for after such slaying of
Christ, their Church was taken from them, and the Temple destroyed, and their
Sacrifices ceased, in which formerly the figure of Christ, viz. Gods honor,
stood.

33. But the Oxen which they have caused to perish, in their self-will,
signifies the outward Man from the Limus of the Earth, which they have caused
to perish with the desire of vanity, so that it is become so grossly beastiall
and miserable, that it is turned from a heavenly Paradisicall Image, into a
corruptible one, which is done out of self-will.

34. Further, it points at the future self will of the Levites, with their
worldly Dominion, signifying how they would slay and kill with their Murdering
swords, whereas they can destroy no more of Gods children but the Oxen, viz.
the beastiall Man: which Murdering swords have ever been among this
Generation, both with the Jews and Christians, which the children of God ought
well to observe, that the Spirit of God in the Covenant says, his soul shall
not be in their murtherous Council, nor his honor in their Churches, for the
sake of which they murder and destroy many that will not believe their Sects
and selfe-willed Conclusions and determinations.

35. Especially at this present time, when Men strive only about the Churches
and Church Matters, and murder one another for such things, and destroy land
and people in their self-will; Men living only in self-will, and do not
entend and seek Gods honor thereby, but only their own honor, might,
authority and power, and thereby fatten the Ox, viz. the Belly God, the honor
of God and his Word, is not among all these; but as Jacob says; Cursed be
their anger for it is vehement and fierce, and their wrath for it is raging;
for they do all out of self-will and anger; and therein the anger of God
drives them on: and therefore they run on into the Curse, in the Murtherous
swords.

36. And it says further; I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel, which is indeed befallen them, so that they are divided and scattered
among all people, and have now no City, Country, or Principality more; also
the Spirit intimates the dividing of the Earthly Life, wherein this anger and
self will must be quite divided from it, and the body be scattered like Ashes:
for the Curse breaks in pieces and scatters both its Dominion and
Priesthood, together with its body and outward senses and Life; for it is all
in the presence of God, but a Curse and vanity.

37. For the Spirit of Jacob says; I will divide them in Jacob; that is,
through the Covenant of Jacob, viz. through Christ, and will scatter them in
Israel, that is, through the new sprout out of the Covenant, the Adamicall
Tree shall be destroyed, and divided, and its works together with its Body and
thoughts, be scattered, and the works of the Devil be brought to nothing; also
this their Priesthood and Dominion shall be yet so destroyed, divided, and
scattered as the Chafe is by the wind, when the Kingdom of Christ and his
Priesthood shall spring up, where Christ alone shall reign, and then all this
will have an End, which seems strange to Babell.

IV. The Testament of Judah.
Genesis 49.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
38. Judah, thou art he, Thy Brethren will praise Thee; Thy hand will be upon
the neck of thy Enemies, thy fathers children will bow down before thee; Judah
is a young Lion, thou art come a loft my son, through great victory, he has
stooped down and couched, as a Lion and as a Lioness, who will set upon him
to rouse him up? The Scepter will not be removed from Judah, nor a Master from
his feet, till the Savior come, and to him will the people cleave: he will
bind his fool to the Vine, and his shee-asses colt to the precious Branch; he
will wash his Garment in wine, and his Mantle in the blood of Grapes: his Eyes
are redder then wine, and his Teeth whiter then Milk.

39. By the first Three sons of Jacob, the Spirit intimates concerning the
corrupted lost Adam and his children, signifying how they were in the sight of
God, and what their Kingdom upon Earth, would be; but here, with Judah he
begins to intimate concerning the Kingdom of Christ, viz. concerning
Christ's Person and Office, and sets Christ in the fourth Line, which is a
great Mystery; for in the fourth property of the generating of Nature, is
understood the fire, viz. the Original of the Fire, out of which the Light
takes its Original, whereby the Abyss becomes Majestic, wherein then also
the Original of Life is understood, before the soul is therein understood
according to its property.

40. Seeing then this Souls Ground in Adam was fallen and perished, therefore
has God also set his figure of the New Life therein, and in this Testament of
the Twelve Patriarchs, the figure stands signifying, how the beginning of
Life is, and how the New birth springs forth in the Light again, through the
perished fire-Life in the Light: also in the Testament of Judah all
Circumstances are declared, showing, how the New Life in Christ would spring
forth through the Soul, and rule over the Sting of Death.

41. Jacob says; Thou art he, thy brethren will praise thee; in this he
looks outwardly upon the Earthly Kingdom; which should arise in the future
Time: and inwardly he looks upon the Kingdom of Christ, which both Jews and
Heathens would embrace, and praise and honor Christ as God and Man.

42. And he says further; for thy hand will be upon the Neck of thy enemies;
by this he understands and means, not only the Jews outward Enemies; but
that the hand, viz. the power of Christ's Grace, would essentially, actually,
and effectually be upon the Neck of Satan and the Serpents Poison and will, in
flesh and Blood, and evermore trample upon that Serpents head in his children
of Faith.

43. Also, thy Fathers children will bow before thee, that is, before this
Christ of the Stock or Tribe of Judah, will all the Children of God, stoop,
bow, and pray to, as a God-Man and Man-God.

44. Also,; Judah is a young Lion, that is, Roaring against the Devil, and a
destroyer of Death and Hell, as a fresh young nimble Lion, mighty in strength
and power.

45. Also, thou art come aloft my son, and exalted, by a Great victory, that
is, after he had the victory over Gods Anger, over Death, Sin, the Devil and
Hell, he was placed at the right hand of Gods power, as a Man-God, and rules
over all his Enemies.

46. Also: He stooped and couched down, as a Lion and as a Lioness, who will
set upon him to rouse him up? that is, he has so deeply humbled himself, with
his highest Love, and rendered himself in our assumed humanity into the scorn
and contempt of the fallen Man, and stooped into Gods anger, and suffered the
Natural Life to break in pieces, and very patiently given his Strong Lions
might, thereinto.

47. But that the Text says; as a Lion and as a Lioness; it signifies, the
young Lion of the Divine Word* in the soul, and the Lioness signifies the
Name JESUS, in the most inward Ground of the heavenly worlds substance, viz.
the Noble Lioness of Sophia, that is, the right seed of the Woman from the
Adamicall Lights Tincture, which faded in Adam, and in this Lion was made
living again in divine power, and associated it self again to the Lion, viz.
to the Soul.

48. Also; who will set upon him to rouse him up? that is, who can set himself
aganst this Lion and heavenly holy Lioness to rouse them up, which are, God
over all, and through all? who will take away his power, who is the beginner of
all power, strength, and might? Where is the Champion that can strive when
there is no higher power to be had?

49. Also; The Scepter shall not be removed from Judah, nor a Master from under
his feet, till the Champion or Savior come, and to him will the people
cleave; the understanding or meaning of this, is twofold, viz. outwardly
concerning the Kingdom of Judah, that the Jewish Scepter of its Kingdom
should continue and they be a Kingdom, till this Champion or Savior, viz. the
Lion with the Lioness, viz. Christ, that is, this Covenant, should become Man;
which is so come to pass, that they held their Kingdom, though it seemed
often as it were quite overthrown, till Christ, and then it quite ceased, and
there was another Master or Governor that ruled it, for since that time they
must be servile people; for the Champion or Savior has taken to himself
their Kingdom, and is therewith entered in among the Heathen, and has called
them also to himself.

50. But the inward Ground is this, that the Kingdom of Christ and his
Dominion over Sin, Death, the Devil and Hell, will not cease, nor any other
Ruler or Master come from between his feet, that is, from the Covenant of God;
till this Savior Christ, should come again to Judgment, and sever his
Enemies, then shall he deliver up the Kingdom again to his Father, and then
God shall be all in all; therefore do the Jews in vain hope for another
Master or Ruler, although indeed he will come to them also in the Time of his
Revelation, Manifestation, or appearing, which time is near, wherein the
Kingdom of Christ will be manifested to all people.

51. Also: to him will the people cleave; this is done already according to his
humanity, and will much more be done in his last manifestation, that all people
will cleave to him and acknowledge him, when Babell takes its End, then will
this be first perfectly fullfilled, which dependence and cleaving to him, at
present the Images, Imaginations or fictions of Opinions and Sects in Babell,
do keep back, in that the strange and foreign People and Nations stumble,
and are scandalized at the Contentions and Disputations of Confounded Or, words
of Jarring Contention.
Speeches, and withhold from it.

52. But when the Tower of Babell falls on every side, then shall all people
cleave to him, honor and serve him, which dependence and cleaving to him,
supposed Christendom, has hindered by the Antichrist, which has a long time
sat in the seat of Christ, as an Earthly God; when this cease, then will
the Kingdom of Christ be wholly manifest, which Men at present behold only in
Or, Opinions, without certain knowledge.
Images: this is understood by those of our society.

53. Also; he will bind his Fool to the Vine, and his shee-asses colt to the
Noble Branch; O thou poor sick old miserable Adam, if thou did understand
this rightly, then thou would be delivered from all strife; What is the fool
and the shee-Asses colt? The fool is the humane soul: for the Young Lion
signifies the power of the divine Word in the soul; but the fool is the
natural soul, which Christ should bind to the vine of the sweet tasted
divine Love, viz. the Eternal Speaking Word would bind this Fool, the
Creaturely Souls Word of the Souls Essence and Substance, to it self, and be
married to it; and the shee-Asse is the inward Paradisicall Man, viz. the
Divine Man, from the Ens of the inward Ground, from the heavenly Worlds Lights
Substance, viz. the Virgin Sophia.

54. This shee-Asse, which must bear the outward burden, of the beastiall Man
upon it, should Christ, that is, the Word, bind to the Name JESUS, viz. to
Gods own selfe-subsisting Substance, viz. to the most Noble Branch, which
bears the sweet wine of the Love of God.

55. And this shee-Asse, is the Temple of God, wherein the Kingdom of God is
again Manifested in us, it is Coloss. 3.11. and 1.27.
Christ in us, which is a shee-Asse in Man, himself takes upon him the
burden and sin of Man, and slays it through the Young Lion.

56. This Inward new spiritual holy Man is rightly the shee-Asses colt, for it
must be manifested through the soul, as Light is manifested through fire, thus
a Man is to understand, that the light is the fires Colt, and is manifested
through the fire, from the dying of the Candle; thus also it is to be
understood in the Ground of the soul, which is also a fire-Spirit.

57. O, thou poor Christendom, if thou did understand this rightly, and
did press into it, so that thou also with this shee-Asse which faded in
Adam, stoodest bound to the foles Noble Branch; what needs striving then? Is it
not now a simple shee-Asse which bears Christ and Adam upon it, viz. Christ
in it, which is its Noble Branch, viz. its sap and power, and Adam upon it as a
Burden.

58. O thou Babylonish whore! thou keep off this shee-Asse with thy
Dragon-Beast, so that poor Christendom must bear thy Evil Beast; whereon
thou whore, ridest; but thy time is near, that thou art to go into the Abyss
of Hellfire, says the Spirit of Wonders.

59. Also; he will wash his Garment in wine, and his Mantle in the blood of the
Grape, that is, Christ will wash our humanity, viz. the Garment of the soul,
in the wine of his Love, and with the Love wash away from the defiled Adamicall
flesh, the earthly dross and spawne of the Serpent, that Adam had received
with his desire and Lust, from which the Earthly Man became a Beast; and leave
the spawne of the Serpent to the Earth, and in the End burn it up with the
fire of God.

60. And his Mantle in the blood of the Grape: the Mantle is the Cover, which
covers the washed Garment, and is even the precious purple Mantle of Christ,
viz. the scorn, affliction, Torment, and suffering; when he thereby washed our
sins in his blood, that is, the right blood of the Grape, wherein he washed
his Mantle, which now he casts over our Garment and covers it, viz. over
our humanity, that Gods anger, and the Devil, may not touch it.

61. O, Man! consider this, this Mantle will not be cast over the Beast and the
Whore, to cover them; as Babell teaches, but over the washed Garment, that is
washed in right true Repentance, with Gods Love: this Garment of the soul will
be covered with the Mantle of Christ, which is once washed in his blood of the
Grape; and not whores, Panders, unclean persons, Covetous, Extortioners,
unrighteous, cruel, raging, stern, and proud, so long as they are such, they
have only the Mantle of the Babylonish whore about them, and get not this holy
washed Mantle of Christ, upon them; flatter and play the hypocrite as much as
thou will, yet thou will not get it, except thou art washed beforehand; thy
Comforting thy self will not avayle thee, thou must set upon it in Earnest,
that thy shee-Asse may live, and thy ^ole be Essentially bound to the vine
Christ, else thou art a Member of the Whore sitting upon the seven headed
Dragon; and if thou could pass through the Thrones of Heaven, yet thou
would be but a child of the Dragon.

62. O, Babell Babell, what have thou done? in Covering the Beast with this
Mantle, and art thy self, remaining under it, a Wolf.

63. Also; His Eyes are redder then wine, and his Teeth whiter then Milk: His
Eyes are now the fire-flaming Love, which pierce and press through the Fathers
Anger, and look through the fiery-soule, wherein the Fathers anger in the
fiery soul becomes a light flaming Love-fire; and so the Souls Essence is
thereby become a sweet pleasant tasted divine red Love-wine, one property in
the Soulish Essence tasting the other in great desire of Love, and the fathers
property of anger flows forth in a clear good pleasant relish.

64. And his Teeth are whiter then Milk: these white Teeth are the desire of
the inward Spiritual Man, where the holy word is together in the desire of
these Teeth, which white Teeth of heavenly desire, apprehends, eats and
drinks the Grape of Christ's blood; for it is the Spiritual Mouth, for which
Christ has ordained his Testament, that it should with these white Teeth, Joh.
6.53. etc.
Eat his flesh and drink his blood; this, the Spirit in the Covenant,
declares clearly and plainly, by Jacob.

65. For, the Testament of Judah points throughout at Christ, at his Person,
Office and Kingdom, for of Judah, Christ should come according to the
humanity, outwardly the figure of the Type, stands, and inwardly, in the
Spiritual Figure, Christ stands clearly.

CHAP. LXXVII. A Further Exposition of Jacobs Testament, Concerning the other
Eight Sons, how both the Jewish Government or Kingdom on Earth, and also
Christendom is Typified under it, showing how it would go with them.
From the 12th verse of the 49th Chapter of Genesis to the last verse thereof.
1. BY the first Three sons of Jacob is typified in the Figure the Kingdom
of perished or corrupt Nature, viz. the Adamicall Man, what it is; and by
Judah, Christ is Typified, who should come and bring the Adamicall Man into his
Kingdom; but by the other Eight sons of Jacob is Typified, only the figure
of worldly Officers States and Governments; signifying, how the Adamicall Man
would manage the Superior Dominion, and how also the inward figure of the
Kingdom of Christ would stand close by it.

2. For here in the outward figure is first Typified, where each Tribe or
Stock would have their dwelling and habitation, and what their Office in
Israel would be, but near to it stands always the figure, representing,
how the outward and the inward Man would stand close by one another; and how
the Kingdom of Nature and the Kingdom of Grace would dwell one by another;
also how the Seven properties of Nature in Gods anger, according to the first
Principle, would also put forth or explicate themselves, and introduce
themselves into figure, to the divine manifestation; which the reader should
well observe and consider, for we will explain both the inward and the outward
figure.

V. The Testament of Zebulun.
3. Zebulun will dwell at the Haven of the Sea, and at the Haven of Ships, Genesis
49.13.
and reach to Zidon. This first, is the outward figure, showing, where this
Tribe or Stock will dwell in the promised Land, but the Spirit also has its
figure to which it points.

4. For Zebulun in the Language of Nature, in sense, is called a desire or
Longing that goes to God, which longing resides with good people; and it
signifies here that the Adamicall Man would dwell near God, and that he
would have delight and refreshment from the divine Neighborhood.
co-habitation; for, Jacob begat Zebulun of Lea, which otherwise was not
esteemed, because she was tender-sighted and bleere-eyd, and not so fair as
Rachell was; which Lea, put her hope in God, that he would bless her, that
she should be fruitful and bear children to her husband Jacob.

5. Now when she bare Zebulun, Genesis 30.20.
she said, God has pleaded well for me; that is, I turned my desire to him,
and he has fullfilled it for me, now his will dwells with mine, and she
called him [ (...)
Zebulun] a near dwelling or Co-habitation, that is, God dwells with me,
and now also will my husband dwell with me in Love, and it signifies, that
the Grace of God in his mercy and Compassion, shall still dwell with the poor
Adamicall perished or corrupt children of flesh, and not forsake them in their
misery.

6. But it has more respect to the Covenant, that the children of the Covenant
in their Adamicall Nature would be a near Cohabitation in Hope, and that the
Outward Man would not apprehend the Kingdom of Christ, but would be a near
co-habitation with it, where Christ should dwell in the inward Ground, viz. in
the Spiritual World, and Adam in this World or outward Life.
Time of the Life; and yet be a co-habitation.

7. For, as the Spirit has, by Judah, declared Christ in the flesh, so now
here he declares that the outward Man would not be Christ, but be a
Co-habitation of Christ; Christ would possess the inward Ground; as he also
says, My Kingdom is not of this world; Therefore the outward mortal Man
should not say of it self, I am Christ; for he is only a Co-habitation of
Christ, as the outward world is only a Co habitation or near neighborhood to
the Kingdom of Christ; for Christ is the inward Spiritual world, hidden in
the outward visible world, as the Day is hidden in the night, and yet they
dwell, one, by, near, and with, the other.

VI. The Testament of Issachar.
8. Genesis 49 14, 15.
Issachar is a strong boned Ass, and he lodges in valleys, between the
Borders or Hills of the Country, and he saw Rest that it was Good, and the Land
that it was pleasant and fruitful; but he has bowed his shoulders to bear
and is become a Tribute servant. In this Testament of Issachar, the Spirit
points first, at the outward figure of this Tribe or Stock, showing where
they should dwell; viz. in the midst of the Land in Good ease and Rest, but yet
be Tributary; but the powerful figure looks upon the inward Ground, viz.
upon the humane Nature.

9. For when Genesis 30.18*
Lea bare Issachar, she said, God has rewarded me in that I gave my Maid to
my husband, and she called him Issachar; that is, a divine wages or reward:
for she had given Rachell her Sons Mandrakes, that she suffered Jacob to
sleep with her this night, upon which she conceived this son, therefore
she called him a recompense from God.

10. But the Spirit says in this figure, he would be a boned strong Ass, and
lodge between the Borders; which outwardly in its habitation was just so; but
in the inward figure, he says; The man which is obtained from God by prayer,
is indeed a Gift and wages, but his Adamicall Nature, is only a Boned strong
Ass for the burden, who bears the Adamicall Sack; but he dwells with his
Mind between the Borders; viz. between God and the Kingdom of this world, his
Mind presses into the Borders of God, and the Body dwells in the World.

11. Therefore the Mind must be as a Boned servile slavish Ass, which though
it sits at ease and rest in a good habitation in the Borders of God, yet it
must bear the burden of sins and of Death in the earthly Sack, and there is
no buying it off with the Mandrakes, before the Death of the Earthly Man; also
no praying to God for it, avayleth, that thereby the Boned strong Ass might
come to divine Liberty; It must remain an Ass, till Christ, in himself
brings it into the Eternal Rest: The Adamicall hurt and loss is so great,
that the Ass must leave the Sack in the Death of Christ, else he will not be
rid of it.

12. But he adds the cause why he must remain a Boned strong Ass, for he
says, He saw the Rest, that it was good, and the Land that it was pleasant;
that is, that the Mind would always desire to rest in the Lust and pleasure
of the flesh; and would desire to take care of the Earthly Lust, and in that
regard, the Mind must be a servile Ass, and servant of Gods Anger; and so
seperateth the Natural Adamicall Man, from the Seed of the Covenant, viz.
from the person of Christ, so that the Natural Adamicall Man in its inbred
Nature, is but this Ass with the Sack, till Christ possesses his Kingdom, in
him; no Covenant or praying, avails, but that Adam must in this world remain
an Ass, till the Sack be gone, and then he is called a new child in Christ,
which new child in this Life is the inward Ground, but the boned strong Ass
is the new childs instrument, upon which the Sack is carried, for the
servility of Gods Anger continues so long as the Sack lasts.

VII. The Testament of Dan.
13. Genesis 49.16, 17, 18.
Dan will be a Judge among his People, as any other Generation in Israel: Dan
will be a Serpent in the way, and an Adder on the path, and will bite the horse
in the Heels, that his rider shall fall back: O Lord, I wait for thy
Salvation. This is a powerful figure of the outward power and authority of
humane Officers in the Kingdom of this World, and is so strongly prefigured,
that it is terrible to read, if a man rightly discern the figure; and yet in
the presence of God it stands in its own proper figure thus; The Spirit
says: Dan will be a Judge among his people, as one of the Generations or
Tribes in Israel.

In the Figure it stands thus.
14. Dan stands in the figure of all outward Officers, from those of highest
authority and power, even to the Ordering of a Man's own private affairs, or
employment^
Government of the humane Life it self; therefore the Spirit faith of him, he
shall be in his own might and power as one Man is to another: In the presence
of God he is not esteemed greater in his own Nature then a Servant or
Minister, for he serves God in his Office, as another servant does his Lord
and Master; the Office is Gods, wherein he sits as a Judge. The Office is
the Authority and power, and he himself is before God, as another Man.

15. But the Spirit says; Dan will be a Serpent on the way, and an Adder on
the path; that is, this Judge in Gods Office would draw poison out of the power
and authority, viz. self-will, and say of himself, the authority is mine, the
Office is mine; that is called, on the way, for the way which they should go,
is Gods, viz. true righteousness; then says Dan: that Land and Country, this
City, that Village, those Goods, that Money, is mine, it is my own, I will
use it to my own profit, advantage, and honor, and live in this Office as I
will.

16. And this very selfehood, is the Serpent and venomous Adder on the way, for
it walks very dangerous steps upon the paths of righteousness; it turns
righteousness into Selfehood to do what it will; it says, I am a Lord, the
City, Land and Country, the Village or Authority and power is mine, I may do
with the people what I will, they are mine, and so sucketh poison out of Gods
Office of a Judge, and thereby afflicts the miserable, and stingeth with this
poison round about in the way of the Office, as an Adder and Serpent.

17. For, the Spirit says; He will bite the Horse in the heels, so that, his
rider will fall backward; that is, he will bite the Horse, that is, the Office,
whereon he rides, in the heels, viz. in the just right, that the
righteousness, viz. Gods rider which he shall bring, may fall backward, and that
he may govern as Gods rider in stead of the righteousness, whereupon the
rider Gods righteousness in his Office says; O Lord, I wait for thy
Salvation, that is, till thou sendest the right rider Christ, who shall ride
over this Adder and Serpent again.

18. Gen 30.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
When Rachell could bear no children to Jacob, she was troubled at Jacob, and
said to him, procure me children, if not, I dye; but Jacob was wrath with
Rachell and said, I am not God, that I should give thee fruit of thy Body: but
she said; Behold, there is my maid servant Bilha: Lie thou with her, that she
may bring forth on my Lap, and I shall be built up by her: and thus she gave
him Bilha her maid servant to wife, and Jacob lay with her; so Bilha conceived
and bare Jacob a son: then said Rachell, God has Judged my Cause, and heard
my voice, and has given me a son, therefore she called him Dan.

19. This now is the powerful figure of Jacobs Testament, wherein he
prophesies so terribly concerning Dan, that he would be a Serpent; and in the
right figure, it signifies, Man's own will, which will not suffer God to Judge
and lead it, but always murmureth against God, as Rachell murmured against
Jacob, because it went not with her as she would, and was implacable with
pressing Jacob, that he would give her children or else she would dye, at
which Jacob was wrath.

20. So now the Spirit represents the figure by Bilha, Rachells mayd-servant,
whom she gave to Jacob for a wife, who bare this Dan, who should be a Judge
and determiner of the anger and strife between Jacob and Rachell, when the
self-will of Rachell would have children by force.

21. And it prefigureth this to us, that the Worldly Office of a Judge, has
its Original from Gods mayd-servant, that is, from the Kingdom and Dominion
of Nature, and that God created Man under no Office of a Judge; but the
selfe-murmuring stubborn and opposite will of Man, which will not be obedient
to God, nor endure to be judged and lead by his Spirit, that has caused, that
Dan, viz. the power and authority to Judge, is borne in the Lap of Rachell,
viz. in the Liberty of Nature.

22. Therefore the Spirit in the Covenant by Jacob, pronounces so sharp and
severe a sentence upon it and says: this Dan, that is, this Office of a Judge,
would be a Serpent and Adder in the way of righteousness, and would bite the
just right, viz. the heels of his horse, that his rider, viz. Justice and
Righteousness might fall to the Ground; and then Nature shall wait for the
salvation of God, viz. for the Justice and Right of Christ by and through Love,
and then Dans Office shall Cease.

23. Which ought well to be considered, by thee Babell, seeing thou boastest of
Christ, whether thy salvation be in thee or no; that thou might Judge thy
self and not need to have Judges, who must Judge thy unrighteousnes, wherein
thou art no Christian, seeing thou continually murmurest with Rachell, and
seek thy will, therefore also the Adder and Serpent of Dan may well sting
thee; for thy Evil malice and wickedness causes that, viz. thy own
willfullnes; therefore also has God given thee up under Dans fallen Rider, so
that thou must go along as a slave and ridden horse, whom the Serpent stingeth
with his venomous sting, viz. with the power and authority of usurping self.

24. But that Dans Rider must fall backward, signifies that this Dan with his
Office shall fall backward in the Conscience of a Christian, when he turns to
Christ and works Repentance; for, in Repentance Dans Government cease, the
Rider Gods Anger falls backward. Therefore also every Christian is bound, to
forgive every one from his heart, when Repentance and Confession and
acknowledgement of sins comes, and so cast the Office of a Judge behind his
back, for the Office of a Judge is the Office concerning sin, that severeth
right from wrong, and always falls heavy upon that which is false and
wicked, but the Serpent often biteth the Horse in the heels, viz. favor,
Greatness, reward, Gifts and bribes: these make Dan an Adder and Serpent.

25. And we see clearly, that Dan, viz the Office of a Judge in Israel, has
its Original from the murmuring, stubborn, and opposite will, and that Dan is
only a determiner of Strife, and not as he supposes, to be his own Lord in
his Office, but a divider, as Rachell says: God has Judged my Cause, viz. by
this Dan, her mayds-servants son, and not her own son; to signify that a
child of God needs no Judge, he judges himself, and suffers with patience.

VIII. The Testament of Gad.
26. Genesis 49.19.
Gad stands prepared, he will lead an Host and retreat back again: this
figure does not prefigure that the children of Gad shall be Captains of
Troops, as also Dans children shall not be mere Judges, but it represents the
Spiritual figure, which is to be seen by Genesis 30.9, 10, 11.
Lea, who gave her mayd-servant also to Jacob, when she ceased to bear, and
would make have to prevent Rachell; for Gad was borne of Zilpa, and should
prevent Dan, for she said readily, turn thee before him, and turn about to
me again; and it denotes humane forecasting and carefullnes, suttlety,
policy, and wicked craft and cunningnes, that do with all suttlety prevent the
right and Justice, and would elevate themselves above all right and truth.

27. For Gad and Dan are both from the Maid servants, and are in the figure as
a Strife, for Rachell and Lea would one prevent the other, and therefore their
ways were merely opposite: so this figure stands thus: when Dan will Judge,
then comes Gad with his subtle agility, and Officiousness to undermine and
insinuate himself.
readiness, and works him out of his Office with flattering speeches, and
specious pretenses; with lying and perverting prevarication, for it windeth all
truth about, and sets his agile nimble suttlety in the right of Truth, and
so the Judge is blinded by his agile nimble pragmaticallnes.

28. This the Spirit intimates strongly concerning Israel, signifying, how
they would live one among another, and how the selfe-power and authority with
Dan, and the agility with Gad, would govern the world; but these are both of
them but children of the Mayd-servants, and not of the Free women, and their
Offices shall have an End.

IX. The Testament of Asher.
29. Genesis 49.20.
From Asher comes his Or, finest of flower*
fat Bread, and he will act to please Kings; when Zilpa Leahs Mayd-servant had
borne Gad, viz. the prepared, subtle, crafty, always ready at every subtle
assault, against the right Justice and Judgment of Dan; then says Moses, she
Genesis 30.12, 13.
bare Jacob the second son, and then said Lea: it is well with me, for the
daughters will praise me and call me blessed; and she called him Asher, and
Jacob said in the Testament; from Asher comes his fatt Bread, and he will live
to please Kings; here, Jacob, viz. the Spirit in the Covenant, compriseth
these two brethren together in a figure: for Gad has the agility, and Asher
takes his fat bread from the King, and Lea says at his Birth, the Daughters
will praise me and call me blessed.

30. Here now stands the figure, but what explanation may this have? Gad
Orders his ways with suttlety, and Asher with flattery and hypocrisy, among
the Kings and Potentates in Authority and power, whereby he attaineth
prosperous fatt days of plenty, pleasure, and voluptuousness: and such are
every one that shall sit in Offices; and as Judges and Magistrates, they do
all, to please their Lord and King; that they may be reputed, honored,
applauded and rewarded by him, and that they may have their fatt bread from
him; and the Spirit by these three sons signifies powerfully, what kind of
people would rule the world, viz. by Dan, the Serpent, viz. self-will; and by
Gad, suttlety, treachery, and undermining deceit; and by Asher, false and
wicked flattery and sychophatising hypocrisy, who always sit in the Courts
of Kings, and serve them for their fatt bread, and only hunt after the
applause and honor of Men.

31. Therefore says the Spirit, from Asher comes his fat Bread: from whom
comes the fat Bread? answer, from the nimble subtle heads, who make the cause
of flatterers and hypocrites seem right; The flatterers sit near Kings, and
applaud him in his selfe-hood, and say, do what thou will, it is all good and
right, and when the King would feign have it in the appearance of right, that
it also may be applauded, then comes Gad with his nimble, subtle perverted far
fetched argumentative prerogative right, and sets the Kings own self-will
in the right of Nature, so that it seems to be right; to these Asher gives
the Kings fat bread; thus they all Three live in the Serpent, and so it biteth
the horse in the heels, and they are all three the Mayd-servants children,
viz. Ministers and Servants of self-will.

32. Dan is the manager of the Or, supreme.
superior Office; Gad is his Counselor at Law in matters of Right Justice
and Judgment, such as the Advocates, Procters, Pleaders, and Attorneys.
Lawyers and Jurists are; and Asher is the Nobility and Councillors of State;
these the Spirit has foreseen in their Testament in these things, which they
would hereafter practice; for the Testator says not; ye shall be such, but ye
will be such, and shows excellently what the Government on Earth in the
self-will of the humane Nature, would be.

X. The Testament of Naphtali.
33. Genesis 49.21.
Naphtali is a swift Hind, and gives fair words. Naphtali is the second
son of Bilha Rachells Mayd-servant, which she bare after Dan, and is a right
brother of Dan; These brethren of Naphtali are now among Kings and Judges, and
denote the Earthly wisdom from the Or, Configuration.
Constellation or Stars, which with Eloquent fair speeches, adorn the Office
of Judicature, so that, Dan, Gad, and Asher, are called able wise understanding
and learned Lords and Masters.

34. But he also proceeds only from the Strife between Rachell and Jacob; for
Rachell said, when Bilha her mayd-servant bare him; Genesis 30.8.
God has decided between me and my sister, and I shall prevail over her:
this signifies in the figure, that these wise and learned speeches of Naphtali
in this Office of Judicature, would be able to bow bend and turn about all
Causes, so that self-will, would remain still a Judge in all causes, so that
none would be able to object any thing in the least against these four Rulers,
the sons of the Mayd-servants, but they would have the Government in Israel
and rule the world, and prevail over all Men.

35. But they are all four the sons of the Maid servants; And Sarah said to
Abraham, thrust out the son of the Maid servant; for he shall not inherit
with my son Isaac, and God was pleased with it, and commanded Abraham to do
it, to signify, that these Offices, shall not inherit nor possess the
Kingdom of Heaven, but shall have an End, when Christ the son of the free
woman, shall receive the Kingdom, all these States and Governments shall be
thrust out, and he alone in his children and Members, shall govern.

36. Behold your selves in this Looking-glass, ye politic cunning very wise
and understanding World, in thy subtle policy, eloquence of speech, favor,
might, potency and honor, and see where it is thou sit, and whom thou
servest; behold thy fatt bread, also the applause from the King whom thou
servest, and what thou purposest, designest, and do, and how thou stand
in thy figure before God and the Kingdom of Christ; thy Eloquence avayleth
nothing in the presence of God; thy prudence, policy, suttlety and cunning,
avayleth nothing, if thou will not give right Counsel, and say and do
according to Truth, and persuade and inform thy superior Lord and Master,
rightly; then thou helpest to generate this Adder and Serpent in the Testament
of Dan for thy superior; and thou thy self art that Adder and Serpent, who
biteth Judgment, Justice and right in the Heel; and therefore thou also shall
attain the End, wages, and recompense of the Serpent, in Hellfire for it.

XI. The Testament of Joseph.
37. Genesis 49.22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
Joseph will spring forth: He will spring as by a fountain, the sprouts or
daughters pass on to the Government, and although the Archers be angry, and
fight against him and persecute him, yet his Bow holds strong, and his Arm
and hand in strength through the hand of the Mighty in Jacob; from whom have
proceeded the Shepherds and Stone in Israel, thou art helped by thy fathers
God* and from the Almighty thou art blessed with blessings from heaven above,
and with blessings from the deep that lies beneath, with blessings of the
Breasts and Womb; the blessings of thy father have prevailed more, then the
blessings of my Ancestors, according to the desire of the lofty in the world;
and shall come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the Crown of his head that
was separate from his brethren.

38. In this Testament, of Joseph, the Spirit in the Covenant represents the
figure of a right divine Governor, in whom the Spirit of God rules, who is
not the son of the Maid servant, but of the freewoman, who serves God and
his brethren, in his Office, who Governs in truth and righteousness, who
suffers not tale-bearers, Sycophants and flatterers about him, who seeks
not his own profit credit and honor, but Gods honor, and his brethrens
profit; this the Spirit has powerfully prefigured, by Joseph.

39. For Joseph was not an intruding Governor, but one rightly called, not out
of policy, suttlety, and plausible speeches and pretenses, so that he can draw
and turn the horse about by the tail, and yet persuade the simple people,
that he turns him about by the head: and the flattering hypocrite also says
of such Governors and Rulers, they are the Head; and they do this only that
they may eat their fatt bread from the Court; he sat not with adorned
Eloquent acute speeches in the Office of Judicature, but by divine
understanding, if he would have flattered and have been a lascivious adulterer,
he could well have been a Governor with Potiphar: but that ought not to be;
for in him, stood the figure of a true Christian Man, showing how such a one
would regulate his life and also his Office, and how the good wellspring,
Christ, would flow forth through him, and judge and rule through him.

40. For Jacob began that Testament and said: Joseph will spring, he will
spring as by a fountain, that is, his wisdom will spring in Gods power, and
flow forth from him; so that he will find wise Council; also the sprouts or
daughters pass on to the Government, that is, his wise words Counsels and
determinations, go forth, as a fair daughter in her virgin Chastity and
virtue.

41. Also; though the Archers be enraged, and fight against him and persecute
him, yet his Bow remains strong, and his Arms and hands in strength, by the
hands of the mighty one in Jacob; that is, though the Devil with his Crew set
upon him and despise him, so that he seeks not his own honor and profit, and
through wicked people shoot his arrows upon him, who bring forth lies under
the specious pretense of Truth, against him, yet his wisdom remains under
the Divine Arm, and his will to righteousness stands as a strong Bow,
through the co-habitation of the Mighty God.

42. Also; from him are proceeded Shepherds and the Stone in Israel; that is,
from him, from his wisdom are proceeded other, wise, righteous understanding
Rulers, viz. faithful Councillors who are near him, Shepherds and Pillars
in the Government: for such as the Prince is, such are his Councillors, as the
Proverb is, when the Council sees that the Prince loves righteousness, and
that he will not be served with hypocrisy and flattery, and that only honest
trusty and understanding wise people, bear sway with him, then they diligently
labor for wisdom and righteousness, that they may please him therein, and then
that Land and Country has good Shepherds.

43. Also; Thou art helped from thy fathers God, and thou art blessed from the
Almighty, that is, from the Or, Faith.
God of Abraham, which helped Abraham, thou have gotten wisdom and
understanding, and that helps thee against thy Enemies, and against their
arrows, and thou art blessed from the Allmighty, with blessings from heaven
above, and with blessings from the Deep beneath, with blessings of the Breasts
and womb; that is, from waiting on the Lord, thou shall receive good things,
honor and Sustenance, he will bless thee in body and soul, in goods and
Estate, and in all thy ways, and give thee sufficient, so that thou will not
need nor dare to use subtle cunning deceit to pervert that which is right, thou will not dare to say of any thing it is thy own to use as thou will, and yet
thou will have sufficient and plenty.

44. For, one that fears God, and leaves selfehood or appropriating any
thing for his own, he gets in stead thereof, all, in the Kingdom of
Christ, the Heaven and the World is his, whereas on the Contrary the wicked
must supply himself with a piece of that, which he has stolen in suttlety,
and acquired to himself with deceit, and take nothing of it away with him but
the hell only and his wicked unrighteousness, and the Curse of miserable
people whom he has tormented upon Earth, they have kindled hellfire with
their Curse in him, and that he takes along with him.

45. Also; The blessing of thy father has prevailed more, then the blessing of
my Ancestors, according to the desire of the lofty in the world, and it shall
come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the Crown of his head that was
separated from his brethren; that is, Jacobs blessing has therefore prevailed
more then his Ancestors, because in him the Ens of Faith was sprouted forth,
and come into many boughs and branches: for the fruit did show forth it self
more, then by Abraham and Isaac: For Abraham generated but one Twig out of the
Line of the Covenant, viz. Isaac; so also Isaac generated but one twig out of
the Line of the Covenant, viz. Jacob; on whom the Spirit looked; seeing Jacob
generated twelve sons, which all stood in the Root of the Line of the
Covenant, and grew out of it as Twiggs, but in Judah stood the Stock, and
therefore he said, his blessing prevailed more; as a Tree which is grown into
branches from the Stock.

46. But that he says: according to the desire of the lofty in the world, he
signifies under it, the prosperity of the blessing to those that are blessed;
for as the Rich of the world desire only highness and good things, so these in
the blessing of God receive temporal and Eternal good things; these shall
from the blessing of Jacob, come upon the head of Joseph, that is, upon his
children, so that they shall in this sprouting, bear good fruit: for the Head
signifies the blossoms and fruit of this Tree.

47. Also; Upon the Crown of his head that was separated from his brethren;
that is, the blessing shall not press forth alone out of the Line of the
Covenant, so that it alone among Jacobs children stood in the blessing, viz.
the Stock of Judah, but upon the Crown of his head that was separated, viz.
upon the ground of the Natural root of the Adamicall Tree in them all; that
they all of them together should be as a fruitful Tree; but concerning their
States and worldly Offices wherein they would live wickedly in the future, he
represents the figure in Dan, and the four brethren from Jacobs wives
mayd-servants, signifying how in the End, the Serpent would manage the
Government in the Adamicall Nature, and how their successors would live in
their Offices, and what kind of world would rise up therein, as it has come
to pass among the Jews and Christians.

XII. The Testament of Benjamin.
48. Genesis 49.27.
Benjamin is a ravening Wolf, in the Morning he will devour the prey, but in
the Evening he will divide the spoil: Benjamin was Joseph's nearest own dear
brother, and yet the Spirit says of him; he is a ravening Wolf, who in the
morning would devour the prey; In this Testament of Benjamin, is couched the
most hidden secret figure of the whole Scripture, and yet in its Type in the
unfolding in the Effect and work, it is the most manifest and open figure,
which is clear in the fullfilling, so that Men may see it with bodily Eyes,
and yet in their Reason are quite blind concerning it.

49. This figure is fullfilled, and yet is in action, and shall be yet also
further fullfilled, it is very secret, and yet as manifest as a Sunshiny Day,
and yet is not understood; but it is known to the Magi and Wisemen, who indeed
have written much concerning it, but it has not been yet rightly explicated,
while, the time of the Evening (when Benjamins spoil shall be divided) was far
off, but now it is near; therefore we shall offer somewhat concerning it, and
hint the sense and meaning for those of our society to consider of, and yet
remain as it were dumb to the unwise, seeing they sit in the dark, and open
their Jaws only after the spoil.

50. The two Brethren Joseph and Benjamin, are the Image or Type of
Christendom, and of a Christian Man, which in their figure are twofold, viz.
the Adamicall Man in his Nature is signified by Benjamin, and the New Man out
of the Covenant in the Spirit of Christ is signified by Joseph; and the figure
represents, how Christ has assumed the Adamicall Man, and that this Man is
half Adamicall and half heavenly, and that entirely in one person which
cannot be divided.

51. So also in this Image or Type he prefigureth Christendom, and how they
would receive Christ and become Christians, viz. that in them Christ, and also
the Evil Wolf Adam, would govern, that is, when they would receive the
Faith, they would be so ravenous raving and zealous as a Wolf, and would draw
the Heathen to them with power and Compulsion, and yet would devour them, that
is, whosoever will not above all, hold the same Opinion with them, they would
presently fall on to Condemn that other Opinion, and persecute it with wars
and the sword, as a raging Lion or Wolf biteth and devoureth; thus in zeal
they would devour round about them with Excommunication and the sword; and that
therefore, not because they are zealous in the Spirit of Christ, but from the
Wolf of the Evil Adam, which would always set it self, in Spiritual and
Worldly States and polities, above the Spirit of Christ.

52. Thus their Zeal would be only from the devouring Wolf, Men being more
zealous under the Name of Christ for temporal Goods, fatt livings, good days,
and worldly honor, then for Love, Truth, and Salvation: they will not be
zealous in the power of Christ's Love, but in the power of the devouring Wolf:
Also in the Zeal of their accustomed Exercises and Worship, wherein yet they
would but play the hypocrites before God, they themselves would devour one
another as covetous greedy Wolves; and so outwarldly the Wolf would Govern.
But yet inwardly in the true children, Christ would govern: Outwardly
Benjamin, viz. the Natural Adam, which indeed is also a Christian, but it is
first, after his Resurrection, when he is quitt of the Wolf; and Inwardly
Joseph, who is hidden under the Wolf.

53. And now the Spirit of Jacob in the Covenant of God, points at the Time,
showing how it would be: viz. in the first time of Christianity they would be
zealous, and hunger after God, in the Spirit of Christ, and yet must hide
themselves from their Enemies, as a Wolf that Men hunt as an Enemy.

54. But when they shall be great and possess Kingdoms, that is, when Christ's
Name shall come under the power and authority of Dan, so that Laws and
Ordinances shall be made out of pretense of Christian Liberty, and its Orders
and Exercises shall come under worldly authority and dominion; then will this
Christendom be a Wolf, which will no more judge and proceed in the Love of
Christ, but whosoever will not call all their Belly* Orders, good and right,
those they would devour with the sword of Excommunication, with fire and Racha.
vengeance, and would raise wars for Christ's Name, and for their
superstitions; and compel the people with power to the acknowledgement of
Christ, and devour round about them as a Wolf, and always hunt after the
spoil, and yet for the most part entend to get the Goods and authority of
strange and foreign people to themselves.

55. Thus would Benjamin in the Morning, viz. in his rising up, devour the
prey, and toward the Evening he would again divide this devoured spoil, that
is, toward the End of the world, when Joseph's Government will get aloft
again, so that Christ shall be wholly manifest, and that this Wolf shall
cease, then will Benjamin, viz. the holy true Christendom, divide the spoil of
Christ, wherewith Christ has suppressed Death and Hell.

56. This dividing or distribution of the spoil shall come, and is already
come, and yet is not, though it is really in Truth, and the whole world is
blind concerning it, except the children of the Mystery: The Time is, and is
not, and yet truly is, when this prey and spoil of Christ and also the Wolfes
prey, shall, through Joseph's hand, be given into Benjamins hand, and be divided
and distributed.

57. O Babell, let this be a Wonder to thee, and yet no wonder neither; for
thou have nothing, and see nothing, at which thou can wonder; as a young
plant grows from a Seed, and becomes a great Tree which brings forth much
fair fruit; so that a Man would wonder at the Grain or seed how so excellent
a Tree, and so much good fruit has lain hid in one only Grain or seed, which
men neither knew of, nor saw before. But, because Men have knowledge and
experience thereof, that it is possible, that a Tree should come out of one
grain or seed, Men wonder not at it; yet Men see not how it comes to pass,
or where that great power and virtue was; so also at present, Men see the
Grain or Seed of the Tree well enough, but Reason contemns that, and
believes not, that such a Tree lies therein, whence such good fruit should
come, that thereby the Kingdom of Benjamin, at the End of Time, shall be
called a dividing or distribution of the prey and spoil.

58. But Joseph must first be a Governor in Egypt, and then Benjamin comes to
him, and then Joseph gives him five Garments of sumptuous apparel, and five
times more food from his Table then the other; when the famine famisheth the
Land, and the soul of Jacob hungereth, then know, that God will thereby draw
Israel into Egypt, viz. into Repentance, and then is the time of visitation,
and Benjamin carries his spoiling sword in his mouth: But Joseph's countenance
smites him, so that he comes into great Terror, and fear of Death; because
the Silver Cup of Joseph was found in his Sack, at which he is ashamed, and
lets his spoiling sword and Wolves Teeth, fall from him; and then Joseph
manifests himself to him, together with all his brethren, at which there
will be such Joy, that the Wolf Benjamin will become a Lamb, and yield his
wool patiently: this is the End of that Speech.

59. The Testament of Jacob, is a figure of the whole time of the world: from
Adam to the End: of which we will set down a short figure for the Reader that
knows the vision or Histories, to Consider of.

60. I. Reuben in this place, being the first son, is set in the figure of
the first World, which lived in the right of Nature without Law, that has the
Priesthood and the Kingdom in the right of Nature, and should be in the
chiefest Sacrifice, and in the Greatest Dominion, but he was fickle therein as
water, and was thrust out.

61. II. Simeon begins with Noah after the Flood, and keeps Levi with him;
that was Sem: But the sword of Ham and Japhet was Simeon: so there went two in
One Substance, viz. the spiritual Will and the fleshly Will, till Moses, and
then the worldly and the spiritual were divided into two several States.

62. III. Levi begins under Moses, who with the Priesthood managed the sword
of Simeon and Levi in the Law, and cut very sharply therewith.

63. IIII. Judah begins under the Prophets, and manifests himself with
the Incarnation of Christ, at which time this Scepter began.

64. V. Zebulun with his Co-habitation sets himself in the midst, viz. in
the Kingdom of Christ, and that was the beginning of Christendom, who dwells
on the Coasts of the Sea, viz. among the Heathen, and sat pleasantly, for it
was a New Love.

65. VI. Issachar, is the Time, when Christendom was settled in Rest, viz. in
Power, Might, and Dominions, which must yet always bear the Burden of the
Heathen, and be servile, and be as a boned Ass for the Burden, for they still
bear the Cross of Christ, and were still Conformable to the Image of Christ,
about three hundred years after Christ.

66. VII. With Dan, did the potent Kingdom and Government of Christendom
begin, when they set up Kings, Popes, Archbishops, and potent pompous
Churches, Chapels, and other Consecrated Places, and then was the Adder and
Serpent on the way of Christ in humane honor, generated in the Kingdom of
Christ; when men began to dispute about the Pomp, State and Glory of Churches,
and to exalt Men into the Kingdom and Offices of Christ, and set them in the
place of Christ, and to honor them in Christ's stead; then was Christ
suppressed, and the Adder and Serpent sat in Christ's Office of Judicature, and
then the Holy Ghost was rejected, and Councills were set in the place thereof,
and then was Antichrist Borne; at that Time the Spirit of Christ said, Lord, I
wait now for thy salvation; for here now my Name must be the Cloak of
Antichrist, till thou shall deliver me in Joseph's time. In this Time is Truth
strongly bitten in the heels, so that the Rider in the Spirit of Christ must
fall backward.

67. VIII. With Gad, who should be the Leader of an Host, begins the Time
of the Universities and Schools among Christians about eight hundred years
ago, when Men readily set Antichrist with power and Might of Armies in the
Chair of Christ, and with babbling, disputing, and perverting prevarication
maintained him against all opposition, when Men made the Tail to be the Head,
and forced the power of Christ into humane traditions and Cannons, and made a
Worldly Kingdom of Christ's Kingdom.

68. IX. With Asher, began the time when Men lived to please King Antichrist,
when he was God on Earth, then came the flattering Hypocrites from the
Universities and Schools, who flattered this King for fatt Bread, viz. for
Good Offices, Benefices, Prebendaries and Bishoprics, and applauded his
doings, and cause, and did all to please him, and set Christ with Antichrist
upon a soft Cushion, and so worshipped the Image in the Revelation.
Apocalypse; about six hundred years ago and nearer.

69. X. With Nephtali begins the Time of the Great Wonder, when Men went on
with high Sermons and deep searching Disputes about the Predestination.
Council of God, so that Men have seen that these in Christ's Chair were not
Christ in power, yet Men sought deep, that they might Cover themselves with a
Mantle, with fair and plausible Maxims, Conclusions, and Determinations, then
came the knotty acute Logic, whereby Men dispute; One part of them says he is
Christ in power and Authority, the other part Contradicts and opposes it,
that part setting his followers and dependents with high pretenses into the
Blood of Christ, and builds all Authority and holy Sermons upon it; and so
the Spirit of Christ in the inward Ground set it self against it, and says;
He is the Antichrist: This Time has continued to our time Ann. 1623.
wherein we Live.

70. XI. With Joseph, begins the Time when Christ will be manifested again,
when he shall cast the Adder and Serpent Dan with the Chair of Antichrist,
with all might and power of selfehood in the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, to
the Ground, and terrify it, with his Countenance, when Joseph's brethren must
be ashamed of their Great unfaithfullnesse, which they have committed against
Joseph, in that they cast him into the Pit, and moreover sold him for Money:
and then will all suttlety, craft, flattery, hypocrisy, and deceit, be made
manifest, and will, by the aspect of Joseph's Countenance be cast to the Ground;
and it is that time wherein it will be said; Rev. 18.2.
Babylon, she is fallen, she is fallen, and is become an habitation of all
Devils and abominable Beasts and Fowls; and then Joseph springs up in his
own power and virtue, and his daughters or boughs pass on in their Ornament,
and his Blessing begins.

71. XII. With Benjamin, begins the time of the Evening under Joseph's Time,
for then he shall again divide and distribute the spoil of the first
Christendom: He belongs to the first and last Time, Especially to the first
time of Joseph, when Christ begins to be manifested; and then he is first
eager as a Wolf, and devoureth far and wide, when he begins to bite and
devour Antichrist, yet all that while he is but a Wolf. But when Joseph's
Countenance shall be unveyled, then he is ashamed as a Wolf that is taken in a
Gin, and begins to be a Lamb, and to yield his fatt and plenty of wool.

72. This is the Testament of Jacob, in its true figure, wherein the Spirit
has pointed at the Times; and the Spirit of Moses says: When Jacob had
finished all these sayings, he drew his feet up together upon the Bed, and
departed, to signify, that when these his Prophesies would be all fullfilled,
then God would call again the unfolded Nature in the Strife of Time into
himself, and draw it together into the Temperature, and then would this Time
have an End, and Strife cease. This we desired a little to delineate for the
Lover of Truth, let him search further in the Spirit of God, which searches
all things, even the deep things of the Deity, and then he will see our Ground
in the Truth.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of the Holy Patriarch Jacobs Burial in the Land of Canaan.
What is thereby to be understood.
Upon the 50 Chapter of Genesis.
1. THe Burial of Jacob, Genesis L.
that Joseph should carry him again into the Land of Candan, after his Death,
and bury him with his Fathers, and that Joseph went thither with a Great
Company, with all the children of Israel, and many Egyptians, it prefigureth
to us Christ's powerful exit out of this world, when the Adamicall Man after
its death should again be carried from this Egypt, and house of torment, into
its fathers first Country, into Paradise, into which, Christ will bring it.

2. But that also many Egyptians went along with Joseph thither, and
accompanied him, signifies that Christ when he shall bring home his Bride into
Paradise, will have many strangers with him, who in the time of this Life knew
him not as to his person or Office, and yet are sprung up in him, in his Love,
which will all go with Christ into Paradise, and dwell and co-habite with him.

3. Their weeping and Mourning, signifies the Eternal Joy, which they should
receive in Paradise, as the Magi always by weeping and Mourning prefigure Joy.
This funeral solemnity, and what is to be understood thereby, is declared Gen
23. and the 50 Chap. of Mysterium Magnum.
before concerning Abraham.

4. Moses says further in this Chapter: Gen 50.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Joseph's brethren feared, after their father was dead and said: Joseph surely
is wrath with us, and will requite all the Evil which we have done unto him:
therefore they caused it to be told him; thy father Commanded before his Death
and said, thus shall ye say to Joseph; forgive I pray thee now the Misdeeds of
thy Brethren and their sin, that they have done so evil to thee: therefore
forgive the Misdeeds of us the servants of the God of thy Father: but Joseph
wept when it was told him: and his brethren went in and fell down before him
and said: behold, we are thy servants: but Joseph said to them, fear not, for
I am under the presence of God, you thought to do evil by me, but God turned
it unto Good, so that he has done as it is at this Day, to pr^s^rve much
people: therefore be not afraid, I will provide for you and your children, so
he comforted them and spoke friendly to them.

5. This figure is a Mighty Comfort to the brethren of Joseph, but seeing
Joseph stands in the Image and Type of Christ, and his brethren in the figure
of a poor Converted sinner, therefore we must expound this figure thus; that
is, when poor sinful Man, who has committed great sins, and has turned to
Repentance and attained Grace, and committed some fau^t again, then he is
always in fear and trembling before the Grace of God, and thinks* God will
impute his first committed sins to him again, and take an occasion against
him by this fault; and in that regard stands in great anguish, and begins
to confess his first committed sins again, and falls a new at the Lords
fee^e and enters again into earnest si^cere Repentance, and bewayleth his
first misdeeds, as David did when he said: Psalm. 25.7.
Lord impute not to me, the sins of my youth.

6. But by this New Repentance and earnest Lamentation, when the poor Man
appears so very earnestly and humbly before God again, the heavenly Joseph
is brought into such Great pity and Compassion, as here Joseph was, that he
comfort the poor soul in its Conscience, saying, it should not be afraid,
all its committed sins should not only not be imputed, but they shall also
turn to the Best, as Joseph said, ye thought to do me evil, but God
intended good thereby; thus God in Christ not only forgiveth the by past sins
to the humble converted Man, but he also adds to him provision for him and
his children, with Temporal blessing and maintenance, and turns all to the
Best, as Joseph did to his brethren.

7. In the End, Genesis 50.24.
Joseph desires an Oath, that when he shall dye, that they will carry his
bones along with them out of Egypt to his fathers; which signifies to us, the
Oath of God in Paradise, that Christ, God and Man, would come again to his
brethren, and stay for Ever with them, and be their High Priest and King, and
nourish them with his power of Love, and dwell by, and in them, as Joseph by
his brethren, and provide for them as his branches and Members, Eternally, with
his power and sapp. Amen.

8. This is a brief summary Exposition of the Genesis.
first Book of Moses, from a right true Ground and divine Gift, which we have
very faithfully imparted, in a Cooperating Member-like Love and Care, to our
Dear fellow Brethren, that shall read and understand this.

9. And we admonish the Reader of this, that when he finds somewhat in any
place of our deep sense to be obscure, that he do not contemn it according
to the manner of the Evil world, but diligently read and pray to God, who
will surely open the door of his heart, so that he will apprehend and be able
to make use of it to the profit and salvation of his soul, which we wish to
the Reader and hearer, in the Love of Christ from the Gift of this Talent in
the Ground of the soul, and commit him into the Working Meek Love of JESUS
CHRIST. Dated 11 September 1623. and then finished.

Praise the LORD in Sion, and praise him all people, for his might and power
goes through, and is over, Heaven and Earth: Ha le lu-jah.
A Brief Abstract of the Sublime Consideration and deep understanding of the
Mysterium Magnum.
Showing how the visible World is a Stream and Reflection of the Divine
Knowledge and Will: and how the Life of Every Creature has taken its
Original; and how the Divine Introitus.
going in and Exitus.
Out, [as to the Creature] is.
EVery sensible and perceptible Life and Being or Essence.
Substance is come ex Mysterio Magno, from the Great Mystery, as from the
stream and reflection of Divine knowledge, in which two things are to be
understood, viz. the Free will of the Abyss, and the Substantial One in the
Will, and how these two are a reflection of the Abyss, viz. a ground of the
Divine Manifestation, also how they are two, and yet but one, out of which,
Time and the visible World, and all Creatures did flow forth, and are become a
Creation.

2. The only One is the Cause of the Will, that causes the will that it
wills somewhat, and though it has nothing that it can will, but only it
self for a ground and place of its Or, I-hood.
own-selfe; It has nothing that it can apprehend or take hold of, but the One;
it comprehends it self in Or, an I-hood.
self, that the will may have somewhat wherein and wherewith it works, which
working would not be a visible substance, if it did not go forth through the
willing.

3. Therefore now the going forth is a Spirit of the Invisible Will and
Substance, and a Manifestation of the Abyss through the Ground of the Unity:
through which going forth, the will of the Abyss, reflecteth the Abyss, as a
Mystery of Omniscience, with which going forth, the cause and original of all
Seperability of the unity of the Abyssall Will, through its own Ground, of its
comprehended selfehood, is understood, also the Eternal beginning of Motion
and cause of Life; which Motion, is a perpetual longing of the will; for the
will thus discerns the Unity through the Motion, how the Unity through the
Motion of the will stands in infinite Multiplicity, in that manner and way,
as the Mind is an unity and wellspring or fountain of thoughts and Or,
perceptions.
senses, whence such a Deep of Multiplicity springs out of that one Mind,
as are Innumerable.

4. By this Threefold unity, we conceive and understand the Essence or Being.
Substance of God, viz. By the unity we conceive the one only God, By the will,
the Father, And by the impression and compression of the will for a place of
self, viz. by the Eternal somewhat that works or wherewith the will works;
[wee conceive] the Son or power of the will, and by the going forth, [wee
conceive] the Spirit of the will and of the power, and by the Reflection is
understood the Wisdom and understanding, out of which all wonders and
substances have flowen forth, and do Eternally flow forth.

5. From the Motion of this invisible working substance, out of the flowing
forth of the Eternal knowledge, is flowen forth the understanding, whereby the
longing discerns, and brings it self into a desire of Imagibility
Conception. Apprehensio^ or Thought.
Imagination, in which desire, the natural and Creaturely Ground of Every Life
and Substance does exist, wherein the Desire has comprised and included, the
flowing forth of the knowledge, in properties, whence two wills exist, viz. one
from the Divine Science or knowledge, the other from the propriety of Nature,
wherein the properties have introduced themselves into a self-will, and
imprinted themselves with self and their own will, and made themselves rough,
sharp, thorny, and hard, so that from such properties are proceeded out of the
knowledge, Opposition and Enmity against such properties; as is to be seen by
the Or, qualities.
properties of the Devil, as also by the crude and indigested Earth, Stones
and other Creatures, how the properties, have turned themselves away from the
unity, and are proceeded into an impression; for which cause in the time of
this world, they must endure the Curse; viz. the fleeing or withdrawing of the
divine will, and must stand in this impression, till the Day of Restoration.

6. Seeing then the Mind of Man, is especially to be considered by us, which
is an Image or Resemblance of the Reflection of Divine knowledge, as a Reflection
of the Divine and Natural understanding, wherein lies the Ground of all
Substances in the One, and manifests and makes it self distinct with the
going forth of the will from the Mind, so that we clearly perceive that the
Mind is a wellspring to Good and Evil, and the Scripture intimates thus much
to us; that the Fall and perdition, is arisen from the desire to the self of
the properties, therefore it is most highly necessary for us, to learn to
understand* how we may come again out from the assumed selfehood, wherein we
have pain necessity and Torment, into the unity, viz. into the Ground and
fountain of the Mind, wherein the Mind may rest in its Eternal Ground.

7. No thing can rest in it self, except it go again into that One, out of
which it is proceeded; The Mind has turned it self away from the unity, into
selfe-desire of perception, to try the seperability or variety of the
properties, whereby seperability and opposition is arisen in it, which now rule
the Mind, and it cannot be released from that, unless it forsake it self in
the desire of the properties, and plunge it self again into the meerest
stillnes, and desire to be silent to its willing, so that the will demerse bath
and steep it self beyond all sense and Imagination into the Eternal will of
the Abyss, out of which it is arisen in the beginning ex Mysterio Magno, from
the Great Mystery, that it, will, no more, in it self, but what God wills
through it, and then it is in the deepest Ground of the unity; and if then it
can but a little while stand therein without moving of selfe-desire, then the
will of the Abyss speaks into it from the Divine Motion, and apprehends
its resigned will, as its own, into it self, and brings into it the Ens of
the Eternal incomprehensibility, of the place or City of God, viz. the
Essential Substantial One.

8. And now as the will of the Eternal Deity, goes forth Eternally through
the Eternal Spirit, and makes a Reflection of the Abyss, so also the resigned
will of the Mind is always together brought forth and Enlightened with the
divine incomprehensibility, with Gods will: and thus the humane Mind rules in
the will of God, in divine skill and knowledge, through, and above all things;
concerning which Moses says; Genesis 1.26.
he should rule over all the Creatures of the world; as Gods Spirit goes
through all things, and proves all things, so may the Enlightened Mind also
rule over and through all the properties of the Natural Life, and overpower
the properties, and bring the highest perception out of the divine knowledge
into Reason; as Saint Paul says: 1 Cor. 2.10.
The Spirit searches all things, even the Dephs of the Deity: and with this
introduction of the divine will, Man is again united with God, and newborn
in the Mind, and begins to die to self of false and wicked desire, and to
be borne with new power and virtue.

9. And so then self cleaves to him in the flesh, but with the Mind his
conversation is in God, and in the old Man a New spiritual Man of divine
thoughts will and senses, is borne, who daily kills the Lusts of the Flesh,
and through divine power makes the world viz. the outward Life Heaven, and
makes Heaven, viz. the inward spiritual world to be the visible world, so
that God becomes Man, and Man God, till the Tree comes to its highest pitch,
and has borne its fruit ex Mysterio Magno, out of the Great Mystery, out of
the Divine Science, and then the outward shell and husk falls off, and then
there stands a spiritual Tree of Life in the field of God.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chief Matters to be found in this Book of the Mysterium
Magnum.
A.
Abel. Chapter 27. Why Abel offered sacrifice. verse. 9. Chapter 29. What the Name Abel
or Habel signifies in the Language of Nature. verse. 20. Chapter 30. Why Abel must
be slain. verse. 16.
Ability. Chapter 61. How the Soul may attain Ability to receive Grace. verse.
39, 40. Chapter 69. How Man's Ability to receive Grace is Lost. verse. 17, 18.
Abimelech. Chapter 46. What the Names of Abimelech and Gerar signify. verse. 2,
3. Chapter 47. How Abimelech made a Covenant with Abraham. What that signifies in
the spiritual figure; and what Moses here signifies under the veil thereof.
verse. from 1. to the 27. Chapter 47. The Holy figure of Abimelech and Pichol.
verse. 6, etc.
Above. Chapter 43. What is called Above and beneath in the Text. verse. 9, 11, 12.
Abraham. Chapter 37. Of Abraham and his seed, and of the Line of the Covenant in
its propagation. verse. from 1. to the 61. Chapter 37. Why the Spirit called
Abraham out of his Fathers Country verse. 21, etc. Chapter 37. How God appeared to
Abraham. verse. from the 45. to the 49. and Ch: 39. verse. 1. Chapter 38. How the
Ens of the Serpent as well as the Line of Christ lay in Abraham verse. 13. Chapter
39. Of Abraham's Sacrifice. from the 13. to the 25. Chapter 39. How God Established
the Covenant with Abraham, and how the Faith of Abraham laid hold on the
Covenant, which was accounted to him for righteousness, and how God called
Abraham to sacrifice. verse. from 1. to the 32. Chapter 40. What is represented
under the History of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. verse. 1. Chapter 40. How 2. Lines
sprang out of Abraham, verse. from 2. to the 6. Chapter 40. From what property of
Abraham; Isaac, and Jacob, were. verse. 13. Chapter 42. How the Trinity appeared
to Abraham. verse. 1. Chapter 42. What Abraham signifies in the Language of
Nature. verse. 1. Chapter 42. What Abraham's washing of their feet that came to
him, signifies. verse. 11. Chapter 42. How Abraham in his seed had the Land for
an Eternal possession. verse. from 50. to the 58. Chapter 43. What Abraham's
praying to the Men for Sodom and Gomorrha signifies. verse. from 16. to the
21. Chapter 45. How Abraham's Pilgrimage was a Type of Christendom. verse. from 1.
to 13. Chapter 45. How Abraham, Sarah and Abimelech were a powerful figure of
Christendom. verse. 15, 16. Chapter 45. How God led Abraham so wonderfully, and
how he was always in Trial, and how the Lord preserved him. verse. from 1. to
the 20. Chapter 46. Of Abraham's unwillingnes to thrust out the Mayd-servant with
her son. verse. from 24. to the 28. Chapter 47. Of the Richnes of the figure of
Abraham's actions. verse. 1. Chapter 47. Of Abimelechs Covenant with Abraham. verse.
from 1. to the 27. Chapter 48. How God tried Abraham, and represented the figure of
Christ's sacrifice in his sufferings and death. verse. from the 1. to the 34.
Chapter 48. How Abraham saw Christ's sacrifice afar off, even 2000 years before
it was done. verse. 10. Chapter 48. How Abraham went up with Isaac to sacrifice.
verse. from 8. to the 13. Chapter 48. Of Isaacks carrying the wood, and Abraham's
carrying the fire and the knife. verse. 14, 15. Chapter 48. Why God said Abraham
Abraham. verse. 25. Chapter 48. How Men should look upon Abraham's figure. verse.
from 37. to the 43. Chapter 49. How Abraham would not have the field of the
children of Heth, for nothing. verse. 11. Chapter 50. How Abraham sent his servant
to take a wife for Isaac. verse. from 1. to the 57. Chapter 51. How Abraham had
six sons by another wife, to whom he gave gifts, but all his Goods he gave to
Isaac; and how he dyed. verse. from 1. to the 55.
Adam. Chapter 17. How Adam did Eat before the fall. verse. 13, 14. Chapter 17. Whence
Adams Imagination and Longing proceeded. verse. 37. Chapter 18. How Adam was before
the Fall. verse. from 2. to the 9. Chapter 18. Of two fixed Substances in Adam.
verse. 7, 8. Chapter 18. How the propagation should have been if Adam had stood.
verse. from 9 to the 14. Chapter 18. How long Adam stood in Paradise before Eve was
made. verse. from 19. to the 27. Chapter 18. How Adam before his sleep had Eaten
of the forbidden fruit. verse. from 30. to the 33. Chapter 19. Adam was not Created
in a Beastiall Image. verse. from 20. to 25. Chapter 23. At what Adam was afraid.
verse. 17. etc. Chapter 25. How God drove Adam out of Paradise, and set the
Cherubine before the Garden. verse. from 1. to the 41. Chapter 25. How Adam,
gets his Bride again that was taken from him in his sleep. verse. 14, 15.
Chapter 25. Why Adam and Eve were brought into Paradise. verse. 17. Chapter 25. What
provoked Adam that he lusted against Gods command. verse. 18. Chapter 25. Why God
Created Adam. verse. 19. Chapter 25. Why the Tree of Temptation was set before
Adam. verse. 23. Chapter 2^. Why Adam was tempted and driven out of Paradise.
verse. 38. Chapter 37. Of Gods Covenant with Adam. verse. 3. Chapter 76. How Adam was,
before his Eve was, and became Monstrous. verse. from 11. to the 18.
All. Chapter 3. How a particular is the sport of the universal total All. verse.
21.
Altar. Chapter 27. Where the Altar of God is. verse. 48.
Angels. Chapter 8. Of the Creation of Angels, and their Dominion in all their
worlds. verse. from 1. to the 34. Chapter 8. Why we see not the Angels. verse.
19. Chapter 8. Where the Angels dwell. verse. 16. etc. Chapter 17. How the holy
Angels live. verse. 35. Chapter 25. What the Angel with the sword is. verse. 2.
Chapter 42. For what God Created the Angels, and Man. verse. 24, 25. Chapter 43. Of
the two Angels that came into Sodom. verse. from 22. to the 64. Chapter 43. How
the Angels did Eat with Lot. verse. 38. Chapter 59. How the Angel met Jacob, and
what that signifies. verse. 24.
Antichrist. Antichristian. Chapter 27. Of the wicked Antichristian Church, also of
the true Holy Church. verse. from the 41. to the 60. Chapter 28. Of Caines
Murdering of his Brother, viz. of the proud Antichristian seeming Church upon
Earth, as also, of the true Christianity. verse. from 1. to the 71. Chapter 36.
What the Antichrist is. verse. 17. Chapter 43. The Antichristian whore does as the
Sodomites did. verse. from 47. to 52. Chapter 77. When Antichrist will fall. verse.
70. Chapter 51. What Antichrist is both among Jews and Christians. verse. 44. Chapter
70. How Antichrist has deceived poor Christendom. verse. 38, 39.
Ararath. Chapter 32. Of the Name Ararath in the Language of Nature. verse. from
33. to the 37.
Ark. Chapter 32. There is a very great Mystery in the Ark of Noah. verse. 10, etc.
Asher. Chapter 77. The Testament of Asher, and the figure thereof. verse. from 29.
to the 32.
As I live. Chapter 42. An Exposition of these words: As I live. verse. 27, etc.
Author. Chapter 5. From what sight and vision the Author has written. verse.
15. Chapter 12. The Author had a Glass to see even beyond Moses. verse. 34. Chapter
18. From what knowledge the Author has written. verse. 1. Chapter 21. The scope
of the Authors writing. verse. 17.

B.
Babell. Chapter 22. Out of what Babell is generated. verse. 54. Chapter 25. How Babell
shall End by the fiery sword. verse. 26. Chapter 27. How Babell enters into the
presence of God. verse. from 52 to the 60. Chapter 29. How Babell speaks out of
7. and 77. verse. 65. etc. Chapter 30. Of the fall of the City Babell. verse. 43.
Chapter 31. How God will at present drown Babell with the fire of his Anger.
verse. 27. Chapter 36. How the City Babell and Christ are one by the other. verse.
60, 61. Chapter 36. Why so much is written concerning the Beast and Whore in
Babell. verse. 67. Chapter 39. What the City Babell is. verse. 56. Chapter 43. The
Time of the Judgment upon Babell. verse. 52. Chapter 44. How the figure of the
destruction of Sodom is applied to Babell. verse. 5. etc. Chapter 59. How it is
that Babell will have the children of Christ go^ to God. verse. 19, 20. Chapter 59.
How it is that Babell cannot hinder or hurt the Children of Christ. verse. 21,
22. Chapter 69. How Babell is a Spy as to the Grace of God. verse. 19. Chapter 70. The
Time is Borne, that Babell shall be spewed out. verse. 90. Chapter 72. How Babells
reproach is set in Judgment before the Most High. verse. 22. Chapter 73. The
Number of Babell and of the Beast. verse. 9, 10. Chapter 73. How Babell at present
fills its sack with provision. verse. 16, 17. Chapter 73. How the Deluge and the
fire of Sodom falls upon Babell unawares. verse. 18.
Babylon. Chapter 41. A warning to Antichristian Babylon. verse. from 66. to the
71.
Baptism. Chapter 31. How the Deluge signifies the Baptism of Christ. verse. 38.
Chapter 41. Of the seals of the Covenant, Circumcision of the foreskin and
Baptism. verse. from 1. to the 41. Chapter 41. Of Christian Baptism* verse. from
10. to 14. Chapter 41. How the Jews and the Christians have but one and the same
Baptism. verse. from 15. to the 17.
Beast. Chapter 30. What the Antichristian Babylonish Beast is. verse. 18, 19. Chapter
30. What the Beast and Whore is. verse. 64. Chapter 31. How, abomination may be
imputed to a Beast. verse. from 31. to the 38. Chapter 36. Where the Beast, the
Whore, and Christ in us, is. verse. 49.51. Chapter 73. What the Number of Babell
and of the Beast is. verse. 9, 10. Chapter 73. Wherefore the time is at hand that
the Beast and the Whore must break in pieces. verse. 11, etc. Chapter 76. How
Simeon and Levi prefigure the Beast and the Whore. verse. 30.
Beastiall Man. Chapter 21. Of the Beastiall Man's Original, and of his sickness and
Mortality. verse. from 1. to the 17. Chapter 21. Of the Government of the Beastiall
Man. verse. 11, 12.
Beersheba. Chapter 47. What the City Beersheba or Bersaba signifies. verse. 20,
etc.
Benjamin. Chapter 77. The Testament of Benjamin, and the signification thereof.
verse. from 48. to the 58.
Benoni. Chapter 63. What the name Benoni signifies. verse. 26, 27.
Bethel. Chapter 63. What Bethel signifies. verse. 19.
Bible. Chapter 74. How the Kingdom of Christ and the Kingdom of Hell are
pourtrayed by the Histories in the Bible. verse. 50, 51.
Blessing. Chapter 41. What in Man shall possess the Eternal Blessing. verse. 1.
Boasting. Chapter 2. We come short of that Boasting or Glory that we ought to
have in God. verse. 3.
Bodies. Body. Chapter 11. Of two outward Bodies. verse. 22. Chapter 11. How all
things of this world have a twofold Body. verse. 19. Chapter 11. Man has a
threefold Body. verse. 20. Chapter 40. The heavenly Body of the soul dies not.
verse. 44, 45.
Bondage. Chapter 39. What the figure is of the Bondage in Egypt. verse. 26, etc.
Book. Chapter 43. How a Man must understand the first Book of Moses. verse. 57.
Chapter 52. How the first book of Moses is a figure of the Spirit of God. verse.
51. Chapter 76. How all slanderous Books and Libells are the Murdering swords of
Simeon and Levi. verse. 29.
Breath. Chapter 15. Of a Threefold Breath in Man, which is a Threefold soul.
verse. 14, 15.

C.
Cain. Chapter 26. Of the propagation of Man in this world, and of Cain the
firstborn and Murtherour. verse. from 1. to the 76. Chapter 27. What is to be
understood by Cains sacrifice. verse. 41. Chapter 27. Why the will of the Serpent
and Devil in Cain would kill the body of Abell. verse. 9.10. Chapter 28. What was
the cause that Cain Murdered Abell. verse. from 4. to the 25. Chapter 29. What the
Name Cain signifies in the Language of Nature. verse. 18. Chapter 29* How Cain and
Abell were the two branches, and the Image of the whole Tree. verse. 23. Chapter
29. What Mark God had set upon Cain. verse. 53. Chapter 29. Of Cains fears. verse.
54. Chapter 29 Wherefore Grace came upon Cain. verse. 56. Chapter 29. Cain was not
borne to perdition. verse. 57. Chapter 29. What should be avenged in Cain
seavenfold. verse. 58. Chapter 37. What in Cain is Cursed. verse. 34. Chapter 40.
Cain, Ham, Ismael, and Esau, are an Image of the Turks and Heathens. verse. 71.
Calfe. Chapter 42. What Abraham's fatted Calfe signifies. verse. 19. etc.
Camells. Chapter 50. What the Ten Camells which Abraham's servant took with him,
signify. verse. 14.
Canaan. Chapter 49. What Moses understands by Canaan. verse. 12.
Care for the belly. Chapter 24. What a Man does effect by Pride and care for the
Belly. verse. 21. etc.
Cave. Chapter 29 What the twofold Cave signifies. verse. 13. etc.
Changed. Chapter 11. How all things may be changed. verse. 11.
Chaos. Chapter 1. What the Eternal Chaos is wherein all things lie hid. verse. 7,
8.
Chariotts. Chapter 72. What the Chariotts, provision, and sumptuous apparel
signify, that Joseph gave to his Brethren. verse. from 24. to the 38.
Cherubine. Chapter 25. Of the Cherubine, that drove the Evil Adam out of
Paradise. verse. 38. etc.
Child of perdition. Chapter 46. How the Child of perdition shall be revealed,
and the Beast and Whore put to shame. verse. 33, 34.
Children of God, or Christ. Chapter 31. How the Children of God saw the daughters
of Men. verse. from 12. to the 16. Chapter 37. How the Line of the Children of God
is as a Tree. verse. 1, 2. Chapter 38. How God delivers his Children through the
Might of his anger. verse. 14. Chapter 44. How the Children of God do often keep
back great plagues, from God. verse. from 19. to the 21. Chapter 46. How it is
that Men see no more in the Children of God then in others. verse. from 4 to
the 6. Chapter 55. Of the Misery and ignorance of the Children of God. verse. 35,
36. Chapter 55. Why the true Children of Christ are persecuted by the Children in
the Kingdom of Nature. verse. from 47. to the 50. Chapter 56. How the Children of
Christ instantly after the blessing enter upon Christ's Pilgrimage. verse. 1, 2.
Chapter 56. How God so wonderfully leads and preserves his Children. verse. 3.
Chapter 56. How the Lord stands aloft on Jacobs Ladder, calling and comforting
the Children of God. verse. 11, 12. Chapter 64. How the despising of the Children
of Christ is good for them. verse. 12. Chapter 66. The Type and Image of the
Children of God in Chaste Joseph. verse. from 32. to the 40. Chapter 66. How the
Children of God have the greatest danger in worldly honor. verse. 53 Chapter 66.
The final and last trial of the Children of God. verse. from 61. to the 63.
and 68.
Christ.
Chapter 19. Wherefore Christ became a Man on the woman's part. verse. 17. Chapter 23.
Why Christ sweat drops of blood in the Garden. verse. 4. Chapter 23. Why Christ
must drink Gall and Vinegar. verse. 5, 6. Chapter 23. Why Christ must be scorned,
killed, etc. verse. 8, 9. Chapter 23. How Christ assumed a Masculine fire-soule in
the woman's property. verse. 43. etc. Chapter 25. Why Christ must be tempted.
verse. 24. Chapter 29. What was Christ's Office. verse. 25. Chapter 34. Why Christ would
not be generated of Man's, or the Masculine, seed. verse. 28. Chapter 37. How
Christ should become a God-Man, and Adam and Abraham a Man-God. verse. from 28.
to 32. Chapter 37. Of Christ's Person. verse. 42. etc. Chapter 40. How Christ and his
Subjects must be twofold persons. verse. 11, 12. Chapter 40. How Christ was
generated out of the Covenant made with Abraham. verse. 15. Chapter 40. How the
humanity of Christ anointeth his Branches. verse. 14. Chapter 40. Wherefore Christ
came. verse. from 48. to 70. Chapter 41. What Christ's, as, Gods, Corporeity is.
verse. 19. etc. Chapter 48. How Christ will certainly come to us again. verse. 13.
Chapter 50. How Christ is a Masculine virgin and God. verse. 26. Chapter 51. How Christ
was a Grape-gatherer that gleaneth. verse. 53. Chapter 56. A firm Ground and
assurance that Christ assumed our Adamicall soul and humanity in the Body and
womb of Mary. verse. from 14. to 20. Chapter 56. From what property Christ became
Man. verse. 20. Chapter 56. Why Christ took his soul from woman and became a Man.
verse. 21, 22. Chapter 69. Where a Man must seek Christ. verse. 22. Chapter 76. How
the Time is near, that the Kingdom of Christ will be Manifested to all
People. verse. 50. etc.
Christendom. Chapter 27. How verbal Christendom partakes of the sacrifice of
Christ. verse. 42. Chapter 68. How at present Christendom stands in Gods
presence. verse. from 31. to the 42. Chapter 68. What the four Elements of hunger
in Christendom are. verse. from the 35. to the 39.
Christian. Chapter 27. What a Christian is, and how he is a Christian. verse. 46.
and Chapter 63. verse. 51. etc. Chapter 40. How a Christian must be a Christian.
verse. 97. Chapter 51. How a Christian in his Faith works in the flesh of Christ.
verse. 31. Chapter 51. When, any is a Christian. verse. 43. Chapter 64. How a Christian
must not account the hate from his brother to be grievous. verse. 26, 27. Chapter
64. What the wish of a Christian to his enemies should be. verse. 27. Chapter 64.
How a true Christian should present the misery and sins of the people where
he lives, daily before God. verse. 37, 38. Chapter 66. What Officer is a
Christian, and what, no Christian. verse. 20. Chapter 66. How a Christian must be
Armed, in worldly Offices. verse. 65. etc. Chapter 68. The most excellent figure in
the whole Bible, of a Tried Christian. verse. 48. etc. Chapter 70. How a Man
begins to be a Christian. verse. 24, 25. Chapter 70. What the difference is
between a Christian and other strange heathen people. verse. 80. etc.
Church. Chapter 63. What the greatest whordome is in the Churches of stone.
verse. from 39. to 43. Chapter 63. How at present Men are ready to storm the
Church, or house of whordom. verse. 45. Chapter 63. How Churches were erected out
of a good intention. verse. 46. Chapter 63. What Holiness is in the Church. verse.
47. Chapter 63. What a Man must do that he may enter into the Church worthily.
verse. 50.
Circumcision. Chapter 34. Why God commanded Circumcision to Abraham. verse. 2.
etc. Chapter 41. Why the Males must be Circumcised on the Eighth day. verse. 35.
etc. Chapter 41. What Circumcision is. verse. 3. etc.
Clod. Chapter 2. The whole world lies in one Clod of Earth. verse. 6.
Coat.
Chapter 64. What Joseph's parti-colored Coat which his father made him,
signifies. verse. 33. Chapter 64. What it signifies that Jacob was deceived by
Joseph's Coat. verse. 49. etc.
Concubines. Chapter 63. How Jacobs Concubines signify the stone Churches. verse.
36.
Conditions, see Forms. Configuration. Chapter 13. A whole Configuration or
Constellation lies in each Element. verse. 12.
Contention. Chapter 17. The Contention of the high-Schooles or Universities about
the Tree of knowledge. verse. 16. Chapter 28. What the cause of Contention about
Religion is. verse. from 26. to the 43. Chapter 35. Whence Contention does arise.
verse. 61. etc. Chapter 36. Of the Contention at the Tower of the Confusion of
Tongues in Babell. verse. 12, 13. Chapter 40. How Contentious Preachers imbitter
the Ears of the hearers. verse. 98. Chapter 51. How the false cold Love of
Titulary Christendom contendeth about knowledge. verse. 46. etc. Chapter 65. What
the Contentious opinions in Babell are. verse. 49, 50.
Copulation. Chapter 41. How the Beastiall Copulation is boarne withal under
divine Patience. verse. 2, 3.
Covenant. Chapter 30. Of the Line of the Covenant. verse. from 1. to the 54. Chapter
32. Of the Covenant between God and Noah. verse. 1. Chapter 33. Of the Covenant of
God with Noah, and all Creatures. verse. from 1. to the 40.
Covering. Chapter 22. The Covering for our nakedness is ours and no more. verse.
77. etc.
Covetousnes. Chapter 24. Whence the great Covetousnes does arise. verse. 10.
Council. Chapter 66. To whom there is no more Council or Remedy to Eternity.
verse. 47.
Councills. Chapter 77. When Councills were set in the place of the Holy Ghost.
verse. 66.
Cradle. Chapter 63. What the Cradle of the child Jesus is. verse. 48.
Creation. Chapter 45. Of the Creation of Heaven and the outward World. verse.
from 1. to the 63. Chapter 11. Of the Mysticallnes of the Creation. verse. 1.
Creature. Chapter 32. How the Image of the Creature shall not pass away. verse.
16.
Cup. Chapter 17. What Joseph's Cup in Benjamins sack signifies* verse. from 1. to
the 13. and 41. to the 57.
Curse. Chapter 10. Of the Curse of the Earth. verse. 8. Chapter 24. Of the Curse, and
of the Body of sickness, whence that arises. verse. from 1. to the 35. Chapter 24.
What the Curse is. verse. 2.

D.
Damn. Damned. Chapter 41. An Excellent figure against those that according to
their Conclusions in Reason by the Letter, damn some children from the womb.
verse. 41. Chapter 66. What the Torment of all the damned is. verse. 67.
Dan. Chapter 77. The Testament of Dan, and the figure thereof. verse. from 13. to
the 25. Chapter 77. How it is signified by Dan, ^ad, and Assure, what kind of
people would govern the World. verse. 30* etc.
Darkness. Chapter 3. Of the Eternal Original of the darkness. verse. 5. Chapter 5. Of
the Enmity in the Darkness. verse. 6.
Day. Days. Chapter 12. Of the six days work of the Creation. verse. from 1. to
the 39. Chapter 12. Of the first Day. verse. 13. etc. Chapter 12. Of the second Day.
verse. 19. etc. Chapter 12. Of the third Day. verse. 32. etc. Chapter 13. Of the fourth
Day. verse. from 1. to the 20. Chapter 14. Of the fifth Day. verse. from 1. to the
13. Chapter 15. Of the sixth days work of the Creation. verse. from 1. to the 31.
Chapter 16. Of the Creation of the seventh Day. verse. from the 16. to the 18. Chapter
16. How the seventh Day has been from Eternity. verse. 28.
Death. Chapter 4. The Original of the Eternal Death. verse. 11, 12. Chapter 11.
What the Death and Misery of Man and all Creatures is. verse. 17. Chapter 23. Why
the Rocks clave in sunder at the Death of Christ. verse. 3. Chapter 33. Why Gods
anger often puts one Man to Death by another. verse. 21, 22.
Decrees. Chapter 61. How the Decrees in Scripture point only at two Kingdoms.
verse. 55.
Deity. Chapter 52. How the Deity manifests it self through the Souls nature.
verse. 7, 8.
Delight. Chapter 3. The Delight or Longing is the Property of the Son. verse. 7.
Deluge. Chapter 32. Why the Deluge, or Noah's flood came after seven days. verse.
20, 21, 22. Chapter 32. Wherefore the fountains of water opened themselves in the
Deluge. verse. 26. etc.
Desire. Chapter 3. The Desire arises from the Longing or delight, and is the
Fathers property. verse. 6, 7. Chapter 3. The Desire coagulateth it self. verse.
5.
Devil. Devils. see Lucifer. Chapter 8. That which is pain and Torment to the
Devils, is joy to the Angels. verse. 21. Chapter 10. How the Devil is the most
despicable poor creature of all. verse. 31. Chapter 17. How Lucifer became a
Devil. verse. 28. Chapter 22. Where the Devils Councell-chamber and school is.
verse. 17. etc. Chapter 37. How the Heathen had not their answers from the Devil.
verse. 12, 13. Chapter 38. How the Devil is a Prince of this world. verse. 5, 6.
Chapter 38. What those four Elements are wherein the Devil and all evil
Creatures live. verse. 7. Chapter 66. Where the Devil is a frolic Guest. verse.
54. Chapter 70. What the Devils fishhooke is. verse. 41. Chapter 74. How the Devil
lost his seat and stool in Man. verse. 17, 18.
Dinah. Chapter 58. The figure of Dinah. verse. from 39. to 45. Chapter 62. How Dinah
was defloured, and Sichem and the City slain and spoiled; the Gate of
Christians wars and the Babylonish whoredom, to be well considered of. verse.
from 1. to the 48. Chapter 62. How Dinah went forth to see the daughters of the
Land, and what is prefigured thereby. verse. 3. etc. Chapter 62. How Dinahs
whoredom and Simeon and Levi's Murthour is a figure of Christendom. verse. from
9. to the 18.
Doctors. Chapter 35. What understanding the Doctors have in their Contention about
Gods habitation and Being. verse. 66.
Dominion. Chapter 39. Whence Dominion arises. verse. 32
Dove. Chapter 32. What Noah's first Dove signifies. verse. 40. Chapter 42. What the
three Doves and the Raven signify. verse. from 42. to the 46.
Dragon. Chapter 76. What the Dragons seven heads are. verse. 25, 26.
Dreams. Chapter 67. What it is to expound Dreams. verse. 1, 2. Chapter 67. Whence
it is that a Beast dreameth. verse. 5. Chapter 68. Of King Pharaohs Dreams. verse.
1. etc. Chapter 68. Wherefore the Natural Magi, could not Expound Pharaohs
Dreams. verse. 2. and 10. and 18, 19.
Driver. see Hunter. Drunk plentifully. Chapter 70. What that signifies, that
Joseph and his brethren drunk plentifully. verse. 94.
Dying. Chapter 20. Of Adam and Eves dying. verse. 26. etc.

E.
Earth. Chapter 10. Whence the grossnesse of the Earth proceeds. verse. 30. Chapter
10. Out of what the Earth is proceeded. verse. 61. Chapter 12. How the Globe of the
Earth is Extruded. verse. 7. Chapter 22. What the Earth is. verse. 45. Chapter 25. Why
God Created the Earth. verse. 29. etc. Chapter 25. When, God set the Time for the
Earth to endure. verse. 19.
Eden.
Chapter 17. What Eden is. verse. 6.
Edom. Chapter 53. What Edom is, and signifies, in the high Tongue. verse. 5 verse
and Ch: 64. and 3.
Egyptians. Chapter 78. What it signifies that many Egyptians went along when
Jacob was buried. verse. 2.
Elected. Election. Chapter 25. Of that saying of St Paul, We were Elected in
Christ Jesus ere the foundation of the world was laid. verse. 20. Chapter 48. How
God Elected not only the Natural Line of Christ, but also the Line of Nature.
verse. 35, 36. Chapter 51. An excellent figure, against the wise Rationallists,
concerning Election or Predestination. verse. from 4. to 24. Chapter 26. Of
Election or Predestination. verse. from 1. to the 76. Chapter 32. A curious
example, how God has Predestined no Election in Nature. verse. 3, 4. Chapter 46.
How Gods Election passes only upon the figure. verse. 30. Chapter 61. Of Gods
Election, or Predestination, or Decree concerning Jacob and Esau. verse. from
1. to the 3. and 23.
Elements. Chapter 10. That the four Elements are but properties. verse. 49.
Ember. Chapter 23. How, in many, there is an Ember glowing toward the virgins
child of the New birth. verse. 41, 42.
Enos. Enoch. Chapter 30. What Enos signifies in the Language of Nature. verse.
11. Chapter 30. What Enoch is in the Language of Nature. verse. 27. etc. Chapter 30.
How long Enochs voice must be silent. verse. 49* 50. Chapter 31. Of the Line of
wonders, issuing from Enoch. verse. from 1. to the 45.
Envy. Chapter 24. Whence the great Envy arises. verse. 11.
Ephraim. Chapter 75. The figure, of Isreal's laying his right hand upon Ephraims
head. verse. 12. etc.
Esau. Chapter 52. What Esau signifies in the Language (...) Nature. verse. 36.
Chapter 53. How Esau despised his being first borne, and sold it for a Mess of
pottage. verse. from 1. to the 28. Chapter 54. The figure of Esaus 40 year, and of
his two wives. verse. 18. etc. Chapter 55. How the figure of Isaacks Blessing, and
of Esau and Jacob is to be understood. verse. from 1. to the 5. Chapter 55. Why
Esau was blessed with the word of Strife. verse. 11. Chapter 55. Why Esau was all
over rough and hairy. verse. 21, 22. Chapter 55. What that signifies, that Esau
attained not the Blessing. verse. 39. Chapter 55. What figure Esau is, in his
Blessing. verse. 40. etc. Chapter 56. The figure of Esaus being a grief to his
parents. verse. 9, 10. Chapter 60. What Esau the firstborn signifies. verse. 3.
Chapter 60. What Esaus 400 Men signify. verse. 6. Chapter 60. How Esau went to meet
Jacob, and how Jacob sent Esau presents. verse. 6. Chapter 61. The figure, of Esaus
saying to Jacob; Whose are these with thee. verse. 10. etc. Chapter 61. How Esaus
curse and malice was turned into Love. verse. 18, 19. and 53. Chapter 61. A plain
Exposition of the Scriptures, saying, Esau sought repentance with tears and
yet found it not. verse. 20. etc. Chapter 64. How Esau stands in the figure of
the Kingdom of Nature. verse. 2
Esdras. or Ezra. Chapter 38. How Esdras in the knowledge of the Spirit, had the
lost Bible dictated to him. verse. 24. Chapter 52. How Ezra has briefly written
the figure and history. verse. 52.
Eve. Chapter 18. Why Eves will was subject to her husbands. verse. 11. Chapter 20.
Why Eve so suddenly Lusted after vanity. verse. from. 2. to the 8. Chapter 20.
How Eve gazed on the Serpent. verse. 22.
Evil. Chapter 10. How the Evillest must be the cause of the Best. verse. 63. Chapter
11. What the great evil of this world is. verse. 15. Chapter 22. What the
greatest evil is. verse. 25. Chapter 28. How the evil causes that the good is
manifest to it self. verse. 67. etc. Chapter 29. How nothing is created Evil, or
to the Dominion of Evil. verse. 11. Chapter 61. Whence Evil and Good proceeds.
verse. 61.63. and 68.

F.
Fall. Chapter 9. Of the Fall of Lucifer, and his Legions. verse. from 1. to the
25. Chapter 11. What the fall of Lucifer, and the Heathen Idols, was. verse. 6.
Chapter 17. Whence the desire to fall, in Lucifer proceeded. verse. 22. to 43. Chapter
17. Of the fall of Lucifer. verse. 25. etc. Chapter 17. How Man came to Fall.
verse. 31. Chapter 17. How God saw the Fall. verse. 33 Chapter 20. Of the Lamentable
and Miserable Fall of Man. verse. from 1. to the 38.
Famine. Chapter 73. How the great famine and hung^r after heavenly food is near
at hand. verse. from 11. to the 14.
Favor. Chapter 66. How the Children of God must not set their hope in the favor
of Man. verse. verse 50. to the 56. Chapter 67.15. etc.
Faith. Chapter 27. What that is which is called Faith. verse. 35. Chapter 39. What
it is rightly, to believe God, with Abraham, which is the right ground of our
Christian Faith. verse. 8, 9. Chapter 48. What Faith in Gods Children is able to
do. verse. 33, 34. Chapter 56. How the Faithful, or believers, put on Christ.
verse. 31. etc.
Fear. Chapter 70. What Jacobs fear, that he would not let his son go to
Joseph, signifies. verse. 28, 29.
Fiat. Chapter 11. How the Verbum Fiat the word of Creation, is still creating to
this day. verse. 9.
Figure. Chapter 54. Of the Figure of the Old and New Testament. verse. 17. Chapter 52.
When the Figure shall wholly be manifested in substance. verse. 52.
Fire. Chapter 3. Of a Twofold Fire. verse. 23, 24. Chapter 24. Wherefore all things
shall be tried in the Fire. verse. 4. to the 9. Chapter 27. With what Fire the
sacrifices of Abell and Moses were kindled. verse. 8 and 21. Chapter 27. How Man in
the Resurrection shall pass through the Fire of Anger. verse. 21, 22. Chapter 27.
The Eternal Fire, and also the Love- fire is Magical. verse. 31. Chapter 37. What
fire at the End of the Day shall purge the floare. verse. 20.
Fool. Chapter 22. What the word Fool means. verse. 65, 66. Chapter 24. What is the
greatest foolishnes. verse. 16, etc. and 30.
Food. Chapter 70. What is the Food of the Eternal word that became Man. verse.
60.
Form. Forms or proherties of Nature. Chapter 28. The Spirit of Christ in his
Children is bound to no certain Form. verse. 51. to the 55. Chapter 6. Of the
seven forms, conditions, or properties of the Eternal Nature. verse. 14.
etc. Chapter 3. What the First form, condition, property or Fiat is. verse. 8, 9.
Chapter 3. What the second Form is. verse. 10, 11. Chapter 3. What the Third Form is.
verse. 12. etc. Chapter 3. What the fourth Form is. verse. 18. Chapter 5. What the
fifth Form is. verse. 1. etc. Chapter 5. What the sixth Form is. verse. 11. etc.
Chapter 6. What the seventh Form is. verse. 1. to the 13. Chapter 6. Of the out-birth
or manifestation of the seven forms, conditions or properties. verse. 21. to
the 24. Chapter 7. How seven forms or properties are in all things. verse. 18.
Chapter 20. Of four forms or properties in Man. verse. 33. etc. Chapter 40. How in
the moving of Nature two forms or properties divided themselves. verse. 7, 8.
Free longing. Chapter 3. The Free longing or Lubet is no property. verse. 6.
Fruits. Chapter 70. What the fruits signify, which Jacob commanded his Children
to carry along with them. verse. 33. etc.

G.
Gad. Chapter 77. The Testament of Gad, and the figure thereof. verse. 26. etc.
Germany. Chapter 45. How Germany shall be blinded by a Star shining from East
to West. verse. 13, 14.
Globe. Chapter 18. Moses Tables written on a Globe. verse. 20, 21.
God. Chapter 1. What God is. verse. 2 Chapter 2. Where God dwells. verse. 8. Chapter
3. Where God is called Father, and Son. verse. 7. Chapter 5. How God is in the
Darkness and in the Light. verse. 10. Chapter 6. How God wills Good and Evil.
verse. 52. Chapter 19. It is Idolatrous to pourtray God as a Man. verse. 27. Chapter
26. Why God became Man. verse. 65, 66. Chapter 43. How Reason thinks that God
dwells only above the Stars and Firmament. verse. 2, 3. Chapter 43. Where God
dwells according to Love and Anger. verse. 4. Chapter 43. How God sees in the
Devils and wicked soul. verse. 5. etc. Chapter 43. How that is understood where
it is said, the Cry was come before God. verse. 6. Chapter 60. How God is
manifested in the Thrones of the Holy Angels, and of the Devils. verse. 45,
46.
Good. Chapter 2. Of what God made the Good and the Evil. verse. 4. etc. Chapter 3.
How out of the Eternal Good evil is come to be. verse. 1. etc. Chapter 3. By
what, Good is known. verse. 22. Chapter 22. To whom we must do good, to whom
not. verse. 81, 82. Chapter 71. How the Eternal Good became Creaturely. verse. 14.
etc.
Goshen. Chapter 73. What the Land of Goshen signifies. verse. 18. Chapter 73. Of the
figure typified by Goshen. verse. 31. etc.
Government. Chapter 22. Whence the Earthly Government arises. verse. 74. Chapter 66.
How the Governor in the Office of Joseph Governs in Christendom. verse. 12.
etc.
Gulf. Chapter 8. The Gulf between Darkness and Light, and between the Holy world
and the dark world. verse. 22, 23.
Gutts. Chapter 19. How the Gutts and intrailes were added to Adam and Eve. verse.
19.

H.
Hagar. Chapter 40. Of the History and most wonderful prefiguration of the Spirit
of God, by Hagar Sarahs Mayd-servant, and her son Ismaell, of his casting out
from the Inheritance, and of Isaacks Inheritance. verse. from 1. to the 100.
Chapter 46. The figure of Hagars casting out, and the Birth of Isaac. verse. from
8. to the 15. Chapter 46. A noble figure concerning forsaken Nature, by Hagar and
her son. verse. from 16. to the 23.
Ham. Chapter 31. What Ham is in the Language of Nature. verse. 7. Chapter 32. Why
Hams Image was Cursed by his father. verse. 9. Chapter 34. How Hams spirit at
present has the Government in Christendom. verse. 37. etc. Chapter 37. What in
Ham and Cain is cursed. verse. 34.
Hanoch. Chapter 29. What Hanoch signifies in the Language of Nature. verse. 28,
29.
Hardened. Hardening. Chapter 61. Why Man continues hardened. verse. 23. and 42. Chapter
61. How, the hardening is not from the purpose of God. verse. 66. etc.
Head. Chapter 23. What it is to tread upon or break the Head of the Serpent.
verse. 32, 37.
Heardsmen. Chapter 73. The figure of this, that Joseph's brethren must say before
Pharaoh that they were Heardsmen. verse. 35. etc.
Heaven. Chapter 5. Of the fullnes of Joy in Heaven. verse. 5. Chapter 8. Heaven is in
Hell and Hell in Heaven. verse. 28. Chapter 10. What we are to understand by the
two words, Himmell and Erde, Heaven and Earth. verse. 47. etc.
Heels. Chapter 23. What the stinging in the Heels is. verse. 33, 34.
Hell. Chapter 3. The true Original of the dark world or Hell, into which the
Devils are thrust. verse. 2. Chapter 4. Whence Hell has its Name. verse. 16. Chapter
5. What and where Hell and the dark world is. verse. 9. Chapter 8. How Heaven is in
Hell and Hell in Heaven. verse. 28.
Hira. Chapter 65. What Hira of Odollam is in the figure. verse. 21.
Honest. Chapter 66. How all things must serve to the best for those that are
Honest or virtuous and fear God. verse. 68. etc.
Hunter. Chapter 35. Of the Hunter or Driver and his Office. verse. 35.

I.
Jacob. Chapter 52. That Jacob comes after Esau, and holds him by the heel;
what that signifies. verse. 37. Chapter 52. What Jacob is in the Language of
Nature. verse. 41. Chapter 53. Why God called Jacob Israel. verse. 23 etc. Chapter 55.
How Jacob was blessed by Isaac unknowingly in the stead of Esau; and what is
signified thereby. verse. from 1. to the 50. Chapter 55. Why Jacob must take upon
him the rough hairy beasts skin. verse. 23. etc. Chapter 55. The figure of Jacobs
being smooth under the skin. verse. 29. Chapter 55. How the figure of Jacob points
at Christ. verse. 30. Chapter 56. How Jacob must wander away, and how the Lord
appeared to him. verse. from 1. to the 39. Chapter 57. How Jacob came to Laban and
served him in keeping his sheep fourteen years for his two Daughters; what
the spiritual figure thereof concerning the Bride of Christ, signifies.
verse. from 1. to the 34. Chapter 58. How Jacob served Laban twenty years, and
begat twelve sons and one daughter, and how God blessed him, and how Laban
often changed his wages. verse. from 1. to the 53. Chapter 58. How Jacobs subtilty
was a figure of Adams subtilty. verse. 16.17.19. and 24 etc. Chapter 58. How the
twelve Children of Jacob, signify the Line from Adam to Noah and his Children.
verse. 38. Chapter 59. The figure of the sayings of Labans children, that came to
J^cobs Ear. verse. 1. etc. Chapter 59. The figure that Jacob fled from Laban, and
that Laban pursued him. verse. from 1 to the 25. Chapter 59. What that signifies,
that God said to Jacob, get thee up, and go to Bethel. verse. 14, 15. Chapter 59.
How Jacob stole away Labans heart, what is thereby to be understood. verse. 16.
Chapter 60. What it signifies, that Jacob divided his flocks into two parts
because of Esaus wrath. verse. 4. Chapter 60. What it signifies, that Jacob
humbled himself before God and his brother Esau. verse. 7, 8. Chapter 60. What the
Present that Jacob sent to Esau, signifies. verse. 9. to the 13. Chapter 60. How
Jacob arose in the night and lead his wives and eleaven Children over the
water, what is thereby to be understood. verse. 14. to the 16. Chapter 60. How a
Man wrestled with Jacob. verse. 17. to the 23. Chapter 60. How Jacobs Sinew was
displaced, what that signifies. verse. 24. to the 27. Chapter 60. The figure of
Jacobs saying, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. verse. 28. to the
35. Chapter 60. The Inward Holy figure of Jacobs saying; that is thy Name verse.
from 37. to the 50. Chapter 61. The wonderful figure, how Jacob and Esau met, and
All mischief and evil will was turned into Great Joy and Compassion: what is
thereby to be understood. verse. 1. to the 22. Chapter 61. The figure how Jacob
divided his wives and children, and went himself before them, and bowed seven
times before Esau. verse. 4 to the 9. Chapter 61. The figure, how Jacob would not
go along with Esau. verse. 69. to the 71. Chapter 61. The figure, that Jacob
pitched his Tents before the City of Sichem. verse. 73. Chapter 63. How Jacob went
to Bethel, how Benjamin was borne, and Rachel and Isaac died, what is thereby
to be understood. verse. from 1. to the 52. Chapter 63. The figure of Jacobs coming
to his father before his End. verse. 53. Chapter 64. How Jacob and Esau departed
one from the other, what that signifies. verse. 4. Chapter 69. How Jacobs sons
came before Joseph, what is thereby to be understood. verse. 1. to the 35. Chapter
73. How Jacob sacrificed at Beersheba, to the God of his fathers, and spoke
with him, what the signification is. verse. to the 8. Chapter 73. The figure of
Jacobs going forth out of Canaan into Egypt. verse. 11. Chapter 73. The figure of
Jacobs sending Juda before him to Joseph, and his weeping upon Joseph's neck.
verse. 19. etc. Chapter 74. How Jacob and the five youngest brethren of Joseph were
set before Pharaoh, and how Jacob blessed Pharaoh. verse. 1. etc. Chapter 74. The
very mystical figure, that Jacob would be buried in the Land of Canaan. verse.
53. etc. Chapter 75. How Jacob before his End blessed the two sons of Joseph.
verse. from 1. to the 30. Chapter 76. How Jacob called for all his sons, and told
them what the state and Condition of every one of them would be. verse. 1. etc.
Chapter 76. What Jacob in the Spirit calls his honor. verse. 24, 25. Chapter 77. A
short figure of the whole world in Jacobs Testament. verse. 59. to the 72. Chapter
78. Of Jacobs buryall. verse. 1.
Japhet. Chapter 31. What Japhet is in the Language of Nature. verse. 9.
Jared. Chapter 30. What Jared is in the Language of Nature. verse. 19, 20. Chapter
30. How Jareds Office is twofold. verse. 21. etc.
Idols. Chapter 37. The Original of the heathenish Idols, and their Oracles.
verse. 7. to the 12. Chapter 95. Of Rachells Idoll-Gods. verse. 9. to the 18.
JEOVA. Chapter 35. Of the Name JEOVA. verse. 49. etc.
Jewel as a Present. Chapter 50. What the Jewel and Present sent by Abraham's
servant signifies. verse. 22. to 47.
Jews. Chapter 37. How the time of recalling the Jews is near at hand. verse.
36. Chapter Chapter 51. verse. 42.
Chapter 37. How the Jews are rejected, and shall be grafted in again. verse. 59.
etc. Chapter 41. The cause of the Jews and Christians blindness. verse. 47. etc.
Chapter 41. Advise to the Christians, Jews Turks and Heathen. verse. 53. to the
71. Chapter 51. Why the Jews did not all turn to Christ when he manifested
himself in the flesh. verse. 25, 26. Chapter 51. What a Jew is. verse. 27, 28.
Chapter 51. How a Jew in his Faith works in Christ's Officer. verse. 28. etc. Chapter
51. How the Jew and Christian come to filiation. verse. 44, 45. Chapter 65.
Wherefore the Jews oftentimes slew the Prophets. verse. 28. Chapter 70. How, to
Eat Christ's flesh, is an abomination to Jews Turks and Heathens. verse. 66.
Chapter 70. How the Jews Turks and strange Nations do eat Christ's flesh. verse.
69. to the 77. Chapter 70. How the Fathers, viz. the Jews had no more, a part in
Grace, then the strangers had. verse. 78. Chapter 75. A figure, showing, that God
would bring the Jews into the true Covenant into Christ. verse. from 1. to the
36. Chapter 76. How the Jews do in vain look after another Master Ruler or
Messiah. verse. 50.
Image. Images. Chapter 21. How the heavenly Image that God Created in Adam, is
capable of the Kingdom of God. verse. 14. Chapter 68. How the Makers of Images are
threatened by the Anger of God. verse. 26. to the 31.
Infidelity. Chapter 51. How Infidelity is as great in one people as in another.
verse. 42, 43.
Interpretations. Interpreter. Chapter 37. By what understanding Interpretations
are made. verse. 10. etc. Chapter 35. What the Interpreter, by whom Joseph
speaks, signifies. verse. 35.
Joseph.
Chapter 58. How Joseph, signifies Christ. verse. 50. etc. Chapter 64. The beginning
of the most excellent figure of Joseph. verse. from 6. to the 61. Chapter 64. How
Joseph was sold and carried into a strange Land. verse. 53. etc. Chapter 64. How
Joseph is taxed for unchastity by Potiphars wife. verse. 56. etc. Chapter 64. How
Joseph was sold for twenty pieces of silver, and Christ for thirty pieces of
silver. verse. 59, 60. Chapter 66.1. etc. Chapter 64. What the whole history of Joseph
drives at. verse. 61. Chapter 66. Of Joseph's Chastity and fear of God. verse. from
1. to the 72. Chapter 66. How Joseph fled from the whore, and what is signified
thereby. verse. 45. etc. Chapter 67. How Joseph interpreted the Dreams of Pharaohs
Butler and his Baker, and what is thereby to be understood. verse. from 1. to
the 18. Chapter 68. The figure of Joseph's putting on other clothes and shaving
himself. verse. 22. Chapter 69. The figure of Joseph's letting his nine brethren
out of prison, and keeping Simeon prisoner. verse. 24. to 29. Chapter 69. The
lovely figure of Joseph's causing his brethrens sacks to be filled, and their
money to be given them again. verse. 36. etc. Chapter 70. How Jacobs sons go
again into Egypt to Joseph, and take Benjamin with them, how Joseph caused
them to be brought to his house, and to Eat of his Table; how Joseph caused
his brethren to be set in their Order, and how Joseph was served by himself,
and his brethren and the Egyptians also by themselves. verse. from 1. to the
94. Chapter 71. How Joseph caused his brethrens sacks to be filled, and the Money
to be laid in the top of the sack, and his Cup in Benjamins sack, and caused
them to be pursued and challenged for Thieves. verse. 1.66. Chapter 72. How Joseph
manifested himself before his brethren. verse. 1. to the 38. Chapter 72. How
Joseph kissed his brethren. verse. 20. etc. Chapter 73. How the Countenance of
Joseph was manifested to his brethren again, and how they must be ashamed.
verse. 15, 16. Chapter 73. The figure of Joseph's saying, I will tell Pharaoh, My
brethren and all my Fathers house is come to me. verse. 25. etc. Chapter 74. The
very potent figure of Joseph's gathering all the Money together in the Famine.
verse. 9 to the 15. Chapter 74. The figure of Joseph's buying all the Land of Egypt
for Pharaoh. verse. 19. to 21. Chapter 74. Wherefore Joseph bought not the Priests
fields, what is the signification thereof. verse. 22. and 27. to the 33. Chapter
74. The figure of Joseph's Law concerning the Egyptians fields to give the fifth
part to Pharaoh. verse. from 23. to the 35. Chapter 77. The Testament of Joseph,
and the signification thereof. verse. 37 etc.
Isaac. Chapter 40. Why Isaac was chosen and appointed to the Inheritance. verse.
39, 40. Chapter 46. Of Isaacks Birth, and Ismaels casting out with his mother
Hagar, what is thereby signified. verse. from 1. to the 37. Chapter 48. Concerning
Isaacks saying to his father, here is fire and wood etc. verse. 16, 17. Chapter 48.
Why Isaac must not be slain. verse. 20. Chapter 50. The figure of Isaacks meeting
Rebeccah in the field. verse. 54 etc. Chapter 52. How Esau and Jacob were borne to
Isaac, and what happened to them. verse. 50. etc. Chapter 52. Why Isaac loved
Esau more then Jacob. verse. 44. etc. Chapter 54. How Isaac in the famine went to
Abimelech and how the Lord appeared to him. verse. 1. to the 17.
Ismael. Chapter 40. God did not reject the whole person of Ismael verse. 19. Chapter
40. The figure of Ismaels rejection or casting out. verse. 36. etc. Chapter 52. Of
the twelve Princes from Ismael, and of his falling before his brethren. verse.
16. etc.
Issachar. Chapter 77. The Testament of Issachar, and the figure thereof. verse. 8.
etc.
Judah. Chapter 65. What the three sons that Judah begat signify. verse. 6. etc.
Chapter 65. Why the History of Judah and ^hamar is put between in the History of
Joseph. verse. 64. etc. Chapter 76. Of the Testament of Judah. verse. 38. etc.
Judging. Chapter 70. What the speech of Christ concerning Judging signifies.
Judge not that ye be not Judged. verse. 51.

K.
Kenan. Chapter 30. What Kenan signifies in the Language of Nature. verse. 17.
Keturah. Chapter 51. What Keturah signifies in the Language of Nature. verse. 2
Kine. Chapter 68. What Pharaohs seven fatt Kine and seven lean Kine signify.
verse. from 11. to the 17.
Kings. Chapter 66. For what, Kings and Princes are served by the Nobility. verse.
18, 19.
Kingdom. Chapter 49. How the outward Kingdom remains Eternally. verse. 17, 18.
Chapter 76. How the time is near that the Kingdom of Christ will be manifested to
all people. verse. 50. etc.
Knowledge. Chapter 45 What knowledge the Outward Man has of the Kingdom of
Christ. verse. 17. etc.

L.
Laban. Chapter 58. The figure of Labans changing Jacobs wages ten times. verse.
28. etc. Chapter 59. How Laban chode with Jacob, and what is thereby to be
understood. verse. 19.
Ladder. Chapter 56. What the Ladder of Jacob was, and what the Angels descending
and ascending, signifies. verse. from 4. to the 8.
Lamb. Chapter 37. What the wedding of the Lamb is, at which God and Man is
Espoused, and Christ Borne. verse. 10. etc.
Lamech. Chapter 29. What Lamech is in the Language of Nature. verse. 37, 38. and
Ch: 31. verse. 2. Chapter 29. Of Lamechs two wives and their children. verse. 39. to
the 46. and 49. Chapter 29. What the Man and the young Man is which he slew.
verse. 48. Chapter 29. What as to Lamech shall be avenged 77 times. verse. 59. to
the 64.
Land. Chapter 75. Of the piece of Land that Jacob gave to Joseph severally from
the rest of his children, and the signification thereof. verse. 31. etc.
Language. Chapter 35. Of the Ground of the Head Language, when all people spoke
but one Language. verse. from 54. to the 59. Chapter 35. What Language the Spirits
use. verse. 60. Chapter 37. How long the undivided Language continued. verse. 4.
etc.
Life. Chapter 11. Whence the true Rational Life in the Elements is. verse. 27.
Chapter 35. The cause of the long Life of the Patriarchs before the Flood. verse.
11. etc.
Light. Chapter 3. The Eternal Light, and the Eternal Darkness, is not Created.
verse. 2. to the 5. Chapter 10. Without Light the Elements had been unmovable.
verse. 44, 45.
Logic. Chapter 77. When the accute Logic came up. verse. 69.
Lord. Chapter 33. How, a Lord, Prince, or Magistrate, has no authority to shed
blood. verse. 15. etc,
Lot. Chapter 43. Why the two Angels lingered in going in, to Lot. verse. 34.
etc. Chapter 43. What is signified by Lotts wife. verse. 37. Chapter 43. The figure of
Lot in that he would give his two daughters to the Sodomies. verse. 53. etc.
Chapter 43. Why Lotts Kinsfolks would not follow him. verse. 65, 66. Chapter 44. How
Lot went out of Sodom, and of the terrible destruction of that whole Country
of Hams generations, and what happened upon it, also how it was done. verse.
from 1. to the 47. Chapter 44. Why Lotts daughters made their father drunk with
Wine. verse. 3. Chapter 44. To what End Lotts wife was turned into a Pillar of
Salt. verse. 28. etc. Chapter 44. Lotts wife is a figure of the present Babylonish
Christendom. verse. 33. etc. Chapter 44. Why Lotts daughters did lie with their
father. verse. 36. to the 47.
Love. Chapter 71. How Gods Love, comes only to help the weak. verse. 19.
Lucifer. Chapter 12. Wherefore and from what Lucifer wa^ thrust out. verse. 4. Chapter
12. Where Lucifer lies captive. verse. 35. Chapter 22. Wher^fore Lucifer was
swallowed up into ^h^ wrath. verse. 30* 31 Chapter 25 Where Lucifer sat before
the Creation of the Earth verse. 18. Chapter 44. How Lucifer d^sired to see the
wrath of Nature. verse. ^7. Chapter 60. How the pride of Lucifer by the M^sters of
the Letter does shut God up into a peculiar heaven apart. verse. 41, 42.

M.
Magistrate. Chapter 22. How the Magistrate is Good, and how not. verse. 74, 75.
Magus. Magia. Chapter 11. The Reader is admonished not to (...) the Magia or
Magic verse. 8. Chapter 11. How Man is hurt by the wicked Magus or Magician.
verse. 12. etc. Chapter 68. Of the Magi or Magicians, which Titulary Christendom
is full of. verse. 4. etc. Chapter 68. Of the Magia or Magic art, among the
Egyptians and Heathens, till the Kingdom of Christ. verse. 3. Chapter 68. How Man
is a true divine Magus or Magician. verse. 23. etc.
Mahalaleel. Chapter 30. What Mahalaleel is in the Language of Nature. verse. 18.
Maydservant. Chapter 40. What it is that the son of the Maydservant shall not
inherit with the son of the Freewoman. verse. 16. to the 70.
Man. Chapter 15. Man is Threefold. verse. 27. etc. Chapter 16. Of the distinction
between the Heavenly and the Earthly Man. verse. from 1. to the 15. Chapter 16. How
Man was while he stood in Paradise. verse. 7. etc. Chapter 18. How Man shall be
after the Resurrection. verse. 3. Chapter 19. How Man was ordained to the outward
Natural Life. verse. from 1 to the 16. Chapter 21. Why God created Man of the
Heavenly Essence. verse. ^6. Chapter 22. How Man deceived himself. verse. 27. Chapter
23. How the Word in (...) Eve was propagated from Man to Man. verse. 31. Chapter
24. How Man has a Cure, and the Devil not verse. 13 etc. Chapter 24. How a Divine
Man must have ^nmity in himself. verse. 31, 32. Chapter 2^. How Man (...) God.
verse. 14* 15. Chapter 29. How (...) in his (...). verse. ^2, 13. Chapter 29. How (...)
Dominion. verse. 14.
Mary. Chapter 37. How Ma^y (...) M^ther that has (...). verse. ^7 etc. Chapter 56.
What (...) the ^l^ssing ^elonging to Mary. verse. 29, 30.
M^usim Chapter ^^. What that God M^usim is. verse. 32.
Mea^^. Chapter 42. What the th^ee Measures of fine Meal sign^fie. verse. 17, 18.
Melchisedech. Chapter 38. What Melchisedech was. verse. 19 etc. Chapter 38. Why
Melchisedech blessed Abraham. verse. 2^.
Mercurius. Chapter 17. What Mercurius is. verse. 18
Mercifullnes. Chapter 70. How Mercifullnes hides its countenance from the
repenting soul.
Metalls. Chapter 10. What the Metalls are. verse. 17. Chapter 10. Of the seven
Properties in the Metalls. verse. from 18 to the 29. Chapter 16. How in the Earth
Stones and Metalls, lies a twofold substance. verse. 10.
Methusael. Chapter 29. What Methusael is in the Language of Nature. verse. 35, 36.
Methuselah. Chapter 12. What Methuselah is in the Language of Nature. verse. 10.
Michael.
Chapter 12. When, Michael strove with the Dragon. verse. 10.
Midianites. Chapter 64. How the Midianites will bring Joseph with them to Pharaoh;
the time is near. verse. 29. etc.
Money. Chapter 70. The figure of the wrong Money that Jacob commanded them to take
with them again. verse. 36. etc. and 48, 49.
Moon. Chapter 23. What the Moon and the Woman in the Apocalypse signify. verse.
35.
Moses. Chapter 11. The time is Borne that Moses casts away his veil. verse. 4.
Chapter 30. When, Moses will keep the sheep. verse. 52. etc.
Motion. Chapter 29. Of Gods Eternal Motion, Moving and forming. verse. 4.
Mouth. Chapter 29. What the Mouth of the Eternal understanding is. verse. 3.
Murtherour. Chapter 19. Why Eve brought forth a Murtherour the first time. verse.
10. Chapter 62. The figure of Simeon and Levi's Murthour. verse. 31. to the 42.

N.
Naema. Chapter 29. Of Naema. verse. 43. etc. Chapter 29. How Naema shall be manifested
to all People. verse. 68.
Names. Chapter 17. What the Great Names are that God called Abraham by. verse. 23.
etc
Naphtali. Chapter 77. The Testament of Naphtali, and the signification thereof.
verse. 33. etc.
Nature. Chapter 3. The description of the Eternal Nature. verse. 1. to the 26.
Chapter 35. How the Language of Nature is extinguished. verse. 12. etc. Chapter 40.
Whereto God uses the Temporary Nature. verse. 31. Chapter 40. What the
Condemnation of the Temporary Nature is. verse. 32.
Night. Chapter 12. Where, there is no Night. verse. 1.
Nimrod. Chapter 35. Of the Name Nimrod. verse. 29. etc.
Noah. Chapter 31. What Noah is in the Language of Nature. verse. 3. and 32.2. Chapter
32. Why Noah was accounted righteous before God. verse. 13, 14. Chapter 34 What
Noah's drunkenness signifies. verse. 27. Chapter 34. How Noah cursed Ham. verse. 1.
to 40. Chapter 35. The Names of the children of Noah are seaventy two. verse. 15.
to 48. Chapter 43. Where, Noah's curse came into Judgment. verse. 29.
Nothing. Chapter 3. The Nothing hungreth after the something. verse. 5.

O.
Oak. Chapter 63. What the Oak signifies under which Jacob buried the Idol
Gods and the Earerings. verse. 4. to the 15.
Office. Officer. Officers. Chapter 22. How the Office is Good, and how not Good.
verse. 72. Chapter 66. How the potent in the Office of God are great Trees without
fruit. verse. 16, 17. Chapter 66. How the Offices and Officers are Gods, and are
Gods servants. verse. 22. Chapter 66. How a Man in an Office must serve either God
or the Devil. verse. 59. Chapter 66. How this world has two sorts of Officers.
verse. 37. to 59. Chapter 77. Where the worldly Office of a Judge has its
Original. verse. 21. to the 25. Chapter 66. How an Officer becomes a Lucifer;
also how he is free from the Commandment of Death. verse. 23. to the 27. Chapter
66. How all Officers are set in the Kingdom of this world. verse. 28, 29. Chapter
66. How at present, is the time of the Coming of the Lord, to burn the City
of these wicked evil Officers with the fire of Gods Anger. verse. 30, 31.
Oracle.
Chapter 37. How the first holy Oracle after the Flood, Manifested it self. verse.
15.

P.
Paradise. Chapter 17. Of Paradise. verse. 1. to the 43. Chapter 18. Of the
Paradisicall Government. verse. 1. to the 34. Chapter 25. How Paradise is one
certain place. verse. 16.
Pastors. Chapter 74. Of all spiritual Pastors or Shepherds, who sit without
Christ in that Office. verse. 6.
Pearl. Chapter 22. How the Pearl of the whole world is trodden underfoote. verse.
35.
Philistian. Chapter 47. What Philistian is. verse. 23, 24.
Physic. Chapter 21. Whence Physic does arise. verse. 7. to 9.
Plants. Chapter 12. Whence it is that some Plants are Poison. verse. 36.
Potiphar. Chapter 64. What the figure of Potiphars wife is. verse. 10, 11.
Pottage. Chapter 53. What the Lentill Pottage was. verse. 4.
Prayer. Chapter 38. How Man with his prayer and will awakeneth the sword of Anger.
verse. 11.
Predestined. Chapter 30. What is predestined to condemnation. verse. 8, 9.
Chapter 40. Ismael is not predestined to Condemnation. verse. 35. to the 54.
Present. Chapter 70. What the Present was that Joseph's Brethren brought him in
their hands. verse. 52, 53.
Pride. Chapter 24. What Men erect with their great Pride and care for the Belly.
verse. 21. etc.
Prince. Chapter 33. How a Prince or Lord has no power to shed Blood. verse. 15.
etc.
Principles. Chapter 4. Of the two Principles, Gods Love, and Anger. verse. 1. to
the 21. Chapter 32. How Sem, Ham, and Japhet, are an Image of the three Principles.
verse. 5. etc.
Prosperity. Chapter 66. Man in temporal prosperity, and in favor and good will
of many Men, ought not to be secure. verse. 50. to the 56.
Prophet. Chapter 67. How the Prophet is the mouth of the Kingdom. verse. 9. etc.
Purgatory. Chapter 25. Of the Purgatory of souls. verse. 13, 14.
Purple Mantle. Chapter 70. To whom the purple Mantle of Christ is avaylable.
verse. 42, 43.
Purpose. Chapter 61. How in God there is no purpose. verse. 60, 61. and 64.

Q.
Qualities. see Forms.
R.
Rachel. Chapter 28. What it signifies, that Rachel dyed and was Buried at the
City Bethleem. verse. 29. Chapter 28. How Rachel was big with child when Jacob
went from Laban. verse. 30. Chapter 58. Why Rachel said: give me children. verse.
1, 2. Chapter 58. Why Rachel must be barren. verse. 47. Chapter 63. How Rachel bare
Benjamin and dyed, what the signification of it is. verse. 20. etc.
Rained. Rainbow. Chapter 32. Why it Rained forty days and forty nights.
verse. 23. etc. Chapter 33. Of the Rainbow and its Colors. verse. 25. to the 40.
Ram. Chapter 48. How the killing and dying falls not upon the right Man, but
upon the Ram. verse. 28. etc.
Raven. Chapter 32. What the Raven signifies. verse. 38, 39.41.
Reason. Chapter 41. How Reason introduces every thing into Gods will. verse. 27.
to the 37.
Rebeccah. Chapter 50. Rebeccah signifies Sophia. verse. 48. Chapter 50. The figure of
the Glorious Banquet of Abraham's servant with Rebeccah. verse. 49. etc. Chapter 52.
How in Rebeccah two Kingdoms strove one with another. verse. 20. to the 30.
Chapter 53. Why the Strife arose in Rebeccah. verse. 27. Chapter 53. VVerefore
Rebeccah loved Jacob. verse. 54. Chapter 55. Why Rebeccah must set Jacob in the
place of the Blessing. verse. 26. etc. Chapter 19 Of Rebeccahs subtilty and deceit
with Jacob. verse. 20.
Religion. Chapter 36. Whence the Contempt of Religion proceeds. verse. 14.
Remedy. Chapter 66. To whom there is no more Counsel or Remedy, to Eternity.
verse. 47.
Repentance. Chapter 31. Of Gods Repentance, where he says, It repents me.
verse. 17. to the 45. Chapter 70. It is a figure of Repentance, that Jacobs
Children must go into Egypt for food twice. verse. 15. to the 23.
Respect. Chapter 51. How in Gods presence there is no respect of Name or Person.
verse. 32. to the 41.
Reuben. Chapter 63. What Reuben signifies. verse. 44. Chapter 63. How Reuben lay
with his fathers Concubine, and what the signification thereof is. verse. 31.
to the 45. Chapter 76. The Testament of Reuben, and the figure thereof. verse. 4.
to the 18.
Revenge. Chapter 22. Whence in Man the wrath and vengeance to be revenged,
arises. verse. 58. to the 64.
Ribbe. Chapter 19. What the Ribbe and dividing of Adam signifies. verse. 2. and
6.
Riches. Chapter 58. How the Riches of the outward Man belong to the New Man.
verse. 21. etc.
Right. Chapter 60. How, Right, is God, and, wrong, is the Devil. verse. 60.
Rocks. Chapter 23. Why at Christ's Death the Rocks clave asunder. verse. 3.
Ring. Chapter 65. What the Ring, Bracelet, and Staff of Judah signify. verse.
32.

S.
Saba or Sheba. Chapter 54. What the fountain Saba or Sheba signifies. verse. 15,
16.
Sacrifice. Chapter 27. Of Cains and Abels Sacrifice. verse. 1. to the 40. Chapter 27.
Why an Earthly Sacrifice must be. verse. 18. etc. Chapter 27. Why the Sacrifice
without Faith is loathsome to God. verse. 13.
Sarah. Chapter 40. Why God made Sarah unfruitful, verse. 27, 28. Chapter 42. How God
asked for Sarah. verse. 26, 27. Chapter 42. What Sarahs laughing and lying
signify. verse. 30. etc. Chapter 49. Of Sarahs Death and Abraham's purchased
burying place, what is signified thereby. verse. 1. to the 18. Chapter 51. Why
Sarah brought forth but one son. verse. 3.
Schools. Chapter 51. Of what profit the knowledge of the high Schools or
Universities, and the Devils knowledge, is. verse. 49, 50. Chapter 64. Whence the
Confused Languages of the high Schools or Universities, come. verse. 24. Chapter
69. The spying and prying of the high Schools or Universities, helps not
into the Kingdom of God. verse. 20, 21. Chapter 77. When, the time of the high
Schools or Universities began. verse. 67.
Scorner. Chapter 40. Why God must have the scorner also, in this time of Life.
verse. 23. etc.
Sea. Chapter 16. What the Glassy Sea is. verse. 28.
Sem. Chapter 31. What Sem is in the Language of Nature. verse. 6. Chapter 34. How Sem
and Japhet took a Garment upon their shoulders. verse. 20. to the 26.
Serah or Zerah. Chapter 65. The powerful figure of the Birth of Peers and Serah
or Zerah. verse. 58. etc.
Serpent. Chapter 20. Of the Creation and subtilty of the Serpent. verse. 9. to the
19. and Ch: 22.29. Chapter 20. In the Serpent lies excellent art. verse. 17, 18.
Chapter 22. The Devil has infected the Ens of the Serpent. verse. 33. Chapter 22. Why
the Serpent is said to be a virgin. verse. 34. Chapter 23. Wherefore God cursed
the Serpent. verse. 23. to the 29. Chapter 27. Where the Serpents head was first
trod upon and broken. verse. 11, 12. Chapter 38. How the Serpents Ens and also the
Line of Christ lay in Abraham. verse. 13.
Seth. Chapter 29. What the Name Seth signifies in the Language of Nature. verse.
24.
Sheckle. Chapter 49. An Exposition of the four hundred Sheckles of silver that
Abraham gave for the field. verse. 8, 9.
Shepherd. Chapter 58. How a Sheheard is more highly esteemed before God then the
highly Learned worldly wise Man. verse. 32. etc. Chapter 60. Why Gods Spirit has
so exactly described the slight actions of mean Shepherds. verse. 49, 50.
Sichem. Chapter 61. What the Name Sichem signifies. verse. 75.
Signal Star. Chapter 70. How the signal Star or ascendant appeared. verse.
30. etc.
Simeon. Chapter 76. The Testament of Simeon and Levi, and the figure thereof.
verse. 17. to the 37.
Sinew. Chapter 60. What it signifies, that the Children of Israel eat not that
Sinew of the Ham. verse. 51. etc.
Sin. Sinner. Chapter 22. Of the Original of Actual sin, and of the awakening
of Gods Anger in the humane property. verse. 1. to the 82. Chapter 22. What sin
is, and what is not sin. verse. 39. etc. Chapter 22. What the sin against the
Holy Ghost is. verse. 43, 44. Chapter 27. What it is that attaineth the
forgiveness of sins. verse. 45. Chapter 48. How far it must go with the
repenting sinner. verse. 21. etc. Chapter 78. The figure of a Converted sinner.
verse. 5, 6.
Sleep. Chapter 19. What Adams sleep signifies. verse. 5.
Sodom. Chapter 42. Of the three Men, which appeared to Abraham in the plain of
Mamre and went toward Sodom, and burnt the City of the Children of Ham with
fire from the Lord. verse. 1. to the 35. Chapter 43. Of the destruction of Sodom
and Gomorrha, how God showed it to Abraham before. verse. 1. to the 7^. Chapter 43.
How Sodom is a looking Glass for the present world. verse. 67. etc. Chapter 43.
What figure, the Judgment upon Sodom is. verse. 14. Chapter 44. What fire was
rained down upon Sodom. verse. 24. etc.
Sophia. Chapter 25. Sophia is the Tincture of the light. verse. 14. Chapter 25. The
fire-soule is the Man or husband of the Noble Sophia, and it is of the fires
Tincture. verse. 14. Chapter 37. How Sophia generateth the true Joseph. verse. 14,
15. Chapter 52. What is called Sophia. verse. 6. Chapter 52. When, the Magic fire of
the soul is Bridegroom to the Noble Sophia. verse. 11. to the 14.
Soul. Chapter 10. True understanding lies in the Soul. verse. 3. Chapter 11. What
the soul is. verse. 20. and 15.25. Chapter 15. How the soul stands in three
Kingdoms. verse. 15.18. to the 24. Chapter 15. There is not three souls but one.
verse. 24. Chapter 17. Of the souls great power. verse. 43. Chapter 22. Whither the
soul must go after the Judgment. verse. 47. Chapter 23. How the soul of Adam
and Eve were ashamed. verse. 1. Chapter 25. How the soul may go through the
Judgment, or how not. verse. 2.3. and 15.26. Chapter 25. How the Virgin child
must flee from the fire-soule. verse. 9. Chapter 34. Of the Animale soul in the
Regeneration. verse. 17. Chapter 37. Wherefore God brings the soul into trouble.
verse. 8, 9. Chapter 52. How the soul may see God. verse. 10. Chapter 56. When, Gods
Grace enters into the soul. verse. 36. Chapter 69. The first Condition of the
poor soul when it turns to Christ. verse. 7. etc. Chapter 70. How the soul
stands in three Principles. verse. 5.
Sound. Chapter 5. How the sound or tune in Heaven, is. verse. 19. Chapter 5. How the
sound or tune in the Darkness or Hell, is. verse. 19.
Speak. Chapter 35. Whence it comes Originally that Man can speak. verse. 73.
Chapter 36. From what it is that Man can spoke and understand. verse. 85.
Spirit. Chapter 4. Of the Original of the Multitude of spirits, Good, and Evil.
verse. 11. Chapter 8. Of the Spirits of the outward world, from Time, that pass
away. verse. 13. Chapter 29. How the Spirit of God has from Eternity sported with
it self in the spiritual world. verse. 4. Chapter 36. From what the false
spiritual persons or Clergy have spoken. verse. 30. etc.
Steward. Chapter 70. What Joseph's Steward signifies. verse. 50.
Strife. Chapter 25. Of the Strife between the seed of the Woman and the seed of
the Serpent. verse. 10. etc. Chapter 36. Wherefore Men do strive. verse. 62, 63.
Chapter 52. When, the Strife in Man is manifested, and Christ breaks the Serpents
head. verse. 31. etc. Chapter 60. What the Strife about the Letter is. verse. 47,
48. Chapter 62. Wherefore the Strife in Christendom must be. verse. 19. Chapter 62.
With what strife a true Christian striveth. verse. 21. etc. Chapter 64. How all
strife comes from the Tower of Babell. verse. 28. Chapter 75. How the time of
strife is at an End. verse. 29, 30.
Substance. Chapter 53. How the Divine Substance gives it self into Nature.
verse. 18.
Succoth. Chapter 61. The figure of Jacobs going to Succoth. verse. 72.
Sun. Chapter 11. From what power the Sun shines. verse. 35. Chapter 13. Whence the
Sun takes its Luster. verse. 16.
Supper. Chapter 70. What that Supper is, Revelations verse. 3. from 44. to the
46.
Swearing. Chapter 53. What Swearing by God is called. verse. 9.
Sword. Chapter 25. Of the Cherubine Angels, Sword. verse. 4. to the 13. Chapter 25.
The Original of the flaming Sword of fire. verse. 25.

T.
Teachers. Chapter 28. What Teachers the children of this world will have. verse.
44. Chapter 36. By what a Man shall know, whether a Teacher come from God or from
the Letter. verse. 54. etc. Chapter 41. How the unfitted Teachers will needs preach
the Holy Ghost into the self-will. verse. 46.
Temple. Chapter 15. What the Temple of God is. verse. 12. and Chapter 36.16. and Chapter
52.8. Chapter 27. How the Temple of Christ must be brought along into the Material
Church of clay. verse. 49.
Temptation. Chapter 48. How Man without Gods Grace cannot stand in Temptation.
verse. 2.
Testament. Chapter 46. What a Man must do, if he would read and understand the
Old Testament. verse. 29, 30. Chapter 46. Wherefore the figures of the Old
Testament have remained silent to this last Time, and now shall be made
manifest. verse. 31, 32. Chapter 54. Of the figure of the Old and New Testaments.
verse. 17.
Tetragrammaton. Chapter 35. Of the Name Tetragrammaton. verse. 53.
Thamar. Chapter 65. Of Judah and Thamar: A mystical figure of Adam and Christ,
wherein the new Birth is excellently prefigured. verse. 1. to the 65.
Time. Chapter 30. Of the seven appointed Times. verse. 34. to 46. Chapter 30. When
the sixth number of Time is. verse. 44. Chapter 31. Of the seven Times from Adam to
the End of the World. verse. 38. to 45. Chapter 69. How the Time of Redemption
draws near. verse. 23.
Timnath. Chapter 65. What Timnath signifies. verse. 22.
Torment. Chapter 71. What it is that has no Torment. verse. 21, 22.
Tower. Chapter 35. Wherefore the children of Noah purposed to build a Tower.
verse. 64, 65. Chapter 35. What the Mystery is of the Tower, and of the divided
Languages. verse. 68. to the 75. Chapter 36. What the Tower of Babell is. verse.
15. Chapter 36. What the figure of Babells Tower is. verse. 5. to the 11. Chapter 36.
What the Babylonish Tower was under Moses and among the Heathen, and now is
among Christians, Jews and Turks. verse. 33. Chapter 36 How a Man ought to
Consider of the Tower and City Babell. verse. 58. Chapter 36. How we must go out
from all Babylonish Master Builders of that Tower. verse. 50. etc. Chapter 66. How
worldly Judges ought not to rely upon the Tower of Babell. verse. 60. Chapter 35.
How the Time is borne that we shall be lead away from the Tower of Babell.
verse. 67.
Tree. Tree of Life. Chapter 35. How the Humane Tree has by Noah's Children spread
it self abroad in its properties, and how at the Tower of Babell they were
divided in the Properties by the Confusion of Languages into several and
different people and Nations. verse. 1. to the 75. Chapter 36. How the Jews,
Christians, Turks, and Heathens, are but one only Tree. verse. 37. to the 40.
Chapter 36. How we may again one with another, be One people, one Tree, one Man
with soul and Body. verse. 43, 44. Chapter 17. Why God set the Tree of Life
before Adam. verse. 38. to the 43. Chapter 17. The Tree of Life, and the Tree of
the Knowledge of Good and Evell, are but one. verse. 10. etc.
Trinity. Threefoldnes. Chapter 1. Of the Trinity. verse. 3, 4, 5. Chapter 7. Of the
Holy Trinity or Threefoldnes of the Divine Essence or Substance. verse. 1. to
the 19.
Tubalcain. Chapter 29. Of Tubalcain. verse. 44. to the 46.
Turks. Chapter 40. How the Turks lie under the veil of Christ, and are borne in
the house. verse. 72. etc. Chapter 40. How God hears the Turks in the Son.
verse. 74. etc. Chapter 40. How the Turks do not blaspheme the Holy Ghost. verse.
78. etc. Chapter 40. Wherefore God has taken away the Candlesticks from the
Turks. verse. 82. etc. Chapter 40. How the Holy voice of Christ is not departed
from the Turks, to forget them Eternally. verse. 87. etc. Chapter 40. Of the
diff^rence between the Turks and the Christians. verse. 92. to the 99.

V.
Venus. Chapter 10. How the inward and the outward Venus are step-sisters. verse.
58. Chapter 13. Venus is the substance of all Metalls. verse. 18.
Verbum Fiat. Chapter 11. How the Verbum Fiat, is still at this day Creating.
verse. 11.
Visions. Chapter 67. What the right Visions are. verse. 7.
Voice. Chapter 23. Of the voice that was in the Garden. verse. 11. to the 16. Chapter
55. The figure of Isaacks saying; The voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands are
the hands of Esau. verse. 27, 28.
Understanding. Chapter 3. Why the Divine understanding brings it self into
spiritual properties. verse. 13. Chapter 3. The Divine understanding receives no
source into it self. verse. 21. Chapter 29. What the Eternal Divine understanding
is. verse. 1, 2.
Unquietness. Chapter 66. What the unquietnes is. verse. 65.

W.
War. Warrior. Chapter 22. How war is Good, and how not Good. verse. 73. Chapter
38. Whence all war and strife has its Original. verse. 7. to the 10. Chapter
33.22. etc. Chapter 38. Of the beginning of the Heathenish wars, how Abraham
delivered Lot; and of Melchisedeck to whom Abraham gave Tithes. verse. 1. to
the 26. Chapter 55. How it is not God, but the Kingdom of Nature in the Anger of
God that will make war. verse. 45, 46. and Ch: 38* 16, 17. Chapter 30. What the
Christians wars are. verse. 42. Chapter 38. No Christian warreth. verse. 15, 16.
Chapter 62. What the outward war that Christians make, is. verse. 24. Chapter 33.
What every warrior or Soldier is. verse. 19, 20.
Washing the Feet. Chapter 42. What Abraham's washing the Feet, signifies.
verse. 11.
Water. Chapter 4. Of the water of Eternal Life. verse. 15. Chapter 10. Of the water
which Christ will give us to drink. verse. 56
Wedding. Chapter 70. Where the assured wedding of the Lamb is. verse. 25. etc. Chapter
70. What a Man must do, when he will enter in to the wedding of Christ. verse.
38.
Whore. Chapter 36. What the Babylonish whore, and the Dragon Beast, is. verse.
20. etc. and 37. Chapter 36. Of the Antichristian Babylonish whore, of all Tongues,
Nations, and Languages, and what lies hid under the Languages and Tower of
Babell. verse. 1. to the 85. Chapter 30. Whence the Mother of the Babylonish
whoredom is arisen. verse. 22, 23. Chapter 36. Of the Babylonish whores child or
Bastard, which is predestined to Damnation. verse. 23. etc. Chapter 37. How the
unchastity of the Babylonish whore, is come up before the Most High. verse. 61.
Chapter 36. What the whores Beast, is. verse. 41. Chapter 36. How the whore hops for
a Golden Temple or Time. verse. 70. etc. Chapter 36. How the whore must fall.
verse. 69. Chapter 36. What is meant by the whoredom committed with the Letter.
verse. 44. etc. Chapter 62. What is whoredom in the sight of God. verse. 30. etc.
Chapter 65. What the whoredom of Judah with Thamar, signifies. verse. 38. etc.
Chapter 65. What David's whoredom with Bethsheba, signifies. verse. 41. Chapter 65.
What Salomons whoredom, signifies. verse. 45 etc. Chapter 66. What the powerful
figure of the whorish unchaste world is, which vermin the world is at present
full of. verse. 41. etc.
Wicked. Chapter 60. How God dwells even in the Abyss of the wicked soul.
verse. 44.
Wife. Chapter 41. How a Man must leave, wife, children, etc. to be a true
Christian. verse. 54.65.
Will. Willing. Chapter 26. Wherefore the fire-soule has free- will. verse. 7. Chapter
27. What the will must do that it may with its desire go to God. verse. 4, 5.
Chapter 27. The Humane Free- will is become sinful. verse. 16. Chapter 29. Why there
is a Contrary opposite will. verse. 6, 7. Chapter 61. What the Ability of the will
is. verse. 57, 58. Chapter 61. The Cause why the false wicked or evil will turns
not it self toward Grace. verse. 59. Chapter 66. How in this Time [of Life] all
things pass in free- will. verse. 21. Chapter 66. How, knowing Nothing is better
then willing for self. verse. 66. Chapter 71. Of the Divine willing and of the
Humane willing. verse. 25. to the 36.
Wisdom. Chapter 1. What the Eternal Wisdom is. verse. 6. Chapter 29. How the
Eternal Wisdom has introduced it self into a formed visibility. verse. 1.
to the 70. Chapter 41. A Speech to the Reason- wise, verse. 42. etc.
Woman. Chapter 19. Of the building or framing of the Woman. verse. 1. to the 27.
Chapter 41. How the Woman is saved through bearing of children. verse. 29. etc. Chapter
66. What the Woman upon the Moon in the Revelations is. verse. 34, 35.
Word.
Chapter 2. Of the Word or Heart of God. verse. 1. to the 11. Chapter 2. Of the
Outspoken Word. verse. 7. Chapter 28. What the Literal Word is. verse. 56, 57. Chapter
36. How Man should try himself in the framing of his words. verse. 81. etc.
Chapter 40. What Gods Word assumed. verse. 10. Chapter 56. Why our soul and the Word
that became Man, are compared together. verse. 23. etc. Chapter 61. What the Word
is. verse. 43, 44.
World. Chapter 2. The whole world lies in a Clod of Earth. verse. 6. Chapter 2. Of
the inward world. verse. 9. Chapter 2. How one world is in another. verse. 10. Chapter
4. Of the Three worlds. verse. 12. Chapter 17. That same world, wherein Adam was
before his Eve was, must come again. verse. 9. Chapter 29. What the invisible
spiritual world is. verse. 4, 5. Chapter 31. How Sem, Ham, and Japhet, are an
Image of the Three- worlds. verse. 10, 11.
Wrong. Chapter 71. How Man does a twofold wrong.

Z.
Zebulun. Chapter 77. The Testament of Zebulun, and the figure thereof. verse. 3.
to the 7.

FINIS.
FOUR TABLES OF Divine Revelation Signifying What GOD in himself is, without
Nature; and how considered in Nature; according to the THREE PRINCIPLES.

ALSO What HEAVEN, HELL, WORLD, TIME, and ETERNITY are; Together with all
Creatures visible and invisible: and out of what all things had their Original.

Written in the German language by JACOB BEHM, and Englished by H. B.

LONDON Printed for H. Blunden, and sold at the Castle in Cornhill 1654.

TO THE READER With an Account of the following Tractate.
IT IS no less common with men would seem wise, than inconsistent with those
that are really so, to find a facile Faith for what they like, and a sturdy
Diffidence for what they dislike: Like the twins of a biased Judgment, the one
savouring of Affection, the other of Prejudice, and both of Partiality.

That some Passages in the precedent Life will meet with such, I make no
question, and therefore thought it not unnecessary to acquaint them with this
Truth, that what therein is related concerning our Author, by the learned
Gentleman that penned the Narrative, was received not from uncertain wandering
Reports, but Authentic Information, from the Tongues and Penns of those, that
(during his life upon Earth) were his familiar Associates; Men conscientious
both in Words and Deeds, well knowing what strict account must be rendered of
both. And how sad an Account have they then to make, whose Throats, like open
Sepulchers, blast with their breath (as far as their venom reaches) the most
eminent Gifts of God in men that bear his Image? whereof did they know the
danger, it could not but make them tremble to consider how their poisoned
Arrows will return and stick in their own Souls: Yet have some not feared
maliciously to defame this deep illuminated man of God; A man whose Writings
(though not to us made Canonical by Miracles) manifestly appear to have been
the Dictates of God's Spirit; and the Will of God, the Rule of his whole life;
always resigning himself (as his own Pen testifies) to the Divine Will: to
will and work nothing but according to the will of God. Yet against the spirit
of this pious man (as if they feared an Ecclips of their Evening splendour, by
the Daylight of his writings) have some (especially among the Lamps of our
Tabernacles) spit forth their Venom, in Aspersions so injuriously false, and
palpably absurd, that neither Reason nor Religion, Prudence or Piety, could
yield any motive thereunto; only the Monster of their own frailty. Thus does
the Prince of the Air blind men with self-love; that though in others they
abhor unrighteousness, yet themselves can rashly proceed to sentence, before
they understood him, yea some of them, before they had read one Leaf in his
Writings: Whereas others that have seriously studied him, and (with divine
assistance) understood much of him, can justly as clearly evidence the true
concordance of his writings, with the word of God in Holy Writ; and their
inconsistence with conceited Sects, corrupt Doctrine, both of our own and
former Ages, and all Heterodox Opinions whatsoever. Well may be said of him,
what an experienced Philosopher writes of Paracelsus; Cur praestantis viri
famam, omni laud dignissimi, periclitari sinemus? Scripta sua non nisi ad Dei
Gloriam, proximique emolumentum edentis; lucrum utique, ut calumniantur, ex
aliorum per scripta ipsius seductis incommodis nequaquam quaesitum ivit; neque,
quod inimicii sius factitare solent, ideo Medicinae dedit operam, ut ex aegris
salu arem faceret; sed quicquid fecit, bono animo fecit, absque mercede, quam
nec accepit, nec opus habuit, artibus suis ipsi absque aliorum detrimento
abunde sufficientibus. Omnes prudentes veritatis amatores neminem ei unquam
parem fuisse etiamnum credunt. Quod vero ignorantium quorundam invidia
contemtim habetur, ipsi nihil derogat, i^se enim manebit Paracelsus, and hi
imperiti convitiatores, suam tantum impudentiam prudentes, etc.

It Is true, in respect of the common style of most Authors, his language may,
to some, seem somewhat monstrous; So do the Characters of Letters to Children,
primo intuitu; and many, even Scripture expressions, to the Ears of the Natural
man Besides, he proceeds much by affirmation; not Disputing, but Convincing
Error; having not received his Knowledge from men, or from the imperfect
fallible Principles of the Schools, but from the true Fountain of Wisdom and
Knowledge. Nor did he write, as most do, by transcription out of other men's
Books; nor were his Dictates neither, the Products of his own Fancy, but by
Divine influence; and (as is his own expression) out of his Three-leav'd Book,
which the Hand of God had opened in him: wherein he found the Knowledge, not
only of all that Moses, the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles taught in Sacred
Scripture, but of all Mysteries also in Heaven and Earth, as himself affirms in
his Epistles, and many other of his writings. But lest his own Testimony
should seem invalid, I make bold to insert what a learned German writes of him.

Now ( says he) when Reason supposes that it is ascended up to the height,
with its Wisdom and Arts, God has stirred up this our dear Jacob Behmen (a
plain unlearned Tradesman) and gifted him with such a noble endowment of the
Universal Knowledge of God and Nature, and shown him the Center of all Beings;
How all things arise from God Originally, consist in God, and again return and
flow into him etc. thereby to call man to the knowledge of God, of himself, and
all things; That he might turn from the corrupt Dark being of this World to
Christ the only Light etc.

This high, rare, and precious Gift (which has not been manifested in the like
manner and Degree, Height and Depth, Breadth and Length before these times) our
Jacob Behmen learned in God, has employed in all faithfulness and simplicity,
and laid it forth as it was given and imparted to him: And in all his writings
has laid his ground in God, and has reared up his whole Building, very
deeply founded, from Him: As Christ speaks of the wise Master Builder, that
he dug deep, and laid his foundation on a Rock, whereupon he built his Tower
on High. As it is clearly to be seen how he does all along, drive and press at
God, Christ, and his Spirit; at Faith and Love; at the mortifying of the old,
and the renovation of the new-man; And in brief, at the Restoration in Christ
of God's Image in us, which did disappear in Adam; Also he shew^th the Order,
Harmony, and Birth of all things; and how they subsist by the power of the yet
uncessantly working word of Gods FIAT, and hold their Analogy and orderly
proportion in the wisdom of Gods wonders: But he does not set it forth with
words of Scholastic knowledge, and contrived Art of Wisdom in Babel, and of
her Builders; but as it was given him according to the knowledge of Nature, in
his own Gift. And though such Terms and Phrases as he uses seem hard and harsh
at first, yet the diligence of an observant Reader, that earnestly desires
knowledge for his Edification, will (by the indwelling Grace of God) so bring
him into a right apprehension thereof, that what before seemed difficult and
dark, will at length be plain, clear, and easy, as it has happened to my self.
Thus far his own Countryman and Accquaintance.

Moreover he had the knowledge of that wonderful Mystery (containing the
Secrets of the whole Creation) The language of Nature, and that in his Native
tongue; whereby the very name of every thing gave him clear Inspection into the
Nature of it. This Knowledge had Adam in his Innocence, but by his Fall lost
it: Else it had been understood (as our Author affirms) in the Language of
every Nation.

Now to the incredulous, if they could but fathom his depths, I should only bid
them ask themselves this Question; Whether Art or Nature ever did or can
produce such sublime Knowledge, such pure and distinct knowledge of the highest
Mysteries? knowing that upon debate with their serious Thoughts, they must
speak the Negative. But there is a malicious Ignorance possesses many, by
which they condemn all things above their, Sphere, and cry down that excellency
in others which exceeds the fathom of their own Comprehensions: I need not
travail for Proof or Instance, Istorum plena sunt omnia, They are no where not
to be found.

Concerning the following Tractate, it contains Four Tables with their
Explication; wherein may be seen, by a spiritual eye, the Ground and Foundation
of all the Authors Works, and profound Mysteries; Yea there is also clearly
decypher'd, that so much sought, and so rarely found Secret Cabal of the
ancient Rabbis. These Tables indeed contain the Sum of all the Authors
writings, of all his Knowledge, of all in Heaven and Earth, yea of all the
highest Mysteries that Man, in this life, is capable of knowing.

The First Table, as the Radix, briefly includes the rest; The other three are
Branches of the First, and all together are properly termed an A.B.C. to all
that the Author has written; which when I perceived, I could not but much
desire their publication; and not knowing when or by whom that might be done, I
furnished my self with all necessaries thereunto; and so by God's enablement
performed it with that care and diligence, which the Majesty of the matter
requires. And though I know it a general Expect, that the skill of a Translator
should illustrate his Author, yet that, in this and some other of his Writings,
can not well be done; for whoever (not perfectly baptized into his Spirit)
shall render them in the genuine phrase of other language, and not punctually
verbatim, will force his Reader to a double loss, both in the significancie of
expression, and in the mind of the Mystery.

In a word, this following Tractate I have annexed to the Author's Life, and
both, not unfitly, to his Mysterium Magnum: For the first ten Chapters of that
Book, are not only introductory to the following Commentary, but likewise an
excellent illustration of these Tables; wherein the pious Reader, by a due
search, may happily find ( pulsanti dabitur) a greater Treasure than the World
can afford, and that to his infinite satisfaction; which I heartily wish him,
together with the Life, Light, and Love of Jesus Christ; In whom I rest

His Servant H. BLUNDEN

1 Table What GOD is without Nature and Creature. What God without Nature and
Creature is, and what the Mysterium Magnum is: How God, by his breathing forth
or speaking, has introduced himself into Nature and Creature. Abyss 1 NOTHING
and ALL Father 2 Will of the Abyss. JE Son 3 Delight or impression of the
Will. HO Spirit 4 Science or Motion. VA 5 GOD in Trinity. Thus is GOD without
Nature and Creature considered. 6 WORD in GOD. 7 Wisdom. Beginning of Mysterii
Magni of the Eternal NATURE Here begineth Mysterium Magnum as distinction in
speaking the WORD; where the WORD by Wisdom is made distinct, Natural,
Sensible, Comprehensible, and Invenible.

The Eternal beginning of the Principles is here also understood, with Gods Love
and Anger, in Light and Darkness.

GOD in LOVE GOD in WRATH 9. The First principle Spiri- 8 The second Principle
Moving, Thinking tual Dark, Feeling, M^nd, Nature V II Angel, Light, Love-fire.
10 Tincture or speaking of the Trinity. I Desire, II. Prick or Science, III
Angush, IV Fire, Angelical World Root of the four Elements. VI Sound or
Distinction. VII Essence, or essential wisdom. Austere Cause of Enmity, Fire
root of heat. Hard, Hellish-life, Hell, Sub- Growing or Greening in the
Spiritual World. 12 Pure Element. 13 Paradise. Sharpness cold fire Root,
Devil, stan- SAL, MERCURIUS, SULPHUR tial. 14 Beginning of the external World.
Here begineth the external visible World, as the out-spoken visible WORD. 1 Is
understood the good Life of the creature which stands in the Quint-Essence. 2
The poison and grossness of the Earth and Earthy Life. 3 The Reader
understanding these, all Doubts and Queries cease in him: and Babel is left in
Ignominy.
The third Principle 15 Heaven. Stars 16 Quint-Essence Good Powers. The 17 The
4 Elements. Devill's Poison introduced. Out spoke WORD. 18 Earthly Creatures.

A Brief Explication of the first Table, of GOD revealed; how out of himself he
continually begets, and breaths forth himself: And how this Table is to be
understood.
NUmber. I. Is the Abyss, the Nothing, and the All. There we begin to consider,
what God in himself is, without [or besides] Nature and Creature; and this
consideration of the hidden God, extends unto Wisdom, Numb. 7. Therein is
understood how God dwells in all, and how all things from him have their
existence; but, himself is to all Incomprehensible, and as a Nothing; yet
through that All, he makes himself visible, sensible, and Invenible Findlich.
attainable.

Numb. 2. Is the Will of the Abyss. And by it, at the right side, FATHER, and
on the other side, JE. This signifies the Will of the Abyss, which is the
Father of all Beings. And the JE signifies the Eternal One, as the Name JESUS
from the Eternal One.

Numb. 3. Is the Good pleasure, Beneplacitum.
Delight [Lubet] or Impression of the Will; by which (toward the right)
stands SON, and opposite to it, HO, signifying how the self-will includes it
self in the place of its possession: The place is the procreation out of it
self; where God begets God; according to the good pleasure of his propriety.
The HO is the breathing of the will, through which the Delight passes.

Numb. 4. Is Science or Motion: at the Right stands SPIRIT, and over against
it VA. Science, is the attraction of the Will to the place of God; where the
Will comprehends the Delight which proceeded to the Son, or to the breathing;
by which outbreathing is understood the Spirit of God. And here is understood
the great Name JEHOVA, as the Three in one.
Tri-une Being; how the Father of himself begets the Son; and how the Holy
Spirit proceeds from both, and yet they be but one Being, which has nothing
before it. For the Science, in the drawing in, is understood a Root of the
Eternal knowledge, or motion.

Numb. 5. Is God in Trinity, signifying that the Tri-une Being, may be known,
as a Similitude of the Will, Mind, and Senses; wherein lies the eternal
understanding. Thus is the Ternarie, the one Eternal understanding, and cause
of all things.

Numb. 6. Stands WORD, signifying distinction in the understanding, as
speaking, the Or sensibilitie. Empfludligkeit.
Perception of it self; which word abides Eternally in God himself; and God as
the Power of Perception, is the Eternal good.

Numb. 7. Stands Wisdom, signifying the outspoken Word, as the power of the
Divine Contemplation; wherein God to himself is Intelligible, Perceptible, and
Revealed. And thus far is God to the Creature, Invisible, Incomprehensible, not
Natural, nor Creatural.

Below the line stands Beginning of the Great Mystery, or of the Eternal
Nature; As of the Separability, Perceptibilitie, and Sensibilitie of the
Properties; wherein is understood, the Divine Extrication or Revelation, how
God introduces himself in the eternal Nature, in Love and Wrath; and not in
himself, for himself is the one Eternal good, but without Distinction, were not
perceptible or manifest.

Here is to be Noted, that the 7. Capital Forms of Nature, are marked (to
distinguish them from the other Numbers) with I.II.III.IV.V.VI.VII.

Numb. 8. The second Principle, stands to the Right. And Numb. 9. The first
Principle, to the left. Thus Numb. 9. signifies the Fathers Property, through
the speaking of the Word in Wrath; And the second Numb. 8. signifies the Sons
property in Love; where the Love of God by the expressed Word is revealed. As
that in Love, Numb. 8. shows the Angelical power-world; and that in Wrath,
Numb. 9. signifies the Dark power-world of Painfulness, wherein God is an
Angry God.

Numb. 10. Stands Tinctur, signifying the Temperature of all powers, how
there through speaking they go forth in Distinction and Forms; as first in the
7. Capital Forms, the Desire, Science, Anguish, Fire, Love-Fire, Sound, and
Being. And further, there stands by every Capital Form, what Properties are
born and proceed out of themselves.

For, if there must be a speaking; then the power must first contract it self,
that it may breath forth it self; then it begets that Comprehensive or
Magnetic Impression, the something (which is the Beginning) wherein the Fiat
which attracteth the powers is understood.

I. Is the first Capital Form of the spiritual Nature, and stands with Numb.
I. Desire, which Desire sharpneth it self, from whence existeth Sour, Hard, and
the cause of Cold; and is the ground of all Saltish properties Spiritual, in
the Spiritual world; and Essential in the External world. So also the Desire of
Impression is cause of its own overshadowing, or Darkness in the Abyss; as all
these Forms belong to Numb. I. To the desire of Infassligkeit.
Comprehensibility.

II. By the second Capital Form, stands Pricking.
Compunction or Science; signifying the contraction of the Desire; where the
first enmity or contrary will arises; for hardness and motion, are not alike.
Now in this form arises moving and feeling; as the root of pain; wherein is
understood the Mercurial Poyson-life, both spiritual and Essential.
corporal; and in the Darkness the pain or Torment of the wicked life;
Neither was the good life without the root of the Evil manifest unto him; and
that is the root of Gods wrath, according to the Perception [sensibility] of
the eternal Nature.

III. The third Capital Form is Anguish; which arises from the desire of
Impression, and from the Enmity of Compunction, where the will stands in
Cruciatus. Qual.
Torment, and is there the cause of feeling, and of the five Senses: for in the
Anguish all Forms grow Painful, and then are they sensible of one-another.
And here is the Word become distinct; and is the root of Sulphur, both
Spiritual and Essential, [Corporall] wherein is rightly understood the
Hellish Fire in Darkness, in painful life, as appears in the Table downward.

IV. The fourth Capital Form, is called Fire; where is Understood the kindling
of the Fire, from the painful Sulphurish root; for the Will goes out of
Anguish again into Liberty; And the Liberty goes to its Revelation in
Anguish: In which Conjunction comes that terrible [like a flash of lightning]
Coruscation, where the Abyss, as the Eternal good, is revealed; And is in the
Forms of Nature, the Understanding and Life, in the dark Enmity; and in the
Liberty is the root of Joy, or rouzing up the Faculties. Kraffen.
Powers; and is the kindling of the Fire; in which kindling the Abyss becomes a
shining Light, as Material.

V. The first form, is called the Love-Fire; where is understood how the
Eternal good, through kindling the painful Fire, introduces it self into an
elevating burning Love-Fire, which Love-Fire was first in God. But thus only it
Infoldeth Wickelt*
windeth up it self that it becomes sensible and moving, where in the good
Powers are operative.

VI. Stands Sound, or Distinction, as the sixth Capital Form; signifying,
that the Natural manifested Life, where the Eternal Divine Word, through the
Forms of Nature, has infolded it self; and where all the Powers of Wisdom
stand in Noise S^halle.
Sound: therein stands the Understanding Life; which in Light, is Angelical
and Divine; but in Darkness it is Diabolical; As at the right, Numb. 11.
stands Angel.

VII. Stands Essence or Essential Wisdom, of the out-breathed word; wherein
all other Forms are revealed; and is even the Essence of all Forms; as good as
Divine, in the Light; but in the Darkness Evil and Devilish: And therein is
chiefly understood Mysterium Magnum [the great Mystery;] the Angelical world
is also therein understood; and likewise the Internal spiritual body of Man,
which disappeared in Adam, when the Souls will departed from Gods will; but
revived again in Christ, that gives to him for the Essence of this
Power-World, which is that heavenly flesh. Joh. 6. And it is the dry Rod of
Aaron, which in the Spirit of Christ, again springs up in Man.

Numb. 12. Stands Pu^^ Element, signifying Motion in the Angelical world in
Essence; and is the One, Holy, Pure Element; wherein the four Elements, in the
Temperature ^ay, and is a root of the 4. Elements.

Numb. 13. Stands Paradise signifying the Eternal springing, or spiritual
growing, in the Spiritual world; from which the external visibile world, Thus
has this place been before the fall of Lucifer and Adam; namely, in an equal
temperature or Harmony, of the 7. Planets and 4. Elements.
out of good and evil (as out of both Eternal Principles) is breathed forth:
In which Source and Regiment, Adam in his Innocence stood; when the four
Elements harmoniously existed in him, as in the holy pure Element.

Numb. 14. Stands Beginning of the External World; signifying how God by his
Word, has breathed forth that spiritual Mysterium Magnum, as the Eternal
Nature of all Spiritual Properties, into a visible external formal Being;
and through the Fiat, as the Divine Desire, has fashioned it into Creatures;
There stands the third Principle, where 3. Worlds in one another, must be
understood: as the dark world of Gods wrath; the Eternal light world of Divine
Love; and this visible fading world.

Numb. 15. Stands Heaven; signifying the Heaven is the parting-mark out of
the spiritual fire and water between the Heavenly and Earthly.
parting Mark, between the internal and external world; as of the visible and
invisible Essence; which Heaven stands in Essence of the spiritual fiery
water.

Numb. 16. Stands Quintessence; signifying the spiritual Powers, as the
Paradise-Ground in the four Elements; as well the Astrall, breathed forth by
internal powers at the beginning of time; (and is that good in the four
Elements wherein the light of Nature shines) as an outbreath'd Or shine Glast.
fulgor of the Eternal light.

Numb. 17. Stands four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, as the
created world, out of the dark and light world, which is the framed word spoken
out of the Eternal Natures Essential power; therein did the Devil cast his
poison, which after the fall of Man, was accursed of God.

Numb. 18. Stands Earthly Creatures; signifying that out of the Quintessence
and the four Elements, were all Creatures of this visible World created, Man
having 2. Eternalls in him; may be saved or damned.
and only from them have their life. But the animated Man has also in him both
inward spiritual worlds, according to the internal soul of man; therefore may
Gods love and wrath be manifested in him: for wherein the will impresseth and
kindles it self, of that Essence it partaketh, and the same is manifest in
him; as is seen in Lucifer.

Thus have you a brief Intimation of the first Table, and [consequently] of all
the Authors writings; faithfully imparted, out of a good Christian affection to
his loving friends; and [is] as an ABC. to beginners.

II. TABLE.

In this second Table, God is considered according to his Essence in Unity;
what he is, in Trinity without Nature and Creature, whereby he fills all
things, and yet needs no place.

AD Father Will IE O Son Delight HO N Spirit Science VA A Power Word Life I
Colors Wisdom Virtue TETRAGRAMMATON. In this Table is considered the efflux of
the Eternal Divine WORD; how the WORD through Wisdom brings it self from Unity
into Separation and Multiplicity; as well in the Eternal Nature and Creature
(according to which God calls himself angry jealous God, and a consuming fire;
as well as a merciful God wherein is understood the foundation of Angels and
Souls, and how they may receive salvation or damnation.) Gods The Wrath, first
or Dark Prin- World ciple Gods (...) Love, or Second Light Prin- World ciple.
Similitude 1 T 2 I 3 N ^ C 5 T 6 V 7 R E Desire or Comprehending Science or
Drawing Anguish Fire Light Lovefire Sound Essence T Dark Feeling or Moving
W^lling Painful Life Love-Life Understanding Working ER Austere Hardness Enmity
Mind Terror Joy Five Senses Form NAL Sharpness Elevating Wheel of Life Killing
Power Love Sperm In the Septcenary without by it self, is understood the
Mysterium Magnum, as the 7. properties of the Eternal Nature.

In the Novenarie downwards, are signified the properties of Life.

In the fourth Form, as in Fire, 2. Principles separate themselves from each
other, as Darkness and Light.

N Fury Pride Despair Hell Glory Giving Taking, or Co^prehending A Greater
Death False will Lesser Death Souls ground Devil Souls Spirit Angel Praising
Increasing T Standing still Breaking From Original separating Folly Wisdom
Highness Humility VR Impotent Self-will Robbing Fantasy Knowledge Strength
Throne

The Second Table Expounded.
THe word ADONAI signifies Or expantion.
opening, or free motion of the bottomless Eternal Unity; how the Eternal
generation, expantion, and effluence of the Trinity of God is in it self.

A, is a triple I, which comprehends it self Cross-wise, as in a Beginning,
Entrance, and Effluence.

D, is the motion of the triple I, as the opener.

O, is the Circumference of the triple I, as the birth of Gods place in it self.

N, is the triple Spirit, issuing forth of the Circumference out of it self as
a triple I.

A. This lower A, is the object, or operation of the threefold I, or Spirit;
from whence eternally spring Motion, Colors, and Virtue.

I, is the essential Effluence of the triple I, where the Trinity flows forth
into Unity. And in this whole word ADONAI, is understood the Eternal life of
Gods unity.

The word FATHER, is the Eternal beginning of operation and will in the
threefold I of the Unity.

The word SON, is that Operation of Power, as comprehension of the will into
which the triple (...) incloseth it self as a place of the divine Egoitae
Ickheit.
self-hood.

The word SPIRIT, is the living, issuing motion in the comprehended power; as
by comparition may be understood in a Flower: where the opening or working of
the growth, is the beginning; the power of the working, is the circumference
and corporal comprehension of the growth; and the Scent [or smell] which
proceeds from the power, is the motion, or the growing issuing joy-life of
the power, whereout the flower springs; by which comparition may be seen, how
the birth of divine power is typified.

The word Power, signifies the breathing, going forth, understanding, and
sensible life; as the foundation and fountain of the outflown knowledge of
Distinctness. Unterscheieidligkeit.
distinction.

The word Colors, signifies the subject, or object of Power, where the
distinction and Original of the sensetive life and knowledge is understood;
whence an Eternal contemplation existeth.

The word Will, signifies the ebullition or motion in the opened Unity;
whereby the Unity wills it self into Trinity, as the Nothing, into its
proper something, wherein it has its Motion and Action.

The word Delight [or Lubet] signifies the effectual sensibility of the Will;
as the highest ground of original love; where the will of the Abyss finds its
self in its Aliquid Etwas.
something, where it yields it self to something as to its sensibilitie, in
which sensibility it works and wills in its own Taste.

The word Science, signifies the effectual sensible knowledge and
understanding in the love-tast; the root of the five Senses, and the ground of
Eternal life: thence flows the Understanding; and therein the Eternal Unity
Groundeth.
planteth it self.

The word, Word, signifies how the Eternal love of the sensible unity with
knowledge speaks forth it self eternally into an object: The Word is the
speaking or breathing of the will out of the power by the understanding: It is
the driving and forming of the eternal power into an infinitness of
Multiplicitie; as the Creator of powers, out of the sole power in virtue.

The word Wisdom, is the outflown word, as an object of the divine knowledge
of divine will; as essential power of the great love of God; from whence all
things have received their motion and possibility: the ground of all the three
Principles; A Revelation of the unity of God; A passive essence of divine
Operation; the foundation of all humility; the Genetrix of all knowledge of
Creatures: An Eternal domicil of the active love of God, and a Ray and breath
of the Omnipotent Spirit.

The word JEHOVAH, is the most holy Name of God, as the Divine sensual life,
the only good; whereby the Holy Trinity, with Glory and Omnipotency, is
understood; the life of the Abyss, as of the Unity; which chiefly stands in
the only love: And therein also is understood the most holy Name JESUS: as the
egress'd I. is the ground and fountain of the breathing of Gods Unity, and a
forming of the understanding.

For the egress of the Unity, leads it self with the I into E, as in the
sight or beholding of a Chaos; wherein the Mysterium magnum (according to the
Divine manner) is understood; and is a triple breathing of the powers.

JE, is the breathing of the Unity. HO, is the breathing of the JE. VA, is the
breathing of the HO, and yet is only one bre^^hing; but makes a triple egress,
of the 3. Centers or comprehensions. And ^herein is understood, how the triple
I, at last closes it self in A, as in a beginning to Nature.

Under [VA] stands Life, signifying, (...) this threefold breathing, is a
real life and power.

Under that, stands Virtue, which signifies, the immense Virtue of such a
breathing life.

Now in this Table is rightly understood what God, without Nature and Creature,
is, in Trinity; as in a triple breathing of the Unity in it self; where
nothing can be said of the place, or dimension of his habitation: for God is
neither here, nor there, but every where alike; as the Abyss is considered,
namely the Eternal Unity without Nature and Creature: and thus is he an
active power and essence of Unity. But that really such power and virtue is
therein, may well be understood, in the effluence of the world, and the
Creatures therein, generated by the breath of God: and there is nothing in the
being of this world, which bears not witness thereof, if truly considered.

TETRAGRAMMATON.
In this Table is also manifested how the holy Name of the Eternal power; with
the knowledge hereof, from Eternity to Eternity; bringing it self into
properties, in Nature to eternal light and darkness; and how the word of
breathing forth, brings it self into a subject, and how self-will and
acceptance of properties arise in the subject; wherein two Essences are
always understood; as Gods own effluence; and then the properties own
acceptance in the free will; in which acceptance another external kind of
subject is understood; whereby the Unity in its Effluence becomes more
external; and thereby the Eternal love brings it self into a sensiblenes, and
like a fiery flame, as in the working of divine Power.

At the upper end of the Table stands Dark World; and under, The first
Principle: and over against it stands Gods Love, Light World; and below it,
from the figure 4. to the figure 7. the second Principle; which signifies how
the outflown will does enclose and overshadow it self, with acceptance of its
own desire; In the Eternal, is an Eternal light; but in the time here on Earth,
darkness is the ground of Nature; and light the ground of the Kingdom of joy,
the Revelation of God; that we may behold his works and our selves.
and with the self desire brings it self into properties, and causes
Darkness; in which Darkness the egressed one by fire in the Light is revealed
and made sensible; and is the cause of the Light; in which Light Gods love
assumeth a fiery operation, from the fire of eternal Nature, and shines in
fire through the dark painful acceptance; even as the light from a Candle, or
day in the Night; whence day and night have their names in Time; but in the
Eternal, there is also an Eternal light and darkness in one another: the
Darkness is the ground of Nature; and the Light is the ground of the joyful
Divine Revelation.

The Dark world, as the ground of the properties of self-desire and will, is
called the first Principle; because it is the cause of Divine Revelation,
according to sensibilitie; and also makes a Own E^gen.
proper Kingdom in it self, as namely painful torment; according to which God
calls himself an Angry Jealous God, and a consuming fire.

And the Light which is revealed in the fire, wherein the unity of the divine
effluence of Love is understood, is called the second Principle, as the divine
Power-world wherein Gods love is a love-fire, and active life; as it is
written, God dwells in a Light which no man can approach unto: for the power
of the unity of God works in the Light, and is God; and the fiery quality in
the Light is of the eternal Nature; wherein the Eternal love of the unity
Perceives and loves it self.

Below the first and second Principles (in the 7. spaces) stand seven numbers;
which signify the seven properties of the Eternal Nature; And under it
stands TINCTUR, distributed in the seven spaces; which signifies the Divine
Word in the Moderation or mean.
Temperature, or equality of the seven properties; wherein the divine powers
lie in an equal will, action, and being; as the outflown name of God, wherein
is understood the great Mysteries of Divine power and operation; with the
characters of the letters [on the left side] divided into the seven Properties.

For the word Tinctur, is that separating word, from whence flow the seven
properties.

T, is the Tau, or the opening of the Unity [ m^nas] the cross of the triple I
a ground to the breathing.

I, is the effluence from Tau, or the egress of the Unity, as the cross-Angle
of life.

N, is the effluence of the sounding Threefold spirit.

C, is the cutting of the sound; where the I as the effluence of Unity,
separateth it self again from Darkness, and where the Or a willing receiving.
Annehmligkeit.
acceptance of the Eternal will breaks.

T, under the figure 5. is that holy Tau, or the opening of Glory, in the fiery
sensibility, opens with ^ewrenden Liebe.
firing love, as with Gods Kingdom: and signifies the great strength of the
Light-Power.

V, is the true Character of the Holy Spirit with three points, the two upward
signify the Fire and Light, and the third downward signifies the Unity in
love, as the meekness.

R, with this the holy fire and light, is comprehended in an active natural
essence; for it signifies the Kingdom, as the Throne; and hereby is intimated,
how the holy Name with the outflown will introduces it self in Mysterium
Magnum, as into the Eternal mystery, whereout Originalis, is outspoken.
existed the visible world.

The great Mysteries of the Tinctur, or the highest ground of Gods Trinity.

T, is the triple I, the Father.

I, is that begotten I, JESUS.

N, is the threefold I, in Spirit.

C, signifies CHRIST.

T, in the fifth Space, is the Father in Christ.

U, is the Spirit of Christ in the Word, which quickneth.

R, is the Royal Throne, about which Darkness and Light strive; there Satan and
Christ stand against one another; namely according to the assumption of Satan's
self-will, as an Erroneous Spirit, and according to the Unity, Christ; where is
understood Love and Anger in one Ground; but in a twofold Revelation. Here are
understood those that belong to God; the other, E^^ Shelos darier an diesem
Orthe.
a Lock rather, at this place.

In this Table in the 7. Spaces is the ground of Angels and Souls; as that
Great Mystery of the change, in which lies all Possibility. Sidewayes, after
the seven figures, the efflux from Monas.
one into seven, is understood. The first Principle is to be understood, unto
the Fire; out of which the Light is manifested: And from Fire to Essence, the
Second Principle. And downward under every Proper^ie, is understood, what kind
of Effluence, out of every property, in the cooperation of other properties,
does proceed; yet not so to be understood that One property alone, gives the
efflux; but all seven afford it; though the first Form is predominant therein,
and retains the higher Regiment.

As under the figure I. stands Desire or Comprehending, whereby is
understood, that the Desire is Magnetic, and incloseth, and darkneth it self,
which is also the ground of Temporal and Eternal darkness, and from that Orig.
Drawing in.
attraction, comes (under it) Sharpness, Austereness and Hardness; and is the
Original of wrathfulness, whence arises the Great Eternal Death. For this
Magnet, draws the Powers into it self, and in it self incloseth them; so that
the working Stands still, and steps into Impotency; as under the Number 1.
appears.

Under number 2. stands Science or Drawing, which is the second Form to
Nature; as the motion of the Magnetic attraction, from whence the sensibility
of Nature existeth; and is the ground of all Contraries, for Hardness and
Motion are Enemies; Motion breaks the hardness again, and yet also begets
Hardness by attraction. Thus two Essences have their existence in the desirous
out-flown-will of God; as the drawing of the Magnetic power, gives Motion and
Sensibilitie; and the thing attracted affords Essence; wherein is understood
the cause Orig. 10.
of Spirit and Body; as in the attracting of Sensibilitie is caused the Spirit;
and in the extracted, the body or cause to Corporietie. Now if this attraction
and Essence be not able to reach the Light of Gods Unity, whereby it may be
mollified; then in it self remains only a Mere Enmity, and is the cause of
the torment of Fury and ambition: whence existeth self-pleasing, and Pride; for
the will of self-pleasing is a false-will, a continual corruptor of it self,
and its Essence.

And in these two Forms, Desire and In-drawing, in their out-flown Properties,
is understood Gods Wrath; and though they be the ground of the sensible life,
Yet if the light shines therein, then are they the ground of the Joy-Kingdom,
as an inward motion of Gods Unity; and a ground of the five Senses; whence
also the creatural life has taken its beginning; and therein stands its
Consumption. Uerte^bnus.
corruption, so far as it loses the light: for it is the Spring of Hellish
Anguish, as the cause of painfulness; and is also the Root of Natural life.

In the third space stands the third Form of Nature called Anguish, as a
spiritual Sulphur-source, according to its property: This takes its Ground
from the first and second Form; as from the Magnetic Desire, and from the
Motion of Drawing; where the out-flown Eternal will, in that unquietness
stands in Anguish. This Anguish is the cause of Natural Will, Mind, and the
Senses, and is the Wheel of Life, as the cause of the Firing-life: for when the
out-flown will of Gods Unity stands in Anguish, then it longs again after
Unity, as after Rest, and the Unity or Rest longs after Motion and
Revelation, for in the Unity there can be no Revelation without Motion; and
therefore the Divine will freely flows out of it self; and the Divine Luber.
good pleasure in the out-flown-will, brings it self into a Desire and Motion
unto a sensibility; that it may perceive it self, and remain two in one
Essence; as the sensible Divine delight, and the cause of sensibility; wherein
God calls himself a Loving God, according to the sensibilitie of Divine
Love-delight; and an Angry God according to the cause of sensibility; as after
the Eternal Nature. And thus, we understand by Anguish (when the divine Light
is not revealed therein) the Hellish fire, and an Eternal despair and Terror:
where the Self-will of Nature continually stands in a dying Torment; ever
desiring to be released from such a condition, which I therefore call the
Little.
lesser Death; it is the Eternal dying Death; but in the Hardness, it is the
great still-standing Death. This Form if it has not Light, is the head-spring
of the false mind; but if it perceives Light in it self, then is it the
spring and ground of the sensible mind, and the right root of fire, as
appears in number 3. downwards.

The fourth Form, numb. 4. is the Fire of the Eternal Nature; understand
spiritual Life-fire: and that existeth from a continual conjunction or
conjoyning of Hardness and Motion. Understand, that thence arises the
Painfulness; but the Splendour existeth from the Delight of the Free Will; where
the Unity of the Delight [good pleasure] is acuated in the properties; then
like a flash [ of lightning] it shines through the continued Conjunction, of
the great meekness of the Unity, and the Fierceness and Motion of the three
first Properties; for then it is in the Essence of the Conjunction, as if Steel
and Stone were rubbed together; whence the flash arises. Such a Flash, is the
true Natural Life of the Eternal; for it is the Revelation of Divine Motion,
and has the properties of Nature; and also the Revelation of the Unity of Gods
effluence in it self. Now which of these two gets predominancy, in that
stands the Life.

The splendour of the Fire, is the Light from the effluence of Gods Unity; and
the Essence of the Fire is the out-flown will, which has brought it self with
the desire into such Properties. Thus in the out-flown fiery will, we understand
Angels and Souls; and in the sensible sharpened Lights power from the Unity, we
understand the Spirit wherein God is revealed, and understood in the spiritual
essence; and in the Fire two Kingdoms separate themselves, as the Kingdom of
Glory from the efflux of Gods Unity, and the Kingdom of the properties of
Nature; and yet [these two Kingdoms] dwell in one another as one. The Kingdom
of Nature is in it self, that great Eternal Darkness, but the Light is the
Kingdom of God; of which S John says, The Light shines in darkness, but the
darkness comprehends it not. As day and night dwell in one another, and yet
the one is not the other.

Thus from the Fires own property, comes the painful life, if it break it self
off from the Eternal Light, and does (as in the property of selfhood) enter
the object; then is it only fantastic and foolish; even such as the Devils
were, and the Souls of the Damned are; as appears Numb. 4. downwards.

In the fifth Property of Nature, is the second Principle, with its foundation
understood; (as the Essence of the Unity in the Light-power) where in the
out-flown Unity is a fire-flaming-love understood, whence existeth the true
understanding-Spirit, with the five Senses.

The first three Forms are only the property to Life; and the fourth is the
Life it self; but the fifth is the true Spirit. When the fifth property is
revealed out of the Fire, then she dwells in all the rest, and changes them
all into her sweet love, that no more painfulness nor Enmity is discerned, but
even as the day changes the night.

In the first 4. Properties, is that life like the Devils; but when the
Lights-power (as the second Principle) is revealed in the property, then is it
an Angel, and lives in divine power and holiness, as appears in the Number. 5.
downwards.

The sixth Property, is the Understanding, as the Sound, where the properties in
the Light stand all in an equality; then they rejoice, and the power of the
five Senses is manifest, and all the properties rejoice in one another; and
thus the love of the Unity leads it self into working, willing, sensibility,
finding, and Highness Pochkeit.
celsitude. Thus is there a contrary in the Eternal Nature; that the Properties
existing therein, the love is known, and that there might be something, to be
beloved, wherein the Eternal Love of Gods Unity may work, and God may be
praised. For if the properties of life be penetrated with the Divine
love-flame, then they praise the great love of God, and yield themselves all
again into the Unity of God. Such rejoicing and knowledge could not be revealed
in the Unity, did not the Eternal will bring it self into painful moving
properties.

The Seventh Property, is that Essence, wherein all the other are essential;
wherein they all act, as the Soul does in the Body: wherein the Natural,
Essential, Eternal Wisdom of God (as the Mysterium Magnum) is understood; out
of which the visible World, with its Essence and Creatures, did arise.

Thus by this Table is understood the hidden Spiritual world, as the Eternal
manifestation of God; from whence the Angels and Souls of Men received their
existence; therefore may they turn themselves to evil or good, for both lie in
their Center.

This Spiritual world is no other than Gods revealed Word, and has its being
from Eternity to Eternity; for therein is Heaven and Hell understood.

III. TABLE.

The seven Properties of the visible World, or external Nature.

MACROCOSMUS

In this Table is signified, how the hidden Spiritual, Eternal Word, (as the
Mysterium magnum) by the motion of Gods Word issued forth, and became visible,
manifest, and Material; And how the inward Powers, through Gods working, have
comprehended and fashioned themselves; how good and bad in every thing is to be
understood; and yet there was no evil in Mysterium magnum, but existed through
the sensibility and assumption of self-desire. Here also is showed what in the
working issued forth from every property, and which have the predominancy;
according to which every thing is formed and governed.

1 Ground 2 of 3 Nature 4 Pure 5 Element 6 Para- 7 dise Cold, Earth, Snow
Original of Air Fire of Essence Heaven Light of Nature Stars Water Saturn
Mercury the planet Mars Sol Venus Soft Jupiter Luna Sal Mercury thunder Sulphur
Flash Sal-niter Oil Power Body Black, Gray Mixt-colours Red Yellow Green, and
white within Blew White without within Red and Green Melancholy Collerick
Sanguin Phlegmatic Grossness of Stone Metal, Stone Rust Growing Pearls Jewels
Menstruum Lead Quick silver Iron, St^el Gold Copper Tinn Silver Bone Wood Herbs
Resin Tincture in the Earth Sweet Bitter Grass Sour Poison Woes Opening Healing
Sren^thning Flesh Stopping Smelling Feeling Seeing Tasting Hearing Loathing of
Nature Dying Lying Wrath War Richess Noble Reason Own possession Lord Craft
Force Justi^e Faithful Truth Simplicity Stealing Deceiving Losing Finding
Earthly Love being friendly Lightminded Obstinate Sad Confounded Senses
Careless Constant Pure Jo^full Ignorant Earthly Beast'y Evil Heavenly Modest
Sensible Low olfe Fox Dog Lion Bird Ape Great Beasts Worms Venomous Worms
Evil Beasts Good Beasts Flying Beasts Tame Beasts Fish.

An Explanation of the third Table, MACROCOSMUS.
IN this Table is understood, how the hidden spiritual world has made it self
visible; and with its own breathing forth, has made it Gegenwurff.
an object where the Eternal Principles are out-flown; and the powers therein
became co-material. For the External Nature is no other than an efflux or
object of the Eternal Nature. The 4. Elements exist from the first 4 Properties
of the Eternal Nature; as the Earth and grossness of all Essences of the Dark
desire, where the other six Properties always became co-material; as we may
conceive of Metals and Powers, good and bad. The Air existeth from the motion
of the Magnetic Impression; The Water from the abruption [breaking off] of the
Impression, where Heat and Cold are in Strife; the Fire of the spiritual fire.
The cold is Perceived in the Magnetic sharpness, as in the right root to Fire.

Before the seven Properties, above the Table, stands Ground of Nature
distributed in the three first Forms. And in the fourth and fifth Form or
property, is divided the word Pure Element.

With the word Ground of Nature, is understood the root of the 4. Elements, The
Pure Element is the ^quality in the Elements; and is called the Quint-essence
of the Elements; as the Tinctur of the equality of Nature: both are that occult
Arcanum so much sought for.
as the four causes of Motion and Sensibility. By the word Pure Element, is
understood the Temperature, or the equality of Nature, and the four Elements;
where the Light also is sensible, Moving, and Elemental. Thus is understood,
how the Eternal Element, as the motion of Divine Power is accuated by the
ground of Nature, and revealed in the Light; where the pure Element is the
motion of the inward Spiritual world; and at the Creation of the world, went
forth into a Being; and is understood of the fifth Essence.

The word Paradise in the 6. and 7. Properties, signifies the spiritual work
in the Lights Essence; as a springing up, or spiritual growth, which at the
beginning of the world, sprung up through all the 4. Elements; and out of the
Earth formed it self into all manner of fruits, and changed all the properties
of wrathfulness into a Temperature. But when those fierce properties, with the
4. Elements, were awakned, by the alienated desire, and false will in Adam, and
attained the Dominion, then the Greening [springing forth] retired back; that
is, it remained in the Tincture of the inward Ground, and is yet in the 4.
Elements, but, in the Inward Pure Element only; and may not be attained but in
the New Birth of the inner man; and in the material Tincture, wherein the
Paradisical working is also manifest to our understanding.

This Table shows from whence all Essences [or Beings] in this world did
arise; and what the Creator is; namely that the Creator has been the divine
power-world; which the Monas
Unity, as the Eternal will, has moved, which will, is God himself, But the
Separator or Divider, Einheit. God made first the Angelical light world, which
in this place (after the Devils Apostacy) separated into this external
visible ess^nce.
was the out flown will in the spiritual world; in such motion, he issued out
of himself, and made him a subject for his working; in which motion, one
subject issued out of another continually, until the external matter of the
Earth (through the divine motion) was drawn into a Mass or Chaos: and this
drawing of the Motion stands thus still: all things therefore fall in the
deep toward the Earth; and that is the reason, that all Power of motion, even
to this day, and to the end of Time, continues so.

The seven Days, and seven Planets, signify the seven Properties of the
spiritual world, The three Principle in Spiritu Mundi, as Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercurius, signify the Trinity of the divine Revelation; as an everlasting
Spring or Fountain, whereout all external Creatures are flown, do flow, and
will flow, even to the end of this time; and therein the Separator, with the 7
Properties, is understood. In this Table we see what proceeded from the 7
Properties; and how the Spiritual power has brought it self into a Material
one (as in the seven spaces downwards appears) whereby we may understand whence
Good and Evil sprung up in this World.

IV TABLE.

MICROCOSMUS.

In this Table MAN is held forth; What he has been in Paradise; as also how
the Properties in him (without assuming Selfdefire) equally stood in the Image
of God: and what he is become through Satan's Deceits: what that Monster of the
Serpent (whereby he is become earthly and mortal) is in him.

And then how Gods Word and LOVE came in to help him again, new born in CHRIST,
daily destroying that Serpen tine Image: also in what danger and misery he
stands in such an Image, either on the ground of Hell or Heaven.

Also a similitude of Divine Revelation and Knowledge in the seven Properties
according to Time and Eternity, formed out of all the Three Principles; for a
further understanding how he is wisely to regulate his Life; and unto what
driving [impulsion] he should yield himself.

Humane Ground before and after the FALL 1 T S 2 I OU 3 N L 4 C E S 5 T PIR 6 U
IT 7 R BODY Saturday Wednsday Tuesday Sunday Friday Thursday Monday Adam in
Paradise.... Erring sp. Christ Desire... Sharpness... Gods word Motion...
Anger... Life Sensibility... Pain... Acceptance Seeing... Bitter woe... Sweet
Loving... Hating... Glory Rejoicing... Despair... Power Heavenly flesh...
Passion... Divine Essence Adam in Paradise... Satan... Christ Similitude...
self-seeking... Gods unity Out going Spirit... Self-knowl.... Resignation
Heating... Self-will... Suffering High... Dominiering... Yielding Humble
Will... Pride... Desire Praising... Reproaching... Equality of Power Unity...
Folly... Wisdom Adam in Paradise... Satan... Christ Tasting... Desire of
division... Baptism Thinking... Lying... Law Mind... Anguish... Breaking
Understanding... Doubting... Hopeing Spirit... Fall... Humility Speaking...
Stinck... Believing Evestrum of Nature... Extruding... Genius or Type Adam in
Paradise... Satan... Christ Strength... Lord... Humility Pentrating...
Potent... Obedience Might... Malice... Mercy Holy... Thirsty... Forgiving
Modest... Wanton... Going Powerful... Mad... Generating Throne... Self
honor... reverence Adam in Paradise... Satan... Christ Angel... Devil...
Christ Officious... Perverse... returning Mild... Theevish mind... repentance
Friendly... Murder... New life Beauty... Belial 's Whore... Holy Virtue...
Poison... Restoring Diligent... Earthly flesh... Sophia Adam in Paradise...
Satan... Christ Heaven... Hell or Perdition... Christ's Calling, Child like...
Strife.... Teaching, Secret.... Torment... Dissolving, Manifest... Ever
falling... New-mind, Singing... Fantasy.... Rejoicing Sounding... Changing...
Praying, Paradise... A Den of the Deep... Springing.

An Explanation of the fourth Table. MICROCOSMUS.
IN this Table, Man is held forth as a similitude of the Three worlds, What Man
is in his Trinity; as first according to Paradise; Secondly, according to the
Spirit of Error; Thirdly, according to the New Birth, which Christ reaches and
will have, John 3.
according to the Soul, Spirit, and Body; What he has been in the beginning,
according to his Creation; What he is become in the fall, by the Spirit of
Error; and What he will be in the new birth through the Spirit of Christ; which
is a true Essential Image, out of the three Principles of the Divine
Revelation; as from the outflown Word of the Divine will.

Man according to the Soul, is an Eternal Nature of the firing quality, as a
spark out of the Center, from whence the fire existeth: If this ground cannot
reach into the divine Light; then is it a Darkness of the Magnetic attractive
desiring power; but if he reaches out of the fire, unto the light, that his
Magnetic desire feeds on the out-flown Unity of Gods Love; the arises from
that fire the good true Spirit, even as light shines out of a Candle. These
are now two Principles, the Soul, in the fire of Eternal Nature; and the Spirit
in the light of Divine Power. But the Body is the third Principle; as an
Essence of the visible world, from the Stars and Elements, formed into an
Image, out of the seven Properties of Nature.

The Soul has the seven Properties of the inward Spiritual world, N. B. The
Difference between the Soul, and the Spirit of the Soul which without God, is
but a dead Image.
according to Nature; But the Spirit of the Soul is without these Properties;
for it stands out of Nature, in Gods unity but through the Souls fiery
Nature, is manifested in the Soul; for it is the true Image of God; as an Idea,
in which God himself works and dwells; so far as the Soul brings her desire
into God, and submits unto Gods Will: if that be not done, then is this Idea,
or Spirit of the Soul, dumb and actless [not working], standing like an Image
in a Looking-Glass, which soon vanishes, and has no being, as it befell Adam
in the Fall. But if the Soul submits to God, and brings its Magnetic hunger
into Gods Love, the Soul then attracteth divine Essence, namely, the Essential
Wisdom of God; then her Idea or Spirit becomes Essential in the Lights power,
and obtains a pious life; as being then the true Temple of God, wherein Gods
Unity is revealed and operative.

But if the Soul herself with her desire, bring in self-love; and with her
desire turn herself into the seven Properties, to try them; and feeds on the
vain delights of the seven Properties; then she extolls herself, and makes to
herself an Evestrum is a continued Astral Influence in the 4. Elements, and
l^kewise, an Astral Spirit in Man.
Evestrum, as an Astrall Object; which Evestrum presently hungreth after the
vanity of the false delight; even as it befell Lucifer and Adam, where the
Evestrum of Lucifer imagined it self into a Fantasy; and the Evestrum of
Adams Soul, into the Animalish Properties of the External world; whereby the
Soul was poisoned, and the Body (out of the Earth's Limus) was suddenly
infected; that the Animalish properties awakened in him, and longed after
Earthly, Beastly sustenance; as Heat, Cold, Sharp, Bitter, How the holy
similit^^^ of God in Man becam^ quenched, a monstro^^ Image assumed.
Sweet and Sour; and with these Properties introduced it self into a springing
fountain of such delights; and so with the desire, Fed on Good and Evil;
whereby the Image of God, as the Idea, became obscure and unactive. Thus the
true Spirit (as the active Idea) became dumb and dead, even as an Image in a
Looking-glass; and so was the Soul cut of from God, and stood in a Natural
will; but Gods will in the Spirit worked worked no more; and the will of the
Evestrum (as the Opposite Image of the dark eternal world began [to work], for
the holy Genius was changed.

At the head of this Table stands TINCTUR divided into the seve^^^
Properties; which signifies the Equality of the seven Properties according to
the Soul and Body that in the first man before the fall, the properties [or
inclination] to separation, Acceptabilitie Annehmligkeit.
and Acceptance, stood in a like will; and all its desires were brought into
God Unity: thus were they the true Paradise; for the Essential Spirit with the
Unity of God, was revealed in them, who were to work through Gods love in all
things. But the Devil envied them, and with his false Lust deceived the seven
Properties of life, and persuaded them, it would be good for them, and they
should become wise; if the Properties (each one according to its kind) would
introduce themselves into self-Acceptance, then should the Spirit taste and know
what was Good and Evil: but then it could not subsist in Gods Unity, of that
he told them nothing.

But no sooner had they brought themselves in their own lusts, than such a
strife and contention awakned in them, tha^ ^ll the Properties began to be
formed in their self-hood.

Thus the Unity, as the Element, was broken [or divided], and the four Elements
strove for predominance; whereupon suddenly from without, fell in the
Inequality, as Heat and Cold, and the Astral division working in the Body; and
Gods wrath (according to the Dark worlds property) in the Soul; which caused
in them (according to the Soul), Thus was our Nature first corrupted: which
ground was never before so plainly discovered.
Horror, Anguish, Necessity, and Eternal despair; and in the Body, arose Heat,
Cold, Woes, Sickness and a Mortal life. Thus Gods Image, the whole man, fell
from his Ordinance; and became a disguised monster: and the awakened Properties
presently began to set up their Government, with Envying, Murdering, Raging,
Tearing and Tormenting. Love was changed into Pride and self-love; Desire, into
Covetousness; Sensibility, into Envy; and the life's fire, into wrath: Thus was
the Hellish foundation, in the whole Man, revealed, and ruled both in Soul and
Body.

Now this Hellish Foundation, is the Spirit of Error; for which man must have
been damned, had not the Divine mercy, the Serpent-treader (a^ the efflux of
Gods love) after the fall, been presently Origin is in-spoken.
promised to the New birth, in the Holy Name Jesus. Which holy Name has, in
mere mercy, and great humility for man's soul and body, given it self forth,
assumed humanity, broken the power of the diabolical Spirit of Error, killed
the lives self-will, and brought again the Properties into Gods Unity. There
the true Spirit (as the human Idea and Gods Image) is renewed again, and filled
with the Divine Love-Essence. And thus the human Soul, through Christ's Soul and
Spirit in that love and divine Essence, has again attained an open Gate unto
God.

Thus in this Table is held forth [or drawn to the life] what Adam has been;
what, through the Fall, he is become; and how he is again Redeemed; and what is
his New Birth out of Christ Spirit. And these are delineated in the seven
Properties under the Word TINCTUR. Souls ground. 1, 2, 3. first Princip. Souls
Spirit out of God 4, 5, 6. second Princip. the (...). 7. (...), now ^^^thly.
In which Properties the Soul has its Center, and in which the Spirit, and in
which the Body [have their Centers also] of which the Reader may further
consider; for under them stand the seven Days of the week, intimating, that
Man is even the same.

This Table shows what Man is internally and externally; first according to
the good Adam, and then according to the corrupted Adam; and also what he is
again in Christ. Whereby, we may understand, how Evil and Good is man; and
whence exist the Property of good and evil, both in the mind and senses.

By the word Satan (signifying the Spirit of Error) is not understood a
Creaturely-Devill; but the Spring [or fountain] of the Spirit of Error.

And by the word Christ, is understood the New-Man (according to the internal)
in the Spirit of Christ. The other spaces, are understood as in the other
Tables; wherein is understood the cause of mutation.

FINIS.

