THREE CHARGES Delivered at the General Quarter Sessions, Holden at Ipswich,
for the County of Suffolk, In the Years, 1691, 1692.

To which is Added, the Author's Vindication from the Calumnies and Mistakes
cast on him, on the Account of his Geographical DICTIONARY.

By EDMUND BOHUN, Esquire

LONDON. Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1693.

The Preface.
THe only Reason of the Publishing these Discourses at this time, is the
confuting a common Report spread and believed amongst them that know me not,
that I am a Jacobite, or a person disafected to the present Government. And
this for want of a better foundation is grounded upon some passages (for the
most part unknown to me) pretended to be found in the second Edition of my
Geographical Dictionary: And to Answer them there needs no more than to tell
the true story of that Book.

My Geographical Dictionary was finished and first published in March 1688. And
I immediately began to make collection for the enlarging and correcting of it
at the request of the Publisher: About Michaelmass of the same year our last
great Revolution began, and their now Majesty's (whom God long Preserve) were
declared King and Queen of England the 12th. of February following, which was
very near a whole year after the writing and Publishing of the First Edition of
that Book; so that what ever arguments are fetched from the first Edition, are
nothing to the Purpose; Except my Accusers can fancy I was endowed with the
Spirit of Prophecy.

That Summer I Published the History of the Desertion and the Doctrine, of
Passive Obedience or Non-Resistance, no way concerned in the Present
Controversy between the Williamites and the Jacobites. And although my name was
not set to either of them, yet it soon got vent that I was the Author of them;
And the Non-Swearers treated me accordingly: But I can easily suppose the
Gentlemen who first Raised this report, never heard any of these things; but if
they yet Question the truth of them they may have Recourse to Mr. Chiswell, who
Printed both those Books.

During this year and the next I was intent upon the Enlarging my Geographical
Dictionary, and another greater Work, which I hope will shortly see the Light;
and having been Extremely ill used both by the Non-Swearers and some of the
Swearers too for some Passages in the last mentioned Book, became very Averse
to the meddling any further in that Controversy, which I perceived was for the
most part managed with more Heat than Discretion on both sides.

About Michaelmass, 1690. I was forced to leave the Town and go Down into
Suffolk, my native Country, to take care of a Part of my Estate which I could
not Let. Here another Set of thoughts and business took possession of me, and
I had neither Leisure nor any Inclination to trouble the World any further upon
that which was the Subject of the two last Books, till at last the Insolence
with which some men treated the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's drew from me, three
Sheets of Paper (which were Printed) but need not be mentioned here: He that
Prints this was the Publisher of them: And if they can from thence either prove
me a Jacobite, he will furnish them with those Papers, and I shall Acknowledge
they are good Artists.

Whilst I was thus Employed, I met with the first notice of the Second Edition
of my Geographical Dictionary in the Country, where I then Lived, in the
Gazette of May, 18th 1691. Which strangely Surprised and incensed me, I having
not heard one Syllable of any such thing intended, till I met with my Name in
the Gazette. And thereupon I sent up to London, to have a Disclaimer of the
said Impression Printed in the Gazette too, for my Justification, which I
presume Mr. Jones has not forgot; but this being denied, I came up to London,
and endeavored all the ways that were possible to give notice to the World
that this Second Edition was Published with out my Knowledge or consent: But
the Bookseller that did me this Injury had so fore-closed all ways of that
Nature, that I could have nothing done, till he himself to stop my mouth,
Published a Second Advertisment in the Gazette, of June the 18th, 1691, With
these words Added to the former Title, The Second Edition Corrected and
Enlarged by another hand; Whereas in the first I was tacitly insinuated to be
the Person that had Imposed upon the World; And in some of the Titles of the
Book I was Expressly said to be so. Tho in truth it was never Corrected at all,
and there was so little Added that the Book was Printed in half a Sheet of
Paper less than was in the former Edition: Yet I am informed there were some
few things added, and upon them chiefly this Calumny is built; As the Boyne,
which River was not in My first Edition, to be sure there is nothing of his Now
Majesty's Passing it. And I am also informed there is great exception taken to
some things that were in the First Edition, and ought to have been Corrected in
this, as they certainly had been, if I had not been thus used.

Being nothing satisfied with the Advertisment put into the Gazette in a Letter
prefixed to the Second Edition of Mr. Lawrence Euchard's Compendium of
Geography, Dated the 3d of September, 1691. I again disclaimed this Second
Edition of my Geographical Dictionary. And after all this I thought I had given
the World abundant Satisfaction that I was no way concerned in it, nor
Responsible for any thing therein Added or Omitted.

There is now at this very time a Third Impression of my Geographical
Dictionary in Folio, in the Press for him that Printed the first, and that too
is Corrected and Enlarged by another hand, and much at the Rate with out Doubt
the Second Edition was. However I am sure it is done without my Knowledge and
consent, and so without any one of the many Corrections and Additions I had in
about five years prepared for it. It is not Improbable, so soon as ever it is
Printed and Published, I shall again from it be proved a Jacobite, or any
thing, some Men have a mind to prove me; and therefore I do hereby again disown
it.

During the time I lived in the Country I applied my self to the Service of my
Country, in the Office of a Justice of the Peace; and for want of better Men it
was too often my Lot to give the Charges in that part of the County where I
Lived: And what I there Spoke on these occasions is Known to too many to be any
otherwise represented than as it was spoken: So that I can not possibly give a
better Testimony of my Loyalty to their Majesty's than these Charges, which as
to the two first were delivered at a Time when I had not the least Prospect of
ever being any otherwise employed by them.

The first Intimation I had of this was in the latter end of August, which was
wholly without my seeking, as is well known to a Person of great Honor, from
whom I received the first Account of it.

I shall now refer it wholly to my Readers to judge between me and my Accusers,
Whether it be reasonable to believe me a Jacobite upon the Account of a Book
which was Written, Printed and Published, very near a whole Year before the
present Government was Established, to which some Things are owned to be Added
since it went out of my hand, by another Person, in which there are many
Passages which I designed to have struck out or altered, and to which I
intended to have added very much, which I have been since forced to put into
the Grand Dictionary: And to believe this against the Testimony of all those
Pieces I have printed since that Time, in defense of their Majesty's Title and
Government: And then be their Judgment what it will, I am their

Most Humble Servant,EDMUND BOHUN.
January 2d. 1692/3
A Charge delivered at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden at Ipswich, in
the County of Suffolk, the Xth Day of October, in the Year 1691. III. Gulielmi
and Mariae, R. R. Angliae.
GENTLEMEN,
THERE was perhaps never any Nation in the World that had better Laws than that
of which we have the happiness, as English Men Born, to be Members; but then I
may as confidently Aver, that never any Nation was more guilty of the breach of
their Laws; nor more Averse to the Execution of them on those that had broke
them, than we generally are here in England. By which it comes to pass that our
Laws seem not to be what indeed they are; and we by our Negligence and stupid
Carelessness lose the benefit of those Laws on the one hand, and on the other
encourage Offenders to multiply their Iniquities till they become intolerable
Burdens to the Earth, and are cut off by the Hand of Justice in the end, who
might easily have been reformed in the beginning, if they that are entrusted
with the Execution of our Laws had been careful and endustrious in doing their
Duties.

Quid Leges Vanae sine moribus? To what end serve those Laws that have no
influence on the Lives and Manners of Men? Why truly I know nothing they are
good for, but to Reproach the Men that break; and the Men that should, but will
not Execute them. Had I been Born amongst the Lawless Cafrers in Africa, or the
Northern Indians in America; a Brutish Nation that have neither Laws nor
Government, I should have been only responsible for the Breaches of the Law of
Nature; but when neither the Laws of God; nor the Laws of the Land, nor the
Laws of Nature, will hold me in, or put a Curb upon my unruly Lusts and
Passions, it is a Reproach to me, and to the Humane Nature, which is made to
look more Brutish and Ungovernable than that of the Savage Beasts, and I have
no Excuse to plead before God or Man for my Justification.

Well, but though there is little to be said for the Breakers of our Laws, there
is less to be said in Excuse of those that should, but will not Execute them.
Are you weary of your good Laws? Why then let them be all at once Repealed,
knock off these Fetters, turn the Malefactors loose into the Nation without
Fear or Danger of the Laws, and then consider what will follow. Shall any Man
be safe one Moment in the Possession of Life, or Limb, or House, or Lands, or
Goods? Will not every Man's Wife and Daughters be exposed to the Violence of
Outrageous Men too? And in this Wretched State what will our Country be better
than an Acheldama, a Field of Blood and Violence? I once saw the Rabble a few
Days in a Lawless Rage, and it frighted me more than any thing I ever saw in my
Life. Ireland and Scotland have seen and felt this Calamity for a longer time,
and to a higher degree; but what has followed but Desolation in the one, and
Bitter and Loud Complaint in the other? If Men would but think it were
impossible they should value any thing above the Laws, which are the only
Security they have for all the Comforts of this Life, nay for Life it self.

Nor do I pretend Men would willingly be Rid of their Laws, or do not
understand the Value of them. The Rebellion in 1641, and the Revolution in
1688, are sufficient Instances how stoutly Englishmen can and will appear for
their Laws, when they see, or do but Imagine, they are in danger to be deprived
of them. Every Man that suffers any thing contrary to Law, or is deprived
without Law, makes Loud Complaints, and the Actors are sure to incur the
public Hatred of the Nation* and to be detested to the Pit of Hell both Living
and Dead, which are clear proofs the Value and Goodness of our Laws are very
well and very commonly understood.

What then is the cause they are no better Executed? Why, Gentlemen there are
various causes, but I can only hint at them, and I must leave it to you and
others to remove them.

I. The First of these is Partiality, both as to Laws, and as to Offenders.
Every Man excepts one Man; and that Sin he has then an occasion for. Punish
Thieves and Murderers as much as you please, but what harm do the Drunkard, the
Common Swearer? Well, punish them too says another, but let Conscience be
free: What, all Consciences? No, Punish the Papist and the Atheist. For what?
For not keeping his Church, not serving of God. Why, oh Man! thou art guilty of
the same thing. Ay, but I do it out of Conscience; and so may the first of
these as truly say, and the latter as confidently, and none but God that knows
the Heart can Confute them. Well, but when we have got over this Bar, all is
not safe yet; for all Offenders are not to be Punished neither, this Man is my
Friend, that my Kinsman, a Third is Rich, and will Revenge it, a Fourth Poor,
and the Parish must suffer for it. Why, who shall be Punished then? The
Friendless, the Helpless, the Hated, One of a Thousand, or so. Thus Laws are
made Cobwebs to catch Flies, and pass Hornets, the stronger, the more dangerous
Rovers.

II. Another Cause is Lasiness. The Execution of Laws is a Laborious and
Painful Task, Expertus Loquor, I speak what I know and have felt. It is easy
to pass by and wink at the Offenses of Men; but let a Man once Rouse up
himself, and resolve to do his Duty, and he shall quickly find it is much
easier to declaim against Vice than to punish it. But surely this is no reason
why we should not do it, because the Trouble that will follow for want of
Justice is infinitely greater than the Trouble of doing it; if we will not have
the one, we must submit to the other.

III. A Third Hinderance is Cowardice. He that does his Duty must expect great
Opposition, and much ill Usage, and some Revenge. And why should I expose my
Head and Family to all this? Why, let such an one do it. Ay doubtless, even the
Man that has no Being, Mr. Nobody, for he only is above the Revenges and
Molestations of all his Neighbors. This is the Reason why Moses so often and
so earnestly Exhorts all that were concerned in the Execution of Justice, to be
Stout and Courageous, and not fear the Face or Power of any Man, because the
Judgment was the Lords, and he would assert and defend his own Minister and
Ordinance, against all that should design their Disquiet or Wrong.

Now Gentlemen, if I could but Cure your Partiality, your Lasiness, and your
Cowardice, I would then promise my self a good effect. But I must beg your
pardon here, for but supposing you can be guilty of any of these things; Men of
your Character and Estates can never be suspected, never Justly. Why Gentlemen,
I would not Defame you, nay, nor so much as Suspect you, if Time and many Years
Experience had not taught me to despair of having what I can say, regarded. I
would not suspect even where I cannot but be certain, but I must suspect
whether I will or no, and you may forgive it me because it is in your powers to
satisfy me, and the World, you do not deserve to be suspected; and if upon the
Return of your Verdict I find cause for it, I will publicly Recant what I now
say, and at the same time return you my Thanks for Confuting my Jealousy. The
gaining this Point is all I aim at to Excite and Awaken your Drowsy Sleeping
Attentions, and even Anger you into your Duty, if nothing else will do. But
when all is done, I would not willingly offend you, and if I have gained my
Point, I am sure I have not.

The Statute of the 32 H. 8. c. 9. says very truly, The Articles.
There is nothing within this Realm that Conserves the Subjects in more
Quietness, Rest, Peace, and good Concord, than due Administration of Laws: For
where this is not, Impunity will soon produce sufficient matter to disquiet any
Nation. But the Work of Righteousness shall ever be Peace.

You shall diligently enquire of, and truly Present, Treasons.
all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies against our most Gracious Sovereigns
King William and Queen Mary: By whom, when, and where, the same were
perpetrated, or attempted, entered into, or disclosed. It is true, this Court
cannot Try any Treason, because not in our Commission; but yet we can and ought
to enquire of it, and you to Present it, that the Records may be after removed
into those Courts who can Try the same.

The compassing the Death of the King, or Queen, or Prince, and declaring the
same by any open Deed. Such as are a design to Depose or Imprison them. For
Death has ever followed upon these Actions, and of necessity ever must. There
is, (said Charles the First,) but a small distance between the Prisons and the
Graves of Princes; and his Death soon after verified the Observation.

Such are the Misfortunes of our Times, that Loyalty it self is now suborned
and made accessory to the disquieting and endangering Two of the best Princes
that ever set upon the English Throne; and Men think and say they do not owe
them the same Allegiance they did their Predecessors, because they are so De
Facto, and not De Jure. A bold and a false Assertion, but which will not
Justify the Conclusion, if it were true. The Allegiance is the same, be the
Foundation of it what it will, for our Laws know but one Allegiance, and have
the same punishment for all Traitors.

The other Overt Acts are, the providing Weapons to effect it, sending Letters
to second it, assembling People to take the King or Queen into their Power,
writing Letters to a Foreign Prince to Incite him to an Invasion; for speaking
is not an Overt Act within the Statute, but if it be set down in Writing any
way, it is then an Overt Act.

The Joining with the King's Enemies within the Realm, or without; and the
Levying War against them is another Branch of Treason within the Act of the 25
E. 3. c. The rest of the Treasons there mentioned can scarce be supposed to
fall within your Cognizance, and therefore may be omitted for Brevity.

The Second Charge delivered at the General-Quarter-Sessions of the Peace,
opened on Friday the 8th of April, 1692, at Ipswich, and held by Adjournment to
the 9th of the same, it being a General Fast that Day. Delivered again on
Friday the 22d of July in the same Year at Ipswich, with some few Alterations.
GENTLEMEN,
IT has ever been my Custom, in Obedience to the Usage introduced by our Wise
and Industrious Ancestors, to open the Charge I was to give you with something
of a Preface, or short Introduction, necessary as to the times, fit for me to
speak, and for you to hear, though the bare repeating the Articles were much more
easy to me: But I value nothing in this World so much as the Service of God,
and the Safety and Welfare of my Country; which are the main things I have ever
aimed at, and for the Promoting of which I shall never think any Labor or
Hazard too great.

Deplorable is the State of Mankind whilst we live in this Mortal Life, and
Miserable World; neither God nor Man, Prosperity nor Adversity, Peace nor War,
Plenty nor Want, can universally please all: And, which is most of all to be
admired at, Men in all Ages have been most Insolent, most Discontented, when
Heaven has most smiled upon them, when Deliverance, Prosperity, Peace and
Plenty, have been given them, and their Wishes prevented: No sort of Men have
met with harder Usage, no Times with more Murmurers, than those that have been
Employed by God to Deliver his People from the most Pitiful State and Condition
of which in the Old Testament, Moses, and Jeptha, and Gideon, and Samuel, and
David, are clear and undeniable Instances, if I had time to open their Story.

This Carriage of the Jewish Nation, from first to last, both toward God, and
toward their Deliverers, was so constantly the same, that the Psalmist in his
short Epitome of their Story sets it down as a never failing Rule, When he Slew
them they sought him, and turned them early, and enquired after God. But then
Psalm. 78.
no sooner were they delivered, but it immediately appeared, they did but
Flatter him with their Mouth, and Dissembled with him in their Tongues. And as
they thus Foolishly Treated God, so they did his Instrument too. For which of
the Prophets, says St. Stephen, have not your Fathers Persecuted? Acts 7. 52.
Or which of the Princes, Judges, Generals, met with better Treatment? But of
this I shall say the less, because the History of the Bible is in all your
hands, upon the least hint your Thoughts will suggest all that I can say upon
this subject.

To lead you then to another Scene which shall verify the same Rule, I will
Remark to you, that within the space of Three-Hundred and Three Years, the
Devil stirred up against the Primitive Church Nine Dreadful and Bloody
Persecutions, and was in every one of them sufficiently baffled and
disappointed, so that it became a Rule, Sanguis Martyrum, semon Ecclesiae. For
they every Day became more Numerous than before, so that by the time I have
mentioned, his Oracles were universally silenced, his Temples deserted and
desolate, his Altars cold and neglected, and the Images that had heretofore
been Adored as the Repositories and Thrones of the Diety, were only regarded as
the Works of Excellent Statuaries, but destitute of Life or Motion; so that now
he saw clearly his Kingdom was Ruined, his Dominion Subverted, and all his Arts
Detected and Destroyed; this put him upon the last Effort, his Dying-Struggle,
to Ruin the Church, and Re-enslave the Manumised World.

To this End he Represents to Galerius one of the Caesar's under Dioclesian and
Maximianus the then Emperors, That the Old Rites, and Venerable Customs and
Religion of their Ancestors, professed and used by them, were wholly neglected,
and at the point of being for ever disused and slighted: That all those Noble
Piles that had in so many Ages been Erected and Endowed to the Honor of the
Gods, Beautifying the Empire, the Celebrating the Memory of Augustus, and the
rest of the Emperors, the vast Numbers of Priests, Flamens, Pontifices, and I
know not what other Orders of Juggling Knaves, too like our Popes, Cardinals,
Monks, and Jesuits, of latter times; were all undermined by an obscure Person
who was Crucified in Judea in the Days of Tiberius Caesar, and that if they sat
still but a little longer, the whole World, and the Emperors themselves must,
in a short time submit to a Crucified Man, and Vale their Scepters to a Cross.

Dioclesian was an Old Prince, and not easily moved to Undertake what he was
not certain he should Effect, because Nine others before him had miscarried.
But Galerius was Young, and puffed up with the Pride of a Victory over the
Persians, and he embraced the suggestion with Warmth and Zeal, and he
recommended the Project with Passion, and backed it with Sham-Plots, and Lying
Defamations. He told the Old Prince, That it was not possible the Christians
could be Loyal to him, because they hated and defamed his Gods, and Ridiculed
his Religion, they despised his Sacrifices, and undervalued his Statues,
Images, Saints, and Hero's, and he might Cherish them as much as he pleased,
but none did truly Love the Emperor but those that joined with him in his
Religion.

When the Number of the Christians was objected, and the Paucity of the Pagans,
he told the Prince, Their Religion had by good Fortune, and the Folly of its
Author, delivered them up bound Hand and Foot; for, said he, they are by it
Tied not to Resist, nor have they ever yet dared to Resist, how much soever
they have been Oppressed; so that if they were Ten to One more than they are,
your Majesty may promise your self an easy, safe, and infallible Victory over
them. He Ordered also the Royal House at Nicomedia to be Fired, and falsely
pretended the Christians about his Court Fired his House, to Consume his
Majesty and his Religion, in the same Funeral Pile. Hereupon in the beginning
of the Year of Christ, Three Hundred and Three, in March, there was Published
by Dioclesian and Maximian an Edict, That all Christians should be Compelled
throughout the World to Sacrifice to the Gods, that all their Books and
Monuments should be burnt, their Churches pulled down, their Bishops and
Inferior Clergy be cut off, and all means used that was possible to Extirpate
this New Sect of Men, the Enemies of the Gods, and of the Empire, from off the
Face of the Earth; upon which ensued the most universal Persecution that ever
had been, for it Extended from the Irish-Sea in the West, to the River Tygris
in the East, and from the Rhine and the Danube in the North, to the Mountains
of Atlas in the South: No City, Nation, or Province, no Sex, or Age, no
Quality, or Estate, was Exempted; and it lasted Ten Years without any
intermission under Dioclesian and Maximianus, Galerius and Severus, Maxentius
and Licinus; till in the latter end of the Year Three Hundred and Thirteen,
Constantine the Great having Conquered Maxentius, and cut off Maximianus, and
Galerius being by the Hand of God cut off by a Dreadful and Loathsome Disease,
an Edict was Published at Milan by Constantine and Licinius, in favor of the
Christians, who were not only permitted the Free Exercise of their Religion,
but had the Favor of the Prince, and the Security of the Laws, turned on their
side.

How did the Christians now behave themselves in this great and sudden Change,
from an Abyss of Misery, to the height of Temporal Felicity? Why, I assure
you, though Dioclesian was then Living, and an Abdicated Prince, there was not
one Jacobite in that Age, not one Christian that scrupled to Swear Allegiance
to Constantine and Licinius; that Branch of the Doctrine of Passive-Obedience,
which gives the Clergy a Right to determine the Rights of Princes, was then not
known, not mentioned: And when Licinius too returned to his Paganism, and fell
a Persecuting, he was soon after Abdicated and Deposed too, not by the Bishops,
or Pope, but by Constantine too, and he found never a Jacobite to Pout, and
Murmur, and Plot, for him neither.

Why, these Men had suffered enough of all Conscience to satisfy them, that
though they might not draw their Swords against their Pagan Persecuting
Princes, yet God had not tied up his own hands too, but he might Raise up a
Prince of Orange, that was no Subject to Galerius, Severus, Maxentius, or
Licinius, but equal, and no more than equal, to the best of them in Authority,
though inferior at first to any of them in Extent of Dominions, and he by the
favor of God upon his Arms might lawfully pull those Tyrants from their
Thrones, and Divest them of that Power, which being given them by God for the
good of Men, they had abused, to the Ruin of his Church, the Destruction of
true Piety, the Encouragement of Perjury, Idolatry, and all manner of
Wickedness, and as much as in them lay, to the Desolation of the World.

In our Revolution, which produced this Monster of Ingratitude to God and our
Deliverers; In Ireland where the Storm fell heavier, and lasted longer, the
very Vexation taught Men more Wit, and they of that Nation that have not been
since in England, will scarce believe we have any Jacobites, at least no
Swearing Jacobites. But of this hereafter.

What Return did the Primitive Christians make to so Stupendous a Deliverance?
Why, they sent Vollies of Praises and Hymns to Heaven, and Watered the Earth
with Floods of Tears, proceeding from Raptures of Joy and Gratitude; and the
new built Churches were filled with the Praises of God, and Prayers for their
Constantine, and few Sermons ended without a bitter Invective against those
Enemies of God, and his Church, who had so long and so furiously endeavored to
destroy them and their Religion.

This Joy was very short, for the Christians were no sooner delivered from the
heavy Pressure of the Pagan Persecutions, but they presently fell into Schisms,
Heresies, and Divisions amongst them, which were almost as troublesome, and
much more infamous and destructive to the Church, than the worst of the Pagan
Persecutions. Donatus in Africa, and Arius a discontented Priest of Alexandria
in Egypt, were the Authors of these New Troubles. And now those Bishops and
Holy Men who had sustained the Pagan Fury of the Persecutions with a Patience
and Union, that made them Revered by the Pagan World, as Men of a Divine
Spirit, being fired each against the other by their Domestic Animosities and
Divisions, treated each other with so much Passion, and so little Respect, that
both Parties became Ridiculous to the Unconverted Pagans; and the Theaters, and
other places of Public Conversation, were filled with the Brangles and
Arguments of Disagreeing Christians, and the Scoffs, Sarcasms, and bitter
Reflections of the Pagan Wits. Donatus began his Schism a little before the
Peace of the Church, and Arius his Heresy in Three Hundred and Fifteen, but
Two Years after it. The first of these could never be ended but with the utter
Ruin of the African Church, by the Goths and Vandals, Moors and Arabians; and
the latter was not brought into any Order till the Reign of Theodosius the
Great, very near One Hundred Years after.

I speak not this to Excite your Wonder, or your Passions, but to Allay them;
the Church of England has within half a Century of Years suffered Two bitter
sharp Persecutions, one from the Dissenters, and the other from the Roman
Catholics; and she has stood against them both, and maintained her Union; but
no sooner was she almost Miraculously delivered from the latter, but like the
Primitive Church, she became divided by the Enemy of Mankind within her self.
The Term of Church of England Men will no longer serve us, but Jacobite, and
Williamite, Swearers, and Non-Swearers, must be brought in too; those that had
lived together from their Infancy with the greatest Love, and Peace, and
Charity, that was possible, are become Strangers, nay Enemies to each other,
and Treat one the other with Contempt, Slander and Defame one the other, to the
great Divertisement and the Entertainment of the Papists, Atheists, and
Dissenters, and to the endangering the Ruin of the best Church in the whole
World; and not contented with this, they that are but an handful of Men, have
set up separate places of Divine Worship to Pray for a King and Queen that have
no Name, for in all things else they agree with us. And the pretense of all
this is scruple of Conscience. The thing in Question is, Whether King James the
Second's Right to the Crown of England determined or not? The Three Estates of
England have resolved it is, and all the Princes of Europe, except the French
King, have confirmed and allowed the Sentence as Just and Reasonable, and now a
few of our Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry, take upon them to maintain the
contrary, and pretend they dare not submit to this Definitive Sentence of the
Three Estates thus confirmed by the Princes abroad; but in the mean time, they
presume to divide the Church upon a Civil Question, they Traduce and Defame
their Brethren, as Apostates, Traitors, and Perjured Men, they wish well to the
Enemies both of the Reformation, and of the English Nation, and they Persecute
outrageously those that differ from them as far as they have means.

Now all this were perhaps to be born with some tolerable Patience, as to the
Non-Swearers; but we have another sort that have taken the Oaths to Their
Majesty's, and yet are more Implacable Enemies to the rest, and to the
Government, than those that have not taken them; their Business is in all
Companies to Extol the Power of France, to raise Scruples against Their
Majesty's Title to the Crown, and to insinuate, that the Favor shown to the
Dissenters, (though Promised by the Non-Swearers in the last King's Reign more
than once) tends more to the Ruin of the Church, than all the Arts, Frauds,
Violences, and Attempts, of the Papists: Their Talent is however rather Banter,
and abominable Healths, than Argument and Reason, and they are the most
Detestable sort of Men that ever arose in any Nation, and ought to be heeded
the most watchfully, (and prosecuted the most sharply,) of all other, because
they defame the Church they pretend to, and make all the rest of her Members
suspected to be such as themselves, that is, the Worst of Men; in one Word,
Perjured Hypocrites.

As to the Non-Swearers, I only defire they would give us but one Example in
all the History of the Church, from our Savior's time to this, of Men that
have done what they have done; that is, broke the Peace of the Church upon a
mere Secular Civil Question, determined by the only Authority upon Earth that
pretends to have any Right to determine it.

As to those that have taken the Oaths, and are still unsatisfied, I desire
them they would consider the Lenity of this Government toward all those that
have Adhered to its Enemies, and are by consequence the Enemies of the present
Government, for they will not own themselves to be Subjects, and there is no
Medium between a Subject and an Enemy in this case. If they themselves had been
to have set down how they would have been Treated, they could scare have Asked
more Mercy, at least, they ought not. Now Gratitude to a Generous Enemy would,
if any thing could have obliged them to a Civil and Quiet Demeanor toward
their Superiors, who could with so much Ease, and so much Applause, have long
since Crushed this small Party to Attoms. And doubtless, the smallness of the
Party is one Reason of the Lenity. The Government is so well Established, that
it can as securely despise the Peevish Efforts of this Party, as a Nurse does
the Rage of an Infant that cannot Speak, but yet can Fight and Scratch.

In the next place, I would have them Consider, That the Non-Swearers have in
Print acknowledged, that it is their apparent Interest to Submit to Their
Majesty's, if they could satisfy themselves. Now they that have Sworn cannot
pretend their Scruples are too strong, for they have apparently Mastered them;
and their Interest, that is, the welfare of their Church and Country is
certainly on that side: Their private Interest is so too, and where the
Temptation lies that engages them against all these, I cannot Conjecture,
except it be an Envy against the Dissenters, and some others they Hate, and an
overgreat Concernment for some of the Non-Swearers, who indeed deserve our
Pity and Esteem, but not to that degree, as to Ruin our Religion, our Country,
and our private Families, out of Complement to them. Nor would they think one
Jot the better of us if we were such Fools as to do it.

I am sorry that our Deliverers should meet with so ill a Return from any of
us: But as the Number, in relation to the whole, is not great, so there has
nothing happened that is new; others have suffered the same ill Treatment and
Ingratitude before them. The Splendour of illustrious and great Actions dazels
the Eyes of Envious Men, and raises an Hatred against those whose Virtues or
Successes are above the common Standard; and the Enemy of Mankind, who pleased
himself with the Scenes of Misery he had prepared for the World, is enraged to
see his Projects defeated, and he Exasperates all he finds disposed to it. The
many Parties that get or lose in such Revolutions, grow Insolent too, or
Discontented, and Exasperate each other by their Jars; and they that have the
least hand in them, fall under the Hatred and Obloquie of both. These are the
true Causes of this thing.

The Third Charge delivered at the General-Quarter-Sessions of the Peace,
holden at Ipswich, for the County of Suffolk, the 7th Day of October, 1692,
when I was leaving that County to settle at London as Licenser to the Press.
GENTLEMEN,
WE are here Assembled, by Virtue of Their Majesty's Commission of the Peace,
to hold a General Quarter Sessions for this part of the County in which we
live; and it is become once more my Duty to give in Charge to you the things
you are to Enquire of, and to Present to: A Duty both on my and your Part of
great Consequence in relation to our Country, and our Selves, and therefore to
be spoken and heard with great Attention and Care.

I am now by the Order of my Superiors to leave you, and to Act in another
Sphere, in the Service of the best King and Queen that has for many Years,
perhaps ever Reigned in these Kingdoms. A Happiness we had as little Reason to
expect, as Merit to deserve so great a Blessing.

Charles the First, and Charles the Second, were Excellent Princes, but had
Queens of another Religion, so that the Court and Kingdom stood divided between
the Husband and Wife, Hopes and Fears; but these are both of our own, that is,
of the best Religion in the World; and so heartily addicted to our Interest,
and desirous of our Welfare, that they have counted nothing too dear to promote
our Welfare and Repose: Hence it is that His Majesty has so often passed the
Seas, and Exposed His Sacred Person to the greatest Danger, that we might Live
at Home in Peace: And the Queen has with equal Generosity assumed and laid by
the Reigns of Government when ever it was for our Good to do so; neither
Ambition, nor the love of Ease, have had any the least influence upon Her Noble
Soul, but She has Reigned when the King was absent, and remitted the Government
into His Hands when He was present, and both for our good, with a perfect
unconcern'dness, of which there is hardly another instance to be found on the
Records of Time in any Nation under Heaven.

Well then, They deserve our utmost Love, Loyalty, and Devotion, the utmost we
can do for Them, or They receive from us: The Reward of these Royal and
Princely Virtues are above the Power of Subjects, God only can Reward this
Excellent Pair equal to Their Merits, and the best that we can do, is to
Recommend them to His Care and Goodness in whose Prosperity our own is most
apparently involved.

As to my self, since I am to leave you so shortly, I think I am bound with
Samuel the Prophet to assure you my Dear Country Men, that I have not willingly
wronged any of you, Great or Small, in Much, or Little. If I have through
Humane Frailty offended any Man, I beg his Pardon, and assure him, and all the
World, it was against my will, and the strongest Resolution I could take, not
to have done it; but as long as we are Men, we shall be subject to Humane
Infirmities, which we may the more easily remit, because we and they are
equally Infirm.

The Savior of the World when he was leaving his beloved Friends, Exhorted
them to Love, Peace, and Union, as the greatest good they were capable of in
this World, yea in Heaven; for take away these, and divide the Inhabitants, if
it were possible, of the the Celestial Regions into Factions and Parties, and
let these mutually Hate and Oppress one the other, Belly and Slander one the
other, as we do here below, and I fear the Joys of Heaven would abate.

My Dear Country Men, what Evil Angel has sown these Tares in our Field, and
thus animated us against each other to that degree, that nothing can again
Unite us? Common Dangers in the Reign that is past seemed to have buried all
our former Heats, and we then walked in the House of God as Friends; but with
our Danger our Union fled, which shows it was forced.

Within my Memory I have heard it affirmed, that all our Divisions proceeded
from our Penal Laws in matters of Religion, and that Liberty of Conscience
would most certainly put an end to them. Why, we have that in the utmost
degree, and yet we are more unquiet than we were before. One Party must first
Revenge the things they have suffered on those that have inflicted them, though
according to Law. Another must needs secure the Blessing, by outing them of the
power to take it away, who heretofore did not love it. A Third thinks, Dominion
is founded in Grace, and that the Godly ought to Rule as well as Inherit the
Earth, and till these, and a Thousand other Whimsies, are obtained, we must
have no Peace.

In the mean time, all forget the Enemy is at the Door with Victorious Forces
ready to Conquer all, if we remain thus Stupidly Brutishly divided; nay, his
Emissaries are within our Walls, and blow the Coals of our Dissentions, in
hopes to Ruin us by our Follies, since they cannot by their Arms. Let us
hearken then to the Council of God Almighty, Fiat Justitia and Erit Pax, Let us
do Justice, and we shall have Peace. Give every Man his due, and Peace will
follow; but if we Oppress one the other, the Apostle tells us, We shall Perish.

Is Liberty of Conscience so Valuable a Good as was once pretended? Then let
our Superiors see it by our Peaceable and Modest Demeanor under it, for fear
they Repent. Is the being under Princes of our own Religion a Blessing? Then
let us Express our Gratitude for it to God in an Humble, Peaceable Devotion;
and to Them, by striving to make Their Reigns over us happy and easy.

But if we thus foolishly go on, whom can we thank or blame but our selves, if
we return to our former State of Danger and Distress? My Kingdom is not of this
World, said he whom we own as our Master. And the Kingdom he has promised to
his, is (...) that is not here neither. (...) and Revenge are but lately
Adopted into the Number of Christian Virtues, and will hardly recommend their
Votaries to the Father of Spirits. Mark them that cause divisions, and shun
them, for they are the Enemies of the Church, the Enemies of the World, and the
Enemies of God. But how shall I know which side is in the Wrong? Why, that
which (...) that it would not willingly suffer without, and against Law, is
certainly in the wrong, let it be what Party it will or can be, and pretend
what Reason it will for it. Try all by this Rule, and you may safely choose
which to cleave to, and which to shun.

This is that Distributive Justice which is the Mother of Peace, and without
which there is no Peace, nor ever was, nor ever will be. Do Men Wrong, and then
Exhort them to be quiet under it, and you will surely lose your Labor, and
appear Ridiculous and Foolish. Trust not in Oppression and Wrong, for Force and
Number are things that foldeth last long. We have seen them baffled Twice
within half an Hundred Years, yea, within my Memory.

My Dear Country Men, Let us make up our Differences, and let every Man study
to be quiet, and to do his own business in Love, preferring the Common Good
before his own, or that of his Party; that we may with United Hearts and Hands
Repel the Common. Enemy, and promote the Peace of England, and the Service and
Glory of King William and Queen Mary out most Gracious Sovereigns. Amen.

FINIS.

