

WIT A SPORTING In a pleasant GROVE OF NEW FANCIES.

By H. B.

LONDON, Printed for W. Burden, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cannons-street, near London-stone, and by S. L. at the sign of the Book-binders
in Shoo-lane, 1657.

THE AUTHOR, TO THE READER.
WHen as our English Poets, those happier men
That can drop wonders from their fluent pena
Have with their miracles of Poetry
Feasted thy ears, and satisfied thy eye;
Then turn aside; and amongst the vulger things,
Place what my newborn Muse abruptly sings.
Which though it be but mean (as it is confessed)
'T has ventured hard to pleas thee, since it is pressed:
If thou smile on it, I shall think my brain
Has labored for this issue not in vain,
If otherwise thou do contemn my lays.
My pleasur's more to me, then all thy praise.
A Pleasant Grove of new Fancies.
On a Lilly in his Ladies hand.
Blessed in thy happy bed fair Lilly lie,
To shade thee from the Sun of her bright eye;
But do not in a wanton pride prefer
Thy self, as adding whiteness unto her,
Alas what glory could in thee appear
So eminent, if not transplanted there?
But see, thou fad'st already, poor proud flowr
Whose fate is limited to one short hour;
And since thou would for such a beutie vie,
Thy conquered envy makes thee pale and die.
Come sit thee down, and with a myslin charm
Ceaze my incircled arm,
Till locked in fast, embraces we discover
In every eye a lover,
Then lost in that sweet extacy of blisses,
We Will speak our thoughts in kisses.
In which we will melt our souls, and mix them so,
That what is thine or mine, there is none shall know:
Rare mystery of love, and wondere too.
Which none but we can do:
Nor shall the leaden spirits of all those,
Who speak of love in tame prose:
Believe our joys: but duly ce^sure us,
Only for loving thus.
Ah! how I smile, that doubtly blessed, we do
Enjoy our selves, and all their envy too.
His Choice.
WHat care I though she be fair
Hair snow-like, or Sun-like eye,
If in that beauty I not share,
Were she deformed, what care I.
What care I though she be foul
Hair, swarthy hand, or Sunburned eye,
So long as I enjoy her soul,
Let her be so, why what care I.
Dim sight is cozened with a glass,
Of gaudy govvn or humerous hair,
Such gold in melting leave more dross
Then some unpolish't prices share,
Be she fair, or foul, or either,
Or made up of all together,
Be her heart mine, hair, hand, or eye
Be what it will, why what carel.
To his Mistress when she was going into the Country.
YEs, yes, it must be so, but must there be,
When you depart, no memory had of me,
My soul being racked as large a distance too
To meet you there, as I must be from you,
While the glad spring for joy you shall be seen
Meet your approach, and cloth her self in green.
And the fresh morning to salute your rise,
Bedevves the ground from it is over joyed eyes,
For joy like grief, we know, sometimes appears,
Writ on our cheeks, with characters of tears.
Go and be happy, go, and when you see
The trusty Ivy clasp it is much loved tree,
And with it is amorous intvvinings cover
The vvelcome waste of it is embraced lover:
Think it our Emblem then, and proved to be
The happy shadow of my love and me,
Go and be happy, and when some svveet brooks
(Calm as thy thoughts, and smooth as are thy looks)
Show thee thy face, then let thy thoughts supply
And though I be not, think that I am by;
For if the heart be taken for whole man,
I must be by thee, be thou where thou can.
Go and when some pretty birds on some small spray,
Near to thy window welcome in the day:
Awake, and think, when their sweet notes you hear,
I was beforehand, and had sung them there.
Go, and whatever thou chance to hear or see,
Be it bird, or brook, or shade or tree;
If it delights thee may my soul in it
Move thy true joys under that counterfit.
So, ask not how I do when you are there,
For at your mercy well or ill I fare
For now me thinks my heart so high does swell,
It must enforce a breath, farewell, farewell.
The Knell.
When the sad toling of my bell you hear,
Think it is some Anfels trump, and judgments near,
Then if but to repent, you take the pain,
Your judgments past, lie down and sleep again.
The Perfume.
Not that I think thy breath less sweet than this,
Thy breath, in which no pleasant sweets I miss,
Not that I think thy white, than this less fair,
Thy white, to which all whites but blackness are:
Not that I think thy heart, then this less pure,
Thy heart, which no dull mixture can endure,
Send I this to thee, but as gold well tried,
Admits allay when it is purified,
So by this foil I would to thee in part
What is thy breath, thy whiteness, and thy
Thy breath, all perfumes, does as far out go,
As does thy whiteness, the descending snow;
The snow descends, but by the winds being blown,
Thy sweetest breath, and whiter snows, ^hine ow^:
Thy heart less mixed than the sole Phoenix bed,
Proclaims thee mistress of a Maidenhead,
And so there were no ashes after fire,
Would that ware conquered in my loves desire,
But if ^h^re be, why can it not suffice?
That one being dead another Phoenix rise.
Thy maidenhead being gone, we still shall prove;
Both being one unparalleled in love,
But I have ridd^'d, let me now unfold,
What is the perfum, what the snow, what gold;
All this, and each of these, thou know thou art,
And I should know more, did I know thy heart.
To his Mistress on her scorn.
Resolve me dearest, why two hearts in one
Should know the sin of separation.
Must the sweet custom of our often stolen kisses,
Be lost, and we live empty of those blisses:
Or do the frowns of some old over seer
Nourish thy fear, or make thy love less steer?
Why did thou suffer me those sweets to steal,
Which but thine own, no tongue can e're reveal,
And prompt me to a daring to believe,
That my sad heart should find no cause to grieve,
Yet now at last have mocket my hope so far,
That I have not a cloud, though meant a star
Well, take thy triumph, study but to be
True to thy self, as thou art false to me.
And thou shall meet a conquest, yet when I
Have groaned unto the world my Elegy,
And thy unjust disdain, perhaps I shall
Obtain this honor in my funeral.
Thy poisonous guilt mixed with thy purged breath,
May make thee wither with me unto death.
So shall I triumph in my ashes too,
In that my innocence has conquered you,
And then my eye rejoice, in that I have
Thy scorn, to be a mourner at my grave.
The Question and Anwser.
WHen the sad reins of that face
In i^'s own wrinkles buried lies,
And the stiff pride of all it is grace
By time un tone, falls slack and dies:
Wilt not thou sigh, and wish in some vexed fit,
That it were now as when I counted it.
And when thy glass shall it present,
Without those smiles which once were there,
Showing like some stale monument,
A scarce departed from it is hair,
At thy self frighted wilt not stare and swear
That I believed the, when I called thee fair?
Yes, yes, I know thou will, and so
Pity the weakness of thy scorn
That now has humbled thee to know,
Though fair it was, it is forlorn,
Loves sweets, thy aged corpse, embalming not
What marvel if thy carkase beauty rot
Then shall I live and live to be
Thy envy, thou my pity; say
When e're thou see me, or I thee,
(Being mighted from thy beauties day)
It Is he, and had my pride not withered me
I had, perhaps, been still as fresh as he.
Then shall I smile and answer: true thy scorn
Left thee thus wrinkled, slack't, corrupt, forlorn.
To his Worthy friend and Mistress.
I charge thee by th^se eyes of thine,
Give me my heart:
Those eyes that stole it out of mine,
I felt the smart.
And least the theft you should deny,
Look where you keep it in your eye.
And now I have espied it there,
Thinking to catch it,
You chain and wind it in your hair,
But still I watch it
And so got loose from thence, it flies,
And sports again upon your eyes.
Though now to cozen me you seek.
Thinking to hide
Yet in the dimple of your check
I have discry'd:
How now discovered it does skip
Twixt the soft prison of each lip.
Yes, yes, I see it stealing, go
Least I should find it,
Through the long gallery of s^ow,
And still I mind it.
How you have shufled it between
Your breasts, not thinking it is seen.
See, see, I see it creeping in (near you I fear)
Through the small crannies of your skin to shelter there.
As if that veil could cosen me,
Alas, I know things I not see.
But if not eye, nor hair, nor cheeks,
Nor lip, nor breast, nor heart it keeps:
Give me them all, for evry part
Thou have, has part of me; my heart.
To his Mistress.
While as the locks of time, and smoother far
Than sliding streams skin and tresses are.
Sweet as Arabian Odours, when in fire
Their struggling spirits upwards do expire.
(When as the courteous wi^d does court our sense,
And nourish it with sweet intelligence)
Is thy pure breath; only this difference know,
That sent is forc'^, but thine is natur^^ so
Soft as the plur^y moss but over spreads
The tender circle of young Turtle heads,
Are thy two breasts, which envioust; do swell
To think that that should this, this that excel:
And yet ashamed such strife their pride has bread,
Both blush and tip themselves with bashful red.
Typs, locks, streams, odours, down, nor blushes are
So red, so sweet, so smooth, so fair.
Anagramme.
I value my Learning,
Well may thou value at the highest price
That plant and makes the brain a Paradise:
To those rare excellent the Iems most bright
But cloudy are, and sollid gold too light.
Maids and Wives.
Maids are white papers, which no hand di^bind.
But Wives are blotted books, and interlind
A drunken brabler.
Who only in his Cups will fight, is like,
A Clock that must be oiled well, ere it strike
Loves Motion.
Kind Love, whose motion deep affection shows.
From the outward sense to the inward Center goes.
On Church bells.
Some Novellists, that conscience most pretend,
With Caps and Surplisses themselves offend;
Others dare rail at other matters else,
As at the Ring, but few against the Bells:
Which should they tax, the Ropes would undertake.
To answer for them, and all quiet make.
Fools Paradise, or Reason Bewitched.
-- and apta
Spicula sent nobis puris --
^^mple as are the Elements unmixt,
Steadfast as is the earth, whose footing's fixed;
Untainted like the silver suite of Swan,
Alone like truth, well ordered like a man,
Like these in each of these was I, until
Upon a time, Reason fell ^oule with Will,
Who backed with sense, that it might battle move,
Implored the aid of all commanding Love,
Love by his mother taught, does soon comply,
To be an Actor in this treachery.
The battell's waged, and reason fleye the field,
While Sense and Will to Love the Conquest yield.
I now, loves subject, am inforclt to do
What ever his designs commands me to do;
See, see (quoth he) do you behold that maid,
Whose equal does not breathe; and there he staid,
To draw fresh air, So quick was he to give
Me notice that I must no longer live,
In my, own self, but her whom when ^ spied,
Me thought I had been happy to have died
Since I at once saw severally in one,
What joined together made perfection.
This was Florella that bright shining star,
Who might have caused a second Trojan war,
Were there a second Paris, for her face;
The world might strive, but then there sat a grace
So chaste that might expel each spurious thought,
Such as foul Hellen to her Paris brought*
There I might read in my Florella's looks,
(Such are indeed beauties most perfect books)
Loves pleasant Lecture where I might epsy
How Cupid once sought entrance at her eye
Whom she repelled, like snow and chaste and cold
Could not admit a Sympathy to hold,
With his hot flames, but melting quite put out
That ardent fire which warmed her round about.
Cupid denied of this did backward start,
And ran for have to hide him in her heart,
Where he renewed fresh flames, and by delay,
So scorcht his wings he could not fly away
Thus force perforce in her my conquered breast
Is the poor Inn of such a God-borne guest,
Whom while I harbor, it is hard to tell
Whether his presence be a Heaven or Hell.
Such pleasurable pain, such painful pleasure
Sometimes below, and sometimes above measure.
Mars on a time forsook his Venus bed,
Protesting he no longer would be led
To these embraces, which like Circles charms,
Made him forget the Heroicke use of Arms.
Venus heard this whiles half in anger she
Did thrust her darling Cupid off her knee.
Down falls the youngster and in falling so
Broke all his Arrows, quiver and his bow,
His grandame Nature pitying the mischance,
Wipes the wagges eyes, told him she would advance
Him to his former office: for a dart
That should transfixe the most obdurat heart.
She would create an eye, and for a bow
She Would make a brow, whose art inclining so,
Should shoot such shafts, that deity should yield
Themselves glad prisoners in the maiden field,
When straight she made Florella, such a maid,
Who being named, need there ought else be said?
It Is not long since that I heard Lovers whine
At whose deep wounds, which from their Mistress eyne
They bleeding had ceceiv`d cause they could win
No mercy from them, whilst I thought some pin
Had scratched their tender hands, till I too late
Grew sensible they were unfortunate
In their lost loves, 'cause when Florella fround,
She like a Commet struck me to the ground,
Till she was pleased to clear her glorious eyes,
Which summoned me from death to life to rise.
Wherefore you speedy Merchant do you run
Beyond the bounds of the all-bounding Sun,
To seek for Rubies, Pearl, and Ivory,
Adventuring hazard both of Land and sky,
When my Florella can afford all this
Without your search in the tumultuous Seas.
Rubies and Pearl, her lips and teeth, her skin,
Like hollow Ivory, locks those gems within,
For which you fondly up and down do rome
When you may better find this wealth at home,
What would the Northern Climate hold too dear
To purchase my Florella to live there?
That where the niggard suit denies to shine,
They might receive more luster from her eyne.
But that I know she loves Religion best,
She had long since, seen India the West,
But least those Pagans who adore the rise
Of the bright Sun, should doat upon her eyes,
She was resolved to stay; woe had I bin
Had she gone thither to increase their sin.
East India nothing holds that is worth her view,
There Is nothing there, that she can take for new,
Their aire-persuming spices, precious gum,
Their fragrant odors, pleasants, Cinamum
All these and sweeter far, she breathes whose smell
Does all things but it self, highly excel:
Once to my friend I did these lines rehearse,
Who streightway smiled and did applaud my verse
But Ah! I fear 'twas my Florella's name
That bribed his tongue, so to belie my fame.
Once, and but once I chanc^d to have the sight
Of my Florella, who makes darkness light:
When leaden Morpheus did her sense surprise,
In the locked casket of her closed eyes,
Feign would I steal a kiss, but as I strove,
Those scarlet Judges of my sleeping love
Did swell against my pride, and angry red,
Charged me stand back from her forbidden bed:
While they her precious breath did seem to smother.
Each privately did steal a touch from the other,
I envious at their new begotten bliss
Was bold on her soft lips to print a kiss.
At which she wak't: And have you ever seen
How fair Aurora, heavens illustrious queen.
Shakes off her sable Robe, and with a grace
Smiles in the front of a fair morning face.
Just so my love* as if night had been noone,
Discards the element of the useless moon:
And from her glorious tapers sent a fire,
To light the darkest thoughts to quick desire.
While thus from forth her rosall gate she sent,
Breath formed in words, the marrow of content.
And have you Sir, at such a tempting time
Bettayd my honor, to this welcome crime,
By stealing pleasure from me, 'twas thy Love
I know, that did thee to this trespass move
For I have proved thy faith which since I find
The trusty Inmate of a loyal mind,
Of force I must except it; and in part
Of recompense, afford thee all my heart,
Thus having ceaz'd my prize; I told her, sweet,
As by no fouler name we ere may greet,
So what is mine I tender, all, my self,
The poorest part of thy unvalued wealth.
Thou have won much in this, thy mercy shown,
That thus at last thou do receive thy own
Least they who after me like fare shall prove,
Should say, See what it is to be in Love.
I am i^ p^rtu.
Loves Apostasy to his friend Mr. E. D.
Tut, let her go, can I ind^re all this,
Yet dye, to doat upon a maidens kiss?
Is there such Magic in her looks, that can,
Into a fool, transfigurate a man?
Did thou not love her? true: and she disdain
To meet thy virtue? let her meet her shame.
Were she as fair as she her self would be,
Adorned with all the cost of bravery:
Could she melt hearts of flint, and from her eye
Give her beholders power to live or die.
I Would rather beg she would pronounce my death,
Then be her scorn, though that preserved my breath
Rise heart! and be not foold; S'foot what a shame
Were it for thee to re-incence one flame
From the declining spark! do thou not know
As she is a woman, her whole Sex does owe
To thine all honor? her false heart and pride
Dare not oppose thy faith; then turn high tide,
And let her (since her scorn does so disease thee)
By her repentance strive again to pleas thee.
The broken-heart-song.
COunt the sighs, and count the tears,
Which have in part my budding years;
Comment on my woeful look,
Which is now black sorrows book.
Read how love is overcome,
Weep and sigh, and then be dumb.
Say it was your charity
To help him whose eyes are dry.
Here paint my Cleora's name,
Then a hurt, and then a flame;
Then mark how the heart does fry
When Cleora is so nigh:
Though the flame did do its part,
It Was the name that broke the heart.
Peace no more, no more you need
My sad History to read.
Fold the Paper up again
And report to other men,
These complaints can justly prove
Hearts may break that be in love.
Women are men's shadows.
1.
FOllow a shadow, it flies you,
Seem to fly it, it will pursue.
So court a Mistress, she denies you,
Let her alone, she will court you.
Say, are not! women truly then
Styled but the shadows of us men?
2.
At morn and even shades are longest,
At noon they are, or short or none:
So men at weakest, they are strongest,
But grant us perfect, they are not known.
Say are not women truly then
Styled the shadows of us men.
Women are not men's shadows. E. Contra.
1.
THe Sun absented, shadows then
Cease to put on the forms of men:
But wives their husbands absent, may
Bear best their forms (they being away)
Say, are not women falsely then
Styled but the shadows of us men.
2.
Shadows at morn and even are strong,
At noon they are, or weak or none:
Women at Noon are ever long,
At night so weak they fall along.
Say, are not women falsely then
Styled but the shadows of us men?
3.
As bodies are contracted, shadows so
Contract themselves to forms as bodies do:
Let men be bounded nere so close, I wist,
Women will rove and ramble where they (...)
Say, are not women falsely then
Styled but the shadows of us men?
An Epigram.
To himself of his Mistress.
WHat though thou merit not? why know there lies
Veiled in the courteous candor of her eyes,
A saving mercy, that can lend a wing
For dull despair to mount on, it is a thing
Beyond the common reach, to know how sweet
He lives, that does in death a pardon meet.
But thou art poor; true, but her better part
Nere looked upon the habit, but the heart.
She that has virtue cannot dote on those,
Whose best perfection is a suit of clothes.
Who court the attracting beauties of the age
With some con'd stuff brought from the Cockpit stage:
Or gull their Mistress by some Poem shown,
Which, 'cause they paid for, they dare call their own,
When, if their brains were ransackt, you might know
They nere commenc't beyond their Crisscross-rowe.
Then hope (poor heart) and strongly that she will
At last embrace thee, for she has the skill
To school thee first with frowns, that so her favor
May, when she smiles, last with the greater savor.
Another Epigram.
To his Superlative Mistress.
COmpare the Bramble to the stately Pine;
The fruitles Thistle to the virtuous Vine;
Compare the Charcole to the snow-white Down,
The wreath of Rushes to the Imperial crown.
Compare the Raven to the turtle Dove,
The Moors of India to the queen of Love.
Compare the Candle to the splendent Moo^*
The fogs of night, to Phoebus eye at noon.
Compare the Kite to sweet-breathed Philomel,
The Lerman Lake to the Helliconian Well,
If these admit comparison, then she
That can admit of no equality,
May find a parallel; but let some men
Rack their dull brains to praise their Mistress [when
The utmost of their language they have spen^
Let them sit down and sigh, and be content
Their Idols eyes to Sunbeams to compare,
Or by the rose her blased lips declare.
My Mistress must beyond their Saints, survive*
In that unequald height, Superlative.
Of one Mary Frail, who lay with Mr. Reason.
MAry was long desirous for to marry,
And vowed that past fifteen she would not tarry;
I am sure this vow of modesty did sail;
To quaver on her lips even in her song.
Or if one touch the Lute with art and cunning,
Who would not love those hands for their swift running?
And her I like that with a majesty
Folds up her arms, and makes low courtesy;
To leave my self, that am in love with all,
Some one of these might make the chasest fall:
If she be tall, she is like an Amazon,
And therefore fills the bed she lies upon.
If short she lies the rounder, to say troth
Both short and long please me, for I love both.
I think what one undeckt would be, being dressed,
Is she attired, then show her graces best.
A white wench thralls me, so does golden yellow,
And nut-brown girls in doing have no fellow.
If her white neck be shadowed with black hair,
Why so was Leda's, yet was Leda fair:
Amber trest is she, then on the morn think I
My Love alludes to every History:
A young wench pleases, and an old is ^ood,
This for her looks that for her won^^n-hood.
Nay what is she that any man loves,
But my ambitious ranging mind approves.
The new Petition.
APollo once disdained not to keep,
So he might keep, his love Admet^^ sheep:
The distaff Hercules did exercise,
TO extract a smile from his dear Ladies eye^
Olympic Joan disdained not to take
A bulls effigies for Eutopus sake:
Achilles fitter far to deal with steel,
Did labor for his Mistress at the reel.
Love spared ^^ander his pledged faith to save
Died, hugging in his arms the murdring wave.
Whilst a new death his Hero does devise,
And drowned her self ith Ocean of her eyes
By Pyramus, the world did understand
That love and life, lay linked hand in hand.
When one was lost in This be, the other flew,
Through the peire't portals of his wound, yet new.
Which when his This be saw, it is hard to say,
Whose spirit posted fastest on the way.
Thus some dejection, others did invade
Great oposition, and have willingly laid,
Their lives at needless hazard, some have died,
and so have to the utmost satisfied
that tyrant love could force, and beyond this,
^he great and true non ultra fixed is.
^et happy this, since whatsoever they tried,
^ as on their Mistress part regratified.
^^h who would, when he saw an equal flame
^f love in her he loved, owe so much shame
^s to esteem his life, if her least grief,
^id but invite his blood for her relief
^ut this forenamed courteous Ghost can bear
^^e witness, I have shed full many a tear,
^poke the best language, Rhetoric affords.
^^mb'd out my heart even to the life in words,
Would, what they did, did like occasion proffer,
And till that, do I can no more, but offer.
And yet for all my sufferings, she that is,
^f I dare reach to call her so, my bliss,
^^ights all my sorrows; Oh weat eye could now
Forbear to yield a tear, when seeing how
^ love, I am neglected weep with me
All you that read my wrongs, so if you be
Compationate, perhaps your tears may move
The frozen Mercy of my ice-white love.
Which if they do, if you at any time
Shall want a drop, I Will lend you some mine:
Methinks I see you weep dear Mistress, th^^
Behold a Noble sea of pitying men
Does waft me to your favor, it you daig^^
Yes now at last to ease me of my pain,
This glory shall unto your mercy rise,
That you have wiped all tears from lovers ey^
The Widow Bride.
To the accomplished Lady of his thoughts.
Feeding I famish, fired by the eye,
Which makes me dying live, and living die.
Fair shall I name thee, to express thy worth!
Nay, thou have something else to set the^ forth,
Then thy external beauty, which no time
Shall ere deface, and that is truly thine.
Though outward white, gra^'d with an inward fair,
Unite in one, exceeds all compare.
For what may glorious Saints, whose divine feature
Immortalis'd above an human Creature,
Appropriate unto themselves save this,
Though they are invested with the roabe of bliss!
Pure is their Store, the State of innocence,
Full be their Lamps of divine influence,
Complete's their A^mour, and their order too,
Thus they attend the Lamb where ere he go.
And thou terrestrial Angel, who can give,
(Though young) example to the old to live,
Divines what thou shall be: for I do see,
All sacred Craces treasured in thee;
As in some curious artful Cabbinet,
Where Patience shines as a rich ^ewellet
Set in a precious (...), which may be best*
Allusion have to thy unspoted breast,
Where vettues have their Mansion: should ^ speak
More freely of thy Merits? I will seek
No modern Model to conform the State
Of my affections, or will imitate,
Any with affectation, but that grace
which thou reserves in action, speech and pa^e.
Honor of ages, what a Sympathy.
Of soul inthroning virtues works in thee,
To make thee more affected! Where desire
Of moderation tempers the heat of ire;
Content all self-repining, and delight
To see another prosper, that base spite
Which worldly Moles express from day to day
In seeing others flourish more then they.
No, thou art earthly Sainted, and can taste
What fruit's in Mundane pleasure being past,
When this same Circle of our humane bless
Quite ran about, shall end with wretchedness;
And is not this above the conceit of man,
That thou the weaker Sex should seem to span
This abstract of thy life, with such respect
Unto thy soul formed by that Architect,
Whose glory is thy aim? Nay, that thy prime
Scarcely arrived at the freshness of her time,
Should so disvalue earth, as to bestow
Thy heart on heaven thy frayler part below.
Where life like to a shade, whose vading glory
Sun's up our discontents as in a Story,
Gets disesteem with thee, fixing thine eye
Upon a more transcendant Emperie.
But that which shall extend thy days more long
Then time can limit, is thy suffering wrong,
Smiling at injuries, as if thy breast
Were of that temper, griefs could not molest,
Nor soil her glorious Mansion, but appears
More eminent by the injuries she bears.
I Have heard indeed, some woman's nature's such
As they can hardly ever bear too much;
The sense whereof, hows'ere our Critics take it,
May be confirmed in thee; for thou do make it
The Trophy of thy triumph, and the crown
Of all thy conquest, to be only known
Thy self in thy affliction, where relief
In Souls sole solace gives receipt to grief.
For Palms pressed down do ever rise the more,
And Spices bruised smell sweeter then before:
So as this sentence verifide may be,
Thou tryes afflion, not affliction thee.
Mirror of women, what a triumphs this,
When there is naught, how great soere it is,
That can depress thy mind below the Sphere
Where it is fixed! For it is this I swear,
And only this which moves me to affect
Thy self far more then any light respect,
Drawn from the tincture of a moving fair,
Which to minds Beautie's short above compare.
For I have known the smoothest sleekest skin
Solid with the blemish of so foul a sin,
As Beauty lost her luster by that stain,
Which once made black could nere be white again,
But thou in both complete, art such an one.
As without assentation there is none
May glory more of what she does possess,
Though on my Knowledge none does glory less.
And happy he if he had known his hap,
Who might repose in such a Ladies lap.
Secure from cenusre; but how weak is sense
When Reason's darkened through concupiscence.
Alas of error, that our humane eye,
Exposed to lust and boundless liberty,
Should derogate from man; where if we knew
How woman's to expect from man her dew,
As man from woman; we should straight infer
`To think of a strange beauty is to err.
He who did till those flowrie fields, which lay
Like Adons grove near to the milkie way,
If he had known what happiness it is
In mutual love t`injoy a mutual bliss,
Where two dividuate souls do selfly move
By one united Sympathy in love;
He would have thus concluded sure I am,
Who dotes on more then`s own is less then man.
But now to thee my lines their love extend,
Making thy self their Center where they end.
`Thou mildest mould of matron modesty,
`Live as thou liv'st, and gain eternity;
Patience shall give thee convoy, same, renovvn,
Both which contend to reach thee triumphs crown.
The true, and happy state of Love.
What I have, that I crave,
Frank I lost, yet Frank I have;
Happy am I in possessing
Of her that gives love a blessing:
Blessed love have earthly rank,
Stated in my style of Frank,
Happy style that thinks no shame
In respect of nature, name,
Form, affection, and in all
To be Frank, as we her call.
Yet so Frank, that though she be
Free, it is in such modesty,
As no Creatures are, have bin,
Can, or may tax her of sin.
Pure in love, sincere in heart,
Fair by Nature, not by Art.
Crimson blushes which display,
Reddest even makes clearest day;
Clearest, where like Ida's snow
Lillies on her cheeks do grow;
Yet so mixed with true delight,
As the red contends with white;
Yet or^'comm'd with Modesty,
Red or white gets victory.
Thus two Franks in beauty one,
Yields enough to d^te upon;
^q^al both in favou, feature,
honor, order, name and natu^^;
Both inclining ^o one stature,
^qua^' by no ear^hly creature.
^er^if I should paint them out,
From the head unto the (...),
I should make you there confess
They were earthly Goddesses:
And that Nature made these two,
As those Mirrors which might show
Her perfection and her store,
Challenging, who could give morel
Thu* both equal in one letter,
One to either, neither better;
Twin-like seem as Time had ^ixt them,
As two sph^res not one betwixt them;
Yet if needs one t^' best do crave,
In my thoughts it is she I have:
She, whose virtues do excel
As they seem imparallel;
Modest, yet not t^o precise,
Wise, yet not cnoceiued wise;
Still in actior, yet her will
Give being to my vows;
I will much engage my heart, if when
I say she is mine, you will say Amen.
Such kindness to our true love shown
Shall bind us doubly then your own.
A trick for your Learning.
TWo Scholars in Thames Street were drinking hard,
And late; to whom a Constable repaired,
And tax^t them for it: Invited yet to drink,
He turned up glasses, till both nod and win^
At greatest faults he would; when sleep at last
Did bridle up his brutish senses fast.
Mean while the waggish Mercuries conspire
To Abuse him, and two watermen they hire
To take him naping, and transport him thence
Th`way of all fish; who nere recovered sense,
Nor from his dead sleep found himself alive,
Till both his Charons at Graves-end arrive.
To all harsh Magistrates a warning fair,
That they of too much wine and wit beware.
The Usurer.
HE puts forth Money, as the Hangman sowes,
His fatal Hemp Seed, that with curses grows.
So grows his damned wealth in the Devils name,
That does in hell the Harvest home proclaim;
For which deep reason my poor Muse preferrs
This suit, that Poets nere prove Usurers.
To a Detractor.
THou still art darting (like a Porcupine)
Thy quils against me, saulting every line
That my hand draws, and with the frostlike power
Of thy benumbed verse, would nip the slower
A Complaint of his separation from his Mistress, caused by his fri^nds
injunction:
DEar heart, remember that sad hour,
When we were forc`t to part
How on thy cheeks I wept a shovvr,
With sad and heavy heart;
About thy wast my arms did twist;
Oh! then I sight, and then I kissed.
Ten thousand fears and joys in one,
Did such distraction frame,
As if the liveless world would run
To Chaos back again.
Whilst my poor heart amidst these fears,
Lay bathed in my milk-warm tears.
Ah then I thought, and thinking wept,
How friends and fate did lower,
On thee Leander; how they kept
Thee from thy Heroes Tower;
While thunder groand, and heaven did vveep
To rock thy sense in silent Sleep.
But Fate must unresisted stand;
Oh who can it oppose?
Ne^essity`s a Tyrant; and
No mean in mischief knovvs;
Else might my fairer Love and I
Unseverd live till one did die.
Just so the hungry in^ant from
His mothers dug is ^ane,
When his weak arms yet spread along:
More dulcid mulk to gain;
And nothing brings the babe to rest,
Until he sleep upon her breast.
Thus being banished from my love,
And ^ore^t to leave her sight,
No thoughts but those of her can move
In me the least delight;
But like true steel my heart does pant,
To touch the long^d ^or Adamant.
Oh let no storm of discontent
Be clouded in your brows,
Dear friends that have my being lent,
Is so pure it never acts ill;
Virgin-modest, yet delights
To discourse of Hymen's rights;
Yet she blushes when she hears,
Ought that is light sound in her ears;
And with skarlet-die displaies
What to women yields most praises:
For praiseworthy' it is in women,
To blush at that Act is common;
Since in speech those actions show
Ill, which modest are to do;
For a Maid should be afraid,
Hearing the loss of Maidenhead.
With this Poem, and a Pearl
Sent to Frank my faithful Girl;
I conclude with friendly vow,
To my Frank her neighbors too.
An Elegiack Sonnet.
If I only had been he,
that had stood so far aloof,
Or had been such Armor proof,
Did I had not as you see,
Shot by woman's Jealousy.
Wretched Woman why should Thou
Dote so much on Idol beauty,
Deeming only fit to su^e thee
When it is not one nor tw^,
Nor a thousand more will do?
Yet love loves not these exchanges,
Love is constant, firm and pure,
Drawn by no eye-charming lure;
It is last that only ranges,
Where new love old love^ stranges.
What is life then but a farm,
And the best a farmer is
Of this life he counts a bliss,
Whree true love sustaines no harm,
Nere engag'^ to Fancies charm!
Of thy sweet Poesy. I wish thee show
More favor to thy self, than thus to blow
Sparks in thine eyes. Art thou not (slave) afeard
To pluck a couchant Lion by the beard,
That rouz^d will rend thee? thou but shootst in vain
Thy bolts of folly, that rebound again
From my unpierced Muse, whose lofty rim
Shall (Dial-like) stand in the face of time,
And look it down, when thou and thine shall lie
Damned up with dust in blind obscurity.
To the Slanderer.
COuld I but work a Transformation strange,
On thee, whose malice pricks and rankles so
I would thy Carrion to a Thistle change,
Which Asses bait upon, and Rusticks mow.
That he is love sick and cannot write Verses.
Ettie, it does not me delight
Verses as before to write,
Quite through thrust
With deeply wounding lust.
^ith lust, the which does me desire
love all men else to set on fire!
Or for young boys,
Or for some female toys.
This the third winter off ^as tore
The forests dre^s, since I forbore
To pine away
For my Inachia.
Though town O what a sport was I?
(For I am shamed at such foolery)
And I repent
My feasting-merrimens;
In which my grief and silent tongue,
And sighs from my hearts botom sprung!
Argued me
Inamorate to be.
And mourning to thee, I did cry,
A poor man's canded ingenie
Was all but vain
To stand against her gai^;
When as, the uncivil power
Of raging wine, had from its bower
My secret thought
With stronger liquer wrough
But in my breast if free rage boil,
That to the winds it may assoil
My sighs ingrate
Which my sore wound cannot b^^
When my modestness cast by
Shall give over presently
To strive so long
With rivals over strong.
When (vexed) I to you had enlarged
These things, to hie me home being charged
Along I went
With fearful impotent,
To those posts (ah) unkind to me,
And doors (ah) full of cruelty,
Where mightily
My Ioyns and sides bruisd (...)
Lyciseus love me now does press*
Boasting that he in tenderness
Dos far surpass
Any young married lass.
Whence nor the free-spent consultations,
Nor the rigid increpations
Of my friends ere
Me off again shall tear:
But some other flame, in sooth,
Of some fair maid or some plucy youth,
Knitting up fair
His long grown head of hair:
The bag of the Be.
ABout the sweet bag of a Be,
Two Cupids fell at odds,
And whose the pretty prize should be,
They vowed to ask the gods:
Which Venus hearing, thither came,
And for their boldness stripped them,
And taking from them each his flame,
With rods of Myrtle whipped them;
Which done, to still their wanton cries,
When quiet grown she would seen them,
She kissed, and wipe't their dove-like eyes,
And gave the bag between them.
To his Mistress.
Choose me your Valentine,
Next let us marry:
Love to the death will pine,
If we long tarry:
You have broke promise twice,
Dear to undo me;
If you prove faithless thrice,
None then will woo you.
His Protestation to his Mistress.
NOon, day, and midnight shall at once be seen,
Trees at one time shall be both red and green.
Summer and winter shall at one time show
Ripe ears of corn, and up to the ears in snow:
Seas shall be sandless, Fields be void of grass,
Shapeless the world, as when all Chaos was;
Before my dear sweet Love, I will be
False to my Vow, or fall away from thee.
Upon Love.
LOve scorcht my finger, but did spare
The burning of my heart,
To signify that love my share
Should be a little part:
Little I love, but if that he
Would but that heat recall,
That joint to ashes should be burnt,
Ere I would love at all.
To his Mistress.
Show me thy feet, show me thy legs, thy thighs,
Show me those fleshly principalities;
Show me that hill where smiling love does si^
Having a living fountain under it.
Show me thy wast, then let me therewithal
(By the ascension of thy Lavvn) see all.
On himself.
Lovesick I am, and must endure
A desperate grief that finds no cure:
^h me! I try, and trying prove
No herbs can cure the power of Love:
Only our sovereign salve I know,
And that is death, the end of woe.
To the Virgins to make much of time.
GAther your Rose-buds while you may,
Gold time is still a flying,
And that same flower that smiles to day,
To morrow may be dying.
The glorious lamp of heaven, teh^sn
The higher he is a getting,
The sooner will his race be run,
And nearer to his settin^
That age is best which is the First,
When youth and old are warmer,
And being spent, the worse and worst
Times still succeed the former.
Then be not coy, but use your time,
And while you may go marry,
For having lost but once your prime,
You may for ever tarry.
Upon Cupid.
AS lately I a garland bound,
Amongst Roses I there Cupid found,
I took him, put him in my cup,
And drunk with wine, I drunk him up.
Hence then it is that my poor breast
Could never since find any rest.
Upon her Breasts.
DIsplay thy breasts (my Dear) there let me
Behold that circummortal purity,
Between whose glories there my lips I Will lay,
Ravished in that fair Via Lactica.
Upon himself.
MOpe-cy'd I am, as some have said;
Because Ive lived so long a maid,
But grant that I should wedded be
Should I a jot the better see?
No, I should think that marriage might
Rather then mend, put out the light.
Draw-Gloves.
AT Draw-gloves weel play,
And prithee lets lay
A wager, and let it be this,
Who first to the Sun
Of twenty does run,
Shall have for his winning a kiss.
To ^he Rose.
Go happy rose and enterwoove,
With other flowers bind my love,
Tell her too she must not be
Longer Loving, long free
That so often has fettered me.
Say if she is fretfull, and I have bands
Of Pearl and Gold to bind her hands,
Tell her if she strugle still
^ have myrtel Rods at will,
^or to tame, though not to kill.
Take thou my blessing; thus go
And tell her this, but do not so.
^est a handsome anger sly
^ik a lightning from her eye,
And burn thee up as well as I.
How Violets came blew.
LOve on a day, wise Poets tell
Some time I wrangling spent,
Whether the Violets should excel,
^or she in sweetest scent:
But Venus having lost the day,
Poor girls she fell on you,
And beat ye so, as some do say,
Her blows did make ye blew.
Counsel not to love.
HE that will not love must be
My Scholar, and learn this of me:
There be in love as many fears
As the Summers corn has ears.
Sighs and sobs, and sorrows more
Then the sand that makes the shore.
Freezing cold and fiery heats,
Fainting swoons and deadly sweats,
Now an ague, then a fever,
Both tormenting Lovers ever.
Would thou know besides all these.
How hard a woman it is to please?
How cross, how sullen, and how soon
She shifts and changes like the Moon.
How false, how hallow she is in heart,
And how she is on her left part:
How high she is prized, and worth but small
Little thou't love, or not at all.
On the Willow-tree.
THou art to all lost love the best,
The only true plant found,
Wherewith young men and maids distressed,
And left off love are crowned.
When once the Lovers rose is dead,
Or laid aside forlorn,
Then willow-garlands about the head
Bedeau'd with tears are worn.
When with neglect the Lovers bane
Poor maids rewarded be
For their love lost, their only gain
Is but a wreath from thee.
And underneath thy cooling shade
When weary of the light,
The love-spent youth, and lovesick maid
Come to weep out the night.
To his Mistress to command him any thing.
BId me to live, and I will live,
thy servant for to be;
Or bid me love, and I will give
A loving heart to thee.
A heart as soft, a heart as kind,
A heart as sound and free
As in the whole world thou cast find,
That heart I Will give to thee.
Bid that heart stay, and it will stay,
To honor thy decree;
Or bid it languish quite away,
And it shall do it for thee.
Bid me to weep, and I will weep
While I have eyes to see:
And having none, yet I will keep
A heart to weep for thee.
Bid me despair, and I Will despair
Under that Cyprus tree,
Or bid me die, and I will dare
Even death to die for thee.
Thou art my life, my love, my heart,
The very eyes of me:
And have command of every part
To live and die for thee.
A Hymn to Venus.
GOddess I do love a girl
Ruby-lipt', and tooth't like Pearl,
If so be I may but prove
Lucky in this maid I love,
I will promise there shall be
Myrtels offered up to thee.
The good night to the Bride*
BLessings in abundance come
To the Bride, and to her Groom,
May the Bed this short night
Know the fullness of delight:
Pleasures may here attend you,
And ere long a boy Love send you.
Curld and comely, and so trim,
Maids in time may ravish him:
Thus a dew of graces fall
On you both; Goodnight to all.
The Willow-Garland.
A Willow-garland thou did send
Perfumed last day to me,
Which did but only this portend,
I was forsook by thee:
Since it is so, I Will tell thee what,
To morrow thou shall see
Me wear the Willow after that,
To dye upon the tree.
To a Teltale.
Thy glowing ears, to hot contention bent,
Are not unlike red Herings, broyl'd in Lent.
To Baull, the Crier.
In thy rude Parish (as thou do profess)
You Are like the Baptist in the wilderness:
Yet ere for conscience off thy head should go,
T^ou would not cry Oyes, but roar out
No.
On deaf Joan, the Ale-wife.
^he prates to others, yet can nothing hear,
Just like a sounding jugg that wants an ear.
To Zounds the Swaggerer*
What do thou mean to revel, roar, ar^ spend*
To drink, and drabble, and swear so? will thou rend
Thy way to Hell? The Devil will spy day
At a small hole, and snach his Chuck away.
To the same.
What Gulf's within thee, that thou swallow'st so?
It is to drown all thirsts before thou go
To that Infernal hat-house? such a ground*
Of reasons deeper than I list to sound.
To his Mistress.
WHat conscience say is it in thee
When I a heart had one
To take away that heart from me,
And to retain thy own:
For shame and pity now incline
To play a loving patt,
Either to send me kindly thine,
Or send me back my heart.
Covet not both; for if thou do
Resolve to part with neither,
Why yet to show that thou art just,
Take me and mine together,
On Love.
I Held Loves head while it did ache,
And so it chanced to be
The cruel pain did him forsake,
And forthwith came to me,
Ah me, how shall my grief be stilled,
Or where else shall we find,
One like to me who must be killed
For being too too kind.
To his Mistress.
It Is evening, my sweet, and dark, let us meet,
Long time we have been a trying;
And never as yet, that season could get,
Wherein to have had an enjoying.
For pity or shame, then let not loves flame,
Be ever and ever a spending;
Since now to the Port the path is but short,
And yet our way has no ending.
Time flies away fast, our hours do waste,
The while we never remember,
How soon our life here, grows old with th^^ yeer^
That dies with the next December.
The Fairies.
IF ye will with Mab find grace,
(...) Set each platter in its place;
Rake the fire up, and get
Water in ere Sun be set:
Wash your pales, and cleanse your Daries,
^uts are loathsome to the Fairies;
Sweep your house, who does not so
^^ab will pinch her by the toe.
Cherry-Pit.
IUlia and I did lately sit
Playing for sport at Cherry-pit,
^^e threw, I cast, and having thrown,
^ got the pit, and she the stone.
To Robbin Redbrest.
When I Am led out for dead, let thy last kindness be
With leaves and moss-work for to cover me:
And while the wood-nimphs my cold corpse inter,
Sing thou my Dirge sweet warbling Chorister,
For Epitaph in ^oliage next write this,
Here, here the tomb of William Redley is.
His Vision to his Mistress.
I Dreamed we both were in a bed
Of Roses almost smothered;
But then I heard thy sweet breath say,
Faults done by night will blush by day;
I kissed thee (panting) and I call
The night to record, that was all;
But ah! if empty dreams so please,
Love give me more such nights as these.
Charon and Philomel, A Dialogue sung.
PHIL. CHaron, O gentle Charon, let me woo thee
By tears and pity now to come unto me:

Chapter What voice so sweet and charming do I hear;
Say that thou art;

Ph. I prithee first draw near:

Chapter A sound I hear, but nothing yet can see;
Speak where thou art:

Ph O Charon pity me,
I am a bird* and though no name I tell,
My warbling note will say, I Am Philomel.

Chapter What Is that to me? I love not ^ish or fowls,
Nor ^ea^ts f^nd bird, but only humane souls.

Ph. Alas for me:

Chapter Shame on thy witching note
That made me thus hoyst sa^l, and bring my boat;
But I Will return, what mischief brought me hither?

Ph. A deal of love, and much grief together.

Chapter What Is thy request?

Ph. Tha^ since she is now beneath,
Who fed my life, I Will follow her in death.

Chapter And is that all? I Am gone:

Ph. By love I pray thee.

Chapter Talk not of love; all pray, but few souls pay me.

Ph. I Will give the vows and tears. Chapter Can tears pay scores
For mending sa^ls, for patching boat and oars?

Ph. I Will beg a penny, or I Will sing so long,
Till thou shall say, I Have paid thee with a song.

Chapter Why then begin, and all the while we make
Our sloathful passage on the Stig^an Lake;
Thou and I Will sing, to make these dull shades merry,
Who else with tears would doubtless drown my Ferry.

To his Mistress.
I could but see thee yesterday
S^ung by a fretful Be,
And I the Iave in snatched away,
And healed the wound in thee.
A thousand thorns, and briars, and stings
I have in my poor breast,
Yet never can see that salve which brings
My passions any rest,
^s love shall help me, I admire
How thou can sit and smile
To see me bleed, and not desire
To stench the blood the while.
If thou composed of gentle would,
Art so unkind to me;
What dismal stories will be told
Of Trose, that cruel Be.
To his Mistress, on the Daybreak.
By the next kindling of the day,
My Julia, thou shall see,
Ere I Have Mary thou can say,
I Will come and visit thee.
Yet ere thou counsellest with thy glass,
Appear thou to mine eyes,
As mooth an: nak'^ as she that was
The Prince of Paradise.
If blush thou must, then blush thou through
A lawn that thou may look
As purest pearls and peebles do,
When peeping through a brook.
Stool-ball.
At Stool-ball, Lucia, let us play
For sugar, cakes, and wine;
Or for a Tansey let us pay,
The loss be thine or mine.
If thou, my Dear, a winner be
At trundling of the Ball;
The wager thou shall have, and me,
And my misfortunes all.
But if my Sweetest I shall get,
Then I desire but this;
That likewise I may pay the bet,
And have for all a kis.
The May Pole.
The May Pole is up,
Now give me the cup,
I Will drink to the Garlands around it:
But first unto those
Whose hands did compose
The glory of flowers that crowned it.
A health to my Girls
Whose husbands may Earls
Or Lords be, granting my wishes:
And when that ye wed
To the Bridal bed,
Then multiply all like to fishes.
To his Mistress.
Thou say, Thou love me* I say no:
But would to Love I could believe 'twas so.
Pardon my fear (Swee^) I desire
That thou b^ righteous found, and I the liar.
Charms.
Bring the holy Crust of bread,
Lay it underneath the head;
It Is a certain charm to keep
Hogs away, while children sleep.
Another.
Let the superstitious wife
Near the child's heart lay a knife;
Point b^ up, and have he down,
While she gossips in the Town.
This `mongst other mistick Charms
K^eps the sleeping child from h^rms.
Another, to bring in the Witch.
To house the hag you must do this,
Commix with meal a little piss
Of him bewitched, the forthwith make
A little wafer, or a Cake;
And this rawly ^ak`d will bring
The old Hag in, no sur^r thing.
Another Charm for Stables.
Hang up hooks and sheers to scare
Hence the hag that rides the Mare
Till they be all over wet
With the mire and the sweat;
This observ`d, the Mains shall be
Of your horses all knot free.
Upon Cupid.
Love like a beggar came to me
With hose and d^blet torn,
His shirt bedangling from his knee,
With hat and shoes out-worn.
He asked an alms, I gave him bread
And meat too for his need.
Of which when he had fully fed
He wish`t me all good speed,
Away he went but as he turned
In faith I know not how,
He touched me so, as that I burn,
And am tormented now,
Loves silent flames and fires obscure,
Then crept into my heart,
And though I saw no bow, I me sure
His finger was the dart.
A Vow to Venus.
HAppily I had sight
Of my dearest Deer last night;
Make her this day smile on me,
And I Will Roses give to thee.
Charms.
THis I Will tell you by the way,
Maidens when ye Leavens lay,
Cross your Dough, and your dispatch
Will be better for your batch.
Another.
In the morning when you rise,
Wash your hands and cleanse your eyes,
Next be sure ye have a care
For to throw the water far;
For as far as that does light,
^o far keeps the evil sp'rit.
Another.
If ye fear to be affrighted,
When ye are by chance benighted,
In your pocket for a trust
Carry nothing but a crust;
For that holy piece of bread,
Charms the danger, and the dread.
St. Distaffs day, or the morrow after Twelf day.
PArtly work, and partly play,
Ye must on St Dist^ ffs-day.
From the Plow soon free your teame,
Then come home, and fother them:
If the maids a spinning go,
Burn the Flax, and fire the towe;
Scorch their Plackets, but beware
That ye singe no maiden-haire;
Bring in pales of water then,
Let the maids bewash the men;
Give St Distaff all the right,
Then bid Christmass-sport goodnight;
And next morrow every one
To his own Vocation.
On Poets.
These Darlings of free Nature want no vigor
Of brain, and therefore to grow richer liker
Than weaker heads, and might be blessed with Angels,
(For which the soldier fights, and Lawyer wrangles)
Did not their lofty ^ancies 'bove the welkin
Still sore, whilst others are* ^or Treasures dilving
But fle, my verse is foundr'd, all this time.
I dream^d on riches, I but raved in ^ime.
Of War.
War's like a cursed wife, whence a man may cull
Some fruits of goodness, (though of mischief ^ull:)
For those land-surfefs wanton peace both breed,
War by incision cures, when Kingdoms bleed.
On Joseph's Cloak.
The Snake his slough, the Dove her plumes cast,
(Whose innocence and purdence hold we fast
As Joseph left his garment, yet retained
A jewel, which once lost is never regained.
Thou stone-cold chastity far off does fly,
And Lust assumes the Cloak of modesty.
DREAMS.
The first Dream.
WEnt I this Morn in cruel sport
To fright the poor Hare from her fort?
Vp-rouze her from the solemn Cel
With horrors of a Fun'ral-Knel?
Did Tyrant-I seek others prize?
My self now made the Sacrifice?
Fates, you are equal, and thou love,
Like mercy I [just Talio] prove
As meant to others; Torture, Pain,
Dire scourge! it is my reward again.
'Twas she the Huntresse was, by the way,
That ayr'd her so, like beauteous May,
(Her Mistress rather) round bestowing
Such Beauties sweets; dull winter showing
Fresh-cheek'd turned Summer. O, what raie^
Then struck our eyes? what wonders blaze
Sweetst, Lightnings? what Soul rapes, divine
Confusions? that th'ore flowing shine
Spak't Heavenly Vision: if Earths race,
Then Wom^n, lovelyst woman 'twas;
Or rare I know not-What: she is ^^ll
Men ^xcellenc perfection call
He^^^y shot daylight Beam-supplyes,
While ^h Sun cloud muffled seemd, close lies
Asham d on's gaudier blazing so,
Those Co^p-rayes to hers in show;
Or't may be Love-(...) feared, least he
By th'jealous Man forsaken be;
Or, indeed struck, with amorous head
Jogd on, and so went sick to Bed:
The World not needing beg the old Sun
Since they in her have two for one.
No Crystal frost-work decked the ground
T'intice her foot, whose Beamings round
That More dispersed, perhaps ore-awd
The glazed Earth, Congelations thawd:
Her Pace Court-measure, graceful'st showd
While th spic't air through her breath ^or good,
Purgd wholesome seemd: as Gobl^^s light,
F^g^ shun her Puerity, take flight.
Ten thausand C^pids came along
Playing in her Eyes, her cheeks, or hung
O'th Breast, Lips, Hayr; encamped appear
In Bright and lovely'st Musters there;
As with their quiverd Host would pierce
All Hearts, and conquer the Universe:
A moving world of wonder showing;
A Heaven of flesh all ^oyes bestowing.
It Was fairely-sweetly cruel she
That chased and seized my liberty:
That let a M^nt of lightnings ^ly
Heap of Grenades from her Eye,
Dart-magazine that shot through mine;
I saw their flaming point to shine
All the way they came, when through tht Eye
The Heart bled in kindest simpathy:
I Sigh, Fca, Muse; what wonders press
Through these glazed Organs, Souls possess!
On Phillis Close Nun-like Retirement.
SAy beauteous Fillis why's so long
Adjournd our Daybreak till all is slung
With Greenland-curse? O why (^ole-fashion)
Pore we on Clods, this dull Creation
Thou our Gem hid? with whom's inshrind,
The longings, blisses of Mankind:
Is It for our sins, that righteous Heaven
Has us this Plague amongst others Given.
This Judgment sent (ala^) that we
Mus^ lose thy Presence, and want Thee?
Or did we too profanely slight
That bl^ssing, meanly rate thy Sight
Enjoyd? when thou (more justly-nice)
By nant do please to inhanceyth Price:
An angry absence must alone
Make thee more reverenc't, and moreknown.
Or last; was it Charity divine
TO our errors, fraylties, did consine
Thee to thy Chamber, Prayers to implore
And atone for us? O restore
That Face back, fair Example to us;
We shall grow good, less criminous.
Rare ^e^uties were not made at all
For cloystring, and live-burial,
Though Bats, Owls be: those glorious Seve^
The unwasted Lamps of Earth and Heaven.
(Sky-brooches) lo, they were not thrust
To corners, log^ d in Rubbish, dust,
But shine to the world, and traverse by
Spears blazing P^geants: whilst hid lie
(Earth-chested) Gold, Gems, where is their glory:
Sight's all; that magnifies thy story.
Sometime it is wholesome, purest Maid*
To air thee through the field and shade;
When from some Hill fayr-map'd does ly
Small Europe, travail^d by thine Eye:
And th'amazd People gazing round,
As though another Morn were found.
For as through sight thou Physick'st us:
And our dross-spirits refinest thus
To subtle Fire this Earth Air grown,
Pure ^uintessentiall: whilst (anon)
The Bloods too revel't in each Vein
So thou do Physic thy Self again.
Mays Sovereign, delicious air,
It Will make that Cheek more snowy-fayr
(If possible,) those Breasts of spice
Thus fan'd more, Beds of Paradise:
Twill make that Angell-shape to strike
Our eyes with motion Angel-like,
Quick, sprightly; improve that daynti'st Frame
So lively, as if all Soul became:
Then show thee often dear Cordial; thus
Thou physickst both thy self and us.
Phillis Nun-like Coyness.
PHILLIS, Fairest, why so coy
So daynty-nice? when but to enjoy
One favor such a task does prove,
Herculean Labou^: tell me Love;
What though that daint^er Hand touch mine,
(Of spo^less Allablaster-shine)
Would't show less fair, and sulli'd be?
Or lose the fashion, if by me
But kindly pressed? though never I
Their sacred white do come so nigh
But with washed hands, nor touch their Down
But reverentiall fear does crown
The Devout Palm: your Glove all day
May freelier touch; your Seizers may,
Silk, needle, lawn, nay, meaner thread:
Then is my Hand more vile indeed
Then these? or say, you purify
Those things by Touch, like Chimistry
May these course hands sublime, refine.
Or say those dayntier Lips touch mine,
Are they impoverisht in their store?
Or wast their Delicates the more
By often giving [since they are
A lasti^g sweetness] or less fair,
Ought^ose their color Ruby excelling?
The more they are kiss`d, more red and swelling.
The wanton air with (...) play
May touch them, and the tawny Ray
Of Phoebus Toys, which often pleas^;
Then are my (...) more base then these?
The Fly may buzzing kiss, and touch
[Unblam`d] those Cherries; min`s ^ut such.
`(...), can you ch^de and frown when I
[Nye starv`d] do beg the chari^y
Th` Al^s of o^ kiss? it was never yet
Held sin for Starv^lings to crave meat;
That`s free: would you not life bestow
Where your self n^re the poorer grow?
N^y sweetest, w^r`t love-^elish`d, this,
You would seem richer by a kiss:
Love`s first-course, second Min^age it is.
The second Dream.
It Was Fresh-cheek'd May with all her pride
And Progress bravery beauti^i^ d;
(...), persumes, and ^ems of price,
To take that s^xe more daynty, nice,
When (...)- World (late fullen) now
(...) all, stampd one whose brow
(...) when froz'd Men
(Not snayls alone) seem^ d Live again:
Forth went ^he Nymph, whose eyes fair ray
Had (...) turned to May,
And spru^'t the poor-clad earth howere
With Flowrs, though Flora banished the year:
Forth Phillis tript; whilst I alone
Engrossed the blessing, the honor won
TO attend her Walks chief Favourit,
Sole Guardian to my Souls delight:
Cal^ d by her as if Heaven had called
To Joys, wherein blessed Saints instal'd,
(Who would not glory?) Champion thence
To weak, yet purest Innocence:
For well my PHILLIS knew that I
Would not hurt, but protecting dye;
And (though, Temptation all, her shape)
Would punish, not commit a Rape.
Thus, though no morning star am borne,
Yet was I Usher to the Morn;
Or rather Sun-companion show,
Whose hand enriched mine with its snow.
Naught envying now Great Turk; Mogor,
Tartarian China^bugbear or
Black Southern Prince; thus septer'd I
Durst boast a fayrer Monarchy.
Each Object as we tract below,
With rival-courtship seemed to woe
My Heavenly Fair; and bred in me
A kind of sportive jealousy:
Birds chant love-songs, Gales whisper soft
Kind tales, steal kisses, whilst (methought)
Herbs, Flowers hung their lovesick heads,
Or bowd with reverence from their beds:
Hills animated seemd rejoice;
And (wanton) ^^cho back her Voice:
O pregnant Soul say, what does prove
So all breeding as that Womb of Love?
Here, whilst I sacrific^d chaste Vows,
Sigh-(...), (made unspotted those
Blessed Hands the Alters) neither care
Thus PHLI^IS breath^d; O, breathed sounds were
Seraphic Music! (words' be gone
That poor Term) Thus she seemd to own --
Hold Fondling, don't expose abroad
Such sweetness to ^h' Ayrs common Road;
Bewise: the Harmonious touch oth' Spears
Not Music is the Vulgar ears:
Repeat the Blisses to thine own;
Tell Venus, or Loves-self alone:
And feed you Lickerish ears, (revived
Your dear Joys,) Fancy makes new-liv'd:
Whilst Cupid scores up all, each word
(Th'Hour, Minute) in's chaste Loves Record.
PHILLIS her Lute.
SIght, Smelling, Tasting, Feeling, all be gone;
And leave with me th'officious Ear alone:
Go Slumber, (or th`whole Covent) loytrers play;
Thou only attend (Souls Favorite) this way:
Bless, bless thy self and me, till seem translaed
To new divine Joys, by that Hand-Created.
List, list with reverence; devoutly O
Hearken; th `Orbs Minstrelsy`s sham`d here below:
While PHILL^S gives Life to her sencless Lute,
And warbling language to what late was mute.
Hark, what delicious strains and Heavenlyrare
Do as twer sweeten, and enrich the Air!
Phebean Ha^^s Great Master finds his skill
Scornd by th `Olimpicks, and but slighted still
When thou once playest; all listening unto thee;
T`whom mean hands like to Winds rude blustrings be,
Or th'note of bubling Brooks: All Music is
Untuned harsh Discord, and but noise to This.
Away all dumpish cares, all pulling sorrow,
[You Cloud-drove] fly my world, pack til the morrow;
Let me forget I`m Earth, or burdened am
With dross of flesh, but t`Elemental flame
Seem rarifi`d turn`d Spirits (air does show
Poor, languid) dance my blood; your veins oreflovv
In g^ad tides; whilst those highst Soul-faculties
Frame all a Masque: that Lute Soul-revels please.
O, there`s a sweetly, svveetly-solemn strain
Has laid all in a slumbering trance again.
And charmdall to amazement; view but round
How strange a Metamorphosis there is found;
Men stand by th`Walls, and furnish out the Room
Like Arras-pictures, or as to some Tomb
Belong`d for Monuments; whilst only flies
A glimpse of Life or Twilight from their Eyes:
All`s turned a Sepulcher, so whist and dead
A silence raigns; the sweet death welcomed:
O, let me thus expire and melt away
To dissolution, Nature that Debt pay
of Vapour-breath, that else a boiling Fever,
Stone, Poison, sturdy Cout, or stab might sever:
Sweet killing PHILLIS, thus the soul to stray
To Heaven `twete t` have Heaven by the way:
Such death were but to live; the Gasps to this
Ore-ravishing Delights, too powerful bliss:
And then I dye a Martyr by thy ha^^,
Though not in wrath, but [spight of countermand]
As fleeting souls last Farewell must kiss
That beauteous Hand, first Fool! Alls spoild by this.
PHILLIS Hand and Glove.
FAir Phillis, my ambitious Muse
Through its aspiring zeal w^'d horse
Rather to charm thy hand then Glov^,
Court that Diviner form, my Lov^;
T'whom Snow with th'Alablaster mine
Great Style of Whiteness only assign:
Where azure streams in purling measure
Make Cupids Isles and Place of pleasure.
But this eclipses vails their light,
And pleads Commission for it; worse spite;
Whilst [cas'd up] beautcous they appear
Like sacred Twin-like Relics there:
Worth 'bove all Romes; like cloysterd Nun,
Or silver Orb involved Moons:
Not naked to each unworthy eye
Or the Suns bolder kisses lie,
[Sight fit'st for King] but then divest,
Break forth like Morns their dusky East,
When silk and gold as touch more fine;
Some Needle-Miracle design;
Where laid to the eye small new Creation,
Birds, Beasts so near inanimation;
So true that Natures self does start;
Half mothering that mere Child of Art:
Mocked by this Landscape, ^ye mistakes
For her own work the Hills, Plants, and Lakes.
Sweet'st Recluse-payr! you meanlyer-choice
Beauties triumph it now, rejoice,
Let coorser Hands now boldly show,
Seek t'enamour with worse Snow.
Your Gloves kind pardon, if I seem
Transported here with what is their Gem,
Chief Riches, Glory; wherefore spite
Should not ore-long debar my sight:
Since I love these too, even in this
Fine, P^ittyest, winning beauty is;
Both as it self, and as '^is thine:
So dainty-shap'd, Symmetrick, fine,
Pure-white withal, that i^ might stand
A rude-drawn Picture to that hand:
Wherein (methinks) breath highest sweets
Whose sublimation Juno fits:
This Pattern seems for the best of gloves
(As that for hands) like the Queen of Leves.
O Cupid would ordain that I
Under that form might hug so nigh
That loved Hand; [miraculous feat!]
But ah, I fear my Youthful Heat,
Sighs soft-breath'd whispers, joyful Dance
Oth' panting-Heart, then colder Trance
With fervent raven us kisses, soon
Would blab the Cozenage; all undone:
W en I Am cashir'd eternally:
Whereas that Favourit-Glove laid by
Recloaths that Beauty; exalted is
To its late Paradisiah Bliss.
His third Dream of FILLIS Evening Walk and Voice.
FIllis and I (O, fondly'st-kind,
Indulgent Stars! thus still you bind;)
Fillis and I in Evening fair
Stole forth to take the Garden-air;
That sweet'st and mildest age of Day,
When Sun does sprinkle a kinder Ray;
Nor begets headache, whilst Goodnight
Sends from Far-West with drowsy light
The Morn, That, placed like pauses sweet
Tween th'Aguish fits of Cold and Heat.
Those harmless Gales were only straying
Which dance the leaves with nicer playing,
Nor whisper, whilst with kind of bliss
Mays Flowery beauteous strangers kiss
In sign of welcome: toyling often
With Fillis Curles; when used (methought)
Reverence too, least through its sin
One curle disturbed, or spoyld had been.
Th'Ayrs Concave stilled to quiet rest
Like Fillis gentle Maiden-brest.
Who, masked and vail^d, (that else had soon)
Travers^d a gloomy Thick designed
With Love-maze Laborynth, where inshrin'd
Th'Worlds beauty appeard: it was ambushplot
To bear the Nightingales small throat,
High^st, strong'd to boot; (that, prais to be
The Shades prime Songster, harmony)
With rest oath Noise, who begun,
As if toth' then departing Sun
Would chirp a merry shril Goodnight,
And so long sing as he gave Light:
Which heard (the fine mirth jollity)
To smiling, pleasure, by and by
Fillis puts in toth'warbling quire:
Fair Goddess lo, which seemd t'inspire
Those little creatures with their skill;
Who now chant Anthems t'her praise still:
The ruder Place seemed Chaos-wise
Turned to a new dressed Paradise,
Earth-Heaven, so well that face and tongue
Might to sweet Cherubins belong.
Gods (wrapped, with joy oth' creation)
T'affairs divine held strait Vacation,
Breaking Heavens Parliament asunder
To see, to hear this Mortal wonder,
(The air traced in measures) while cros-armd
Some sat, inamourd showing, Love-charmd;
Consulting all her soon translation
From this base earth to th'starry station
As their Quires Mistress, while She-powrs
Or prais^d, or envied from their Towrs,
Wood-satyres skipping wildly round:
This masque at least my Fancy found.
Lo The All of Rapture, sweets how high!
Best Joys the ears capacity
Could reach to, only those above,
The dear Soul-melting Sounds of Love.
Her Lute was rare though dead the sound,
This living therefore rarer erownd:
That, was but hollow Timbers noise,
This, sweet, warm, lovely Woman's voice:
Religion swayd, else I had nigh
Been guilty of Voice-Idolatry.
FILLIS and the Nightingale.
RAre charming Voice! but [O] how rare
Breathed by that She so only fair!
Whose face and bodies beauties be
Composed with so rare Symmetry
(Heavens choice design) so sweetly accorded,
One Heavenly Consort all afforded,
And were the Harmony o'th Eye,
Seemed Natures silent Melody:
Nere man so doubly-blest; the eye, ear!
Record it Love, it was only here.
Each trembling Noat those Corals wrought
(When born) seemed swaddled, wrapped methought,
And (as soon dying) Embalmed within
So sweet breath, as perfum'd't had been;
Came flying in a precious air
Of Odors, 'bove Arabian far:
The same sweet noats you would have deemd
The several souls of Music seemd;
Whilst the whole Song rare sweetst compound,
Wherein th'Ear's Sugar, Sytrop found.
O could I Have caught and kept alive
Those precious sounds beyond reprive
Those Spirits of Sweetness as they fly,
So to have had constant Melody;
Nay Phillis self still by me in those:
Her Breath, preserved and relick'd close
Had serv^d for sovereign protection
Against poysnous Plagues, and all infection.
If that fam^d Harp, could Rivers cause
To stand at wanton gaze and pause;
Beasts. stubborn Rocks, and burly Trees,
Made dance in Antique Revels these;
Her voice must greater Magic prove
And make them court her fall in Love.
While Fillis breathed and clos^d her song,
Behold a pretty vvonder sprung;
The ambitious Nightingale replied,
Through pertest emulations pride;
[Chief Chorister I 'th feathered Court
To th`Royal Eagle fam`d] in sport
Would sing her part, and nimbly runs
Her fine-poiz'd quaint Divisions:
Now Fillis, then the Nightingale,
Now she then she, which should prevail:
The Chirper falls to earnest now,
No more must jesting strains allow:
It Is sober Duel, no idle play,
Sharp brest-con^ention for the day:
Till the poor Bird presumes still higher*
As life would forfeit and expire.
Which pitying, I was fain to entreat
Her softer heart would make retreat,
And end the dangerous strife so nigh
By yielding a false Victory:
This quarrel must not the loss prove
Of such a voice to the Spring and Grove:
Her Mercy rather should reprive
[Double honors Trophie] keep alive.
When loath to stifle yet my blisses,
I silenced those svveet lips with Kisses:
Though but the ears airy joys transfer'^
To the solid touch; so, saved the Bird.
His fourth Dream of Cressas Funeral, the Love of Difloris.
IS any Pastors care so deaf to Fame,
That has not heard of fairest Cressas name?
[So used to bleatings] whom that Funeralknel.
Which groand this Nymph to earth, did hearts congeal.
Has not arrived to? happy sure's that He
In this, since knows not the common Misery;
Distres^d Arcadias loss [with whom does share
Nature, Grand Mourner] her beloved fair
Cloistered in dust: nor [without company]
Died she alone, a hundred seemd to dye
In Sorrow with her: The Suns self was gone
Fast from her Funerals, and Night came on
To bring her Sables. O what new-raised Train
Of Gobl^ns struck my sight? which roved the plain
With such dire ceremony, ruful guize,
As each did his own Funeral solemnize.
Lo, Deaths March it was; First went young swains by pair
Each crowned with mournful Cipress, Usherer
To th solemn Hearse: Those four next to' that le^
Bare Shieldes, where pictured on a cole-black be^
A pale dead Virgin lay, prepared as twere
To Bridals and which beauteous did appear
Even in death; by deaths black arms imbract*
And over, in white Characters was placed,
This* this my Lover, this my Bridal: So
All passed along. But following the Hers^ did go
A single Swain; how dismal-lookt slow pac't*
Trust bulk of wretchedness, ore whose face cast
A mere Life-damp; seemed Ghost to the Corpse before;
Sighs stormed about him, whilst he drenched their shore
His torrent eyes; and thus would needs excel,
Surpass in grief: About his Hat mixed well
Forsaken Willow, Cipress; where above
This written, Deaths my Rival. Next does move
^he Virgin-train in white, which Censers bear
^ark-vail'd like Doomsday Planets* Torchlight there
^orc't frightful Noon. And thus they softly trace
^ire measure! how unwilling!) to th sad place
^here they must leave their slumbring Nymph behind
^' enrich the Covetous Earth; which (half struck blind)
^he Youth beheld, never spoke Sorrow more
Then now in silence: different Passions store;
^ere sighs, there tears, pale looks there, yet all one
Consort in Grief: This, general alone,
All looked their utmost, til now lost the sight,
With whom their eyes seem^d as 'twere buried quite;
And (blind to upper things in earth beneath
Are following her, as if in spite of death
Would still enjoy: with many a pitying muse,
The rude ore churlish mold should so abuse
That daintiest Body, which (though one more nice)
Las, now complained not; but death-tranced lies.
What Maiden adiews; what tears! Swain kissed the Place;
All saying, Richer-gem'd Earth never was.
Epitaph.
HEre Chastity it self does lie,
And Beautie's self; whom never eye
Nor tongue could tempt as yet love;
Till Death his violent dart did prove;
And (powerful'st) wou unto his Bed:
Though She was even then Ravished.
PHILLIS Complaint.
WHy was I born,
Or not born blind?
Though thence the scorn
Of whole mankind,
Their Pity, or Wonder;
That so I Would Woman's Shape nere known;
(...) se^ing had I mist but one,
But Thine alone;
We only kept asunder:
^then kind Heavens you had blessed
A Soul of Anguish,
That Is now condemned to sad unrest
And endlesly must languish.
Yet check my Heart, no more
These Plaints give ^re:
Since thou had rather die, through her rejection
Then not have seen so rare perfection*
On his retired Lady.
I.
When you were born, sure nature mea^ some other thing:
Whose (...) (by your discontent)
Youl'd peevishly to ruin bring.
The Sun does shine, the stars hold forth,
And so should you expose your worth*
II.
Why should a face, whose Magic may
weak, seuls recruit,
The (...) and the veils obey?
Or wherefore should that tongue be mute,
(...) many to mortal ears,
Sin^s ^igh and sweeter then the Spears?
III.
Each for her Co^ntreys welsare, came into the earth.
Part of her best pa^ts we may claim;
As truly forfeit at her birth,
Yet since forced b^ons are not so kind,
We Will beg your face, and virtuous mind.
IV.
As did Medusa by her eyes, to stones convert
Each daring look; so thine surprise;
But it is not with Medusa's art:
As flesh to stones transformed she,
So stony hearts are broke by thee.
V.
Thy sacred lips, where cherries grow, set round with spi^e,
Whence loves Ele^tars freely (...);
Why in recess constrained so nice?
Sure he shall die unblest that ^iffes
The famou^ ^ooty of your kisses.
VI.
Will thy bright beams be ere the less for lighting me?
(...) thy comeliness?
(...) thy dignity?
(...) no longer in the Mines:
(...) and yet she shines.
VII.
Pray what ^vails Diana's tower?
Or what consent
Is couched in the golden shower,
While she receives imprisonment?
The life of beauty's by resort,
Not in the pri^on, but the Court.
VIII.
(...) cheeks abroad,
(...) no more
Those G^ms each (...) would appla^d,
(...) with a (...) adore.
(...) your self and we in this
(...) greate^ share in bliss.
(...)

