The Second APOLOGY to Balthazar Tylcken treating of the Eternal
PREDESTINATION and Election of GOD and of the INCARNATION or Becoming Man, and
PERSON of CHRIST and Concerning the VIRGIN MARY.

Written in the Year 1621. Finished the 3. of July.

by Jacob Behme Also called Teutonicus Philosophus.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West end of St. Paul's. 1661.

He that Believes is certainly Foreseen.
He that Believes not has most Regardless been.
He that Believes, is certainly Elected.
He that Believes not, hath's Election Rejected.
A Letter Or a PREFACE To Herre J. D. K.
Written when this Treatise was Finished.

1.

ESteemed truly Honorable highly Learned Sir; after my hearty desiring of the
Grace, Love and Mercy of our Dear IMMANUEL, as also all temporal welfare of
Body, for you, I will not conceal from you Sir; that I have received and read
the Book with the Appendix, and considered the Opposers understanding
apprehension and Opinion, in the Love and Fear of God; and sufficiently
understand in what apprehension the Man runs on; and that he has not at all
in the least understood my Writings.

2. Also I very much Lament the Man, that he has plunged himself into such a
Lake, with the Election of God, out of which assuredly he cannot get, unless
he learn to understand the Center of all things or substances.

3. Also he lamentably goes astray concerning the humanity of Christ, and
concerning his Mother Mary; which Opinion, is quite contrary to our Christian
or Spiritual Faith, upon which our Restored Salvation stands.

4. But I desire from my heart, that this Man might become seeing, for he is
zealous, for then his Zeal would be profitable: only the way which he now
goes, is an Open Gate to all vanity or Licentiousness, and despair; and there
must a severe account belong to such, introducing men into despair and vanity.

5. I desire he may be advised; that he might become seeing, that he may at
length acknowledge, the friendly Dear heart of JESUS CHRIST; which has
manifested it self in our humanity; Math. 18. 11.
to seek and to save our poor lost Man.

6. For this vain frivolous reproach which he venteth against his Brother, is
no Christian way at all; it will not build SION but destroy it, if he will be
comprehended under the seventh Rev. 10. 7.
sounding of Trumpet, and be one among the Rev. 14. 4.
first fruits, then he must go out from all reproachings, contention, and
scorning, and seek only the heart of brotherly Love; else all is Babel and a
Fiction, even clamouring and Contending, and never coming to the Limit of our
Rest in Christ.

7. I have a little presented it before him and other Readers, of my Writings,
to consider of it; since I see that not only my Opposer, but also others for
the most part Persons of high Dignity, are thus perplexed with this conceit
about the Predestination or Election of God, to try, whether this most
difficult error might be brought out of the Minds of many of them.

8. But I am intended to write an The Book of Predestination written 1623.
Entire Book thereof, if I could but perceive that Men would not so spitefully
oppose me; without knowledge what spirits Child I am; this I offer to you as
learned and experienced Men to consider of, and entreat you, to ponder aright
whence my apprehension and skill might come.

9. For you see and know, that I have not learned it, much less studied or
understood it aforehand, as the manner of simple Idiots or Layicks is, neither
have I sought it, or understood any the least part of it but it is given me of
the Grace of the Most High, in that I have sought his Love-Heart, to hide my
self therein, from the Horrible Anger of God, and the Hatred or Enmity of the
Devil.

10. Therefore I exhort and beseech you in the Love of Christ, to think of it,
and rightly hold close to the Holy Scripture of the Spirit, and keep it rightly
to the proof or Touchstone, with a true Christian Mind, and then your Eyes will
be opened, that you will see and know it.

11. Though I do not at all doubt concerning your Person Sir, for I look upon
you to be a very honest Lover of God and of the Truth; and I also hope, that my
Mind which is so very exceedingly inclined toward you, will not deceive me.

12. For I steadfastly hope, and do present it in my Prayers to God, that Sir,
the Fair Garland or Crown of Divine Honor in the knowledge of the Wisdom, may
be set upon you, that you might not need to use either Mine or others writings
to the knowledge of God: but Sir you know in your self, as it has also
happened to me, out of what spirit I write, and use nothing else about it; for
it is written, Joh. 6. 45.
They shall be all Taught of God: Jer. 31. 34. Heb. 8. 11.
and know the Lord: Joel 2. 8.
I will pour out my Acts 2. 17.
Spirit upon all Flesh; also your sons and your daughters shall Prophecy,
and your Young Men shall see visions.

13. Why will Men reproach then, when God powers out his Spirit upon such a
simple Man; so that he must write above the Reason of All Men; and higher than
the Ground of this World is.

14. Dear Sir, it is done out of Gods Love toward you; that you may see the
Ground and root of your School-Contention; for many have sought but not at the
right Limit or Place, whence contention is arisen to them, which has filled
the World, and has almost quite destroyed all brotherly Love.

15. Therefore, God calls you, with a higher voice, that you might yet see,
whence all Evil and Good Originateth, and proceeds, because you should cease
from Contention and Strife, and most highly acknowledge that which from the
Times of this World has been hitherto hidden, and is only manifested or
revealed to the Children of the Saints.

16. But seeing it is showed to me how your heart Sir is inclined to wisdom,
therefore I speak sublimely toward you, and do hope, you will accept it in
true Love, and understand it rightly as it is intended: I would I could give
you half the Spirit of my knowledge: and then you would need no Writings;
although, I esteem you wise, yet I will once brotherly salute you with this
Writing, before the rough Winter of Calamity Come, which is upon the way.

17. If your Honor Love my Writings, I pray you to read them diligently, and
above all especially to lay them to the Center of All things or Substances; and
then the Three Principles will be very NOTE.
easy.

18. I know and am assured, that if you apprehend the Center in the Spirit,
that you will have such joy in it, as excels all the Worlds joy, for the
Noble STONE of the wise Men, lies therein, it gives certainty in ALL things,
and releaseth Man from all encumbrance and perplexity, in the Strife and
Contentions about Religion, and opens to him the highest secret Mystery which
lies IN himself: he brings his work which he is chosen to by Nature, to the
highest PERFECTION; and can see all things into the Heart: must not that be a
Jewel above all the precious things of this World?

19. If you should meet with any thing in my Writings that were unintelligible
and too high, I entreat you to Observe it, and send it me in Writing, and I
will render it in a Childish manner.

20. But since I observe you have a very sublime understanding, therefore I
exhort and entreat you, in a right entention, as it is set before God; that Men
would enter into such a Life, and Live and Converse in the knowledge, that we
may be found as First Fruits in the Lord in SION.

21. The Lord N. at N, if you did come into acquaintance with him, I entreat
you to Judge of his Gifts, for he is zealous, and a great Seeker, God give him
that he may find; and I entreat you to send the Enclosed Writing to him with
the soonest, opportunity; wherein you will do him and me a pleasure, also send
this with it to the Lord N: or to N. that he may send it to him.

22. In respect of the venomous spiteful Pasquill or Libel of the
unintelligent zealous Person, I have given The first Apology to Balthazar
Tylcken about the Aurora.
Three and twenty sheets in answer; but have kept up that Answer to this time,
that the Man might not be discountenanced, hoping that by the Information of
Good People he would somewhat become seeing, and still I have forbidden it to
be given abroad, that if it were possible, he might forsake his Malice or
Malignity; else if the Answer should be published, he would have small cause of
boasting, as he supposes to have by it; in the mean time deliver this to be
considered of a little by HIM.

23. If he will not be thus satisfied, to converse in brotherly Love, let him
certainly believe, that where Gods Love is, his Anger is also; that will show
him, that he will be ashamed thereof, and wish that he never had begun it: but
if he will be quiet, then may this Answer, be laid up in some known place; he
may assuredly believe that I see further than he understands.

24. For, a Time opens it self which is wonderful, which in my Writings is
enough signified, it certainly comes, therefore earnestness and sincerity is
necessary to be used.

25. Out of respect, and for Gods honor sake, I have friendly answered the
known Person; for I regard More the Children of God, viz: my Eternal
Brethren, than my Vindication or Justification; for, I willingly 1 Timothy: 4. 10.
Heb. 11. 26.
suffer-reproach for the sake of Truth, and of the honor of Christ; for it is
the Badg or Livery of Christ, I send it to your honor, friendly, and Commit
you, together with Ephesians. 6. 24.
all those that Love JESUS, into the Grace of Jesus Christ; Dated the 3. of
July, 1621.

Jacob Behme.

The INTRODUCTION To the Answer, To Balthazar Tylcken's aspersing Pamphlet,
concerning some Points or Conclusions, in the Book of the Becoming Man or
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, by him Opposed.
JACOB BEHME Warns his Fellow-Brethren.
The Open fountain in the Heart of JESUS CHRIST; be our Quickening and Life,
and let it bring us into his Light, in a Brotherly Love and Child-like Union;
that we may converse in his power or virtue, and love and know our selves in
Him.
1. Dear Sirs and Brethren in Christ, in what dangerous Lodging, in the vale
of 2 Cor. 5. 1. 4.
this Earthly Tabernacle, in Flesh and Blood; in the Kingdom of the Stars
and Elements, we lie captive in the Opposition and assaults of the Devil, and
in what Dangerous Ways of the Devil in the Lusts of Flesh and Blood, we use
to walk, unless the bright Morning Star of the Heart of Jesus Christ,
awaken or arise in US; is not sufficiently to be spoken or written.

2. How indeed, the World so altogether departs from the ways of the Divine
Light; and goes grouping in the Dark; neither will they suffer themselves to
be helped, but do only despise and scorn Gods Messengers, which are often
sent to them from God out of his Love, to warn them of their ungodly ways:
this we all see and know alas too much, how the own self Reason from the
Stars and Elements, lays and sets it self against the open fountain of
the Love, in the Heart of JESUS CHRIST; and scorneth all that which God sets
before them for a Warning and Teaching, as was done in the Time of Christ and
his Apostles; wherein the Reason-wise Schools, not only Scorned the simplicity
of the Persons that taught the Kingdom of Christ, but also despised all
Wonders or Miracles, and held only their own dissembling Hypocritical Reason
to be true and right.

3. And as it was at the Time of Noah, before the Deluge or Flood, also at
Sodom and Gomorrha, also at the time of the destruction of the Jewish people,
also among the Heathen before Israel was brought out of Egypt into their Land
or Country: when they drove them out and slew them: so also it is in this
present Time, wherein all live in Strife or Contention and Opposition, and rage
and rave, against God and the way of righteousness, as Madmen, and yet
always Cry Here is the Church of CHRIST, avoid such a one he is Mad or
Senseless and from the Devil.

4. And yet One party lives as wickedly as the other, they carry the Name of
God in their Mouths for a show as an Oath; and yet their Heart sticks full
of Gall, venom, or poison and bitterness; There is no fear of God in their
Hearts, Romans 3. 15.
their Mouth is full of Cursing, reproaching, scandalous deriding Blasphemies,
there is no desire to Love and Concord, or unanimity in their Hearts, but
Pride, State, Covetousness, and vain voluptuousness, only that they
continually list up themselves above Gods Children, and to obscure and
overthrow their way which they walk, in, the Light of God, that their Teaching
and Life might not be known, and that the Devil may continue to be Chief
Great Prince in the humane Will and Government or Dominion: therefore they
blaspheme scandalize and reproach the Children of God, and account them for
Fools, that they may remain Covered in Obscurity.

5. And that which is more horrible, thus the Divine Omnipotence, must be a
Cloak or Mantle to hide their wickedness, wherewith they cover themselves,
and mix Gods Will therein, as if Nothing were done without Gods Will, and that
all of it is only Gods purpose or predestination, who from Eternity has
concluded in himself, what shall be manifested in the Time, whether it be
Evil or Good.

6. Whereas, they yet understand nothing of God nor his Will or Substance, yes
they are as blind concerning it, as one that is born blind is to the visible
things of this World, as is clearly discovered and presented to view in this
aspersing Pamphlet, against the Book of the Becoming Man or Incarnation of
Christ, and in his former Pasquil or Libellous Pamphlet [against the Avrora]
that the poor confused Man, runs on so senslesly, and raveth against it, and
yet has no Ground or understanding in him at all, so that: I lament his great
want of apprehension, and must have a great sumpathy or fellow-feeling with
him, and do wish from my heart, that God would once open his heart, that he
might first see and understand e're he Judges.

7. For, the poor blind Man, rejects many a thing in my Book, and sets even
such a thing in the place thereof, as my meaning is, in the knowledge of it,
which makes me wonder, how he is such a zealous Saul, and is zealous for the
Law of God, and yet has no apprehension of it at all in the Light of God: I
wish heartily that the Light to Saul at Damascus might shine round about him,
that he might become a Paul, seeing he is so zealous, then might his zeal, be
profitable toward the furthering the Salvation of Man.

8. But so long as he is in such a way, as to blaspheme reproach and persecute,
and so to rage in blindness as Saul did, he will effect nothing, but only rave
against God to his greatest Condemnation, and will but confound those whom he
thinks to teach, and lead them deeper into darkness.

9. For he has conceived such an Opinion in his Reason, which it were much
better he had never set it down in Paper: Also I am very much afraid, that
Satan has Cast his own self-Reason, without Divine Light, into such a Prison,
and Captivated him with such a Snare, out of which it will be hard to break
forth, and without the Divine Light cannot at all be done.

10. But now seeing it is apparent, that not only he but others also are
encumbred and perplexed with the purpose or Predestination and Election of God,
and do thus represent the Omnipotence of God after such a manner, wherein they
go on in ignorance very confusedly, and understand Nothing of Gods Will to
Good and Evil, much less do they know what God is, from whence horrible
Opinions are concluded of, and yet this Man in such confused Reason so
shamelesly entendeth to disgrace and suppress my Writings which yet have a far
deeper Ground, then he ever understood; therefore it shall be a little
signified to him, to try whether he or another will thereby become seeing in
God.

11. Not with intent to contemn but to instruct out of my Talent which is
given to me of God: For men know very well that I am no Doctor from the School
of this World, if it were not given to me I should not understand it.

12. And though I did not so highly seek, yet it has been given to me without
my knowledge: I sought only the fountain of Christ, and understood Nothing of
the Mystery what THAT was; but now it is also afforded me as a Favor, to see
the Substance of All Substances; in which without the Light of God I should
indeed be Blind.

13. But seeing the Man with his Pamphlet annexed so my Writings, understands
nothing at all of the Mystery of the Substance of all Substances, much less
the Principles to the C^nter in the Principle; and yet undertaketh to reprove
my Writing, also with a strange understanding quite Contrary to my sense or
meaning, and perverteth my Sense or Thoughts into a strange and very foolish
understanding, only to bring sorth his conceits under such a semblance, which
neither consists with the Ground of the Holy Scripture, nor with the Light of
Nature; therefore I am as it were necessitated to wash the Dirt from my sense
and apprehension.

14. Seeing he begins so artificially, and drags the Scripture by the hair of
the Head to it, that it must serve him as he will have it, let the Ground and
Cornerstone be where it will, whether there be such an understanding in the
alleged Terms or Texts or No, only that he may bring Scripture and Letters,
and exchange words with words, and thereby cloak his Erroneous meaning with
such a semblance, so he does but bring Scripture for it: and though many times
in my Writings I handle not just that very Matter, that he would answer with
Scripture, but bring clean another Meaning; and that he perverts my sense to
the quite Contrary, and thereby would make it suspected: therefore I will a
little summarily and briefly answer him to his aspersed Objections; Not in that
Manner as to Contend with him; but for those to consider of that read my
Writings.

15. For a true Christian has no Contention with any Man, about Religion; he
that contendeth about words, and despises his Brother, is blind, and 2 These.
3. 2.
has not the Faith.

16. For FAITH, is not a Historical conceit, but a right Life, the Spirit of
God must be generated in the Center through the Principle of the Soul, and
spring up in the Mystery of the Mind, and therein Rule and Shine, it must be
Man's Will and Deed, yes, it must be his inward Life and understanding, and Man
must be resigned into if, else there is no right Faith or Divine understanding
in a Man, but only Fables and Babel, Contention and Clamor, to tear and rend,
about the Husk and not enjoy the Kernel.

17. Therefore I say now; Is Gods Spirit in my scorner? why then is he a
Scorner and Contender? Has he the Faith, why then does he despise Christ's
Children and Members, whose Christianity is earnest and Sincere? Christ said;
Joh: 13. 35.
Love one another, thereby Men shall know that ye are my Disciples; Also, 1
Cor. 5. 12.
Do ye not judge, those that are within, God will judge those that are
without; Is he in the Spirit of Christ? why then does he despise the Spirit of
Christ? Or is Christ become at Odds with himself?

18. O dear Sirs and Brethren, take it into consideration, and look upon the
holy Scriptures rightly in the Spirit of Christ, and then ye will find that a
right true Christian has contention with no man; for Phil. 3. 20.
His Conversation is in Heaven, as Saint Paul says: from whence he continually
expects the Savior Christ, that Math. 6. 10. Luke 11. 2.
Gods Kingdom in him may come and Gods Will in him be done; Math. 18. 11. Luk:
19. 10.
Christ is come to seek and to save that which is lost, what should then the
Spirit of Christ in the Converted Man, will, otherwise?

An Admonition, also what the First Principle or the Dark World, is; and how,
the Fire is not the First Principle.
19. Dear Sirs and Brethren, I tell you in good will and faithfulness, as I
have obtained Grace in the Spirit of Christ, Note.
that a Divine Spirit dwells in no contemning and scorning derision or
disgrace: but go out from that, and tread the Contention in the Mind,
underfoote, account it as Dung.

20. And seek the Life of God in Christ with earnestness, when you get that,
you need no other Master to teach you, the Spirit of God will well teach you,
lead you and drive you, yea he will teach WITHIN you: For it is written, Joh:
6. 45, Isa: 54. 13. Jer: 31. 34.
They shall all be taught of God: and Christ says; Joh: 16. 15.
The Holy Spirit shall receive of Mine, and make it known to you within you.

21. All outward Teaching, does not lay fast hold in Man, unless Man cast his
desirous will thereinto, how will it then take hold in the scorner, who
brings an Envious opposition against the Spirit of Christ.

22. Dear Sirs and Brethren, do but see and consider him, what the poor
blind Man in his Pride and State sets before him, he reproves that which he
knows nothing of, and that which he has no apprehension of, which I very
much Lament that the Man runs on thus without any Ground.

23. He begins to reprove, that I have written concerning the Great MYSTERY of
the Eternal Nature, out of which the Third Principle, viz: the Outward World,
with the Stars and Elements are become generated and Created, and yet
brings nothing to Light, that Men may see, that he understands somewhat of
the Ground, and Center; he says, The Word and the Wisdom of CHRIST, are the
Mystery, viz: the Outpoured Glance of his Glory, in which every thing is
Created; who is it now that striveth with him about that, that Joh: 1. 3. Col:
1. 16.
all things are created by God through his Wisdom; I have in all my Writings
written so; and it needs not his Gloss or Exposition at all.

24. Only the Question is, out of what God has Created them; If he will say,
that Evil, as also Earth and Stone, also all venomous or poisonous Creatures,
and particularly SIN, are generated out of the outpoured Glance or Luster of
his Wisdom; then he speaks as a blind Man of Colors, which he has never
seen.

25. But, that he brings forth such a sad and miserable meaning, Men see,
sufficiently, in that which he writes concerning the Will and Election of God,
and so thrusts all into Gods Predestination, and drags the Scripture by the
Hair of the Head to it, quite contrary to the Meaning of the Scripture: Oh
that the Confused Man might come so far, as first to learn to understand the
Center of the Eternal Nature, and of all things or Substances, before he speak
of the Great Mystery of all things or Substances and reprove those to whom the
same is revealed or manifested from God.

26. If he will now put it so, that all things were in the Great Mystery of
God; then he must distinguish the Word of Love, and the Eternal Name of God;
from Gods Anger and fierce Wrath, in which he calls himself Deuteronomy: 4: 24.
Chap: 9. 3. Heb. 12. 29.
a Consuming Fire.

27. If he will say, that the Consuming Fire is Gods Wisdom and Love, then he
will say, that Hell is Heaven, and that the Heaven, wherein Gods Majesty
shines, is the Darkness; If he will not admit, that the Center to the Fire of
God, is an Eternal Darkness, whereinto the Devil plunged himself, when he
despised Gods Meekness.

28. If now this outward World with all things or Substances therein, is become
generated only out of the Word of Love, out of the Holy Name of God, out of the
Wisdom; why it is then called, and is, Evil and Good, and moreover, a vale of
Misery, full of anxiety and Toil? why then did God Gen: 3. 17.
Curse it for the sake of One Sin?

29. If it be the Mystery of the Wisdom, why is it then without Divine
Understanding; but if it be not that, as he also does not determine; then I
ask, what kind of Mystery is THAT out of which it became Created, that it is
Good and Evil whether is it an inceptive or beginning Mystery or an Eternal
one, seeing the blind Man will know Nothing of the Eternal Nature, and
knows not nor will not distinguish the Clear Deity from the fierce Wrath of
God and the Eternal Nature: whereas he has a true similitude of this in Fire
and Light, and in whatsoever thing out of which the Fire burns, if he did but
see.

30. If he will not admit, that before the time of this World, there has been
a Mystery in the Eternal Nature, in which the Eternal Nature from Eternity in
Eternity continually Originateth, wherein Gods Anger and fierce Wrath from
Eternity becomes generated, wherein the fierce Wrathful hard and Stern
Property has Generated Darkness and a Mist or Cloud or Vapor; and yet has
been like no Mist, but the fierce wrathful Spirit has had such a property,
wherein all Evil is understood; as also the stern Earth; Then let him tell
me, out of what THAT is proceeded; and tell me further, how the Life can
subsist without the Fires property; and whence the Fires Property Originateth.

31. Let him show me another Center, then I have shown him in the book of the
Three Principles, as also in the Book of the Threefold Life of Man, and yet
much more, deeply and fundamentally, in the Book of The Sin Points, of the
Great Mystery of the Substance of all Substances, concerning the Thr^^ Worlds;
how they stand one in another as ONE, and how they Eternally support
themselves, and each is the Cause of the Other, so that in the Great Mystery
there is nothing Evil, nor any thing without a Cause.

32. Let him first come into the School, and learn the A, B, C, before he call
himself Master, it is not to go upon strange Feet, if one will speak of the
Mystery, to furnish or adorn himself with strange Masters or Artists, but to
understand it himself; himself to have the Spirit of understanding, or else to
leave the Mystery undefiled, and let those speak and write of it, to whom God
has manifested or revealed it.

33. His Tattle which he drives on, with his drawing the Holy Scripture to it,
takes or reaches not my sense and understanding at all: The Children of God
speak in their apprehension and Gifts, not out of the Mouth of others, but
their own, and I speak also not out of the Mouth of others, but out of my own:
but out of One spirit we all speak, every one out of his own Gift; what does
that avail the unintelligent, to whom the Mystery of God is not entrusted? why
does he reprove us all before he rightly understands one of them.

34. Learn first to understand the Center of the Eternal Nature, and how to
distinguish the Clear or bright Deity from Nature, and learn how the Deity
reveals or manifests it self through Nature, and Learn what Gods Wisdom
is, how it is the out spoken Substance of the Deity; and what the Divine-Life
is, and then what the Nature-Life is; also what a Principle is; e're he wittily
subtillizeth: Let him first learn beforehand, what the Eternal Tincture is,
and what the One Element is; also what Paradise, and Heaven, are, what Evil
and Good are; Let him first go into the School of Pentecost; that he may
attain that Spirit, in which only there is understanding.

35. But he must first 1 Cor. 3. 18.
become a Fool, and then come to be Nothing, as the World supposes, if he will
attain the Spirit of the Mystery, that God may be his Will and Deed, and then
let him come, and I will speak with him of the Mystery, else let him leave my
apprehension unreproved.

36. If he be a Christian let him Live in Love toward a Christian, and rejoice
in the Gifts, which God gives us one among another; why does he brag and
reproach so much, that shows him to be a Proud Man, let him deal Meekly, and
I will meet him meekly; if he understand any thing according to his Gifts, let
him praise God, and not contemn that, which God gives to another, if he can
not endure to read it, let him leave it for those whom God has called
thereunto, to whom HE will reveal or manifest it.

37. Is not that a wonderful thing; that he will reprove the Three Principles,
and understands not out of what Center and understanding the Spirit speaks:
he will begin the first Principle with the Fire, where then remains the
Center out of which the Fire originateth?

38. Let him tell me, how the Eternal Nothing introduces it self from
Eternity in Eternity, into an Eternal Center, and how the Eternal Nature from
Eternity continually generateth it self; whereby the Eternal Will, which is
called God, manifests or reveals it self from Eternity.

39. With this his half-mute, Description, he will not bring me into it; but in
My Book of the Six Points he will well find it, let him read that; it is like,
he will become seeing, if he but seek and begin aright.

40. When I write of Three Principles, then I understand Three Worlds, as
First, the Center to Nature, the Dark World, in which the Fire, or the
sharpness of the stern Might originateth from Eternity, the Form to the
Fire-Life, in which property Gods fierce Wrath and Anger also the hellish Fire
is understood: from whence the Nature-Life Originateth, which is not called
God, and though indeed it is Gods, yet it attaineth not the Name and Divine
source or quality in its own Essence, as Saint John Witnesses, Chap. 1. Verse.
5. Where he says; The Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness has
not comprehended it, and this shows it self also in the Outward World, how
the Light shines or gives Light in the Darkness.

41. Now if the Fire be the First Principle, as he says; then let him tell me,
whether the Darkness comes out of the Fire, or whether the Fire makes
Darkness; Also what that is which Makes Darkness; and how all this thus
generateth it self from Eternity in Eternity.

42. I suppose here, my Pamphlet Maker, will remain Mute, he will indeed be
silent concerning it, unless he go with Me into the School: but he should
first put off the Click of Pride; else this Schoolmaster will not receive him,
he will have Children at School, which look and trust upon him: Not Lords.

43. When I write of three Principles, then I write of Three Worlds, of Three
Eternal Beginnings, how they generate themselves.

44. I understand with or by the Principles, Not the Chaos, the Eye of the
Ether, which dwells without Ground or Place in it self, but I understand,
How the Eye of the Ether Manifests or Reveals it self, through and with
the Principles, and introduces it self into Power Might Shining Glance and
Glory, viz; with Desire and Lust or Longing Delight; where, in the Desire the
first shutting in, is effected, which is a Darkness, where the Desire is the
first Center to Nature, which introduces it self into the source or quality,
into the perceptibility and perception, even into the Fire, viz: into the
fourth Form, as is sufficiently Described in our Books, viz: of the Three
Principles, also of the Threefold Life, also in the Second Book of the
Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, concerning Christ's Suffering and Dying,
and yet higher in the Six Points: to which Books I refer the Reader, and so in
this Part, which the blind Man opposes, it is not here expressed at Large.

45. Now if Gods Fire, which generateth the Glance or Luster of the Majesty, be
the first Principle; and yet in the Darkness, the source quality or Torment
and Pain, and moreover the stern Life, is generated, and also the Fire it self
Originateth out of the Darkness, viz: out of the sharpness, with the aspect
or appearance of the Liberty in the Lust or Longing out of the Chaos; then tell
me now my Opponent, whether the Dark World be a Principle, or whether He or I
be blind in the Mystery.

46. I know also very well that the Fire is a source or quality of Every Life,
but I say that the Root of the Fire is Dark; and that the Dark world is not
called God, for it is an Enimicitious quality in it self; a Cause of Nature.

47. Indeed it is Gods, and God who manifests himself, through the Dark World
with the Fire, in the Light of the Majesty, is its Lord, for it becomes
generated in the Desire of the Chaos, out of the Abyss in the Nothing, and in
the Desire introduced into Darkness, but the Lust or Longing Delight, of the
Chaos, to the Revelation, takes only thus its Sharpness and Fires Might to it
self, and yet brings it self again through the Dying in the Fire, wherein
the Darkness dies, understand the Darknesses substantrality, forth through
the Fire into the Light, and makes another or Second Principle, of another
source or quality, viz: Joy Meekness and Love-Desire.

48. Thus the Dark-source or quality-Spirit, remains to be in it self an
anguish and Pain, and is called Gods Anger and fierce wrath, and the kindled
Fire in the Fourth Form at the Center, is called a Consuming Fire, whence God
calls himself an angry, Zealous or Jealous, fierce wrathful, God.

49. And here understand Death and Dying, as also Gods Holy Kingdom, also his
Anger or Kingdom of Hell; viz: the Darkness is the Eternal Hell or Hole
wherein Lucifer Batheth himself, and into which the wicked Soul goes; and the
fierce wrath to the Fire-Life is the right hellish Fire-life therein, and yet
there is no far distance from God, but a Principle only severeth them.

50. As we see a Similitude of this, in Fire and Light, where the Dark Matter
in the Fire, Dies, and the Light shines out of that which dies, and dwells
in the Fire, and the Fire comprehends it NOT.

51. Also the Light is not of the Fires Essence quality source or Torment, for
the Light gives Meekness and an amiable Wesen.
thing or Substance viz: out of that which before was a Dead Dark Substance, a
Water and herein lies Mysterium Magnum the Great Mystery: My Dear
Pamphlet-Maker, seek and you will find, knock and it will be opened unto you.

52. Your Conceit is a Dead understanding, as to the Mystery, if you be taught
of God, then go with me to the Center, and then I will show it you in all the
things of this World, yes in your very SELF: I will have nothing excepted;
wherein I will not show you the Similitude of the Three Principles: Forbear
your reproaching and become a Child, then it will be shown you; but I will not
cast the Pearl under your Feet, know that, nor under None.

53. I have my knowledge and skill not from Conceit or Opinions as you have,
but I have a living skill or knowledge in the visibility and Experience or
perceptibility: I need no Doctor from the Schools of this World about it, for I
have not learned it from them, but from Gods Spirit; therefore I am not afraid
of your Clamor and Scorn.

Of a right Christian. And of the Divine Wisdom the Eternal Virgin that is no
Genetrix.
54. Dear Sirs and Brethren in Christ, I pray be Scholars of Gods Wisdom,
let none say of Himself, I understand it, we know nothing concerning God, what
HE is; but Gods Spirit must become the knowing in US, else our knowing is but
Fiction, a continual Confusednesse, a 2 Timothy 3. 7.
continual Learning and understanding nothing in the Ground of the Center.

55. What is it for me to speak much of the Wisdom out of the Scripture, and
could repeat the Bible Or know the Bible outwardly: inwardly were better.
without Book, and understood nothing of what the Wise Men have spoken, and out
of what Spirit and knowledge; if also I have not the same Spirit which they
had, HOW then shall I understand them.

56. To such knowledge belongs not Conceits, and to collect together a heap
or abundance of Texts to his purpose; THAT no Holy Man, or wise Man, has done;
but a living Spirit out of God can See the Mystery, and converse in its own
knowledge.

57. Gods Spirit must be IN the Reason, if Reason will see God; there belongs
an humble resigned heart to it, not a Scorner in Reason; where Reason boasts
it self to be enlightened, that is only a Sydereall or Starry Enlightening, to
be so NOTE.
sharp witted.

58. If any be a Child of God, then let him seek his Brother in the Love of
God, and then I can trust him, but while he is a Scorner, he has put on the
Devils Vizard and Hood, and goes about in Pride, he is no Christian, but a
Mouth or Lip-Christian and Consufed Babel: as indeed such Books of Controversy
or Contention and Hypocrisy are ALL Babel.

59. Let one show another the Way of God, in Love, Humility, and in the Fear of
God, as becomes the Children of God, then such Contemning would not exist in
the World, whereby the simple Layick is seduced; and totally ignorant of the
Cause, falls on in reproach and Contempt, against his Brother who is not of
his Opinion or Sect of Religion; and yet One in a Religion, which without Gods
Spirit and Power, is but a conceit and Opinion, is as blind as the other.

60. For the true Religion stands not alone, in outward Words, in appearance
or show, but in Living active power, that one desires from the Ground of his
Heart, to perform to another what he knows he ought to do.

61. It must come into deed, else it is but a Colored or Painted faith a
Historical Babel; where Gods Spirit is not, there is no Faith; also no
Christian; but where that is, there it works clear works of Love, he
teaches and reproves Meekly, he is not puffed up and Scornful; as my
Opponent.

62. He will needs write out the Ground of the divine Wisdom, and scorn my
Explanation, which I have spoken from the Center, and Confirm himself with the
Collected Texts of Scripture, and despises that which I have Written: That the
Wisdom is a Virgin without Generating, that she is NO Genetrix, but that the
Spirit of God is her Life and Generating, which Reveals or Manifests in her
the Divine Wonder; and he will set that which is better in the stead thereof.

63. He says, the Wisdom suffers and Generateth; and he collecteth a heap
of Texts for proof: Who now is at odds with him in this: Not I: I say the same;
and he writes but my words, but understands not my Sense or Thoughts, he is
at Odds with himself.

64. I speak out of the Center, and he from the Substance that is Generated, I
understand, that the Wisdom is not the Center or the Opener, but Gods Spirit
is that; I understand thus, to speak in a Similitude, that as the Soul in the
Body, manifests or reveals it self, through the Essence of the Flesh; and
that the Flesh had not the Might or strength if there were not a living Spirit
in it: so also Gods Wisdom is the Out-spoken Substance, where through, the
Power and the Spirit of God manifests or reveals it self in Forms,
understand in Divine Forms and Shapes in the Wonders.

65. It generateth or bears indeed, but it is not the Divine Principle or the
Center of the Genetrix, but the Mother wherein the Father Works.

66. And therefore I call it a Virgin, because it is the Modest Chastity and
purity of God, and carries no Desire backward to the Fire; but its longing
pleasure or Lust of Delight goes forward with or in the Revelation or
Manifestation of the Deity.

67. She could generate Nothing if the Spirit of God did not work in her, and
therefore she is NO Genetrix, but the Looking-glass of the Deity, the Spirit
of God generateth in her; he is her Life, she is his Chist, Cabinet, or Body;
she is the Holy Spirits Corporeity, in her lie the Colors of the Virtue, for
she is the Out-spoken Substance, which the Father comprehends out of the
Chaos, that is out of himself without besides beyond or before Nature in the
Nothing; and brings the same forth with the desire to Nature, through the
Eternal Nature, through the first Principle, through the Fire of his Might,
into the Second Principle, in the Divine Power, into the Light of the Majesty.

68. It is that which the Father, from Eternity in Eternity continually
re-comprehendeth, which the Father who is a Fire and Light, introduces into
his Fire-Life, to the Center of his Heart.

69. She is the highest Substantiality of the Deity; without her God would not
be Manifested or Revealed, but would be only a Will, but through the Wisdom he
brings himself into Substance, so that he is Manifested or Revealed to
himself.

70. And therefore I call her a Virgin, being she is in the Marriage with God:
so that she generateth without a Fire-life, for in her the Light or the right
Divine Life, Manifests or Reveals it self, she is a Virgin of the Modest
Chastity and purity of God, and yet is in the Marriage with God.

71. Thou subtle prudent School or University from the Constellation, if thou
did here understand the Ground, thou would NEED NO Books more, ALL lies
herein, the Stone of the Wise Men, or Philosophers STONE, lies in this place,
but first put off your rough Garment, and then you will see it.

Of the Third Principle, which is the Bride of God: and how the Spirit of God
is no Principle and yet is a Principle.
72. NOw when I speak of the Third Principle, I understand the Outward World:
Then says my Opponent, God has made it through his Wisdom, and proves it by
Scripture; and I say so to; but I proceed not mutely, I say out of what; for
God has given me the knowledge; It is Not I my self that know it, but God
knows it IN Me.

73. The Wisdom is his Bride, and the Children of Christ, are in Christ in the
Wisdom also Gods Bride: Now then if Christ's Spirit dwells in Christ's
Children, and if Christ's Children be Branches on his Vine, and one Body with
him also one Spirit; whose now is the knowledge is it Mine or Gods? should I
then not know in the Spirit of Christ, out of what this World is Created, if he
dwells in me, which has created it, should HE not know it.

74. Therefore now I submit and will know nothing, so far as I am self, viz: in
that part from the outward World, that he may know in me, what he will. I am
not the Genetrix in the knowing, but my Spirit is his Wife or (...) which he
generateth the knowing, according to the Measure (...).

75. As the Eterna^^ Wisdom is the Body of God, and he generateth therein what
he will; then now if he generateth, it is not I that do it, but he in me, I am
as Dead in the generating of the knowledge, and he is my Life, and indeed I have
neither sought it or learned it: he inclines himself to my Minehood, and my
Ihood inclines it self up into him.

76. But now I am Dead, and understand Nothing, but he is my understanding,
therefore I say, I live in God, and God in me, and so I teach and write of him,
Dear Brethren, and otherwise I know Nothing

77. Bear with my folly a little I pray, in that which I tell you, not for my
own boasting, but for your Learning and knowledge, that you may know, whom you
scorn and despise when you deride me, I will not hide it from you, but mean it
heartily.

78. I have written of Three Principles, which are known in Me, but weakly, as
a Scholar which goes to School, so it has gone with me.

79, My Opponent writes of Four Principles, and calls the Spirit of God a
Principle also, according to his meaning, though I bring no Controversy into
HIS meaning about it, he may make Ten, for the Wisdom has neither Limit nor
Ground, but he neither understands my meaning nor his own.

80. Let him tell me, How the Holy Spirit is a Principle; or what does he
understand by a Principle? will he make the Clear Bright Deity to be a
Principle? which is Eternal without ground and Beginning, which dwells in
the Nothing, also possesses nothing but only it self? I can not speak so of
the Principles; but I speak of the Three Worlds; in and with which the
Incomprehensible Deity manifests or reveals it self.

81. One of them; with or by the wrought power in the Desire to the Eternal
Nature, viz: with the Spirit of the Dark source or quality, through which the
Will of the still Eternity sharpeneth it self, and brings it self in the Fire
through the Light, and so the sharpness remains Eternally only in it self,
and yet in the still Will of the Meekness thus receives a Cause, in the
sharpness, to the Kingdom of Joy, and yet also remains not Essentially
standing, with the Spirit, in the fierce wrathful sharpness.

82. But the Root is a Darkness, and the Spirit goes forth out of the Chaos
through the Root through the Fire in the Fathers Property, through the Second
Center of the Love and Kingdom of Joy into the Light.

83. Now therefore that very SPIRIT which is the Life of all in every Substance
or Thing according to its property, is NO Principle; but according to the
Eternal Nature of the fierce wrathfulnesse, it is a Principle.

84. Thus also the Second Principle, subsists with or by the Divine World, viz:
where the Divine Power with (...) of the Majesty is poured forth, which is
justly accounted (...) THREE Persons.

85. But the Principle in the Fire, is to (...), where the Dying is, and out of
the Dying another Life (...), viz: out of the Fire a Light, and yet there is no
dying, but a consuming source quality or Torment, and out of the Source Quality
or Torment, the high triumphing Spirit existeth; where then, Gods Love-Will,
and Anger-Will, severeth it self into two Worlds, viz: into Light and
Darkness, and he is called God according to the Light, and according to the
poured-out virtue or power of his Wisdom.

86. But the Eternal Divine Original, is not in the Eternal Nature; the Will
to Nature is sooner, and THAT Will is the Chaos, wherein all lies, and the
Spirit existeth out of that, and Manifests or reveals it self with or by,
Light and Darkness, Therefore I call not the Spirit of God, a Principle: for
it is without or besides all Beginnings, yet with the Eternal Beginnings,
manifested or revealed with God in Trinity, though the Ternary also is in the
Chaos: as is expressed in the Book of the Six Points.

Wherefore the Outward World is a Principle of its own; its Model is Eternal.
87. NOw when I Write of the Third Principle, then I also say, that God has
created all things through his Wisdom, but out of the Spirit which is called
God, this World is NOT Created; for it is called Evil and Good, and a
Murdering Den of the Devil.

88. Also it is not generated out of the Divine Wisdom, but by or through the
Wisdom; the Wisdom is Not the Matter of this World, else I must call a Stone
Gods Wisdom; and Sin also; but it is generated out of the two Eternal
Principles, of both Worlds Substantiality, viz: out of the desires of BOTH.

89. God the Father who is ALL, has moved himself with the Creation of this
World, that is, in the Forms of both Worlds, of both Natures, and has created
Angels, understand out of the Spirit of the Eternal Natures.

90. For, if a Spirit be to subsist, in the kingdom of Joy, then it must have
the Center in it self, out of which the Joy Originateth, viz: the Center to
the Dark World, which is the sharp might, else it would be a stillnesse,
without Moving.

91. Therefore, when Lucifer contemned the Light, he remained in that part of
the Darkness; for his Will went out from the Light, and would domineere in the
Fires Might, whereby he angered God according to the Fires property, that is, in
the Principle in the Fires property.

92. Thus I say, the Outward World is a Principle, that it has a Life of its
own, generated out-of both the inward Spiritual Worlds, viz: a Revelation or
Manifestation of the First and Second Principle, a Model or Similitude of the
Eternal Nature, comprised in the desire of the Eternal Nature, and Manifested
with a Beginning, and included in a Time, which with the End goes again into
the Eternity.

93. This Model or Time has stood in Gods Wisdom; which the Wisdom has
manifested through TWO Spiritual WORLDS, with the Moving of the Eternal
Father, and that which is Revealed or Manifested, goes out of both Eternal
Principles, viz: out of the Light and Dark World; and thus Joh: 1. 5:
the Light moves in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not.

94. And herein lies the Drawing to Evil and Good, and here is that which the
Scripture says concerning the Will of Man; Rom: 6. 16.
To which you give your selves as servants in Obedience, either to the Light of
God, or to the Darkness in the Anger of God, to that you are servant, and into
that you go, to which you are obedient, of THAT you are led and drawn, also
Elected for children; they are BOTH Gods, but the Light is only called God or
Good.

How the Soul is out of all the Three-Worlds, of its Might and Free Will; of
the drawing of the Father; and what is called to Believe above Reason.
95. MY Opponent writes, that the Soul of Man, is inbreathed into Man, out of
the Mouth of God, and I have no Strife about that, and it needs no Gloss:
But I speak not blindly as he does; I say, out of the total Wonder of God, out
of the Center, out of the Will to the Eternal Nature, that is, out of the
Chaos, and out of the Eternal Nature, that is, out of the two Eternal
Principles, out of Darkness, Fire, and Light, a total Image and Similitude of
the total Deity of the Substance of all Substances.

96. And I say, that the Spirit of God, has inbreathed it self, according to
all the Three Worlds properties, for it is the Life and the Spirit of all
Substances, in every Substance according to its property.

97. For, before the times of this World, there was Nothing, no 18. 26.
Life without him: but it is as the Scripture faith; With the Holy thou art
Holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse.

98. In the Holy or Saints he is the Divine Kingdom of Joy; and the Divine
Life; but with those, which incline their will into Gods Anger in the
Darkness, he is Gods Anger-Spirit.

99. Indeed God himself is ALL; for from him all is proceeded; why then do we
longer Contend so much about God, let us strive after that which is Best, after
Love, then we become Children of Gods Love.

100. Why will you * Deny Man Free Will? surely his Soul is vsagen.
created out of the highest Omnipotence of God, and has Divine might or
strength, if it enters into the Love of God; as Christ teaches us; That we
should not only do such Wonders or Miracles as he did with ^: 14. 12.
the Fig Tree, but much greater; if we had but Faith, then we could with one ^:
22. 21.
word, cast the Mountains into the Sea.

101. He has indeed told us he would give us Faith; for he said; My Father
will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him for it; ^k: 11. 13.
his words Must be true, and whosoever speaks against them, are Liars:
Moreover, he says; Math: 9. 13.
He was come to call Sinners to Repentance, and not the Righteous.

102. What folly is it to make or set and impose Election upon Man, and take
away his Free Will: has not the poor Sinner Free Will; that he CAN Come? Why
then does Christ Math: 11. 28.
call them to himself? Math: 11.

103. You say with the Scripture, Joh: 6. 44.
There can none come to him, unless the Father Draw him: very right, I say so
too: Romans 9. 16. 18.
It lies not in our doing willing or running; but in Gods Mercy; He draws
whom he will, and hardens whom he will; it is all right; but you are Blind;
and understand it not aright.

104. If it lay in Man, then did Salvation stand in Man's strength or might, to
become saved through an Opinion; as, or how, he will, and though likely, the
old Evil Man which dyed in Adam, continue.

105. Therefore, Note, Note.
when we dyed in Adam, then we lost the own self (...), and lay in Gods Mercy:
and it was instantly said; Joh: 3. 3.
You must become borne of God again, if you would see God.

106. Now at present after the Fall; we have no power as to the kingdom of
Heaven, to meddle with it: but if we obtain the Spirit of Christ, which has
of Grace generated it self again in our Souls, then Math: 11. 12.
the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent snatch it to
themselves.

107. It is not in our ability, that we snatch it to our selves, but the
ability is Gods, who has introduced it again through Christ into us; we
cannot take it with force and own-selfe Right, but of Grace it is promised to
be bestowed.

108. Now it lies not in that we hunt after it in own selfe-reason, and
willing to take it; but it lies in this; that we cast our selves again into
the Bosom; viz: into the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ; viz: into our
New Mothers Body or Womb; viz: into a New Becoming Man or Incarnation: that we
with our Will be in the Obedience of Christ's Will, that we become Nothing; viz:
nakedly and barely a glimps or Seed of a Will, that Christ became our Will, and
his Becoming Man or Incarnation be our Becoming Man or Incarnation, his
New Birth out of God and Man, our Birth out of God and Man; his slaying of the
Anger of God in the Center of the Soul; our slaying, his Resurrection our
Resurrection; his Eternal Divine Life, our Eternal Divine Life; then it is
really so; that Joh: 6. 37.
whosoever comes to me, viz: into my Becoming Man or Incarnation, that is,
into me, him I will not thrust away. Also, Joh: 10. 27, 28, 29.
my Lambs are in my hands, none can pluck them away out of them; and the Father
who has given them to me; is greater than all; Land the Father are one.

109. Dear Brethren and Friends, do but understand the Drawing of the Father
aright, it should not so be understood, that God hardens any, who desires to
convert from Sin; but those who do not desire that, the NOTE.
desire stands in our Will, but the Conversion stands in Gods Mercy.

110. But now he has promised the Mercy out of Grace, to the desiring Will:
for he says; Ezekiel: 1. 3. Mal: 3. 7.
Turn to me, then will I turn my self to you; Also, Math: 7. 7. to the 11.
Luk: 11. 9. to the 14.
Knock, and then it will be opened unto you, seek and then you will find, ask
and then you will receive: What son is there that asks his father for an
Egg, and he gives him a Scorpion: Can ye that are Evil, give good gifts to
your Children, how much More my heavenly Father.

111. Note.
Will thou now say, God hardens thy Heart and Will, that thou can not ask?
prove that out of Scripture; or will thou say, thou can not believe? that is
also NOT true.

112. Can thou not believe? then cast all thy Sins into the becoming Man or
Incarnation of Christ, into his Spirit, and be in him as Dead; Note.
let HIM in THEE believe, how or as he will; why do thou long take care or
perplex thy self about strong Faith which overthrows Mountains, it stands
not in thy power, to believe SO.

113. Only take care about a true earnest sincere Will, go out from Sin, and
strive against Sin in Flesh and Blood, desire it no more, become its Enemy,
have Enmity against it, let God make of thee and believe in thee, as strongly,
as he will: depend on God, and wrestle with him, as Jacob did the whole night,
who then said; Gen: 32. 26.
I will not let thee Go unless thou bless me; and David said, Psalm: 30. 5.
Though it continue all the Day, and in the Night, and again till the Morning;
yet my heart shall not give over.

114. This is really, to believe above all Reason, when the Heart receives no
Comfort, and yet depends on God; and says in the Will; LORD, LORD, I will
not leave thee, whether thou cast me into Heaven or Hell, I will not forsake
thee; for thou art mine and I am thine: I will be Nothing in thee, make of me
what thou will.

115. Dear Brethren, observe it well, Note.
This storm and force, at last breaks Heaven and Hell: whereof my Opponent
as I understand, in his very lamentable Writings, knows nothing at all.

116. He says, Man should stand still, and expect what God will do with him,
whether he casts him into Heaven or Hell; Man cannot prevent or hinder it, it
is concluded in Gods predestinate purpose, or Council; whether he will cast
every One; O the Most Lamentable Place, and Miserable Faith, God pity us, that
we suffer our selves to be so blinded.

117. If we cannot come to God, why then does he bid us to Come, Christ indeed
says; Luk: 5. 31. Math: 18. 11.
he came into this world to seek and to save poor sinners; also, he came to
seek that which is Lost; viz: the poor condemned Sinner, whom God had clearly
drawn into the Darkness, and firmly included therein, and Chosen him to be a
Child of Darkness; the same is Christ come to seek, and to save, and not the
Righteous, who is honest or pious beforehand, look upon the Father of the Lost
or prodigal Son; how he did with the Swineheard; who had spent his heavenly
Goods, with the Devils Swine.

Of the Gross Error of Balthazar Tylcken, Concerning the Seed of Adam upon
which he builds his Election.
118. MY Opponent will make TWO Seeds in Adam, out of which Naturally two sorts
of Men become generated from the Mothers Body or Womb, one out of the Seed of
the Woman, and the other out of the Seed of the Serpent, therefore God Loved
the One, and forsook or hardened the Other; and will prove it with Cain and
Abel, also with Jacob and Esau: upon which he builds the Election.

119. But I tell you Dear Brethren; if at that time when he wrote such
Blasphemy against God and Mankind, he had been asleep, how happy had the time
been: thus he makes of the Image of God a twofold Image, out of One Seed Two
Seeds; One party he ascribes to the Devil, viz: to the Serpent; and the Other
to the Woman's Seed.

120. But I would ask him, Whether Cain and Abel, as also Jacob and Esau, were
both conceived from the Seed of Father and Mother; or whether at the Time, when
Cain became conceived, there was in that very Seed in Adam and Eve, out of
which he became conceived, a mere fleshly Essence, as he gives forth; then
must even the Devil have wrought or effected that very Seed in Adam and Eve,
for which, God, out of his predestinate purpose has rejected him; or let him
but tell me, who wrought or effected that same Serpents Seed in Adam and Eve,
of which he speaks: being he will not permit him to be Good and Evil
according to the Two Inward Worlds, and so makes a Total Separation.

121. O thou totally blind lamentable miserable Reason! be but advised; The
Door of Grace stands yet wide open, do not thus seduce the Children of
Christ, Acts 20. 28.
Whom Christ has purchased with his precious Blood; who there says; Math: 11.
28.
Come all to me who are heavy laden with sin; observe yet the Center, and the
Ground of the Will of God, look upon the Center.

122. John says: Joh: 1. 5.
The Light shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness Comprehended it not; do
you not understand this? when Adam was in his Innocence, then his Light also
shone to him in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended not his Light;
but when he Imagined after the Darkness, that is after Evil and Good, then
the Evil, quenched out his Light to him; and the Darkness became manifested
or revealed on him, then the Divine Substantiality dyed to him, understand, the
Divine Bodies, or heavenly Fleshes Substantiality, and the outward Spirits, and
the outward Elementary Fleshes Substantiality, awakened or arose; and gat a
beastiall property.

123. Also together in that beastiall property, awakened or arose the Spirit or
source or quality of Darkness, viz: the First Principle in Gods Anger; and so
he dyed to the Angelical World, viz: to Paradise, and awakened or arose to the
Outward World which is Evil and Good, out of the Two Inward Spiritual Worlds.

124. The Dark World should not be manifested on Man; for the Light, understand
the Divine Light, shined in Adam in the Darkness, and the Darkness, viz: the
first Principle could not Comprehend the Light; but when Adams Imagination went
thereinto, Note, when it was that the Darkness Comprehended the Light, in Adam.
then the Darkness Comprehended the Light: and all the Three Principles were
stirring and manifested or revealed in Adam.

125. For, Adam would be as God, and know Good and Evil, which God did forbid
them; that they should not Eat of Good and Evil, else they would dye, but the
Devil persuaded them, they should become wise thereby; yes wise Indeed! so
that, when their Eyes became opened, through their Imagination and Earthly
Eating, that they knew the outward beastiall property, which became manifested
or revealed on them; Note, Note.
the poor Soul was ashamed and is still ashamed to see the Beastiall Property.

126. The Outward Body on Adam, was indeed before the Fall, but not Manifested
or revealed to the Soul, as now at present the Kingdom of Heaven is in us, but
to the Soul in its outward Part in this World not Manifested or revealed: A
Child of Christ, lives at present in this World with the New Birth in Heaven,
and the Eye of the averted or Reverse Soul, sees it not: but the Eye IN Christ
sees it.

Why God hated Cain and Esau, and loved Abel and Jacob, and which are those
lost sinners that Christ is come to save.
127. Dear Brethren, do but understand it aright: Cain was not begotten out
of a total Devilish Essence, out of the Serpents Seed, but out of the Essence
of all the Three Principles, of all the Three Worlds, for as Adam was after his
Fall so also was his Seed.

128. But know this; when Adam fell, then came the Three Principles together in
Adam, into Strife one with another, viz: Gods Anger-Kingdome, Gods
Love-Kingdome, and this World Kingdom: Cain was Comprehended in the
Anger-Kingdome, and Abel in the Love-Kingdome; therefore rightly said God of
Jacob, Mal. 1. 2, 3 Rom: 9. 13.
Jacob have I loved, and hated Esau; thus also it was with Cain and Abel, Cain
had comprehended the Anger-Kingdome; viz: the First Principle in the Essence in
the Seed in the Mothers Body or Womb in the Wrestling, and Abel Gods Love, viz:
the Second Principle; And now Cain was of an Evil kind or Condition, and Abel
honest or virtuous.

129. Now, see Dear Brethren; when Cain and Abel Sacrificed, then God, that is
Gods Love and Meekness; viz: the Second Principle, Gen: 4. 4, 5.
savoured Abels sacrifice, but Cain's God would not accept: then Cain was in
fierce wrath against his brother Abel: there ye see the Strife between the two
Eternal Principles, between Love and Anger in both the Brothers in Man; how
the dark fierce wrathful Kingdom, is become also manifested or revealed in
Man; then said God to Cain, Gen: 4. 6. 7.
Why art thou in fierce Wrath? Is it not so, that when thou art honest or
virtuous, thou art accepted, but if not then Sin rests before the Door;
but rule thou over it, and let it not have the authority or preheminency.

130. Here observe: God said Rule over sin; let it not have the preheminency
or power: Had there not been in Cain, wherewith he could rule over the Evil,
then God had not bid him do it, though likely the Anger in him was mightier or
stronger than in Abel; yet he was not therefore altogether begotten out of the
Angers Essence, but out of the THREE into ONE: Christ is come to seek and to
save that which is Lost, as himself says, and not for the sake of the
righteous.

131. Now who are those that are lost, Cain, Ishmael, and all poor Sinners
comprehended in the Anger of God; who were NOTE.
lost from their Mothers Body or Womb, for their sakes is he become a Man or
Incarnate, and calls them all to him, they should come whosoever will, they
should seek, pray, and knock, and he will give them the Holy Spirit; and if
they come there is more joy, at one alone lost Man comprehended in the Anger of
God, among the Angels of God in Heaven, than at Ninety and Nine Abels or
Jacobs, which need no repentance, which became comprehended in the Love in the
wrestling-wheele, in the Center of the Three Principles.

132. God loved Jacob, understand, he was comprehended in the Mothers Body or
Womb, in Gods Love, which co-worketh therein, and Esau was hated, for the Anger
had comprehended him: But now the hate is not so to be understood, as if God
would not have the lost Sinner; No, but for the sake of the Sinner is God
become Man, and Come to call the poor Sinner to Repentance, and to the New
Regeneration, out of the Anger in the Soul.

133. And Christ said, thou would Not; Math: 23. 37. Luk: 13. 34.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children together as
a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and thou would not; Also, Micah
7. 1.
How feign would I eat of the Best Grapes; but I am as a Vine-gatherer that
Gleaneth.

What the hardening is: And how the Love of God warns the Sinner: Also how
the Love of God is as well Omnipotent to preservation as his Anger is to
Destruction.
134.

Question.
NOw says Reason, What is THAT Now which Wills not? Seeing God calls the
Lost Sinner, and wills in Christ to have them, and new Generate them; is that
the Fathers Hardening?

Answer.
Yes indeed it is his Angers hardening; and the Devils Will; understand it is
the Dark Worlds Will which hardens Man, but it cannot do that TO Death, but
as a Dark Night.

135. But what does Gods Love, viz: the Second Principle; to that Man? It
complains very often IN the Heart, when Man desires Sin: and says commit
it not, or do it not: Gods Anger, will burn in thee; fear Gods judgment,
and it warns Man of his wicked ways; now if he follows the Free Will and
Converteth: then it is rightly said: To the Honest or virtuous; that is so long
as he is honest or virtuous, the Light must arise or spring up to him out of
Darkness, and then the Light begins to shine in the midst in the Darkness.

136. But if thou say; He cannot convert, it is impossible; then thou
speak in the Might or Strength of God, and against all that which Christ
says: he came for the sake of lost Man, because he would seek and save him;
should then Gods Anger be greater than his Love; Christ has undeniably, broken
the hard Death and fierce Anger of God in pieces; which held us captive in the
Center of the Soul, to the bands of the Dark World, viz: of the First
Principle, and Col: 2, 14, 15.
made a show in Triumph of Death in the Soul, on the Cross, so that the
Scripture in the Spirit of Christ says; 1 Cor. 15. 55, 57.
Death where is thy Sting? Hell where is thy Victory? the Snare is broken and
we are delivered; thus sings the Church of Christ.

137. Dear Brethren, I will ask you; what Profit is there in all Teaching and
Preaching, if GOD do harden Man's heart, as my Opponent says; that he can not
understand, and receive it in; What need Men Preach to the Righteous, who run
their Course without it? But Christ says, he came for the sake of the poor
lost Sinner, and not for the sake of the Righteous, which need not Repentance:
Do you not see, that Christ Drove the Devil out of those that were clearly
already possessed of the Devil? and received them for Children: Also, Out of
Mary Magdalen the great Whore.

138. Though now indeed the Scripture says: Romans 9. 18.
He hardens whom he will, that is meant of the Stubborn arrogant Sinner; who
sins against Grace, and does but ^^arn God under a flattering hypocritical
show; he flattereth him with the Mouth, and his Spirit entendeth only falsehood
and wickedness, from those he withdraws himself at the Last, and lets him
go on in his flattery and hypocrisy; who will help him, who takes his own
Will in for a helper; Would he be helped, then must he go out from his own
Will, and be resigned up into God.

139. Then thou say; Rev. 19. 6. Math. 20. 15.
God is Omnipotent; and may he not do with Man's Will, what he will; It is he
which is Potent in all things; Isa. 50. 8.
Who will Contend with him? as the Scripture says; and my Opponent urges that
mightily.

140. Hearken my Opponent: you are much too young for that matter: Learn first
what God is: What his Will in Evil and Good, is; thus there is a Chain fixed
in Reason; but know also: that Heaven is against Hell, and Hell against Heaven,
the Anger against the Love, the Darkness against the Light? What do you here
mean concerning God; if I should speak after your manner; that God is Mighty to
do all in all things: as indeed it is true: then must I say, that God is ALL,
NOTE.
He is God, He is Heaven and Hell, and is also the Outward World, for Romans 11.
36. 1 Cor. 8. 6.
from him, and in him all things Originate: But what do I effect by such
Discourse, which is no Religion; such a Religion the Devil receives into
himself, and would be Manifested or Revealed in all things, and be Mighty
Potent in all.

141. Then thou say: Thus God is at Odds with himself, being he is Evil and
Good: O thou Dear Reason, learn the Center here, or stay at Home with thy
Teaching and Writing: Behold! I tell thee this: If there were no Anguish, there
would be no Fire; if there were no Fire, there would be no Light; if there were
no Light, there would be neither Nature nor Substance; and God would not be
Manifested to himself: What now would there be then? A Nothing: when thou will
come on to the Center, then thou will see it: Concerning this very high Article
I refer the Reader to the Book of the The great Six Points.
Six Points concerning the Three Worlds: there he will see what God is: and
what his Will and Omnipotence is, and what is called God.

142. For if his Anger be Omnipotent to destroy, then is his Love also
Omnipotent to preserve: if this Contrariety were not, there would be no Life;
and there would be no Good, also no Evil; For if there were No fierce Wrath,
there would be no Moving; thus the Substance of all Substances is a continual.
Working Desiring and Fulfilling; the Fire Desires the Light, that it may get
Meekness and Substance, for its burning or Life; and the Light desires the
Fire, else there would be no Light, and it would have neither Power nor Life,
and they both Desire the Dark Anguish else the Fire and Light would have NO
Root, and all would be a Nothing.

143. Therefore I say unto you now (...) Gods Love is as Great as his Anger,
his Fire is as great as his Light; and his Darkness as great as Note Note.
either of the other; it is all alike-Eternall without beginning and it
begins it self from Eternity with or by the Darkness; and brings it self
from Eternity to the Darkness into the source or quality even into the Fire,
and in the rising up of the Fire, is the Eternal Death; where the Darkness
and the Light separate themselves, each into a Principle in it self; and the
Light also it self possesses it self; One dwells in the Other unapprehended
by the Other; there is in Eternity no parting asunder: those that dwell in the
Darkness see not the Light, and those that dwell in the Light see no Darkness.

What God is; and how without the Darkness all would be Nothing: and in what
Manner Man has Ability or Strength to go out of Evil into Good and out of
Good into Evil.
144. THen, says Reason, what is God then: Or who is God, when it is said: God
hardens Man's Mind? Behold he is All, but the Light alone is called God, for
in the Light is Power or Virtue, Love and Meekness or soft gentle Substance;
and in the Fire, horror Might and Life.

145. Then thou say; thus the Darkness is a Cause of the Deity? NO: but God
would not be Manifested or Revealed, and there would be no Nature nor Creature
without the Darkness; neither thick nor thin, or Dense nor Rare, neither
Color nor Virtue.

146. God is indeed without besides or beyond Nature, but without Revelation or
Manifestation of any Form: through the Eternal Nature he Manifests or
Reveals himself, in Trimity, and with the Wisdom in Wonders, and with the
outward Nature Manifests or Reveals the spiritual Worlds: viz: with the
Time the Eternity; but whatsoever has its beginning out of Time, passes away
with Time, and its Shadow remains in Figure according to the property of BOTH
the Eternal Worlds: as it wasbefore the Times of the World.

147. Therefore Observe now: Note Note.
Gods Anger makes the Dark Mind Or pregnant or satisfies it.
full; and Gods Love makes the Light Mind full; Math. 13. 12. Luke 8. 18
For whosoever has to them it will be given.

148. But now all stands in strife: the Light against the Darkness, and the
Life against the Death, and the Death against the Life.

149. But Note Note.
Man is out of the great Substance of all Substances; and in him is the Strife;
now if he be Captivated in the Evil or Malice, then he cannot avoid the Great
Evil; unless he fall into Death; that is into the Nothing, then he is free
from the Turba; or Wrath; and falls into Gods Mercy; for his Will goes again
into that out of which it is Existed in the Creation at First; viz: into the
foreseeing or Predestination in CHRIST JESU, before the Foundation of the
World was laid; there it is at the Limit and fallen again into the Fiat, and so
Christ conceives or receives it.

150. For, Joh. 17. 6. 24.
the Men were Thine, said Christ; and thou O Father have given them unto Me:
Joh. 10. 28.
and I give them the Eternal Life; Father I will that they be where I am.

151. But whosoever remains in that which is his own; as he is NOTE.
Born or generated to this World; he remains in that; as he is apprehended in
the Wrestling-Wheele in the Center of the Life's Springing up: Now therefore it
stands FREE for him; to go out of the Good into the Evil; and out of the
Evil into the Good.

152. NOT that he has the Power, to make himself a Child and Heir, that is
done out of Grace, but the Maker stands ready for him, and waits for him
Every Hour, to Evil and to Good; Hell desires him, and Heaven desires him,
both Desires stand ready for him and open in him; ALL the Time of his Life; he
has Hell and Heaven in himself; if he go with his Will out of God into
Reason, in Flesh and Blood, then is he IN or upon the Ground or Foundation of
Hell; which will when the Light of the SUN extinguisheth, be manifested on him:
but if he demerse himself out from fleshly Reason; in Resignation, into God,
then he is IN Heaven; All lies in the Will: Whithersoever the Will enters,
thither Body and Life or Substance must after it; and THAT, in Man is FREE.

153. Has Man Might or ability, with his Will, to demerse himself into Gods
Anger; as my Opponent acknowledges; wherefore also not into Gods Love; Note.
but he cannot Make himself a Child; he goes only with the Will into the
Matrix, and then the Divine Fiat apprehends him, and Makes him One: Indeed
he can not make himself a Devil, the Hellish Fiat according to the Dark Worlds
Property Makes him One, when he does but give his Will up thereinto.

How Balthazar Tylcken is the Devils Advocate: How the Devil does assault none
More with Despair, then the Children of God; also Concerning firm Confidence
of the Faithful.
154. MY Opponent says, The Soul is proceeded out of the Mouth of God, and it
is true; but if it be proceeded out of the Mouth of God, then it is proceeded
out of the Divine Omnipotence, why then does he take away the Free Will from
it, It has Free Will in Evil and Good; he speaks so much, as if I should
say; I can think nothing that is Good, I can never frame any good Will in me,
to do any Good.

155. But the Scripture reproves him and says thus; Say not in thy Heart, if
I Sin, God has done it; for the Fifth Psalm 5. Psalm. 54.
Thou art not a God who art pleased with wicked Matters: And in Ezekiel. 33. Ezekiel.
33. 11.
As true as I Live, I will not the Death of a Sinner, but that he Convert and
Live.

156. But he says, God hardens him out of his Predestinate purpose, so that
he cannot Convert; who now shall be righteous, the Prophet or my Opponent? The
Scripture answers thus; It is much more so, that Romans 3. 4.
God is true and every Man a Liar.

157. My Opponent sets it down evidently, and gives it forth to be so
understood, that God willed the Fall of Adam; if the Magical Paradisicall
Birth had not pleased God, else would Gods Majesty not have become manifested
or revealed; if that were true, then God were unrighteous, in that he did
forbid Adam to Fat of Evil and Good: why then will God Judge me for it; and
account or impute that for Sin, if I do what he wills to have.

158. But I say, the Devil willed to have it so, that Man should Sin, and
that the Earthly became Manifested or Revealed in Him, of which he is ashamed;
and my Opponent thereby affords the Devil a right Advocate, which I verily:
Lament, that this Man speaks even the Devils Words and Will; and so casts a
Snare of Despaireing, on to Man's Neck; he gives so much to be understood; that
Man NOTE.
cannot be saved, though he would never so fain, unless he be Elected to it;
that is assuredly the Devils Doctrine and Word.

159. Where will the Tempted remain, when the Devil assaulteth him and says:
Despair, thou art Not Elected of God, he should by that Doctrine Despair and
say, I can do no more, if God will not have me then thou may take me away.

160. And yet he is so Holy, and tickleth also some dissembling Hypocrites, and
says in the Pasquill or Pamphlet, It is a great Comfort to the Children of
God, viz: To the Elect, when they find by themselves, that they are Elect
Children of God. O how many dissembling Hypocrites would not lie under this
Mantle, if Sin Sleep.

161. O alas, Miserable Doctrine; O man, open thy Eyes wide and beware; the
Church of Christ sings;

Woe er is it am besten mit, da will er's nicht entdecken.

Where he is most pleased with Man, he will not always show it.

162. Whom does the Devil assault with Despair, but even the Children of God,
that they might not be manifested or revealed, and God often hides himself,
that they might cry aloud anxiously to God, for so the Noble Pearl-Tree grows.

163. He often shows himself strange to his Children, so that they can
oftentimes fetch no Comfort: as the Math. 15. 22, 26, 27.
Canaanitish Woman, when he likened her to a Dog, only that the Faith and
earnestness might become greater in the Storm, he lets the heart even
Quake or Tremble, that the Earnest may become great.

164. Now if doubting thus seizes upon a Man, then with this Man he must
Despair: It stands written, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
God wills that all Men should be saved. Which now is true? your Cripled
Election or Christ's Promise?

165. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
It is a precious worthy Word, that JESUS CHRIST, is come into the World, to
save all poor Sinners: Who has now the Right? I will remain by the Words of
my Savior, and will believe, that Romans 8. 38, 39.
Nothing, whether it be High or Low, whether Power or Principality, whether
Hunger, Nakedness, vengeance, Perils, also No Creature can tear or separate me
from the Love of God which is in Christ JESV.

166. And if all men did say, thou art dainned, and if my Heart also did say
it, yet I will not believe it, but demerse my self into Christ's Sufferings and
Death, and let the Death of Christ make of me what it will, if I must be in
Death, then will I be in his Death, and in no other; but seeing his Death, is
become an Eternal Life, Note.
therefore I shall well remain in him, let who so will Elect me there, I Bled
or choose my Savior Christ: my Will shall remain in him; though the World in
Gods Anger make of the Outward Body what it will; when I have him; then I ask
not after Pope, Turk, Emporour, Devil, Hell, nor Heaven: he is my Heaven, I
will be Dead and a Nothing; that he may live in Me, and I in him; and if Body
and Soul should break in pieces, yes I will not depart from him; what now will
the Mo^^ion or Proclamation do to ME?

167. I have Elected to my self, my Savior, and he has Elected me, even
before I was, I believe NO otherwise, let any Teach or Write what they will; he
that will venture and try it with me shall find it by (...): I am sure it is
the right way, therefore I speak and write thereof; for it is my Passime and I
rejoice that I shall come to this, that I shall be delivered from the Or
Accuser.
Opponent of the Anger of God.

168. Therefore I say to my Brethren, what the Lord has said in Me; whosoever
will go along, lee him come, he that will not, but will look upon many
Elections, and expect till the Spirit of God fall upon him and draw him let him
stay there till that bosom, if he will not labor and Work with God in his
Vineyard, then he has also no Wages to expect. I know not how to get any thing
our of B. T.
his Description, that they refresh me, but only Sadness and Sorrow of heart,
Doubting and Despair.

How Nothing is impossible to Faith. What Gods Drawing is. Why the Wicked
Becomes Not Drawn. What a right Christian is: and who becomes hardened by God.
169. MY Opponent in Scorn says; Could God Create nothing steadfast? He
likeneth us Men, as to God, to be, as the Note of the Potter etc. See Chap. 9.
in the Book of Predestination. And Romans 9. 21.
Potter and Clay or Lump, is One to the Other: Hearken my Opponent: why then
doct thou say, that the Soul is proceeded out of Gods Mouth; how does that
accord with the Clay and the Potter? What Man would become a Pot, for a Pots
sake? Or if that were possibles; Is God become Man for a handful of Earths
sake? O No, it is an other Manner of Pot, wherein God became Man; It was also
another Pot which brake in Paradise; look upon Numb. 17. 8.
the dry Rod of Aaron which Sprouted and hare Almonds; ask it what it
signifies, it will tell thee.

170. My Dear Scorns; thou understandest nothing thereby, where in God is
become Man; much less concerning Gods Creation, of the Possibility and
Impossibility; thou say only God, God, and know not what God in, also
thou will not know it, only thou say; Joh. 3. 27.
A Man can take or receive to himself Nothing in God, unless it be given him.

171. Note.
I know also well, that I can do Nothing in my own Might or strength; The
Faith can do it: that can receive where there is Nothing: If I cast my Will
into Gods Will, then GOD believes in My Will; and then I can receive, for
nothing is Impossible to Faith: I can receive to my self the Becoming Man or
Incarnation of Christ; if My Will, wills, yet I cannot do it, but Gods Will
in Mine.

172. My Will and Gods Will must be One; for my Savior has told Me he will
give the Holy Spirit into my Will, if I but ask him for it: And should not that
be true then? would my Opponent deny me also to Ask? I can Ask, THAT none On
deny.

173. Now Christ has promised to hear; and though I find it not instantly in
the power or virtue, yet if I ask; THEN I believe that God has given me his
Spirit; and though my heart and all the World should say clearly No: yet I will
let the Words of Christ be more certain to me, then all Bablings and Fictions.

174. Am I indeed the day Staff or Rod of Aarow? in me lies the Drying or
withering, through Adam: but if Christ has introduced his Sap into my withered
Flesh and into my Dark Soul again, shall I not take or receive it to my self?
shall I first expect the Drawing?

175. I know that I can have no Good Thought in me unless it be from God; Now
if I would feign be saved, then I know, that very Will is Gods Drawing; why
should I long then expect other drawing, if the Lord calls in me, and bids
me turn to him, is not that Drawing? but, what Man, can say, he is not SO
drawn? Even none at all: God draws every one.

176. Note.
The evil Man will not follow, he goes on in a disputable Way, and seeks
Subterfuges or Excuses; and says he is Holy; and his Heart is a Thief, and
Covetous, a Murtherour, and moreover a Proud Devil; he flattereth himself only
under Christ's Purple Mantle, and tickleth himself with Christ's Suffering and
Death; but will not enter thereinto; and with Christ dye to Sin and become an
Enemy to it, he will only walk upon Roses in sat and Jolly Days, and devour
the sweat of the Miserable in Pride, for says he, God draws me not; yes thou will not: therefore he hardens thee, and his Anger draws thee, also the
Devil, whom thou servest.

177. Should God draw thee? then cast the false or wicked ways from thee, set
thy self as if thou were to meet an Enemy, where it concerns Body and Life: If
the Anger draws thee and holds thee: do but Defend thy self and thou will
soon get One that will help thee.

178. Does the Anger in the Conscience Say? thou art mine, thou can not be
saved, then say in opposition, I take only CHRIST'S Death with me, and do with
me how thou will, take that and wrap thy self therein, let Gods Anger and all
Devils roar over thee and say and complain against thee what they will, out of
these Swaddling Clothes shall no Election pluck THEE whether it be of Vix: Of
Gods Anger.
God, or the Devil, or Man.

179. But the Wanton Licentious way which men now walk, wherein Men only tickle
and comfort the Old Evil wicked One, the Murderer, the proud stately,
Covetous Babylonish Antichrist, with Christ's sufferings and Death, he should
only be quiet, and fatten himself well, Christ has satisfied; if he be marked
or noted under Christ's Blood Banner, and Elected; then he cannot be damned;
this way is totally false or wicked, Murtherous and unrighteous.

180. If thou will be a Christian, then thou must be and become conformable to
Christ's Image, and walk in his Footsteps and with him, suffer persecution,
disgrace, and scorn, love the way of Truth and Righteousness, do that which
Christ has taught thee; not with hypocrisy, to take double or fourfold; and
give a little piece of it to another: No, it must be earnest; thou should not
Esteem any thing thou have, as if it were thy own, only; but consider that
thou art only a servant therein, and servest thy Lord in Heaven, therein, thou
should dispose of it according to HIS pleasure.

181. Not to suck up the Miserable, and give a little piece thereof to a
Beggar: and say I minister indeed to the poor: First, (...) them their Sweat,
else thou will be accursed in all thy Service of God, and be kept back from God.

182. Serve him with Mind and Heart: walk in the Light; let the scorn of the
World, be Joh: 20. 25.
the Prints of Christ's wounds, to thee; labor watch and pray, and stand
always in care and circumspection against the Devil; Arm and fortify thy
self continually against him; and consider thou art here a Pilgrim; and in the
Vineyard of Christ; labor faithfully in the Kingdom of God: all thy Labor
follows after thee; for Christ said; Joh: 5. 17.
My Father works and I work also; so must thou also, as Joh: 15. 5.
a Branch on the Vine work and bear fruit.

183. For a Christian is a Branch on the Tree of JESUS CHRIST, if it will not
work and bear fruit, then it Romans 11. 22.
shall be cut off, that it hinder not other Branches, that is it must quite
wither and he hardened as to the Life of Christ: these will God harden. Here it
is said; Rom: 9. 18.
I harden whom I will; viz: a Branch that will not bring forth fruit; to such a
one God will not give the Sap of Christ; It is not said, Note Note.
God will not be mine; but thou will not be his, and so you are parted.

184. Do thou say? God can make of me what he will, he is Omnipotent; he
makes of thee what thou will, his Love is Omnipotent, and also his Anger; THAT
which gets thee; holds thee; The wicked is to God a good savor to Death,
and the Saint or holy, is so to the Eternal Holy Life: as thou growest, so
thou art, such Sap as thou drawest into thy self, such Fruit thou bear.

185. Why do thou blame God? God so far as he is called God, CANNOT will
Evil; for he is Good, there is no Evil Will in Him, but according to his
Anger, he desires Wood or Fuel in his Fire, which is conformable to or fit
for the Fire.

186. Therefore rightly says the Apostle; Rom: 6. 16.
To whom you give your selves for servants in Obedience, his servants you are,
whether of Gods Love or Anger: Here the Apostle speaks of Man's Election, that
Man CAN give up himself, and be given up: and though indeed of himself he
cannot take or receive, yet God gives him the taking or receiving, for he has
promised it him.

The abominable Doctrine of Balthazar Tylcken: Admonition not to doubt of
Election: Admonition and Warning to Balthazar Tylcken.
187. THe Doctrine of My Opponent is throughout no other; then this, If God
make a Good Tree, then it is so; that is, if he make one a Christian, then he
is so, as if Man need do nothing in it, he need not work and labor for it,
that he may become a Good Tree.

188. Alas; God (...) us, why has God given us the LAW and Teaching; and said,
thou shall not do this, or that; If he will have Evil: How very shamefully,
goes this Man astray, how very careless and negligent, does he cause Men to
be; Dear Brother, Mind and Consider of this abominable Doctrine; How he
gathers the Texts of Scripture together, for a false service to God, only
that he may prove, that God works, both Good and Evil in us.

189. What needs proof for that I say so too: that Gods Love works Good in
us, and his Anger, if we give our selves up into it, works evil fruit to
Damnation: but what does it avane him, to bring men into such a careless
negligent way? He should rather tell them, that they should Repent, as God
says in the Prophets; Psalm: 95. 7, 8. Heb: 3: 7. 8. and 4. 7.
To day when you hear the voice of the Lord, Harden not you hearts: Let my
word enter into your Hearts and Ears.

190. But he says; It cannot Enter; God makes either a Good or an Evil Tree:
this serves well to all careless negligence and wickedness; and lastly to
Despair; that is the end of his Doctrine, you will find nothing better or
more in his Grace Election or Predestination.

191. And I say with good ground, and it is the precious truth; that if such
Doctrine should become embraced or received, then will the World at length
become a Murdering Den of Devils: For every one will say; how can I do
otherwise, then God drives me, if God will have me to be his child, he will
teach and lead me well enough, but if I be not Elected, why should I long
favor the Honest and virtuous; I will do as the Devil does and hate them,
and be their Enemy, to his kingdom I belong; I will steal, rob, murder, and
cheat, and deceive the simple: that I may be potent and voluptuous; there will
no other come of it, being God will not draw me, therefore really I must serve
God Lucifer; but if God will have me, he will well draw me from THAT, that I
shall not do it.

192. Alas, be not so Evil and wicked, do not that, God has forbidden it,
let every one have a care of his own salvation, and Phil: 2. 1^.
fear the Lord with Trembling; let no Man despair; and say, there is a fast
door upon me, I cannot be saved, for such Thoughts the Devils have, and the
Damned in Hell; If I knew there were but seven Men Elected in our City or
scarce two, I would NOT despair, but believe that I were one of them.

193. My Opponent, consider your self, for the sake of your Salvation: when
you shall appear before the Judgment of God; and Christ shall say to the
wicked, who in such Doctrine have become, lazy careless and negligent, go
Math: 25. 41. etc.
away from me ye Cursed, I was hungry, thirsty, sick, naked, and in Prison, and
ye have not ministered unto me, and they shall say, Lord, thou have not Elected
us for children, and drawn us, then will he say, have I not caused my
goodness to be prelented to you, and caused my Word to be taught, and
faithfully called you, and warned you of the false or wicked way? and they
shall say, we have been Taught, that thou have out of thy predestinate purpose
Elected one to the childship or filiation, and hardened the other; now being
that sslandeth in thy Word, why will thou blame us then, we were able to do
nothing that was Good.

194. My Opponent, I put you in Mind of this, Consider I pray, what will you
answer, that you have expounded thus; that, the Anger of God, which God in his
Love, in the Soul of Man, has drowned with the blood of his Son; you make to
be an Electour again, you give the Sword into its hand again.

195. The Anger was indeed in Adam before the Fall, yet not manifested or
revealed, and the God of Love has set his heart upon it, that he will boult it
up again in the humane Soul, that we should run to him as to an Open Fountain.

196. I would have you asked: that if Adam had continued in his Innocence,
where the^ had remained your Eternal Election or NOTE.
Predestination, if he had begotten children in Paradise; therefore now if you
will maintain your Eternal Election over Man, then must you say, the Fall of
Man is also out of God predestinate purpose.

197. But what means that which God said; Gen: 2. 17.
Thou shall not eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, if he would
have that to be done, and has also forbidden it, then God were unrighteous,
and Men need keep no Commandment which he has forbidden in Moses: For he would
have if that Man should Sin, that he might have cause to punish him; thus it
were to be Concluded in Reason.

198. Beloved, Consider your Gloss or Exposition, I will speak brotherly and
Child-like to you, put but away your Crooked scornful Horns, and let us deal
one with another as Brethren, and Members: with scorn, we can advance Nothing
that is Good, we do but deceive the Men in the World, that are plain and
simple, therewith.

199. If you have Christ's Spirit, as you would be thought to have, then meet
Me and my Brethren, in the Meek Love and Humility of Jesus Christ, show me I
pray you, your love in the Spirit of Christ, who came in great Humility to us
poor lost children of Eve, to seek and save that which is Lost; If you be a
child of that Spirit, be so, faithfully, with Meekness, Love, and
Friendlinesse, with modest speech, and cast the Horns of scorning away: that I
may know that you are my Brother: then will I be very Loving to you: if God
give you more then me: but if not, yet I will in that weakness, rejoice with
you, and refresh my self in that which God gives.

200. And be not so furious against the dear Revelation, which God has
favored US with at Last; read it first aright; it has a very Noble precious
Original and beginning, which reaches above all Reason, yes, above, the
Outward World, and above the Light of the Outward Nature, why do you rage
against the Most High?

201. I Christianly admonish you, take heed what you do, that the Anger of the
Lord, do NOT take hold of you, and God Curse you, I tell you I will be
guiltless as to your Soul; if you do awaken it.

202. See what was done by 2 Kings. I. 10, 11. Numb: 26. 10.
Eliah: Also to Corah, Dathan, and Abivdm, in the Wilderness: I tell you for
so much as it is known to me in the Lord, it may happen so to you and more
besides, for at present it is a Wonderful Time; not known or acknowledged by
All; The Lord has sent his Spirit of Zeal or Jealousy; There is a Wonderful
time before the Door, which you will find by Expersence, if you Live.

Of the Eternal Predestination and Election of God; The beginning and End
thereof is One only, and Always the same.
203. MY friend, you speak after a humane Manner; and write of Gods Eternal
Predestination and Election; it will not bear to be so written of.

204. When the Scripture speeks of Gods Eternal purpose or Predestination; it
speaks not of a purpose or predestination that has been Long before; for in
God there is no beginning: but there is an Eternal beginning, where the
beginning and the End is all ONE; the First is continually the Last; and the
Last is the First: whatsoever God has begun, from Eternity to foresee, that he
begins now also at this Day always every Moment to foresee.

205. I CAN say with good Ground, thus, that if I were in my Mothers body or
womb, comprehended in his Anger, then God had from Eternity seen me and
apprehended me in his Anger; and I were from Eternity Elected in his Anger.

206. But if I convert in Repentance, so that Gods Love apprehend me, then I am
also from Eternity foreseen out of the Anger into the Love; for in God, ALL is
Eternal, Note Note.
whatsoever at this day, begins to alter in the Eternal, that is, from
Eternity, to Eternity, equally in the Eternity.

207. The Spirit in the Scripture has another kind of speaking, than the
World has: Know you not how it stands written in the Scripture? where the Lord
says; Note Note. Jer: 18. 7, 8.
Suddenly I speak against a Nation or people, which are Evil, that I will
destroy it, but if they convert, then it repents me of the Evil, which I
thought to do unto them.

108. Look upon Jon: 3. 2. 10.
Nineveh, there you shall see whether God does not alter his Will, for Man's
sake: and the Apostle says, that even 1 Cor. 14. 32.
the Spirit of God, is subject to Man, viz: to Holy Men.

209. NOTE.
His Election and beginning is always every moment, his Eternal Birth or
Geniture, is also every moment, in him and before him, is all, both New and
Old: for the same God who Ephesians: 1. 4.
has Elected us in Christ before the foundation of the World; he also every
moment Electeth his Children that come to him: the Matter consists only in the
Conversion of the Will.

210. And though it stands written, that it lies not in Man's willing: that
is only concerning those, that Desire God, and yet will not go forth out of
their sinful Will, they keep their sin, and yet will be saved, Note.
therefore it lies not in HIS Willing, but in this, that Man go out from
sin into Gods Grace; and then it lies in the Mercy; and that God does
readily, for he has promised it.

211. Note.
It lies not in Man to make himself blessed or saved, but in the Grace, which
God in his Son has promised and bestowed: for 1 Timothy: 2. 4.
God wills that All Men should be helped or saved, as the Scripture says;
his Election and out going is from Eternity, and his Mercy is also from
Eternity in Eternity, ALL is in him ETERNAL.

212. Therefore Men should better consider the Scripture as to such Terms or
Expressions; for it often speaks out of the Eternal Mouth, which begins
every Moment.

213. Note.
For, when the Scripture faith, Joh: 12. 40.
He hardens their Hearts, that they believe not, and so come not to be saved,
then it speaks of those, who would be saved by their own ability, in their
Evil Will and Life: those he suffers to go on in their purpose or
predestination, for they will do it.

214. As also Adam did, he would not be resigned into God as a Child, but be
his own, and apprehend and know Good and Evil, and Live in all the Three
Principles; for he went out from Gods will into his own, of set purpose,
therefore God left him, and then he fell down and slept.

215. And when he did eat of the forbidden fruit, then Gods Anger Elected him
to the Damnation of Death, and Gods Love spoke against it, saying, The Seed of
the Woman shall Bruise or Crush the Serpents head, and that was also an
Eternal Election, and yet it was also a beginning Temporary Election: for how
can an Election pass upon a thing, when as yet it has no Root.

216. Note.
Gods Anger has from Eternity continually and still at this very day: Elected
IT SELF to be a Darkness; that Gods Love and Light might in the Anger become
Manifested or revealed.

217. Now that which is out of the Eternal, as, the Soul of Man; that has
also Free Will, to manifest it self in the Light, or in the Darkness; NOTE.
NOT that it has the Light and Darkness in ITS power; but it has ability to
work in Good or Evil, that is in the power of the Light, or of the Darkness,
and in which soever it works, that manifests it self, in it.

218. The Might or power is Gods, and the Soul is his Child, a Branch in the
Tree, proceeded out of Gods Mouth; out of Love and Anger; all THAT lies in it,
and is its own propriety.

219. Who will then take away the Free Will from it, being it is a Branch in
the Eternal Tree, and has Love and Anger in it self; Or is it not true? My
Opponent speaks Even so, that the Anger lay hidden in Adam before the Fall,
and has manifested it self with the Fall.

220. But he makes me Wonderful beginnings in the Seed of Adam, One with God,
another with the Serpent, and that is a gross Error, there are not TWO sorts
of Seeds, but ONE only, but two sorts of Dominions lie in the Seed, viz: Gods
Love and Anger, and is but one only Seed.

221. But as to one part from the Divine Substantiality, from the Holy and pure
Element, in which the Paradise and Heaven ^^eth; as also the Tincture of Fire
and Light, that very Seed disappeared in Adam when he fell, whereof God said;
Gen: 2. 17.
The day that thou eatest of this Tree, thou shall dye.

222. And the other Seed, understand Spirit, is the Center of the Eternal
Nature, viz: of the Dark World, according to which God calls himself an
Angry God, but that was not stirring and manifest, while the Light shone in the
divine heavenly Paradisicall Substantiality; but in the Fall it became
manifested or revealed.

223. But now, Adam was also shut up in the Dominion, and in the Spirit of the
Outward World, but that must in his Innocence go also behind and come after;
for Gods Kingdom ruled in him: but when he fell, then it became also
manifested and powerful in him, and instantly, heat and Cold, fell upon him,
so that he must cloth himself; and he fell by the Outward Worlds Might into
the Corruptibility of his Body.

224. Now what kind of Seed should become generated in Adam, out of which Cain
and Abel could be conceived, even such a one as Adam was after the Fall, viz:
according to the Outword World Evil and Good, and according to the Anger-World
totally Evil.

225. But now the Kingdom of God, viz: the Heavenly Substantiality was faded
or disappeared in him, for the Darkness had received in, the Light in him; as
you have an Image thereof in the dry Numb: 17. 8. Heb: 9. 4.
withered Staff of Aaron which Sprouted again: So also did the faded or
disappeared Substantiality in the Spirit of Christ, when God became Man, in
that very faded Substantiality.

226. Now my Opponent with your Election, come hither to School: now show me
the Grace-Election, I will also show it you in the Divine knowledge, to me is
given to see as sharply and accutely, as any one can search. Mark this which
follows.

227. NOw when the Image was faded or disappeared, what did God with it, did he
let it fall quite away and remain in Death? No. Then instantly the Door of
his Mercy set it self Open, and said; Gen: 3. 15.
The Woman's Seed shall Crush the Serpents head.

228. Then the Dear Name JESUS incorporated it self in the faded disappeared
Image, and the Mark or Limit in this faded disappeared Image became
strengthened; which with the Revelation or Manifestation, stood in the Body or
Womb and Seed of the Virgin Mary, as a propagated Seed; for if that had not
been so, then had all those before Christ's Birth been Lost.

229. For, the high Noble Virgin of the Wisdom of God; with which Adam in his
heavenly in breathed Spirit, was Espoused or Married, that, is Immortal: that
presented it self in the Light of Life to Man, viz: to Adam and Eve, and
warns them of the ungodly ways, and continually shows through the
Prophetical Spirit, the Limit or Mark of the Covenant, where it will, with the
Dear Name JESUS, with the Word and power of the true Deity, open it self
again in Man's Soul.

The Second Part. Of the Becoming Man or Incarnation and Person of Christ.
How Christ, is become Man or Incarnate, out of No Strange Seed, but out of
Mary, and yet indeed not in Eves Earthly Essence, the Holy Ghost was the Man or
Masculine therein.
230. MY Opponent, tell me here, what the Woman's Seed is, upon which you found
your Election, you say, the Children of God must become generated out of the
Woman's Seed, as the Dew out of the Or Avrora.
Morning Redness, and reject Adam's and Eves Seed, and make a Strange Seed,
and yet God said; Through the Woman's Seed shall the Head of the Serpent be
Crushed; Who is the Woman? is it Eve? No, that you will not admit! Why? Because
otherwise you cannot Cloak your Election or Predestination.

231. Well now; if you be Learned; as indeed you go about mightily to Color
your Cause with Texts of Scripture; then show in the Holy Scripture, that God
intended a Strange Woman; you say, that Mary is not from us Men; but is a
Virgin from Eternity: that you must and shall prove, or else it shall have
neither place nor belief.

232. But I will demonstrate with strong Arguments, that the Word of Promise
goes upon the Woman's Seed, viz: upon Eve and Adam, that is, upon the Matter,
or Matrix, which was taken from Adam, out of which the Woman was framed, out of
and in which Adam should have impregnated himself, if he had stood, and had
not suffered himself to be over-powred.

233. For the Woman Eve, should have been the propagated Child, but it could
not be, and therefore she was taken out of Adam's Essence and Bone, and was
Made Genesis 2. 18. etc.
a help for him, so that the propagation must be performed through TWO.

234. Now if Mary, Christ's Mother, be not from us Men, then is Christ, not the
Son of Man: as he so very often calls himself: and where then would my poor
Soul remain, which lies Captive in a dark Dungeon? whereas if God would
Regenerate it again as the Dew out of the Morning Redness: could he not well
do it without becoming Man.

235 Besides, if Mary were not Man or Humane from us, what then would the
strange CHRIST be profitable to Me, and then it would not be true, that the
Word is become Flesh; Or how could I enter into CHRIST'S Suffering Dying and
Death, if it were not done in Me.

236. But I can with Truth say, as the Apostle says, that I believe Gal. 2. 20.
I am Crucified and dead with Christ, and rise up in and with him, and bear his
Image on me.

237. Thus says my Opponent, then Christ were conceived in a sinfust Seed, if
Eve had been the Woman in the Promise, No, I say not that.

238. Christ, viz: the Living Word, was not generated from Man's Seed, but in
the shut up Seed of the Heavenly part, which in Eve, faded or disappeared: as
the Note, the dry Rod of Aaron grew not through the Four Elementary Water and
Fire.
dry or withered Rod of Aaron signifies; he became again, the dead parts Sap
and Life; for the Sin fell not upon the heavenly part, but that dyed;
understand Substance; and not Gods Spirit, which rested in the Covenant; till
at the Limit of the Covenant in Mary.

239. The Anger of God, Manifested or revealed it self in the Earthly Part, as
a Life; and the heavenly, disappeared or faded, as God said; the day thou
eatest thou dyest.

240. He meant not solely the Earthly Death, for Adam lived Genesis 5. 5.
Nine hundred and Thirty Years e're he dyed: and God said, the day thou eatest
thou dyest, that is, to the Kingdom of Heaven; and live to the Earthly
World, as it came to pass.

241. I say not, that God became Man in Eves Earthly Essence, else he must have
had a Father; but thus himself is the Father.

242. Understand this aright; Luke 1. 35.
The Angel said to Mary, The holy Spirit will come upon thee, and the Power of
the Most High will over-shadow thee; in that sticks the Mark or Key: the
Angel said, he will come upon thee, and the Power of the Most High will
over-shadow thee; Do you not understand this? The Holy Spirit would open the
shut Center in the Covenant in the Dead Seed, and the Word of God would give it
self in with living heavenly Substantiality, into that which was shut up in
Death, and become a Flesh; the Holy Spirit was instead of a Man or Husband: he
brought the Heavenly The Eternal Love-fire and the Water of tbe One Element.
Tincture of the Fathers Fires Glance, and of the Eternal Sons Lights
Glance. He was in the Tincture, the Life and the Moving.

What Manner of Essence the Word received or assumed, wherein God and Man
became One Person: Also how Christ is a Creature, and how he is No Creature.
243. NOw understand me according to its high worth; I speak in the Vision or
Sight and not in the Opinion or Conceit; In Adam, when God inbreathed the Soul
into him then was the Soul surrounded or endued, from the Glance of the Fathers
Fire, together with the Center to the Fire, and also from the Glance of the
Light, with Divine Substantiality, Moving in Gods Wisdom or Substantiality.

244. But now, in the Fall, the Light extinguished; and only the Fire, with the
Center to the Fire, remained, that was now the Dried or withered and dead.
Soul, as the Dry Rod of Aaron signified; and Old shut up Barren Sarah Abraham's
Wife; and Old Elizabeth dead in the Womb or Matrix, the Mother of John the
Baptist.

245. This Soul was, from Adam thus dry or withered, propagated, except some
Holy or Saints in the Covenant, where the Holy Spirit in the Covenant Moved, as
is to be seen by Old Luke 1. 41.
Elizabeth; that the Child in the Covenant in the Mothers Body or Womb, when
the Spirit moved the Child's Spirit, when Mary came to her, that it leaped for
joy, in the Spirit of the Messiah; when it perceived THAT; and both the Mothers
Prophesied.

246. That stryed or withered Essence of the Soul, understand the Woman's Part,
not the Man's; although the Man's Part also lies in the Seed of the Woman, but
too weakly in respect of the Fire, the Word took or assumed to himself, with
the dead Substantiality, into the Living now opened and introduced with or by
the Holy Spirit, and God and Man became ONE Person.

247. But now understand me aright; my Opponent will not permit that I should
say; CHRIST is aCreature; and yet it is true, so far as concerns the Soul, and
the Outward Kingdom viz: the Third Principle, he is a Creature; for the
outward hangs to the Inward; else Christ had not been in this World, if he
had not had the outward Kingdom on him, but without impurity in the Similitude
of the Deity.

248. He was a Creature, and he IS one Eternally; understand as to the Soul,
and as to the Substantiality which dyed in Adam, which he with the introducing
of the living Divine Substantiality, and with the Word and Spirit of God, made
living again; and as to the Third Principle, with that he is a Creature and a
King and High Priest of Men.

249. But as to what concerns, the Eternal Word, together with the Divine
Substantiality, which now became introduced into the in death enclosed
Substantiality, Christ is NO Creature, but the first Born of the Father in
Eternity

250. Understand, in the Creature, is the new introduced Substantiality, viz;
Christ's heavenly Flesh, Creaturely; but without besides or beyond the Creature,
it is uncreaturely; for, that very Substantiality is the right true Divine
Principle; it is as great as Gods Majesty; in all places, filling all in the
Second Principle; and THAT in the Body or Creature, and THAT without the
Creature is totally entirely ONE undevided, totally one power or virtue, might,
and Glory, Paradise and pure Element; wherein Gods Eternal Wisdom dwells.

251. As the SUN shines or enlighteneth in the whole World: and so now if
there were not in the deep such a Substance as the Sun; then it would not
receive the Glance or Luster of the Sun: Note.
Thus the Gorporeity of Christ, is the fullness of the Heaven, in the Person,
Creaturely; and without the Creature, Living; in ONE Spirit and Power or
virtue, Not TWO.

Of the Virgin Mary. How Mary was no strange Virgin, but the Daughter of
Joachim and Anna, Whence the Author has his Knowledge. And what is called,
Christ's Descending into Hell.
252. MY Dear Opponent; you will needs have a strange Virgin, and you despise
my very high knowledge given me of God; was Mary? Whose Generation or descent is
sufficiently to be found in the Bible? a strange heavenly Virgin? And moreover
standing in Gods Wisdom? And from Eternity Elected or Predestined thereto?
How then came it? That, when the Angel came to her, and brought the Message?
That she should be impregnate or with Child? And bear or Generate a Son? She
said, How shall that come to pass? Seeing I know of no Man? Did not the
Eternal Wisdom then know it, how it should come to pass?

253. I Suppose therefore, my Dear Opponent, you must permit Her to be the
Daughter of Joachim and Anna; as the Holy Scripture sets it down, else our
Salvation will stand in suspense and be in doubt.

254. I ask you in earnest, if you be Gods Child then tell me: How or where
has Christ Broken Death? And whither went he into Hell? as the Church
teaches? tell me! If he has NOT received or assumed our Soul.

255. Your Conceited work of a Sacrifice alone does not satisfy me; I would
know from you, HOW Death in the Soul is become broken; neither Covenant nor
promise avails as to that, if Sacrifices could have done it, then it had been
done among the Jews; it must be done with right Heavenly Man's Blood.

256. Now, I would know, whether it be done in my Soul? Whether my Will-Spirit
have attained an Open Gate to God with or by Christ's Death; that I may say,
Gal. 4. 6.
Abba, my Dear Father; or No? Tell me this, or leave my Writings uncensured.

257. I have my knowledge from God, and not from your Fiction, Schools or
Universities; where you contend about words, as a Dog about a Bone; go with me
into the Center, be taught of God, I will show it you, in the whole World, in
all Substances, living Creatures, and Created things, I will set it lively
before your Eyes: how the greatest secret hidden Mystery is in Death.

258. Now if my Soul were not together in the Death of Christ, seeing it was in
the Father from Eternity, in the Divine Essence; then have I no part in Christ's
Death.

259. I know, that JESUS CHRIST'S precious heavenly Blood, which out of the
Divine Substantiality, became Blood, in the dried or withered Images Seed;
through the Might or strength of the Heavenly Tincture, has kindled the Fire
which was dark in the Soulish Essence, so that, the same, Souls Fire in that
very hour began to burn in a white clear bright Majestic Power Light and
Glance or Luster.

260. And there Gods Anger in the Soulish Essence was quenched, and made to be
Love, THIS is Called * CHRIST'S Descention NOTE Christ's Descending into Hell.
into Hell; when Gods Love in the Virtue or Power of the Living Word in the
Heavenly Substantiality, with Christ's Blood, brought it self into the Center of
the Soul viz: into the Fathers Anger, and overcame and quenched the Same with
Meekness.

261. That was the Smoak-Hole, white the Devil and the Serpents Seed Ruled,
and Now that very Hell became destroyed; and the Devils Kingdom in the Soul
taken away.

262. And here it is rightly said: that Note. Romans 3. 17.
as Sin came from One upon all, and penetrated from One upon all; so also
came the Grace and Eternal Life from One upon all, and penetrated upon all.
Now whosoever will not himself receive it, but expects another peculiar
Election; let him remain as he is, he may come or not come; It is said: Math.
11. 17. Luke 7. 32.
We have Piped to you, and you have not Danced; we have called you and you have
not come to us.

Question. How is the New Birth performed in Us? Also: WHAT of Us shall Arise?
263. MY Dear Brother, Tell me, if you be borne of God, and enlightened, as you
suppose, how is the New Birth performed in US? is it entering in or
exgenerating? is it not performed in us in our Souls? Indeed Christ must become
manifested in us, after the Manner as in Miry.

264. What mean you by the New Creature? Also do you understand, a New Soul?
Or the Old, which you have inherited from Father and Mother? or what do you
hold concerning the NOTE.
Resurrection of the Dead, WHAT of us must arise? For, the Soul dies not, also
Christ in us dies not; for he is once dead to Sin for and in Us. What is it
that arises? The EARTHLY Body? viz: the Evil Flesh that is infected by the
Devil, and full of Sin and Abomination? THAT is NOT it that shall live in
God: For Christ said, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
Flesh and Blood, CANNOT inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

265. What is it then? For the New Creature generated out of the Dew of Heaven,
as you say, also cannot arise, for it dies Not: Christ's Life, is its Life; You
will quite take away the first Adam; what remains then? If you are Learned,
tell me! and play not on my Pipe: you would have it, that Christ has not
received or assumed Adam's Flesh: then can Adam NOT rise again.

266. My Friend, I Exhort you in the Love of Christ, be not an opposer, till
you understand the Center of all things or Substances, together with the Three
Principles, For the Power or virtue of the Resurrection is performed according
to the THIRD Principle; there shall Nothing of ADAM pass away, but only the
gross Droffinesse of the Beastiall Property, and the Sin, which has been
wrought or committed according to the Anger of the First Principle.

267. The Mystery, viz: the Quintae Essentia, shall arise; For Christ Flesh, so
far, and in whomsoever it is become Living, Dies NO more; In whomsoever, the
shut up heavenly part, is, in the power of the Word that became Man, become
Living, that dies not: It dyed in Adam; therefore it needs no [further]
Resurrection.

268. Also our Works follow not after us, in That; but in that which is a
Similitude of the inward World; viz: in the Outward Mystery: Now if Christ has
not received or assumed that to himself from US Men; how then will it arise?

269. I say Christ has received or assumed the whole humanity from us, on to
his Heavenly; but only not the BEASTIAL Property and Sin: but he has
received or assumed the Joh. 1. 29. 1 John 2. 2.
Sins of the World on to himself; As an own self-guilty Person; and slain
the Death in our Souland Flesh: else there were no Remedy for Man: therefore
must only a strong Savior come into the Humane Property, and slay Death; and
destroy Sin, and Introduce his Love into us.

279. Now I believe, that I shall arise in HIS and MY Flesh, and Eternally Live
in him, his Life for mine, his Spirit for mine, and all whatsoever I am, for
his; He, God, I, Man, and in him God and Man: and he in me God and Man.

271. This shall none tear out of my Heart; I have known it; Not I. but
Christ in me, therefore whosoever will, may Fable and Babble about it, I need
no Election or Predestination to it: my Savior Christ has Elected me IN my
Soul Spirit and Flesh in himself; I am therein Joyful and Comforted. let who
will be a Heretic and Feigner: Luke 10. 42.
I have with MARY Elected or Chosen the Best thing, and will in the mean time
sit at the Feet of my LORD JESU; till all Feigners and Grace Electioners or
Predestinatours, have seigned and babbled Out, ALL they CAN.

272. They say, they cannot [doe so]: that is their Obstinacy and Wilfulness;
I say, if I cannot, yet Christ in Me can: And say with Jacob, Genesis 32. 26.
I will not leave thee unless thou bless me; and Though Body and soul should
be Joh 13. 15.
dissolved, yet I will not leave thee, cast me into Heaven or into Hell, yet I
am in thee and thou in me, thou art mine and I am thine, the Enemy shall NOT
part us.

How Mary was Eves Daughter; and how Christ has had a Humane Soul, which is
Eternally Immortal.
273. MY Opponent, has so wonderful a vain discourse concerning Mary; he
will prove out of the Scripture, that SHE has been from Eternity, and draws
a whole heap of Texts together about it which yet are all against him, those
very Texts speak all of the Virgin of the Divine Wisdom: and then, who is it
that contendeth with him? that Christ is become Man, in that very Virginity?
not I: I have throughout written just So: but I understand also, that the same
Virgin was also IN the Mark, or Limit of the Covenant, in which God became Man.

274. But Mary was from Eve, else Christ had not received or assured our humane
Soul; as he also very strongly denies it, that he has assumed no Soul from
us, a strange thing helps not me, in a strange thing he is not my Brother.

275. Is his Soul no Creature but God himself? Is he not out of or from us? why
then did Luke 23. 46.
he commend it to his Father in his Death, into his hands: And said, Math. 26.
38. Joh: 12. 27.
On the Mount of Olives; My Soul is troubled even unto Death; May God also be
troubled? I believe he must now permit it to be a Humane Soul, if he will stand
before the Scripture and Truth; that so Christ remain to be our Brother: as he
said Joh. 20. 17.
After his Resurrection; Go and tell my Brethren, I ascend to my God and to
your God, else how should Christ say, I go to MY God, if he were no Creature?
God needs no going without besides and beyond the Creature.

276. Beloved, what may indeed his Temptation in the Wilderness have been?
WHAT in him became Tempted? His Deity? or his Soul? Beloved, pray tell me, Did
God Tempt himself? Or What had he to do with the Humanity? I suppose the Man
will here be Silent; Read my Book of the Threefold Life; therein thou will have
the ground of all, even More then any one could Ask, which I here let pass.

277. He writes that Christ's Soul did flow forth out of the Word and the
Wisdom, then is Christ Totally strange and not my Brother; as he says; if
they are to be Brothers then they must come out of ONE Body; but Christ would
not have spoken right, if this Opinion should take place.

278. God promised Abraham; that in HIS, understand in Abraham's Seed, should
all People become blessed: but Balth^sar Tylcken.
he says no; but in Abraham's promised Seed; God.
he says not, in the Seed which I promise thee; or in my Seed, but in thy Seed.

279 Note ye Expositors of the Scripture.
O! how terrible it is, that Man Dare so to pervert the Scriptures; Dear Sirs,
where will you abide? How will you stand before God? Have you not the Spirit of
True Knowledge from God? Why then do you make Glosses or Expositions upon the
Scripture? What are your conceits profitable? that you Exchange Words for
Words; and imbitter the Scriptures? let them stand unexplained, if you be not
called to it of God; Why do you so long make many Note.
Errors? leave the Explanation to the highest Or Language of the Holy Spirit.
Tongue in Every Man.

280. Why do you Juggle so much with the Holy Spirit? are you more knowing or
skillful then HE? Yes indeed ye are stately proud, self honoring,
self-profiting, wilful stubborn Children: Jer. 23 21.
Ye run and None has called you; suffer, your selves first to be called, and
enlightened with Gods Light, before you run.

281. Note.
From such imbittering, from the beginning of the World to this time, nothing
has existed, but strife Wars and Desolation, and Babel is an unsure Leader,
full of Abomination and Pride, to make Ostentation of it self, that a Man has
studied, or that a Man has read much: But the Holy Spirit, uses in those
Children which he calls: only ONE Book with THREE Leaves, therein only they
must study, they need none of them, more, neither are they profitable.

282. My Opponent will not permit, that the Virgin Mary is out of or from Adam;
if that were true, then she had also no Soul; or else a strange one; for she
said, Luke 1. 46.
being with Old Elizabeth; my Soul does magnify the Lord; and Simeon said to
her, Luke 2. 35.
A Sword will pierce through thy Soul: Now if she be only the Virgin of the
Wisdom of God; as he writes, then no Sword could pierce through her Soul; for
that is God himself, that is, his outspoken or Expressed Substance:

283. Also I tell you indeed, that the Virginity of God, viz: the Wisdom,
became Manifested or revealed in Mary, through the awakening of God, when God
manifested the Limit or Mark of the Covenant which stuck in her; then she
became highly Luke 1. 42.
blessed above all women; for God was manifested in her and in her Seed; her,
in Adam, dead Substantiality, viz: the heavenly part, Sprouted again; but her
outward Body was from this World, that we see in all her life, and
Conversation, in Eating and drinking, in sleeping and waking: Also in her
perplexity when she had Luk 2. 41, 42, 48.
lost her child JESUS: when in the twelfth year she offered JESUS in the
Temple.

284. Now if she were only Gods Wisdom; and not Man or humane; why did she not
then know all things? as JESUS her Son did? seeing in the Wisdom of God, ALL
knowledge lies, from Eternity in Eternity? and though likely she did give up
her self into the Lowliness, as the Opponent says; that does not cause her
skill and knowledge to cease, it did not cause the skill and knowledge in JESUS
her Son to cease; why then should it do so in his Mother? Had she not the
Flesh of Joachim, and of Anna her Mother? Why then did she Suck her Mothers
breasts? and desired the Essence of this World? and did Naturally eat Earthly
food? What manner of Body had she then nourished, with the Earthly food? Does
the Divine Virgin Eat Earthly food? I suppose my Adversary is in an Error.

285. Note.
There is in Mary assuredly, a twofold Virgin to be understood: viz: One
out-of God, and One out of Eve; I believe and know, that the inward was hidden
in the outward, and only manifested in God; as also in US the New Man is hidden
to the Earthly.

286. For, nothing may become manifested in the outward World, unless it take
or assume the outward Worlds Substance on to it self; Indeed the Outward
World, as also the Outward Man is generated through Gods Wisdom; and the pure
Mystery, of the Outward World; which lies hidden in the impure; stands in
the root of the inward World, and belongs thereunto.

287. Note. About the Resurrection.
Therefore shall the Outward Man with his Mystery of the Third Principle arise
at the Last Day, and enter into the inward; so that the inward stands turned
outward, and the outward inwards, and so 1 Cor: 15. 28.
God is ALL in ALL.

288. I know not what manner of understanding that would afford, if I should
say, with my Opponent; that CHRIST has not assumed our humanity; would God,
only Tincture Man, through the Wisdom; then it might well have been done
without becoming Man.

289. Also if Christ be no Creature, why then has he conversed in a Creaturely
form; and dyed with woe and pain, as a Creature, on the Cross? Can the Deity
also suffer and dye? I know nothing of that yet: that it can dye, which was
from Eternity without beginning; had that been possible to have dyed, then
should Lucifer and Adam's Soul also have dyed.

290. But now, that only dies, which is generated out of the Time, viz: the
outward Man from the Third Principle; that so out of the Temporal Death, the
Eternity may Sprout forth; and the Time, viz: the Temporary figure become
turned and brought into the Eternity.

291. For, therefore came Christ in our Outward and inward Mystery, that he
might introduce our Temporary Mystery into the Eternity: that he might Convert
Man again IN and WITH himself, into that Form, which Adam was of, in the
Creation, when he knew not what Evil and Good was.

Of the vain Contention about knowledge: When we read IN our selves, then we
read in Gods Book; No knowledge makes us happy: A Warning and Admonition.
292. MY Dear Brethren in Christ; take it into Consideration, pray be Christ's
Members, pray be Branches in the Tree of Christ; see diligently in the Epistles
of Saint Paul, how we must Enter into Christ's Suffering and Death; and dye away
to the old Earthly Man, and enter into a right Love.

293. Of a Truth most certainly, in Contention and Reproaching, the Spirit of
Christ is not, but only a painted Looking-glass; without Life and knowledge;
but Consider that we are Branches in one and the same Tree; which is Christ,
and God is Christ's Tree.

294. Why do we so long contend about knowledge? Indeed knowledge is not alone
the way to blessedness or Salvation; the Devil knows more than we, but what
does that avail him? For, that I know much affords me no Joy: but that I
Love my Savior JESUS, and continually desire him, that affords me Joy, for
the NOTE.
desiring is a receiving.

295. I know Nothing, also desire to know nothing, nor have I at any time
sought any skill or knowledge; for I am a child in knowledge, and a Nothing; I
would also feign know Nothing; that I might in knowledge, be dead and a
Nothing, that God in the Spirit of Christ, may be my knowing, willing, and
doing, that I may run in his knowing and willing, and that not I, but he; that
I may be only the Instrument, and he the Hand and the Labor.

296. Why will you long contend with me? I know Nothing of your knowledge,
neither have I ever learned it; Search your selves, in whom, knowledge is,
wherein, it is that I know, seeing I am indeed dead in the knowing, for the
sake of that which will know IN Me.

297. In my knowing, I do not first collect Letters together out of Many
Books, but I have the Letters in Me, indeed Heaven and Earth together with all
things or Substances, and Moreover God himself, lies in Man; Should he not
then dare to Read in that Book which he HIMSELF is?

298. If I had no other Book at all but only My own Book which I my self AM; I
had Books enough, even the whole Bible lies in Me; If I have Christ's Spirit,
what need I then more Books? Shall I contend and dispute against that which is
without me? before I learn to know what is in me?

299. If I Read my self; then I read in God's Book, and ye my dear Brethren
ALL, are my Letters, which I read in me, for my Mind and Will sindeth you in
me: I wish heartily that you also may find me.

300. I exhort you as Children and Brethren out of or from my precious Talent,
that you go out from Contention, and Read the Brotherly True brotherly Love.
Alles. Bey. Christo: All. By. Christ.
A. B. C. IN you: for it is all Nothing and unprofitable before God, that you
contend about the Letter, it stands indeed in ALL Men; the Plowman is as
Learned and near to the Kingdom of God, as the Doctor, if he Read the
Brotherly A. B. C. IN himself.

301. No skill or knowledge makes you blessed, but that you enter into the
knowledge, and be and become the doer or practicer of the skill or knowledge;
Not a proud, surly, selfe-honouring, Stubborn wild withered Branch, but
Living, in he Tree of God, wherein one Branch affords Sap and Life to the
other.

302. O how the Mother complains over some of you, that you are dry withered
Branches; Note.
It is told you, that the dry withered Branches shall be cut off; Restitutio
Renovatio Reditus Reparatio Regeneratio Revolutio
for the Tree shall renew it self, and present OMNIUM
its first Form of Youth again, for the End belongs into the Beginning.

303. If you shall all despise this, which is at present told you, and not
turn into your selves, and learn to Read your own Book; then will an Ano
from the Rising or East and Midnight or North, Cut you off, that you shall
never more say, I read in strange or foreign Books, and feed my self in
strange Pasture.

304. God has sent his Heart together with his Life INTO Us, wherein all
stands written; he that reads that Book in himself, is Learned Enough; the
Other is Babel, and a Fable, that a Man will needs be learned in the Letter
without him, before he can read his own Book: Let him first read his own,
and so he will in his own, find ALL what ever the Children of God have written.

305. Note.
ALL of us Men have together but One only Book which directs to God, which we
have in Common: The WORD is near thee in Thy HEART. Deuteronomy: 30. 14. The Word of
FAITH. Rom: 10. 8. See verse. 298. 299. 300.
EVERY one has it IN himself; that is the Dear or Precious Name of GOD, his
Letters are the Flames of Love, which out of his Heart in the Name JESV, he
has manifested in US: Read but those only Letters in your Heart and Mind,
and then you have books enough: ALL Scriptures of the Children of God direct to
THAT, in that ONE only Book; for therein lie all the Treasures of Wisdom; See
only to this, that you become Newborn in the Life and Spirit of CHRIST, and
then you have ALL, whatever God IS, or CAN do.









tetractys of the Tetragrammaton

Not one JOT, (...), or Tittle of the Matt 5. 18.
LAW shall pass away.

JOD Jod, signifies a Substantive.

JAH Existence.

JEHV He, who is Existent.

JEHOVAH Being of Beings. Or Substance of ALL Substances.

JHSVH (...). A Savior (...) JESUS.

306. But you are drunken, and err, and go astray, and seek the Key to the
Book, and Contend or dispute about the Key; every one says, I have the Key;
and yet none will unlock his own Life's Book; every one has the Key to God in
himself, let him but seek it in the right place: but you would rather contend
or dispute, then seek the The Holy Spirit dwelling in Gods Word, in Every ones
Heart.
Key in your selves, Therefore you are all of you blind, that contend or
dispute; you do but go Seeking, as before a Looking Glass; why do you not
go into the Center? for with other seeking you will not find the Key, be as
Learned as you will, it will not avail.

307. It lies not in Art and Reason, but in an Earnest purposed resolved Will,
to go out from self, and forsake all own self, skill, and knowledge, and
with Repentant humble desires, to cast your self into Gods knowing, and desire
only Gods knowing, yet with or in this manner, that he in you may know what he
will; thus you will put on Divine skill or knowledge; and FIND the Key about
which you contend or dispute.

A Conclusions Also how the present so called Christians, Turks, Jews and
Heathens are alike. And how one people shall devour the other: The Harvest is
near.
308. MY dear Brother: hate me not for my knowledge sake, for I, so far as I
am I, knew not beforehand, that which I have written to you; I supposed I
wrote it only for my self, and it is without my knowledge so come about; I
tell it you in true faithfulness; if you have not the Gift to understand it,
then leave it to me, for I understand that well, which I have written.

309. If any can understand it, and has a Mind to it; I willingly and readily
afford it him; but if not, and that he does not desire it, in that he does not
understand it: let him not rise up with scorning and blasphemy against God,
else there will follow an Earnest severity, which you neither can nor will
know, any thing of, in such a Course; but afford me leave to Labor in that
wherein I am set.

310. But my Opponent faith; without God, we can think nothing that is Good;
also know nothing of God, without him; I say so too: that I know nothing of God
without God, my knowing is in him; and stands in his might or power.

311. Why then is HE my Enemy, for that, which God knows in ME, that I should
manifest or reveal to you, the way to him; I am indeed Nothing; and he is Ail,
he that can understand it, let him understand it; but he that cannot should let
it stand; with such objecting you will not fathom nor understand my Writings.

312. I see your Spirit much better then you understand, what manner of
Objections you make; but I cannot find, that my Opponent understands any
thing fundamentally in my apprehension or sense: but it is all of a wild,
surly, envious, property; very scornful, so that I more lament his misery,
that he is for blind therein, then that I desire to answer him.

313. I exhort you all that read and hear this, slop not your hearts, look
upon the time and consider it; see in what time we and our fathers, have lived:
viz: in vain Contention and Strife; what is the World, viz: Man, become the
honester, or better, by the Strife? Nothing, but more hellish, wicked,
voluptuous, reproaching, and more scornful.

314. He is by the Manifestation of the Gospel, in his Life become the worse;
all the while they have contended, one brother has contemned another, and
persecuted and hated him: what manner of fruit have you of the Gospel at
present, as there should be:

315. Must not the Dear and precious Name of God, at present be the Cover to
Man's wickedness? Are not the present, Christians, so called, as also Turks,
Jews, and Heathens, all alike to one another in Life? What does the Name of
Christ avail you? If you live but heathenishly? Do you suppose it is enough,
that you know, that Christ dyed for Sin? That you need only to tickle and
Comfort your selves with Christ's Death; and retain the false or wicked Man;
who is only proud or stately and a Contender.

316. Can you not perceive what will suddenly follow upon it? viz: that seeing
they are all alike in Life and Will, they should be accounted alike, before
God; and so if Men seek nothing but strife and mere Contention, it must come
to such a mixed Confusion in the Strife, that one people will devour the other.

317. For God withdraws his hand from People, while they will not suffer his
Spirit to reprove them, therefore has the Wrath taken up its sword and desire,
and drives on mightily in the Minds of Men, so that one people destroys and
devoureth the other; What our Fathers have laid in with reproach and scorn,
that will their children Eat up with sword and slaughter.

318. And that God suffers, to be, because Men only use his holy Name to
Cursing and Swearing, and so misuse it: and in the knowledge of his Name and
Will, are only selfe-willed; and use his Name only for a Reproach, so that one
brother despises another only for the sake of the knowledge of his Name,
though he should seek him in his knowledge in Love, and go before him with a
holy Life.

319. Note.
What now are the Christians so called, better than Turks and Heathens, if they
live Turkish'y, and more then Turkishly or Heathenishly? Note.
Where is the Christian and Evangelicall Fruit?

320. Every one faith; It will be good when this Evil is past and gone; but I
tell you in true knowledge, that it will not be good; but worse and worse,
unless you Convert every one in himself, and turn his Heart and Mind to
Love and condescension; else one people will devour another; and the Countries
will Consume, Wast and Destroy Themselves, and there will be such a vain Evil
World, that they will not be worthy to be called Men.

321. And this they will do themselves one among another; and there will be a
General Mixture and Confusion of People in the Strife; no one part better than
another; till the Anger of God Satiate its sierce Wrath; and the people
introduce themselves into the highest perdition and misery; and See the first
Epistle to Paulus Keym. verse 30.
then thou will see and learn to know thy self, what thou have been, in thy
Pride, when thou art Naked, and wilt Seek the Lord in thy Misery, and see what
Evil thou have done to thy SELF.

322. Therefore my dear Brethren: Seek but the Pearl; all you that entend to
avoid the Anger of God, look not one upon the Life of another, but upon his
OWN: Note.
For it is no more Disputing, but either Convert, or perish.

323. The Time of Disputation and Babbling is out, you will get no further with
Disputation; but with the Regeneration in the Spirit of Christ, you will reach
and obtain the Pearl; so that you need never to Dispute More.

324. Let every one be in Sincere Earnest, and seek himself in himself, and
see what he is: and Consider how to Seek his brother in Love: let him but go
out from Covetousness and Pride, and Content himself with Sustenance and
preservation.
food and Raiment, and put his trust in God, who gives Rain and blessing.

325. Indeed we take nothing along with us from this World, why then do we
then contend about that which is vain, and thereby squander and loose that
which is untransitory; it must come to the Limit or Mark, or else it will be
still worse, and that People which will not enter into this Limit or Mark, must
be quite devoured and Consumed; Signifies.
says the Spirit of Wonders.

326. This I would not have concealed from you Dear Sirs and Brethren in
Christ, who read my Writings and make use of them, in consideration of my
Opponent; and I exhort you brotherly, as also my Opponent, that you would lay
the Holy Scriptures upon my Writings; but in the Scripture seek nothing else
then the Paternall Love-Heart of JESUS CHRIST, and then you will well FIND
from what Spirit I have written.

327. But he that has no mind to do this, let him leave my Writings at rest,
for I have written Nothing for him; I have written them for my self, without
any thought how it would go with them; neither do I know how it comes to
pass, that they run so abroad, for I have not run after any body with them,
and I wonder as much as you, what the Most High does about them.

328. Yet Observe it and become seeing; for the Day breaks or dawneth: if you
will learn rightly to understand my Writings, then you will be freed from all
Contention and Strife, and learn to know your selves: yet indeed the Letter
cannot do it; but only the Living Spirit of Christ; the way is faithfully
shown you.

329. Now do what thou will, the Harvest is near; that every one will
partake, of what he has gathered into his Barn, I speak from my whole Heart
very Earnestly, in my knowledge given Me of God, and Commend my self into your
brotherly Love, into the Dear and Precious Name of JESUS CHRIST.

Dated the 3. July. 1621.

330. Rejoice in the LORD all Countries, and Praise him all People! For his
Name goes over all Mountains and Hills, HE shoots forth like a Sprout, and
goes on in Great Wonders, who will hinder it?

HALLELV-JAH.
A Postscript of the Translatour into Nether-Dutch out of the Three High Dutch
Copies, and this English Translation out of a High Dutch Copy was Compared with
it. Who writes thus.
THis Treatise was Written in Answer to Balthazar Tylcken concerning some
Points in the Book of the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Jesus Christ: This
Balthazar Tylcken first wrote a reproachful Book against Jacob Behme,
Concerning some Points in the AVRORA which Jacob Behme has Answered, in the
First Apology to Balthazar Tylcken; afterward Tylcken opposed some Points in
the Book of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ; and added some Sheets as an
Appendix to that Book: which were sent over to Jacob Behme, upon which his
Answer was, as is to be found in this Second Apology of His.

Here follow the CONTENTS Of the SECTIONS, As they were Divided by the
Translatour into the Nether-Dutch.
I. Part. Apo: to Tylcken II. Of Predestination.
A Letter or Preface concerning Verses. 15. I. An Introduction to the Answer,
an Exhortation and marning from verse. 1. to 18. II. What the first Principle or
Dark World is. How the Fire is not the first Principle. He that will attain
the Spirit of the Principle, must first become a Fool to the World. From v.
19. to 53. III. Of a right Christian: and of the Eternal Wisdom, which is no
Genetrixs From v. 54. to 71. IV. Of the Third Principle. What the Bride of God
is: and how the Spirit of God is no Principle, and yet is One. From verse. 72 to
86. V. Why the Outward World is a Principle of its own: Out of what the Angels
are; out of what joy Existeth: The Model of this World is Eternal. From verse.
87. to 94. VI. How the Soul is proceeded out of all the Three Worlds; Of the
Might or Strength, and of the Free Will of the Soul: Of the drawing of the
Father: And what it is, to believe above all Reason. From verse. 95. to 117.
VII. Of the gross error of Balthazar Tylcken, concerning the Seed of Adam,
upon which he builds his Election. From 118. to 126. VIII. Why God hated
Cain, and Esau; and loved Abel, and Jacob: and who are the lost Sinners for
whose sake Christ came. From 127. to 133. IX. What the hardening is, how the
Love of God warns Sinners; Also how the Love of God is as Almighty to
preserve, as his Anger is to destroy. From verse. 134. to 143. X. What God is:
How without the Darkness all would be Nothing: And in what Manner, man has
ability to go out of Evil into Good and out of Good into Evil. From 144. to
153. XI. How Balthazar Tylcken is the Devils Advocate: How the Devil does not
assault any with Doubting, more then the Children of God: And of the firm
Confidence of the Faithful From 154 to 168. XII. How Nothing is impossible for
Faith; what the drawing of God is; Why the Wicked are not drawn; what a right
Christian is; and who become hardened from God. From 169. to. 186. XIII. The
abominable Doctrine of Balthazar Tylcken; an Exhortation not to doubt of
Election; and an Exhortation and warning to Balthazar Tylcken. From verse. 187,
to 202. XIV. Of the Eternal Purpose or Predestination and Election of God: The
Beginning and End whereof, is one and the same always. From 203. to 229.
II. Part. Of the Person of Christ. Apol. to Tylck. II.
XV. How Christ became Man out of no strange Seed, but out of the Seed of Mary;
and yet not in Eves Earthly Essence: the Holy Spirit was the Husband. From 230.
to 242. XVI. What manner of Essence the Word assumed, in which God and Man
became One Person: How Christ is a Creature, and how no Creature. From 243. to
251. Of the Person of the Virgin Mary. XVII. How Mary was no strange Virgin;
but the Daughter of Joaohim and Anna: Whence the Author has his Knowledge;
and what is, Christ's Descention into Hell. From 252. to 262. XVIII. Question
How the New Birth is performed in us: Also, what of us shall arise: Also of
Impossibility and Possibility. From verse. 263. to 272. XIX. How Mary was Eves
Daughter, how Christ had a humane Soul; which Eternally is Immortal. From 273.
to 291. XX. Of the vain Contention about Knowledge: When we read in our
selves, we read in Gods Book; No Knowledge makes us Blessed: a Warning and an
Exhortation. From verse. 292. to 307. XXI. A Conclusion. How the present so
called Christians Turks Jews and Hoathens are all alike. How one people shall
devour the other; and how the Harvest-is near at hand. From 308. to 330.



FINIS.

