THE CONSOLATION OF Philosophy.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher for the Author, 1664.

The Preface and Occasion of this Melancholic Divertisement.
ALthough many may and needs must remember the Sadness of the late Times, which
called the greatest Knaves on earth Honest men, and the justest Loyalty on
earth Treason, and which rewarded and punished both Titles as preposterously as
they named them, forgetting the holy Prophet's woes against such Hypocritical
Misnomers: yet it is as much to be remembered that all have not the like causes
of memory; some Families being but so wounded as easily curable; others died in
the place; to others -- Haeret lateri lethalis arundo. Among these last Tho.
Coningsby of North-Mimms in the County of Hartford, of a most ancient Family,
and as plentiful Fortune, having been High Sheriff of that County in the year
1638, was, (upon the Confidence of Loyalty the late Blessed King had found and
tried in him) by a Commission sent from Redding, again made his Majesty's
High Sheriff in the year 1642* and together with his Commission received this
gracious Letter following under that King's own hand of Blessed Memory.

CHARLES R.

TRusty and well-beloved, We greet you well, and do hereby give you Our
assurance, that although We have at this present made choice of you to be Our
High Sheriff of Our County of Hartford, We have done it out of no other respect
then as a mark and testimony of Our Favor, and Confidence of the utmost of
your Service in these Times, wherein We intend to employ Persons of greatest
Integrity and known Affections to Us, and the good of Our Kingdom; of which you
have formerly given sufficient testimony. And although it may bring upon you
great Expense and Trouble; yet We are confident you will not value it, in
regard of Our Service, and the good of that Our County; which shall not be
forgotten by Us on all occasions. So We bid you heartily farewell.

From our Court at Redding this 11^h of November. 1642.

Soon after he received also a Writ and Proclamation, sent from Oxford, which
declared the late Earl of Essex and his Adherents Traitors, and authorized him
to array the County for the King's Service. The like Command other Sheriffs
received: and the Sheriff of Essex that then was did thereupon address himself
to the Parliament, as if he would beg leave of them to execute the Writ against
them, and entreat their favor to declare them to be (what they were) Traitors.
For which treacherous Flattery he had their Fatherhoods thanks, was caressed,
made their Treasurer, grew rich, and to complete his reward is now Sir Baronet.
But Mr. Coningsby, of another temper; according to his trust and place;
executes his Writ at S. Albans, and was there with the peril of his life (happy
if he had then perished) taken Prisoner by Cromwell, (who had the thanks of the
House too for his exploit) is carried to London, committed to London-house,
where he continued Prisoner till the year 1643. and was then adjudged (by a
then Committee-man, now a real Judge) to be within their Ordinance for
Sequestration, though made after his fact, by virtue of those words ( Whoever
have or shall:) as if he could have divined that any such transcendent
Impudence would appear in the world, as would confirm Wickedness, and punish
Duty by a Law. And yet if he could, he could not have failed in his Duty; for
he knew not fear. This was quickly smelt out by that famous Vulture Sir Will.
Brereton, who alleged it against him, and that he had sent one of his Sons
into the King's Army (true, but not proved:) and thereupon got the
Sequestration and Plunder of his Estate; robbing him at once of more then two
thousand pounds. They seized also on his Real Estate, which then was not less
then fifteen hundred pounds per annum.

After this he is removed from London-house to the Tower, where with much
barbarous usage he was held seven years more, under several Gaolers; when at
last broken and languishing in Body through Restraint, and Sickness contracted
by it, his Son, by a pious deceit of bribing underhand, and being bound for
him, (who would never have consented to his own Safety on those terms, for his
Generous Soul scorned to petition Rebels) gained him into the Country, where he
found as great objects for his Grief as he did in thraldom it self. For then he
saw how during the time of his Imprisonment they had, besides his Goods and
Rents, wasted and destroyed his Woods and Houses, to the value of more then
three thousand pounds; and that in this seeming Liberty he did but behold his
own and his Familie's Ruin at a nearer view, the Sequestrators and their
Harpies continuing before his face to prey upon him and their own Masters too,
the lesser Vermin preying on and cheating the greater, converting (as was
afterward made appear against them before the King's Commissioners sitting at
the Savoy) more then two thousand pounds out of his Estate, from the general
Sink to their own particulars, as he in the Satyrist,

-- damnatus inani
Judicio (quid enim salvis infamia nummis?)
Exul ab octavo Marius bibit, and fruitur Diis
Iratis, at tu --
In this just disdain he offers to contest his Right against them at Law: But
they, as if this had been the higher Crime, got an Order to imprison him again,
and breaking open his Daughter's house, in the greatest inhumanity imaginable
seized on him, being very sick and weak, enforce him to ride to London in great
torment, and have him committed Prisoner to the Serjeant's man; where growing
weaker then ever, and more discomposed, he is again by the same religious craft
gained into the Country by his Son with a nominal Liberty; where soon after he
was, in the year 1654, (after twelve years worrying) finally released by Death.

He was the Son of Sir Ralph Coningsby, who had for the more immediate Stem
of his House Sir Humphry, a Wise and Learned Judge in the Reign of King Henry
the Seventh, but as to his remoter Root, was lineally descended from a long and
Noble Race of Ancestors that were Barons of this Kingdom both before and after
the Conquest. He was of a middle Stature, his Hair black, his Complexion ruddy,
his Eyes black, full, and exceedingly piercing; in all so Comely, that those
who knew his youth would say, as the Prince of Poets does of his Deiopeia, that
he was praestanti Corpore: but for his Spirit; so great and undaunted, that it
was not at all to be bowed by Terrors or Miseries, disdaining in the whole
story of his Life to submit his native and gallant Freedom to the frowns of any
that were but his Fellow Subjects, though in greater authority, as was often
proved. Once in a long Suit he had about a right of his Predecessors in Enfield
Chase, with no worse man then King James, the Judge then sitting required him
to produce his Evidences in Court. He said he would produce so much as
concerned the matter in hand. The Judge said he would make him produce the
whole, and that he would, if he could, pick a hole in them. To which he
replied, That it were better the Skin were plucked over his ears, then that he
should sit on that Bench to that purpose. The King being told it, and that it
was taken as an Affront and Contempt of his Authority, swore by his Soul, (his
usual Oath) that Coningsby said right, and that he should have right.

He was of a nature so severely and superlatively just, that he would wrong no
man; and, though it were to his prejudice, did not seldom protect others from
wrong: and when he observed any man of Power do wrong, he used to say, That
man has kindled a Fire will burn his own House. Out of this apprehension, when
he was leaving the world, though he pardoned all personal Injuries, yet he did
prophetically bequeath the old Cause and its Fautors to that Destiny some of
them came to, the Gallows, saying, as a well built Christian might, That it was
impossible that the righteous God should permit them to go unpunished always.
But Cur bonis viris mala fiant is yet a riddle. He was a person of admirable
Parts; but such are too commonly the more unfortunate; and among his
Misfortunes it was not the least, that he had such Parts, and wanted a
Profession to stir them, and keep his large Soul from rust and Idleness. His
last and great Character, which speaks him born for this trying Age, was, that
he lived and died Honest, preferring his Conscience and Loyalty to his Life,
Liberty and Estate; choosing rather to leave his Family which was numerous, but
dear to him, (for a better Father never lived) poor and distressed, then
rendered infamous and stained by any unworthy act of his.

His Misfortunes ended not with his Life; for after his Death his Estate was
adjudged by the Rebels to be sold, (by the name of Tho. Coningsby deceased) and
his Son could not enjoy it but by purchase: by which means, together with his
Piety in supplying and preserving his Father, and his own constant Sufferings,
he contracted such heavy Debts, that he was enforced to sell above one thousand
pounds a year, with his best House, (built by his great Grand father, Sir Henry
Coningsby, upon the most noble part of his Inheritance) worth more then ten
thousand pounds, not considerable in purchase. Sure no man can think he could
do this without the greatest reluctance and regret in the world, being the sad
Presage of the utter extinction and fall of that Family, and the just cause of
sorrow to succeeding generations, which more concerns him then his own
Calamity: for as to himself, he yet inherits his Father's Mind, though not his
Possessions. Fatum sub pedibus dedit superbum. In the midst of the Calamitous
Times, (not forgetting his addresses to him who only can help) to alleviate his
troubled Mind, he made English Lipsius his Constantia; so deceiving tedious
hours, til it pleased Heaven to restore the King. Many then expected a Law de
Repetundis, at least against such as were able and fatter Villains: but instead
of this other things were done, in favor of some indeed, but to the prejudice
(which was the foulest Partiality) of others, (as was made too apparent before
the Commissioners at the Savoy as before.) Upon this rushed in a Deluge of
Vices, whose rage broke down the former Banks, and divided the Affections of
those whom former Miseries seemed to have fast bound; thereby showing that
Fortune only, not Honesty, was both their Pilot and Cement, and that they held
together more out of Destiny then Virtue; of all men the most to be detested.
This did the Son of this suffering Father dearly prove, and as sadly consider:
for that he having better Principles of Honor and Honesty from him whose Blood
he glories in, and being willingly defective in what those people boast of,
Impudence and Falsehood, he found no worser recompenses from any then those
should most have assisted him. They said he was too great a Sufferer to be
relieved; and some, that had they had Honor should have most lifted him up,
bandied against him. This made him accuse Fortune in the fit. But now humble
and wiser reflections on Providence, by which it comes to pass that what seems
most otherwise proves often for our good, and considering the Person and Fate
of our most Gracious Sovereign, who but a few months before His happy
Restoration (when He was entertained with the highest Caresses imaginable)
passed through the States of Holland unregarded, and was in other places worse
used; considering this, and the giddy roulings of Fortune, with the rude
insultations she makes on the Highest and Worthiest of men, retiring to
recreate himself, he (as you see) put the brave and stout BOETHIVS into an
English dress; which though ruder and courser then it should have been, is so
much the more like his own Condition, and gives himself satisfaction, though
not others: a poor satisfaction and pitiful comfort to a lost Family; yet he
leaves it as a Relic of his Honest Mind, reposing his trust in Almighty God,
who when he pleases can raise up those are cast down lowest: at least by this
Posterity will know how, and in what unhappy Times, and for what cause it was
the Storm came upon him and ruined him, and learn to decline the fondness of
this mutable World, and seek the never-sading Treasure.

PARENTALIA in memoriam nobilissimi T. C. Arm. Hartford. facta.
COnduntur sub his moenibus sicut decet Templi ful^ra,
Ossa magnanimi Herois, Thomae,
Radulphi Conings by Militis filii dignissinti,
Qui talis vivus fait qualem vetat Pictas mori;
Et vix credent Posteri seculo isthoc vixisse,
Nisi quod (...) gerat certissimum, honestam miseriam.
Summae Probitatis reum summa Infelicitas probat,
Virumque ad optima natum, quia sustalit pessuma.
Acerrimus Aequi bonique sed nunquam turbidus Assecla*
Justitiae cultor strenuus, nec non minus Pacis;
Assertor Patriae, sed nullus desertor Regis;
Libertatis publicae Vindex, sed fine Perduellionc;
Civis eximius, sed non deterior Subditus.
Pro Jure veteri dimicavit contra novam Praerogativam;
Quod Jacobus Rex Carolusque sentiunt, diliguntque simul;
Nempe integram dignoscentes fidem, etiam sic con^ ^tem.
Ob haec, persona Regia indutus, quando Regem ipsum
Satagit profanum Vulgas (vah nefas!) exuere,
Non deserit Principem quem prius gravem habuit,
Minus oppressum ferens, quam opprimentem Dominum;
Qui justum expertus, neminem aptiorem duxit
Justis qui plectat poenis concitatam Plebem.
Hujus vesanam Rabiem dum coercere accinctus
Vicecomes fidus fortiter officio fungitur,
Eheu! rebellibus armis violatus liberate priv^tur,
Per Conciliabulum istud quod ^ueri libe^os prae se tulit.
Saevitiam cujus carnificinamque impiam
Variis rapinis carceribusque refertam;
Quae divina omnia humanaque raepit atque excuti^,
Pie dedignans, animo infracto pertulit.
Scilicet, Bona sua perdere maluit quam Virtutem;
Nec moratur Fortunas, unici Aestimator Honoris.
Pudet Haereditatem emere taentis Majoribus relictam,
Vel cauponari terras quas sola Pietas prodidit;
Ditiorem se reputans propter jacturas tales,
Magisque beatum dummodo innocenter pauperem.
At non sic pris^ae Fidei Pacisque Raptores,
Qui gr^gem tantum deglubentes esuriunt adhuc,
Et ferculis tot plenis absorptis, manent sordidum pecus;
Non enim repl^tur haec mala Bestia vel maledicta.
Ita demum proscissis Legibus Legumque Patrono,
Serenissimo Dei Uncto sacrilege trucidato,
Liberate, Fide, rebus Sacris pessundatis,
Corruentibus Ecclesia funditus aetque Republica,
Circumspicit omnia, caeterum nil dignum vita intuens,
Heu! perfidus terras fugit, coelum spirans,
Martyris pene nomen adeptus, at Confessoris haeud dubi^.
Illic fulgens Anima ditescit nunquam spolianda,
Et pace fruitur quae spernit turbas Parricidales;
Inde jam Orco maturum Senatulum despicit,
Atque ipsis nequ^ores Daemonibus Latrones ridet.
Vita functus est October. 1^^, Sepultus 5to, Annoque Aetatis 63. Incarcerationis
12. Salutis Hum. 1654.

On the same.
SO then, He Is quit at last, and now has gained
What baffled Justice never had obtained;
Has finished all at once, and found a friend
By whom two Compositions meet one end.
That of his Humane frame which they so often
Had torn and bruised is sor'd one half aloft,
Where they must never reach it, nor come nigh,
B'ing so weighed down with Blood and Villainy.
And for the other, though refined and grown
Purer then their Souls by Affliction,
So that like agile Vapor seem it might
To have made ready for the Spirits flight,
And cast off all its grosser weight, that so
It might keep pace and with like vigor go
As did its swift Companion; yet because,
Breaking none else, he would keep Nature's Laws,
See, here it falls among the noble dust
Of old Progenitors alike good and just,
And fitly with Sir Harry and Sir Ralph
Now mingling Ashes sleeps as calm and safe:
Whose honest bones did welcomly give way
For his, that were as stout and true as they,
And seemed in their cold Mother's lap to kiss
And hugg each others common fame and bliss.
Where let them rest, till that auspicious Morn
Shall dawn, will all their Loyalty return.
And now this broken thus and thus dissolved,
The second bursts, wherein he was involved,
The Body Politick's Chain, or rather Snare,
In which three Nations bound and tortured are;
That tearing Engine, on whose hooks we find
None caught, but leave their skin and flesh behind;
Our English Inquisition, which exceeds
That under which the Hesperian Sinner bleeds:
For there unhappy wretches only weep
For breaking Laws, but here because they keep:
There if they take Estates they take Life too;
A civil Cruelty; but we undo,
And rob, and swallow all that should preserve,
Then shake whole Families off to beg and starve.
We do not fell at once the spreading Oak,
Nor kill his goodly pride at one fair stroke;
But pill and bark it first, and so it is pined,
And dies inglorious torn with every wind.
Which barbarous Zeal none but a Jesuit can
Defend, or viler Presbyterian;
None but the Rabbi Sme^, whose vafrous Name
Will Guido and his Tribe excuse in shame;
Who are now Brethren, and by dire consent
Have knit so fast a League 'twixt them and Trent,
That though they look big on it and face it still
In other points, yet both are one in Ill:
Whilst to resist, depose and murder Kings,
Are not proclaimed now such horrid things
As our ^ame simple Fathers held, who were
Too innocent to be Godly, and did fear
God more then needs; and who, if they lived now,
And would not humbly to this Idol bow,
Would not for swear, and plunder, and rebel,
And freely at their Order run to Hell,
Must through the dire Committees furnace pass,
Though seven times hotter then the Prophet's was.
And so did this great Hero prove, who felt
Their twelve-years Limbo, whose hot flames did melt
And eat up both his Body and his Land,
Though he scorned both, that he might Loyal stand.
But now the kinder Grave has all acquit,
Disdaining that the State out-spoiled it,
And grew more ravenous and dreadful more
By their new Tophets then was his before:
So that 'twas harder Villanage to get
Through their two Halls, then pay old Nature's debt;
And the deep wounds of Death were looked upon
As milder fate then Sequestration.
On which the Prince of Terrors jealous grew
Lest they would rival his Dominion too,
And cloud his Name, which, before theirs, none durst
Of all things Horrible deny the first.
Therefore he served against them here, who has
So long obeyed their irreligious wrath,
Rescuing this Martyr from the Harpies rape,
Just as their eager throats did widest gape.
For which we thank him, and shall thence begin
Fair hopes that he who their long friend has been
May now turn foe, and pay back their base fears
With as much ruin and as many tears
As they have caused: unless they can as well
Covenant with Death as they have done with Hell.
M. S. D. D. G.

THE FIRST BOOK Of the CONSOLATION OF PHILOSOPHY.
I That was wont to sing full merrily,
Am forced sad tones to howl in misery:
The tattered Muses bid me for to write
A mournful Song, while they with tears indite*
No terror could affright these Sisters free,
But of my griefs Companions they would be.
The glory of my happy youth does give
Some comfort to the cares in which I live.
Unwelcome age (that never-failing thief)
Intrudes himself, and mixes with my grief.
My hairs untimely from my head do fall,
My skin is loose, and joints do tremble all.
That death is happy that blithe Youth does spare,
But comes when called by one oppressed with Care.
Alas! he will not close the weeping eye,
And deaf he is to souls in misery.
Whiles fickle Fortune fanned me with her wing,
Each hour fear of death with it did bring.
But now that she has changed her cozening face,
Death takes delight to come a Tortoise pace.
O friends, why did you often me happy call?
He never was firmly seated that could fall.
While thus I musing lay alone,
Designing how t'express my moan,
Above my head appeared to me
A Woman of bright majesty,
With Eyes that shined clear and bright,
And pierced beyond all common sight;
Of lively color and full strength,
Although her years had drawn a length
Beyond what any mortal does.
Her Stature too was various,
Sometimes of the common size of men;
But to the heavens she would then
Lift up her head, and pierce the sky,
Deluding the beholder's eye.
Her Robes were made of finest thread,
And without seam were perfected:
And, as I after came to know,
With her own hands she weaved them so.
Like as old Pictures do appear
In smoaky rooms, their color were:
And in the lower bordering
The letter II was weaved in green;
And in the upper see you might
The letter TH weaved in white.
Between the letters there were set
As 'twere a ladder up to get,
So climbing the degrees, to move
From Earth below to Heaven above.
But some rude hand her Robe did tear,
And every one caught for a share.
In her Right hand a Book she held,
A Scepter did her Left hand wield.
When she the Muses had descried,
They standing all by my bed's side,
As willing for to comfort me,
On them she cast an angry eye,
And, Who unto this languishing
Sick man, said she, these whores did bring?
With poisons they his fancy please,
But give no Physic him can ease.
These, these are they that Reason's corn
Destroy, with planting fruitless thorn;
These trouble, not relieve, the mind:
And could you none but this man find?
Had you but only drawn apart
A rude, profane or vulgar heart,
I had not cared; but to ensnare
Him who has been my only care,
In Wisdome's School brought up and nursed?
Go, go, ye Sirens, go accursed,
And leave this sick man's cure to me.
This said, the whole quire did agree
In one sad look, confessed that they
For shame did blush, so went away.
Tears dazzled had my eyes, and I
Affrighted all this while did lie;
Wondering who this same should be
Commanded with such majesty:
And silently I did me bear,
Expecting what next I should hear.
She me approached, and did sit down
On my bed's side; then with a frown
She me beheld, who grieved did lie,
And on the ground had fixed my eye.
But thus, she seeing me in pain,
Of man's disquiet did complain.
O how (cast down with care)
Men's minds oppressed are,
Who leaving bright daylight,
Run grovelling in the night,
While clogged with things below,
Vexations on them grow?
He, while he lived free,
The heavenly Orbs did see,
The splendour of the Sun,
And course of the cold Moon,
What course each wandering Star
Thorough each Orb did bear.
All these he firmly knew,
And all the causes true:
How shrill loud Winds do make
The Pontick Sea to quake,
What spirit roules the world,
How Hesperus that is hurled
Down nightly, shines each morn;
Who it is that does adorn
The Earth in the Spring with Flowers;
Who gives fertile Showers,
Makes Autumn's grapes to swell.
He wonted was to tell
Dame Nature's secret laws;
But now knows not the cause
Why he oppressed does lie,
With sad and down-cast eye.
The foolish world him took,
Thence on it he does look.
What boots it though, said she, to chide?
'Twere better Physic were applied.
Then fiercely she on me did look,
Art thou the child, said she, I took,
Fed thee with milk and many a cate,
Until thou came to man's estate,
Then gave thee Arms, which had kept thee
(Had thou kept them) unconquered, free?
Do know me? what, is it shame or fear
Does make thee silent? would it were
Ingenuous Shame; but I do see
It Is stupid Fear oppresses thee.
But when not only silent I
But speechless seemed, then she, to try
My health, upon my breast she laid
Her hand: Danger there is none, she said;
A lethargy (the common ill
Of minds seduced from good to ill)
He has, he is stupefi'd; but lo,
When come to's self, he will me know.
Let Us wipe from's eyes (that so he may)
This cloud of mortal things away.
Her vestment then folding in plies,
She wiped therewith my watery eyes.
Darkness left me now and night,
my sight came to me clear:
Just as when bright Phoebus light
at noon cannot appear,
For that clouds have round about
the hemisphaere beset,
So fixed, that it is a doubt
the Heaven's motion's let:
Boreas sent from Thracian den
in the evening retrives
The light of the Sun, whose beams then
strike the beholders eyes.
So sorrow's clouds being dispelled,
I looking up, found I beheld
And knew the face that brought me cure:
Then looking on her, Thou art sure
My Nurse that brought me up, said I,
The all-powerful Philosophy.
Art thou from heaven also sent
To exile, that thou do frequent
These solitudes? or art thou come
Me to accuse, as falsely some
Already have? Darling, said she,
Why should thou think I will leave thee,
And not part of the burden take
Which thou do bear for my names sake?
Philosophy would sure be shent,
If she should leave the Innocent.
Fear would me seize, as if in sight
Some hideous thing did me affright.
What? it is but now as it has been;
Wisdom full often has been seen
By wicked manners to be torn.
Of old, (our Plato not yet born)
How often have I with Foolishness
Had strong contests? wise Socrates,
His Master, for me did see die,
Yet dying gained the victory.
Stoics and Epicures by name
Unto his wisdom have laid claim,
And others too what came to hand
(Though I did call and did withstand)
Did catch as prey, they tore my Coat
Which with my own hands I had wrought,
And every one did get a part,
Believed they would all, they did depart.
Amongst these, 'cause something did appear
Like me, Imprudence thought they were
Of mine; so the mad multitude
She did pervert with Errors rude.
Perhaps thou do not know the flight
Of Anaxagoras, nor spite
That Socrates endured, nor
The torments Zeno suffered, for
That they were strangers: yet thou know
That glorious memory can boast
The Canii, Soran's, Seneca's;
Recent are the fames of these.
Why was it these Virtuous men did fall?
'Cause in my manners they were all
Instructed, loose minds could not like
Their manners, so to theirs unlike.
So that no wonder it is at all,
If in the conflict they do fall
Whose Maxims are for to displease
The bad, whose number's numberless,
Yet to be scorned, for that no guide
But ERROR, who draws them aside,
They have; who if against us in sight
He do draw up, and us does fright,
Our chieftain presently does place
Her forces in a secure place.
They instantly in vain employ
Themselves, our strength for to destroy;
While we above sit and deride
Their plunderings and foolish pride.
Thus from their fury we retire,
Sit safe, where Folly cannot aspire.
Who in a quiet state
With an undaunted look
Can trample on proud Fate,
Good and bad Fortune brook,
Not him the foaming threats
Of rough Seas yelling death,
Nor Vesuvus fierce heats
That strive to stop his breath,
Nor Lightning wild, which coming from above
Full often high towers does consume, can move.
Do not for Tyrants care,
Who without force do rage,
Nor hope thou, nor yet fear:
Their fury thou wilt assuage.
But who does trembling stand,
Wishing for what is not sure,
Has left for to command,
And must (enslaved) endure.
The fool has made a Chain, and it is most fit
That he that made it should be bound with it.
Do thou yet understand? or do
I to a Goose yet velvet show?
Why do thou weep? why tears do shed?
Speak, show thy Reason is not dead.
If thou wilt be cured don't be shy
Thy wounds to show. My mind's force I
Collecting then, this answer made,
Does not fell Fortune me invade?
What need I further it declare?
This place it self does make it appear
Is this at all like to that place
Which thou did choose for thy solace,
My Library, where thou and I
Often did descant on the beauty
Of things both humane and divine?
Did I then thus my arms entwine?
Or did I thus dejected look,
When we disclosed hid Nature's book;
When with thy Jacob's staff thou me
Instructed'st in Geometry,
And did describe the spangled Sky,
That I should guide my life thereby?
And is this all that they do earn
That thee do serve? did not I learn
From Plato's mouth, as thy decree,
Those Commonwealths should happy be,
Where either wise men bear the sway,
Or else, where to wise Guardians they
Committed are? by him also
Thou with good arguments do show,
That honest men endeavor should
To sit at helm, and not be fooled,
Nor let lewd Citizens to grow,
Who would the good quite overthrow.
This thou me taught'st, and I desired
To practice what thou had inspired.
Thou and my God (who thee did place
In wise men's minds) are witnesses
That nothing but the good of the State
Brought me to be a Magistrate.
Hence all my mischiefs grew, 'cause I
With wicked men could not comply.
The wicked ones I did offend;
Though never so great, I them contemned.
I could not Conigastus brook
When he the goods of poor men took.
How often Triguilla (though he were
The King's great Houshold-officer)
Have I restrained from ills before,
Such as were past made him restore?
How often did I interpose
My power, with hazard, to save those
Who marked were for sacrifice
By the Barbarians cruelties?
No man did ever me withdraw
From doing right: that without Law
By Pillage and by Taxes rife
The people suffered, was my grief,
As much as theirs. Before the King
In a great Famine I did bring
The Praetor, urged the heavy rate
Laid on Campania, and that State
Saved from impov'rishing. I drew
Paulinus Consul (when a crew
Of ravening wolves did go about
Him to devouer) safely out.
When Cyprian Albin did accuse,
Him till his trial to excuse
I did my self to the hate expose
Of his accuser. All these foes
For others cause I now do prove.
My safety then should others move,
Since that there is no way for me
Now left, by Courtiers to be free,
'Cause I was good. But by what way
Was my fall wrought? why, even they
Who Basil had accused before,
And him displaced, now being poor,
They him did hire me to accuse.
Opilio also they did use,
And lewd Gaudentius, two that were
For cheating banished, and for fear
Did take Asyle; the King advised
Did judge them to be stigmatized,
If not soon gone: yet these against me
Were heard: unheard of cruelty!
Was it my cause, or their offense,
Made them so righteous evidence?
Fortune (if not to see me blamed,
At least so basely) was ashamed.
But what great Crime? in short 'twas this;
I wished the Senate's happiness.
And how? I stood in the defense
Of The Senate, quasht the evidence
Prepared to make them Traitors all.
Now judge you whether that I shall
Rather this heinous crime deny,
And so shame thee, or justify
It as a truth. I Will be no lier,
I did and ever will it desire.
Shall I confess it an offense?
I then must own the evidence.
But was it a crime to wish them well?
Their own Decrees against me do tell
That it was so: but Follie's elf
(Which ever does belly it self)
Cannot change the merit of the cause.
Nor ought I by Socratick laws
To hide the truth, or grant a ly:
If so, then in what fault am I?
But this to thee and all wise men
I leave to judge; yet with my pen
I Will write it down, that all may know,
Present and future, what I do.
Why should I name those Letters feigned,
By which I falsely was arraigned
The Roman liberty to hope?
The craft of them had been laid open,
If the confession* might that day
(Which in all business most does sway)
Of my accusers have been taken.
Alas! hopes of freedom none remain.
I well may wish, but answered had
In Canius words, when it was said
By Caius Caesar, he was one
That wrought the Conjuration
Which was contrived against him,
If I had known't', thou had not bin.
But sorrow has not so me dulled,
Only to whine because Vice would
Against Virtue strive: but I admire
Her to overcome he should aspire.
Weakness may prompt us unto ill:
But that we should conceive our Will
(God seeing) against Innocence
Should conquer, monstrous is to sense.
From hence one of your family,
Not ill, thus reasoned, If there be
A God, from whence does evil come?
If none, whence good? but to come home,
Grant wicked men, who sought the blood
Of The Senate, and of all were good,
Sought mine, who did the Senate serve;
From them too did I it deserve?
When did I either say or do,
But thou did me instruct thereto?
Thou know, not dreading danger, how
The Senate's good I did avow,
Whenas the insatiate greedy King
Did (at Verona) cause to bring
Albinus Treason on them all,
That in his guilt they all might fall.
That all these things are true thou know,
That of my self I never did boast.
For he does lessen his good name,
Who by a brag does catch at fame.
But see the event: for Virtue true,
I Am paid with what to th'Wicked's due.
When free confession at a Bar
Is made, those Judges cruel are
Who humane frailty don't respect,
Nor on false Fortune do reflect.
Had I burnt Churches, killed the Priests,
Made righteous blood run through the streets,
Yet present I should have been tried;
But now five hundred miles aside
I by the Senateam condemned
(Because that I did them defend)
To death and to proscription.
O worthy that never any one
Should so offend! but they did see
Of my great guilt the dignity;
Which for to blind they did allege,
Falsely, that I by Sacrilege
My conscience had defiled, t'attain
My honors: but thou know that gain
Of Worldly things thou far away
Did from my mind remove, nor may
It be believed, who in thy sight
Does live, can such a crime commit.
This Pythagorean daily thou
Into my ears and thoughts did sow,
FOLLOW THOU GOD: nor was it right
That he should use an unclean sp'rite,
Whose excellence thou made so free,
That like to God he seemed to be.
At home my innocent Retreat,
Of honest Friends the concourse great,
The sweet society I held
With holy Symmachus, dispelled
Even suspicion of such crimes.
But O the wickedness of the times!
They with this crime did me asperse,
'Cause with thy doctrine and manners
I was replete: so not enough
That thou no help should me allow,
But for me too thou should be torn.
One evil more not to be born
Was, that most men did think it right,
They not the Cause, but Fortune's spite
Beholding, crying all things down
But what The Event does happy crown.
Who Fortune leaves, it haps to those
Their good esteem they first do lose.
To think on it is vexation great,
How busily the Vulgar treat.
And it is most true, The heaviest weight
Of adverse Fortune is, that strait
Who is accused, and falls thereby,
Is thought to suffer worthily.
And I from my estate thrust out,
Stripped of my honors, and no doubt
Of my good name, thus suffer must
For goodness punishments unjust.
Besides, methinks I plainly see
The wicked making jollity,
And egging each trapanning knave,
No matter how, the good t'enslave;
Who by my fall deterred, do ly
Open unto their villainy:
Who dare do mischief 'cause that they
Unpunished are, and will for prey.
This to the innocent is hard,
Not only for to be debarred
Of safety, but of his defense.
Then loud to cry is no offense.
O thou most High,
that sitt'st on thy eternal Throne,
Who to the whole Sky
gav'st rules for it to move alone,
That made the Moon
by the Sun's reflex to shine so bright,
Small Stars to drown,
he from her hid, to lose her light.
One Star thou made
to attend the Sun each night new born,
Which then invades
the circle to bring up the morn.
When Winter does
the trees divest, to have short light;
When Summer clothes
them, then thou do contract the night.
Throughout the year
the seasons ruled are by thy power:
What Is nipt by the Bear,
the West-wind's fresh again restore;
And when benign
Arcturus gravidates the earth,
Then thou do bring
hot ripening Sirius to the birth.
All things we see
by thy fixed law thou do direct;
And can it be
that Man alone thou should neglect?
How, or from whence,
is it fickle Chance does him pursue,
And Innocence
receive the hire to the wicked due?
That wicked men
set in high place the good deride,
Whilst in a den
bright Virtue's forced her head to hide,
And the Just man
a villain's deemed, whilst perjuries
Do him crapan,
and neatly-close-composed lies?
But if that they
get strength, insulting they none spare,
But make a prey
of mighty Kings whom all do fear.
Thou that guid'st all,
behold this miserable Earth,
And the no small
part of it, Man, thy dearest birth.
Fortune's his foe,
but thy great power her rage can lay.
Then us below,
as thou above do, rule we pray.
When I with grief had this snarl'd out,
She smiled, and nothing moved, No doubt
(Said she) I made, when I did see
Thee weep, thou were in misery,
And banished, but how far from home,
Had thou not told me, I Would not known.
But from your Country, as you have said,
You are not banished, but have strai'd.
Or if you would rather think it true,
It Is you your self has banished you:
For no man living else could do it.
Remember that your off-spring's root
Is not Athenian Anarchy,
But in one King blessed Monarchy,
Who joys in many Subjects free,
Does none thrust out, by's laws to be
Guided, and's justice to obey
Is the full sum of all we pray.
Do thou not of thy Country know
The ancient law, the which does show
That no man can be banished thence
That there would make his residence?
For who within its bounds does keep,
Cannot fear he can deserve to sleep
In exile: but who would it quit,
Quits therewithal desert and wit.
So not the place, but thy disguise
Me moves. For why? I do not prize
Thy Library so richly wrought,
But thy own Mind with Virtues fraught,
Which not of Books, but Knowledge great,
I once with care had made the seat.
Thou have with truth spoke thy good will
To th'common good, but with small skill
Thou have thy own deserts laid out.
That thou art honest none do doubt:
All know the falsehood they did use.
Thou have done well not to accuse,
But gently, thy accusers hate,
Because all tongues do it relate.
Thou blam'st the Senate's foul decree,
Thou griev'st they have accused me,
Bewail'st the loss of my good name,
And then Fortune do exclame.
With bitterness thou do complain,
That Virtue's recompensed with pain.
At last thou thy sharp verse do close
With prayer, on earth, for heaven's repose.
By all which plainly we may see
Sadness and grief distracteth thee.
So that in this mind thou art in,
With easy things we must begin.
Those perturbations that thee swell
A gentle handling may dispell.
So fitted them for to endure,
With sharper medicines we will thee cure.
Who seasons does not know,
But does in the Solstice sow,
It Is fit he should want Bread,
And be with Acorns fed.
No Violets you will find,
When Frost the earth does bind;
Nor on the withered tree
Fresh branches will you see.
It Is Autumn, all can tell,
When Bacchus clusters swell.
God does unto each time
A proper use assign;
And it so fast has bound,
Nothing can it confound:
But what does it forsake,
A sad account does make.
With a few questions first must I,
With your good leave, you move and try;
That so I may know your disease.
Ask me, said I, e'ne what you please,
I Will answer make. Then she replied,
Do think that Chance this world does guide?
Or think thou Reason does it rule?
Then said I, I am no such fool
To think rash Chance at all can move
Such certainties; it is God above
To his own work does sure preside,
Nor will, nor have I it denied.
It Is true, said she, you so did sing
When Man you grieved to be the thing
Only from care Divine left out.
But of the rest you made no doubt.
And truly I do wonder how
You can be ill, that this do know.
But we will higher seek to find,
For that I guess something's behind.
Then tell me, since thou do believe
That God to the world does order give,
By what means does he govern it?
I cannot frame an answer fit,
Since scarce thy scope by me's conceived.
Then I, said she, was not deceived,
Thinking a breach was open left
By which disturbances in crept.
But can thou tell of things the ends,
Or unto what whole Nature tends?
I Have heard, but grief makes me forget.
Do know who all things did beget?
Yes, God, said I. And how cannot be
That you the Rise, yet End don't see?
Troubles of mind ('it is often found)
Do man in's Reason much confound,
But not destroy. Answer me than,
Do thou remember you are a Man?
Why yes, said I, most perfectly.
And can thou tell what it is to be
A Man? Strange question asked, as though
Me rational I did not know,
And mortal too; I do confess.
Do thou, said she, know nothing else?
Why, no: Then thy disease is plain,
Self-ignorance does cause thy pain.
And now the cause I have found out,
Thee for to cure I do not doubt.
Confounded by Oblivion vile,
Thou griev'st thy plunders and exile:
Not knowing of all things the close,
Thou vile men happy do suppose:
Forgetting how the world is swayed,
Thou think that Chance has thee betrayed.
Not cause of Sickness hence alone,
But Death it self may easily come.
That yet thou do in safety live,
To God you are bound thy thanks to give.
Of Health a symptom great I find
By th'sense thou have of the world's mind,
That Chance therein does not abide,
But Godly Reason does it guide.
Then do not fear, this spark so small
In thee life's fire kindle shall.
But for yet it is not time t'apply
Strong remedies, therefore will I
( Knowing by nature minds up take
Opinions when they truth for sake,
From whence Disturbances arise,
And darken their truth-seeing eyes)
This cloud of Errors dissipate,
Or gently it attenuate.
From falshood's darkness so set free,
Truth's glorious splendour thou may see.
In clouded sky
the Stars no light can give.
When Winds blow high,
at Sea we scarce can live.
A Flood down hill
with ready current goes,
But does stand still
when Rocks do it oppose.
So Truth's bright charms
if thou will clearly see,
Clouds, Rocks and Storms
must first removed be.
Nor Hope, nor Fear,
nor Joy, nor Grief obey;
Minds clouded are
and. biased where these sway.
THE SECOND BOOK.
WHile silently on me she gazed,
Her modesty m' attention raised.
Then she began; If truly I
The causes of thy grief espy,
Thy former Fortune thou do grieve,
The change of which thou do believe
Thy Mind has altered. I well know
The many wiles of this siend foe.
Most friendly she does ever use
Those whom she most means to abuse,
With saddest grief them casting down,
When unexpected she does frown.
But if thou will but lay to heart
Her manners, nature, and desert,
In her was nothing worth thy cost,
Nor by her have thou gained or lost.
But this into thy mind to bring,
I think will be an easy thing.
With my wise sayings thou were wont
(When she thee courted) her to hunt.
But nothing new does us come nigh
Without the mind's reluctance.
Hence it is that thou a while art gone
From thine own quiet station.
But time it is that thou do take
Some pleasing Cordials, thee to make
More fit strong medicines to receive;
Soft, sweet Persuasives I conceive,
Which only then have their right use,
When they our dictates don't abuse.
With them let Musick's sweet delight
Strike notes now solemn, and now light.
What is it, I pray, has wrought this teen?
Have thou ought new, not heard of seen?
If thou blam'st Fortune for this change,
Thou err'st; her nature is to range:
She her own law has kept with thee,
In keeping Mutability.
Such was she when she thee did lure,
And with false joys did thee allure.
Her double Deity to thee
Discovered is, which few else see.
And if you like her, don't complain;
If not, then do thou her disdain.
And this which now does thee oppress,
Should cause thy ease and quietness.
She thee has left; if not, it is sure
Thou never could have been secure.
Do fading joys so rich appear?
Are Fortune's smiles to thee so dear?
Why, thou can neither trust her stay,
Nor brook that she should go away.
Then if that none can her retain,
Nor let her go without great pain,
What is this slippery Deity,
But index of Calamity?
For what time present does commend,
Prudence regards not, but the End.
And who both ways her nature metes,
Nor kindness hopes, nor fears her threats.
With a contented mind then bear
What Is done in Fortune's theater,
Since thou art under her command.
For with what reason can it stand,
She should not her own freedom use,
Whom for thy mistress thou did choose?
Thou at thy Fortune may repine,
But can not change one stroke in the line.
If Sails to the winds committed are,
The Ship no certain course can stear;
Nor thou to thy designed Port go,
But thither where the winds do blow.
Thou sow'st thy ground good Corn to bear,
But oft-times comes a barren year.
Fortune's thy Mistress, her obey.
But thou her turning wheel would stay.
Fool of all fools! if once that she
Stands still, she Fortune leaves to be.
While thus with haughty pride she does run round,
And like a torrent all does drowned,
Cruel, she without aw on Kings does tread,
And falsely smiling mounts the abject head.
She hears no plaints, nor cares for pain,
But laughs at them that do complain.
Those who her trust she cozens, by her power.
Showing them blessed and cursed the self-same hour.
But yet let Fortune have fair play,
Then judge if ought but right she say.
Why do thou daily me accuse,
O man? how do I thee abuse?
What is it that from thee I have taken?
Choose thy own Judge, before him complain.
Of Wealth and Honors me implead;
I willingly will back concede
All that thou ask'st, if 't can be shown
That any mortal them does own.
When first to live thou did begin,
Naked and poor I took thee in:
With my own goods I cherished thee,
For which thou now do rail at me.
I brought thee up with tenderness,
And with abundance did thee bless.
Well; now from thee these things are rent:
Be thankful I so long them lent;
And not complain that thou art crossed,
As if thy own goods thou had lost.
No violence on thee does light;
Wealth, Honors, Pleasures are my right;
Me for their mistress they do own,
With me they come, with me they are gone.
Thou rashly do to them lay claim,
And falsely do thy loss proclaim.
Shall only I be barred my right?
The Heavens we see do bring forth Light,
And it again with Darkness hide.
Each year the Earth decks as a bride,
With Fruits, and Leaves, and Flowers gay;
Then with chil Frosts nips them away.
Calm Seas and quiet now entice,
Now into horrid Storms do rise.
Yet me (that fickle am by kind)
Insatiate Man to him will bind.
I, having power, in the world do play,
And sporting turn a wheel always;
Pleasing my self to see how I
The high turn down, the low bring high.
If thou do for thy pleasure climb,
To throw thee down is my pastime.
And yet no injury to thee,
To use my own, I being free.
Do thou not know rich Croesus sat,
Whom Cyrus great did fear of late,
Himself had burnt in his rich tower,
Had Heavens not quenched it with a shower?
Have thou forgot how pious Paul
Did grieve his prisoner Perses fall?
What do all Tragedies deplore
But Fortune's turning Kingdoms over?
When yet a youth, were thou not taught
That at Jove's threshold there were wrought
Two Vessels, one replete with Ills,
The other Goodness wholly fills?
What if too much thou took'st of one,
If yet from thee I am not gone?
What if this change a just cause be
That thou should better hope of me?
Then faint not, nor desire to be,
Where all are subject, only free.
If as the sands
the Seas cast up on high,
Or as the bands
of Stars in the spangled sky,
If so with Wealth
rich plenty should us store;
Yet want of pelf
vain man would still deplore.
If God each one
Honors and Wealth should grant;
Still they would moan
Honors and Wealth to want.
Rapine does still
insatiately require:
No bridle will
hold in untamed desire.
None have so much
but still desire more:
He Is never rich
that thinks that he is poor.
If Fortune thus to thee should say,
How could thou answer her, I pray?
Now if thou can thy plaints defend,
Speak forth, and I Will attention lend.
Then I; These are but specious shows,
Music and Rhetoric, God knows,
Which while we hear do only please;
But to deep Griefs do give no ease.
When from the ear the sound is gone,
Grief more the heart does work upon.
It Is true, said she; these foments are
Applied but only to prepare
To cure thy unruly grief.
But that which must bring thee relief
Must deeper pierce, which I Will apply
When it is fit time the same to try.
To be in misery to profess,
Is to forget thy Happiness.
Thy Father dead thou were took in
By the chief men, and joined in kin
(Alliance which is only good)
First to their love, and then their blood.
Who did not emulate thy joys
Blessed with such Father, Wife, and Boys?
But these as common I pass by;
Nor will I name the dignity
With which thy Youth did Age excel:
The top of thy blessed Hap I Will tell.
If that in mortal things we see
Ought that is blessed, can it be
A cloud the light should so obscure
That memory should not endure?
When thy two Sons thou did behold
Carried from home, Consuls enrolled,
The Senators them waiting on,
And peoples acclamation;
When thou the King's praise did dilate
Before them placed in chairs of state;
When thou 'twixt them, while throngs did press,
Triumphall largess did disperse:
While Fortune thus did favor thee,
While of her bounties she was free,
While none so much her minion was,
Thou her good words did give, I guess.
Let thee and Fortune reckon now.
What though that she has bent her brow?
Number thy Joys and Sadnesses,
Thou happy yet wilt thee confess.
And if that thou do therefore moan,
Because thy Joys are past and gone:
Like reason bids thee mourning stay,
Since sorrows also pass away.
Art into the world but newly come?
Do look here for Elyzium?
What Is in this life of certainty,
When every hour men do die?
And could we Fortune's self insure,
She could but until death endure.
What difference then, whether by dying
Thou leave her, or she thee by flying?
When Phoebus galloping amain
scatters his orient light,
The lesser Stars to fly are fain
from his all-dazling sight.
When Zephyrus does gently blow,
the Earth a blush puts on;
But ruffling Auster he does throw
death's paleness her upon.
When courted with a gentle grace,
the Seas are smooth and clear:
But then put on an angry face,
when Boreas does appear.
If nothing in this world be sure,
but all to change is bent;
Trust if thou will to Fortune's lure;
trust what is not permanent.
But know that every thing that is made
lies under this decree,
To rise, to flourish, and to fade,
and then no more to be.
Lady of Virtues, then faid I,
All thou have said is verity:
A prosperous swift course I had,
Which to remember makes me sad:
For of all mischief that is seen,
The worst is to have happy been.
Opinion thee does vex, said she;
From which the things themselves are free*
If the vain name of Loss thee stound,
Let Us see how much thou do abound.
If thou the best do still retain,
How can thou of misfortune plain?
If thou keep'st still of Fortune's store
What is most rich, thou art not poor*
Thy Father, mankind's ornament,
Best Symmachus, to Virtue bent
And holy Wisdom, for whose health
Thou would lay down thy life and wealth,
He safe from injuries does moan
Thy miseries, as if his own.
Thy Wife does live, commended high
For modest wit and chastity;
No more to say, her father's like,
For thee does live, though in dislike
Of life: in which one thing I grant
Thou full felicity do want;
For that she wishing thy relief,
Does pine away herself with grief.
Thy Children, who have Consuls bin,
Maintain the uprightness of their kin.
Since Life then is the thing most rare,
For which all mankind does take care;
How blessed would thou thy self confess,
If thou knew'st thy own happiness,
Enjoying still, as't does appear,
What then life's self is far more dear?
Then cease to grieve, and things miscall,
Since Fortune has not shipwreckt all.
That Anchors stick, and sound's the Rope,
Gives comfort now, and future hope.
Pray God they hold, and still be sound;
For if they hold, we shall not drowned.
But thou do see how we are torn,
How overboard our goods are born.
I Am glad, said she, thou moved art,
And that thy grief is but for part.
But I thy niceness cannot digest,
And plaints, 'cause you are not wholly blessed.
For who so full content can find,
That something will not displease his mind?
Humane affairs still doubt procure,
Or never gained, or never sure.
One does abound, but's shamed by's Birth;
Another Noble, wants earth.
One stored with both wails single life:
Another happy in a Wife
Wants Children, and does grieve to see
Another Child his Heir must be.
Another having Children store,
Grieves they are wicked, or else poor.
So none with Fortune are content,
But their Condition still lament.
They Are ignorant, her have not tried;
And they that have, cannot her abide.
Add, those men that most happy are,
Have quickest sense of their ill fare:
If Fortune but a little frown,
With smallest gusts they are cast down.
An easy thing distracts the state
Of those that are most fortunate.
How many do thou daily see,
Would think themselves in heaven to be,
If they the least part did possess
Of that which yet thy life does bless?
This place which thou call'st Banishment,
The Natives live in with content.
So nothing's ill, but what is so thought;
And unless so, there is happy naught.
Who is so happy, but (if he
Once angry grow) a change would see?
With what a world of bitterness
Is seasoned humane happiness?
Which though it please while't does remain,
Yet none could ever it retain.
See then the miserable bliss
That in all mortal things there is,
Which stay not with those are content,
Nor please the froward while they are lent.
Why mortals then seek bliss without,
The which within they need not doubt,
Is for that Error them does drowned,
And Ignorance does them confound.
The center of true bliss I Will show.
Do thou to any thing more ow
Then to thy self? why, no: then why
Enjoy'st thou not thy self wholly?
In doing so thou shall enjoy
What Fortune's self cannot take away.
And that these casual things do ow
No Blessedness, thou thus may know.
If Blessedness be the chief Good
By Humane Reason understood,
And that the chiefest Good is not
Which does depend upon a lot;
For that that same excel it must
Which Chance nor Power out can thrust:
It Is manifest that Bliss is higher
Then Fortune's fopp'ries can aspire.
This more; Who Happiness does row,
Or knows she will change, or does not know.
If he don't know, what blessedness
Can be in ignorant blindness?
And if he know, his fears are still
He shall her lose, since go she will.
So being in fear continually,
It Is sure he happy cannot be.
And if her loss he can neglect,
So that no way it him deject,
It Is a poor Bliss that will not cross
Him that enjoys it, in the loss.
But since by many ways you are known
To be a person who does own
That humane minds not mortal are,
And that this one thing more is clear,
That Death this Happiness does end;
Then if no further it extend,
No doubt but all mankind that die,
By Death fall into misery.
But we have many known that have
Sought Blessedness even in the grave,
By Death not only, but have so
By torments and afflictions too:
Then in this Life what can us bless,
Whose end only gives Blessedness?
Who would him seat
With caution great,
Where is no fear
That Winds should tear,
Nor Waves that threat
A downfall great;
Let him not fly
To Mountains high,
Where Winds that blow
May overthrow;
Nor on Sands rear
Which cannot bear:
But set him down
In a low ground,
Where Winds that roar
Cannot turn him over.
Thus quiet he,
May happy be,
Scorning their rage
Throughout his age.
But since that I these foments find
Already sink into thy mind,
I stronger medicines now will try.
Grant Fortune's goods had certainty:
What Is in them that is worth the while,
Or well considered is not vile?
Are Riches thine, or of such count?
Does Gold or Money so surmount?
Why, in the spending, these by far
(Then in the acquist) more glorious are.
Base Avarice is hated still;
Bounty does mouths with praises fill.
And since Wealth can with no man stay,
Wealth's precious then when given away.
For should one man keep all the store,
All other men must needs be poor.
Words without Cost all men may spare,
But Riches spent diminished are.
Why, then it is of necessity,
Who parts with his Wealth, he poor must be.
How poor a thing is Riches then,
Which cannot be enjoyed by men?
Nor without making many poor
Can any man make up a store.
Does Jewels luster thee entice?
If ought be in them of great price,
It Is from the Jewels, not the Men.
Why so admired, I wonder then.
What in a senseless thing can seem
So fair, that Reason so't should deem?
Which though they by creation are,
In their degree, exceeding fair;
Yet far below thee they are placed,
Nor do deserve to be so graced.
Do pleasant Fields else thee delight?
Why not? no doubt it is a fair sight.
So does the Sea delight the eye,
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Sky.
But what are all these things to thee?
Dare thou at all boast their beauty?
Do thou sweet May adorn with flowers?
Is Earth made fertile by thy showers?
Why of vain joys do so much make?
External, for thine own do take?
Fortune will never make that thine
Which does by Nature thee decline.
The Earth no doubt her fruits does bring
To nourish every living thing.
And if enough will thee suffice,
Scorn Fortune's superfluities.
Nature with little is content;
And if on her there more be spent,
'Twill or not please, or hurtful be
With nauseous satiety.
Do thou delight for to appear
In several Suits gorgeous and dear?
If they at all the fancy raise,
The stuff or Tailor has the praise.
Will many Servants make thee blessed?
If bad, they are a household pest:
If good, another probity,
Pray, what shall that redound to thee?
By all which it is plainly shown,
What thou count'st thine is not thine own.
And if no beauty be in these,
Why should they anger thee, or please?
And if by nature they are fair,
And so thee please, what need'st thou care,
Since thou may all their beauty see,
Though they possessed by others be?
For they not precious are therefore,
'Cause thou have made them of thy store:
But thou have them in great esteem,
Because that they do precious seem;
And hunt'st them with great earnestness,
For fear that want should thee oppress*
In this thou art deceived also,
Since still thou want to make a show:
For this of all hands we must grant,
They that have most, they most do want.
Who nature only would suffice,
Cares not for superfluities.
Have you no inward sweet content,
On outward things you are so bent?
Or how is your condition free?
With a divine soul do agree,
To boast the glory of thy state
In goods that be inanimate?
Their own contents each other thing:
But you, whose Mind from Heaven does spring,
With low things would your self adorn,
Whereby you your Creator scorn.
God would have Man all things excel:
He, them to serve, himself does sell.
For if that good more precious is
Then that which does that good possess,
And you base things your good esteem,
You truly them to serve do seem.
Which justly does upon you light,
Of Man not having the foresight,
To know, all things he does excel
Whenas himself he does know well:
And if himself he cease to know,
He puts himself the Beasts below.
For Ignorance the nature is
Of Beasts, but it is of Man the vice.
You do your self but make a scorn,
When you with what is not yours adorn.
For what is seen we only prize;
What Is hid, in its own ordure lies.
I do deny that good to be
Which does the owner injury.
Am I in this deceived, or no?
I Am sure that thou will not say so.
But often who Riches do possess,
By them are brought to heaviness.
Since every rogue does think that he
Has right to them as well as thee.
And thou who now thy throat do fear,
And for false goods do take such care,
If thou those goods away would fling,
Before the Thief thou would leap and sing.
Then worldly Wealth great joy has sure,
While who't enjoyes cannot be secure.
Happy that Age
who their own Fields did till;
Could Hunger's rage
with Acorns easily fill;
Did not their Wine
with honey mixed confound,
Nor made them fine
with Tyrian dye unsound;
Who on the grass
did take their quiet rest,
Drink Water was,
and under Pines did feast:
When dangerous Trade,
which with it Wealth did bring,
Was not yet made
of Vice the fatal spring.
No Trumpets did
the Soldiers minds elate,
No weapons hid
in wounds through mortal hate.
What could invite
men then to kill and slay?
For none would fight
if it were not for pay.
O would again
those manners might return!
But love of gain
like Aetna's fire does burn
Ah! who was he
that first did treasures find?
Man lived free
they in their cells confined.
Of powers and of dignities,
Which you extol unto the skies,
Not knowing truly what they are,
I will unto thee now declare.
If they in wicked hands do light,
Not Aetna's flames can show such spite,
Nor Inundations do such harm.
Of this let Consuls power warn,
Which first taken up for Liberty,
So great a burden grew to be,
Your Fathers sought to lay't aside,
As Kings before were for their pride.
And if by chance (as it is but rare)
Honors conferred on good men are,
What is in them that can delight
But Courtesy and doing right?
So that there is no honor due
To Dignity without Virtue.
For Virtue only does confer
Honor on those in power are.
And what is this desired thing?
What does this glorious Power bring?
Did you but see, you would deride
Those poor things to which you preside.
O things of Clay! if among Mice
The itch of Honor should entice,
And one for highest place should crowd,
Would it not make you laugh aloud?
For if the Body thou look on,
What poorer thing is made then Man,
Who often destroyed is by a Fly,
Whom often a Worm does cause to die?
Now none can greater power have,
Then this poor Body to enslave,
Or that which far inferior is,
The goods of Fortune, fools chief bliss.
For no man the free Mind commands,
Nor moves, which firm on Reason stands.
When once (we read) a Tyrant King
By cruel torments sought to bring
A bold free spirit to relate
Who with him did confederate,
With His teeth he did his tongue displace,
And threw it in the Tyrant's face.
So to his virtue bravely he
Did turn the Tyrant's cruelty.
What to another can one do
That he himself's not subject to?
Busiris who his guests did kill,
His blood great Hercules did spill.
And Regulus, who often in bands
The Poeni led, they bound his hands.
Then what great power is in man,
Who his own harms not hinder can?
Again, if that in Dignities
Any essential good there lies,
The wicked could not them attain:
For these are rules that are certain,
Things naturally contrary,
And things opposed cannot agree.
Since bad men then we see oft-time
Unto these dignities to climb,
We may affirm in them to be
No good, they do so well agree.
So may be put on the same score
The rest of Fortune's goodly store;
For that most often they them share
Who of all men most wicked are.
These things may be considered too:
They valiant are, valiantly do;
Who Is swift, we nimble-footed call;
And Music makes men musical;
Physic Physicians, a sweet tongue
To Rhetoricians does belong.
Nature gives all in all respects
What Is proper, not contrar' effects.
And in all things that are her due
All opposition does eschew.
But Wealth cannot Avarice repel;
Nor Power make him not to swell,
Whom vicious lusts do strongly bind
In fetters not to be untwin'd.
And Dignities which bad men gain
Make them not worthy, but the stain
Of their unworthiness does show.
That this is so, we come to know
Because to things a name you rear
Which their effects will no way bear.
For these are neither Wealth, nor Might,
Nor Dignities so called of right:
But if their right names they do bear,
They are Vexations, Trouble, Care.
Lastly, who is wise the like concludes
Of all false Fortune's interludes,
In which, as it is manifest,
There Is nothing good, naught that makes blessed:
Which neither to good men are sent,
Nor make them good to whom they are lent.
What ruins did he make
that Rome did fire,
The Fathers brought to stake,
and to aspire
His Brother's blood caused spill,
Mother to die,
That he might gaze his fill
where he did ly!
Ah! cruel sure was he,
without a tear
Her intrails torn could see
that did him bear.
Yet this man did bear sway
from the Sun's rise,
Unto where ends the day
in the western skies;
From where congealed to ice
men wine do eat,
To where the world not nice
stark naked treat.
And would this power vast
his mind assuage?
No; he with sword did wast,
with poison rage.
Thou know, said I, Ambition never
To worldly greatness did me rear.
But being stored with Learning, I
Thought fit in silence not to die.
Then she replied, This is the thing
That oftentimes great wits does bring
(Even such as at high virtue aim)
To hazard all on Fortune's game.
Desire of Glory and high place
Puts on a seeming lovely face:
But how they vile, nay nothing are,
By what I Will show will plain appear.
First then, by demonstrations all
Which we call Astrologicall,
It Is plain, to heaven's vast extent
The whole Earth's bulk is but a point,
So small, that to the Globe if we
Compar't, it nothing seems to be.
Of this small point not the fourth part
(Well known by Geometrick art)
With living creatures planted is.
From whence take Lakes, and Bogs, and Seas:
Consider this, thou will find then
There Is scarce an atome left for Men.
Then if of this small point thou art
Shut up within the smallest part,
How poor a thing is thirst of Fame,
Or perpetrating of a Name?
Or how can Glory great be found
Coop't up within so narrow bound?
Next let us add this one thing more*
This little point is filled with store
Of Nations, who all are at strife
In manners, language, course of life:
Amongst whom Fame is not greatly spread,
'Cause commerce is prohibited,
Travel is hardly undergone,
And to be tongue-ty'd's vexation.
Then for a single Man a name
To get, is hard, when Towns want fame.
Tully in his time does relate,
The fame of Rome was not dilate
Beyond mount Caucasus, yet she
Then the World's Mistress seemed to be.
Thou then do see how straight and poor
The glory is thou labour'st for.
That fame, do think, Rome could not gain,
One Roman should to it attain?
Besides, as Nations diverse are,
Their Laws and manners differ far:
For what one people think worth praise,
Another with chastisement paies.
So that whoever takes delight
In Fame's high busie-winged flight,
(Which in most Countries cannot have vent,)
Let home-spread glory him content.
That Fame called Immortality
Must in one Nation tether'd be.
More famous men forgot have died
Then are by Writers dignified.
Or can Records eternize men?
No; Time consumes Writers and them.
But you immortal call that same
Which is indeed but future fame.
Consider but th'infinity,
Of ever-bless'd Eternity,
And you will find the joy you seek
Is not a mote in a bright week.
Ten thousand Years let be the case,
With it compare one Moment's space;
Yet definite both spaces are,
Though small, they some proportion bear.
Then multiply this manifold,
Yet no comparison will hold.
Finite things among themselves may be
Compared, not with Infinity.
Then though that time do fame long spare,
It with Eternity compare,
Thou Wilt find it is not only small,
But seems not to be at all.
But you think naught can you commend,
If vulgar praise don't it attend.
Conscience nor Virtue you regard;
From vulgar mouths you seek reward.
Learn how he truly did deride
One swelled with this vainglorious Pride.
Injuriously he did contend
With one who Virtue did pretend,
Called himself a Philosopher:
And now, said he, it shall appear
Whether that name you rightly use,
And more and more did him abuse.
All which he patiently did bear,
Seeming no whit for it to care.
At last insultingly said he
Now that it is true you plainly see.
But bitingly he did reply,
Thy foolish tongue does thee descry.
But at what is it brave men do aim,
Such as by Virtue only claim?
(For these are only worth my breath)
What is it that they gain after death?
For if (the which we credit not)
Men in the Grave do wholly rot,
No Glory sure the Grave retains,
If naught of him whose it is remains.
Bu if a soul unspotted, free
From this Earth's prison upward flee,
Enjoying Heaven, she will despise
All earthly sought-for vanities.
Who headlong does
upon vainglory run,
And does suppose
chief Good to build thereon,
Let him behold
the spacious Heaven fair,
And the pinfold
of Earth with it compare:
And if with Fame
this spot he cannot fill,
He will with shame
condemn his towering will.
Why should fond Pride
its self aim for to free
From that which tried
no mortal man can be?
Though Fame do fly
to Regions far remote,
With titles high;
death Glory values not.
But high and low
suffer alike Death's groans.
Who now can show
Faithful Fabricius bones?
Where Is Brutus wit,
and rigid Cato's care?
In some small script
it is only said, they were.
Then by Records
a Name is only shown,
A toy of words,
the Man lies still unknown.
But thee to quell,
if thus to live thou choose,
Let me thee tell,
a second Death pursues.
But lest that thou should think that I
Am Fortune's utter enemy;
I Will grant there is a time that she
Deserves of men esteemed to be,
When she her self does open lay.
Well understand me what I say:
For it is a wonder I relate,
The which I scarce can explicate.
To be great truth I do aver,
Then Good, Bad Fortune's better far.
For She deceives most certainly
In promising Felicity:
But This does Fortune truly show
Inconstant, changing to and fro.
She falsely cheating men does fool;
But This presides in wisdome's school,
She does men's minds in fetters bind,
Falsely pretending to be kind;
But This from bondage sets them free
By making known the uncertainty.
So One you see to be a blast,
The Other sober and steadfast:
One foolishly deceived with lies,
The Other grown by practice wise.
In fine, the Happy man still straies
From the direct into by-waies:
Whereas the Other to the right
Reduces men by a clear light.
And do thou think it a small thing,
That this harsh fortune thee does bring
To know who faithful is to thee,
Discovers false friends treachery?
She parting, with her goes her train;
But thy true friends do still remain.
This to have known at how dear rate
Would thou have bought when fortunate?
Then leave to moan that thou have lost
Thy Wealth, since thou can truly boast
That thou thy faithful Friends can tell,
Which does all Treasure far excel.
Constant though, the world
Change does evermore;
Seeds in the earth though hurled,
Forced are to restore;
Phoebus to make Day
Riding gloriously,
Phoebe for to sway,
The small light of the sky;
Seas bounded to be,
Though the Earth above:
This rare Concord he
Made that is all Love.
Let him loose the rein,
All things Love combine,
Hurry do amain
To wars intestine:
Social Loves are lost
Which fair order keep,
And the World is tossed
As Ships in the deep.
People joined in peace,
He for them does care:
Jarrs he makes to cease
'Twixt the Married pair.
Laws he does prescribe,
Binding faithful friends,
Which them fairly guide
Unto honest ends.
Happy are they sure
That thus guided are
By that Love so pure
Guides the Heavens fair.
THE THIRD BOOK.
HER Song did so much ravish me,
That stupefy'd I seemed to be.
But recollecting, O thou blessed,
Said I, reducer unto rest!
How have these thy instructions free
And pleasant singing cherished me?
So that henceforth I think I shall
Fell Fortune's strokes not fear at all.
And those Remedies the which thou
Both harsh and bitter call'dst but now,
I do not henceforth hate to prove,
But cordially I them do love.
Then she replied, When I did find
That thou did my instructions mind,
Then did I know thou would comply
Not onl' in form, but seriously.
Those which remain that nature bear,
Tasted they bite, sweet swallowed are.
But that which thee does now invite
With so much pleasure and delight,
How much would thou it more intend
If thou the scope did comprehend?
Why, what is the final drift? said I.
What? perfect true Felicity;
Which thou do dream for to attain,
But cheated art with fancies vain.
Then I replied, I the humbly pray
Me this to show without delay.
Most willingly I will, said she:
But first I must declare to thee
Things contrary, that thou thereby
May know true Bliss more perfectly.
Who will a good Ground till,
All Weeds he first must kill,
And then most certainly
He shall grow rich thereby.
Who sweet would taste, he must
His palate first disgust.
Stars then do shine most bright
When darkest is the Night.
And when Morn does appear
The Sun does shine most clear.
So thou from darkness free,
Most clearly then wilt see;
Dark Error laid aside,
Bright Truth will be thy guide.
Then she a while did six her eye,
Her thoughts retiring inwardly.
At last, O how are men, she said,
With many cares disquieted?
All several ways do play their game,
Yet all at the same End do aim;
That is, chief Good, which I define
To be Man's ultimate design:
The which indeed the chief Good is,
All others being comprised in this*
But if in all it don't agree,
The chiefest Good it cannot be;
For that there is something left without
The which may cause desire and doubt.
By which it is evidently shown,
Chief Good has all Perfection.
This for to get, men sev'rally,
As I have said, themselves apply:
To which men's minds most certainly
Have natural propensity;
But Error makes men to esteem
What is not such, so such it seem.
So Plenty some esteem the ground,
Thence toil in Riches to abound.
Others high Honors and great Place,
Not spoke to, but, If It please your Grace.
Others with Power and Command
To rule do love, or near to stand.
But who of Fame make most account,
In Peace and War seek to surmount.
Many in Mirth chief Good would find;
These to all Pleasures are inclined.
There are which seek for to acquire
All these with different desire.
As some do Riches love, only
That Power and Pleasure they may buy.
Some Power seek, thereby to gain
Great Riches or a lasting Name.
To these or other the like end
All humane actions do intend:
As Honor or a pop'lar name,
Thereby for to advance a fame;
A Wife and Children pleasure bring.
But Friendship's such a holy thing,
Not to be named in Fortune's throng,
To Virtue only't does belong.
All other things do men invite
For Power, or else for Delight.
All goods of the Body easily
To what is said referred may be.
As Strength and all proportions fair
An active body do declare:
Beauty and bold Activity
Do give Renown; Health, Jollity.
By all which, all may plainly see,
All men do seek Felicity.
For what each man does most prefer,
That his chief Good he does declare.
But we chief Good define to be
Beatitude. Then blessed is he
(At least so to himself does seem)
Enjoys what he does most esteem.
Lo then what it is that does express
The All of humane Happiness;
Wealth, Honor, Power, Glory, Pleasure.
Which only by the Epicure
Considered, made him to decree
Pleasure his chiefest Good to be;
For that from's mind each other state
Seemed all delight to alienate.
But to men's studies I Will revert,
Which though they do their minds pervert,
Yet still chief Good is the design.
But as a man overcome with wine
Cannot find his direct way home;
So Self-conceit them overcome.
But how can they be said to err,
Who not to want do endeavor?
For is there any state more blessed
Then that with Plenty is possessed,
Which not on others does depend,
And which its own self can defend?
Or can those men be said to err,
Who still the best things do prefer?
No; for can that an ill be thought
Which by all mortal men is sought?
Must Power not be counted good?
Must feeble it be understood
Which does all other things surmount?
Must Fame too be of no account?
Why, all men must acknowledge this,
What most excells most famous is.
I were a fool, if I should tell
This Blessedness does so excel,
That it nor trouble has nor care,
Nor subject is to grief or fear;
When smallest things for to acquire
That bring delight, men do desire.
Hence it is they Riches do procure,
Power, Rule, Glory, and Pleasure;
That by these things they may obtain
Respect, Delight, and splendid Fame.
That it is Good then it is plain,
That men do hunt with so much pain.
To which how Nature does impell,
Demonstratively all may tell;
Since though to various studies bent,
In this End, Good, they all consent.
Kind Nature the whole World does guide,
with Gordian knot does bind,
Does certain Laws for it provide,
Which now to warble is my mind.
Although the Libyan Lions are
with easy fetters bound,
And take their meat at hand, and fear
Their angry Master's whip and frown:
Yet if they once do taste of gore,
their nature then is seen;
They hideously do yell and roar,
And tear the ground, and fiercely grin.
Then scorning both the whip and call,
themselves they do unty,
And on their Masters they do fall,
Tearing them piecemeal greedily.
The Bird used on the trees to sing,
if he in cage be penned,
Though best of dainties you him bring,
Yet to his nature he will bend.
And if that once he do get out,
and in the woods be free,
All your enticements he will flout,
And chant his tunes melodiously.
If that by force a tender Plant
be made to ground to bend,
Do you but once let loose your hand,
It upward presently will tend.
The Sun each night falls in the West,
yet still he does return,
Leaving all mortals to their rest,
Till he again salutes the Morn.
All things obliged are by this law,
and joy thereto to bend;
All do a perfect circle draw,
Join their beginning with their end.
So faintly you, O sons of Earth,
Yet truly fansy your first birth;
And the true ends of Bliss foretold,
Though darkly, in each thought behold*
Nature to good all men does lead,
But various Error does mislead.
Consider if the course men tend
Can bring them perfect Bliss in the end.
For if that Wealth or Honor can,
Or ought like, make a happy man,
Then we will confess they happy are
Who do of these get greatest share.
But if that they their promise scant,
If much of what is good they want,
Do they not openly confess
They bring but a false Happiness?
First thee I will interrogate,
Who did with Wealth abound of late.
With all that Wealth did ever find
Thou could possess a quiet Mind?
It Is true; my Mind was never free,
But something still did trouble me.
Was it not 'cause thou could not have
Something thy Lust or Will did crave;
Or else because thou could not get
Rid of what fain thou would be quit?
It Is true, said I. Then the presence
Of this thou sought'st, of that the absence.
I do confess't. And does not he
Want who still does desire? said she.
It Is true, said I. Then she replied,
Who wants cannot for himself provide.
Why no, said I. And thou when rich
Did suffer this tormenting itch.
I did. It seems that Wealth then cannot
Or give sufficient, or bar want.
Yet this it promised. Nay, what is worse,
Money in'ts nature has that curse,
That none to keep it has the skill,
But 'twill away against his will.
I it confess. How can deny't,
When daily it is forced by might?
Hence it is so many are out-lawed
For Moneys kept by might or fraud.
It Is true. Then Wealth does want, said she;
And to be kept must guarded be.
I grant. But none this guard would have
Were It not his Money for to save.
No doubt. The case is altered then:
For whereas Wealth was thought by men
Sufficient all things to upbraid,
It self does want another's aid.
But is there any means that may
This Want from Riches drive away?
Can Hunger, Wealth, or Thirst endure?
Or Winter's Cold can Riches cure?
Yes, Wealth has power, you will say,
Thirst, Hunger, Cold to drive away.
It Is true, thus Wealth may bring supply
To Want, but not make it not to be.
If Want with Wealth must be supplied,
And never will be satisfied;
If Want do always gape and crave,
Wealth is to Want a very slave.
A little Nature will suffice,
But there is no bound to Covetise.
Then if that Wealth cannot Want confound,
Nay if that Wealth makes Want abound,
What Devil is it possesses thee,
To think Wealth has sufficiency?
Though the Rich man
With Gold abound,
Yet no Wealth can
Desire bound.
Though rich adorned
With nations spoil,
Hundred beeves horned
Do till his soil;
Yet Care will still
Oppress his mind:
So makes his Will,
Leaves all behind.
But Dignity does this afford,
Makes honorable and adored:
And Magistrates no power want
To root out Vice, and Virtue plant.
But they do not Vice abrogate,
But Vices more accumulate.
Whence it is that we do often misprise
The wicked that to Greatness rise.
Catullus Nonius Scab did call,
Though placed in the chair Magisterial*
Do thou not see how Dignity
Does add unto the infamy
Of wicked men, which less would show
If Honors did not make it grow?
Thou did refuse to be elate
Unto the glorious Chair of state,
If Decorate were with thee joined,
When thou did see his sordid mind.
For Honors we cannot him respect
Who of himself deserves neglect.
But if a man with Wisdom we
And Goodness do replenished see,
We give him all the honors due
To sacred Wisdom and Virtue;
In whom alone it is innate
Her goodnesses to propagate.
Which worldly Honors cannot do,
For that no proper good they ow.
Again, if that a general scorn
Does make men sordid and forlorn,
Then Honors that don't bring Respect,
Must bring Contempt and sore neglect.
If Honors make men evil fare,
Bad men with Honors even are,
While they the Honors do defile.
But further, listen yet awhile,
And thou shall see this painted place
Can give small comfort, no true grace.
Among the Barbarians let be seen
A man that often has Consul been,
They will not with reverence 'bout him throng:
But if to the place it did belong,
It would not cease the same to be
In any Nation or Country;
As Fire is in all parts Fire.
But for their Worth does rise no higher
Then what Opinion does it give,
It therefore can no longer live,
When it does come for to be seen
Amongst them who Honors don't esteem.
And do they any better fare
At home, whence they derived are?
The Praefectship of old had power,
Now but a Name and burden sour.
Who for the people did provide,
Was much esteemed, now vilify'd;
For that some bad men were accused,
That they that honor had abused.
But as before I have made known,
That Honor proper good has none,
But from Opinion takes repute,
As men the same do execute:
If Honors then don't give respect,
If ev'ly used they cause neglect,
If change of times do them deface,
And if Opinion them disgrace,
If in themselves no beauty be,
What pleasure can they give to thee?
Though Nero fell,
Proud and cruel,
his body did adorn
With Tyrian silk,
Stones white as milk,
he was the people's scorn.
Though he did grace
Proud men with place
the Senate to keep under,
Yet for to guess,
Honors could bless
by him bestowed, 's a wonder.
Can Kingdoms then make men be great?
Or can King's favors men elate?
Why not, if they would always be?
But these to change we often do see.
Times past and present do show clear
To Misery Kings subject are.
Is not that Power then most vain
Which its own self cannot sustain?
And if that Kingdoms make men blessed,
Of it the loss does them divest.
Nay, if in Rule they are confined,
Why, that brings trouble to their mind.
There is no universal Crown,
The vastest Kingdom has a bound:
Where others power does it pin,
There does anxiety begin,
And makes them hapless; by which count
Kings ill their good does far surmount.
The which a Tyrant having tried,
Great Princes fears he did deride,
By pointing down a Sword in the air,
Hung by a slender threatening hair.
Is not then Power a fine thing,
That cannot of fear remove the sting?
Who would, but cannot, securely rest,
How by their Power are they blessed?
And would not thou that Power upbraid
Which would, but cannot, be obeyed?
Can thou him mighty think to be,
Who if not guarded is not free;
Who, though to him they reverence bear,
Yet he of them stands still in fear;
Who with great Power to be graced,
I'ch' hands of Servants must be placed?
And can Kings favors any save,
When Kingdoms so much weakness have?
These, often disfavour do throw down,
And often they perish with the Crown.
Think but how Seneca once fell,
Whom cruel Nero did compel
To choose his death; yet he had bin
Both Friend and Master unto him.
And did not Antoninus send
His Soldiers for to make an end
Of Papinianus, whom before
He favored, Courtiers did adore?
Both these their Power would have quit;
And Seneca (if he would thought fit)
His wealth to Nero had resigned,
And privately himself confined.
But Greatness did them both destroy,
Nor a poor wish could they enjoy.
Is not then Power a fine thing,
Which Fear to the owner still does bring;
Which is not safe to be enjoyed,
Nor laid aside can harms avoid?
What trust in such a Friend can be
Who only c^^rts Prosperity?
If Adverse fortune comes, then he
Of Friend soon proves an Enemy.
What greater plague can Pluto send,
Then the feigned smiles of a false Friend?
Who would be Great must his own Passions rule,
Must not submit himself to be
By Lusts inthrall'd, that should be free.
Though he commands from Inde to farthest Thule,
Yet if Care conquer him and plaints,
He subject is, and Power wants.
How false and filthy too is Fame!
Which made the Tragic Bard exclaim,
O Glory, Glory, for thy hire
You Are cursed by those did thee desire.
For many men have gained a Name
By vulgar, false-opinion'd Fame:
Then which what can more base appear,
When they must blush their praise to hear?
But though the people true Worth sing,
What to a Wise man does this bring,
Who seeks not good by pop'lar fame,
But a good Conscience makes his aim?
Then if a Name to propagate
Men purchase would at so great rate;
They sure would think it great injury
Should not this Name extended be.
But, as before I have declared,
From many Nations is debarred
A private Fame: nay more, what here
Praiseworthy is, is slighted there.
But I this windy pop'lar Fame
Do not think worthy for to name,
Which without judgment is up blown,
And lasts not to be called ones own.
And now who is it that does not see
How vain a thing's Nobility,
Whose Glory, if we rightly weigh,
Is not his own does it enjoy?
Nobility that is not new,
Is praise that is to Parents due.
If Praise it be that Fame does give,
They who are praised in Fame do live.
Then if thy own Worth thee don't praise,
Another's Worth cannot thee raise.
Which since it is so, the good that is
In Nobleness is only this;
That he that is born of high estate,
Is bound not to degenerate.
All humane kind living,
From one beginning spring,
One governs eve'ry thing,
the Father high.
He made the Sun so bright,
To the horned Moon gave light,
Made Earth of Men the site,
set Stars in the sky.
In Man he, him to grace,
A heavenly Soul did place;
So of a noble race
all mortals are.
From whence then is this cry,
I Am born of Parents high?
Each man in the Deity
has equal share,
Unless that he with vices base and foul
Degrade his noble high-descended Soul.
Of Luxury what shall I say,
Whose appetite bears greatest sway?
Yet not without anxiety,
And 's cursed in the satiety.
What sad diseases does it bring?
What horrid pains do from it spring,
As 'twere the fruits that it does bear?
I skill not in these pleasures rare.
But all shall find, them don't refrain,
That Pleasure's end is certain pain.
And if that these can make men blessed,
I see no cause t'exclude the Beast.
Who wholly does himself apply
These Pleasures for to satisfy.
But of all Pleasures of this Life,
The best is Children with a Wife.
Yet feelingly one did repeat,
My Children are my torments great.
There Is no Condition this can free,
Thou long have tried it true to be.
That saying of Euripides
I do acknowledge me does please,
Who did proclaim Sterility
A happy Infelicity.
All Pleasure has this great malignity,
To wound and to torment who have it had,
like to the Be,
Who having lost her Honey does grow mad,
And stings and swells the robbers, though she die.
Then suerly there is no doubt
But who goes this way, does go out
Of's way to Blessedness, nor can
These Goods him render Happy man.
Nay, these are Ills, I Will briefly show.
Do thou endeavor Rich to grow?
Thou from another it must gain.
Would thou to Dignities attain?
Thou must beseech the giver's grace,
And to excel, thy self debase.
Do thou desire Power to have?
Thou make thy self to plots a slave.
If thou great Glory do procure,
Envy thee renders unsecure.
Would thou a life of Pleasure lead?
Who would not Luxury down tread,
And think it base to have his Mind
To so base service be confined?
And who the body's Beauty prize,
How build they on uncertainties?
Can they the bulk of the Elephant,
Bull's strength, or Tiger's swiftness vaunt?
See Heaven's firmness, space, and fire,
Then leave these low things to admire.
Nor yet are these worth thy least thought
With him compared that them wrought.
Then Beauty is but a frail thing,
More fading then the Floweri'th' Spring.
Of which learned Aristotle cries,
If one could see with Lynceus eyes,
And with those eyes could penetrate
The intrails nasty sordid state,
The fair-fram'd Alcibiades
Would the beholder nothing please.
Thou can not then thy Nature prize,
But the infirm beholders eyes.
(...) of thy Body be as proud
(...) thou can wish, so't be allowed
That three days Fever can destroy
The thing in which you so much joy.
From which we briefly may collect,
These Goods which promise such respect,
Nor can their promise keep, nor show
That they do any goodness ow;
So that they men nor bring to rest,
Nor are at all, men by them blessed.
O how does Ignorance
Erroneous ways advance!
You seek not Trees for Gold,
Nor Vines for Crystalls cold:
You do not climb a Hill
Fishes with nets to kill,
Nor go to the Ocean clear,
To hunt the Fallow-deer.
You careful are to know
The times of ebb and slow;
And in what coasts are bred
White Pearls, where Corrall red;
What part of the Sea the Fin,
What Shel-fish does ly in.
But what you most should mind,
Chief Good, in that you are blind:
And seek for that below,
Which 'bove the Stars does grow.
They Are cursed not to be wise,
Who Wealth and Honor prize;
Which when with pain they have got,
Then Goods they know they are not.
The forms of false Felicity
As yet I Have only showed to thee;
Which if that thou do clearly know,
I will true Bliss now to thee show.
I see, said I, that no Wealth can
Sufficient be for any man;
No Kingdoms, howsoever great,
Can give a Power that is complete;
No Dignities, full Reverence;
Nor Glory, wished for Eminence:
No Pleasures can give Perfect Bliss.
Know thou the causes of all this?
Methinks I see a glimmering:
But you a clearer light may bring.
The reason's plain; for that it is tried
That humane Error does divide
What Is simple, perfect, and what is true,
And it to Falsehood gives as due.
Do thou think what is in nothing scant,
That the same thing can power want?
Why no, said I. Thou think then right:
For if in ought it want full might,
In that it is of necessity
It must by others succored be.
That Is true. Then the condition
Of Power and Enough's all one.
So't seems. What think thou then? is it sit
To slight this, or to honor it?
Why, it to honor, there is no doubt,
Since best of things it brings about.
Why then, unto Sufficiency
And Power let us add Dignity,
And then these three but one appear.
We must it add, if truth we will hear.
And now, said she, think thou that this
Obscure and base, or famous is?
Consider too (since you do grant
That is most glorious naught does want,)
Whether this Glory* do want Fame,
Which to it self it cannot frame,
And so does seem to come below.
I must needs grant it Famous too.
Why then, in this we must agree,
Fame differs not from the other three.
We must. Then that which naught does want,
That which in Power is not scant,
That which has Fame and Glory high,
That is most pleasant certainly.
But see, said I, I no way can,
How Grief should seize on such a man.
No; by what is said, we must confess
That man does perfect joy possess.
And this too's of necessity.
Power, Fame, Respect, Sufficiency,
And Pleasure, have a several name,
But all in substance are the same.
It Is true, it is of necessity.
Then this you will grant, man's pravity
Divides what is simple, pure:
Which while he strives for to procure
By part, the which no parts contains,
Nor whole nor part to him remains.
How Is this? said I. Who Wealth would have,
Flies Want, but Power does not crave;
Had rather live obscure and vile,
From all delights himself exile,
Then part with what he cannot hold,
His dear-beloved darling, Gold.
But by these means, most certainly,
No man can have Sufficiency;
Whom Power leaves, or Cares molest,
Or Baseness hides, can have no rest.
Again, who would to Power rise,
Wastes Wealth, and Glory does despise;
And without Power, Honor too
Nor Pleasures can at all him woe.
And yet when he has all his will,
There Is many things he wants still.
Sometimes he Necessaries wants,
Sometimes is vexed with Cares and Plaints;
Of which since he cannot rid his mind,
He wants that Power he designed.
With the same reason we may measure
All Honor, Claritude, and Pleasure.
For since that every one's the same
With all the rest, he is to blame
Does unto any one aspire,
Losing thereby his own desire.
What then? said I. If one address
Himself to all, can they him bless?
No, we have showed they cannot do it,
Since they their promise cannot make good.
Nor can they Bliss bring to effect,
Since each has singly his respect.
I do confess that nothing can
Then this be truer taught to man.
The causes then and form, said she,
Thou see of false Felicity.
Now bend thy mind but contrary,
And thou true Bliss shall soon espy.
When thou the causes of false Bliss
Did open, thou did then clear this.
For if I rightly construe thee,
That Is perfect, true Felicity,
Which does sufficient render, and
Gives Pleasure, Fame, Respect, Command.
Further to make it plain to sight,
That I do understand thee right;
I do acknowledge that which shall
Do truly one, performs them all:
And then no doubt but this must be
True, perfect, full Felicity.
O happy thou that do think so,
If one thing more thou wilt add thereto!
What Is that? said I. Do think there is
In mortal things this perfect Bliss?
Why no, said I; for thou have made
It out so plain more cannot be said.
Why then these things but represent
The image of true Good, but cannot
Confer this perfect Good on men.
I do agree, I answered then.
Since that thou then have so much gained,
To know true Good from what is feigned,
Of all remains this is the sum,
To know from whence this Good does come.
Why, that from thee I do expect.
On Plato then I must reflect,
Who taught, for things that least do weigh
We ought the Heavenly Aid to pray.
What then do think is fit to do
The sovereign Good to come unto?
We must our prayers to him address,
Who does all good beginnings bless.
Thou rightly have advised, said she;
Then sung this Song melodiously.
O thou that do with Reason high
all things in order guide,
Thou whose bright Throne's above the sky,
Yet govern'st all the world beside:
Thou from all time make Time to flow,
Yet thou do still remain;
Thou giv'st to all things here below
Alternate courses, joy and pain.
No cause external thee did move
this mighty work to frame:
Only from thy internal Love,
From envy free, it freely came.
The Examples of all things that are
thou from above did bring:
For thou that art the fairest Fair,
To thy fair Mind form'dst every thing,
Commanding perfect All to be,
Perfect to be each Part;
Making the Elements to agree
Which Nature does so widely part.
Thou joyn'st the Moisture with the Flame,
the Water with the Earth;
Lest that the Fire all should tame,
And Earth should not bring forth its birth.
Thou in fit stations ordered have
the Soul that all does move;
And so adaptly have it placed,
Its threefold nature joins in love.
Which Soul two several Orbs does sway,
them rouls with motion round,
Winding about to its first way,
Circles the Mind'bove all profound.
By the same command this Soul it drives
Celestial motions all,
Gives being to the lesser lives,
And fosters all things on this Ball.
'Bove all thou do in chariots high
our Souls cause for to ride;
Making some fit to pierce the sky,
Whiles others things terrestiall guide.
The which, when they have run their round,
by thy command benign,
With thy eternal fire crowned
They back to thee return agin.
Blessed Father, to thy glorious Throne
let my dull mind ascend:
Thou that the fountain art alone
Of Good, grant I behold the end.
And when that I have found this Light,
grant that on thee I may
My mind fast fix with cleared sight,
Casting all earthly things away.
Surround me with thy splendid Rays:
for rest I thee attend,
For which all pious men thee praise,
Who art Beginning, Way, and End.
Now that the forms are understood
Of perfect, and imperfect Good;
I think it reason for to show
In what this perfect Good does grow.
In which we first ought to enquire,
Whether that Nature can acquire
Such Good as is before defined;
Lest, contrary to what is designed,
We be deceived with a show
Of Truth and Knowledge, nothing so.
But that there is, none can deny,
A fountain of Felicity.
For whatsoever imperfect is,
It Is but what does Perfection miss.
Whence follows, if in any kind
Something imperfect we do find,
In it then of necessity
Something that is perfect there must be.
For where Perfection there is none,
There can be no Imperfection.
Nor from a lame imperfect thing
Does Nature her beginning bring;
But from what perfect is in all
She does into defection fall.
Which if it be so, as I Have made plain,
That there is imperfect, brittle, vain
Felicity of Good, then who
Can doubt but there is perfect too?
Most rightly thou conclud'st, it is so.
But where it dwells, said she, thus know.
The common thought of humane kind
Does prove that the most heavenly Mind,
Which over all things does preside,
Is good; nor can it be denied:
For then God better who can guess,
Then whom there better nothing is?
So Reason, that does evidence
That God is good, makes plain to sense
That he is perfect; for else he
Could not of all things ruler be.
Something there is would him excel,
In whom true perfect Good does dwell:
Which must more ancient be also;
For perfect things we all do know
Before imperfect were: so then
In infinitum we must run,
Unless that we do God confess
To be replenished with Goodness.
But we before concluded this,
What Is perfect Good, that is true Bliss:
Therefore it is of necessity
True Bliss in the high God should be.
This is so strong a truth, said I,
None can gainsay it certainly.
But mark, I pray thee, then said she,
How thou approv'st inviolably
That the high God we did profess
To be replenished with Goodness.
How Is that? said I. Thou do not sure
Presume that this same Father pure
Did so receive this chief Goodness,
With the which he replenished is,
That it from any other came:
Nor do thou think but it is the same
To be God, who has this Goodness,
And the thing had, true Blessedness.
For if that God did it receive,
He Is better sure that did it give.
But we do worthily confess
God all things does excel, all bless.
But since of God we now do treat,
If Goodness have in him a seat
By nature from a diverse cause,
If he obeys another's laws,
Let him who can bring forth to light,
Who did these diverse things unite.
Lastly, whatever thing is diverse
Cannot be that from which it differs.
Wherefore what from the chiefest Good
To differ may be understood,
In its own nature's not the same;
Which wicked were of God to name,
Then whom there nothing better is*
For naught can better be then his
Beginning; which if understood,
Then God to be the chiefest Good
(Who is the first substantially)
We may conclude most certainly.
It Is true, said I. But I did press
That chiefest Good was Happiness.
You did. Then God we must confess
Is the only real Happiness.
By thy first precepts I did gain,
But these have made them far more plain.
Thus then more firm I Will make it appear:
Two sovereign Goods that different are
Cannot subsist, for that it is plain
That two Goods cannot be the same;
So we must neither perfect grant,
While one Good does the other want.
And what not truly perfect is,
That cannot be the chief Goodness.
Wherefore the chiefest Good, we see,
Not possibly can diverse be.
But we the chiefest Good aver
God and Beatitude both are:
Then that the highest Bliss must be
That is the highest Divinity.
Nothing is in it self more true,
Nothing more firmly can accrue
To Reason, nothing said can be
More worthy God's high Majesty*
Farther, as Geometricians use
All kind of knowledge to refuse
But what their Propositions
Infer by Demonstrations;
So I will this same give to thee
As it were a Corollary.
As men by gaining Blessedness,
Do gain thereby what does them bless,
And Bliss is high Divinity;
Then who gets this does get to be,
As it is plain and manifest,
Thereby most happy and most blessed.
As men by Justice Just are said,
By Wisdom men are Wise men made:
So likewise of necessity
Men Gods are by Divinity.
Then who does gain this Blessedness,
He then a God can be no less.
I, but there can but one God be.
That Is true in nature verily;
But yet there may be more then one
By God's participation.
Call you this a Corollary?
A precious one it is, said I.
But there is one more precious yet,
Which Reason does persuade to knit.
What Is that? said I. Since it seems plain
That Bliss does many things contain,
Whether all these do conjugate
In Parts to make this Blessed state;
Or one Part of them does complete,
For all the rest, this Bliss so great.
I would, said I, that thou would clear
These things more in particular.
Why, we aver that Blessedness,
Said she, is the chiefest Goodness.
It Is true, said I. The same thou may,
Said she, add unto all the rest.
For it is chief Sufficiency,
Chief Power, and chief Dignity,
Chief Honor, and chief Pleasure too.
And what have all these Goods to do,
This Power, and Sufficiency,
And all the rest of that degree?
Are they but parts of Blessedness?
Or do they Good entire comprise?
I see what it is you go about:
But how, said I, will you make it out?
Why thus; If all these members be
Of ever-bless'd Felicity,
Then each from other far escarts:
For this the nature is of Parts,
Of many, one entire to frame;
But these are all one and the same.
For these indeed no members be:
For if, then this Felicity
Would of one member be conjoined;
Which cannot be. That Is true, I find:
But what remains I do desire.
It Is plain that all things do aspire
To Good: therefore Sufficiency
Is sought, 'cause Good therein does ly;
And Power, deemed Good to procure.
The same of Honor, Fame, Pleasure.
The sum and cause of all desire
Is this then, Good for to acquire.
For what nor Good, nor Good is like,
That has a general dislike.
And contrary, what are not so
By nature, if they make a show,
They as true Goods desired are.
So that the Sum, the Scope, the Care
Of whatsoever desired is,
Must be believed to be Goodness.
For for what cause a thing is sought,
That end to compass must be thought.
As if a man for Health do ride,
Though pleased his prauncing Horse to guide,
Yet more the effect, his health, does take.
So all things sought for Goodness sake
Are not themselves so much desired,
As Goodness self, to be acquired.
But we already did profess
That same for to be Blessedness
For which all other things are sought:
That therefore they are sought, we taught.
By which it plainly does appear,
Goodness and Bliss the same things are.
I see no reason but it is so.
But we did also plainly show
That God and Bliss is the same thing.
You did, said I. Thence then does spring,
That God's whole substance placed is
In Goodness self, that is perfect Bliss.
Come hither all you that are taken
In Lust's deceitful wicked chain,
Whose minds mind naught but for to gain things terrestrial.
Here from your labors you may rest,
Here is a port with quiet blessed,
Here is the refuge that is best for wretches all.
The Gold that Tagus does afford,
Nor what rich Hermus banks has stored,
Nor Gemms of which the Indian's lord,
the Mind can clear;
But rather it obnubilate:
For that which here gives best estate,
And does men's minds most elevate,
from earth they tear.
In mines cannot be found that light
Which does adorn the Heavens bright,
And which does pierce with so much might
the souls impure.
Which Light to whom it shall appear,
Will his dark soul so fully clear,
That thenceforth he may justly swear
the Sun's obscure.
With strongest Reason I agree,
All things, said I, composed be.
But how much more would it esteem
If Goodness self, said she, were seen?
Why infinitely, said I then,
Because by it I God should ken,
Who Goodness is. Why this, said she,
By reasons true I Will show to thee;
Let but those things remain which I
Already proved have certainly.
They shall, said I. I Have showed, said she,
Those things which by most sought for be
Nor true Goods, nor yet perfect are,
Because amongst themselves they jarre*
For if one from another swerve,
They cannot perfect Good preserve,
Which only then is true and right,
When in one form they do unite.
For that which is Sufficiency,
The same is Power, Dignity,
Fame, and Pleasure. If then that these
Ben't all the same, they have naught that please*
Then this a truth all must confess,
What Is discrepant is not Goodness.
And if by being one they do
Goodness become, then it is so
That therefore they come good to be
By the obtaining Unity.
So't seems, said I. Then all that is good,
To be good by thee's understood
By Good's participation.
So it is, said I. Then to be one,
And to be good, you do declare
To be the same; for those things are
Of the same substance whose effects
By nature have the same respects.
I cannot deny't. Know thou, said she,
That all that is, so long will be
As it is one, but perishes
When Unity in it does cease?
As how? said I. Why thus, said she;
In Living creatures we it see,
It does a living thing remain
While Soul and Body are the same.
But if that these asunder fall,
No longer we do so them call.
The Body too, while we it find
With all the parts in one conjoined,
The humane species seems to be:
But if divided, Unity
Being distraught, it is no more
The thing that it appeared before.
And so all other things we see
Are lost by losing Unity.
In all things I can think upon,
This is no supposition.
Why, is there any thing, said she,
That does desire naturally
To leave to be, and for to come
To nothing, or destruction?
In Living creatures, then said I,
Who have nature's activity
To will and nill, I do not find
(Unless some outward force them bind
For to obey) any 'ntention
Of free and willing destruction.
All living things their health defend,
Shunning to come unto their end.
But what of things called vegetal
To think, I do not skill at all.
But this too thou may also know,
When Herbs and Trees thou find'st to grow
In Places for their nature fit,
Wherein if they be firmly set,
Their nature will not let them dry,
Nor but by course of Nature die.
In Plains, on Hills, in Fens some spring;
Others hard Rocks, some Sands forth bring:
Transplant but these, and presently
They wither do away; and die.
For Nature every thing does give
What Is fit, and willingness to live.
And do not all these things get birth
By thrusting down their heads in the Earth?
The which does nourishment infuse
To the Root, and that does strength diffuse
To the Stock: what part most tender is,
Within, like marrow, placed is:
The Wood, like bone, this does secure,
Then Bark to make it to endure.
Again mark Nature's careful heed,
Who multiplies all things by Seed;
By which she seems for to endeavor
To make them for to live for ever.
And things that are Inanimate
Seem to desire that same state
Which most does tend to their welfare.
Hence Levity does Flame up rear,
By Weight the Earth is downward pressed,
For that these motions suit them best.
What does with every thing agree,
That it conserves most perfectly.
And things by opposition
Are brought unto destruction.
Again, what is Hard, as Stones, defend
Strongly their parts, resist their end.
What Liquid is, as Air and Water,
As soon unite as they do scatter.
Fire does all division fly.
Nor do we now at all descry
The motions of the knowing Soul,
But the intentions natural.
Such are, how we our meat digest,
Yet not thereon do think the least.
Not knowing it, we breath in sleep.
So does the creature a force keep
Of preservation, not by the will
OF the Soul, but Nature's principle.
For Death, which Nature does abhor,
Is by the Will often pleaded for.
The Generative act again,
By which only all things remain,
Sometimes is bridled by the Will,
Though Nature do desire it still.
Wherefore this self-affection grows,
Not from the Will, but Nature's laws.
For Providence did give to all
Things that she made a natural
Desire to remain, and this
The chief cause of remaining is.
Wherefore there is no reason thou
Should doubt that every thing should bow,
By nature, up its self to bear,
And all corruption do defer.
I now confess I clearly see
What seemed before incertainty.
Moreover that which does desire
To be, said she, that does aspire
To be but one, which away taken,
Being it self will not remain.
That Is true, said I. All things, said she,
Then do desire Unity.
This I did grant. But I said this,
One is the same that Goodness is.
You did. Then all things Good design,
Which thus we truly may define;
Good is the thing all things desire.
Nothing, said I, can be thought higher.
For either nothing does preside;
Or if that any thing beside
This Unity, all things would run
Headlong into Confusion.
And if that any thing there be
Which to arrive at all agree,
That thing must needs be understood
To be the chief of all that is good.
O how I do rejoice, said she,
That thou this point of verity
Do apprehend? by this thou have
Discovered what before thou said
Thou did not know. What Is that? my friend.
What is of all things the true End.
For that is the thing all things desire.
And since then Good there is nothing higher,
We must ingenuously confess,
The End of all things is Goodness.
Whoever with a knowing mind
Will seek the perfect Truth to find,
And will not be deceived, nor tread
The paths that into Error lead,
Let him look upon
His own discretion,
And bind his Notions in a round,
Let him teach his Will,
But only this skill,
With its own treasures to abound.
And then what lately hid did ly
In clouds of Error, will thereby
Break into splendour far more bright
Then Phoebus in's most glorious light.
The thick Body's shade
As yet has not made
A full Eclipse upon the Mind:
If Learning do glow,
Seeds of Truth will grow,
While inwardly they comfort find.
If any one should question thee,
Could thou an answer make him free?
Was ever any one yet found
With Reasons light did so abound,
Unless God in love
Him inspired from 'bove,
And gave him a Prophetic strain?
Give Plato his due,
Who says it is full true,
What Is learned we can recall again.
With Plato greatly I comply,
For thou into my memory
Now twice have those instructions brought
Which I Would not known had thou not taught:
Once Sickness from me did them hide,
Nor with my grief would they abide.
Look back on what is said, said she,
And then into thy memory
Will be recalled with much ease
What not to know thou did confess.
What Is that? said I. How and which way
God does this worldly fabric sway.
I do remember then, said I,
This same to know I did deny.
What thou in this wilt say, although
Far off I see, yet it to know
More plainly, I desire from thee
To hear expressed. Thou shall, said she.
But lately thou did grant to me,
God the world's Governor to be.
I did, and do it now assever,
Nor do it doubt, nor will do ever:
And I will briefly tell thee why
My Reason does with this comply.
The World that is framed of many a part
Could not have been reduced by art
Into one form, unless that One
Alone had made the Conjunction.
Again, though they conjoined are,
Their natures disagree so far,
They would this Concord break again,
Unless that One did them contain.
Nor could Dame Nature certainly,
Keep on her course so orderly,
Nor keep her motions so direct
In time, and place, and in effect,
Unless a perfect Unity,
Disposed of this variety.
And this same One, whatever it be,
Which all things made, does all agree,
I by the name of God do call,
A name that used is by all.
Since thou of these things thus do think,
Thou art, said she, even at the brink
Of perfect true Felicity,
And may again thy Country see.
But our proposals let us review.
Did we not grant Bliss did ensue
Sufficiency, and did confess
That God is that same Blessedness?
It Is true we did. Why then, said she,
The World to govern wants he
External help? if so, then he
Has not a full Sufficiency.
That cannot, said I, be denied.
Then he alone does all things guide
That must by all be understood.
But God I showed to be chief Good.
I do remember that beside.
Then he as Good does all things guide,
As well as by himself, and this
Of rule the very Rudder is
Which does this worldly Vessel guide,
And safely makes all things abide.
I grant, and I before did see,
Though dimly, this sound verity.
I do believed. But now I find
Thou do more strictly bend thy mind
The truth to see: but I Will declare
What shall more plainly make it appear.
What Is that? said I. Since we confess
God does rule all things with Goodness,
And that all things to good incline
By nature, and not by design,
Who doubt can but they governed be
Not forced, but voluntarily,
And that each thing most freely does
To's ruler's will its self dispose?
This to be true I do esteem;
Nor would the guidance happy seem,
If that it should a yoke impose,
Not leave a freedom to dispose.
Then what does Nature's law obey
Goes not from God a devious way.
Why, no. And if it should, said she,
What profit could it reap thereby,
Since we most powerful him grant,
'Cause he alone does nothing want?
Why, none. Then there is nothing which would
Or can resist this chiefest Good.
Nothing, I think. Why then, said she,
That the chief Good we must agree,
Which firmly all things govern does,
And sweetly does the same dispose.
How these results not only do
The height of Reason to me show?
But thy words placed are so right.
They give to me a high delight.
Henceforth then imprudence and folly
Will never vye with things so holy.
Have thou not heard, said she, the tale
How Giants Heaven did assail?
But them this power did confound,
And worthily them threw to ground.
But will thou that I farther yet
Thy intellect with reasons whet?
By this collision there is no doubt
There will some sparks of Truth fly out.
Do as you please. There Is none, said she,
Doubts God Omnipotent to be.
None well in's wits. The word is so,
Omnipotent can all things do.
That Is true. What then? can God do Ill?
Why no, said I. Then follow will
That Ill is nothing, since that who
Can all things, cannot Evil do.
Do me delude, me thus to bring
Into a Lab'rinth with reasoning?
Thou me always do put in doubt
While thou thy self go in and out
At pleasure: or do complicate
A winding circular estate
Of the simplicity Divine?
For but even now thou did define,
Beatitude chief Good to be,
And that placed in the Deity:
That God himself is this Goodness,
As also perfect Blessedness.
Hence followed, None can happy be
That is not one of the Deity.
Thou said the form of this Goodness
The very substance of God is.
This Good to be but one you taught,
For that by all things it is sought.
You farther also did decide,
That God by good this World does guide:
And that all things do with their will
Obey; that Nature has no ill.
To prove all this thou did not bring
Reasons which do at distance spring,
But such as nigh and proper are,
One still confirming the other.
Why then I do not mock, said she;
For by God's help that is proved, you see,
For which we did agree before
The heavenly aid for to implore.
Such is the form of this Divine
Substance, that it does not decline
To outward things, nor does at all
Accept things that are external.
Of which Parmenides does say,
A round is equal every way.
And if that I have not gone far
For reasons to prove this matter,
But only have made use of those
Which fitly from it self arose;
Thou have no reason me to blame,
Since Plato taught the very same:
Speech that to matter is applied
To the matter ought to be allied.
Thrice happy is the man that can
goodness clearly once behold,
Thrice happy surely is the man
whom earth's ties do not hold.
Orpheus he
Full mournfully
his dear-belov'd Wive's death did 'plain;
While he did play
Woods ran away,
and Rivers fixed did remain.
The Hind without all fear did ly
close unto the Lion's side,
Nor was the Hare scared with the cry,
nor when she the Dogs espied.
Yet inwardly,
The fire did fry,
and he who all things else could tame,
Could not appease
This fierce disease,
nor quench this all-devouring flame.
Full highly then he did complain,
the Gods without mercy were,
And his dear Wife for to regain,
unto Hell he did repair.
With measured feet
And music sweet
he did the hel-hounds all disarm;
His mother she,
A Goddess free,
did teach him how he them should charm.
He did his grief before them lay,
his lost Love did sadly mourn,
And Pluto' s self did humbly pray
her to him for to return.
With his sweet Song
The Fiends among
he Cerberus did chiefly move,
Who him let in;
Then all being for
to solicit for his Love.
Now Ixtion not turns the Wheel,
Tantalus his Thirst forgets,
Nor Titius does the Vulture feel,
music all their torments lets.
The shady King,
When he did sing,
could not deny to grant his boon,
Give him, said he,
Euridice,
with Music us he has overcome.
But lest that he too high should swell,
with this law I will him ty,
If he look back on her in hell,
he shall lose her instantly.
But who with law
Can Lovers aw?
Love is a thing that has no bound.
He by twilight
Of her had sight,
lost her, and did himself confound.
This Fable does all them concern
who to virtue do arrive,
And then forget what they did learn,
back again to darkness drive.
Who does know Bliss,
Yet will with this
vain world give trouble to his mind;
All he did gain
With so much pain,
by looking back, he lost will find.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
PHilosophy with a sweet voice
Did sing this song, and kept a choice
Decorum both in word and look;
When I abruptly undertook
(Not having yet my grief laid by)
To speak: O light of truth, said I,
Whatever yet thou have laid forth
Appears to be of divine worth,
By reasons not to be repelled.
Thou said these were from me with held
By extreme grief, and yet but so,
That heretofore I did them know.
But of my grief the greatest cause
Is this, to know that God, who laws
To all does give, is good; then how
Can Ills or be, or scot-free go?
This which does so much trouble me,
I leave to be admired by thee.
A greater yet (for to be plain)
Is this, while wickedness does reign,
Virtue has no reward at all,
But stead thereof the wicked call
It Vice, and punishments inflict.
But that it should be a delict,
And God should see it, who all does know,
All power has, who will not do
Any thing but what is very good,
May be admired, not understood.
That Is right, said she, if that it were
As thou do think, it would more scare
Then sight of ugliest monsters would,
To think the Heavenly Father should
In his well-ordered house respect
The basest, and the best neglect.
But it is not so: for if that that thou
Our late Conclusions do avow,
By his help of whom now we speak
Thou Wilt know the Wicked are but weak,
The Good are potent; and that Vice
Is punished, Virtue held in price.
The Good enjoy a happy state,
The Wicked are unfortunate*
More may be said of the like strain
Will make thee henceforth not complain.
And since the form of perfect Bliss
By me unto thee showed is,
And that thou know where it is placed,
The time I will no longer wast,
But I to thee the way will show,
How thou unto thy home may go.
I will give wings unto thy Mind,
By which thou shall a safe way find,
(Set free from all disturbances)
Unto thy Country with much ease:
Triumphantly thou home shall ride,
My skill and knowledge thee shall guide:
For I have Wings of subtle make,
which if the Mind puts on,
'Twill soon above the Pole ascend,
and Earth not look upon.
'Twill soon pass through the Aerie globe,
and clouds will leave behind,
With nimble course the Fire 'twill pass
of the Sun, that mortals blind.
The region cold that Saturn rules
will not at all it stay,
'Twill pass the Stars that paint the sky
so bright in the Milky way.
And having past the highest sphere,
and left the Pole so bright,
Upon the highest Orb 'twill stand,
enjoying clearest light;
Whereas the King of Kings does hold
the Scepter and the reins,
And on his throne of Glory set
all evil he restrains.
If thou unto this place do come,
which now thou have forgot,
This is my Country, thou will cry,
here, here I claim my lot.
Whence if that thou do look upon
the place thou left'st behind,
All the fell Tyrants on the earth
thou will in exile find.
Thou promisest great things, said I,
Of which thou me wilt certify
I make no doubt: but I thee pray,
In clearing them make no delay.
First, you do this acknowledge then,
There Is Power always in good men;
And that all bad men are without
All Power, thou can make no doubt;
Since one the other does make plain,
For good and bad are wholly twain.
If Goodness do no Power want,
Then Evil Weak we needs must grant.
And if Ill's Weakness does appear,
Then Goodness Strength by its made clear.
But that more easily there may
Be credit given to what I say,
My proofs I equally will bring,
Now this, now that side marshalling.
There are two things which in effect
In men's affairs bear chief respect;
That Is Will, and Power: if these two
Be not entire, all will not do.
No man will go about to try
What to his Will is contrary:
And if that he no Power have,
In vain his Will does strive or crave.
Hence it is that if thou one do see
Who would get that that had cannot be,
It Is want of Power does restrain
That he that thing does not attain.
Why this, said I, none can deny.
Thou must confess then equally,
That he who does whatever he will
Has Power the same for to fulfill.
It Is true. For it does Power show,
According to the Will to do.
The Will abridg'd, of the contrary,
Does show an Imbecility.
I it confess. But do, said she,
Remember that we did agree,
In all intentions of the Will,
Though diversely it use its skill,
Still Blessedness by it is designed?
I do. But do thou bear in mind,
That Blessedness is the true Good;
By which it must be understood,
Who Bliss does seek, means Good thereby?
I do remember it, said I,
And in my mind I hold it still.
Then all men, whether good or ill,
With one and the self-same desire
Do unto Goodness still aspire.
That Is certain truth. And so is this,
That who gets Goodness he good is.
But good men get what they desire.
It Is true. And evil lose their hire;
For if that they do Good obtain,
They do no longer ill remain.
It Is so. Then since they both desire
Good, and the one does lose his hire,
And the other not, then it is plain
That Power with good men does remain,
Weakness with ill. Whoever with sense
The nature weighs and consequence
Of these things, must agree thereot.
She then replied, If there be two
To whom by nature the same thing
Proposed is; if one do bring
The same to pass by a right course,
The other strives by ways are worse
The same to do, but cannot complete
The work, but only't imitate;
Which of these two most Power has,
Do think? Although that I do guess
What it is you mean, yet I would fain
Have you describe it yet more plain.
To move by walking (thou wilt not then
Deny) is natural to men.
It Is so, said I. Nor can deny
But it is the feet move naturally.
I cannot. Why then, if one do use
His feet, another does refuse
This natural means, and he will go
Upon his hands; which of these two
Will thou the stronger deem to be?
Make out the rest; for surely he
Who goes the true and natural way,
To be the strongest all will say.
Why so, said she, the chiefest Bliss,
Which equally proposed is
To good and bad, the good apply
To get by Virtue naturally;
The bad by Lusts (but all in vain)
Seek this chief Good for to attain.
Do think they can? Why no, said I;
The sequel plainly does't descry.
Then what is proved makes appear,
The good are strong, the bad weak are.
It Is right, said she, and by this scope
I do (as wont Physicians) hope
Good strength of nature, since I find.
To Knowledge a so ready mind.
I will therefore more reasons bring.
See if bad men have any thing,
Who cannot unto that arrive
To which their nature does them drive.
And if their power in this be scant,
Consider how much strength they want.
For they no small rewards desire,
But to the top of Bliss aspire,
To which they no way can attain,
Though night and day they take great pain.
Which proves the strength of those are Good:
For as it must be understood
That he that runs and wins the goal
Most able is; so thou must hold
His power greatest, does acquire
The utmost end of his desire.
Which for the wicked cannot do,
It plainly does their weakness show,
Who leaving Virtue, follow Vice.
Is It Blindness that does them entice?
Why, what is more weak then Ignorance?
Or do they know it, yet Lusts advance?
This their Intemp'rance Weakness is,
And they are overcome by Vice.
Or do they knowing, willingly
Leave Virtue, and to Vices fly?
By this from Strength they are so free,
That thus they leave at all to be.
For who the common end of all
Does leave, leaves being therewithal.
This to be strange perchance may seem,
That wicked men, whom all do deem
The greatest part of humane kind,
Thus to be nothing we should find.
Yet so it is. The wicked I
For to be ill do not deny:
But I do also say withal,
That simply they are not at all.
For though a carcass does make known
This is a man, he is simply none.
So wicked men I ill allow,
Yet them to be I disavow.
That is which order does retain,
And keeps his nature: what does strain
And swerve from it does leave to be
(At least) what it is naturally.
But ill men act, ( though evilly)
Thou say, and I it not deny.
But this their Power not from Strength,
But Weakness will appear at length.
They can do ill, but not good too;
If good, then they could not ill do.
So that such Power does plainly show
That they indeed can nothing do.
For we before did this agree,
Ill in it self nothing to be.
Since nothing then a wicked man
Can do but ill, he nothing can.
It Is so. But yet that more certain
This may appear, by being more plain,
We said (thou know) a while before
The chiefest Good had greatest Power.
You did. But it no ill can do,
Said she. That Is true. But do thou know
Any so mad, to think that men
Can all things do? No. Yet they can
Do evil. Yes; I would to God
They tether'd were that they could not.
Since then this Power can all things do,
And wicked men cannot do so;
The Power then we must confess
Of those do ill is much the less.
Moreover Power counted is
Among those things that do bring Bliss:
And all those things to Good refer
As to the top of their nature.
But it is not possible that Ill
At all should strive Good to fulfill.
Therefore it is not to be desired.
But Power is to be acquired.
Then sure the possibility
Of doing ill no Power can be.
All which most plainly does confirm
Good Powerful, Evil infirm.
What Plato said, then does stand true,
That only wise men they can do
What they desire; they that do Ill,
Do only exercise their will,
But cannot unto that arrive
Which they desire, for that they strive
By wicked means for to obtain
That good which they desire to gain.
But of their end they needs must miss,
For Wickedness leads not to Bliss.
What though thou mighty Kings do see,
In Purple shining gloriously, mounted upon their Thrones of state,
With armed men circled about,
With a bent brow threats belching out, confounding others with proud hate?
Yet look, thou inwardly wilt find,
That fetters strong these Lords do bind: by Lusts their hearts are poisoned,
So ly tormented by Excess.
Then Anger does their minds possess: so a vexatious life they lead.
One while they are wearied out with Grief,
Then Hope does give them no relief.
When thou do see one thus assailed,
Never wonder he cannot aspire
To Good, the top of his desire,
by so many fell Tyrants quail'd.
Thou then do see they durty are
Who follow Vice, and they are fair
Virtue embrace: so that it is plain,
Good have reward, and Wicked pain.
And it is but just it should be so:
For every thing a man does do
Is for reward; as who does run
A race, he does expect the Crown.
And we have showed that Blessedness
Is that same Good for which all press.
Then Good does (as reward) attend
All humane actions in the end.
It Is Good gives a good man esteem,
It Is Good that so entitles him.
So men are Vicious called from Vice:
But Virtue always has a price.
And though the Wicked rage and rail,
The wise man's Crown will never fail:
Let wicked men fret and repine,
Their proper Virtue still will shine;
Which dark would be, or rather none,
If it were borrowed, not their own.
For every man may claim his right,
Or it may forced be by might.
But 'cause that each man in regard
That he is good has a reward,
By consequence, if Good he leave,
He a reward shall not receive.
Lastly, if all Reward be sought
Because it good to be is thought,
Who him rewarded will not confess,
That Good and Virtue does possess?
But what reward? no mean one sure,
But even the fairest and most pure.
Remember that Corollary
Which lately I did give to thee.
Since Blessedness is the chief Good,
And it must needs be understood,
Who of this Goodness is possessed
Must of necessity be blessed;
And that for to be blessed, must be
To be a God, we did agree:
Then the reward the good partake
(No time can end, no power shake,
Nor wickedness can overthrow,)
Is to be Gods. Which since it is so,
Then wicked men cannot be without
Perpetual pain, there is no doubt.
As Good and Ill are contrary,
Reward and Pain so disagree.
Whatever the good receive as gain,
The bad receive as much in pain.
Goodness to the good a reward is,
The bad with horror punished is.
And he who finds but little ease,
Cannot doubt but he has some disease.
Then if they this would call to mind,
Themselves in pain they sure would find,
For that they are not only tainted
With Ill, but strongly are infected.
But see by way of contrary,
How wicked men tormented be.
For all that is, to be but one,
And that one good, to thee is known.
Whence follows that whatever is
Must needs be good: and so from this,
Whatever Goodness does decline
Does leave to be: thus then rejoyn,
The wicked are not what they were.
But yet the shape of men they bear.
I but by being wicked then
The nature quite they have lost of men.
For since that only Virtue can
Lift Mortals up above what is Man,
It of necessity does follow
That Vice does cast them far below.
So that if thou with Vice do see
A man transformed, no man is he.
Whoever does with griping wrest
Another's goods, he is a Beast,
And thou a Wolf may well him call.
He who perpetually does braul,
And live unquiet, none does spare,
Unto a Dog thou may compare.
Who does by Fraud and Cheating live,
The name of Fox thou well may give.
Who in fierce Anger all does tear,
A Lion's mind he sure does bear.
Whom vain and idle Fear does strike,
To Hare or Hind thou may him like.
Who has a slow and stupid head,
Like to an Ass his life does lead.
Who is unconstant, wavering,
From Birds he is no way differing.
Who is with filthy Lusts besmeared,
To the filthy Sow may be compared.
So he that does bright Virtue fly,
To be a man does leave you see.
Not being with divine right blessed,
He is transformed into a Beast.
While that Ulysses did command
his ten-years wandering Fleet,
The East Wind drove them to the land
Whereas they did fair Circe meet,
And Sirens with their voices sweet.
This Lady had in magic skill,
skilled in all herbs that grow.
Such liquor she to them did fill,
And Sirens them enchanted so,
That none could possibly them know.
Like unto Swine she some did make,
and some like to the Bear.
Some did the shape of Lions take:
These in their fury nothing spare,
But with their teeth and claws do tear.
Some Wolves, who when they up did lift
their voice to weep, did houl,
Some like to Indian Tigres swift,
Who though indu'd with a mild soul,
To live were forced for prey to prole.
Though witty Hermes pitying
the Captain, him did save,
And unto him did Moly bring,
She all the others did enslave,
While they to tipole still did crave.
Now beasts, to feed and walk like men
they strove, but all in vain;
Acorns good food, lodging a Den:
For why, there nothing did remain
Of voice, or body, like humane.
Only their Minds were still the same;
which grieved for to discern
Their Bodies so exposed to shame.
A weak it is and feeble Charm,
That Bodies can, and Minds not harm.
Man's strength is placed inwardly;
if poisons take the Mind,
They more deface Humanity:
For though to the Body they seem kind,
The Soul they cruelly do grind.
I do confess indeed, said I,
That ill men without injury
May into Beasts be said to swerve,
Though humane shape they still conserve.
But I Would not have their cruel will
Have power to the good for to do ill.
Nor have they, as I*le show, said she,
In place convenient unto thee.
For if that same which seems a power
Were taken away, 'twould be a cure,
And so their punishment would ease.
For it though credit some will not please,
Yet wicked men are worser far
When their desiers perfect are,
Then if they could not bring to pass
Whatever their desire was.
If ill to will be a great curse,
In him ability is worse:
Upon it too we may reflect
When ill does come unto effect*
And who is guilty of these three,
Endures a threefold misery.
I grant, said I; but would to God
That they this misery had not,
Or that they quickly might it lose*
Sooner perhaps then you would choose,
(Said she) or they do think 'twill be.
And yet compare Eternity,
Nothing in this life can be long.
And if ost-times design of wrong
Be frustrate by untimely end,
This to their pain some ease does lend.
For if that Wickedness do reign,
The longer wicked, more the pain.
Then he more wretched sure would be,
If Death from ill did not him free.
For if that we do right profess
Of The misery of Wickedness,
As it is eternal, so it is right
That it is also infinite.
This thy illation, then said I,
By me can hardly granted be:
And yet I think it is no more
Then has been granted heretofore.
Thou rightly think, but whosoever
To make Conclusion shall forbear,
Must show the Premises not true,
Or that they do not raise a due
Conclusion; or else otherwise
What from the Premises arise
If he do grant, he has no cause
On the Conclusion for to pause.
There Is one thing more I will conclude,
Which will no less seem strange and rude,
Yet follows necessarily
From what is agreed already.
What Is that? said I. Why, wicked men,
When punished, are more happy, then
If they at all not punished were.
Nor do I go about to rear
Up a position that to all
Is known, that wicked manners are
By Punishments restrained, and Fear
Men to be honest does compel,
Beside the Example does do well.
But for another reason I
Judge them unhappy do go free,
Though of Example there were none,
Nor of Correction reason shown.
What may that other reason be?
Have we not granted this, said she,
The bad unhappy, good are blessed?
Why yes, said I. Then if some rest,
From Misery, some good do come,
Is he not better then such one
To whom no good does come at all,
But lives in pain perpetual?
Why, yes. But if to's misery
More pain and greater added be,
Is he not more unhappy yet
Then he that does some easement get?
Why yes, said I. Then wicked men
When they are punished do find then
Something that is good; for Punishment
Is good, b'ing Justice instrument.
And then not punished for to be
Is further ill; Impunity
To be an ill by thee's confessed,
Cause Right it does and Justice wrest.
I cannot deny't. The wicked then
Are far more miserable, when
That pain does them unjustly spare,
Then when they justly punished are.
For this to Justice does belong,
The other is to Justice wrong.
None can deny't. Nor none, said she,
One good, the other ill to be.
All this does follow, then said I,
From what before we did agree.
But after Death for Souls do thou
No punishment at all allow?
Yes marry, and that great, said she;
And them twofold I think to be:
One sharp and a dire punishment,
The other a mild purgament.
But these to treat of I not mean:
The ground and reason of this theme
Was only that it might be seen
(What thou did most unworthy deem)
In wicked men no Power to be;
And further too, that thou might see,
That they who ills do perpetrate
Do never punishments escape:
And also that thou may conceive
The Power (for which thou did ask leave
Soon for to end) not long to be;
If long, 'twere the more unhappy;
And most unhappy yet of all,
If that it were perpetual.
I said before, the wicked then
Are far more miserable when
That pain does them unjustly spare,
Then when they justly punished are.
The consequence of which is this,
Their punishment most grievous is,
When they seem punished not to be.
To so great reasons I agree.
But if to men they be reserr'd,
Who Will judge them worthy to be heard?
It Is true, said she; for their dim eyes
To the clear light of truth cannot rise.
So like they are unto the Owl,
Whose sight Night brightens, Day does foul.
For while they on their own lusts look,
And not into the secret book
Of things, they judge impunity
Of Ill a Happiness to be.
But know this as a firm award,
Thou need'st no Judge thee to reward
If Virtue thou and Good follow;
Thou on thy self do it bestow.
Again, if thou thy self apply
To Vice, thou need'st no enemy:
Thy self to judge thou will be free,
Thou will thine own tormentor be.
As if by turns thou should uprear
Thy sight unto the Heavens fair,
And then again should cast it down
Upon the filthy miry Ground,
Even the very sense of Sight
Would now show dark, and then show light.
I, but the vulgar thus don't see.
I prithee what is that to me?
Must we be ruled, or with them join,
Who to be Beasts we do define?
What if a man that lost his sight,
Forget should that he ere saw light,
And should believe that he has all
Perfection that is natural?
If I should unto this agree,
I surely were as blind as he.
But when will this be credited
By those who don't believe what is said,
That they are much more unhappy,
That do, then suffer injury?
The reason I would know, said I.
Thou can not sure, said she, deny,
That who with a wicked intent
Does ill, does merit punishment.
And it does many ways appear
The wicked miserable are.
All this is true. Then it is plain,
They are unhappy, deserve pain.
So it is, said I. If then, said she,
The case referred were unto thee,
Which would thou punish, him that did
The wrong, or him that suffered it?
No question I would certainly
Him punish did the injury.
Then more accursed he seems to thee
Who did, then took the injury.
It follows so. From this therefore,
And from like reasons many more,
It Is plain that who does injury
Upon himself brings misery.
What need then Orators make moan,
Judges to move to compassion
O^ them that in afflictions are,
And the wrong-doer not to spare,
Whereas in truth they pity ought
All those that have injustice sought?
Who should a mild, not angry way
Accused be, that so they may
By counsel, as to patients foul,
Cut off a part to save the whole.
Who this considers would not use
Defense, but rather would accuse
Himself; and he who wicked is,
If he of Virtue and of Bliss
Could but a little glim'ring see,
And know he might delivered be
From Vice's filth by punishment,
Would suerly be well content
To suffer pain, and would refuse
At all an Advocate to use;
But would to his Accuser's hate
And Judge's doom himself prostrate.
By which he wholly would abate,
In wise men, all invet'rate hate.
For none but Fools the Good decry;
And they are more fools the Bad envy.
As by disease the Body's pined,
So Vice does macerate the Mind.
And if that Sickness stir up love,
Much more should they compassion move
Where Wickedness the Mind does seize,
For this is much the worse disease.
Whence is it with so much eagerness ye do
Pursue your fate? would you death woo?
He is at hand: if Lion, Tiger, Bear,
Serpent, nor Bore will not do it, your selves you will tear
Whence does this cruelty proceed,
Thus one another to make bleed?
If' cause Opinions differ you blood spill,
This cause no reason has but depraved Will.
Then learn to love the good, pity the ill.
Here I do plainly see, said I,
What is or the felicity,
Or misery that does attend
The good, or wicked does offend.
But yet I am not satisfied,
But that there is good and bad beside.
For what wise man would banished be,
Live poor and ignominiously,
Rather then rich and honored?
This it is makes Wisdom credited,
Whenas the Governor's renown
To the people is transmitted down.
Besides that Prisons, Whips and Racks,
By Law provided for the backs
Of wicked Citizens, do I
Admire much they changed should be,
And Punishments should good destroy,
While as the ill rewards enjoy.
I pray render me a reason
Of this unjust confusion.
For I my self should wonder less,
If I thought Chance all things did press.
But now I much astonished am,
When I consider that they come
From God, that he does distribute
Oft-times what is pleasant to the good,
What Is sharp to the bad, again that he
The good keeps short, to the bad is free.
Unless I may the cause discern,
Why all is not Chance I never shall learn.
No mar'le, said she, if any thing,
The cause not known, confusion bring.
But though the cause thou do not know
Why that things are disposed so;
Yet since the World must God obey,
Never doubt but he does rightly sway.
Who does not know Arcturus course,
What him about the Pole does force,
How slow Boots guides his horse,
Why he so late to bed does go,
In The morn himself so soon does show,
Must needs the rest of the Heavens not know.
What is it that when the Moon's in the full
Her glorious light from her does pull,
Whose splendour all the Stars did dull?
The reason being hid to some,
Made them with Kettle and with Drum
And Cries unto her aid to come.
None wonders that strong Winds do raise
The waves, nor that the Snow not stays
When looked upon by Phoebus rays.
These things seem easy to be known:
Those things the mind do vex alone
Which seldom unto it are shown.
Things sudden do the vulgar move:
But if blind Error we remove,
They no way wonderful will prove.
It Is so, said I: but since that thou
The hidden cause of things can show,
I thee desire to bring to light
The reasons so wrapped up in night.
Above all others pray thee tell
(Me for to ease) this miracle.
Then she a little smiling said,
Thou have a suit unto me made
Which to perform a matter is
So difficult, best skill may miss.
The matter it is so abstruse,
One doubt resolved, thousands produce:
Like Hydra's heads they do increase;
Nor will they come to any peace,
Unless they purely be calcined,
With a quick fire of the Mind.
For in this we must explicate
Mild Providence, and rugged Fate,
Unlook'd-for Chance, divine Cognition,
Free Will, and dark Predestination.
The weight of these thou well may guess.
But thee to cure since I profess,
Though time be short, I Will use it so
That thou in part shall them all know
And if my verse delights thy ear,
Thou must the same awhile forbear,
Till I do utter orderly
Some reasons. As you please, said I.
Then she, as if she new began,
Her speech to me this wise did frame.
The generation of all things,
All Nature's changing proceedings,
All whatsoever things do move,
The Cause, Form, Order's from above.
The high Mind set composedly
In The tower of true Simplicity,
Thence issues out a firm decree
How every thing shall governed be.
Which for that purely it is divine,
We do it Providence define.
But if to the things we it refer,
Which by this Mind disposed are,
We call it Fate. That this is clear*
By both their natures will appear.
For Providence that Reason is
Divine, which constituted is
In God himself, who all does guide:
But Fate in low things does abide.
By Providence Fate orderly
Disposes all things variably.
Providence does all things unite,
Though diverse, or though infinite.
Fate singly does them cause to move,
As Time or Form or Place approve*
So temp'ral things for to know right
United into God's foresight,
Is Providence; and the same union
By time digested and made known,
Is Fate: distinct, they have one End;
For one on the other does depend.
Order of Fate is guided by
Providence's simplicity.
For as a good Artificer,
(Does a form in's mind decypher,)
In time and order brings to pass
What but before in his mind was:
So God does by his Providence
Dispose all things in the future tense;
And what things he does so dispose,
Fate does in order them disclose.
Then whether Fate's web woven be
By Spirits which immediately
Serve Providence, or by the Soul,
Or Nature which does serve the whole,
Or by the motions of the Spheres,
Or Angels, or the Devil's cares,
Or some, or all of these, yet hence
Full clear it is that Providence
Is an unmoved and simple form
Of such things as are yet unborn,
But Fate's an engine moveable,
The which does orderly fulfill
What the divine Simplicity
In time does order for to be.
Whence all things that do Fate obey
To Providence allegiance pay.
And Fate must unto it submit;
For under Providence are set
Some things which Fate it self surmount.
Among the which we well may count
Such as are sixth unmoveably
Nigh the all-ruling Deity.
For as when many circles spin
About one center, that within
To the center's stableness comes nigh,
And is as 'twere the hinge whereby
All those that placed are without
Do make their motions round about;
But that which outermost does turn,
A great circumference does run,
The more it from the center goes,
The larger spaces from it grows;
But what to the center is fast knit,
Does stableness enjoy with it:
So all those that are placed far
From the first Mind, perplexed are
With more and greater snares of Fate;
And he enjoys a freer state
Who out at distance does not ly,
But to the center does draw nigh.
And if unto the high Mind he
Can fixed be by stability,
Above all second things he is born,
And Fate's necessity may scorn.
Wherefore as we Discourse do find
To be the product of the Mind;
And what begotten is, we see
Is still the fruit of the same tree;
Eternity produces Time,
And Circles from the Center climb:
So moving Fate has a firm ty
To Providence's certainty;
Which does alone the Heavens move,
Which joins the Elements in love,
Which makes all growing things proceed
From the corruption of the Seed,
Which does men's acts and fortunes chain
In links that firm and sure remain.
Then since they claim their principle
From Providence immovable,
It must be of necessity,
They have immutability.
And then all things best governed are,
When the divine Mind takes the care,
And with his own Unmovedness
Represses their Confusedness.
Hence it is that though this Order seem
To you to be of small esteem,
For that all things confused appear;
Yet God hereby does take such care,
That he disposes all to good.
This you have already understood:
For ill, as ill, there is none takes care,
No not those that most wicked are;
But they with wicked error do
Seek good which way so ere they go.
But if chief Good the center be
Of this same Order, certainly,
It no man can turn out of the way.
I but Confusion it is, you will say,
Good men to have Prosperity,
And then again Adversity;
And Wicked men for to enjoy
Their will, and then again annoy.
But are there any men that live
So wise, that they can sentence give
Who wicked are, and who upright?
Or must they be so 'cause they say it?
How comes it then to pass there lies
In judgments such incertainties,
So that whom one thinks worthy gain,
Another censures unto pain?
But let us grant that some man can
Discern the good from the bad man.
Can he also the temper see
Of The Soul? with it these may agree.
Who ignorantly then does say
He wonders, as well wonder may
Why to one's body that is sound
Sweet things are only proper found;
T'another's that is as sound as he,
Sharp things and bitter do agree.
Some sick men are with Lenitives,
And some are cured with Corrosives.
But the Physician that does know
Each temper, and can reason show
Of this man's health, that man's disease,
No admiration does him self.
Now of the Soul is Verity
The index of Salubrity,
And Vice the Sickness of the same.
Then who, then God, a fitter can
Physician be, who knows so well
Good to conserve, bad to expel?
Who does from his high Throne of Bliss
See what for each man fitting is;
And what is fit he does assign
Him, by his Providence divine?
This all the wonder is of Fate;
When he that knows the best estate,
Most knowingly for it does care,
The ignorant astonished are.
But now in brief I will explain
What humane Reason can attain
Of secrets purely divine.
Whose Virtue thou think most to shine,
Who most serves Truth and Equity,
The eye of Providence does see
Quite otherwise: hence Lucan does
Ingeniously admonish us,
The Victor's cause the Gods did please,
The Vanquished, Cato. If in these
Then transitory things thou see
What thou think evil done to be;
Believe it is dimness of thy sight,
But divine order is still right.
But if there any be so just
That God and man approve him must;
Yet possibly his Mind's so weak,
His Innocence he will forsake,
If him in Bliss it will not maintain,
But rather is the cause of pain.
This man the all-wise God does spare,
Foreseeing that he cannot bear
Adversity, so growing worse
It would be unto him a curse.
Another man so virtuous is,
So like to God in Holiness,
Him Providence does not think fit
In any case for to afflict,
So that so much as Sickness she
Should him assail, will not agree.
For as one who me far excells
From sacred knowledge freely tells,
The Carcases of Holy men
Of Virtue are composed. And then
As it does often happen that
Virtue does good men elevate,
It is to keep the wicked low,
Which otherwise would all overflow.
Again she mixes one with the other,
As she does see minds them can bear.
Some she does prune, some she does mow,
Lest they too rank should over-grow
With long Prosperity, some she
With hardships suffers vexed to be,
That so the Virtues of the Mind
By Patience may assurance find.
What Is easy to be born, some fear,
Others do ssight what they cannot bear.
These she afflicts with Misery,
That they their strength of mind may try
Some for the glory of a Name,
Do catch at Death, to purchase Fame.
Others, by strange enduring pain,
By their example have made plain
That Virtue cannot conquered be
By all this worldly misery.
Which things since right and orderly
They are disposed, no doubt can be
But that they do the good procure
Of them that do the same endure.
Now that the wicked do enjoy
Sometimes their will, and then annoy,
From the same causes does arise.
That they are punished, none that is wise
Can wonder, or condemn; for why,
It does both others terrify,
And does mend them: besides the joy
The wicked have aloud does cry
To the good, that they should learn thereby
How vain a thing's Prosperity.
I also more consider this;
Perhaps one's nature so fierce is,
That Poverty would make him worse:
Then him to free from this fame curse,
Kind Providence for remedy
Stores him with Money plenteously.
Another who does Vice affect,
Upon his fortunes does reflect.
And fears the loss would more displease,
Then now the spending does him please;
Does change his life, and while he fears
To lose his state, his Vice forbears.
One lately raised to Happiness,
With Pride does on destruction press.
To others there is Power lent
For to inflict dire punishment,
The good thereby to exercise,
The wicked thereby to chastise.
For as no correspondence can
Be 'tween a good and wicked man;
So do the wicked still deny
Among themselves for to comply.
And how can it be otherwise,
Since they being guilty of Vice,
Within themselves perplexed are,
And being mad, they none do spare?
From whence by Providence is often
This miracle seen to be wrought,
That ill men, ill men good do make;
For that from them they damage take:
So hating of their wickedness,
They fly to Virtue for redress,
Detesting for to be like them
Whom they do hate above all men.
For only strength that is divine
Can out of evil good refine.
Which it does do in this respect,
By giving it a good effect.
For Order does all things entwine;
And what from Order does decline,
Does so but seem, keeps the right way:
For where that Providence does sway,
There sure can no Confusion be.
But it cannot be showed by me,
How God, who does to all preside,
Does by his Providence them guide.
Let it suffice that we do see
That God, who did Nature decree,
By mortals must be understood
For to dispose all things to good.
For that all things he does produce
He to his likeness does reduce:
And does all Evil banish by
Course of fatal necessity
From out his kingdom: so that we
Considering the Deity,
Must know on earth ill cannot abound,
Since no place for it can be found.
But I do see you weary are,
This weighty burden for to bear;
Though It reason be, prolixity
Must needs be tedious unto thee:
Therefore I thee to recreate
Some verses sweet will modulate.
Take them as a refection,
Thy journey better thou wilt go on.
If thou the Laws of the most High
Wilt with a knowing mind descry,
Behold the motions are above,
How they do keep both peace and love.
Though Phoebus be hot,
Yet he does not
his Sister Phoebe's cold restrain:
But they mutually
Do friendly comply,
to warm and cool the Earth again.
Nor does the Pole, on which the world
Is turned, desire to be hurled
Into the Sea, although he see
All other Stars there drencht ^o be.
The Evening-star
Does always prepare
the coming of the shady Night:
The Morn-star does bring
The joyful tiding
of every Day's approaching light.
So that they do perpetually
In Love agree and Unity:
This Love does banish from the Stars
All discord, strife, and civil wars.
By this Unity
The Elements agree,
so that the moist yields to the dry,
The cold joins in love
With Fire that is above,
and weighty Earth below does ly.
This Love and this blessed Unity
Causes the Spring so gay to be,
Causes the Summer ripe the Corn,
And Autumn to blow Plenty's horn,
That well drive away
Cold Winter we may:
gives us all things that life sustain;
And when that we die,
Brings us presently
to our beginning back again.
While their Creator set on high
Does govern them full orderly;
As King and Lord he all does sway,
So from their order they cannot stray.
Yet he by his will
Can make that stand still
whose order is to flow amain;
And that make to stray
Whose order's to stay,
for none his power can restrain.
But did not he the creatures bound,
And them compel into a round,
They soon exorbitant would grow,
And would all order overthrow.
It Is Love mutual
To good drives them all,
and makes them that they do remain.
It Is. Love is the thing
That all things does bring
to their beginning back again.
Do thou the consequence now see
Of all I have declared to thee?
What Is that? said I. Even all, said she,
Fortune, what ever, good to be.
And how, said I, can that same be?
Attend, and thou shall see, said she.
Since that all Fortune, mild or hard,
Conferred is or for Reward,
Or trial of the good; or for
The Punishment of the wicked, or
For their correction; it is plain
It Is good, 'cause just, or for it is gain.
Thou truly do the question state;
And if I Providence and Fate
(As thou to me have lately taught)
Consider, it is firmly wrought.
But I do think it may be placed
Among those things that time do wast;
For thou did lately tell to me,
Some things believed may not be.
Let this be one. For why? said she.
Because that men do commonly
Assever they ill Fortune have.
And if that thou the same do crave,
The vulgar speech I Will not refuse,
But all humanity will use.
Do as you please, said I. Then she;
Do thou not think that good to be
That profitable is? I do,
Said I. Thou can not then but know
That all whatever does correct,
Or trial make, 's good in the effect.
It Is true, said I. It must be good,
Or else thou had not understood
This their condition for to be
Who, virtuous, with adversity
A war do wage, nor those that do,
From Vice reclaimed, Virtue pursue.
It Is plain, said I, unto me now.
But prithee further, what think thou
Of what the good have as reward?
Does the rude vulgar think that hard?
Why no, said I; but good, as it is.
But what do they think then of this,
What bitter is, and does restrain
By punishment the wicked man?
Do they think this same good to be?
No, but the worst of misery.
Then see, said she, how following
The Vulgar's foolish bellowing,
That same thing now is visible,
That you would have incredible.
As how? said I. The consequence
Of this is plain to every sense,
That they who Virtue do possess,
Or toward her are in progress,
Their Fortune is concluded good;
But by the Vulgar's understood,
That they who wicked do remain
Bad Fortune have, if they have pain.
It follows so. But who is wise,
Said she, does think Adversities
To be a trial, does make head,
And no more does the issue dread,
Then does the valiant Chieftain do
When to the battle trumpets blow.
The difficulty is the thing
Which unto both does honor bring:
One seeks in Glory for to rise,
The other is esteemed Wise.
And Virtue does its name derive
From Vis, 'cause it does strongly strive.
And you who in the progress are
Toward Virtue, surely do take care
Not to be pampered with delights,
Nor to be pined with affrights:
But against both Fortunes you put on
A conquering resolution.
Lest you Delights should overflow,
Or Sorrows should you overthrow,
You strongly do a Mean endeavor.
For it is sure that whosoever
Or short does stay, or further go,
May have Felicity in show,
But never shall reward obtain,
For all his labor and his pain.
But if you will uprightly live,
You to your selves your Fortune give.
For whatsoever Fortune ill
Does seem, it is good Fortune still:
For it the good does exercise;
Or else correct, or punish vice.
What greater pleasure on the earth is found,
Then with strong Difficulties for to cope,
And then with victory for to be crowned?
Of this stout Agamemnon had great hope,
When before Troy he ten whole years did ly;
Filled with disdain, he thought the time not long,
And ended it with glorious victory,
By fire expiating his Brother's wrong.
Which rather then he would not bring to pass,
He sacrificed his only Daughter dear,
Who to the Gods of the Wind a victime was,
That Neptune safe the Grecian Fleet might bear.
Ulysses his Companions did bewail,
Whom cruel Cyclops in his den did eat;
But he with blindness did the Cyclops quail,
Then joy did mitigate his sadness great.
Great Hercules renowned is for toil:
He did the proud ambitious Centaurs tame,
And from the raging Lion took the spoil,
And men-devouring Birds he made his game.
He from the watchful Dragon did fetch out
The Golden Apples, and did Horses feed
With Kingly flesh; the Hell-dog led about,
And from the monster Hydra the world freed.
He made swift Achelous back to go,
And quelled Antaeus on the Libyan sand:
He did the fiery Cacus overthrow,
Nor could the huge-tusk'd Bore his force withstand.
With his stiff neck and brawny shoulders he
The Heavens upheld. For these he gained at last
Up to the Gods translated for to be,
So who the Heavens upheld, the Heavens hold fast.
These high examples let brave minds regard.
Who toils in Virtue, has a sure reward.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
WHen this was said, she did begin
Quite other matters to weave in.
Then I, her interrupting, said,
Thy exhortation is well laid,
And ought observed for to be
Coming from thy authority.
But since that I do find it true
Now by experience, that which you
Of Providence to me did tell,
That many questions thence would swell,
From thee I do desire to know
Whether that Chance or be, or no,
And what it is. I will, said she,
Make good my promise unto thee;
And unto thee the way will show,
How thou in safety home may go.
The things I was about to say,
Although that they much profit may,
Yet they from our set purpose were;
But I did offer them, for fear
Lest with these heavy burdens pressed,
Thou should tire for want of rest.
Of that, said I, no fear can be,
They rather ease do bring to me.
Besides, if thy discourse appear
With Truths on all sides to be clear,
Of all which does thereof arise
There Is no man sure will doubt that is wise,
Thy way, said she, I Will follow then;
And in this manner she began.
If that without a Cause be lent
Unto rash motion an Event,
If any one this Chance do call,
I do aver there is none at all:
And a vain voice it is alone,
Without signification.
For where can Chance have any room
Where God to order all does doom?
That Nothing does from nothing rise,
Is truth confirmed by the ancient wise,
Even by those could nothing tell
Of the effecting principle;
But all their knowledge only was
Material subject, nature, cause.
But if that any thing does spring
From no Cause, it does from Nothing
Seem to come: but if this cannot be,
Then neither can there possibly
Be that same Chance lately defined.
And what, said I, can we then find
In the whole world nothing at all
That Fortune we or Chance may call?
Or is there something (lies unknown
To the Vulgar) by these terms is shown?
In Aristotle's Physics thou
Truly may the reason know.
As how? said I. When any thing,
Says he, by accident does bring
To light some other thing then was
Intended by the moving cause,
This is called Chance: as if a man
For tillage does plough up a lawn,
And does a hidden treasure find,
It Is presently to Chance assigned;
But wrongly, since it does not pass
From nothing, for it causes has;
The which, 'cause they were not foreseen,
A Chance does make it for to seem.
For if the Husband man had not
The ground broke up, nor to other put
The treasure there, 't had not been found.
Now thou do see the cause and ground;
It does from several causes come,
Not from the Agent's intention.
For neither he that hid the gold,
Nor he that did the plough-staff hold,
Intended it should come to pass;
But, as I said, it only was
Concurring causes that did bid
The one dig up what the other hid.
Then Chance by us may be defined,
Event from Causes that are joined.
Now Causes do concur and grow
From a Connection which does flow
From that inevitable Read
Which does from Providence proceed,
Which does all things (seen in the close)
In time and place rightly dispose.
Among the rocks
whereas those people dwell
Who do with mocks
their enemies all quell,
Whilst flying they
Do with their deadly darts
Their followers slay,
them piercing to the hearts,
There Tigris does,
there does Euphrates rise;
This one way goes,
that the other swiftly flies.
Should they unite
and both together run,
With all the might
of Floods that to them come,
There Is nothing could
their raging force withstand,
Destroy they would
all the whole neighboring land.
Trees they would tear
from out the firmest ground;
They naught would spare,
but all things would confound;
If not consigned
their channels for to keep,
By that high Mind
that law gives to the Deep.
It is just so
with Fortune's raging spite;
Who all does know,
does force her to do right.
I do it understand, said I,
And with thy judgment do comply.
But with thy Causes do thou
To man at all Free Will allow?
Or does this fatal Chain up ty
Men's minds, that they move not freely?
No, there is no nature reasonable,
But is endued with Free Will.
What things soever Reason do
By nature use, use Judgment too,
By which they with a lively sense
Easily discern the difference
'Twixt what is good and what is bad;
What Is to be left, what is to be had.
Then who of Reason has the skill,
He freedom has to will, or nill.
But I Will not say that unto all
This Freedom is alike equal:
For that the substances Divine
Have Judgments that are clear and fine,
Wills uncorrupted, and what they
Do will, they by their Power may.
But it is of necessity
That humane minds most free should be,
When they in speculation are
Of the High God: less when they care
For the body take* least when that they
Let earthly vanities them sway.
But yet their greatest bondage is,
When they do sell themselves to Vice:
Reason's possession then they quit;
And putting from their eyes the light
Of Truth, they into darkness fall,
And lewd affections worst of all;
To which consenting, they do bring
Upon themselves a languishing,
And they by this their being free
Throw themselves into slavery.
Yet still high Providence does see
All things from all eternity,
And to the merits of each state
Does give, as they are predestinate.
All things does he
Both hear and see.
Homer did sweetly sing
bright Phoebus praise:
Yet he cannot look in
the Earth's dark ways;
Nor can he pierce with his eye
the Ocean clear.
To him that made the Sky
all things appear;
No Earth does stand between
his knowing sight,
Nothing by him's unseen
in the darkest night.
With one thought of his mind
he clear does see
Whatever was designed
or ere shall be.
Then he that does behold the total sum,
He truly may be called the brightest Sun.
I now, said I, confounded am
Far more then when that you began.
How can that be? said she: yet I
Conjecture where your doubts do ly.
These things, said I, too much oppose
To be believed, That God foreknows
All things that are, or ere shall be,
And to believe the Will is free.
For if that God does all things see,
And by no means deceived can be,
It is a necessary case,
What he foresees must come to pass.
Wherefore if from eternity
Not only deeds, but counsels he
And darkest thoughts of men foreknew,
Then a Free Will cannot be true.
For there no Act can be alone,
But Will also there can be none,
Hid from the divine Providence,
In his unerring prescience.
For if that things another way
Then was foreseen quite alter may,
Foreknowledge certainly there is none,
But rather an Opinion.
Which to believe of God above
Is impious. Nor do I approve
The reason, which some men resolve
This knotty question does dissolve.
They say that nothing comes to pass
' Cause it foreseen or foreknown was;
But contrary, for that 'twould be,
High Providence did it foresee.
If so, the same necessity
As well is for the contrary.
For it is not necessary that
What is foreseen must therefore hap;
But this does necessary seem,
What-ere does hap, it was foreseen.
As if we labored for to know
Which of these two the cause should show;
Whether Foreknowledge rises from
Necessity of things to come,
Or the Necessity does grow
From the Foreknowledge. But I Will show
That howsoever things ordered be,
The event of things is necessary,
Though Providence don't seem to infer
Necessity. For if that there
One sit, and I him sitting view,
That he does sit I do think true:
Again, if that my thought be true,
That he does sit must be true too.
In both then there is necessity,
To sit, and also true to be.
But therefore sure he does not sit,
Because that I so think of it:
But therefore I so think of it,
Because it is true that he does sit.
So though the cause of truth proceed
But from one part, yet there is need
Of relative community,
Or we this point shall never agree.
We must make the like inference
Of Future things, and Providence;
Who 'cause things must be, does foresee,
But her foresight don't make them be.
So necessary it does seem
That things to come should be foreseen,
Or else what things God does foresee
Should fall out necessarily.
So take it which way soever you will,
It must needs overthrow Free Will.
Besides, is it not preposterous,
That worldly things should be the cause
Of God's eternal Prescience?
And pray what other is it in sense,
To say, because that things must be,
That therefore God does them foresee,
Then for to say, what is come to pass,
Of Providence the great cause was?
Besides, if I do know a thing,
I know also it has being:
And if that I know ought shall be,
I know it necessarily.
Whence follows that no man can shun
What in Foreknowledge must be done.
Lastly, if any one conceive
A thing to be, that may deceive,
That is no Knowledge certainly,
But Opinion's uncertainty,
Which from the truth of Knowledge is
Far discrepant. Then truth it is,
That if a thing be for to be,
But yet not of necessity,
It cannot possibly be shown,
That the same thing could be foreknown:
For Knowledge is a thing so pure,
It no false mixture will endure;
So that if ought conceived be
By it, it is of certainty.
For this cause Knowledge cannot ly,
Because that of necessity
Whatever it does apprehend
Must be the same unto the end.
How then? by what means can God know
That things uncertain will be so?
For if he thinks that things will be
Inev'tably, that may not be,
He is deceived: which for to speak
Or think of God is wicked, weak.
Again, if so that he foresee
Things as they are, such for to be,
Or not to be, to come to pass,
Or not to come, what skill, alas,
Is this, which does not comprehend
What stable is or sure in the end?
It as ridiculous must be
As was Tiresias Prophecy;
What* e're I say, or sure must be,
Or sure it is it must not be.
In what does Divine Providence
Excel the skill of humane sense,
If that, as men, uncertain he
Does judge the event of things to be?
But if that naught uncertain can
Be unto him that is certain,
Then the event must certain be
Of whatsoever he does foresee.
Which thing all Liberty expels
From humane actions and counsels;
If all these without falsity
The Heavenly Mind does surely see,
And them does bind and does constrain
Unto events that are certain.
This granted, what confusion
Must all humane affairs put on?
In vain Rewards propounded are
To the good, Pains to the ill, if there
Be no free motion of the mind,
But Necessity does it bind.
And that will high Injustice seem
Which we most just do now esteem,
The wicked for to punish, or
The good reward; since neither's for
Their own delict or probity
Received, but of necessity.
Virtue or Vice there will be none,
But of all things confusion.
And then, (then which there nothing can
Be more blasphemous thought by man)
If Providence do all things guide,
And humane Will to it be tied,
It follows that our Vices must
Be laid on him that is most just.
Nor will there any reason sway
Why either we should hope, or pray.
For what does hope or prayer avail,
If the determined end cannot sail?
No conversation there will be
'Twixt Mortals and the Deity.
For if no hope at all remain,
To pray will be esteemed but vain.
But if by just Humility
We have access to the Deity,
And by it do of grace partake,
Which is the only means can make
Us happy, and by which men can
With God have Conversation,
By which they to that light are joined
Inaccessible by mankind,
And do there by all good obtain;
If that, I say, prayer be made vain
By holding of Necessity,
Then by what other means shall we
Stick fast unto, and be made one
With the great Prince of Union?
All men it must to ruin bring,
If (as thou did but lately sing)
They from their fountain severed are,
And in the Deity don't share.
How does Erinnys break the league of things?
What spirit is it that such contention slings
Between two truths, such mighty warfare brings?
How is it that singly things do clearly stand,
But joined so dark are, none them understand?
Or is it, that all truths do go hand in hand?
No but the Soul, that here is but a guest,
With cloudy members of dull flesh oppressed,
Cannot attain to know what things are best.
Why should she then with zeal burn like to fire?
Why hidden ways of Truth should she desire,
Whenas she here can naught but doubts acquire?
If she the things that she desires does know,
Why then with scruples does she vex them so?
Why does she toil so much them to re-know?
If she knows not, why does she, being blind,
Seek them to know? who ever wished to find
He knew not what, or sought to catch the wind?
What if she find them? yet they being found,
How shall she know their natures for to bound,
When she herself in ignorance is drowned?
Or for that she first came from God above,
Must all things which here and above do move
No Causes have, but what she does approve?
She now with cloudy flesh is mantled over;
And though some things of what she knew before
She does retain, her knowledge is but poor.
Yet who seeks Truth, he does not do amiss;
Though he cannot come to know it, yet he gains this,
That he not wholly thereof ign'rant is.
Some things he does to memory commit;
High things ^e does admire, and high wit
He scans with reason, and retains what is fit*
This, said she, is an old complaint,
Canvast and scrutin'd by that quaint
Distributer of Divination,
Cicero; and thy self art one
That much has toiled in it: but as yet
There Is none of you has had the wit
Sufficiently to find it out.
The reason of it is, no doubt,
'Cause blindness of Humanity
Cannot see Divine Simplicity,
Nor comprehend the notions great
Of heavenly things in her conceit:
To which if that she could attain,
There would no doubt at all remain.
But I the same with my best skill
Open to lay endeavor will.
But first I must those doubts remove
Are by thee moved, and do thee move.
And first I do demand of thee,
Why thou not reason it to be
Do think, that nothing comes to pass
'Cause it Foreseen or Foreknown was.
It only seeks for to maintain
Prescience, don't Free Will restrain;
Nor it at all the cause to be
Of the Event's necessity.
Do thou bring any arguments
For the necessity of Events,
But 'cause that God does them Foresee
They must be of Necessity?
But if Foreknowledge does not bring
Necessity upon the thing,
As thou thy self did late express,
When thou the same thing did confess,
How is it, of things voluntary
That the Event must certain be?
I will thee an example show,
Thereby the consequence to know.
Suppose there were no Prescience,
Could thou, do think, affirm in sense,
That what proceeds from the Will,
Necessity does it compel?
Why, no. Let Us then again suppose
Prescience, and that it does impose
On nothing a Necessity.
The Freedom of the Will will be
As absolute the same alone,
As if Prescience there were none.
But thou will say, Although there be
By Prescience no necessity
Of the Event, a sign it is
Things so to happen cannot miss.
By the same reason, the same thing
Had hapt had no Prescience bin.
A Sign does always something show,
But does not cause it to be so.
Wherefore who this does not allow,
Must first demonstratively show,
That certainly nothing can be
But it is from Necessity,
Before that he can make it appear
Foreknowledge does this title bear.
If there be no Necessity,
Then Prescience no Sign can be
Of what is not. Besides proofs must
Not upon men by Signs be thrust,
But by firm Reasons, proofs well wrought,
From causes necessary brought.
But by what means may things not be;
Which for to be God does Foresee?
It Is true there is no means, but that
What God Foresees to be must hap.
For though I don't believe at all
What God Foresees must not befall,
Yet though it must befall, say I,
It is not of necessity
From its own nature. This to be
A truth I Will plainly show to thee.
There Is many a thing before our eyes,
While doing, that this truth descries.
As he that drives a Coach or Cart,
Does many things to show his art.
For should Necessity compel,
In vain the Artist should excel.
So other things conclude may we
Not to be of necessity.
Which as they have no necessity
Of being, before that they be,
So they without necessity
Do happen, when they come to be.
It follows then some things be free,
In the event, from Necessity.
And yet there is none will say what is done,
Before 'twas done, was not to come.
By this the event of things is shown
For to be free, although Foreknown,
For as there is no necessity
Of knowing things that present be,
^ut as they are done, or left undone;
Just so it is of things to come.
But likely it is thou do suppose
There no Foreknowledge is of those
Things whose event's not necessary,
Because their natures disagree.
For thou may think of Prescience
Necessity the consequence;
And if there is no Necessity,
Then no Foreknowledge can there be;
For Knowledge naught can comprehend
That is not certain in the end.
And if the event uncertain be,
And it as certain we foresee,
It Is plain that Knowledge it is none,
But dark and cloudy Opinion.
For otherwise a mind to bear
Of things, or Causes, then they are,
Thou think it much averse to be
To Knowledge's integrity.
The cause of which thy error's this,
Because thou think that what known is,
By its own force and nature's known;
But the contrary shall be shown.
All that is known, is not known by
The force that in it self does ly;
But the force lies, as I suppose,
IN the faculty of him that knows.
That this a perfect truth must be,
I Will by example show to thee.
Suppose a body round to be,
The Eye this body's form does see,
The Hand it feels; that it is round
We by two different ways have found.
The Eye it viewing with sight clear,
Unto the Mind its form does bear:
The Hand, by joining to the thing,
And round about it compassing,
Does so the roundness of it find,
And it conveies unto the Mind.
So Sense a Man does one way see,
Imagination diversely,
Reason a way not like these other,
And understanding quite another.
By Sense the figure as it is placed
In the material thing's embraced.
Imagination form does see
Without Materiality.
But Reason yet does higher fly,
Considers universally
The Species of every kind,
In the particulars assigned.
But Understanding yet more high
Does soar, and fixes its bright eye,
While it with knowing beams does pierce
Above the frame of the Universe,
And with pure sight of the Mind does see
The simple form from all these free.
So it is, that the superior
Comprehends the inferior;
But the inferior in no wise
To the superior can arise.
So that the Sense no Sense can find,
If it to the Matter be not joined;
Imagination cannot see
Of Kind the Universality;
Neither can Reason comprehend
Of simple Forms the utmost end:
But Understanding, from an high
Once casting down her knowing eye,
Does straight the simple forms conceive
Of all things that are underneath;
But she the Forms discerns so,
As none of the rest can them so know.
Reason's Univeriality,
Sense's Materiality,
Imagination's Form, all these
She comprehends with much ease;
Yet Reason does and Sense refuse,
Nor does Imagination use,
But with one stroke of the mind does she
See and know all things Formally.
The same thing Reason, whenas she
Beholds Universality,
Imagination does not use,
And totally does Sense refuse,
Yet things Imaginable and
Sensible she does comprehend.
For Reason does describe truly
Thus her Universality.
A Man's a creature animal,
That Is two-footed, and rational.
This is a notion known to all
In It self to be universal;
Yet it Imagination does
And Sense contain, every man knows:
Though it no use at all does make
In all the notions it does take
Of Sense, or Imagination,
But Rational conception.
Imagination does the same:
Though she all Forms and Figures frame
IN the mind, by sense of Touch and Sight,
Yet they laid by, she judges right
Of things, not by any reason
Of Sense, but Imagination.
Then do thou not now plainly see,
IN the knowledge of all things that be,
All their own Power and Faculty
Do use, not their's, they are known by?
Nor is this any injury;
For since all Judgment judged must be
The act of him the judgment gave,
It Is necessary he should have
Full power unto him consigned,
Not by another be consigned.
The ancient Chairs and Schools were filled
with old men and obscure,
Who into the minds of men instilled
Outward things only, did procure
To the Mind Idea's that were sure.
As when we have in readiness
a paper that is white,
We wont are on it to impress
Letters that do resemble night;
So we the Minds Idea's write.
But if the Mind no motions make
that are her proper own,
But does from outward things them take,
Like Glasses show but what is shown,
Whence she sees all things would be known;
Whence she all single things beholds,
or them divided knows;
Whence it is that she all things enfolds,
What from the highest Heaven flows,
And what on the Earth's surface grows:
With this same knowledge she repleat
with Truth does Falsehood gall.
No Knowledge sure can be so great
Which does from outward Objects fall,
As that which comprehends this all.
Yet living creatures Passions have,
which do the Mind excite;
Each Object does attention crave,
Both of the Hearing and the Sight:
And this their forms does bring to light.
And thus the Mind to outward things
her knowledge does apply:
Not that the outward Object brings
Unto it any novelty,
For it kn^w all intrinsicly.
And if in Bodies it be so,
Their outward forms by Sense to know,
The outward Object must reflect
Upon the Sense and it affect;
And that we do the Passions find
Precede the Actions of the Mind,
And do provoke the Soul to stir
Those inward forms ly hid in her;
If that these bodies right to know,
The Mind to Passions this does ow,
Although she Passions do at length
Subdue by her own force and strength;
How much more do those things that be
From Corporal Affections free,
The outward Objects not attend,
But to the Mind their powers bend?
Wherefore there is of Knowledges
Like difference as of Substances.
Some creatures motionless, have Sense,
But they want all other science;
As Shel-fish, which to rocks stick fast,
And thence do nourishment exhaust.
The Beasts and Birds that use motion,
Have Sense and Imagination,
By which they fit things covet do,
And seek all dangers to eschew.
Reason does only Man define,
And Understanding is divine.
So that same Knowledge excels sure
Which excells of its own nature,
And does not only its own show,
But does all others Objects know.
If Sense and Imagination
Then should rise up against Reason,
And this same their contest should be,
There Is no Universality,
As Reason thinks she does behold,
And thus their argument should hold;
Whatever thing is Sensible,
Or that is Imaginable,
That Universal cannot be:
If Reason's judgment true then be,
Then nothing can be Sensible,
No nor yet Imaginable;
For many things to her are known
Subject to Imagination
And Sense; then vain is the conceit
Of Reason, which does Objects treat
That in their natures Single be
With her Universality.
Thus Reason's answer would be free,
That in Universality
She does behold what is Sensible,
And what is Imaginable,
But their weak Knowledge cannot fly
Up to Universality,
'Cause they no Knowledge have at all
'Bove Figures and Forms Corporeal.
Then certainly we must affirm,
That Knowledge for to be most firm,
As also to be most perfect,
Which knows both Form and the Effect.
In this contention, surely we,
Indu'd with Reason's faculty,
That have Imagination
And Sense also to work upon,
Cannot in reason but attest,
That Reason's cause is much the best.
Just so it is, when Reason does
Think that God's Understanding knows
Things yet to come no otherwise
Then she does think she them descries:
For thus thou say, If the event be
Not certain and necessary,
Then a Foreknowledge of the same
Also can no way be certain.
Hence, of these things thou do allege
That there can be no Foreknowledge;
And if there be, naught certainly
Can hap, but of necessity.
If as we have of Reason part,
God Judgment would divine impart,
As we already did conclude
All Sense and Thought for to be rude,
'Cause they to Reason would not yield,
So Reason must submit the field
To the Understanding Divine Mind.
Then granting that our Reason's blind,
Let us unto that height aspire,
Where Reason, when she has got higher,
Will see those things, and plainly too,
Which in her self she could not do;
Which is, that those things which have no
Certain event, God does Foreknow;
And that Opinion this is none,
But rather highest notion,
Bound up in that Simplicity
That by nothing can bounded be.
On earth what several kinds
of creatures are!
Poison the Serpent lines.
yet he is fair:
His skin no soil will take,
though he does creep,
Yet he does furrows make,
and dust does sweep.
Birds use their wings to fly
upon the wind,
And in the air full high
a passage find.
Beasts going on the ground,
their steps appear,
By which in Woods often found,
they hunted are.
All several formed you see
in Nature's book;
Yet all in this agree,
on Earth they look
Man only does erect
his stately crown,
To the Earth gives no respect,
nor eye throws down.
If Earth don't thee inchant,
thy Form does teach,
For all things thou can want
to Heaven to reach.
But if thou Earth do love, and to it trust,
Thy Body will above thy Soul be thrust.
Then as to thee before was shown,
Whatever is known, it is not known
By its own nature, but by his
By whom it comprehended is.
Let Us now the Divine substance see
With care and with sobriety;
That seeing it, we may also
Know what it is that he does know.
First then, God is confessed by all
That Reason have, to b' eternal.
The thing that must considered be
Is, what is this Eternity.
For this will unto us declare
What Is knowledge and what is nature are*
Eternitie's full possession
Of life, without conclusion.
This unto us will plain appear
If temp'ral things we do compare.
All things that live do proceed from
Times past, go on to time to come;
And there is no one that can embrace
At one instant all the whole space
Of his whole Life, knows not next day,
Nor is what he was yesterday.
Nor in this very present day
Does he of's Life more time enjoy,
Then one moment transitory,
In which to Move, or Speak, or Die.
Then none of time can be more free
Then Time can make himself to be.
Though that (as Aristotle said
Of The World) it no Beginning had,
No End shall have, if Life, I say,
With Time enduer should for aye,
It could not rightly be a thing
That might be called Everlasting.
For though that Life were infinite,
It could not at one time unite
All its whole course, being barred from
All the whole time that is to come.
Then that same which does comprehend
All that whole Life which has no end,
All that is past knows certainly,
All that is to come does plainly see,
That same must the Eternal be.
And this is of necessity;
For that he in himself alone
Has all perfect possession,
Makes all things present him assist,
And also carries in his fist
The all and whole infinity
Of Time, that has mobility.
But very largely they mistake,
Who from Plato's opinion, take
This frame to be coeternal
With him that framed this same All,
Because that Plato this has penned,
It nor Beginning had* nor End:
And they do think to prove by this,
The World (as God) Eternal is.
For it is one thing for to have
Life without end, which Plato gave
To the World, and it is another
(As it is easy for to gather)
At one instant for to embrace
The whole and every part of the space
Of this same Life, the which is plain
Only in God for to remain.
Nor yet does the Creator seem
Then Creatures older to have been
By time's stretched measured Quantity,
But by's nature's Simplicity*
The world does strive to imitate
God's present motionless estate;
And since he cannot equal it,
By motion he does vie with it,
And stead of God's Simplicity,
He, by infinite quantity
Of time that is past and time to come,
Does with him for the garland run.
And since at once he cannot embrace
The whole and every part of the space
Of his whole Life, by being still,
He seems in part to have his will,
Binding himself to each moment,
That so he may be permanent;
And unto all it question, can
This answer truly make, I am.
More words to speak he cannot stay,
But to make it good he takes his way
Of everlasting journeying,
His Being so continuing;
So going on, all that long space
(He cannot at once) he does embrace
Wherefore if that of Plato we
Will followers exactly be,
We must high God Eternal call,
And the Universe Perpetual.
Since then by nature it is so,
That every judgment that does know
Which under it is placed, and that
God still enjoys a present state,
And that his Knowledge does surmount
All that can be in Time's account,
And that he ever does remain,
And in Simplicity does reign,
And does the spaces infinite
Of past and what is to come unite,
And that they all unto him are
As if they now at present were;
If thus thou will God's Prescience
Consider with an upright sense,
Thou certainly wilt find, that he
Does rather all things present see,
Then that he does at distance roam
At any thing that is to come.
And for this cause, not Previdence
It called is, but Providence;
Because he from his high Aspect
Has all the world in his Prospect.
But why do thou require should be
Of those things a necessity
Which the Divine mind does foreknow,
And yet of Men thou do not so?
If thou a thing do present see,
Does thy sight make it Necessity?
Why no. Then if so be we dare
Low things with High for to compare,
As thou do things at present see,
So God does with his eternal eye.
Nor does this Foreknowledge alter
Or the property, or nature;
Yet he in present does them see,
As they in time to come will be,
And with one glance of's mind does know
What things must necessary flow,
Also what things besides must be
That are not of necessity.
As when at once you with your eyes
See a Man walk, and the Sun rise;
Though at one glance you do descry
Them both, yet you know certainly,
That one is of necessity,
The other's but voluntary.
So God beholding from above
Things that unto their end do move,
Does not alter their quality,
Or make them of necessity;
Yet he does them all Present see,
As they in Future are to be.
So that Opinion this is none,
But rather highest notion
'Stablish'd in truth, when he does see
That such a thing shall certain be,
And yet withal he it does know
Not from necessity to flow.
If unto this thou do reply,
What God sees of necessity
Must come to pass, and me wilt ty
Unto this word Necessity;
I will confess it is most true,
But such a truth as none can view
Not well skilled in Divinity.
For that may be necessary,
If so that it referred be
Unto the high Divinity,
Which in its proper nature weighed
May free and absolute be said.
There Is a twofold Necessity:
One Simple, that All men must die;
The other is Conditional,
And may, or it may not befall;
As if thou see a man to go,
That he does go must needs be so.
Then it is of necessity;
For what thou know, that needs must be.
But the Condition does not draw
Simply with it that needful law;
It does not from the Nature grow,
But the Condition makes it so.
Necessity did not compel
Him for to go, or to stand still;
But if he go, it then must be
That he goes of necessity.
Just so, if Providence do see
Ought Present, 'cis necessary,
Although that in'ts own property
There is not a necessity.
But God at present does see all
That by free will shall e're befall.
And this, if we do God respect,
Is necessary in the effect,
By that condition which alone
Is tied to the Divine notion.
But if that it considered be
In its own Nature, it is free.
Without all doubt those things shall be
Which Divine Providence does see:
And yet of them there are some still
Proceed, not forced, but from free will,
Which do not lose their nature, though
By being they must needs be so;
Because it might have been so, that
Their being never might have hapt.
But what makes matter though they be
In no manner necessary,
If by that same condition
Which is placed in God alone
They do so happen for to be
As if they were necessary?
Just as I said awhile ago,
The Sun does rise, a Man does go:
Which while they do so, it cannot be
But their so doing must needs be:
But yet before these came to pass,
One of them necessary was,
The other not. So every thing
God present sees, time forth shall bring;
But some from the agent's power shall be,
And others from necessity.
Then rightly we do hence declare,
If things to God referred are,
Then they are of necessity;
But if that by themselves they be
Considered, they are wholly free
From the bond of necessity.
Just as it is of every thing
That only have of Sense being,
If you to Reason them refer,
Then they all Universal are;
If by themselves you them consider,
They then all singular appear.
But thou will say, If so it be
That I to change my will am free,
Will It frustrate Providence, if so
I change from what she did foreknow?
I answer, Thou indeed art free
In thy own mutability;
But whether thou do change or no,
Or whatsoever it is thou do do,
Providence (that continually
Is present) still the truth does see,
And thou her Prescience can not shun,
No more then the eye that sees things done,
When freely thou thy self do change
To actions that are new and strange.
But then thou wilt say, Shall I suppose
That I God's knowledge can dispose?
And if I this, now that will do,
Will God his Knowledge vary so?
No; for God's Foresight does prevent
All future things, makes them present.
Nor, as thou think, at all does he
Now one thing, now another see;
But with one present look does see,
And know thy mutability.
Which things God does not comprehend
Because such things shall have such end,
But this divine Simplicity
Is proper to the Deity.
By which also that doubt's made clear,
Which thou did lately seem to fear,
That it is an unworthy thing
That we should God's Foreknowledge bring
On humane actions to depend
Since that its force does comprehend
At present all that is future,
And to each thing appoints measure;
But he receives nothing at all
From whatsoever happen shall.
Since then that all these things are plain,
Free Will to mortals does remain;
Nor are those Laws unjust which do
Propound Rewards and Pains unto
All the free actions of the mind,
Nor to necessity them bind.
The all-knowing God too still is free,
Who from above does all things see;
And the present eternity
Of this his sight does still agree
With all the qualities that shall
In all our future actions fall,
Giving Rewards and Punishments
To good and unto bad intents.
Nor are your hopes or prayers in vain;
If unto God you do not feign:
If they 're faithful and cordial,
They Will not be ineffectual.
Forsake then Vice, and Virtue prize,
And let your hopes to the height arise,
Your humble prayers to God direct,
They will produce a blessed effect,
If from dissimulation free.
And is it not of necessity
That you in all things should do well,
Since in your Judge's eye you dwell?
THE END.

