THE CONTINUATION OF AN HISTORICAL DISCOURSE, OF THE GOVERNMENT OF ENGLAND,
Until the end of the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.

WITH A Preface, being a Vindication of the ancient way of Parliaments in
ENGLAND.

By Nath: Bacon of Grais-Inne, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, for Matthew Walbanck, and Henry Twyford, and
are to be sold at Grais-Inne Gate, and in Vine Court Middle Temple, 1651.

The Contents of the several Chapters of this Book.
I. THe sum of the several Reigns of Edward the third, and Richard the
second. fol. 3. II. The state of the King and Parliament, in relation of him to
it, and of it to him. fol. 13. III. Of the Privy Council and the condition of
the Lords. f. 26. IV. Of the Chancery. fol. 35. V. Of the Admirals Court. fol.
41. VI. Of the Church-mens Interest. fol. 45. VII. Concerning Trade. fol. 64.
VIII. Of Treason and Legiance, with some considerations concerning Calvin's
Case. fol. 76. IX. Of Courts for causes criminal, with their Laws. fo. 92. X.
Of the course of Civil Justice during these times. fo. 96. XI. Of the Militia
in these times. fol. 98. XII. Of the Peace. fol. 108. XIII. A view of the
summary courses of Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth, in
their several Reigns. fol. 115. XIV. Of the Parliament during the Reigns of
these several Kings. fol. 127. XV. Of the Custos, or Protector Regni. fol.
134. XVI. Concerning the Privy Council. fol. 141. XVII. Of the Clergy and
Church Government during these times. fol. 146. XVIII. Of the Court of
Chancery. fol. 162. XIX. Of the Courts of Crown Plas and Common Law. fo. 165
XX. Concerning Sheriffs. fol. 168. XXI. Of Justices and Laws concerning the
Peace. fol. 170. XXII. Of the Militia during these times. fol. 175. XXIII. A
short survey of the Reigns of Edward the fourth, Edward the fifth, and Richard
the third. fol. 181. XXIV. Of the Government in relation to the Parliament.
fol. 187. XXV. Of the condition of the Clergy. fol. 191. XXVI. A short sum of
the Reigns of Henry the seventh, and Henry the eighth. fol. 194. XXVII. Of the
condition of the Crown. fol. 202. XXVIII. Of the condition of the Parliament
in these times. fol. 223. XXIX. Of the power of the Clergy in the Convocation.
f. 229. XXX. Of the power of the Clergy in their ordinary Jurisdiction. fol.
232. XXXI. Of Judicature. fol. 241. XXXII. Of the Militia. fol. 245. XXXIII. Of
the Peace. fol. 253. XXXIV. Of the general Government of Edward the sixth,
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. fol. 259. XXXV. Of the Supreme power during
these times. fol. 268. XXXVI. Of the power of the Parliament during these
times. fol. 277. XXXVII. Of the Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical during these last
times. fol. 283. XXXVIII. Of the Militia in these later times. fol. 290. XXXIX.
Of the Peace. fol. 297. XL. A summary Conclusion upon the whole matter. fol.
300.
A PREFACE, CONTAINING A Vindication of the Ancient way of the Parliament OF
ENGLAND.
THE more Words the more Faults, is a divine Maxim, that has put a stop to
the publishing of this second part for some time; but observing the ordinary
humor still drawing off, and passing a harsher censure upon my intentions in my
first part, then I expected: I do proceed to fulfill my course, that if
censure will be, it may be upon better grounds, when the whole matter is
before: Herein I shall once more mind, that I meddle not with the Theological
right of Kings, or other Powers, but with the Civil right in fact, now in
hand. And because some men's Pens of late have ranged into a denial of the
Commons ancient right in the Legislative power; and others, even to adnull the
right, both of Lords and Commons therein, resolving all such power into that
one principle of a King, Quicquid libet, licet; so making the breach much wider
then at the beginning; I shall intend my course against both: As touching the
Commons right, jointly with the Lords, it will be the maine end of the whole;
but as touching the Commons right, in competition with the Lords, I will first
endeavor to remove out of the way what I find published in a late Tractate
concerning that matter, and so proceed upon the whole.

The subject of that Discourse consists of three parts, one to prove that the
ancient Parliaments, before the thirteenth Century, consisted only of those
whom we now call, the House of Lords; the other, that both the Legislative and
Judicial power of the Parliament rested wholly in them: lastly, that Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of Parliament, or the House of Commons, were not known
nor heard of, till punier times then these. This last will be granted, Viz.
That these several titles, of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, were not known
in Parliament till of later times: Nevertheless, it will be insisted upon,
that the Commons were then there: The second will be granted, but in part, Viz.
That the Lords had much power in Parliament in point of Jurisdiction, but
neither the sole, nor the whole.

The first is absolutely denied, neither is the same proved by any one instance
or pregnant ground in all that Book, and therefore not clearly demonstrated by
Histories and Records beyond contradiction, as the Title page of that Book does
hold forth to the World. First, because not one instance in all that Book is
exclusive to the Commons; and so the whole Argument of the Discourse will
conclude, Ab authoritate Negativa, which is no argument in humane testimony at
all.

Secondly, the greatest number of instances in that Book, are by him supposed
to concern Parliaments, or general Councils of this Nation, holden by the
Representative thereof; whereas indeed they were either but Synodicall
Conventions for Church matters, whereunto the poor Commons (he well knows)
might not come, unless in danger of the Canons dint; or if they did, yet had
no other work there, then to hear, learn, and receive Laws, from the
Ecclesiastics. And the Lords themselves, though present, yet under no other
notion were they, then as Council to the King; whom they could not cast out of
their Council till after Ages, though they often endeavored it.

Thirdly, the Author of that Tractate also well knows, that Kings usually
made Grants and Infeodations by advice of the Lords, without the aid of the
Parliament: And it is no less true, that Kings, with the Lords, did in their
several ages exercise ordinarily Jurisdiction, in cases of distributive
Justice; especially after the Norman entrance: For the step was easy from
being Commanders in War, to be Lords in peace; but hard to lay down that
power at the foot of Justice, which they had usurped in the rude times of the
Sword, when men labor for life rather then liberty; and no less difficult to
make a difference between their deportment in commanding of Soldiers, and
governing of Contrymen; till peace by continuance had reduced them to a
little more sobriety: Nor does it seem irrational, that private differences
between party and party, should be determined in a more private way, then to
trouble the whole Representative of the Kingdom, with matters of so mean
concernment. If then those Councils mentioned by the Author, which concern the
Kings Grants, and Infeodations, and matters of Judicature, be taken from the
rest of the Presidents, brought by him, to maintain the thing aimed at; I
suppose scarce one stone will be left for a foundation to such a glorying
Structure, as is pretended in the Title page of that Book: And yet I deny not,
but where such occasions have befalne the Parliament sitting, it has closed
with them, as things taken up by the way.

Fourthly, It may be that the Author has also observed, that all the Records
of Antiquity passed through (if not from) the hands of the Clergy only, and
they might think it sufficient for them to honor their Writings, with the
great Titles of Men of Dignity in the Church and Commonwealth, omitting the
Commons, as not worthy of mention, and yet they might be there then present, as
it will appear they were in some of the particular instances ensuing, to which
we come now in a more punctual consideration.

The first of these by his own words, appear to be a Church-mote, or Synod;
it was in the year 673. called by the Archbishop, who had no more power to
summon a Parliament, then the Author himself has: And the several
conclusions made therein, do all show that the people had no work there, as
may appear in the several relations thereof, made by Matthew Westminster, and
Sir Henry Spelman, an Author that he makes much use of, and therefore I shall
be bold to make the best use of him that I can likewise, in Vindicating the
truth of the point in hand: For, whatever this Council was, its the less
material, seeing the same Author recites a president of King A^thelbert,
within six years after Austins entry into this Island, which was long before
this Council, which brings on the Vann of all the rest of the Opponents
instances, which King called a Council, styled, Commune Concilium tam Cleri
quam Populi: Page 126.
and in the conclusion of the same, a Law is made upon the like occasion, Si
Rex populum Convocaverit, etc. in both which its evident, that in those times
there were Councils holden by the People, as well as the Magnates, or Optimates.

His next instance is in the year 694. which is of a Council holden by the
Great Men, but no mention of the Commons, and this he will have to be a
Parliament, albeit that he might have found both Abbatesses, or Women, and
Presbyters, to be Members of that Assembly, and (for default of better)
attested the conclusions of the same, notwithstanding the Canon, Nemo militans
Deo, etc. But I must also mind him, that the same Author recites a Council
holden by King Ina, Suasu omnium Aldermannorum and Seniorum and Sapientum
Regni: and is very probable, that all the Wise men of the Kingdom, were not
concluded within the Lordly dignity.

The third instance can have no better success, unless he will have the Pope
to be allowed power to call a Parliament, or allow the Archbishop power to do
that service by the Popes command, for by that authority; this (what ever it
be) was called, if we give credit to the relation of Sir Henry Spelman, Council.
Britt. Page 212.
who also recites another Council within three leaves foregoing this, called
by Withered at Barkhamstead, unto which the Clergy were summoned, Qui cum viris
utique militaribus communi omnium assensu has leges decrevere: So as it seems
in those times, Ibid. pa. 194.
Soldiers or Knights were in the common Councels, as well as other Great Men.

In the next place, he brings in a Council holden in the year 747. which
(if the Archbishop were then therein President, Ibid. pa. 242.245.
as its said, in the presence of the King) was no Parliament, but a
Church-mote, and all the conclusions in the same do testify no less; they
being every one concerning Ecclesiastical matters.

Page 219.
And furthermore, before this time, the Author out of whom he cites this
Council, mentions another Council holden by Ina the Saxon King, in the
presence of the Bishops, Princes, Lords, Earls, and all the wise old Men, and
People of the Kingdom, all of them concluding of the intermarriage between the
Brittons, Picts, and Saxons, which formerly, as it seems, was not allowed:
And the same King by his Charter; mentioned by the same Penman, notes that his
endowment of the Monastry of Glastenbury, was made, not only in the presence
of the Great Men, but, Cum praesentia populationis; and he says, that Omnes
confirmaverunt, which I do not mention as a work necessary to be done by the
Parliament, yet such an one as was holden expedient as the case then stood.

Forty years after, he meets with another Council, which he supposes to
be a Parliament also, but was none, unless he will allow the Popes Legate
power to summon a Parliament: It was holden in the year, 787. and had he duly
considered the return made by the Popes Legate, of the Acts of that Council,
which is also published by the same Author, he might have found, Page 300.
that the Legate says, that they were propounded in public Council, before
the King, Archbishop, and all the Bishops and Abbots of the Kingdom,
Senators, Dukes, or Captains, and people of the Land, and they all consented
to keep the same.

Then he brings in a Council holden in the year, 793. which he would never
have set down in the list of Parliaments, if he had considered how improper it
is to construe, Provinciale tenuit Concilium, for a Parliament, and therefore I
shall need no further to trouble the Reader therewith.

The two next are supposed to be but one and the same; and its said to be
holden, Anno 974. before nine Kings, fifteen Bishops, twenty Dukes, etc. which
for ought appears, may comprehend all England and Scotland, and is no
Parliament of one Nation, but a party of many Nations, for some great matter,
no doubt, yet nothing in particular mentioned, but the solemn laying the
foundation of the Monastry of Saint-Albans.

What manner of Council the next was, appears not, and therefore nothing can
be concluded therefrom, but that it was holden in the year, 796.

That Council which is next produced, was in the year, 800. and is called in
great letters, Concilium Provinciale, which he cannot Gramatically construe to
be a Parliament; yet in the Preface it is said, that there were, Viri
cujuscunque dignitatis; and the King in his Letter to the Pope, says
concerning it, Page 321.
Visum est cunctis gentis nostrae sapientibus; so as it seems by this, and
other examples of this nature, that though the Church-motes invented the
particular conclusions, yet it was left to the Witagen-mote to Judge and
conclude them.

There can be no question, but the next three Presidents brought by the
Opponent, were all of them Church-motes: Council. Brit. Page 328.
For the first of them, which is said to be holden in the year, 816. is called
a Synod, and both Priests and Deacons were there present, which are no Members
of Parliament, consisting only of the House of Lords, and they all of them
did, Pariter tractare de necessarijs and utilitatibus Ecclesiarum. The second
of them is called a Synodall Council, holden, Anno 822. and yet there were
then present, Omnium dignitatum optimates, which cannot be understood only of
those of the House of Lords, because they ought all to be personally present,
and therefore there is no Optimacy amongst them. The last of these three is
called, Synodale Conciliabulum, a petty Synod in great letters; Council. Brit.
Page 334.
and besides, there were with the Bishops and Abbots, many Wise men; and in all
these respects it cannot be a Parliament only of the great Lords.

The next Council said to be holden in the year 823. cannot also be called
properly a Parliament, but only a consultation, between two Kings and their
Council, to prevent the invasion of the Danes; and the attests of the Kings
Chapplain, and his Scribe, do show also that they were not all Members of the
House of Lords.

The Council cited by the Opponent in the next place, was holden, An: 838.
being only in nature of a Council for Law, or Judicature, to determine the
validity of the Kings Grant made to the Church of Canterbury; which is no
proper work for a Parliament, unless it befall during the fitting of the same.

The next is but a bare title of a Council supposed to be holden, An. 850. And
not worth its room, for it neither shows whether any thing was concluded, nor
what the conclusions were.

The work of the next Council alleged to be holden, An. 851. was to
confirm the Charter of the Monastry of Croyland, and to determine concerning
affairs belonging to the Mercinies and if it had been a Parliament for that
people, it might be worthy of inquiry how regularly the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, and the Ambassadors from the West Saxons
could sit amongst them and attest the conclusions therein made, as well as the
proper members of that Nation.

He comes in the next place to a Council holden in the year, 855. which is
more likely to be a Parliament then most of them formerly mentioned; if the
Tithes of all England were therein given to the Church, but hereof I have set
down my opinion in the former part of the discourse. And though it be true,
that no Knights and Burgesses are therein mentioned, as the Opponent observes
out of the Title; yet if the body of the Laws be duly considered, toward the
conclusion thereof it will appear that there was present, Fidelium infinita
multitudo qui omnes regium Chirographum Laudaverunt Dignitates vero sua nomina
subscripserunt. Council. Brit. Page 350.
And yet the Witagen-motes in these times began to be rare, being continually
inrerrupted by the invasions of the Danes.

The three next Councills alleged* to be in the years 930. 944. 948. Were
doubtless of inferior value, as the matters therein concluded were of
inferior regard, being such as concern the passing of the Kings Grants,
Infeodations, and confirmations.

The Council mentioned to be in the year 965. is supposed to be one and the
same with the next foregoing, Council. Brit. Page 480.
by Sir Henry Spelman, which calls it self a general Council, not by reason
of the general confluence of the Lords and Laity, but because all the Bishops
of England did then meet. The Primi and Primates were there, who these were is
not mentioned; but its evident that the King of Scots was there, and that both
he and diverse that are called Ministri Regis, attested the conclusions: It
will be difficult to make out how these should be Members of the House of
Lords, and more difficult to show a reason why in the attesting of the acts of
these Councills which the Opponent calls Parliaments, we find so few of the
Laity that scarce twelve are mentioned in any one of them, and those to descend
so low as the Ministri Regis, to make up the number.

Five more of these instances remain, before the coming in of the Normans.

The first of which was in the year 975. and in a time when no Parliament,
Council. Britt* Page 490.
according to the Opponents principles could sit, for it was an Inter regnum.

The two next were only Synods to determine the difference between the
Regulers, and the Seculers, in the Kings absence, by reason that he was under
age; and they are said to be in the years 977 and 1009. But its not within the
compass of my matter to debate their dates.

The last two were Meetings or Courts for Judicature, to determine the crime of
Treason, which every one knows is determinable by inferior Courts before the
high Steward or Judges, and therefore not so peculiar to a Parliament, as to be
made an argument of its existence. And thus are we at an end of all the
instances brought by the Opponent, to prove that Parliaments before the Norman
times consisted of those whom we now call the House of Lords. All which I shall
shut up with two other notes taken out of the Book of Councils, published by
Sir Henry Spelman.

The first of which concerns a Grant made by Canutus, Page 534.
of an exemption to the Abbey of Bury Saint Edmonds, in a Council wherein, were
present Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Dukes, Earls. Cum quamplurimis
gregariis militibus, cum populi multitudine copiosa votis regiis unanimiter
consentientes. The other taken out of the confessors Laws, which tells us that
Tithes were granted to the Church, A Rege Baronibus and populo. Page 621.
And thus shall leave these testimonies to debate with one another, whiles the
Reader may judge as seems most equal to himself.

Being thus come to the Norman times, and those ensuing; I shall more summarily
proceed with the particulars concerning them, because they were times of force,
and can give little or no evidence against the customs rightly settled in the
Saxon times, which I have more particularly insisted upon, that the original
constitution of this government may the better appear. Now for the more speedy
manifesting of the truth in the particulars following; I shall pre-advise the
Reader in three particulars.

First, that the Church-motes grew more in power and honor, by the aid of the
Normans Law, refusing the concurrence and personal presence of Kings, whom at
length they excluded from their Councils with all his Nobles; and therefore it
is the less wonder if we hear but little of the Commons joining with them.

Secondly, that the Norman way of government grew more Aristocraticall then the
Saxon, making the Lords the chief Instruments of keeping Kings above and people
underneath, and thus we meet with much noise of meetings between the King and
Lords, and little concerning the grand meetings of the Kings, and the
representative of the people; although some footsteps we find even of them
also. For Kings were mistaken in the Lords; who meaned nothing less then to
serve them with the peoples liberties, together with their own which they saw
wrapped up in the gross.

Thirdly, by this means the Councils of the King and Lords grew potent, not
only for advise in particular occasions, but in matters of judicature, and
declaring of Law, ordering of process in Courts of Plees; which in the first
framing were the works of Wise and Learned men, but being once settled become
part of the liberties of every Freeman. And it is not to be doubted but these
Councills of Lords did outreach into things two great for them to manage, and
kept the Commons out of possession of their right, during the present heat of
their ruffling condition, yet all this while could not take absolute possession
of the legislative power.

I now come to the remainder of the particular instances produced by the
Opponent, which I shall reduce into several Categories, for the more clear
satisfaction to the Reader, with less tediousness.

First, it cannot be denied but the Council of Lords gave advise to Kings in
cases of particular immergency, nor is it incongruous to the course of
government even to this day, nor meet that the Parliament should be troubled
with every such occasion, and therefore the giving of advise to William the
Conqueror, what course he should take to settle the Laws of England according
to the instances in Councills holden, An: 1060. And 1070. And to gain favor
of the great men according to that in An: 1106. and in the manner of endowment
of the Abbey of Battle, as in page: 25. of the Opponents discourse: and what to
do upon the reading of the Popes Letter, according to that in An: 1114. And
whether the Popes Legate should be admitted, as in page 18. And how King Steven
and Henry shall come to agreement, as An: 1153. And how to execute Laws by
Judges and Justices Itinerant, as An: 1176. And touching the manner of
ingageing for a voyage by Croisado to Jerusalem, An: 1189. And to give answer
to Ambassadors of a foreign Prince, page 25. And how King John shall conclude
peace with the Pope, An: 1213. Where nevertheless Math. Paris says, Page 23.
was Turba multa nimis: I say all these might well be done by a Council of
Lords, and not in any posture of a Parliament; albeit that in none of all these
does any thing appear but that the Commons might be present in every one, or
many of them all.

Secondly, as touching judicature, the Lords had much power therein, even in
the Saxon times, having better opportunites for Knowledge, and Learning,
especially joined with the Clergy, then the Commons in those times of deep
darkness, wherein even the Clergy wanted not their share, as in the first part
of the discourse I have already observed. Whatsoever then might be done by
Judges in ordinary Courts of judicature, is inferior to the regard of the
Parliament; and therefore the Plea between the Archbishop and Aethelstan,
concerning Land, instanced, An: 1070. And between Lanfranke and Odo, An: 1071.
and between the King and Anselme, page: 15, 16. and the determining of Treason
of John (afterward King) against his Lord and King Richard, page: 23. And the
difference concerning the title of a Barony between Mowbray and Scotvile, page:
25. And giving of security of good behavior by William Brawse to King John,
page 26. All these might well be determined only before the Lords, and yet the
Parliament might be then sitting or not sitting, as the contrary to either does
not appear, and therefore can these form no demonstrative ground to prove
that the Parliament consisted in those times, only of such as we now call the
House of Lords.

A third work whereby the Opponent would prove the Parliament to consist only
of the House of Lords, is, because he finds many things by them concluded
touching the solemnization, and the settling of the succession of Kings; both
which, he says, were done by the Lords in Parliament, or those of that House;
and I shall crave leave to conclude the contrary: For neither is the election,
or Solemnization of such election, a proper work of the Parliament, according
to the Opponents principles, nor can they prove such Conventions, wherein they
were to be Parliaments. Not the election of Kings, for then may a Parliament be
without a King; and therefore that instance concerning William Rufus, page 16.
will fail, or the Opponents principles, who will have no Parliament without a
King.

The like may also be said of the instance concerning King Steven, page 18.
Much less can the solemnization of the election by Coronation, be a proper
work for the Parliament: Nevertheless the Opponent does well know that both
the election of a King, and the solemnization of such election by Coronation,
are Spiritlesse motions, without the presence of the people; and therefore
though his instance, page 17. concerning the election of Henry the First, by
the Bishops and Princes, may seem to be restrictive as to them, yet it is not
such in fact; if Matthew Paris may be believed, who tells us, that in the
Conventus omnium, was Clerus and Populus universus, Mr. Seldens Title of Honor.
and might have been noted by the Opponent out of that Learned Antiquary, so
often by him cited, if he had pleased to take notice of such matters.

A fourth sort of Instances, concerns matters Ecclesiastical, and making of
Canons; and hereof enough has been already said, that such work was
absolutely challenged by the Church-motes, as their proper work; and therefore
the Instance, page 16, 17. of the Council in Henry the firsts time, and the
Canons made by the Bishops there; and that other called by Theobald Archbishop
of Canterbury, and instanced by the Opponent, page 19. I say, both these do
fail in the conclusion propounded.

Fifthly, As touching the most proper work of Parliaments, which is, the
making of Laws concerning the liberties and benefit of the people; the
Opponent produces not one instance concerning the same, which does not
conclude contrary to his proposal; for as touching those two instances in his
thirteenth page, Anno 1060. they concern not the making of Laws, but the
reviving of such as had been disused formerly, which might well enough be done
by private Council. But as to that in his fifteenth page, of the Law made by
the Conqueror, concerning Remigius, Bishop of Lincoln, although it be true,
that we find not the particular titles of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
yet besides the Council of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and Princes, we
find the Common Council; for so the words are, Communi Concilio, and Concilio
Archiepiscopus, Episcopus, Abatus, and omnium Principum, although the Opponent
would seem to wave these words, Et Concilio, but putting them in a small
Character, and the rest in a voluminous Letter, that the Readers eyes might be
filled with them and overlook the other.

Secondly, as to the instance of the Council at Clarindon, in his nineteenth
page, which he cites out of Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, and Hoveden,
although he pleases to mention the several ranks of Great Men, and those in
black Letters of a greater size; and says, That not one Commoner appears,
yet Master Seldens Hoveden, in that very place, Tit. Honor, Page 703.
so often by the Opponent cited, tells him, that both Clerus and Populus were
there.

Thirdly, The Opponent cites an instance of Laws made by Richard the First,
in his twenty fourth page, and he sets down the several ranks of Great
Men, and amongst the rest, ingeniously mentions, Milites, but it is with a
Gloss of his own, that they were Barons that were made Knights, when as
formerly Barons were mentioned in the general, and therefore how proper this
Gloss is, let others judge; especially seeing that not only Milites, and
Milites Gregorij, but even Ministri, were present in such conventions, even in
the Saxon times: And Master Seldom in the former known place, mentions an
Observation, that, Tit. Honor, Page 703.
Vniversi personae qui de Rege tenent in Capite, sicut ceteri Barons debent
interesse judicijs curiae Domini Regis cum Baronibus.

Fourthly, He cites in his twenty fifth page, another instance in King John's
time, in which, after the assent of Earls, and Barons, the words, Et omnium
fidelium nostrorum, are also annexed, but with this conceit of the Opponents,
that these Fideles were those that adhered to the King, against his enemies; be
it so, for then the Commons were present, and did assent; or they may be, says
he, some specially summoned as Assistants; take that also, and then all the
true hearted in the Kingdom were specially summoned and were there, so as the
conclusion will be the same.

In the fifth place, he cites a strange President (as he calls it) of a Writ
of Summons in King John's time, in his twenty seventh page, wherein Omnes
miletes were summoned, Cum armis suis, and he concludes therefore the same was
a Council of War.

First, Because they were to come armed, its very true, and so they did unto
the Councills in the ancient Saxon times, and so the Knights of the Counties
ought to do in these days, if they obey the Writ, Duos Milites gladijs
cinctas, etc.

Secondly, He says, That the Knights were not to come to Council; that is his
opinion, yet the Writ speaks, that the Discreti Milites were to come, Ad
loquendum cum Rege ad negotijs regni: Its true, says he, but not, Ad
tractandum and faciendum and consentiendum* Its true, its not so said, nor is
it excluded; and were it so, yet the Opponents conclusion will not thence
arise, That none but the King, and those who are of the House of Lords were
there present.

The sixth and last instance mentioned by the Opponent, is in his thirtieth
page, and concerns Escuage granted to King John, who by his Charter granted,
that in such cases he would summon Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and
the greater Barons, unto such Conventions by special Writts, and that the
Sheriff shall summon promiscuously all others which hold in Capite; and thence
he concludes, That none but the Great Lords, and the Tenants in Capite (whom
he calls the lesser Barons) were present, but no Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses; all which being granted, yet in full Parliament the Citizens and
Burgesses might be there. For Councills were called of such persons as suited
to the matter to be debated upon.

If for matters purely Ecclesiastical, the King and his Council of Lords, and
the Churchmen made up the Council.

If for advice in immergencies, the King and such Lords as were next at hand
determined the conclusions.

If for Escuage, the King and such as were to pay Escuage, made up a Council
to ascertaine the sum, which was otherwise uncertain.

If for matters that concerned the common liberty, all sorts were present,
Littlet. lib. 2. cap. 3.
as may appear out of the very Charter of King John, noted in my former
discourse, Britt. Pa. 122.
page, 258. and also from an Observation of Cambden, concerning Henry the
third, Ad summum honorem pertinet (says he) Ex quo Rex Henricus tertius, ex
tanta multitudine quae seditiosa ac turbulenta fuit optimos quosque ad Commitia
Parliamentaria evocaverit.

Secondly, The Opponent takes that for granted that never will be, Viz. That
all the Kings Tenants In Capite, were of the House of Lords; when as himself
acknowledges a difference, page 28. Viz. That the Barons are summoned by
Writs, Sigillatim, as all the Members of the House of Lords are, but these are
by general summons, their number great, and hard it will be to understand,
how, or when, they came to be excluded from that Society.

I shall insist no further upon the particulars of this Tractate, but demurr
upon the whole matter, and leave it to judgment upon the premises, which might
have been much better reduced to the maine conclusion, if the Opponent, in the
first place, had defined the word PARLIAMENT: For if it was a Convention
without the People, and sometimes without the KING, as in the Cases formerly
mentioned, of the Elections of William Rufus, and of King Steven: And if
sometimes a Parliament of Lords only, may be against the King, and so without
King or People; as in the Case between Steven and Maud the Empress, and the
case likewise concerning King John, both which also were formerly mentioned;
possibly it may be thought as rational for the Commons in after Ages, to hold
a Parliament without King, or House of Lords; and then all the Opponents labor
is to little purpose.

THE CONTINUATION OF AN Historical Discourse of the Government of ENGLAND.
THE former times, since the Norman entry like a rugged Sea, by cross winds
of arbitrary vapors, in, and about the Crown; and by Foreign engagements
from the holy Chair, made the true face of affairs cloudy and troublesome,
both for the Writer and the Reader.

Hence forward, for the space of three hundred years next ensuing, Kings by
experience and observation, finding themselves unequal to the double chase of
absolute Supremacy, over the Sturdy Laity, and incroaching Clergy; you will
observe, to lay aside their pretentions against the peoples Liberties, and more
intentively to trench upon the Spiritualty, now grown to defy all Government,
but that of Covetousness.

Nor would these times allow further advantage to Kings in this work, they
being either fainted by the tickle Title of the Crown, hovering between the
two Houses of York and Lancaster, or drawn off to Foreign employments; as
matters of greater concernment for the present well being of the Kingdom, or
for the spreading of the fame of such as desired to be renouned for valiant Men.

It will be superfluous to recount the particular achievements formerly
attained by these Ecclesiastical men; the former Treatise has already said
what was thought needful concerning that: For the future, I shall even premise
this, That the ensuing times being thus blessed with a truce, or stricter
League between Kings and Commons; the errors in Government more readily do
appear; the corruptions in natures of men more frequently discover themselves;
and thereby the body of the Statute-Lawes begin to swell so bigg, that I must
be enforced to contract my account of them into a narrower compass; and render
the same unto the Reader, so far forth only as they shall concern the
general stream of Government; leaving those of privater regard, unto every
man's particular consideration, as occasion shall lead him: For what ever other
men please to insist upon, this I take for a Maxim, That though the Government
of a King is declared by his actions, yet the Government of a Kingdom is only
manifested by ancient Customs, and public Acts of Parliament.

And because I have undertaken a general Survey of the Reigns of thirteen
several Kings and Queens of this Nation; (for I shall not exceed the Issue of
Henry the eighth) and to handle each of them apart, will leave the Reader in a
Wilderness of particulars, hard to comprehend in the general sum; I shall
therefore reduce them all into three heads: Viz. Interest of Title, Interest of
Prerogative, and Interest of Religion; the last of which swayed much the three
Children of Henry the Eighth; the second as much in their two Ancestors, Viz.
Henry the Eighth, and Henry the Seventh; and the first in the three Henry's of
Lancaster, and three succeeding Kings of the House of York: And because Edward
the Third and his Grandchilde Richard the Second, do come under none of these
Interests, I shall consider them jointly, as in way of Exordium to the rest;
although the course of the later was as different from the former, as Lust
falls short of a generous Spirit.

CHAP. I. A sum of the several Reigns of Edward the Third, and Richard the
Second.
Several I may well call them, because they are the most different in their
ways and ends, of any two of that race, that ever swayed their Scepter; and
yet the entrance of the first gave countenance to the conclusion of the last.
For the Scepter being cast away, or lost by Edward the Second, it was the Lot
of his Son, Edward the Third, a Youth of fifteen years of age, to take it up;
he knowing whose it was, and feeling it too heavy for him, was willing enough
it should return; but being overswayed by Councels drawn from reason of State,
and pressed thereto by those that resolved not to trust his Father any more, he
wisely chose to manage it himself, rather then to adventure it in another
hand; but that is not all, for as its never seen that the Crown does thrive
after Divorce from the Scepter, but like a blasted blossom, falls off at the
next gale of adversity; such was the issue to Edward the Second, his Power once
gone, his Honor followed soon after, he had ceased to be King, and within a
small time did cease to be Edward.

His Son, thus made complete by his Fathers spoil, had the honor to be the
Repairer of the ruins that his Father had made; and was a Prince which you
might think by his story, to be seldom at home, and by his Laws seldom
abroad; nor can it be reconciled without wonder, that Providence should at once
bestow upon England, a courageous People, brave Captains, wise Council, and a
King that had the endowments of them all. Otherwise it had outreached conceit
it self, that this small Island, wasted by the Barons Wars, the people beaten
out of heart by all Enemies, in the time of the Father, should nevertheless in
the time of the Son, with honor, wade through so many difficulties of mighty
Wars on every side abroad, and devouring Pestilence at home; and yet lay a
platform of an Epulent, wise, and peaceable Government, for future Generations.

Yet he had his failings and misfortunes, a great part whereof may be
attributed to infirmity of Age; which in the first part of his Reign was too
little, and in the later part too much. True it is, that Governors of the
Persons of Kings, may in some measure supply defects of Nonage, but seldom
where the Governors are many, and never if they be ambitious: And it was this
Kings fate to miscarry in both; for he had in his Youth twelve Governors by
constitution, and they, two supreme by usurpation, Viz. The Queen and
Mortimer, till they were both consumed in the flame which themselves had
kindled. And this disparity wrought somewhat unsuccessefully in the Kings first
War: For the generosity of his spirit (himself being young and active) minded
his Council to advise him employment in a Foreign War, rather then they
would adventure its motion at home, least it might prove circular, which is
most dangerous for Government, if the Prince be not under command of himself.

This first War was with Scotland, whose power was inferior to that of
France; the King young, and the danger nearer; and therefore though the last
affront was from France, that more fresh in memory, and more peinant; yet the
King was advised to give place, and speak fair, till he had tried masteries
with Scotland, and thereby secured his Rere: This he wisely hearkened unto, and
met with such a successful turn of Providence, that like an O Yes before a
Proclamation gives warning to Scotland that the Wheel is turned upon them; and
that there is somewhat more then humane motion in the matter, that exasperates
the English upon an enterprise, so often crossed by Providence hitherto; and
the King also (being but a Soldier in hope as yet) to dare against those that
had so shamefully foiled his Father, and also put himself already once to the
Retreat.

And yet there did concur a kind of necessity of second Causes; for, the King
found the Crown engaged, and the minds of the Scots so elate, as the English
man's case was not to live to Fight, but to Fight to live; and so imbittered
against one another by the fierce Wars under the Barrons, that nothing could
quench the fire, but the withdrawing of the Brands into Foreign action, like
some angry spirits that spoil their own bodies, unless they chide or fight
it out with others.

In the first brunt with Scotland, the King gained nothing, but understanding
of the humors of some of his great Lords; which once purged out, he renues the
War, prevails, and after ten years stir (wherein he became a trained
Soldier against the Scots) he wann the Cross, and then goes to play his
Prize in France, to complete his Crown with the Flower De lis: Which was the
great work of the rest of his Reign; in which four parts of five was
Victorious; the fifth and last, was declining like some Gamesters, that winn at
the first, and for want of observation of the turning of the Dice, come off
loosers at the end.

For the King being rather satiated then satisfied with Victory and Honor,
returned home to enjoy what he had, leaving his Son, the Black Prince, to
pursue the War, and to act the Soldiers alone, who now began to honor his
Valor above his Fathers. But, the Tide is spent, the Prince of Chivalry dies,
the brave Commanders wasted; and the French too fickle to continue subject to
the English, longer then needs must, tack about for another Adventure, and make
it plain, that France is too bigg to be Garrisoned by England, and that it
will cost England more to hold it then to have it.

His Religion was more to the purpose, then of any of his Predecessors since
the Norman times; he reflected upon God in common events, Antiq. Brit.
more ordinarily then the general stream of the Clergy did in those days: He
loved, if not adored devout men and their prayers, and yet intentively
disclaimed opinion of merits in the Creature: He saw the Pope through and
through, loved him but little, feared him less, and yet lost neither Honor
nor Power thereby.

His chief policy at home, was, to be much at home, great with his People, and
they great with him; what the Parliament did, he accounted well done; he never
questioned their Power, though he was overreached in questioning their
Wisdom: For he that shall prefer his own wisdom above that of the
Parliament, must needs think himself extremely Wise; and so much the more, to
know himself to be such: But the worst of his fate was, to live to his Winter
age, and after fifty years Reign, or more, to dye in his minority under the
rule of a Woman of none of the best fame, after he had so long enjoyed the
honor of greatest note in the Christian World, in his days.

Rich. 2.
Such was not Richard the Second, though the only Son of that famous
Cheiftaine, the Black Prince of Wales; (a renouned Son of a renouned Father)
but (as a Plant transplanted into a Savage soil) in degree and disposition
wholly degenerate, retained a tincture of the light inconstancy of his Mother,
and the luxuriousness of his Great Grandfather, Edward the Second, and running
his course, came to his end.

The. lib. 4. Cap. 21.
His entrance, however by color of Inheritance, yet was a greater adventure
then his Predecessors, that came in by election; upon the designation of his
Father by his last Will, say some. For this man came in upon many
disadvantages, both of time and person: The times were very troublesome, the
Kingdom new wrapped up in a double War abroad, and (which is worse) flooded
with distractions at home, contracted partly by his Predecessors weaknesses in
his decrepit estate, partly by a new interest of Religion sprung up against the
Papal Tyranny, from the Doctrine of Wickleiff; all which required a very wise
Man, and a brave Commander, in both which the King failed.

Religion now began to dawne through the foggs of Romish usurpations and
superstitions, aided thereto by a Scisme in the triple Crown, that continued
forty years, with much virulency abroad, and with as bad influence upon our
Myters at home: Some of whom were called Clementines, others Vrbanists, and yet
none of them all worthy of either of the Names, in their proper signification.
The Laity, though lookers on, yet were not quiet: For though Liberty be a
hopeful thing, yet its dangerous to them that are not a Law to themselves;
especially in matter of Opinion; for that arraines the rule, and lays the way
open to licentiousness. And now that the Liberty from the Keys began to be
taught as a duty of Religion, the inferior sort meet with Doctrines of
licentiousness, upon mistake of the notion, and will acknowledge no rule now
they must be all at liberty: and thus sprang up the insurrection of the
Servants and Bondmen against their Lords and Masters, under Cade and Straw;
that might have brought the Common wealth into a hideous Chaos, had not the
Lords and Great Men betimes bestirred themselves; and the King showed an
extraordinary spirit, or rather a kind of rage, that put it self forth beyond
the ordinary temper of his mind. Much of this mischeife was imputed to
Wickleiffs Doctrine; Hist. Eccles. Ang.
for it is an ordinary thing to proclaim all evils, concurring with the very
joint of Reformation, to be the proper fruits thereof; but I look upon it as a
fruit of corruption that endeavors to stopp the breath of Reformation in the
birth; and there is somewhat of a hidden influence from Above in the thing; for
it was not only the Cupp of England, to be thus troubled, Antiq. Brit. ^62.
but France and other places, had their portion suitable.

The Kings minority rendered him unequal unto these contrary motions; he was in
his eleventh year, when he entered the Throne; and (which was worse) his years
came on faster then his Parts, but his work posted before them all. The common
help of Protectors left him yet more unhappy, for they were prepossessed with
strong engagements of particular Interests; and so were either not wise enough,
or not good enough for all. This brought forth a third inconvenience, the
change of Protectorship; and that change of Affairs and Interests, an
uncertain good that brings forth a certain evil; for variety of Instruments
and Interests move several ways, and though the end be one; the difference
concerning the way, many times, does as much hinder the Journey, as so many
blocks in the way.

The Protectorship was thrice changed, the Kings Unkles had the first essay;
any one of them was bigg enough for one Kingdom, but all of them together were
too great to make one Protector. The Duke of Lancaster would have done well
alone, if he had been alone, and that work alone; but he being somewhat engaged
with the Wickleiffists, and so entangled with the Clergy, and other restless
spirits, and drawn off by his private aim at the Crown of Castile, saw this
work too much, and so he warily withdrew himself, leaving the Directory to a
Committee of Lords, a sovereign Plaster, questionless, where the times are
whole, but not for these distractions, wherein even the Committee it self
suffered its share: Thus the breach is made the wider; and for a cure of all,
the Government is committed into one hand, wherein the Earl of Warwick
acquitted himself well, for he was wise enough to observe such as the people
most honored: And thus passed over the two first years of the Kings Reign.

The remainder of the Kings minority, was rather in common repute then in true
account: For the King, however young, took little more from the Protector, then
he saw meet to color his own commands with opinion of Regularity; and so his
will came to full strength before his wisdom budded. Thus lifted up, he sets
himself above all interests of Parliament, Protectors, Counselors, Unkles,
wise, Men and Law; leaving them all to be rules for those below. And so long as
the Kings desire is thus served, he is content to be reputed a Minor, and be as
it were under protection of others, though not under their direction; and is
content to continue thus until his two and twentieth year: Some might think
him very moderate, had he been moderate; but he forbears suing out his Livery
so long as he may live without care, and spend without control: For by this
time the humor of his great Grandfather budded in him; he pawned his heart to
young men of vast desires, and some say so inordinately, as he prostituted his
chastity unto them. And its no wonder if the Revenues of the Crown are
insufficient for such Masters. Thi^ the people soon felt, and feared their own
Free-holds: for they are bound, says he, not to see the Crown deflowred for
want of maintenance, its very true, nor to see the Crown deflowred of its
maintenance. A Parliament therefore is called; in which diverse Lords
associate, 11. Rich. 2. n. 8.13.
and prepare Physic for the Kings lavish humor, which being administered,
wrought for ten years after, till it had purged him of his life, and the
Kingdom of their King.

It was an Act of Parliament that gave power to fourteen Lords and others, to
regulate the Profits and Revenues of the Crown, and to do Justice to the
People; this was to continue for one whole year. The Parasites no sooner found
the effect hereof to their Cost, but the King grows sick of it, and finds an
Antidote to overruled Acts of Parliament, by Acts of Privy Council, declares
this ill-favored Commission void; and the Contrivers, Advisers, and
Inforcers, Traitors. To make it more Majesticall, he causes the Judges to
Subscribe this Order, and so it becomes Law in repute. This foundation thus
laid, he builds in have an Impeachment of these Commissioners of high
Treason; and supposing that they would not readily stoop, himself stoopes
lower; for he would put his Right to trial by battle, which was already his
own, by the judgment of the Masters of the Law: For so they may be well
called, seeing they had thus Mastered it. In this the King had the worst, for
he lost his Honor and himself: (God has a care of common right even amongst
Idolaters.) Then comes the Parliament of Wonders, wherein the Kings Party are
declared Traitors, and the chief Judges with their Law, judged by another Law.
The King not meddled with, thinks it high time to come out of his Minority, and
assumes the Government of the Kingdom and himself, to himself, being now
three and twenty years of age; old enough to have done well if he had cared
for it: But resolving to follow the way of his own will, at length it led him
to his own ruin: only for the present two things delayed it, Viz. The
Authority, Wisdom, and Moderation of his Unckles, especially of the Duke of
Lancaster now come out of Spain; and the great affection which the King
pretended to the Queen, who had also gained a good opinion amongst the People:
The benevolent aspect of the People, not for their own advantage, but for the
Public quiet, procured many Parlies and interviewes between the King and
People, and many Laws for the upholding of the Court and Government, although
both War, Laws, Justice, and Counsels, all are faint, as all is faint in
that man that has once dismanned himself. This he perceives well enough, and
therefore Peace he must have by any means. The Queen dies, himself being nigh
eight and twenty years old, takes a Creature like a Wife, but in truth a
Child of eight years old, and this is to get Peace with France. Its no wonder
if now he hunts after unlawful game, and that being ill taken brings all
things out of order ( For abused Marriage never wants woe:) Civil men are now
looked upon as severe Cators; and his Unckles, especially the Duke of Gloucester
with a jealous eye, which accomplished his death in the conclusion. The Dukes
of Lancaster and York forsake the Court, Favorites step into their rooms: The
old way of the eleventh year is reassumed: Belknap and others are pardoned,
and made of the Cabinet. The Pardon of the Earl of Arundell is adnulled,
contrary to the advice of the major part, and the Arch Bishop, the Earls
brother is banished. The Lords forsake the wilful King, still the Kings
jealousy swells; The Duke of Hertford is banished, or rather by a hidden
Providence sent out of the way for a further work. The Duke of Lancaster dies,
and with him all hope of moderation is gone, for he was a wise Prince, and the
only Cement that held the joints of the Kingdom in correspondency. And he was
ill requited, for all his Estate is seized upon. The Duke of Hertford, and his
Party are looked upon by the People as Martyrs in the Common Cause, and others
as Royalists; Extremities hasten on, and Prerogative now upon the wing is
towering above reach. In full Parliament down goes all the work of the tenth
and eleventh years Parliament, which had never bin, if that Parliament had
continued by adjournment. The King raises a Power which he calls his Cuard,
of Cheshire men; under the terror of this displaying rod, 21. Rich. 2. cap. 9.
the Parliament and Kingdom are brought to Confession: Cheshire for this
service is made a Principality; and thus goes Counties up, and Kingdoms down.
The Kings Conscience whispers a sad Message of dethroning, and well it might
be, for he knew he had deserved it. Against this danger he intrenches himself
in an Act of Parliament, That made it Treason, To purpose and endeavor to
depose the King, 21. Rich. 2. cap. 3.
or levy War against him, or to withdraw his Homage, hereof being attainted in
Parliament. And now he thought he was well guarded by Engagement from the
Parliament, but he missed the right Conclusion for want of Logique: For if the
Parliament it self shall depose him, it cannot be made a Traitor, or attaint it
self, and then has the King gained no more then a falls birth.

But the King was not thus quiet, the sting of guilt still sticks within, and
for remedy he will unlaw the Law; and gets it enacted, that all Procurers of
the Statute of 10. Richard the Second, and the Commission and Procurers of the
Kings assent thereto, and hinderers of the Kings proceedings, are adjudged
Traitors. All these reach only the branches, the root remains yet, and may
spring again; and therefore in the last place, have at the Parliament it self:
For by the same its further declared, That the King is the sole Master of the
Propositions for matters to be treated in Parliament, and all gainsayers are
Traitors.

Secondly, That the King may dissolve the Parliament at his pleasure, and all
gainsayers are Traitors.

Thirdly, That the Parliament may not proceed against the Kings Justices, for
offenses by them committed in Parliament, without the Kings consent, and all
gainsayers are Traitors. These and the like Aphorisms once Voted by the
Cheshire men, assented unto by the Parliament, with the Kings Fiat, must pass
for current to the Judges, and if by them confirmed or allowed, will in the
Kings opinion make it a Law for ever, That the King and all Parliaments is
Dominus fac primum, and Dominus fac totum. But the Judges remembered the tenth
year, and Belknaps intertainment, and so dealt warily; their opinion is thus
set down, It belongs to the Parliament to declare Treason, yet if I were a
Peer, and were commanded, I should agree: So did Thorning under-write, and
thereunto also consented Rickill, and Sir Walter Clopton, the last being chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, the first chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
the second another Judge of the same Bench. The sum in plainer sense is, that
if they were Peers, they would agree; but as Judges, they will be silent. And
thus the Parliament of England by the first of these four last mentioned
conclusions attainted themselves; by the second yielded up their liberties, by
the third their lives, and by the last, would have done more, or been less:
And to fill up the measure of all, they assigned over a right of Legislative
Power unto six Lords and three Commons, and yet the King not content,
superadded, that it should be Treason for any man to endeavor to repeal any of
their determinations.

The Commonwealth thus underneath, the King tramples upon all at once; for
having espied the shadow of a Crown fleeting from him in Ireland, he pursues
it, leaves the noble Crown of England in the base condition of a Farm, subject
to strip and waste by mean men; and crosses the Irish Seas, with an Army. This
was one of Englands Climactericall years, under a disease so desperate, that no
hope was left but by a desperate Cure, by sudden bleeding in the head, and
cutting off that Member that is a principle of motion in the Body: For it was
not many months ere the wind of affairs changed, the King now in Ireland,
another steps into the Throne; the noise hereof makes him return, afarr of
enraged: but the nigher he comes the cooler he grows, his conscience revives,
his courage decays, and leaving his Army, his Lordship, Kingdom, and
Liberty, behind, as a naked man submits himself to release all homage and
fealty; to resign his Crown and Dignity, his Titles and Authority; to
acknowledge himself unworthy and insufficient to reign; to swear never to
repent of his Resignation; and thus if he will have any quiet, this wilful
man, he must be content for the future, neither to will nor desire: And poor
England must for a time be contented with a doleful condition, in which the
King cannot rule, and the Parliament will not, and the whole body like a Chaos
capable of any form that the next daring spirit shall brood upon it.

CHAP. II. Of the State of the King and Parliament, in relation of it to him,
and him to it.
A King in Parliament is like the firstborn of Jacob, The excellency of
Dignity, and the excellency of Power, but alone unstable as water: Examples
of both these we have in these two Kings, Whereof the first was Crowned by the
Parliament, and Crowned it; the latter also Crowned it, but with Thorns; and
yet the Parliament in all held on that wise way, that it neither exceeded its
own bounds, nor lost its own right.

I shall enter into the consideration of particulars under these heads: First,
In relation more immediately to the interest of the King: Secondly, To the
interest of the Kingdom in general. The King, though higher then all the
people by the head, and so has the Prerogative of Honor as the most worthy,
yet his strength and abilities originally do rise from beneath, otherwise, he
is but like a General without an Army, the Title big, but aerie; and many
times his person subject to so much danger, that in stead of drawing the eyes
of all the people to look upon him with admiration, they are drawn to look to
him with observation, and in this respect he may be said to be less his own
man, and more the Kingdoms then any of the inferior sort. This befell in both
these Kings in a special manner; each entering upon the grand government of a
Kingdom before they were able to understand the work, or govern themselves:
and therefore were under power of Protectors for the guard of their Persons and
their Education, and of the Parliament for Council and Direction in Cases
relating to the Kingdom. The chide of a mean man when its Parents are dead, is
Filus Amici, but of a King, is Filius Populi, to be by them trained up in such
manner, that he may be Pater populi, when he is come to age. In the mean time
though he be a King, yet his Person like a precious Jem must not out of the
ring, but must be directed by Council, though under some kind of restraint, 1
E. 3. Stat. 1.
and the Counselors all the while no Offenders in such Cases against the
Prerogative Royal. And therefore though it be true that Kings grow faster then
other men, and sooner come to full age then they, yet Edward the third now in
his sixteenth year might not pass over Sea into France, though it were for
restoring of Peace, but by direction of the Parliament: nor is it meet in such
Cases that Kings should stand upon the Prerogative of a Negative. Secondly, it
may likewise be said, that his Family is less his own as he is a man, then
another man's. For private Families are no further under the public Law, then
in relation to the public Peace, to punish after breach made. But the
Families of Kings are looked upon by all in relation to the honor and profit
of the Public; not only because the Kings servants have by their nigh
attendance upon his Person a more powerful influence into his actions, which
may reflect a malevolent aspect upon the whole course of affairs, if they be
not better ordered that are so nigh him. But more especially in regard that the
government and order of the Royal Family trencheth deep upon the Honor of the
Kingdom, and purses of the People, who are concerned to see the same
accommodated suitable to the State and Port, which the Nation would bear forth
to the World. And therefore for the Parliament to intermeddle in the Kings
Family, is not foreign nor new: Alice Piers was a Familier, if not of the
Family of Edward the third, yet both her self and others of that Family were
complained of as a grievance. Richard the second, was once a young man, and
ever a young King; and what Edward the third wanted only in his youth, and in
his infirm old age, this man ever wanted: for he that knew not how to govern
himself, how much less could he govern his Family: And if in this condition
the Parliament become his Stewards, to set a yearly Survey and Check upon his
Servants and Family, 9 Rich. 2. n. 31. 11 Rich. 2. n. 23.
in order to good order of the same, and Kingdom, otherwise men must conclude,
it did that which was just: though Richard the second, and those of his mind
think not so. But this is not all; Kings have not only such as serve the
outward man, but some that serve their Consciences, of old time called
Confessors; in those days without name, for fear of Superstition, yet the
thing remains still in some well favored Chaplain, and their work is to lead
the Kings Conscience in dark ways, or rather into them; commonly he has a
devout outside, and that is the Kings Idol: but if while his eye be toward
Jerusalem, his mind be toward the dead Sea, the King is his; and then the
blind leads the blind: Like some Ignis fatuus, to such as know it not: No man
is so well known by his company as Kings are by these men, and these men by
their Actions. Although some have bin so witty as to cheat the whole generation
of Mankind, by entertaining holy men to be their Chaplains: themselves the
mean time, without any spark of that holy Fire. Yet this King was not so
cunning, he had a Confessor of his own choice, and according to his own heart,
who was complained of as a grievance, 5 Rich. 2. n. 17, 18.
and the Parliament removed him: So nigh they adventured, even to invade the
Kings own conscience, if it may be called conscience, that will acknowledge no
Law, but that of its own mind.

Thirdly, The Kings Revenue was under the check and control of the Parliment,
for it befalls some Princes, as other men, to be sometimes poor in abundance,
by riatous flooding treasure out in the lesser currents; and leaving the
greater channells dry. This is an insupportible evil, because it is
destructive to the very being of affairs, whether for War or Peace. For the
Kings treasure is of a mixed nature, much of it being intended for public
service, as himself is a public person. And for this cause he has Officers
of several natures attending upon this treasury. Some for land, some for Sea,
some for the general treasure of the Kingdom, some for that of the household,
and some for the privy purse: the common end of all, being to maintain state
in time of peace, and strength against time of War: because its no easy
matter to maintain the just proportions for each of the said ends, it is the
less wonder that such a brave Prince as Edward the Third should Labor under
want for maintenance of the Wars; and so lavish a Spendthrift as Richard the
Second; should Labor under more want to maintain his port and countenance in
peace. And therefore, though it be true that the public treasure is committed
to the King as the chief Steward of the Realm, yet it is as true that he is
but a Steward; and that the supreme survey of the Treasure rests in the
Parliment, who are to see that the treasure be not irregularly wasted, to
reduce the same into order; and for that end to call the Treasurers and
Receivers to account, to see to the punishing of such as are unfaithful, and
encouraging of others that are faithful; for when by extravagant courses, the
Treasure is wasted; by extraordinary courses it must be supplied, which ever is
out of the Subjects purses. And in such cases it is great reason that they
should observe which way the course lies of such expenses. If then in such
cases, sometimes the Parliament has stayed the issuing out of the Kings
Revenue for some time, 2 Kich. 2. n. 12. 9 Rich. 2. n. 4. or. 41. 14 E. 3. n.
6. 27 E. 3. n. 8. 9 R. 2. n. 40. 15 E. 3. n. 16.
or otherwise viewed and examined the same, charged it with conditions, 22 E.
3. n. 29.14 R. 2. n. 15. limited it to certain uses, and in case of misuser
refused to levy or make payments, the case will be without dispute, that the
Parliament ordered the public treasure as they saw most need. But much more
if we consider how the greatest part of this treasure was raised. Viz. Not
from the old Revenues of the Crown, but by new impositions, levies, and
assesments, laid upon the people, even what they pleased, and in what manner
they thought meet, and not otherwise. Aids are lawful if they be legally
given by common consent of Parliament: Taxes if legally given by Parliament, 14
E. 3. cap. 20.
are no less lawful, yet they must be collected in such manner and by such
means as the Parliaments Order does direct: Loans of monys to the King may be
made by them that will, but the King must not demand them, because the subject
has no means to recover the debt. 25 E. 3. n. 16.
This trick had been lately tried by Edward the Second, much money he got, and
it was repaied by the order of the Parliament. But of all the rest, nothing
showed more absolute authority in the public Revenue, then the care that was
had of the Demesnes of the Crown, 1 E. 3. vet. 1.
for whereas the expenses of Kings grew so vast, that neither the yearly
Revenue could suffice; nor aides, assesments, and taxes could satisfy, however
ordinary they in these times were become; rather then Kings would contiane
themselves they would invade their own Demesnes, by pauning, selling, and
giving them a way, either for love or money; and thus was poverty treasured up
against the future, both for King and Crown. The Parliament, espying this leake
that was like to undo all, applied a speedy remedy, undoing what was done, and
undoing some by an act of Resumption, and thereby taught Kings to look to
their honor better for the future; 1 Rich. 2. n. 48.
and people also to take heed of meddling with such considerated matters, and to
know that he that has such in his possession, has them by a cract title that
cannot be amended but by Act of Parliament.

Fourthly, An English King is no Outlaw, nor can he do any wrong, though the
man may: he has a double relation, one as a King, the other as a man, and the
uniting of both in one Person, has cheated many a man of his judgment in the
Case of Prerogative: he has a double will, and these many times contrary,
equally as in other Relations; and in this contrariety, sometimes the King
overcomes the man, and sometimes the man the King; so as if any man, the King
has much more cause to cry out, O miserable Man: These diverse wills are
generally led by diverse rules. One of a man, which many times reaches no higher
then the Affections; and if the man be weak they deserve little better name
then Lusts. The rule of a King is Law, or Counsels, of these in place; and
unto these in all prudentialls, he must submit his judgment and will, as he is
a King: nor can he do otherwise, unless he will presume to be wiser then his
Council: Suitable hereunto does that clause in one of the Statutes of these
times conclude, 25 E. 3. Provisor.
Viz. That the King is bound by his Oath, to pass all Laws that are for the
good of the Kingdom: For were the power of election, or determination of the
Point only in the King, then were the Oath in vain, nor is the Parliament at
all (in case of the Kings dissent) to judge of the convenience or inconvenience
of Proposalls made for the good of the whole body, 21 E. 3. n. 64. 3 Rich. 2.
n. 83. 2 Rich. 2. n. 38.
according to that power which it exercised in these times: Nor is it
irrational to infer here from that, if Law and Council be the rule of a
King, then the obedience of the people unto this King must be in order to Law
and Council, otherwise the disobedience cannot be determined to be against the
King, but against the Man; and though against the private will of the
Commander, yet not against the Law, nor therefore can it be said illegal or
unjust. The Parliament in these times held forth this Doctrine plainly to the
World, that it is their proper work in Cases needful to do right to such as
are wronged by the King: his command is no Warrant in such Cases. 15 E. 3. n.
6, 7.
If a man be wrongfully imprisoned by him, 1. E. 3. Ver. 1. 15 E. 3. cap. 3. 11
Rich. 2. n. 11.12.15.17.
he shall be released and set at liberty by them: Let his Act be never so
authentical under the Broad-Seale, it can take no man's right away. Richard the
Second, did his utmost to satisfy and quiet the tumultuous rabble under Cade
and Straw; and granted store of Manumissions to the Bondmen by Declaration,
and by his Letters Patents, but not one of them good enough to deprive any one
of the meanest of the Freemen of their rights in those Bondmen. The
privilege of showing mercy, 5 Rich. 2. n. 8.12.13.
and granting pardon has been anciently betrusted to the King, as to an
Overseer of the execution of Law, yet he has not that Prerogative, To have
mercy on whom he will have mercy. Ever since this Narion had learned to read
the Bible, Murder has been excepted from mercy, nor did the Law ever allow any
King any Prerogative to pardon that. Edward the Third, did not challenge any
such, not only bound thereto by his Coronation Oath, 10. E. 3. cap. 2. 14 E.
3. c. 15. 2 E. 3. cap. 2.
but by public Acts of State, declaring the same; yet because the Parliament
was not always sitting, and Kings were ever subject to this Temptation, to
favor Servants, by granting mercy to Malefactors; a general rule of
Inhibition is made against all pardon to be granted by the King, in Case of
Felony, but only in Cases allowed by advise of the Council. Its true that in
the first times of Richard the Second, he liked not to be thus girt in his
power, which he pretended was more at liberty in his Predecessors; possibly he
meaned King John and Edward the Second, who many times did what they listed;
yet under his favor, no Law was so shameless, 13 Rich. 2. Sr. 2. cap. 1.
as to hold forth such a power, till Richard the Seconds Law countenanced it:
But why do I call it a Law, which is only a Declaration by consent of the
Lords, such as then were* 11 Rich. 2. n. 3.6. 21 Rich. 2. n. 35.
the Commons would never own such an opinion; and therefore it soon proved
abortive; for within three or four years, by public Act of Parliament, its
peremptorily declared, that the Kings Pardon shall not extend to murder: So as
upon the whole matter its plain that it is not the Kings will, though supported
by the Council of Lords, and backed by the opinion of the Judges, that must be
a rule for the government of this Kingdom, nor does any Allegience bind
obedience thereunto, in Case where Justice, or the liberty of the People is
concerned.

Three things yet remain which Kings have claimed to be their own, Viz.
Conferring Titles of Honor, and places of Trust, and the Legislative power.
The first is but a Feather, and not worthy of regard, yet it is plain that
these times produce many presidents of Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, made in
Parliament, and possibly it may be apparent that the first motion of any such
Title of Honor, did first fetch its Original thence, if not in the field. But
its not worthy of the labor. The second is more considerable, Viz. The power
of conferring places of Public Trust: This, Kings have pretended unto,
although in course of Congruity, it will be thought more meet that it belongs
rather to that chief and grand Trust of the whole Kingdom committed to the
Parliament, and the Practice of these times is not much discrepant, whether we
regard such as are for advice or execution, Of the first of these are those
whom we commonly call, the Privie-Councell, whose advise in course touches
first upon the Kings Person, but by reflection works strong impressions upon
the People, so far as the influence of the Kings power extends. And therefore
its not beyond the Sphere of the Parliament to interpose and qualify that
influence, so as it may be for the general good of the whole Kingdom: For
many times Kings are either above or beneath themselves; and in such Cases if
the Council be of the Kings suite, he is of the deeper die, and proves more
Malignant to the People. Edward the Third, growing into great opinion in the
World, his Proportion exceeds his own Portion, 14 E. 3. n. 55.
and the Peoples good wills to boot* they think the fault is in the privy
Council, and an Inquisition set upon it: So also they do in his fiftieth
year when he grows downward. 50 E. 3. n. 10. 1 Rich. 2. n. 5^
And the like in the beginning of Richard the Seconds Reign, he being now a
Youth, and therefore unstable in his Resolutions, and unable to make Election:
So as upon the whole matter, if the King fall short in point of judgment, or
Resolution, or inordinate in his Affections: 3 Rich. 2. n. 34. 5 Rich. 2. n.
17, 18.28. 6 Rich. 2. n. 19.
But more especially where they observe the Major, or more considerable part of
the Council to draw toward a design; in such Cases as these, the Parliament
as its own duty undertook to settle a good Council about the Kings Person,
that might advise him during their Recesse. For the Privy Council is never
more it self then when it is an Epitome of the Common Council of the
Kingdom. In like manner such Officers as concern Execution of Law, and
Council, are as narrowly to be inquired into: for if their motion be
irregular, its less material what the rule be: the Parliament therefore held
it their duty to interpose in the Election of grand Officers of the Kingdom;
such as are the Chancellors, Judges, and Justices, or to confirm or displace
them, or bind them by Oath, the Rolls of the eighth, fourteenth, fifteenth,
and thirty sixth years of Edward the Third, and the sixth, tenth, and eleventh
years of Richard the Second, do manifest this sufficiently.

I have done with the Subject matter or work of the Parliament in the mutual
Relation of the King and it, the manner of proceeding was either jointly with
the King, or without him; and either jointly with the two Houses, or severally;
and either immediately by themselves, or their Committees. As touching the
first, its evident that in all matters wherein gain arises to the Crown from
the people, by Subsidy, or otherwise, the strength of the Grant by Act of
Parliament rests in the two Houses, and that the Kings assent is but Pro
forma, as touching that matter; and therefore such Grants have been made as
tended in some measure to derogate, either from the Kings wisdom, care, or
fidelity, yet even these have passed with the Royal Assent, though the full
Assent or good will of the Person of the King was not correspondent thereto: as
in these Cases formerly noted, where Subsidies were given with Limitations and
Conditions, and upon rendering account to the People. And it is as evident,
that where the Kings Person is disabled to understand (as in Case of Infancy)
there the Royal Assent can bear little weight with it; 37 E. 3. n. 34. 1 Rich.
2. n. 5. 5 Rich. 2. n. 75.
but most of all in the Kings absence, where either the Assent is put thereto
by Commissioners, that know not the Kings particular mind, or the Act is done
only by the Houses, in nature of Ordinances; and yet these of force to bind
all Parties, but the King. But nothing more debased the Royal Assent in these
times, then a trick that Edward the Third played in the midst of the fullest
strength of his Government: It was in time of War, which never is time of good
Husbandry and laying up, nor of sober advise in laying out, nor of equity in
levying and collecting money for the nerves of War. This forward Warrier in the
heat of his Achievements, finds his strength benumbed for want of money, he
leaves off, comes home, rages against his A. Bishop, to whom he had committed
the care of Provision for his War, and the A. Bishop, as hotly falls upon some
of the Treasury in the Army on the one side, and upon others in the Country;
whose oppressions, says he, in stead of bringing in money, 15 E. 3. c. 3.
made the people to give a stop thereto. A contest hereupon thus had, it was
concluded by the Power of the Parliament, that such men should be questioned,
and that the Parliament from time to time should call all Officers of State to
account, Antiq. Britt. Eccles.
and thereupon ensues a calm. After the Parliament ended, the King repeats the
matter, it makes his heart sick, he disgorgeth himself by a Proclamation made
by advise of Nobles, and Wise men, as he says, and tells all the World he
dissembled with his Parliament, and what he did was done by duress of mind, to
please for the time, and to gain his ends, which being now had, he by his
Proclamation revokes what he had done in Parliament, 15 E. 3.50.
or endeavored it* And thus is England put to school to learn to dissolve
three hard knots: First, Whether a King can dissemble with his Parliament.
Secondly, Whether Edward 3. his dissembling assent makes a Law. Lastly, Whether
by a Proclamation, by advise of Nobles and Wise men, he can Declare that he
dissembled with his Parliament, and therein not dissemble the Royal Assent, so
as to bring all the Laws made in any Kings time into question at least during
his life. However the result may be, its evident the Royal Assent gets no
honor hereby, and the Statute as little, that has suffered this Proclamation
all this time to pass among the number of the Statutes in Print as a Law, when
as many Statutes that are Laws of note are left out as useless.

Although in the general, the two Houses joined in every Act, Ad extra, yet,
Ad intra, and in relation one to another, they had their several operations,
the House of Commons intermedled more in the matter of fact, the House of Lords
in matter of right, although in either of these there is a mutual aspect from
both: In matters of judicature, much rested with the Lords, and therefore it is
ordained, that, 15 E. 3. c. 1. 15 E. 3. c. 3, 4.
The House of Lords shall remedy all offenses contrary to the Law of Magna
Charta: And in cases where no remedy is left, nor judgment by the Law, the
matter shall be determined in Parliament, and the King shall command execution
to be done according to the judgment of the Peers: Which Laws seem to be
but declarative of the former Law, and in the nature of reviving that power
into Act which was formerly laid asleep, and does strongly implye that the
ultimate act in judicature rested with the Lords, in relation not only to the
House of Commons, but also in relation to the King, whose work in such cases,
is, not to judge above, or with the Peers, but to execute their sentence: and
that carries with it a list, whereby the power of a King may appear not to be
so supreme in making of the Law, as some would have it; for if his Judgment
and Conscience be bound by the Votes of the Peers in giving a Law, in Case of a
particular person, where the Law was not formerly known: Let others judge of
the value of this Negative Vote, in giving Law to the whole Kingdom. Its true
that this Parliament was quarrelled by the King, and he kept it at a bay by a
Proclamation that pretended Revocation, as far as a Proclamation could revoke
an Act of Parliament; but it effected nothing, nor did the contest last long:
Now though this Jurisdiction thus rested in the House of Lords, in such Cases,
as well as in others; yet is it not so Originally in them, as to be wholly
theirs, and only as they shall order it; for the Commons of England have a
right in the course and order of Jurisdiction, which (as the known Law) is part
of their liberty: and in the speedy execution of Justice, as well as they have
right to have Justice done: and therefore whereas in Cases of Error, and
delays, the Appeal was from the inferior Court to the Parliament, which
immediately determined the matter, 14 E. 3. cap. 5.
and now the trouble grew too great by the increase of Pleas: For remedy
hereof, a kind of Committee is made of 1 Bishop, 2 Earls, 2 Barrons, who by the
advice of the Chancellor, Treasurer, and the Judges, shall make good judgment
in all Cases of Complaint of delay in Judgment, which Committee is not made by
Order of the Lords alone, which they might have done in case Jurisdiction had
bin wholly and only shut up in their custody, but by Act of Parliament, and
joint concurrence of the Commons with the Lords: For as the Commons challenge
speedy Execution of Justice, as one of their liberties: So also to be under the
jurisdiction of such Judges, and Courts, as the Laws (in the making whereof
themselves challenge a Vote) do establish and appoint.

I will conclude this Chapter with the Constitution of the Parliament in these
times. For, the difficulties that befell between the Kings and their people, or
Houses of Parliament, wrought two sad effects, Viz. A propensity to decline
calling of Parliaments, so often as was used and exspected; and when it
assembled, as great a propensity in the Members to decline their attendance,
Walsing: An. 1315.
by means whereof, as the Historians tell us, the Parliament was sometimes
enforced to adjourn it self for want of number sufficient: the first of these
arose from want of good will in the Kings, the other from want of courage and
zeal in the people. The first of these was fatal and destructive to good
Government; for though in distempered Parliaments its good to withdraw, yet in
distempered times its necessary to meet, and gain a right understanding of all
parties; and therefore these times were so happy as to bind themselves by
public Acts of State to recontinue the Assembling of Parliaments. For the
face of the Times represented unto all, that Agitations were like to be quick,
violent, and to continue for some succession of Time: Its therefore safe, if
not necessary, that every eye should be open, and Counsels ready for every
Occasion. A law at length is agreed upon, that A Parliament shall be holden
once every year, or more if need be. 4 E. 3. cap. 14.
But in thirty years the power of this Law is wasted out of mind, and the
evil reviving, revives also the Statute, 36 E. 3. c. 10.
and yet they had thirteen or fourteen Parliaments in thirty years space, and
not above three, or but once four years distance of time between any two of
them in Succession. This was the sense of the Members of the Houses in their
meeting, but at home, they had homely conceits, and its found no less
difficult to bring them to the meeting, then to continue the meeting according
to the Law, being either loath to adventure their thoughts into the troublesome
affairs of the Public, or their Persons to expense and hazard: But the
Public must be served, and therefore an Act of Parliament is made, 1 Rich. 2.
c. 4.
That all such Members as decline their appearance at the Parliament, after
Summons made, shall be amerced, and the Sheriffs likewise that shall neglect
return of Summons: And the Statute implies that it was no Introduction of a
new Law, but a reviving of former Law now or lately difused, or a Custom now
out of Custom. And to take away all Objection in point of charges and
expenses, another Law was made to establish the assessments, and levying of
their Wages, 12 Rich. 2. cap. 12.
upon the Lands that anciently were chargeable therewith, in whose hands soever
the same shall come.

I shall conclude with this, that the Parliament, though like a Garment, it
sometimes covers the goodly feature and proportion of a well composed body, yet
it keeps the same warm, and as a Shield is first in all dangers, and meets
with many a knock which the body feels not: This is their work and reward; Its
true, that in the wearing it is felt heavy, but it is the easier born, if it be
duly considered, that it is better to be so clothed, then to be naked.

CHAP. III. Of the Privy Council, and condition of the Lords.
THe later must make way for the former, for according to their Personal
esteem in their own Countries, such is their Authority at the Board in joint
Counsels: And it was one point of happiness in a sad time of War, that all
men looked one way. The Lords were much addicted to the Field, and could do
much with Edward the Third, who was a brave Leader, and more with the People,
who had bin so long time used to the rough trade of Soldiery, that they loved
not to be at home about matters of Husbandry, wherein they had so little
experience. And having so fair a Garland in their eye as France, its no wonder
if Domestic designs seemed meaner, or more dangerous. Thus did God do
England a good turn, although it was made for the present thereby neither so
rich or populous, as it might have bin in a time of Peace. This French Heat
wasted many a tumultuous Spirit, and Innobled the Fame of the King and Lords,
not only abroad, but won them much Honor and Repute of those that remained
at home; and so by congregating Homogenealls, and severing Heterogenealls,
rendered the body of the People more Univecall; which tended much to the
settling of the joints of this distracted Nation. A timely birth hereof
doubtless was the peaceable entry of Richard the Second, upon the Throne, and
quiet sitting there; whiles as yet he was but a Child, the Princes of the
blood many; and they of generous, Active, and daring Spirits: yet do we not
meet with a whisper in Story of any turbulent or aspiring humor in them or the
People, during those tenderer times of that Kings reign. But after that he
came to know more in himself then was to be found; and to outreare his
abilities, having some of the Lords ready at his elbow to help him: these
changed the Kings course, although the general part of that Noble Band kept
still their Array; and retaining the body of the People in due composure,
thereby declared themselves to be the Kings Friends, though the others were
Richards Favorites, so as he was fain to stoop to occasion, and submit to be a
King, that would have otherwise been more or less. And thus the Lords were
become Supporters to the Crown, Studds to the Throne, and a Reserve to the
People, against the violent motions of an unbridled mind in their King; who
seeing them so united, and endeavoring to break them into parties to obtain
his desire, lost both it and himself. It is a degree of cleanly modesty to
impute the miscarriages of unruly Kings, to their Council: For however during
their minority, Counselors are more rightly Officers of State; yet when Kings
will be their own Men, their Counselors are no other then the breath of the
Kings own breast; and by which a King may be more truly discerned then any
man, by his bosom Friends. Edward the Third, was a man of a public Spirit,
and had a Council suitable to his aim: Richard the Second, a man that desired
what him pleased, would have what he desired; and a Council he had that served
him in all: for God answers the desires of men's hearts in Judgment as well as
in Mercy; and a sore judgment it is both to King and People, when the corrupt
desires of the King are backed by a flattering Council.

It must be granted that the Privy Council of Kings, has been an old ginne of
State, that at a sudden lift could do much to the furthering of the present
Estate of public Affairs: Nevertheless, through the Riot of Kings, their
Designs generally tended to make more work for the Parliament, then to
dispatch; to do much, rather then well; like works for sale, rather then for
Master-peice, and sometimes to undermine, yea, to outface the Parliament it
self; like some unruly servants that will put away their own Masters: Nor can
it otherwise be expected, unless the Kings elected ones be turned into the
Parliaments Committee; or that constant annual Inquisition by Parliament, be
made into their Actions: for occasional inquiries breed ill blood, though no
attainder be; nor are they easily undertaken, whereas constancy in such Cases
makes the worst to be resolved but into a matter of common course.

The natural and original power of the Privy Council, is very obscure,
because there are several Degrees of them that occasionally have been used,
all of whom may deserve the name of Privy Council, in regard of the
Parliament, which is the most public Council of all the rest, and always
has a general interest in all Causes in the Kingdom.

The first of these, is that which was called, The Grand Council of the King,
which as I think, was not the House of Lords, who are called by Summons, and
were only to attend during the Parliament; but a body made up of them: and
other wise men of his own retinue: and of this it seems there was a constant
body framed, that were sworn to that service; 16. E. 3. Memb. 5. in Dors.
for some in these times were sworn both of the Grand Council, and the Privy
Council, and so entered upon Record.

The second of these Counsels was also a great Council, and probably greater
then the other; but this was called only upon occasion, and consisted of all
sorts, like a Parliament, yet was none: An example whereof we have in the
Ordinances concerning the Staple, which at the first were made by the King,
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Lords, and great Men of the Kingdom, one out of every
County, City, and Borough, 27 E. 3. Stat. 2 28 E. 3. cap. 13.
called together for that end; their results were but as in point of trial for
six months space, and then were turned into Statute Law by the Parliament.
These two are Magna Concilia, yet without power, further then as for advise;
because they had no ancient foundation, nor constant continuance. Another
Council remains more private then the other, of more continual use, though
not so Legally founded, and this is called the Kings Privy Council, not taking
up a whole House, but only a Chamber, or a Table, signifying rather
communication of Advice, then power of Judicature, which more properly is in
Banco* And yet the power of this grew as virile and royal, as it would
acknowledge no Peer but the Parliament, and usurped the representative of it
as that had bin of the whole Kingdom. The ambition thereof has ever bin
great, and in this most notoriously evident, that as it had swallowed up the
grand Council of Lords, it seldom can endure the mention of a Parliament, but
when Kings or Affairs are too rugged for their own touch. The platform of
their power you may behold in this their Oath.

1. That well and lawfully they shall council the King according to their best
care and power, Mag. Cart. Vet.
and keep well and lawfully his Councels.

2. That none of them shall accuse each other, of any thing which he had spoken
in council.

3. And that their lawful Power, Aid, and Council, they shall with their
utmost diligence apply to the Kings rights.

4. And the Crown, to guard, and maintain, save, and to keep off from it,
where they can without doing wrong.

5. And where they shall know of the things belonging to the Crown, or the
rights of the King, to be concealed, intruded upon, or subtracted, they shall
reveal the same to the King.

6. And they shall enlarge the Crown, so far as lawfully they may, and shall
not accouncell the King in decreasing the rights of the Crown, so far as
they lawfully may.

7. And they shall let for no man (neither for love nor hate, nor for peace,
nor strife) to do their utmost (as far as they can, or do understand) unto
every man in every Estate, Right, and Reason, and in Judgment, and doing right
shall spare none, neither for riches nor poverty.

8. And shall take of no man without the Kings leave, unless meat or drink in
their journey.

9. And if they be bound by Oath formerly taken, so as they cannot perform
this without breaking that, they shall inform the King, and hereafter shall
take no such Oaths, without the Kings consent first had.

All which in a shorter sum, sounds in effect, that they must be faithful
Counselors to the Kings Person, and also to his Crown; not to decrease the
true Rights, but to enlarge them, yet all must be done lawfully. And secondly,
that they shall do right in Judgment to take no Fees, nor any other Oath in
prejudice of this.

The first of these concern the Public only at a distance, and yet the
point of increasing and diminishing of the Crown in the sixth Section is
captious, and may sound as if there is a Legal enlarging of the Crown,
whereof he that takes the Oath is to judge. A matter which only and properly
concerns the Parliament to order and determine, or else farewell all liberty of
the People of England.

The second concerns immediately the King in his politic capacity, but
trencheth upon all the Laws of the Kingdom, in the executive power; and all
the motions in the whole Kingdom, either of Peace or War, following in the
rear, either immediately, or mediately, are under this notion interested into
the transaction of the Privy Council, to debate and determine the Kings
judgment therein, unless it will determine alone. And how easy a thing it is
for such as have power of determining the Action by the Law, to slip into the
determining of a Law upon the Action, and so to rule by Proclamation;
experience taught succeeding times sufficiently: Nevertheless these times
wherein Parliaments were every moment upon the wing, and kept this Noble Band
in awe, by taking them into their Cognizance, placing and displacing some or
all of them, directing and binding them by Oath, as they saw occasion, of which
the Records are full and plentiful. I say, these times thus constituted added
yet further encouragement to them, by giving them powers by Statute Law, over
and beyond what by ancient Custom they had obtained. The King and Council of
Lords had anciently a power of Jurisdiction, that has bin in the first part of
this discourse already observed; yet its very probable that it was not any
select company of Lords, but the whole Association; for its granted by all,
that they had originally a Principal hand in the jurisdiction: And its hard to
conceive how any private number should catch such a power, if not by
usurpation. But the manner of acquiring, is less material; the principal
consideration rests upon the quality of this Jurisdiction. For it is evident
that much difference has bin, both concerning the place and manner of
exercising this Authority. In general, It must be granted that all Pleas,
Coram Rege, were grounded upon Writs first purchased, and returnable, either in
Banco, or in Camera; 20. Ass. pl. 52.
or in Cancellaria. And no difference at all will be concerning the
Jurisdiction in Banco, for that was by the Course of the Common Law; and the
people held it one of their liberties to have one known course of Law, for
determining matters of right and wrong. As touching these Pleas, which were
holden by Writs returnable in Camera, they were properly said to be Coram Rege
and Consilio, whose meeting was in the Council Chamber, in those days called
the Star Chamber. 41 E. 3. Rat. Clau^.
For other returns of Writs in the Star Chamber do not we find, but such as
were in Camera, 16 Rich. 2. Memb. 11. in Dors.
nor Prohibitions from thence, but under the notion of the Kings Council; and
this Camera, as I said, was the place of the joint meeting of the Council, as
well of those of the Chancery and Benches, as of those that attended upon
matters of State. Now the influence of Society in point of Judicature,
principally aspected upon some Pleas belonging to the Crown: although even
these also properly were determinable in the Kings Bench; nor can I observe any
rule to bound the powers of these two Judicatories; but this, that the Council
Table would pick and choose, and prohibit the Kings Bench as they pleased: and
to that end would order Originalls out of the Chancery, as they thought most
meet: for it is observed by Fleta, Fleta, li. 2. cap. 34.
that the Kings Bench has no Jurisdiction of it self, but by special
Warrant; that is to say, by Original Writs returned thither: Nevertheless, it
may seem that such Crimes as are contrary to common honesty, or the public
profit or peace, in a more exemplary way then ordinary; and therefore may be
called, Crimina laesi Regni, or against the State: These, I say, might more
properly belong to the subline Judicature of the Council Table; as knowing
better how far the public State was interested, or indammaged in such Cases,
then the other Judges that were experienced only in ordinary matters of a more
private concernment.

38 E. 3. Rot. Pat. Ps. 1. Memb. 13. 39 E. 3. Ps. 1. M. 13.42. E. 3. Rot.
claus. Memb. 8. in Dors. 2 Rich. 2. Rot. Pat. Ps. 1. 12 Rich. 2. cap. ^.43.
Ass. pl. 38.
To recite the particular Cases upon record, concerning racing of Records,
Forgeries, and other crimes of falsehood, conspiracies, combinations, to abate
and level the prices of Commodities, Ryots, and such like, will be
superfluous. In all which and others of that Cognizance, the Sentence exceeded
not Fine, and Imprisonment, or ransom; Neither yet were the Common Pleas so
rural, but the Council Table could relish them also, and digest them well
enough, and therefore did not stick to prohibit the Courts of Common Law,
under color of a strange maxim. That it is neither just nor honest for a man
to be sued at the Common Law, for a matter depending before the King and his
Council: No, though the Court of Common Law had the precedence; and therefore
although the right of Tithes being depending at the Common Law, Co. Instit. 4.
c. 5. 22 Ass. pl. 75.
the Archbishop in opposition to the jurisdiction, sueth before the Kings
Council, and the proceedings at the Law are thereby stayed; and no wonder, for
the Council Table challenged to hold the balance of all Courts of Law within
their own Order: and so if any doubt concerning the Jurisdiction depended, 13
Rich. 2.12. Tit. Prohibition.
the Council Table gave the word, and all stooped thereto: But enough of the
Subject matter, the manner follows; a new form of Process is taken up, that
the Common Law and ancient Custom never knew, and which grew so noisome to the
People, that complaints are made thereof as of common greivance, and remedies
are thereto applied by the Laws of these times. 5 E. 3. cap. 9.
For whereas by the Grand Charter nothing could be done in Judgment, but
according to the Laws of the Land, and in affirmance thereof a Law was made in
these times, that no Accusation, nor Attachment, nor forejudging of Life, or
Member, nor seizure of Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chattels, should be against
the form of the Grand Charter, and Law of the Land: the course of affairs grew
so stale, that amongst other innovations, a trick of a new kind of trial is
brought forth, by suggestions upon Articles exhibited against any man before
the Council Table; and thereupon issued forth Attachments against the party
complained of, by means whereof, and other courses (for they could also
sequester) much vexation arose unto the People. Hereunto upon complaints
multiplied, a remediall Law is made; whereby it is Enacted, that all such
suggests made, 37 E. 3. c. 17.
shall be carried to the Chancellor, Treasurer, and the Kings Grand Council;
and the Informer shall find surety to prosecute with effect, and to incur
the like penalty intended for the Defendant, if the Plaintiffes proofs be not
complete; and then the Process of Law shall issue forth, and the Defendant
shall not be taken against the form of the great Charter; that is, he shall not
be taken, until first the fault appear upon Record, 25 E. 3. c. 4, 5. 42 E. 3.
c. 3. and 4.
by Presentment, or by due Process, or by original Writ, according to the
Ancient Law of the Kingdom: Either therefore the Privy Council had no power
to hold any Pleas at all, or else no power of trial: 1 Rich. 2. n. 87.
The first of these was concluded in open Parliament, and the second, as good
as so: for if the first, then the second will come on undeniably. But suppose
all this be given up, yet was this Liberty to hold Pleas so qualified, that the
person could not be touched, till the thing did appear by Inquisition, and then
in a Legal way: such proceedings was had upon suggestion made against the City
of London, Fabian. Vit. Hen. 3. ann. 1141.
in Henry the Thirds time, for one of the Judges was first sent into the City
to find the suggestion by a Jury, and then the Lord Mayor appeared before the
Lords, and traversed the matter, and in a manner appealed, or rather demanded
to be tried, according to the custom of the City. 43. Ass. pl. 38.
And the like course do we find observed in our Law Reports of these times,
in a Case concerning the price of Wool, by a false Report. The foot of the
whole account will be this, That the work of Judicature of the Privy Council
in these times in Cases of Crimes, was to receive Articles, and award
Inquisitions, and after return in nature of a Grand Inquest, to recover,
Traverse, and to order trial at the Common Law; 43. Ass. pl. 38.
and upon Verdict returned, to Fine and Ransom. In other Cases either of right
or equity in matters of private property, they were determined, either by
Judges of the Bench, or Chancery, although possibly the suite was Coram
Concilio, for that all the said Judges were of the Kings Council: And yet, as
I dare not affirm, so I cannot deny, but it might also be possible that some
matters, especially these of a greater consequence, either in their own nature,
or in regard of the persons whom they concerned, were determined by the major
Vote of the whole Council, in a prudentiall or rather Arbitrary way: But this
was, Invita minerva, and used so rarely, as the Path is grown out of view,
saving some few footsteps here and there remaining, which show that the Grand
Council of Lords had been there.

CHAP. IV. Of the Chancerie.
IT is the birth of the Kings Power in Judicature, and may deserve the name of
the first born. For though it had no better Title in these later times, then
Officium; Miror. cap. 4. Sect. 2. Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 13.
because amongst other of the Kings Escripts, it formed Writs remediall for
such as had received wrong; yet even by that work, it was in repute for so much
skill in the Law of the Land; that by the consent of all, it was as well able
to advise a remedy, as to advise the Complainants where to have it: and yet it
had one adventage further, that it was an Office of remembrance to the King,
who is a Person of great trust in the Law, and gave such credit to all Acts
done before him, as being entered into the remembrance, became of the highest
nature of Record, against which no Plea did lie. Amongst these, matters of debt
and contract coming into the account, this Office taking notice of the Record,
took Cognizance of the thing, and for the executing thereof: and thus in
these, and such like Cases, granted Judicial Writs, and so found out a way of
Judicature, Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 13. Sect. 8.
to as many Causes as the State would trust it with: and because it pretended
Cognizance only of matters of Record before them, they found out a way of
examining of witnesses by Commission, and returning their Depositions in
writing, which being become a Record before them; they gave their Sentence upon
the whole matter, without the ancient ordinary trial, Per pares: It becomes a
kind of Peculiar, exempting it self from the ordinary course in manner of
trial, and from the ordinary rules of Law, in giving of Sentence, and as a
back door for the Kings Arbitry, in case of Judicature in matters of Common
Pleas, as the Council Table was in Crown Pleas, they both are looked upon
with a very pleasing eye of Majesty, which loves not to be strait laced; yet
all is imbattelled under the colors of Equity, Honor, Convenience, and
Conscience, like a Monopoly that is bred under the wings of the Public, but
feeds it self upon it.

That this had attained the Title of a Court so anciently, as in K. Stevens
time (as the Honorable Reporter notes) I much question, Instit. 4. c. 8. fol.
78.
by the Title that Fleta gives it in later times, nor under his favor, will
that Testimony cited out of the History of Ely warrant it, but upon a mistaken
ground of misplacing the note of distinction: for I take the words to be thus
translated, King Etheldred determined and granted, that the Church of Ely
should for ever in the Kings Court hold the dignity of the Chancery, and not
hold the dignity of the Kings Court of Chancery: Nevertheless, its clear that
these times brought it to that condition that it might well carry that name, if
formerly it had not; For it grew very fast both in honor and power, and this
not by usurpation, (though it did exceed) but by express donation from the
Parliament. Yet is this power much darkened in the limits and extent thereof,
chiefly in regard that the Chancellor is betrusted with many things, whereof
there is no evidence for the Chancery to claim any Cognizance. For he was in
these times a person of many interests and relations, being one of the Quorum,
in the Star Chamber, of the Kings Council, chief in the Chancery, most
commonly a Clergy man, and therewith Legate e latere, and in these several
Relations might act directly, and yet in several Courts. And therefore, though
he had power with others, to punish neglects of Execution of the Statutes of
Wines, 4 E. 3. cap. 12. 9 E. 3. cap. 1. 14 E. 3. cap. 5.
by Act of Parliament, and also of the Statute concerning Victual, and to
determine matters of controversy between parties in Cases depending before the
Parliament, and in some matters that concern the Kings Revenue; yet cannot
these be said to be the proper work belonging to the Cognizance of the
Chancery, but to the Chancellor by special Commission in another relation:
Allbeit I cannot deny but the Court it self had Cognizance in matters of as
strange a nature, 27 E. 3. cap. 26. 36. E. 3. c. 9. and cap. 13.
Viz. To punish disturbances of Merchants in their trade, to see to the
executing of the Statutes of Purveiors, and to remedy greivances contrary to
other Statutes (which general words let in a wild liberty to that Court to
intermeddle in Laws which were never intended for their touch) to punish
Nusances according to discretion, 12 Rich. 2. c. 12. 27 E. 3. c. 24.
to give remedy to Merchants upon the Statute of Staple; so that its clear
enough the Parliament intended it should be a Court, and gave their Seal to
their power of Judicature. Nor as it seems, was this any regret to the Courts
of Common Law, but as a thing taken for granted. For the Reports tell us, that
if the King grants Tithes, arising from without the bounds of any Parish, the
Patentee shall sue in the Chancery by Scire Facias, and shall there proceed to
issue or demurrer, 22 Ass. pl. 25.
and then to the common Law; where upon trial, if the Defendant make default,
the Plaintiff shall have Judgment, Bro. scire fac. 154. 24 E. 3.73.
and Execution. And if the Heir be in Ward to the King, the Mother shall sue
and recover her Dower in the Chancery. And they tell us that it had power to
prohibit Spiritual Courts, and Courts of common Law, yea, to overruled or
reverse judgments: and yet the common Law held its ground when it was
concerned: for neither were all suites there by Bill, as in cases of Equity,
nor determined according to such rules, 43 Ass. pl. 32. 24, E. 3. pl. 35. 39 E.
3. fo. 14. 21 E. 3. fo. 47.
nor did the power of Judicature rest in the breast of one Chancellor, but in
him jointly with other Council of the King, which were also learned Judges of
the Law. For the Report informs that Edward the Second, had granted a Rent in
Tail to the Earl of Kent, who dying, his Son under age, and Ward to the
King, Edward the Third, seized, amongst other Lands, the rent, and granted it
to Sir John Molins: Upon Petition, the King refers the matter to the Arch
Bishop, and others of the Council, calling to them the Chancellor: A Scire
Facias goes forth to Sir John Molins; he upon appearance, pleaded to the
jurisdiction, as a case belonging to the common Law; but it would not be
allowed, because it was to repeal the Kings Charter.

And whereas it was objected that the reference was to the Arch Bishop, and
others, and therefore the cause ought not to be determined in the Chancery; it
was resolved that it did properly belong to the Chancery, by the Law: And in
the Argument of the case, it appears clearly that the Kings Council there,
43. Ass. pl. 35.
were learned in the Law. And the same is yet more evident by the Title of
Bills in those days exhibited in the Chancery, which was directed to the
Chancellor, and the Kings Council, and the rule given, Per tout les Justices;
which I rather note for the shortness of the form of Bills in those days,
far different from these times, wherein the substance of the complaint,
however small in it self, is oftentimes blown out into so great a bubble,
that it breaks to nothing: And the Statutes formerly mentioned do assert the
same thing, as touching the Kings Council. For though they speak of the
Council or Chancery in the English Tongue, yet in the Original the words are,
Conceill en Chancery.

Having thus touched upon the matters under the Judicatory of the Chancery, and
Judges in the same: in the next place, the manner of proceedings comes to
consideration. For it seems they had been formerly very irregular, and that
contrary to the Grand Charter, upon a bare suggestion in the Chancery, the
party complained of was imprisoned, and no proceedings made thereupon: for
remedy whereof, it was ordained, that upon suggestions so made, the complainant
was to find Sureties to pursue the suggestions, and that the process of Law
should issue forth against the party without imprisoning him, and that if the
suggestions were not proved true, the complainant should incur the like
penalty, that the Defendant should have done, 37 E. 3. cap. 27.
in case be had been found guilty: but afterward this later clause was
altered by another Statute, because it was full of uncertainty; and it was
ordained, that in such case the Complainant shall be imprisoned, 38 Ed. 3. c. 9.
until he shall satisfy the Defendant of his damages: And furthermore, shall
make Fine and Ransom to the King. But because that the Defendant many times
held his advantage, even to extremity; this course lasted not long, but a new
Law was made, 17 Rich. 2. cap. 6.
which put the power of awarding damages in such cases into the Chancellor, to
do according to his discretion: And thus the Chancery obtained power to award
damages, which they never had formerly, and the Chancellor, a Precedence both
in the Chancery, 43 Ass. pl. 32.
and of the Council in the Court of Star Chamber, and in many cases in the
Exchequer: by the first he had a power in matters of meum and tuum; by the last
in matters, Mei and Regis; and by the other in matters Mei and Regni. A
considerable man certainly he was in the motions of Government; but how much
more if he be made Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Cardinal, and Legate e Latere;
or Arch Bishop, Lord Treasurer, and Legate e Latere; as these days had diverse
times seen. Extraordinary advancements bestowed upon the Nobility, brings
Honor to the Throne, but if they be not men of noted worth, and uprightness,
they make the Scepter stoop, by stirring up of envy in the Nobility, and
indignation from the People. For seldom is it seen, that Advancements are fed
from the Crown, though they be bred from thence; but either maintained by new
supplies from the Peoples purses, or the ruin or decay of some Offices more
ancient then themselves, or both: And such was the condition of the Chancellor,
he sucked fat from beneath, and blood and Spirits from the Grand chief
Justiciar of England, and so reduced that Honorable Potentate, unto the Degree
of chief Justice of the Kings Bench, leaving scarcely unto him the name or
title of Lord. One thing more remains touching the election, or nomination of
this Great man. At the first, he was no better then a Register, or the Kings
remembrancer, or Secretary, having also the Honor to advise the King in such
matters as came within the circuit of the Writings in his custody; and
questionless, Eo usque, its suitable to all the reason in the World, that he
should be of the Kings sole Nomination and Election: But when it befalls, that
in stead of advising the King, his word is taken to be the rule, and a
Judicatory power put upon that; and unto this is superadded that Honorable
trust of keeping and governing the great Seal of the Kingdom, with the
continual growing power occasionally conferred upon him by the Parliament: He
is now become no more the Kings Remembrancer, but the Lord Chancellor of
England, and Supreme Officer of State. And it seems but reasonable that he
should hold his place by public Election, as well as the Grand Justiciar,
(whose Plumes he borrowed,) and other Grand Officers of State did before him.
For he that will have his Servant to work for another, must give the other
that Honor of Electing him thereto; nor was this laid aside or forgotten by
these times, but a claim was put in for the Election or allowance of this
principal Officer amongst others, 15 E. 3. n. 10.15. 15 E. 3. c. 3. 10 Rich.
2. n. 16.10.
the Parliament obtaining a judgment in the case by the Kings Confession, and
so the thing is left to the judgment of future Ages, Viz. Whether a King that
can do no man wrong, can dissemble the Royal Assent in Parliament, or declare
himself Legally in that manner by Proclamation?

CHAP. V. Of Admiralls Court.
THis is a third Court that maintained the Kings judicatory power, in a
different way from that which is commonly called the Common law, and by many is
therefore supposed, to advance the Kings Prerogative, but upon mistaken
grounds: It is very true, that the way is different from the common rode, both
in its original, and in the course of proceedings; nor could it other be,
considering the condition of the Nations, and the People of the same,
interested in common traffic. The people thus interested, as much differed
from the other sort of dry men (if they may be so called) as Sea from Land, and
are in nature but as march men of several Nations, that must consenter in some
third way for the maintenance of commerce for peace sake, and to the end that
no Nation may be under any other Law then its own. The condition of the
Nations in the times when civillized government began to settle amongst them,
was to be under the Roman Emperors, who having settled one Law in the general
grounds throughout all Nations, made the Sea likewise to serve under one rule
which should float up and down with it, that men might know upon what terms
they held their own, wheresoever they went; and upon what terms to part with
it for their best advantage: in its original therefore this Law may be called
Imperial, and likewise in the process, because it was directed in one way of
trial, and by one law, which had its first birth from the Imperial power: and
probably it had not been for the common benefit of Europe to have been
otherwise, at other time, or by other directories formed. Nevertheless this
became no Gemm of Prerogative to the English Crown, for if England did comply
with foreign Natives for its own benefit, it being an Island full of the Sea,
and in the common rode from the most parts of Europe that border upon the Sea,
and of delight in Merchandise, it is but suitable to it self; and it did so
comply, as it saved the maine Stake by voluntary entertaining those Laws
without being imposed upon by Imperial power: for the Saxons came into this
Kingdom a free People and so (for ought yet appears to me) continues to
this day: I say that in those first times, they did take into the consideration
of Parliament the regulating of the fluctuating motions of Sea-laws; nor were
they then, or after, properly imposed by the Kings Edict. For though it were
granted, that Richard the first reduced the Sea-laws in the Isle of Oleron; yet
that the same should be done without advise of Parliament in his return from
the holy Land, is to me a riddle, considering what Histories do hold forth
concerning of his return through Germany, nor can that be good evidence to
entitle Kings of England to a power to make and alter Laws according to their
private pleasure and interest. Nor does that Record mentioned in the
Institutes, warrant any such matter, but rather on the contrary groundeth the
complaint upon laws, statutes Franchises, and Customs, Estabilished, Instit.
4. cap. 22. fol. 142. and 144.
and that this Estabilishment was by the King and the Council.

This Law was of a double nature according to the Law of the Land, one part
concerning the Pleas of the Crown, and the other between party and party; for
properly the Kings authority in the Admiralty is but an authority of
Judicature, according to Laws established, which both for process and sentence
are different from the Common Law, as much as the two Elements do differ, yet
not different in the power that made them: I shall leave the particulars to be
inquired into, by them that shall mind it elsewhere, and only touch so much as
shall reflect upon the maine Government. This power was executed by Deputies
diversely, according as the times and opportunities were, for War or peace, and
either transitu or partu. What was done in time of War, or whiles this Shipp
is out of the English Seas, comes not to our purpose, and therefore I shall not
meddle with that, further then this, that in the first times Kings were wont to
divide the work of judicature, and of War into several hands. The power of
War and Peace they committed unto men of approved courage and Skill in that
service, and therefore generally, not to the men of highest rank, who had
neither mind nor Skill for a work of such labor, diet, and danger: this power
passed under diverse names, sometimes by grant of the custody of the Sea coasts,
sometimes of the parts and Sea coasts, sometimes by being made Captain of the Sea
men, and Mariners, and sometimes Admiral of the Ships. It was a great power,
and had bin much greater but that it suffered a double diminution; the one in
the time, for three or four years commonly made an end of the command of one
man, and at the best it was, quam diu Regi placuerit; Gloss. fol. 16.
the other diminution was in circuit of the power, for all the Maritine coasts
were not ordinarily under the power of one man, but of many; each having his
proper precinct upon the South, or North, East, or Western shotes: and under
the title of Admiral in the times of Ed. the first and forwards, who brought
that title from the holy Land; nevertheless about the end of the times,
whereof we now treat; the custody of the whole Sea began to settle in one hand,
under the title of Admiral of the English Seas, and the place was conferred
upon men of the greatest rank, and so continued ever afterward. The power of
jurisdicton, or judicature all this while remained distinct, and it seems was
settled in part in the power of the Sheriff and Justices. For by the Law the
Sheriff and Justices had cognizance of matters between the high water and the
low water mark, and what was done, Super altum mare, was within the directory
of the Admiral, these were but few things, and of small considerablenesse: the
principal of them being concerning War or peace, and those only within the
English Seas. But after Edward the third had beaten both the French and
Spaniards at Sea, the people grew much more toward the Sea, and became so
famous, that the greatest Lords thought the Regiment of Sea affairs worthy of
the best of their rank, and were willing with the title of Admiral, whiles
they left the work to others; and so the Admiral became a person of more
honor and less work then he had been formerly. The greatness of the honor
of this place thus growing, soon also began to contract greatness of power
beyond what it had formerly; and this was principally in matter of
jurisdiction. For not contented with the power of a chief Justice of War and
Peace within the Seas, which was his proper dominion: the Lord Admiral gained
the same within the low water mark, and in the maine streams below the next
Bridge to the Sea, 15 Rich. 2. c. 3. Dier. 15. and 16. El. mic. pl. 2. 8 E. 3.
Coronn. 199.
and in all places where Ridells were set; and yet these places were within the
body of the County. Nor did he endeavor less to gain in matters of
distributive justice, for although he had a legal jurisdiction in things done
upon the open Sea, so far as to defend, order, determine, and cause
restitution to be made, in cases of damage done unjustly; yet was it no less
difficult to keep this power within its own bounds, then the watery Element upon
which it floated; but it made continual waves upon the franchise of the Land;
and for this cause, no sooner had these great men savored of the honor and
authority of that dignity, but comes a Statute to restrain their Authority in
the Cognizance of Cases only, unto such matters as are done upon the main Sea,
13 Rich. 2. cap. 5.
as formerly was wont to be: and within two years after, that Act of
Parliament is backed by another Act to the same purpose, in more full
expressions, 15 Rich. 2. cap. 5.
saving that for Manslaughter, the Admiralls power extended even to the high
water mark, and into the main streams. And this leads on the next
consideration, Viz. What is the subject matter of this Jurisdiction, and
Authority: I shall not enter into the depth of particulars, but shall reduce
all to the two heads of Peace and Justice.

The Lord Admiral is, as I formerly said, a Justice of Peace at Sea,
maintaining the Peace by Power, and restoring the Peace by setting an Order
unto matters of Difference, as well between Forrainers, as between the English
and Forrainers; as may appear by that Plea in the fourth Institutes formerly
mentioned.

Secondly, That point of Justice principally concerns matters of Contract,
and Complaints for breach of Contract; of these the Admiral is the Judge, to
determine according to Law and Custom. Now as subservient unto both these, he
has authority of command over Sea men, and Ships that belong to the State, and
over all Sea men and Ships in order to the service of the State, to arrest and
order them for the great voyages of the King, and the Realm, and during the
said voyage; 25 Rich. 2. cap. 3.
but this he cannot do without express Order, because the determining of a
voyage Royal, is not wholly in his power.

Lastly, the Lord Admiral has power, not only over the Sea men serving in
the Ships of State, 2 Rich. 2. cap. 4.
but over all other Sea men, to arrest them for the service of the State; and
if any of them run away without leave from the Admiral, or power deputed from
him, he has power by inquiry to make a Record thereof, and certify the same
to the Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, etc. who shall cause them to be apprehended
and imprisoned. By all which and diverse other Laws, not only the power of the
Admiral is declared, but the original from whence it is derived, namely from
the Legislative power of the Parliament, and not from the single Person of the
King, or any other Council whatsoever. But enough has been already said of
these Courts of State, in their particular Precincts One general interest
befalls them all, that as: they are led by a Law much different from the Courts
of Common Law, so are they thereby the more indeared to Kings, as being
subservient to their Prerogative, no less then the Common Law is to the
Peoples liberty: in which condidition being looked upon as Corrivalls, this
principal Maxim of Government will thence arise, That the bounds of these
several Laws are so to be regarded, that not the least gap of intrenchment be
laid open each to other, least the fence once broken, Prerogative or Liberty
should become boundless, and bring in confusion in stead of Law.

CAHP. VI. Of the Churchmens Interest.
BUt the Churchmens interest was yet more tarte, standing in need of no less a
lay, then that of the Kings Authority; for that the King is no less concerned
therein, then the People; and the rather, because it was now grown to that
pitch, that it is become the Darling of Kings; and continually henceforth
courted by them; either to gain them from the Papal Jurisdiction, to be more
engaged to the Crown, or by their means to gain the Papal Jurisdiction, to
be more favorable and complying with the Prerogative Royal. The former times
were tumultuous, and the Pope is gained to join with the Crown to keep the
people under, though by that means, what the Crown saved to it self from the
people, it lost to Rome: Henceforth the course of Affairs grew more civil, or
(if you will) graced with a blush of Religion: and it was the policy of these
times, whereof we now Treat, to carry a benign aspect to the Pope, so far
only as to stave him off from being an enemy, whiles Kings drove on a new
design to ingratiate and engage the Churchmen of their own Nation unto its
own Crown. This they did by distinguishing the Office, or Dignity of
Episcopacy, into the Ministerial, and Honorable parts; the later they called
Prelacy, and was superadded for encouragement of the former, and to make their
work more acceptable to men for their Hospitalities sake; for the maintenance
whereof, they had large Endowments, and Advancements: And then they reduced
them to a right understanding of their Original, which they say, is neither
Jus Divinum, 25 E. 3. Stat. 6.
nor Romanum, but that their Lordships, Power, and great Possessions, were
given them by the Kings, and others of this Realm. And that by virtue thereof,
the Patronage and custody of the Possessions in the vacancy ought to belong to
the Kings, and other the Founders; and that unto them the right of Election
into such advancements do belong, and not unto the Pope, nor could he gain
other Title unto such power, but by usurpation, and incroachment upon the right
of others. But these Great men were not to be won by Syllogismes; Ordinarily
they are begotten between Ambition and Covetousness, nourished by Riches, and
Honor; and like the Needle in the Compass, turn ever after that way. Edward
the Third, therefore labors to win these men, heaped Honor and Privileges
upon them, that they might see the gleanings of the Crown of England, to be
better then the vintage of the triple Crown. Doubtless, he was a Prince that
knew how to set a full value upon Churchmen, especially such as were devout;
and it may be, did somewhat outreach in that course: For though he saw God in
outward events, more then any of his Predecessors; and disclaiming all humane
merits, reflected much upon Gods mercy, even in smaller blessings: yet we find
his Letters reflect very much upon the Prayers of his Clergy, and loved to have
their Persons nigh unto him, put them into places of greatest Trust, for
Honor, and Power, in Judicature; that not altogether without cause, he had
thereby purchased unto his Kingdom, the name and repute of being a Kingdom of
Priests. But all this is but Personal, and may give some liking to the present
Incumbents, but not to the Expectants; and therefore the Royal Favor extended
so far in these times, as to bring on the Parliament to give countenance to the
Courts and Judiciary power of the Ordinaries, by the Positive Law of the
Kingdom, although formerly the Canons had already long since made way thereto
by practice: I shall hereof note these few particulars ensuing.

Ordinaries shall not be questioned in the Kings Court for Commatation,
Testamentory Matters, 15 E. 3. cap. 6.
or Matrimonial Causes, nor other things touching Jurisdiction of Holy Church.

Things formerly bred by the Canon, nourished by continual practice, allowed
by Ordinance of Parliament, or Grant from Kings in Parliament, are now
confirmed by solemn concurrence of the whole representative Body of the
Kingdom, to have and to hold with Warranty. And yet the sense is not so
general as the words, nor does it seem much other, then a Confection made for
the Arch Bishops appetite, to cure a distemper between him and the King: 22
Ass. pl. 70. 45 E. 3.24. Fus. consultat. 5.
for the Civil Judge lost nothing hereby, nor would the Crown, as may appear
by a Law of equal Authority with the former: for though an Executor or
Administrator may cheat, yet it tells us that Ordinaries only can oppress and
extort from dead men; 31 E. cap. 4.
and therefore in such cases does provide remedy by inquiry, 25 E. 3. Stat. 3.
cap. 9.
and Indictment before the Kings Justices.

They shall have Cognizance of Usury, during the Delinquents life, and the King
after the Delinquents death. 15 E. 3. c. 5.


The difference arises from the different end; the first being to reform the
Person by Church Censures, and to urge him to restitution; Miror. Just. cap. 5.
Sect. 1. 51 H. 3. petit. cleri. Artic. 16. 50 E. 3. n. 158. 6 Rich. 2. n. 57.
14 Rich. 2. n. 24. Instit. 3. cap. 70. 6 Ed. 3. coram Rege, Rot. 130. Porff.
the latter is for the Kings Fine or Forfeiture: For as touching the Usurers
estate, the offense was in the nature of Felony, forfeiting both Lands and
goods to the King, after the Delinquents death: And it seems the manner was
to Indict the Delinquent during his life, and that stuck to him as a deadly
arrow in his side, till he died. Nor did it lie in the power of the Ordinary,
by Ecclesiastical censure, so to reform the Offender, as to clear him to the
King, unless the party offending, made his peace with the King by Composition:
and thus the Law continued, for ought appears to me, till the time of Henry
the Eighth.

25 E. 3. c. 8. pro clero. ^8 E. 3. cap. 2. ^5 E. 3. St. 2. 9 Rich. 2. c. 4.
They shall have Cognizance of avoydance of Benefices of Right: They shall
certify Bigamy; and Bastardy had beyond the Sea; and whether a Prior be
perpetual, or dative.

The first of these concerning avoydance of Churches, it seems was somewhat
doubtful in point of Practice, for that the Civil Judge used to determine all
manner of avoydances, as well in Fact, as of right; but by this Statute they
are restrained only unto avoydances in Fact, so as after this Statute it is
holden, that avoydances by death shall be tried by the Country; but if the
avoydance be by Deprivation, Resignation, Bro. quar. imp. 85.
Creation, or otherwise, it shall be tried by the Ordinary: because by common
intendment he is more connusant of the thing, then Country people. But as
touching the point of Bigamy, the matter is more doubtful, in regard that
commonly the marriage of a second Wife, or Widow, is a matter in Fact, done in
the face of the People; and of which they take notice, especially where the
life of man is concerned, which rather requires the judgment of his Peires,
then where the outward maintenance only is engaged. Nevertheless because the
main point is, whether the Party be a Clerk or not, and the same anciently
rested upon the Certificate of the Ordinary: Its by this Law again allowed to
him to try and certify this point of Bigamy also, although the Statute of
Bigamists, might seem to Entitle the civil Magistrate thereto, 8 E. 3. 8.
as the Law was holden to be before this Statute was made. In the next place,
although it cannot be denied, but the trial of Bastardy beyond the Sea, might
as well lie in the Cognizance of the Lay Magistrate, as in that of the
Ecclesiastical; yet seeing the Clergy had already attained the Cognizance of
the thing, the place proved but a matter of Circumstance, especially they
having the advantage of the Civil Magistrate in this, That in regard the
Ecclesiastical Persons beyond the Sea, had also obtained the Cognizance of
that matter amongst themselves, their Testimony or Certificate would come with
more credit to the Clergy in this Kingdom, then to the Civil Magistrate;
whose Cognizance in such Cases they did disallow.

Lastly, concerning Priories, whereas some were presentative, and filled by
Induction from the Ordinary; and others were Donative, having their Priors
merely at the will of the Abbot, to be placed and displaced as he thought most
expedient: if then the point in Issue depends upon this knot, this Law
refers the trial unto the Ordinary, who by common Presumption best knows
whether any Institution and Induction had passed his Registry, and Seal, or
not. And thus, though a kind of Judicial power seems to be carried along
herewith, yet is all in a ministerial and subservient way, unto the Civil
Magistrate; and nevertheless with such credit and authority, that the main
hinge of the Judicatory, in such cases, depends upon the dash of their Pen.

No Bishop, nor Archbishop, 18 E. 3. cap. 1.
shall be impeached before the Civil Magistrate, without the Kings express
Warrant.

The former particulars, concerned matter of Authority; this and others
ensuing, concern matter of immunity, which, or most of which were formerly for
a long time within the Fancy of the Canon, but never came to the height of
Parlimentary approbation or authority till now, that it comes in as a
Peace Offering to pacify the quarrel between the Archbishop Stratford, and
the King: For he being engaged in the French Wars, so resolved to continue;
and therefore to maintain distempers at home, he held neither Honorable, nor
safe.

14 E. 3. cap. 2.
Their Temporalties shall not be wasted, during the Vacancy: Nor shall they be
seized, but by Judgment of the Court.

The first of these was an ancient Law, grounded upon great reason; although
dulled by time, and by covetousness of the needy Patrons, next to laid aside,
if not quite put out of countenance: So as a new Law must be made to revive it,
and to abolish that corrupt custom, or practice of depredating those
Possessions given to a holy use in common supposall, contrary to the trust by
them undertaken, and the use still continuing. But the second Branch is in
nature of a Law of Restraint, set upon the Common Law: for the persons of these
Spiritualized men, were of so aerie constitution, as they could not be holden
by hands made out of the Clay, such as the rude Laity were; and therefore the
Civil Magistrate, upon all occasions used to lay hold upon that, whereof there
was some feeling, which were called Temporalties, and thereby drew them to
appearance at the Lay Courts; for however Spiritual the Clergy were, they
would not easily part with their Lay Fees. But now by this Law, the times are
so* attenuated, that the very Temporalties are made so Spiritual, as not to be
meddled with by the Lay Magistrate, unless upon judgment first obtained
against them. And sutably thereunto within twelve years following, another Law
was made more punctual, 25 E. 3. c. 6.
that their Temporalties should not be seized upon for contempts, but that
their Persons should be seized; yet within twenty years after that, this Law
begins to be out of Countenance, and the Opinions of the Judges began to grow
bold upon the ancient rule, that their Temporalties were Temporal, though
their Persons were Spiritual; and that it was more dangerous to imprison the
person of a Clergy man, then to attache his Possessions: And therefore they
held, 44 E. 3. fol. 35, 36. Per Thorpe. 7 H. 4. fol. 41. Per Gascoigne.
that if the Ordinary remove not the Incumbent when the Kings Writ commands him
so to do, his Temporalties should be seized. And if the Ordinary should
certify one to be a Clerk which is none, the like course is to be taken.

They shall depute the next and most lawful Friends, 31 E. 3. c. 11.
of the Intestate to Administer his goods.

The Statute at Westminster the second, West. 2. cap. 19.
having given formerly a kind of allowance* that the Ordinary should be
Administrator to the Intestate, so far as to answer the Intestates debts, lent
him thereby an opportunity to possess himself of the whole, to all intents and
purposes; which being observed by the Parliament, by this Law they made way for
Administration, to fall through the hands of the Ordinary, into the lap of
Administrators, made by the Authority of the Parliament; but of the Ordinaries
nomination, according to the authority hereby to him given. These
Administrators thus made, had a greater power then ever the Ordinary had, or
could give. For though the Ordinary by the Statute at Westminster, was bound to
pay the Debts of the Testator, yet could he never bring Action as the
Administrator to all intents by this Law is enabled to do: And though it be
true, that the Administrator is by this Law ordered to account to the Ordinary,
yet does not that entitle the Ordinary to any interest in the personal Estate;
but only gives him a bare authority to take the account, without any
compulsory power by Ecclesiastical censures, to enforce him thereto.

Secondly, it is such an account, as is no Evidence in any Court of Record: And
Lastly, if upon the foot of the account, any arreare remained, or surplusage of
Estate; the Ordinary could neither recover, nor order the same; because by the
Law anciently, the next friends had the sole interest therein: and being by
this Statute made Administrators, the whole power of ordering the Estate is
vested in them.

To conclude, this Statute was made in favor, and for the ease of the
Ordinaries, if they would please so to take it, for they could get no benefit
by executing the Administration in their own Persons, if they intended to
Administer according to the Law.

5 E. 3. c. 5.
The Persons of the Clergy are privileged from Arrests, during the Holy
Actions of their Officiating.

This was plotted since Anselmes time, he and his Successors, endeavored by
Constitution, and Canon, continually to mind the Civil Magistrate thereof,
but could never nurse it up to the Degree of a Law, till now; they gained the
advantages of the times, growing into a more tender apprehension of Devotion,
then formerly, The penalty of transgressing this Law is left in general, and
therefore did the less scare, but within three years after, it was confirmed
with a certain penalty of Fine, 1 Rich. 2. c. 15
and Imprisonment, as to the Kings suite, and damages to the party offended:
and the Privilege was enlarged, for, and during their continuance in the
Consecrated ground, in order to such Services, and not upon Fraud, or Collusion
to avoyde Arrests: But by neither of these Laws was the Arrest, (although
contrary to them) made void, as touching the Process.

14 E. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 1.
The goods of the Clergy, are discharged from Purveyance, and their Houses from
Quarter.

The later of these was an Incroachment upon the greater Clergy men: For under
the Title of Hospitality, which the Prelates were obliged to by their great
Possessions, and Revenues, conferred upon them to that end, Kings used to
quarter Messengers, to and from Scotland; The Kings Horses, Dogs, and Hawks,
etc. But the point of Purveyance, was an ancient Prerogative belonging to
Kings, and by no Custom were the goods of any man discharged therefrom, till
it was by act of grace first confirmed by Edward the first, Westminster. 1. cap. 1.
Stat. de prisis.
and afterward by grant of Edward the second, yet by reason of the rudeness
of the times, did not those acts prevail to that settlement that was promised;
till now Edward the third renewed the Law: nevertheless could not this Law of
Edward the third perfect that work, because it was but a bare command till
Richard the second made a remediall Law, 1 Rich. 2. c. 3.
giving thereby the Clergy that were wronged a right of action of trespass
against the Purveyors, and to recover treble damages, whereas formerly they
were liable only to a fine to the King, which many times was as soon pardoned
as asked.

These condiscentions might have wedded the English Clergy to the English
Crown, but that it was coy and expected further gratuities: besides they
beheld their old Stepdame Rome, now in its full Splendour and power, and deeply
interested in the sway of affairs in this Kingdom, and above all the rest,
the nigh affinity between the Prelate and the Pope was such, that they sucked
one milk, breathed one air, and like the Philosophers twinns, lived in each
other: The later of these was not discerned by those dim sighted times, and
therefore they could do nothing toward the dissolution of that knot, but left
it to future times, who found no other way then to cut it asunder: But Edward
the Third and his successor espied the first, felt the inconvenience thereof,
and applied themselves to such remedy as they found most ready at hand. All
things that are subject to time are also subject to change, which comes commonly
slower upon Governments that are less Eclesiastical, for Churches continue
longer in a growing condition then in their complete estate, like a Christian
that seldom endures long after his full ripeness. Thus England; its hitherto
above a thousand years since the Gospel came to the Saxons, and well nigh a
thousand years since the Pope set his foot amongst us; ever approaching nigher
the Throne, and ascending thereunto; but finding it full of a King that would
not remove, he sits down in his lapp; a heavy burden questionless he was,
considering his claim of jurisdiction, his provisions, pensions, exemptions,
impositions, and such like oppressions; and therefore its no wonder if the King
feeling the encumbrance, gives a lift at the Popes power, by stoping the
current of money from England Rome-wards: 4 E. 3. cap. 6. 5 E. 3. cap. 3.
To this end the Statute made at Carlisle is revived, whereby the Clergy are
inhibited from conveying treasure beyond the Seas; but the Pope knew how to
ride, and will not so easily forego his saddle. The Roman Eagle had made many a
fair flight in England, and had not yet fully gorged himself; he grants ten
thousand Marks yearly out of taxes laid upon the Church livings in England,
unto two Cardinals, neither of which did, nor, by the Canon, could live in
England; the treasurership of York also to another Cardinal, after that the
King had conferred the same else where. He proceeds also further to invade the
undoubted rights of the Crown, by making an election of the B. of Norwich, and
causing him to be invested, Rege renitente: the King spent eight years in the
recovery of his right, and was deluded in the conclusion; he now sees it
bootelesse to stand always upon his defense, and receive affronts; he resolves
therefore to enter the lists; Rot. Parl. 10. E. 3. Arch. Reg. 18 E. 3. tit. 38.
Fox. 388, 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. cap- 22. Fox. Sect. 1.
and makes seizure of the Deanery of York, which formerly by usurpation, the
Pope had conferred upon a Cardinal; and of all Church livings given by the
Pope to aliens: Then a Law is made more sharp then those in the eighteenth
year, wherein Provisors of Abbeys and Priories are made liable to a
Praemuniri, and Provisors of other Ecclesiastical Livings and Dignities,
whereby the presentation of the rightful Patron is disturbed, to be fined and
imprisoned until the fine and damages to the party wronged be paid. And all
such as draw men to plead out of England, in cases that belong to the
cognizance of the Kings Court, and all obtainers of provisions in the Court at
Rome, these were also subject to a Praemuniri. 27 E. 3. c. 1.
For whiles these things were thus in action, the Pope bestirred himself
notably with Citations, Excommunications, interdictions, and such other birds
of prey, not only against mean men, but Judges, Bishops, and the Kings
Council; as amongst others, the case of the Bishop of Ely, at the solicitation
of some of inferior regard, as I remember, a Clerk or some such thing: Antiq.
Brit. Eccles. 247.
yet as these Bull-drivers or summoners to the Romish Court, were no late
upstarts, so were not these times the first that took them to task: for before
the Statuts of Praemuniri, we find provision was made against Provisors, and
that some Statute did precede those in Print, which punished a disturber of the
Kings Incumbent, by a Bull from Rome, with perpetual imprisonment, or at the
Kings will; besides the party wronged was allowed an action for his damages, 21
E. 3. fol. 40
Qui tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso sequitur; and before that time also,
bringers of Bulls from Rome were imprisoned, although in all these cases
aforesaid* the liberty of the Persons, both of Lords and Praelats, was saved:
38 E. 3. cap. 1.
And thus all the while King Edward the third kept the field, he gave the Pope
cuffe for cuffe, but retiring himself to take his ease, he waxing wanton,
waxed weak, and more slowly pursued the vindication of his own right, and his
Subjectes liberty. The Laws are laid aside, and Rome had further day given to
plead, and in the mean time execution is staid: the double mind is double
died, and advantage is soon espied, above sixty Church livings more are
suddenly catched and given to the favorites at Rome; the Parliament rings
herewith, Rot. Parl. 51. E. 3. tit. 35.
yet the King delays the remedy, and in this Edy of affairs, Edward the third
dies, and Richard the second takes up the place, who had wit enough to observe
what concerned his own interest, and courage enough to pursue it. But neither
wit nor courage to overruled his lusts, which in the conclusion overruled all
rule, and brought himself to destruction. He found the people at his entrance
into the Throne irritated with the Popes opressions, and vexed at his
Grandfathers desidiousnes. His Spirit is also stirred within him, and himself
thereby pressed to tread in his Grandfathers former ways, and to outrunne him
in his later: 3 Rich. 2. c. 3.
he made the penalty of Praemuniri to extend to all Farmores, or others, in
nature of Bailiffs, that held any Church maintenance to the use of any alien,
and unto all Aliens that are Purchasors of such Provisions to any use: 7 Rich.
2. cap. 13. 12 Rich. 2. cap. 15.
and unto all Lieges, that shall in like manner purchase such Provisions:

But as touching such as shall accept such provisions, he ordained Banishment
for their Persons, and Forfeiture of their Estate: 13 Rich. 2. Stat. cap. 21.
Notwithstanding all this, the Roman Horseleach would not so give over. The
King grew into displeasure with his Subjects, and they with him, and with one
another; they see the Pope still on Horseback, and fear that the English
Clergy, their own Country men, if not Friends, and Abbettors, yet are but
faint, and feigned Enemies to the Popes Cause. Nor was it without Cause that
their fear was such, for as the Pope had two hands to receive, so they had two
hearts, making show of forming blows at the Pope, but then always at a
distance, or when without the Popes Guard; and thus the Laws begin to stammer
and cannot speak so plain English as they were wont. The people hereat
offended, resolve to put the Clergy into the Van, and to try their mettle to
the full.

16 Rich. 2. cap. 5.
At the last Parliament that Richard the Second did hold, both the Lords
Temporal, and Spiritual, are opposed one by one. The Lords Temporal (like
themselves) resolve and enter their Resolutions, to defend the right of the
Crown in the Cases of Provisors; although even amongst these great men all
were not equally resolute; for Sir William Brian had purchased the Popes
Excommunication against some that had committed Burglary, and he was committed
to the Tower for his labor: But the Prelates answer was ambiguous, Antiq. Brit.
and with modifications, which was all one to cry (as men use to say) Craven:
yet was the Statute made peremptory, according to what was formerly Enacted.
And though the Prelates cautionary way of proceeding, might be a principal
reason why the Popes power held so long in England, in an usurping way: yet
Kings also much conduced thereto, by seeking too much their Personal ease
above the Honor of their Place, and the Popes blessings, and opinion of his
Favor, more then their own good, or the Peoples liberty: for there was no
other balm for a distracted mind, then that which dropped from the Popes
lips. In like manner Richard the Second, being already, at least in purpose,
estranged from his People, sought to get friends at Rome, to hold by the
Spiritual Sword, what he was in danger to loose, by laying aside the Sword of
Justice, which is the surest Tenure for Kings to hold by: And though the
Popedom was now under a Schism, between two Popes, Clement and Urban; yet he
was so far won for Urban, 2 Rich. 2. cap. 7.
that he not only engaged himself, and the Parliament, to determine his
Election, and uphold the same; but also, Ex abundante, did by Implication allow
to him an Indefinite Power, to grant Provisions, and so at once he lost the
Die, and gained a Stake, that like a bubble looked fair, but soon vanished
away.

Nevertheless, these two Comrades, whiles they were together, resolved to make
the most of each other that they could; and therefore though the Popedom liked
not the King, yet the Pope had his love so far, as he could deny himself;
for he had already denied his Kingdom: Antiq. Brit. 272.
And (if the Articles exhibited against the King by Henry the Fourth, be true)
the Pope had his Faith also: For (that he might be rid of his reputed Enemy,
Arch Bishop Arundell) he trusted the Pope with that Complement of making Walden
Arch Bishop of Canterbury in Arundells stead; which the Pope took so kindly,
as he made it a President for Provisors for the future. Nor did the King stick
in this one Singular; but made it his Custom in passing of Laws, (especially,
such as the King was most devoted unto) to put more Confidence in the Popes
Amen, then in all the Prayers of his Commons, with his own Soit fait, to boot.
The sum then will be that the Prize was now well begun, concerning the Popes
power in England. Edward the Third, made a fair blow, and drew blood; Richard
the Second, seconded him, but both retired; the former left the Pope to lick
himself whole, the later gave him a salve, and yet it proved a Gangrene in the
conclusion.

The second means used to bring down the power of the Pope in this Nation, was
to abate the power or height of the English Clergy: for though the times were
not so clear as to espy the Root of a Pope in Prelacy, yet experience had
taught them, that they were so nigh engaged, that they would not part. And
therefore, first, they let these men know, that Prelacy was no Essential
Member to the Government of the Kingdom; but as there was a Government
established before that rank was known, so there may be the like when it is
gone. For Edward the Third, being troubled with a quarrel between the two Arch
Bishops of Canterbury, and York, concerning Superiority, in bearing the
Cross; and the important Affairs of Scotland, so urging. Summoned a
Parliament at York, which was fain to be delaied and adjourned for want of
appearance, and more effectual Summons issued forth; but at the day of
Adjournment, none of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury would be there;
and upon this Occasion the Parliament was not only interrupted in their
proceedings, but an ill president was made, for men to be bold with the Kings
Summons, in such Cases as liked not them; and thereupon a Statute was made to
enforce Obedience upon Citizens, and Burgesses, 15 E. 3. St. 3. cap. 6.
and such Ecclesiastics as held, per Baroniam. Nevertheless, when the matters
concerning Provisors began to come upon the Stage, which was within two years
after that Law was made, the Clergy found that matter too warm for them, and
either did not obey the Summons, or come to the Parliament; or if they came,
kept aloof; or if not so, would not Vote; or if that, yet order their tongues,
so as nothing was certainly to be gathered, but their doubtful or rather
double mind. These Prelates thus discovered, the Parliament depended no more
upon them, further then they saw meet: At six or seven Parliaments, determined
matters without their Advice; and such as crossed the Principles of these men:
and therefore in a rational way might require their Sense above all the rest,
had they not been prepossessed with prejudice, and parties in the matter. Nor
did Edward the Third, ever after hold their Presence at so high Repute at such
meetings; and therefore Summoned them, or so many of them, as he thought meet
for the Occasion; sometimes more, sometimes fewer, and at a Parliament, in his
forty and seventh year, he Summoned only four Bishops, and five Abbots. And
thus the matter in Fact passed in these times, albeit the Clergy still made
their claim of Vote; and desired the same to be entered upon Record.

And thus the Parliament of England tells all the World, Antiq. Brit. 23. Co.
that they hold themselves complete without the Clergy, and to all intents and
purposes, sufficient to conclude matters concerning the Church, without their
Concurrence. Thus began the Mewing time of Prelacy, and the principal Feather
of their wings to fall away, having now flourished in England nigh eight
hundred years; and had future Ages pursued the flight as it was begun, these
Lordings might have beaten the Air, without making any speedy way, or great
work, saving the noise.

A third step yet was made further, in order to the reducing of the power of
the Popedom in England, but which stumbled most immediately upon the greatness
of the Prelates. For it was the condition of the Spiritual Powers, besides
their height of Calling to be set in high Places, so as their Title was from
Heaven; but their Possessions, were from men, whereby they gained Lordship,
Authority, and Power, by way of Appendix to their Spiritual Dignities: This
Addition however it might please them, yet it for a long time ere now had been
occasion of such murmur and grudge in the Commons against the Clergy, as though
it advanced the Clergy for the present, yet it treasured up a back reconing for
these men, and made them liable to the displeasure of the Laity, by seizure of
their great places: when as otherwise their Ecclesiastical Dignities had been
beyond their reach. And of this, these times begin now to speak louder then
ever, not only by complaints made in Parliament by the People, 25 E. 3. R^t.
Palm. 22. n. 15
but also by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to the King, that the
Kingdom had been now long, and too long time governed by the Clergy, to the
disherison of the Crown; and therefore prayed, that the principal Offices of
the Kingdom, might henceforth be executed by the Laity: and thus the stir
arose between the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, each prevayling or loosing
ground, as they had occasion to lay the way open for them. The Duke of
Lancaster being still upon the upper ground, that as little regarded the Popes
Curse, as the Clergy loved him.

But the worst, or rather the best, is yet behind; Outward Power, and
Honorable places, are but undersetters, or props to this Gourd of Prelacy,
that might prove no less prejudicial by creeping upon the ground, then by
perking upward: For so long as Error abides in the Commons, Truth can have
little security amongst Princes; although it cannot be denied, but its a good
sign of a clear morning, when the Sun rising, glories upon the top of the
Mountains. God gives Commission therefore to a Worm, to smite this Gourd in
the root, and so at once both Prelate, and Pope, do wither by undermining.
This was Wickleife, that had the double Honor of Learning in Humane and Divine
Mysteries; the latter of which had for many years passed obscurely, as it were
in a twilight amongst the meaner sort, who had no Indowments to hold it forth
amongst the throng of learned or great men of the World.

And though the news thereof did sound much of Holiness and Devotion, Theames
unmeet to be propounded to an Age scarce Civillized: Yet because diverse of them
were more immediately reflecting upon the Policy of the Church, wherein all the
greater sort of the Churchmen were much concerned, but the Pope above all the
rest; the access of all the matter, was made thereby more easy to the
Consideration of the great Lords and Princes in the Kingdom, who out of
principles of State, were more deeply engaged against the Pope, then others of
their rank formerly had been: Duke John of Gant led the way in this Act, and
had a party amongst the Nobility, that had never red the Canon Law.

These held forth Wickleife and his Learning to the World, and Edward the Third
himself savoured it well enough, but in his old Age desiring his ease, was
contented to look on, whiles his Lords Temporal and Spiritual played their
Prize, yet giving his plaudite rather to his Son, then his Spiritual
Fathers, as if led by Principles of Nature, rather then Religion: This was the
blossoming part of the Wickleifists, but the principal strength was from
beneath, where the roots spread and fastened exceedingly, especially in the
South, and Eastern parts of this Kingdom. To tell of the Usurpations of the
Clergy, the Idolatry of their costly Worship, the vanity of their Curses, etc.
was exceeding welcome news to an oppressed multitude, especially where these
things were rightly understood. The Issue soon manifested it self to the
World, no Parliament passed without reflections at Prelates, Rome, or some such
thing; and not only the persons and practices of these men, but even their
Laws and Canons, were begun to be had in contempt; 51 E. 3. n. 46.47.
and their missives slighted. And thus these men pretending Patronage, both
from Right drawn from Heaven, and derived from men, fail in their Evidence,
unless the people do still believe more then they are able to understand.

No marvel if Rome be now rouzed, and that sort of men that formerly were
Wolves in Sheeps clothing, become now red and fiery Dragons, taking up a new
course of Establishing their Power by Persecution. This was a way of Power
indeed, but its a touchy thing to have to do with fire, least it gets too
high. It is therefore holden a point of discretion by the Prelates, not to
meddle with the Lords or the Common People; the former were too great, the
later too many: the one sort would not hear, the other would not understand:
The Teachers therefore being the Velites, at them they give fire. Wickleife
their Leader, comes on bravely; and notwithstanding, they all made at him, he
routes them, and in despite of them all, comes off fairly, and dies in his bed
by the course of Nature: Antiq. Brit.
Then an Ordinance is levelled at the rest of the Teachers: This was made of an
old Canon, the nature whereof was to this purpose.

5 Rich. 2. Stat. 2. c. 5.
That upon complaint of the Bishop, the Kings Writ shall be granted, to
apprehend Preachers of Heresies, Errors, and matters of Slander, tending to
Discord, and Discention, between the States of this Realm, with their
Factors, and Abbettors; and to imprison them, till they be acquitted according
to the Law of the Church.

This Law (for such it yet appears) gives occasion to consider of these
particulers, Viz. The Crime, the Delinquents, the manner of Inquisition, and
the penalty. For the first, (not to trouble my way with Debate, about the right
of liberty of Preaching) the matter in Fact was, that men did publicly Preach
without Authority, matters of Theology, tending (as its said) to sow discord
and dissension; so as they are under consideration and censure of the
Churchmen, and Canon Law, in one regard, and of the Laws of the Kingdom, and
Civil Magistrate, as disturbers of the Peace, on the other side: and thus the
Subjects liberty is cast into a mysterious, cloudy, and doubtful posture, by
matters of Opinion.

Secondly, the Persons Delinquent, are also left to an indefinite Construction:
For they are not only Preachers in public, which might be an Order of Men,
within the Church Cognizance as things then stood; in regard it was permitted
to the Church, to Authorize Men to preach, but also their Factors, and
Abbettors; words that might comprehend any other person whatsoever, according
to the passion or discretion of the Churchmen.

Thirdly, the manner of this Inquisition must be according to the Canon, and
then the people are at the Churchmens mercy, to return Complaints against whom
they please, upon such Grounds as they shall think meet. The Persons that must
make this Inquisition by this Law, are the Ordinaries, or any one of them, and
for ought appears the same might be done, by Pope, Council, general,
National, Provincial, Diocessan, or their Delegates, according to the Canon:
Although the last president that I met with, was executed by a Grand Council
of Lords, and Prelates, in the time of Henry the Second. But now the Clergy
finding the Laity, began to swell against the Canon; they thought it high time
to get the Civil Sword to join in the work, to be as their Hands to
apprehend, and Goalers to hold in Custody, such as they should complain of,
without any other Legal Conviction; although hereby, they not only disclaimed
the exercising of their own power of Imprisoning, which they by the Canon
formerly claimed to have in such Cases; but also acknowledged to receive their
power Judicatory in such Cases from the Parliament.

Thus was this Ordinance levelled, as I said, but the shot fell short: For this
Law attained no further perfection, then a mere shape, and was complained of
by the Parliament, within few months after its first noise, that it was made
and published without the Commons consent, 6 Rich. 2. Artic. 52.
or knowledge; and that the Nature thereof was directly contrary to the
Liberties of the people; and therefore they prayed that it might be repealed,
and the same was done accordingly; although the times have been such as would
not suffer the same to come into the public Book of Statutes in Print. But
whether Statute or no Statute, they tell the King plainly, that they will not
further be bound or justified by the Prelates, then they, or their Ancestors
were anciently used to be; and besides that, they thought somewhat more, which
they laid up against future times; nor was it long ere they discovered it. For
a Subsidy being offered to the King by the Laity, under a Proviso, that the
Clergy would grant a tenth; the Clergy took this Articulating of the Commons
in snuff, and protested that the Laity should not charge them. The Commons
hereat begin to bid battle, to the Temporalties of the Clergy, and had not the
King been a fast friend in good earnest unto the Clergy, the Laity had won the
Field. Thus were these times like the motion of the Balance unto the
Churchmen, sometimes up, sometimes down; getting somewhat which they formerly
had not, with less assurance in what they had.

CAHP. VII. Concerning Trade.
KINGS hitherto had lived upon the main stock, improving the same to the
utmost penny: few of them laid up for the future, much less indevoured to
advance the principal for their successors.

There had now been ten Kings of this Nation since the Conquest, all of them
spending what they had, or could get from the people, in the maintenance of
their Patrimony, or their own Lusts: if any overplus was either gained by, or
saved from the game, their Executors might be the better for it, their Heirs
were not: but Edward the third had a new game to play, he must gain his right
by his Sword, or he must loose it; his Spirit was too big to sit still and bear
blows: and yet pre-advising himself about the poverty of the people, and that
their patience would be spent soon after their supplies, if they continually
saw much going out, and nothing coming in; he had a rule upon his private
expenses, a good gloss upon the public, and a platform for the augmenting
of the treasure of the Kingdom, as well for the benefit of the people, as of
the Crown. In order to the first, it is considerable, that the Royal family
was great and numerous above all his predecessors: that besides the King and
Queen who were of a gallant and accomplished deportment, they had a son, a
Prince of as great renoune as ever Prince had, and he also family suitable to
his generosity: that they had other children, every on like their Father, both
for War and Peace; and that for the maintenance of all these, the expenses
must be in reason larger then formerly they were wont to be; nevertheless;
because purveyance for the King had already swelled so big, that all other
oppressions seemed to be swallowed up into that one, the King to moderate the
rigor thereof made nigh twenty Statutes, 4 E. 3. cap. 4. 14 E. 3. c. 19. 34 E.
3. cap. 2. 36 E. 3. cap. 2.5, 6.
first excluding all servants at wages; and Horses and Dogs which were put to
board with the Sheriffs: then reducing the purveyance only to the families of
himself, his wife, and children, then to the families of himself, the Queen,
and Prince: and in the levy hereof, some men's estates were absolutely
privileged, and some kind of goods, as sheep before shearing, 14 E. 3. cap. 1.
24 E. 3. cap. 6. and 15. 4 E. 3. cap. 4. 14 E. 3. c. 19. 36 E. 3. c. 3. 4 E 3.
cap. 3. 28 E. 3. c. 12.
and trees about the dwelling house. Nor is the settling of the manner less
considerable. It must be levied by authority in writing under the seal: and it
must not be taken against the owners will, or upon malice; nor must be spared
for reward; the price must be the same with the true Market price; the measure
according to the common measure stricked, and the payment must be immediately,
if the price be under twenty Shillings, if above, 36 E. 3. cap. 2.
it must be made in a quarter of a year, and no man must charge more carrige
then is necessary, and thus was this wild Ivy of purveyance that like some
kinds of plants spreads over all, by rooting up and cutting down brought into
some kind of fashion, that if did no good it might do the less hurt unto the
People.

Secondly, although it be true that Edward the third was a King of many taxes
above all his predecessors, yet cannot this be imputed as a blot to the honor
of the Law, or liberty of the people; for the King was not so unwise as either
to desire it without evident cause, or to spend it in secret or upon his own
private interests, nor so weak and irresolved as not to employ himself and his
Soldiers to the utmost to bring to pass his pretentions, nor so unhappy as to
fail of the desirable issue of what he took in hand: so as though the people
parted with much money, yet the Kingdom gained much honor and renoune, and
becoming a terror to their neighbors, enjoyed what they had in fuller
security and so were no loosers by the bargain in the conclusion. Secondly,
although they parted with much, yet nothing to Prerogative but in a
Parliamentary way; and so it was not taken but given. Thirdly, though the taxes
were frequent, yet but light; for frequent light taxes steal insensibly without
regret, and as they grow into matters of course, so they meet with acceptance
of course. Two things made them of light account. First, they were not taxes
altogether of Money in kind, but of goods, such as the sheafe and fleece, and
such like things, whereof the ownership is visible, whereas many are supposed
to have Money which have it not, but must borrow it or sell their goods at an
under rate many times to accomplish it for the payment of their Taxes. 5 E. 3.
c. 6.
Secondly, these Taxes were assessed by the Neighborhood, and not upon
extremity of Survey, by Commissioners, who many times are subject to miscarry
upon grounds of private Interest, or for want of due information, or by making
more haste then good speed.

These Taxes likewise were reduced to the ancient rule, according to the
Statute of Westminster the first. And thus did this King show himself truly
Royal in demanding his Taxes upon evident grounds of State, levying them with
a tender hand, 25 E. 3. c. 11.
and employing them to their right end.

Thirdly, that which digested all, and bred good blood, was in that the people
had quid pro quo, by the advance of Trade, wherein the King showed himself the
Cape Merchant of the World. Certainly, men's parts in these times were of vast
reach, that could manage such Wars, settle such a Government, and lay such a
foundation of a treasury by Trade, a thing necessary to this Island, next unto
its own being, as may appear, not only in regard of the riches of this
Nation, but in regard of the strength thereof: And in regard of the maintenance
of the Crown; the two later of which being no other then a natural effluence
of the former, it will be sufficient to touch the same in order to the thing in
hand. Now as touching that, its evident that the riches of any Nation are
supported by the Conjuncture of three regards.

First, that the natural Commodities of the Nation may be improved.

Secondly, that the poorer sort of people, be set a work.

Thirdly, that the value of money be rightly balanced.

For as on the one part, though the people be never so laborious, if the
natural Commodities of the Island be not improved by their labor, the people
can never grow much richer, then barely for subsistence during their labor: so
neither can the improvement of the natural Commodity enrich the Kingdom, so
long as many mouths are fed upon the main stock, and waste the same by
idleness, and prodigality: Nor though both these should concur, yet cannot
the Kingdom be said truly to be rich, unless by intercourse and traffic,
there be an emptying out of the superfluity of such Commodities by way of
barter, or otherwise. for such Foreign Commodities, whereof this Nation
stands in most need, for supply of all occasions. For God has so attempered
the whole Regiment of the earth, in such manner, that no one Nation under
Heaven, can well and comfortably subsist in, and by it self, but all must give
and receive mutual Commodity from each other: otherwise, superfluity would
make any Commodity (though in it self never so precious) vile; and little
conducible to the enriching of the Nation. Now for the compassing of all these,
the Wise men of these times, first took into their consideration the
principal Commodities of this Kingdom, 2 E. 3. cap. 9.
and because they found them impounded in the Staple, they set all at liberty
to buy and sell the same as they pleased: And thus began a Free Trade of Wool,
throughout the Realm* and matter for employment by every man that would: but
this continued not long. The people soon had Commodity enough for work, and
Kings liked too well of the restraining of that liberty, in order to their own
benefit, and soon found out occasions to reconcile the reason of State with
their own Interests, and at length settled the Staple in certain places in
several parts of the Kingdom; 27 E. 3. cap. 3.
but this extended only unto the Commodities of Wool, Leather, and Lead; for
as yet the Manufactures were not come to Maturity. Secondly, the endeavor was
to advance Manufacture, and principally such of them as are made of the Staple
Commodities, amongst all which, Wool had the precedence, as being the most
principal and ancient Commodity of the Kingdom; and the Manufacture of Wool
of long use, but had received little encouragement before these times. For that
it formerly had been the principal flower in the Flemish Garden, and nourished
from this Nation, by the continual supply of Wool that it received from
hence, which was the principal cause of the ancient League between the House
of Burgundy, and this Crown. But Edward the Third, was now too well acquainted
with the Flemings Affairs, by a joint Engagement with them in the Wars with
France, and therein had gained so good an opinion amongst them, that he might
adventure to change a Complement for a Courtesy. The Staples beyond the Sea
were now taken away, he now inhibiteth the Importation of Foreign Clothes,
and having gained these two steps onward his way, he represents to the Flemings
their unsettled Condition, 11 E. 3. cap. 2.3, 5.
by these bordering Wars with France, the peaceable Condition of England, and
Freedom of the People; then propounds to them an Invitation to come over into
England, promises them share and share like with his own People, with such
other Immunities, as they take his offer, come over, and brought their
Manufacture with them, which could never after be recalled: So as now the
Wool, and Manufacture dwell together, and like to Man and Wife, so long as
they care for one another, both will thrive, but if they come to play their
games apart; both will be loosers in the Conclusion.

The third step to the advance of Trade, was the Exportation of the surplusage
of the Staple Commodities, that remained over and besides that proportion that
should suffice for the Manufactures; to which end, it was ordered, that no
Wool should be Exported till it had remained at the Staple by the space of
fifteen days. 31 E. 3. c. 8.
That time was necessary, and longer time might have been Convenient, but that
the Markets beyond the Sea could not be delayed longer time, without much
damage to the Merchant and Owner, for as much as Winter time is no time to
prepare Wool for the Manufacture, and by over long continuance of the
Commodity upon the hand of the Merchant, or Owner, both the Commodity, and the
Manufacture might surfeit, lie in despair, and Trade choked thereby. For its a
necessary preparative to Trade, to keep the Nation in some kind of hunger
after the Staple Commodities, so as the main stock be not too great to occupy,
and yet to leave enough to use. But because this Nation formerly had been, and
as yet were used too much to Foreign Manufactures, the importing of which, did
debase the Home made Manufactures, and discouraged that work; therefore the Law
was made to reduce the vanity of Apparel, (which infected these times) to
more Sobriety.

Some delight in Foreign Commodities, and Manufactures, is doubtless
profitable both for Trade and Shipping; so as what is Imported, exceeds not
what is Exported: for too much of that makes the Domestic Commodity
contemptible, the Nation poor, and the People want work, because its a noted
vanity of this Nation, That they love things far fetched, and dear bought. As a
cure therefore to this disease, 43 E. 3. cap. 1.
English Cloth by Law is enjoined to be worn by all Persons, 11 E. 3. c. 2, 3.
under the Degree of a Lord, and so the former Inhibition of Importation of
Foreign Clothes was strengthened thereby. And because the English Clothiers
should not take advantage hereby, to raise the price of their Clothes to their
own covetous pin: 27 E. 3. c. 4. 7 Rich. 2. c. 9. 17 Rich. 2. cap. 2. 50 E. 3.
c. 7.
Therefore the Law also settled a certain price and measure, and the same
before sale was to be allowed upon view, and for the goodness of the Clothes,
and perfect working thereof; Laws were likewise made against Exportation of
all such as were not perfectly made.

A fourth step in the advancement of Trade, was the compelling stoop to the
Perke again, unless upon hope of prey or gain to be gotton thereby. Such were
the times of Edward the Third, wherein partly for that cause, and partly for
the scarcity of men left from the Sword and Pestilence, not only workmen were
scarce and dear, but even the Mass it self was grown stately, the private
delights of Kings and great Men, and scarce vouchsafeing to be seen by common
gaze, but at a great distance: The Priests had little Charity, and the Poor
had as little money; so as no penny, no Pater Noster. A sick and very crazy
time questionless was it, when the Clergy were stately, 36 E. 3. c. 8.
and the Poor idle. The Priests wages for this cause are now settled, and they
that would get much, must get many littles, and do much: but the greater sore
was amongst the poorer sort; either they would not serve, 23. and 25. E. 3. 2
Rich. 2. c. 8.
or at such wages, as could not consist with the price of the Clothes, and the
subsistence of the Clothier. Laws therefore are made to compel them to work,
and to settle their wages; so as now its as beneficial to them to serve the
meaner sort of Clothiers, as the richer sort: For the Master must give no more,
nor the Servant take more, and thus became labor current in all places.

Viz. The enriching of this Kingdom with Foreign Commodities, and the
maintaining of Shipping, which was and is a principal means, not only of
riches, but of strength unto all Sea bordering Countries, especially regard
being had to these three Considerations.

First, that Importation do bring in more profit, then Exportation disburseth.

Secondly, that both Exportation, and Importation be made by Shipping belonging
to this Nation, fo far as may consist with the benefit of this Nation.

Thirdly, that the Exportation be regulated to the overplus, saving the main
stock at home. The truth of the first will be evident from this ground, That no
Nation can be rich that receives more dead Commodities from abroad, then it can
spend at home, or vend into Foreign parts, especially if it be vended in its
proper kind, and not in money; 27 E. 3.
and therefore the Laws provided that no Merchant should Export more money
then he Imports, and what he does Export must be of the new stamp, which it
seems was inferior in vallue to the old: yet the times may prove so
penurious, that this rule may be waved for a season.

The second is no less beneficial; for as it is in War, so in all Trades;
the greater the number is that is employed, the more effectual the issue will
be: and therefore though it in the general be more beneficial, that all
Exportation and Importation might be by our own shipping; yet in regard times
may be such, as now they were, that the shipping of this Nation, is more then
ordinarily employed for the service of the State: And that every Nation
striveth to have the benefit of Exportation by Vessels of their own.

And lastly, in regard the case may be such, as Importation may be, at a
cheaper rate by Foreign Vessels, and Exportation likewise may for the time be
more prejudicial to this Nation, if done by our own shipping, then those of
other Nations. Therefore the course must be changed, so far forth as will stand
with the occasions of the State, and common profit of this Nation. And for
these causes, and such like, 27 E. 3. 43 E. 3. c. 1. 5 Rich. 2. c. 3. 6 Rich.
2. c. 8. 14 Rich. 2. c. 5
in the times whereof we now Treat, the Laws often varied; sometimes no Staple
Commodity must be Exported in English bottomes; sometimes all must be done by
them, and within a year again that liberty was restrained; and after that,
liberty given to Forrainers to Export as formerly.

The third and last Consideration is as necessary as any of the former; for if
Trade be maintained out of the maine Stock the Kingdom in time must needs be
brought to penury, because it is their Magazine: 31 E. 3. c. 8.
and for this cause it was provided, that all Wool should remain at the
Staple 15 days, to the end it might be for the Kingdoms use: if any one would
buy, they must do it within that time, otherwise it might be Exported.



First, for preserving a full Market, for whiles the Commodity lies scattered
in all places, the Market must needs be the leaner; partly in regard the
Commodity lies in obscurity, and partly because when it is known where, yet its
not easily discovered whether it be vendible or not; and besides small parcells
are not for every man's labor, and the greater are not for every man's money.

Secondly, Staples are convenient for the stating of the general price of the
Commodities; in regard the quantity of the Commodity is thereby the more easily
discovered, which commonly makes the price. And the quantity of the Commodity
thus discovered will not only settle the price to it self, but also balance
the price of the Manufacture.

Thirdly, the Staple having thus discovered the quantity of the Commodity, will
be a ready way to settle the quantity of the main Stock that must be preserved,
and regulate Exportation as touching the overplus. But it cannot be denied that
the first and principal mover of the making of the Staple, was the benefit of
the Crown: for when the Commodity was gone beyond the Sea, it imports not to
the Subjects in England, whether the same be sold at one place, or more, or in
what place the same be settled, until the Manufacture was grown to some
stature; and then the place became Litigious. The benefit of Exportation,
pretended much interest in the settling thereof beyond the Sea, but in truth it
was another matter of State; for when it was beyond sea, it was a moveable
Engine to Convey the Kings pleasure or displeasure, as the King pleased; for it
was a great benefit to the Country, or place where ever it settled; or else it
moved or stayed according to the inclination of the people where it was, either
for War, or Peace. But on the contrary, the Interest of the People began to
interpose strongly: and for these Causes the Parliament likewise intermed^ed in
the place; and thus the Scene is altered: some times its beyond the Seas, in
one place, or in another: sometimes in England. In Edward the Thirds time, 43
E. 3. cap. 1. 12 Rich. 2. cap. 16. 14 Rich. 2. cap. 11.
we find it sometimes at Calis, sometimes in England,: In Richard the Seconds
time; we find it again beyond the Seas, at Middleburgh, thence removed to
Calis, and after into England: where at length the People understood themselves
so well, that the Parliament settled the same, it being found to burdensome for
the Manufactures to travel t^ the Staple beyond the Seas, for the Commodity
that grew at their own doors, besides the inhancing of the price, by reason
of the carriage, which falling also upon the Manufactures, must needs tend to
the damage of the whole Kingdom. This was one way indeed, and yet possibly
another might have been found; for if a Computation had been made of the main
Stock, and a Staple settled within the Kingdom for that, and the overplus
exported to a Staple beyond the Sea, it might have proved no less commodious,
and more complying. It is very true, that there are many that call for the
liberty of the People, that every man may sell his own Commodity as he pleases;
and it were well that men would consider themselves as well in their Relations,
as in their own Personal respects: for if every man were independent, his
liberty would be in like manner independent; but so long as any man is a Member
of a Commonwealth, his liberty must likewise depend upon the good of the
Commonwealth; and if it be not good for the Nation, that every man should sell
his own Commodity as he pleases; he may claim the liberty as a Free man but
not as an English man; nor is that liberty just, so long as his Country has
an interest in his Commodity for its safety and welfare, as in his own person.
I do not assert the manner of buying the Staple Commodities, by Merchants of
the Staple, to sell the same again in kind, for their private advantage;
diverse limitations must concur to save it from an unlawful engrossing; nor
does it appear to me that the Staplers in these times used such course, or were
other then mere Officers for the regulating of the Staple, in nature of a Court
of Piepouders, belonging to some Fair or Market. Nevertheless, I conjecture
that it may well be made evident from Principles of State, that Mart, Markets,
and Staples of Commodities, that are of the proper Offspring of this Nation, are
as necessary to Trade, as Conduits are to places that want water.

25 E. 3. Stat. 5 cap. 13. 6 E. 3. cap. 2. and 3.
As touching the excellency of the Money, several Rules were made, as against
imbasing of Money, against Foreign Money not made current, against counterfeit
and false Money: For according to the goodness of the Money, so will the Trade
be more or less, for the Merchant will rather loose in the price of his
Commodity in Money, then in exchange for other Commodity, because the vallue
thereof is less certain, and the Transportation more chargeable.

Secondly, as touching the plenty of Money, that is as necessary to the
advance of the Trade, as of the goodness of it: for according to the plenty
thereof, will be the plenty of the Manufactures, because Handy-crafts men
having no Commodities but their labor, cannot work for exchange, nor can
exchange supply Rents and maintenance to the greater sort of people. 6 E. 3. c.
2, 3. 17 Rich. 2. cap. 1.
To this end therefore it is provided against melting of Money, and Exportation
of Silver and Gold: And yet to encourage or not discourage Importation of
Silver and Gold, liberty was given to every man to Export so much as they did
Import, provided that what they carry away, must be of the new stamp, or Minted
in this Nation. By this means Bullion came in with probability, 27 E. 3.
that much thereof would remain in the Nation in liew of Commodities exported,
or if not, the greater part; yet at least the Mint gained, and that was some
benefit to the Nation.

Thirdly, for the fuller currence of the Money, the Mint was established in
several parts of this Kingdom, according to the ancient custom, and this was
advantageous both to the Mint, and to the stock of Money in the Kingdom. This
establishment was with this difference, 18 E. 3. c. 6.
that though the Mint was settled by the Parliament, yet the Exchange was left
to the Directory of the King and his Council; 18 E. 3. cap. 6. 25 E. 3. Stat.
5. cap. 12.
because the Exchange is an uncertain thing, subject to sudden alteration in
other Nations, and its necessary that in this Country, it be as suddenly
balanced, with the Exchange in other Countries, or in a short time, the
Nation may receive extreme damage. In regard whereof, and many other sudden
exigencies in Trade, it seems to me convenient, That a particular Council
were established for continual influence into all parts of these Dominions, to
take into consideration the quantity of the Staple Commodities, necessary to be
retained as a Stock at home, for the use of the People, and the Manufactures;
and accordingly to balance the Trade of Exportation and Importation; by
opening, and enlarging, or shutting, and straitning the Stream, as occasion
does require.

And lastly, to watch the course of the Exchange in Foreign Parts, and to
parallel the course thereof, in this Land thereto: For otherwise, the Public
must necessarily suffer so long, as Private men seek their own particular
interests, only in their course of Trade.

CHAP. VIII. Of Legiance, and Treason, with some Considerations upon Calvin's
Case.
AS times change manners, so do manners change Laws: For its the wisdom of
a State, when it cannot overrule occasion to pursue and turn it to the best
issue it can. Multitude of Laws therefore are not so much a sore to the
People, as a Symptom of a sore People; yet many times Laws are said to be
many, when as they are but one, branched into many Particulars, for the
clearing of the Peoples understanding, (who usually are not excellent in
distinguishing,) and so becomes as new Plasters made of an old Salve, for
sores that never brake out before. Such sore times were these, whereof we now
Treat, wherein every touch made a wound, and every wound went to the heart,
and made the Category of Treason swell to that bigness, that it became an
individuum vagum, beyond all rule, but the present sense of timorous Judges,
and a touchy King. Thus were many of the ignorant and well meaning people in an
hideous danger of the gulf of forfeiture before they found themselves nigh the
brimme.

All men do agree that treason is a wound of Majesty, but all the doubt is,
where this Majesty rests originally, and what is that legiance which is due
thereto, the breach whereof amounts to so high a censure; for some men place
all Majesty in one man, whom they call an absolute Monarch. Others in the great
men, and others in the people, and some in the concurrence of the King and body
of the people: and it is a wild way to determine all in one conclusion, when as
the same depends wholly upon the constitution of the body; look then upon
England in the last posture, as the rigider sort of monarchiall politicians do,
and Majesty will never be in glory, but in the concurrence of the King and
Parliament, or convention of Estates, and so upon the whole account it will be
upon the people, whose welfare is the supreme Law. Rome had Kings, Consuls,
Dictators, Decemviri, and Tribunes long before the Orators time, and he saw the
foundation of an Empire, or perpetual Dictatorship in the person of the first
of the Caesar's; any of all which might have challenged the supremacy of Majesty
above the people: and yet the often change of Government showed plainly that it
rested upon another pin; and the Orator in express words no less; when
speaking of the Majesty of that Government, he allotteth it not to those in
chief command, but defines it to be, magnitudo populi Romani; Cic. partit.
Orat.
afterward when the pride of the Emperors was come to its full pitch in the
times of Augustus and Tiberius; an Historian of those times in the life of
Tiberius tells us, that he declared the bounds of Treason to be determined in
three particular instances, of treachery against the Army; Sedition amongst the
people, and violating the Majesty of the People of Rome; in all which men were
not punishable for words, but actions and endeavors. I do not herein propound
the Government of the Roman Empire as a model for England, but a majori, may
conclude, Si quis majestatem populi Romani minuisset, Tacit. an. 1.
that if the proper seat of Majesty was in the people of Rome when Emperors
were in their fullest glory, its no defacing of Majesty in England to seat it
upon the whole body, from whom the same is contracted in the representative and
so much thereof divided unto the person of the King, as any one member is
capable of, according to the work allotted unto him. These several seats of
Majesty making also so many degrees do also imply as many degrees of wounding,
for its written in nature, that the offense tending to the immediate destruction
of the whole body is greater then that which destroys any one member only, and
when the written Law makes it treason to compass the destruction of the Kings
Person, it leaves it obvious to common sense, that its a higher degree of
Treason to compass the destruction of the representative, and above all, to
destroy the whole body of the People; crimes that never entered into the conceit
of wickedness it self in those more innocent times; much less saw they any
cause to mention the penalty by any written Law. Nevertheless because many
sadd examples had accurred within the memory of this present age, of the danger
of the person and honor of Kings; and yet on the otherside they saw that in
such cases of Treason the Kings honor was made of retching leather, and might
easily be strained within the compass of a wound of Majesty: therefore Edward
the third imitating Tiberius, reduced the crime of wound of Majesty in the
Person of the King, into certain particular instances, out of the compass
whereof, the Judges of the Law in ordinary course must not determine Treason.
These concern either the safety of the Person of the King, or of the
succession in the Royal Throne; 25 E. 3. Stat 5. cap. 2.
or lastly, the safeguard of the public right by the board and privy seal,
the vallue of Money, and by persons in matters of judicature judicially
presiding, all of them reflecting upon the King, considered in his politic
capacity; for otherwise many crimes might have been mentioned, more fatally
reflecting upon the King in his natural capacity, which nevertheless are
omitted as not worthy of so high a censure. 17 R. 2. n. 20, 21. 3 R. 2. n. 18.
22 Ass. pl. 29. Stat. 11 R. 2.
Other Treasons are left to the determination of the Parliament as occasion
should offer it self, whereof diverse examples of a new stamp accurred within
forty years next ensuing, which were of a temporary regard, and lived and died
with the times.

To these two notions of Majesty and treason, I must add a third, called
Legiance, for it is that which makes Majesty to be such indeed, and lifts it
into the Throne, and whereof the highest breach makes Treason: and because that
which has been already said reflecteth upon an opinion, or rather a knot of
opinions (for I find them not punctually adjudged) in Calvin's case, I must a
little demur to them, because as their sense is commonly taken; it alters the
fundamental nature of the Government of this nation from a commonweal to a pure
Monarchy. In handling of this case the ho. Reporter took leave to range into a
general discourse of legiance, although not directly within the conclusion of
the case; and therein first sets down the general nature thereof, that it is a
mutual bond between an English King and his people; and then more particularly
sets forth the nature of this bond in the several duties of obedience and
fealty, fo. 5. a. and those also in their several properties, Viz. natural,
absolute, fo. 7. a. due to the King, omni soli and semper, fo. 12. a. in his
natural and not politic capacity, fo. 10. a. whereas he says, this bond is
natural, he means that its due by birth, fo. 7. a. By absolute (if I mistake
him not) he means, that it is indefinite, fo. 5. b. Viz. not circumscribed by
Law, but above Law, and before Law, fo. 13. a. and that Laws were after made to
enforce the same by penalties, fo. 13. b. and therefore he concludes that this
legiance is immutable, fo. 13. b. and fo. 14. a.

Thus having stated the point as truly as I can, both for the nature of
legiance, and the object thereof, Viz. the King, and not the people, otherwise
then in order to the safety and honor of the Kings Person, considered in his
natural capacity as he is a man; I shall in the next place examine the grounds
as they are severally set down, and therein shall lead the Reader no further
then the Reporters own concessions. Not troubling the Reader with any doubt,
whether this bond consists in obedience only, or in that fealty: and in all
shall ever be mindful of the honor of that Pen with which I have to deal.

First, whereas it is said, that English legiance is natural, and grounded
upon the birth of each party within the Kings dominions and protection, it
needs no debate, so as the same be taken, sano sensu, Viz. for a qualified
legiance beared of those sublimities of absolute, indefinite, immutable, etc.
for otherwise if such a high strain of legiance be due from every English man
by birth; then all the Magna carta, or laws concerning the liberties of the
People come too late to qualify the same, because they cannot take away the
Law of nature, f. 14. a. and thus the party once born English must for ever
remain absolutely obleiged to the King of England although happily he lives not
two Months under his protection all his ensuing life time.

Secondly, the legiance of an English man to his King arises from that civil
relation between the two callings of King and subject, and therefore it is not
a natural bond which cannot be taken away. The first is true by the Reporters
own concessions; Protectio trahit subjectionem, and subjecti oprotectionem; so
he says, fo. 5. a. fo. 9. b. and therefore though it be granted that
Magistracy in general is from nature, as he says, fo. 13. a. yet of weak birth
is that inference which he makes, Viz. That English allegiance is a principle
in nature. Unless it be also admitted that all men on earth that submit not to
English legiance do sin against nature. The difference then will stand thus,
Magistracy is founded in nature, therefore legiance also. But English
Magistracy is from civil constitution, therefore is English legiance of the
like nature. In the next place, the Reporter says, that before any municiple
Law was made, Kings did dare jura, and he mounts as high for an example as the
Trojans age by the testimony of Virgil: but I believe he intended not much
strength in this, seeing its well known by any that knows the scriptures, that
there were municipal laws given, and that concerning the office of a King by
Moses, which was more ancient then those of Troy, and long before the time of
Virgil, who neither tells us in what manner those Trojan Laws were made, though
the Kings gave them, nor if al were according to the Reporters sense is the
testimony of a Poet (who sometimes uses his poetica licentia) to be taken in
terminis, in the next place, the Reporter vouches the testimony of Fortescue,
c. 12 and 13. which is as absolutely opposite to the maine point in hand, as
any Penn can declare* for he tells us of diverse sorts of Kingdoms, some gotten
by conquest, as those of Nimrod and Belus, etc. But says he, there is a
Kingdom politic, which is by the association o^ men by consent of Law, making
one chief, who is made for defense of Law, and of his subjects bodies and
Estates, and he cannot govern by any other power, and of this nature, says he,
the Kingdom of England is, fo. 30.31.32. A second piece of the foundation of
this opinion of the Reporter is taken, ab inane, it is a vain thing, says he,
to prescribe Laws but where by legiance foregoing, people are bound to obey:
but this compared with the words of Fortescue, formerly mentioned, falls of it
self to dust, and therefore I shall not further enlarge concerning it.

Thirdly, The Reporter brings in to help the matter the consent of the Law in
elder times, by certain cases vouched to that purpose; the first concerning
the Legiance of Children to Parents, which comes not to this case, because it
is a legiance of nature, and this legiance whereof we speak is yet under a
litigious title. And I suppose will in the conclusion be found to rest only
upon a civil constitution, therefore I leave that. The second is, that a man
attainted and outlawed, is nevertheless within the Kings protection for this
(says the Reporter) is a Law of nature, Indelibilis and immutabilis, and the
Parliament nor Statute can take this power away, fol. 13. b. 14. a. and
therefore the Reporter concludes, that as well the Legiance of the subject as
the protection of him by the King are both of them from the Law of nature. An
opinion that speaks much mercy, yet it seems strange, considering the pen,
for if it be a Law of nature, and immutable, for the King to protect Persons
attainted, then must no such Person suffer, for if he be under the Kings
protection, that, being by a Law of nature, cannot be changed by any positive
Law, as the Reporter says, nor can the King, be so bound, by any such Statute,
but by a nonobstante, he can set himself at liberty when he pleases, and then
the issue will be this, the King has a natural power to protect the Persons
of Law-breakers, from the power of the Law, therefore much more their Estates;
and then farewell all Law, but this of the Kings natural protection. I say
that these are of a high strain, considering what the Reporter speaks, 11.
Co. fo. 88. 8. Co. fo. 20. 4. Co. fo. 35. 7. Co. fo. 36.
elsewhere. But to pursue his instance, he says, that the King has power, to
protect an attainted person, that if any man kill him without warrant he is a
manslayer; and yet this Person attainted has lost the legal Protection. Its
true, yet not to all intents, for by the sentence of the Law, his life is bound
up under the Law of that Sentence, Viz. 35 H. 6.63.
That he must not suffer in other manner then the Sentence determines, nor
before warrant of Execution issue forth to that end. And notwithstanding the
Sentence, yet the Law leaves him a liberty of Purchase, or Inheritance, though
to the use of the Crown, and therefore in some respects, the Law protects his
Person so long as he lives, and the Kings Natural Protection is in vain in
such Cases.

Lastly, suppose the King has a power of Nonobstante, if the same be allowed
to him in a limited way by the Law, it is no argument to prove the Kings
natural Power which is driven at under natural Legiance, much less if it
cannot be made forth that the Law does allow any such power of Nonobstante at
all; but by the iniquity of the times, permits the same to subsist, only to
avoid Contention, as it came into this Kingdom by way of Usurpation. And thus
I have only discovered the Foundation of this first qualification, which I
shall only leave naked, supposing that no man seeing it, will build at all
thereupon.

The second property that comes to be considered, is, That English Legiance
is absolute, fol. 5. b. fol. 7. a. which is a word of a vast extent, serving
rather to amaze men's apprehensions, then to inlighten them; and therefore the
Reporter did well not to trouble himself or the Reader, in the clearing or
proof thereof, but left the Point rather to be believed, then understood, nor
shall I in the Negative; for God himself can have no other Legiance from an
English man, then absolute Legiance; and Kings being (as other men) subject to
err, especially in this Point of Prerogative, are much rather subject thereto,
being misled by such Doctrines as these are; Act. 14.19.
The Scripture determines this Point, and cuts the knot in sunder.

The third property of English Legiance, which the Reporter insisteth upon, is
that it is indefinite; which he explaineth to be Proprium quarto modo, so as it
is both Universal and Immutable, fol. 5. b. fol. 12. and neither defined by
Time, Place, or Person: As touching the Time, and Person, the Reporter enlarged
not at all, therefore I shall only leave the Reader to chew upon the Point,
supposing himself in the first times of Edward the Fourth, when Henry the
Sixth, was then alive; and let him resolve to which of them his Legiance had
been due, considering them both in their natural Capacity, as the Reporter
would have it. But as touching the Place, its reported that English Legiance is
not only due from an English man, to an English King in England; but in all
places of the Kings Dominion, though otherwise Foreign, as to the power of the
Law of England: yea, says the Reporter, as far as the Kings power of
Protection does extend. And yet this had not been enough, if the Premises be
granted: for if this Legiance whereof we speak be absolute, and omni soli and
semper, then is it due to the King, from an English man, ubivis Gentium.
Nevertheless, to take the Reporter in a moderate sense; it is worth
consideration, whether English Legiance in the days of Edward the Third,
extended as far as the Kings power of Protection; when as he had the Crown of
France, in a Foreign right to that of England. In this, the Reporter is
extremely Positive upon many grounds which he insisteth upon,

First, he says, that Verus and Fidelis are qualities of the mind, and cannot
be circumscribed within the predicament of Vbi; and upon this ground, he might
conclude, that this Legiance is due to the King, from an English man all the
world over, as well as in all the Kings Dominions; but concerning the ground,
it may be denied, for though simply in it self considered as a notion, Verity
or Fidelity are not circumscribed in place, yet being qualities of the soul,
and that being in the body, in relation thereunto, it may be in the predicament
of Vbi; for where ever that Body and Soul is, there is Faith and Truth,
according to its model, which though not absolute, and indefinite, yet if
according to the Laws of the place wherein the man is, he is truly said to be
Verus and Fidelis.

Secondly, the Reporter argues, that the Kings Protection is not Local, or
included within the bounds of England; therefore also is not the Legiance: for,
Protectio trahit Legiantiam, and Legiantia Protectionem: Had this reason been
formed into a Syllogism, it had appeared less valuable; for the Protection of
an English King qua talis, of an English man, is local and included within the
bounds of the Kingdom: But if the same King be also King of France, or Duke of
Aquitane; and an English man shall travel into those parts, he is still under
the same Kings Protection, yet not as King of England, but as King of France,
or Duke of Aquitane, otherwise, let the party be of France, or Aquitane, or
England, all is one, he must be (whether French or English) under an unlimitted
absolute Protection, without regard had to the Customs or Laws of the place;
yea, contrary to them, which I believe the Reporter never intended to affirm.

Thirdly, the Reporter falls upon the matter in Fact, and tells us that the
King of England, did many times, De facto, grant Protections to Persons in
places out of the English Confines, and it will not be denied: But never was
any absolute and indefinite Protection so granted; for the Protection extends
to defense from injury, and all injury is to be expounded and judged according
to the Laws of the place: Nor do any the Presidents vouched by the Reporter
clear, that the King of England did grant as King of England, Protection to any
English man in any parts of the Kings Dominion beyond the Seas, which was not
qualified according to the Laws and Customs of that place: especially, it
being apparent, that an English King may hold Dominion in Foreign parts, in
Legiance under a Foreign King; as Edward the Third, held the Duchy of Guien,
and therefore cannot grant absolute Protection in such place, nor receive
absolute Legiance from any person there being.

Fourthly, the Reporter says, that the King of England, has power to command
his Subjects of England, to go with him in his Wars, as well without the
Realm of England, as within the same; therefore the Legiance of an English man
to his King, is indefinite, and not local, or circumscribed by place, or
within the Kingdom of England. Although the first of these be granted, yet
will not the inference hold, for possibly this may arise from the constitution
of a Positive Law, and not from natural or absolute Legiance, nor does any
authority by him cited justify any such Legiance: But I cannot agree the
first; for it is not true, that the King has any such power from his own
Personal interest; nor do the authority of former Ages warrant any such
matter: for a fuller disquisition, whereof I shall refer the Reader to the
eleventh Chapter ensuing, because the Whole matter concerning the Militia,
comes there to be handled in course.

Fifthly, to close up all the rest, the Reporter brings, The Testimony of the
Judges of the Common Law, out of the Testimony of Hengham; wherein an Action
was brought by a French woman, against an English man, who refused to answer,
because the Plaintiff was a French Woman, and not of the Legiance or Faith of
England: This was disallowed by the Judges, because Legiance and Faith was
referred to England, and not to the King? Thereupon the Defendant averred, that
the Plaintiff is not of the Legiance of England, nor of the Faith of the King:
And upon this Plea thus amended, the Plaintiff gave over her Action. The
Reporter from hence observes, that Faith and Legiance is referred to the King,
indefinitely, and generally; and therefore it is so due to him. The reason
might have had more force, had the Object of Allegiance, or the nature thereof,
been the point in question; but neither of them coming to debate, and
Allegiance being subjected to England, and Faith to the King. I see not what
more can be concluded from hence, but that Allegiance from an English man is
due to England, and Faith to the King, which I suppose must be intended to be
in order to that Allegiance; because by the former Plea, England had them both,
and the King was wholly left out of the Case. Nevertheless, I rather think
that the present Point in controversy, will receive little light herefrom on
either part.

We are now come to the fourth Property of English Legiance, that it is due to
the Kings Natural Capacity, and not to his Politic Capacity, or due to the
Office of a King, in regard of the Person of the man, and not to the Person in
regard of the Office, fol. 20. And because this is of no small importance,
neither easily understood, nor granted: Therefore he backeth his Opinion by
many reasons.

First, he says, that the King swears to his Subjects in his Natural
Capacity, therefore the Subjects swear to him in his Natural Capacity. This
reason was intended to be taken from Relatives, and then it should have been
thus: A King does swear to his Subjects in their Natural Capacity, therefore
Subjects swear to a King in his Natural Capacity: but it being otherwise, it
is mistaken, and proves not the Point. Yet if we should take the Reporter, in
sano Sensu, there is no question but the Oath is made to the Natural Capacity;
yet not Terminative, more then the Oath of the Tenant to his Lord, which this
Author pleases to couple with the mutual dependence between King, and
Subject, fol. 4. b. 5. a. Nor does the Oath of an English man bind him to the
Obedience of all, or any Commands, which the King shall give in relation only
to his Natural Capacity, or in opposition to his Politic Capacity: Nor will
the Reporter himself allow that the Politic Capacity of the King, can be
separate from his Natural Capacity, fol. 10. And yet it is evident that a King
may in his Natural Capacity command that, of which in his Politic Capacity
cannot give allowance.

The second reason of this Opinion, is taken from the nature of Treason, which
says the Reporter, is committed against the Natural Person of the King; and
this is against due Legiance, according to the form of Indictments, in that
Case provided. This is not demonstrative, because that crime which is done
against the Natural person of a man, may as well extend to it, in relation to
his Place, or Office; and so may Treason be plotted against the Natural Person
of a King, as he is King: neither is their any other difference between the
murder of a King, and a private Man, but only in regard of the Place and
Office of a King, which makes the murder of him Treason; for which cause all
Indictments that do conclude, Contra Legiantiae debitum, do as well also
conclude, Contra Coronam and Dignitatem, etc.

The third reason is this; A body politic, can neither make nor take Homage,
33. H. 8. Bro. tit. Fealty: Therefore cannot the King in his Politic Capacity
take Legiance. The first must be granted only, sub modo, for though it cannot
take Homage immediately, yet by the means of the Natural Capacity, it may take
such service; and therefore that Rule holds, only where the Body Politic is
not aggregate, and not one person in several Capacities, for the Tenant that
performs his service to his Lord, performs the same to his Lord in his
Natural Capacity, but it is in relation to his Politic Capacity, as he is
his Lord: For Lord and Tenant, King and Subject, are but Notions, and neither
can give nor take service; but that man that is Lord, or Tenant, or King, or
Subject, may; even as the power of Protection is in a King, not as he is a Man,
but as a King.

The fourth reason is this, The Kings natural Person has right in the Crown
by Inheritance, therefore also in the Legiance of the Subject. This is the
strength (as nigh as I can collect) of that which is set down as a sixth
reason, but I make it the fourth: because the third, as I conceive is but an
illustration of the second; and the fifth is upon a supposall of a Fides ficta;
whereas that Faith of an English Subject, which is according to Law, is the
truer of the twain. But to the substance of this fourth reason; If the first
be granted, yet the Reporter cannot attain his conclusion; for the King may in
his Natural Capacity, have right to the Crown by Inheritance, and yet not
right in the Legiance of his Subjects, otherwise then in right of the Crown;
As in the Case of Lord and Tenant, the Lord may inherit the Lordship in his
natural Capacity, but the Service is due to him as Lord, and not as by
Inheritance in the Service in the abstract. And though it be granted that the
Legiance to a King, is of a higher strain, then that of a Tenant to his Lord,
fol. 4. b. 5. a. Yet does the Reporter bring nothing to light, to prove them to
be of a different Nature in this regard.

The fifth and last reason that comes to consideration, is, from a Testimony
of the Parliament; for it is said, That this damnable Tenet of Legiance to the
King in his Politic Capacity, is condemned by two Parliaments: But in truth I
can find but one under that Title, that mentions this Opinion, and that is
called Exilium Hugonis, which in sum is nothing else, but Articles containing
an enumeration of the particular offenses of the two Spencers against the
State, and the Sentence thereupon: The offenses are, for compassing to draw the
King by rigor, to govern according to their wills: for withdrawing him from
harkening to the advice of his Lords, for hindering of Justice, and Oppression,
and (as a means hereunto,) They caused a Bill or Scedule to be published,
containing that Homage and Legiance is due to the King, rather in relation to
the Crown, then absolutely to his Person; because no Legiance is due to him,
before the Crown be vested upon him: That if the King do not govern according
to Law; the Leiges in such case are bound by their Oath to the Crown, to remove
him either by Law or Rigor.

This is the substance of the Charge, and upon this exhibited in the Lords
House, the Lords, super totam materiam, banish them before their Case is heard,
or themselves had made any appearance thereto: So as to the matter of this
Scedule (which contains an Opinion suitable to the Point in hand, with some
additionall aggravations) the Parliament determines nothing at all: but as to
the publishing of the same, to the intent to gather a party, whereby they did
get power to act other enormities mentioned in the Charge; and in relation to
these enormities, the Lords proceeded to Sentence of banishment; all which was
done in the presence of the King, and by his disconsent, as may appear by his
discontent thereat, as all Historians of those Affairs witness: and it is not
probable that the King would have been discontented with the proceedings of the
Lords, in asserting the Prerogative of a King, in that matter of the Scedule,
if he had perceived any such thing in their purposes. Add hereunto that the
Lords themselves justified the matter of the Scedule in their own proceedings,
all which tended to enforce the King to govern according to their Counsels,
and otherwise then suited with his good pleasure: By force they removed
Gaveston from the Kings presence formerly, and afterward the Spencers, in the
same manner: So they removed the King from his Throne, and not long after, out
of the World.

Last of all, I shall make use of one or two Concessions, which has passed the
Reporters own Pen (in this discourse of his) for the maintaining, that the
Legiance of an English man, is neither Natural, nor Absolute, nor Indefinite,
nor due to the Natural Capacity, but qualified according unto Rules.

The first is this, English men do owe to their Kings Legiance, according to
the Laws, therefore is it not Natural, or Absolute, or Indefinite. The
inference is necessary, for the later is boundless, and natural; the former
is limited, and by civil constitution: If any branch therefore of English
Legiance be bounded by Laws, then the Legiance of an English man is
circumscribed, and not Absolute, or Natural. The major Proposition is granted
by the Reporter, who says, that the Municipall Laws of the Kingdom, has
prescribed the order and form of Legal Legiance, fol. 5. b. And therefore if
by the Common Law, the Service of the Kings Tenant, as of his Manor, be
limited, how can that consist with the absolute Legiance formerly spoken of,
which binds the Tenant being the Kings Subject, to an Absolute, and
Indefinite Service: Or if the Statute-Lawes have settled a Rule, according to
which each Subject ought to go to War in the Kings Service beyond the Sea,
as the Reporter grants, fol. 7. and 8. Then cannot the Legiance be absolute
to bind the Subject to go to War according to the Kings own pleasure.

Secondly, an English Kings Protection of his Subjects, is not Natural,
Absolute, Indefinite, nor Originally extends unto them in their Natural
Capacity: therefore is not the Legiance of an English Subject to his King,
Natural, Absolute, Indefinite, nor Originally extends to the King, in his
Natural Capacity.

The dependence of these two rests upon the Reporters own words, who tells
us, that Protectio trahit Subjectionem, and Subjectio Protectionem; Protection
draws with it Subjection, and Subjection draws with it Protection, so as they
are Relata, and do prove mutually one another Nature, fol. 5. a. And in the
same Page (a few lines preceding) he shows why this Bond between King and
Subject is called Legiance, because there is a reciprocal, and double Bond:
for as the Subject is bound in Obedience to the King, so is the King bound to
the Subject in Protection: But the King is not Naturally bound to protect the
People, because this Bond begins not at his Birth, but when the Crown settles
upon him.

Thirdly, this Protection is not absolute, because the King must maintain the
Laws, fol. 5. a. and the Laws do not Protect absolutely, any man that is a
breaker of the Laws.

Fourthly, this Protection is not Indefinite, because it can extend no further
then his Power, and his Power no further then his Dominions, fol. 9. b. The
like also may be instanced in continuance of time.

Lastly, the Kings Protection extends not Originally to the Natural
Capacity, but to the Politic Capacity; therefore till a Forrainer comes
within the Kings Legiance, he comes not within his Protection: And the usual
words of a Writ of Protection shows, that the party Protected, must be in
Obsequio nostro, fol. 8. a. The sum then is, that as Protection of an English
King, so neither is Legiance, or Subjection of an English man Natural,
Absolute, Indefinite, or terminated in the Natural Capacity of the King. And
to make a full Period to the Point, and make the same more clear, I shall
instance in one President, that these times of Edward the Third produced. The
former English Kings, had Title to many Teritories in France, but Edward the
Third, had Title to all the Kingdom: And being possibly not so sensible of
what he had in possession, as of what he had not; He enters France in such a
way, and with that success, that in a little time, he gains the highest Seat
therein, and so brought much Honor to the English Nation; and more then stood
with the safety of the Kingdom. For in the union of two Kingdoms, its
dangerous for the smaller, least it be swallowed up by the greater.

This was foreseen by the English, who knew England did bear but a small
proportion to France, and complained of that inconvenience; and thereupon a Law
was made, that the People of England, 14 E. 3. Stat. 4
should not be subject to the King, or his Heirs, as Kings of France: which
manifestly imports, that an English King may put himself in such a Posture,
in which Legiance is not due to him; and that this Posture is not only in Case
of Opposition, but of diversity, when he is King of another Nation, and does
not de facto, for that Time, and Place, rule as an English King: which if so, I
suppose this notion of Natural, Absolute, and Indefinite Legiance to the King
in his Natural Capacity is out of this Kingdom, if not out of the World: and
then the foot of the whole Account will be, that the Legiance of an English
man, is Originally according to the Laws: The sum of all, being comprehended
in the joint safety of the People of England.

CAHP. IX. Of Courts for Causes criminal, with their Laws.
THe great growth of Courts, founded upon Prerogative, derogated much in these
times from the ancient Courts, that formerly had attained the Sovereignty over
the People, and in the hearts of them all. This was a hard Lesson for them to
learn, but especially of the Kings Bench, that was wont to learn of none; and
yet must be content to part with many of their Plumes to deck the Chancellor,
much of their work to busy the Prerogative Courts, holden Coram Rege; and more
to those holden Coram Populo, I mean, The Courts of Oier and Terminer, Goal
delivery, and Ju^tices of Peace. Those of Oier and Terminer, were now grown
very common, but less esteemed, as being by men of mean regard nominated for
the most part by the party that sued out the Commission, which for the most
part was done in behalf of those that were in danger, and meaned not to be
justified by Works, but by Grace. These escapes, though small in the
particulars, yet in the full sum made the matter so foul, as it became a
common greivance, and a Rule thereupon set by the Parliament, for the
regulating both of the Judges of such Court, 2 E. 3. cap. 2. and 7.
and the Causes. The Commissions for Goal delivery likewise, grew more mean
and ordinary: The chief sort of men in the several Counties, had formerly the
power, but were found to savor too much of Neighborhood, and Alliance; the
leading of the work therefore, is now committed to the Judges at Westminster,
and the other made only Associates to them. But above all, the Courts of
Sheriffs, Coroners, and Leets, were now grown sour with Age, having attained
courses by common Practice, differing from Oppression only in name; and yet
were the times so unhappy, as by these courses they had obtained fovour, and
respect, amongst the great men, and so gained more power from above to abuse
them below. These men loved to be Commissioners of Oier and Terminer, and
having learned how to make capital offenses pecuniary, found such sweetness,
as they used not to be weary of their places, though the Country grew weary of
them; and therefore disliking uncertainties, in such matters of benefit, they
cannot rest till they obtain more certain settlement in their places; some
for years, others for life, and some for ever. The disease thus contracted by
degrees, the cure must be accordingly; first the Sherifwicks much dismembered to
please the Court Favorites, and fill the Kings privy purse, and all raised to
the utmost penny of the full, and beyond the just vallue. 4 E. 3. cap. 12. and
15.
A Law is made to restore the several Hundreds, and Wepentakes to the Sheriffs
and their Counties, and all of them are reduced to the old rent; and it is
likewise provided that none shall execute that place in County or Hundred, who
shall not then have sufficient Lands in that County to answer damages for
injustice by them done. 2 E. 3. cap. 4. 4 E. 3. cap. 4.
And that no Sheriff shall serve in that place above one year; and then not to
be chosen again for that service, till three years be past: which later
clause was only a medium taken up for the present occasion, 1 R. 2. cap. 1^.
in regard that men of ability became very rare in these times, especially, in
some of the Counties. The election of the Sheriff is likewise not to be
forgotten, for though the Counties had the election of Coroners in regard they
looked that no man should come nigh their blood, but whom they trusted; 28 E.
3. cap. 6.
yet the Sheriff came not so nigh their skin, nor yet so nigh their
freeholds, as anciently they had done, for that their power in judicature was
much abated, and so not worthy of so high regard, yet in respect he was still
to be a Minister of justice, and his place valuable more then formerly; it was
holden convenient that such as had the chief power of judicature at
Westminster, Viz. the Chancellor, Treasurer, Chief Baron, 14 E. 3. cap. 7.
and the two chief Justices, should nominate the man that should be their
Servant, and in the Parliament nevertheless, 14 E. 3. n. 33.
interposed in that Election as often as they saw cause.

Secondly, as touching Causes criminal, which more ordinarily come within the
Cognizance of these Courts: They generally held the same regard in the eye of
Law in these times that they had done formerly; nevertheless, in two crimes
these times wrought diversely, urging the edge of Law against the one, and
abating it as to the other. The later of these is commonly called Petit
Treason, which is a murder destructive to the Commonwealth, in an inferior
degree, and at a further distance, because it is destructive to that Legiance,
by which Families do consist, and of whom Kingdoms are derived.

Mirror Just. cap. 2. Sect. 13. 21 E. 3. fol. 17. b.
In former times it extended unto the Legiance between Lord and Tenant, and
Parents and Children: but by this Law of 25. E. 3. it is reduced to the
Legiance only of Man, and Wife, Master, and Servant, Clerk, and his Ordinary:
the last of which was now lately taken up; and might have been as well laid
aside, as diverse others were, but that in these times much is to be yielded to
the power of the Prelacy, who loved to raise the power of the Ordinary, to an
extraordinary pitch, that themselves might be the more considerable.

This reducing of Treason into a narrower ground, made the Regiment of
Fellonies to swell: A hard thing it was in a Warring time, for men to conceit
themselves well dressed, until they were completely armed: Some used it for a
Complement, and amongst others, honest men had as good cause to use it, as some
that were ill affected, had a bad; and of the last sort, some did aim at
private revenge, though many aimed against the Public quiet. But however the
intentions of men thus harnessed might be different, the looks of them all are
so sour, that its hard to know a man for Peace, from a man for War. And
therefore the People were now so greedy after Peace, as they are ready to
magnify, or multiply all Postures of Armed men into the worst fashion, being
well assured that the readiest way to keep themselves from the hurt of such
men, is to have none of them at all. But Edward the Third, 25 E. 3. c. 2.
had more need of them then so, and will therefore allow men to ride Armed, but
not to Troop together, to rob, kill, or imprison any man; and if any Person
did otherwise, it should be Felony, or Trespass, but not high Treason.

All this was in favor to the People, and yet it was not all, for when Mercy
grows profuse, it becomes cruelty: Murder is very incident to times of War,
yet is an Enemy to the Peace, of so high a nature, that though the Kings pardon
may do much, yet both King and People declare it an impardonable crime, by the
Common Law, and that the Kings Prerogative shall not extend so far, as to
Pardon the same. This justice done to the party dead, was a mercy to them that
were alive; a means to save blood, by bloodshed, and not so much by the Kings
Grant, as by his Release. One thing more in these cases of blood, the people
obtained of the King, which they had not so much by Release, as by Grant, and
that was the taking away of Englishire, an ancient Badge of the Imperial Power
of the Danes over the Saxons, and which had either continued through the
desidiousnesse of the Saxons, in the times of Edward the Confessor, unto the
Normans time, or by them taken up again, and continued, until these times that
Edward the Third was so far desirous to declare his readiness to maintain
the Liberties of the people, as to be willing to restore them where they
failed, and in particular took away the manner of Presentment of Englishire,
14 E. 3. cap. 4.
blotting out the Title and Clause concerning it, out of the Articles of
inquiry for the Judges Itinerant. And thus whether Native or Forrainer all men
are now made in death equal, and one Law serves all alike,

Next unto blood, these times grew more sensible of Ravishments, then former
times had done: For though they had determined a severe Penalty against so
foul a Crime, and made it in the nature of Felony capital, which was enough
to have scared any man from such attempts, yet for the proof of the matter in
Fact, much rested upon the will of the Woman, which for the most part grounded
upon self respects, and private prudence labored to conceal that which could
not be made whole by revealing; and by after consent skind over the sore as to
themselves, which corrupted inwardly, and endangered the whole body; to cure
which, a Law is made to restrain such late connivance in the Woman, 6 Rich. 2.
c. 6. 5 E 4. fol. 58.
by depriving her both of her Joyncture, and Inheritance, which otherwise had
been saved to her by such compliance, as after consent unto such violations.

CHAP. X. Of the Course of Civil Justice, during these Times.
HOwever the course of the Law concerning matters of the Crown, passed in a
troubled wave, yet in matters of Common Pleas, it passed in a calm and full
Channel; as the Reports in Print do sufficiently witness, nor was their any
change of Principles, but only some alteration tending to a clearer
manifestation of the same. I will not touch upon every particular, but only
upon two, which reflect somewhat upon the Public policy, the one touching
the course of Inheritance in some particular Cases; the other touching pleading
in the Courts of Civil Justice.

The first of these was occasioned from Conjuncture of Affairs, the Case being
such, that Edward the Third had now gotten himself a new Kingdom unto that of
England, and must look to maintain that by Power, which he obtained by force,
and conducing thereunto, must have continual employment of the English in that
Service, as being most trusty to his Cause. And that it is un reasonable, that
such English as had devoted themselves to his Service in this Cause, and in
order thereunto, had transported themselves, and their Families into those
Foreign parts, should thereby loose the benefit of Leiges, 17 E. 3. n. 19.
in the Birthright of their Children, borne in those Foreign parts. Upon
consideration had hereof, and of a former leading Opinion of the Lawyers and
Parliament, a Declarative Law was made; 25 E. 3. Stat. 2
That all Children borne without the Kings Legiance, whose Father and Mother at
the time of their Birth, shall be under the Faith and Legiance of the King of
England, shall have the benefit of Inheritance within the same Legiance, as
other Inheritors have. These are the words of the Statute, and do occasion a
double observation, one from the matter, the other from the manner of the
Expression.

The Subject matter is so delivered, not as an Introduction of a new Law, but
as a Declarative of the old, that lay more obscurely hidden, for want of
occasion to reveal it, and the substance thereof rests only in this, to
enable the Children of English Natives, borne beyond the Seas; not the Children
of those that are of Foreign birth, though within the Kings Teritories in
those parts, as the opinion has been, nor does any ancient President, or
Case, warrant the same, as might be at large manifested, if it might conduce to
the end of this discourse, and for the same cause, after this Statute; when as
the Commons would have had a general Naturalizing of all Infants borne beyond
the Sea, within the Kings Segniories; the same would not be granted, 42 E. 3.
c. 10.
otherwise then according to the former Statute, and the Common Law.

That which in the next place concerns the manner of expression, is this,
That a Child is said to be borne out of the Kings Legiance, and yet the Father
and Mother at the same time to be of the Faith and Legiance of the King of
England: It seems to me, that it intends only those Children of English
Parents, borne within the Kings Teritories beyond the Seas, because the words
ensuing concerning Certification of Bastardy of such Children, are, that the
same shall be made by the Bishop of such place upon the Kings Writ directed to
him, which could never have passed into those places that are not of the Kings
Teritories: and so the Issue will be, that the Legiance of those born in those
parts, though they are Leiges to the King, yet they are not of the Legiance of
the King of England, but as Lord of that Teritory.

The other matter to be observed concerning pleading in the Courts of Civil
Justice, is this, That whereas anciently, 36 E. ^. c. 15.
from the Normans time, till these times, the pleadings were in the Norman
tongue, they shall be henceforth in English; out of an inconvenience, I
believe, rather supposed then felt: for though some kind of knowledge of
Law-termes may be increased thereby, yet unless that shall be professedly
studied, it will breed nothing but Notions, and they an overweening conceit,
which many times sets men to suites in Law, to their own loss, like some
weak influence of the Celestial bodies, that are strong enough to stir up
humors, but not to expel them, or draw them out. However, even thus in part
is the reproach of Normandy rolled away, like that of Egypt from the Israelites
at Mount Gilgall.

CHAP. XI. Of the Militia in these Times.
War is ever terrible, but if just and well governed, majesticall; the one
may excite resistance and defense, but the other Conquers, before blow given;
because it convinces the judgment, and so prevails upon the Conscience: For
that heart can never be resolute in its own defense, that is at War with its
own understanding; nor can such a heart consider such a War, otherwise then
as Divine, and bearing the face of an Ordinance of God; and then how can the
Issue be unsuccessfull. It is no strange thing for Kings to miscarry in their
Wars, because its rarely seen that they are under good Council; but if a
Christian Council miscarry, we may conclude it extraordinary, in the efficient
Cause, and no less wonderful in the issue, and end. Upon this ground, it
concerns a Christian Nation, not only in point of Honor, but of safety and
continuance, to settle fundamental Laws for War, against time of War; as of
Peace, in time of Peace. Neither was England deficient herein, saving that
ancient times were more obscure in the particulars, and these days revealed
them at such a time, wherein we may say, that Edward the Third, approved
himself, not only King of England, but of himself, above the ordinary strain
of expectation; for being now become a famous Commander and Conqueror, having
also an Army inured to fight and overcome, and so might have given a Law; he
nevertheless, received the same, submitting both it and himself to the
Directory of the Parliament, in making a War with France, which was three to
one against him in every respect, (but in the Title) besides the disadvantage
from Scotland, that lay continually beating upon his rear. The like may be
observed of his War with Scotland, in both which, he evidently tells the
World, that he held it unreasonable to enter upon the managing of an offensive
Foreign War, without the concurrence of the common consent of the people;
and that not only for the thing it self, but also for his own personal
engagement in the Service. For a King, though he be the Generalissimo, yet is
he so from the people, and his person being of that high value, is not to be
exposed to every occasion, that may provoke War, without due advice first had
with the public Council, because in his person the people adventureth as
well as himself. And in this manner were the Wars in France by Edward the
Third, and in Scotland, concluded upon debate. In the next place, as touching
the arraies of Men for War, I find no footsteps of any power which was
claimed as peculiar to the King therein, and acknowledged by the Parliament;
but many instances do I meet with in the opposite; all which do plainly tell
us, 13 E. 3. n. 15, 17, 18, 37, 38. 14 E. 3. n. 14, 15, 16, 19, 42, 53. 20 E.
3. n. 14.
that the old shifts of Jurati and obligati ad arma, could do little either in
the calling of men forth, or arming them for the War. But in case of public
defense against forrainers, men were summoned upon their Legiance as anciently
was used. And this was by both King and Parliament fully declared, and all such
obligations by writing called in and damned as dishonorable to the King. In
foreign service the course was no less regular; if the War was by especial
direction of the Parliament, 1 E. 3. cap. 15.
they likewise ordered the manner of the raising of Soldiers, Viz. So many out
of a County, and so many out of a Borough, all which are by the express words
of the Statute, said to be granted by the Knights and Burgesses. 4 E. 3. cap. 5.
But if it was only upon the Kings particular instigation and not by order or
consent of the Parliament, the King in such cases being Volunteir, all the
Soldiers were in like manner; unless some particular Law, or Tenure,
otherwise obleiged them. As touching the arming of Soldiers; the Law was yet
more certain and particular. If the Soldiers were men of estate they were
armed according to the ancient rule asserted by the Statute at Winton, or
otherwise were especially assessed by the Parliament, or by virtue of their
Tenures; the first of these is confirmed by Edward the third in Parliament, 1
E. 3. cap. 5. Stat. 2.
wherein he wills that no man shall be urged to arm himself otherwise then
he was wont in the times of his Ancestors Kings of England. The two later were
likewise confirmed by another Law, made in the same Kings time; 25 E. 3. Stat.
5. cap. 8.
whereby it was ordained, that no manshall be constrained to find men of arms,
Hoblers, nor Archers, other then those which hold by such services, if it be
not by common consent and grant made in Parliament. By men of Arms meaning
those which we now call Curiasseires, or complete armed; by Hoblers meaning
those now called light horsemen. The Archers served on foot, and were
Principally armed with Bows, although they had also Swords or other such
offensive portable Weapons.

The first of these concerns only the arming of a man's own person, the other
the finding of Soldiers, and arming of them, and both together sufficient for
the safeguard of the rights and liberties of the people, invaded in those times,
by Commissions of array; and such other expressions of Prerogative Royal; for
as touching the arming of a man's own Person, the Statute of 1. Ed. 3. formerly
mentioned, is clear in the point. And though the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. does
not in the letter direct, as touching the finding arms for others as is urged
in his Majesty's answer to the Declaration of the Parliament, Fol. 418.
concerning the Commission of Array, July, 4. 1642. yet is it therein granted
that a complete Soldier is within the Letter of the Statute; and seeing the
person of the Soldier is not in the power of any private Person in such cases
to command him to the service, it seems clear to me that the Statute must
intend the arming of him with complete arms, Pat. Rot. 3 E. 3. n. 18. Regist.
fol. 192. a.
and not the armed person of the man. The souldery thus arrayed, they are in
the next place to be called by their Rendezvous; the Knights by summons sent to
the Sheriff, but the rest by Proclamation. If the Knights appear not, a fine
is let upon them; if others run a way from their conduct, a Writ issued to
the Sergeant at arms to apprehend them; if they were not arrayed, 4 E. 3. cap.
5.
then the recognisances of such as undertook the work are estreated. 50 E. 3.
n. 62.
All plunder or spoil committed by the Soudiers in their conduct, was to be
satisfied by the Conductor, or Commander, that received their Pay, or Charges
for their conduct: And although the charges for conduct had formerly, De facto
been defraied sometimes by the County, by virtue of Commissions that issued
forth, both for the raising and conducting of them; yet was this no rule, nor
did Edward the third claim any such duty, but disclaimed it, and ordained by
Act of Parliament, that both the pay and conduct Money, should be disbursed by
the King, 1 E. 3. cap. 7.
from the time of their departure from their several Counties. For to this end
(and for the safeguard of the Realm. 18 E. 3. cap. 7.
And for the maintenance of the Wars of Scotland, France, and Gascoigne.) The
King had supply from Aids, Releifs, Wardships, 14 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 1.
Marriages, Customs, and Escheats, nor did the Parliament grant any particular
Aid by assessment or public Tax, but when they evidently saw the burden of
War, to be extraordinary; as it befell in the Conquest of so great and potent
a Realm as France was: Wherein although the Taxes were many, yet so well
ordered were they, and with that compliance from the King, that the people
endured them with much patience, so long as the King lived. Lastly, in all
these Cases of foreign Wars (for of such Cases only these Laws are to be
understood) it was especially provided, 1 E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 5.
that no man should be distrained, or urged against his will, to go out of his
County. But in Case of defensive War; the course was otherwise, for all men in
such Cases are bound by the Law of Nature, to defend their own Country from
Invasion, in order to the safety of their own Estates, and habitations. They
were arrayed, or gathered together by Commission of Array from the King, armed
according to the Laws formerly mentioned, and not by arbitrary order of the
Commissioners: And by virtue of such Commissions, they were drawn forth and
led to places, where need required. Sometimes to one Coast, sometimes to
another, yet not altogether at the Kings pleasure, for the Parliament upon
occasion set rules of restriction, and generally exempted the North parts
beyond Humber, from being drawn Southward, 13. E. 3. n. 18.
and left them as a reserve, for the defense of the Marches, bordering upon
Scotland; and sometimes ordered, the Array should be executed only in some
particular Counties, 20 E. 3. n. 14.
and other times wholly exempted the Country adjacent, within six miles of the
Sea Coast. And because the King might under color of a defense Array the
People, where no such occasion led the way, and command them out of their
Countyes, a Statute is made that states the Case wherein such Array shall be; 1
E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 5.
the words whereof are variously set forth in the Books in Print, whether
determinatively, or carelessly, I cannot tell, but all of them do differ in
sense one from another, and from the Truth; some of the common Books have the
words thus: None shall be destrained to go out of their Counties, unless for
cause of necessity, and of sudden coming of Strangers, or Enemies, into the
Kingdom: Others read it thus, But where necessity requires, and the coming
of strange Enemies into the Kingdom. The Kings answer to the Parliaments
Declaration, concerning the Commission of Array, Fol. 422.
would read it thus, Unless in case of Necessity, or of sudden coming of
strange Enemies, etc. But the words in the Roll are these; Et que nulls ne
soient distresses d'aller horse de les Countees, Si non pur Cause de necessity,
de sudden venue, des Stranges Enemies, en Reqaulme, In English thus, word for
word, And that none be destrained to go out of the Counties, if not for cause
of Necessity, of sudden coming of strange Enemies, into, or in the Kingdom:
which words determine the Point, That none shall be by Commission of Array,
drawn out of their County, but in case of Necessity: And secondly, that this
Case of Necessity, is only the coming of strange Enemies, into, or in the
Kingdom, so as probably the Invasion must be actual before they be drawn out
of their Counties, and not only feared; and it must be a sudden Invasion, and
not of public note, and common fame foregoing, for then the ordinary course
either of Parliament, or otherwise, must be used to call those that are bound
by Statute, or Tenures, or Volunteires to that Service, seeing every Invasion
is not so fatal, as to require a Commission for a General Array. Against what
has been thus noted, the judgment of Sir Edward Coke in Calvin's Cafe lies yet
in the way, Fol. 7. b.
who affirms, that the Subjects of England are bound by their Legiance to go
with the King in his Wars, as well within the Realm, as without; and this
Legiance he tells us, is that Natural Legiance which he says, is absolute
and Indefinite, etc. and not Local, which if not so, then were not the English
bound to go out of England; an inference that is neither necessary, nor is the
thing affirmed certain. It is not necessary, because English men may be bound
to go out of England, by virtue of their Tenures, particular Contract, or else
by special Act of Parliament, and not by virtue of that Natural Legiance,
which in Truth is no where.

Now for the maintenance of the Point, the Reporter alleges two Statutes
affirming the thing, and Common practice; and lastly, Authorities of the Judges
of the Common Law. 11 H. 7. cap. 1. 2 E. 6. cap. 2.
As touching the Statutes, one in Henry the Sevenths time, and the other in
Edward the Sixths time: I shall speak of them in the succeeding times, when we
come at them, for they are no Warrant of the Law, in these times whereof we now
treat; much less is the modern practice of these later days, a Demonstration
of the Law in the times of Edward the Third, nor of the Nature of the Law in
any time, seeing that it is obvious to times, as well as particular Persons, to
do and suffer things to be done, which ought not so to be; and therefore I
shall for the present lay those two Considerations aside. But as touching the
Opinions of the Judges of the Common Law, two Cases are cited in the
Affirmative, which seem in the Negative, and the rest conclude not to the
Point.

The first of the two cases, is the opinion of Justice Thirning in the time of
Henry the Fourth, word for word, thus, A Protection lies for the Defendant in a
Writ, 7 Hen. 4. Protect. 100.
upon the Statute of Laborers, and yet the Defendant shall not have such
matter by way of Plea, Viz. That the King has retained him to go beyond the
Sea: for the King cannot compel a man to go out of the Kingdom, That is, (as
the Reporter says) Not without Wages; intimating thereby, that if the King
shall tender wages to any man, he must go whither the King shall please to
send him, which is not only destructive to the opinion of Thirning, concerning
the Plea, but also (though granted) is destructive to the Reporters judgment
in the main point: For if an English man may refuse to go without wages, then
is he not bound to go by any natural absolute Legiance, as the Reporter would
have it. And as touching the second Case, which is Bigots and Bohuns Case, it
clears the same thing; for it was resolved, that they ought to go but in
manner and form, according to the Statutes, then is not the ground in the
absolute Legiance, for that is not qualified, but in the Positive Statute Law,
which tieth only in manner and form, and that by voluntary consent in
Parliament.

The rest of the Cases, do neither conclude the main point, nor the particular
thing that the Reporter intends: for he would imply to the Reader, that
English men were anciently used to be imprested for the Wars in France: 44 E.
3. fol. 12 12 H. 4.7. 32 H. 6. fol. 4. 17 H. 6. Protect. 19 H. 6.35.
and hereunto he voucheth one Authority out of ancient Reports of Law, in
Edward the Thirds time, one authority in the time of Henry the Fourth, and
three in the time of Henry the Sixth; none of all which do speak one word
concerning impresting, and that in Edward the hird, does imply the contrary;
for the Case is, that in a Praecipe quod reddat, a Protection was offered by
the Defendant, as appointed to go beyond Sea with the Duke of Lancaster; and
the Plaintiffes Council alleged that the Defendant had been beyond Sea, with
the Duke, and was returned: To this the Defendants Council answered, that the
Duke was ready to return again; and for this cause the Protection was allowed:
Yet a Quere is made upon this ground, that it might be that the Defendant would
not go over with him, nor was it proved that he would, which shows plainly,
the party was not imprested, for then the thing had not been in his power to
will or nill.

The last instance that the Reporter produces, is that of Forinsecum
Servitium, or Foreign Service, and that seemerh to be Knight Service to be
performed abroad: But this falls short of the Reporters intention in three
respects,

First, though it belongs to the King, yet not to him only, but to other
chief Lords, so says Bracton.

Secondly, it is not due from every English man: Bract. li. 2. fol. 36. and 37,


And lastly, it is a Service due by virtue of Tenure, and then the Conclusion
will be, That which is due by Tenure of Lands, is not due by natural and
absolute Legiance: and so this Foreign Service, arising merely by compact, and
agreement between Lord and Tenant, and not by the natural duty of an English
born Subject, (which is the thing that the Reporter drives at in all this
discourse) will be so far from maintaining the Reporters opinion, as it will
evidently destroy the same.

And thus the Posture of this Nation, in the Field remains regular in the
rule, what ever has been said against it; notwithstanding, that in the very
instant of Action, there may be some irregularity, which no doubt both was, and
ever will be, in stormy times; nor did it conquer the Law: For though War may
seem to be but a sickness of the State, yet being in Truth, as the Vltimum
refugium, and only reserve unto Law, beaten to a retreat by oppression: It is
no wonder if this motion, or rather commotion that brings on the Law of Peace
in the rear, be still and ever subject to a rule of Law, how unruly soever it
self seems to be. Now because Law imports execution, and that presupposes a
trial, and it a Court; therefore did our Ancestors (amongst other Courts not
regulated by the Common Law) form a Court for the Service of War, called The
Court Martial, or the Constables Court, according as the Office of one or the
other, had the pre-eminence. The proceedings herein, were ordered as I said,
not according to the Common Law, for that is like the Land, much distant from
all other Nations, and the negotiation of this Island with other Nations, (as in
time of Peace, so of War,) require a rule common to all those Nations, or
otherwise no negotiation can be maintained: And for this cause, the proceedings
in this Court, were ever according to the rule of the Civil Law: The work of
this Court is principally judicial, and in some Cases Ministerial.

The first reflects upon causes Foreign and Domestic, and both of those, are
either Criminal, and such as concern the common Peace of the place of war,
or more civil, relating only unto private interest. As touching the first of
these, I suppose it is no Bull, to speak of a Common Peace, in the place of
War; for a Common Peace must be in each party within it self, or otherwise
no party at private variance can subsist within it self, much less make War
with the other; and therefore in order unto War, there must be a Law of
Peace, for the trial of Offenders, and punishing them, for offenses committed
against the good government of the War; such as are breaking of ranks,
deserting the Standard, running away from the Colors, mutinies, murders,
rapes, plunderings, private quarrels, disobedience to command, and such like;
all which do bear the show of Crimes against the Common Peace of the Army, and
the Country.

Of the second sort, are matters concerning Quarter, and Contracts in order to
the government of the War, saving such as are made, before either party be
Enrolled for the War: For if a man does covenant to serve in the War, 13
Rich. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 20 8 Rich. 2. n. 31. 8 Rich. 2. c. 5. Regist. sol. 191.2.
and keeps not his day at the first Rendezvous, he is to be attached by Writ
at the Common Law. Causes Domestical likewise fall under the like division:
for whatsoever Cause may be Foreign, may also be Domestic; because the Army is
ever imbodied within the Kingdom, and must be under the Directory of the
Martial-Law, upon the first forming thereof. Now though the particular Laws of
the Army, for the government thereof, be ordinarily according to the Prudence
of the General, yet certain Fundamentalls have been ab Antiquo, made by
Custom, and the Parliament, against which the course of Judicature must not
go; and as the Parliament saw need, it set also particular Directions, 50 E.
3. n. 33. n. 161. 3 R. 2. n. 27.
as for the payment of Soldiers wages, for remedy of wastings and plunderings
in their own Country, and other such Emergencies. But the execution of all
these Laws Originally, was in the Martial of the Army, and because that the
Army was generally dissolved, or such persons engaged in such matters of
Controversy, departed from the Army, before the same were concluded. Therefore
the Martialls Court continued in order, to the determining of these matters;
and in continuance of time, other matters also crowded into that Society,
although sometimes under the Directory of the Constable of England, as well as
at other times under the Martial; more particularly, that power of determining
matters concerning Torniament, a sport that like a Sarcisme tickles the fancy,
but wounds the heart, and being of as little use in a Commonwealth, as of
benefit; therefore is laid aside, nor need I to speak any more concerning it.
There is one thing more, somewhat like a Torniament, but that it is in good
earnest, and that is called Duel. This comes likewise within the Cognizance
of this Court, but in a Ministerial way, and as subservient to the Common Law,
in Cases of appeal and right: Hereof needs likewise little more then the
naming, and therefore, I shall leave the Reader that would understand the
particular managing thereof, unto the discourse compiled by the Duke of
Gloucester, Gloss. 129.
in Richard the Seconds time.

Lastly, as touching the Antiquity of this Court, though it may be great, yet
the power thereof was doubtful, and scarce taken notice of in any public Act
of State, till about these times; when as a complaint was made by the Commons,
for the incroachment of that Court, upon the liberty of the People, and bounds
of the Courts of Common Law; Nor is it strange, that such unquiet times brought
forth such Presidents, but much more strange that the Common Law held up its
head against such violent irruptions of War.

CHAP. XII. Of the Peace.
YOu have seen the Kingdom in Armor, now see it in Robes, and you will say
that its Majesty therein, is as grave, as it was in the other brave. Its true,
the tempers are so contrary, as it may be wondered how one and the same should
be wise and willing for both: but when God will do much, he gives much, and
can make a people as one man, like unto Caleb, fitted both for War and Peace:
Besides, the times were now much conducing hereto, its vain to endeavor to
allay humors in the body, which are maintained by Agitation, they must be
purged out, or the whole will still be endangered: and therefore although Kings
hitherto did endeavor to establish a peaceable Government, yet being led by
ill Principles of private Interests, they labored to little purpose: but now
the Scene is altered, and one wise moderate King, that was as wise as valiant,
did more then they all: And first set a rule upon his own desires, contenting
himself with the condition of an English King; and then upon his people, making
them contented with the condition of English men.

The order herein was no less observable; for the former wrangling times
having trained up the minds of men in a tumultuous way, nor could they skill to
pace in the steps of Peace, the King led them into Foreign parts to spend their
heat, till being either weak or weary, they are contented to return home, and
study the happiness of a quiet life: these men thus ordered, the rest at home
are made more cool, like a body after Physic, and all are now contented to
submit to Law and Magistracy. A fitting time now it was for Justices of Peace
to come upon the Stage in their best garb: For though the work was more
ancient, yet like some loose notes laid aside in several places, it was not to
be found, but at a distance, and after long delay. But Edward the Third, sums
up all into one brief, and brings a complete model thereof into the World for
future Ages to accomplish, as occasion should lead the way. The course was now
established to have Justices settled in every County, there to be resident and
attending that Service. First, they were named Guardians, or Wardens of the
Peace, 1 E. 3. cap. 16. 1. E. 3. n. 5. 17 E. 3. n. m. 1 E. 3. cap. 6. 18 E. 3.
c. ^.
but within a few years altered their Title to Justices. First, they were
chosen out of the good and lawful men of each County: After that they were two
or three chosen out of the worthiest men, and these were to be joined with
Lawyers. Then was one Lord and three or four in each County of the most worthy
men, 34 E. 3. cap. 1.
adjoined with Lawyers. Afterward in Richard the Seconds time, 12 R. 2. c. 10.
the number of Justices in each County might attain to the number of six, and
no Steward of any Lord to be admitted into the Commission: but within half a
year all is at large, so be it that the choice be out of the most sufficient
Knights, 14 R. 2. c. 12.
Esquires, and Gentlemen of the County. Again, within two years, the number in
each County, is set at eight, yet in all these, the Judges and Sergeants were
not reckoned, so as the work then seems not so much as now a days, although
it was much of the same kind; and yet it grew up into that greatness which it
had by degrees. Before, they were settled by Edward the Third, there were
Custodes pacis, which might be those whom we now a days call the
High-Constable of the Hundred, whose work was purely Ministerial.

Afterward about the second year of Edward the Third, the Guardians of the
Peace had power of Oier and Terminer, in matters of riding Armed upon the
Statute 2. Ed. 3. After that, 2 E. 3. cap. 3. 4 E. 3. cap. 2. 8 E. 3. n. 67. 18
E. 3. cap. 2. 17 R. 2. c. 10.
they have power of inquiry by Indictment in certain Cases, within four years
after they have power of Oier and Terminer in Cases of false Jurors, and
maintenance: and about ten years after that, they obtained like power, in
matters of Felony and Trespass. The way of Commissions in case of life and
member thus opened; another occasion of Commission offers it self for a
determinative power, in case of offenses against the Statute of Laborers, and
the Cognizance hereof is soon settled upon Commissioners in the Counties
specially chosen for that Service, 25 E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 7. 34 E. 3. c. 11.
which questionless as the times then stood, was as commendable work as it was
necessary: For Soldiers were so many that Laborers were very few; and those
that once are accustomed to Arms, think ever after meanly of the handycraft;
nor will they ever stoop thereto after their Spirits are once elivated by
Mastery of Adventures. And secondly, those few Laborers that remained of the
Sword, Plague, and other disasters of these wasting times, understood their
advantage, and set a value upon their labors, far above their merit,
apprehending that men would rather part with too much of a little, then to let
their work lie still, that must bring them in all they have; but these
Commissioners lasted not long, though the work did: The Justices of Peace are
looked upon as meet for that service, 42 E. 3. c. 6.
and its a vain thing to multiply Commissions, where the work may be done by
one, that before this time had obtained an additionall Cognizance of all Causes
of Riots, Batteries, wandering dangerous Persons, and offenses in Weights and
Measures, and in Purveiance. 34 E. 3. c. 5, 6.
To them, I say, all this work concerning Laborers, is also committed by the
Parliament; and herewith a way was laid open for Crimes of greatest regard
under Felony, to be determined by trial in the Country, according to the
course of Common Law. The issue of all which was not only ease to the People,
but a great escape from the rigor of the Councel-Table in the Star Chamber, and
the King's Bench at Westminster, on the one side, and also from the gripe of the
Clergy on the other; who hitherto held the Cognizance of the Markets in Weights
and Measures to themselves. This model so pleased all men, that Richard the
Second, that was pleased with nothing but his own pleasure, gave unto the
Justices of Peace yet further power to execute the Statute at Northampton,
against riotous ridings, 14 R. 2. c. 12.
and to settle the wages of Laborers and Servants, to punish unlawful
Huntings by the meaner sort of people, and regrators of Wool, 13 R. 2. cap. 8.
cap. 13. 14 R. 2. cap. 4. 16 R. 2. cap. 4. 17 R. 2. cap. 9.
falls Weights in the Staple, unlawful wearing of Liveries, and unlawful
fishings, contrary to the Statute at Westminster, 2. Thus was the power of
Justices of the Peace grown to that height in these and other things, that it
undermined, not only the Councel-Table and Kings Bench, but the Commissions of
Jail delivery, and of Oier and Terminer, so far forth as their work was,
much less then formerly, for Neighbous in cases of Crime, are better trusted,
with the lives and estates of men, then strangers, so as in all this the people
are still the gainers.

The manner of Judicature by these Justices of the Peace still remains: nothing
appears by any Statute in these times, that one Justice of the Peace might do
alone, 15 R. 2. cap. 2.
but record a forcible detainer, although questionless in point of present
security of the Peace and good behavior by the intent of the Statutes, he might
do many things, but in Cases of Oier and Terminer, all must be done in
public Sessions, which the Justices of the Peace had power to hold by
Commission only, until the thirty sixth year of Edward the Third, and ever
after that they held their Sessions, by virtue of the Statutes, 34 E. 3. cap.
1. 16 R. 2. cap. 4.
and had power to determine diverse things in their Sessions, according to
discretion. These were remedies after the Fact, now see what preventing Physic
these times afforded.

One thing that much irritated the spirits of men into discontents, was false
news, or slanderous reports, raised and spread amongst the great men: For in
these times the Lords were of such considerable a power as the vexation of one
Lord, proved the vexation of a multitude of the meaner sort; and though the
Statute of Westminster the 1. formerly had provided against such tales, yet it
touched only such as concerned discord between the King and People, although
by implication also it might be construed to extend further. But Richard the
Second, willing to live in quiet, that he might enjoy his pleasure, would have
the people know their duties in plain words, 2 R. 2. cap. 6.
and agreed to a Law, that all such as published such false news, tending to
sow strife between the great men, 12 R. 2. c. 11.
should be imprisoned until the first mover was found, and if he were not
found, then the Relator should be punished by advice of the Council: So much
power was then given to the Council, what ever it was.

Thus the seed was choked, or was so intended to be, though every passion was
not thus suppressed: For some angers conquer all fear, and will hold
possession, come what will: In the next place therefore, provision is made
against the first actings in sorting of parties, by tokens and liveries;
utterly inhibiting the meaner sort of the people, from giving of Liveries to
maintain quarrels, ^ R. 2. cap. 7.
upon pain of Fine and Imprisonment, and the trial to be before the Justices
of Assize, which it seems was in affirmance of former Laws, as by the Preamble
of the Statute does appear, though the Laws themselves are not extant. About
fifteen years after, it was by sad experience found, that the Lords maintained
quarrels by multitude of Liveries, and therefore another Law was made
inhibiting the Lords to give Liveries to any, 16 R. 2. cap. 4.
but their meniall Servants; and its ordered, that the Justices of the Peace,
shall make inquiry of such offenses, and punish them according to their
discretion.

A third prevention was provided against gathering together of parties, after
they are sorted. For the humors may so abound, as nothing will keep them in;
they must either break out into a sore, or a long sickness of State will
certainly follow; To this end therefore, the Statute made at Northampton, 2 E.
3. cap. 3. 7 R. 2. c. 13. 20 R. 2. cap. 1.
is again revived, expressly forbidding all Persons to ride Armed, unles in some
particular Cases of executing Justice, or guarding the Person of the King, or
his Justices, and such like: And if men will be so adventerous, as to outdare
Law, by public force, Troopings together, and Riotous ridings: Another course
is taken, not by Commission of the Peace, but rather of War, directed unto
valiant persons in every County, and they have power thereby to apprehend such
Offenders, and imprison them until the Goale-delivery, though no Indictment be
found thereof, until the Goale-delivery shall be. By this Commission therefore
power is given of Posse Comitatus, in nature of a Commission of Array, with an
additionall power of fighting and destroying, so as though the King grants
the Power by the Commission, yet the Parliament gives the power to the
Commission; and be it a Commission for Peace or War, it is Originally from
that power.

The fourth and last prevention, was the taking away means of continuance and
supporting such Riotous ways, 13 R. 2. cap. 15
Viz. Castles and Goales out of the Custody of private hands, and restoring
them to their Counties.: For Goales and Castles are taken promiscuously for
places of security, in times of Peace to keep ill persons from going out, and
in times of War, from getting in: Amongst these, some belonged to the King,
and were committed to such as he favored, who commonly (in such times of
Oppression and Violence) grew too big for Justice, usurping a Gaole-delivery,
and making such places of strength many times, even to the innocent, a Prison
to keep them from the Law, but unto guilty persons an Assilum to defend them
against the Law. And these thus belonging to the King, were under no Law, but
of Prerogative, whereas other Castles of private persons were under the yoke
of the Statute, 13 E. 1. For remedy of all which, the Kings Castles are once
more returned to the Sheriffs Custody, by Act of Parliament; who questionless
has the power to dispose of all places of Strength, whether in order to Peace,
or War, and could not dispose them into a more fafe, and indifferent hand,
then the Sheriffs; who is as well the Kings Officer, as the Kingdoms Servant,
and much entrusted by the Law in the execution of its own power. And thus is
this Nation now prepared for a settled Peace, a Condition that is long in
ripening, and soon rotten, unless it be well fenced, and overawed by a good
Conscience: But Richard the Second, was neither so good, nor so happy; his
Heart affected to be high, but his Head could not bear it; he turns giddy, and
runs far wide: Those that would reduce him, he inforces into Foreign Countries;
and himself holds on his careere over hedge and ditch into Ireland, where
under pretention of holding Possession of that Kingdom, he lost England, and
whiles he plays his game in that Country, another plays King, by your leave,
in this, and steps into the Throne; teaching the King thereby this lesson,
though too late; That Nonresidency is dangerous for a Priest, but unto a
Prince, fatal, unless his Subjests be fast to him, when he is loose to them.

CHAP. XIII. A view of the summary Courses of Henry the Fourth, Henry the
Fifth, and Henry the Sixth, in their several Reigns.
HE that played this pranke was the banished Duke of Hertford, son of John of
Gaunt, and by his death, now become Duke of Lancaster by Title, and as the
times then were, it proved not hard to get more: For in uncertain
Commonwealths, it is an easy thing for a man of opinion, that has less then
his due, to get more then he ought. As son of John of Gaunt, this Duke had
the peoples good wishes; he (a wise and a brave man, and under oppression)
gained the more upon the people, by how much they love brave men, and
compassionate, such as suffer wrong, especially from such persons, from whom
they all found the like measure. All these concurring with the Kings absence,
invited the Duke to adventure himself upon the influence of the peoples favor,
to gain his own right, and what more the people would allow him; and if no
more, yet his Honor is saved, he came for his own, and attained his end.

Thus then he comes over, without Army, or Foreign power, or other help,
saving the advice and interest of Archbishop Arundell, who was his Companion
in suffering, Partner in the Cause, and no less welcome to the Clergy, then
the Duke himself was to the people; and so gained power to the Duke, though he
brought none. Upon their Arivall the aspects of all are benign; the Dukedom
waits for him, and in that, as in a mirror he beholds the way fair and easy;
yet further, it pities him to see the Kingdom so torn in pieces and spoiled:
The People knew him able, and hoped him willing to amend all; they offer him
their Service, which he accepts, and therewith the Crown: so hard a thing it
is for to put a stop to a Conqueror in his careere.

By this time was the Duke of Hertford thus become Duke of Lancaster, and King
of England, under the name of Henry the Fourth, by a design, that in the proof
was more easy then commendable; and which being effected, cost more skill to
make that seem fair, which was so foul, then to accomplish the thing. He
therefore first heaps together Titles, enough to have buried the clamor of
Usurpation, if it would have succeeded. Conquest was a Title freest from
dispute, whiles Power holds; but it looks better from a Foreign Enemy, then
one sworn to the English Crown; and therefore after that had served his turn,
he disclaymed it as that which was, though meet enough to have, yet unmeet to
hold.

His right by Designation from his Predecessor, he glanced upon, but durst not
adventure it too deep into the Peoples consideration, whose Ancestors had
formerly overruled the Case against King John. He then stayed upon a concealed
Title, from a concealed Son of Henry the Third, of whom they who listed might
be persuaded; but few believed the thing, nor did himself, but thence takes his
flight up to a Jus Divinum, or some hidden Fate that called him to the work;
but even there his wings failed him, and so he falls flat upon the Peoples
Election, De been esse. Some of these, or all together might make Title enough
for a great man that resolved to hold by hook, what he had got by crook; and
therefore trussing them up all together, he enters his claim to the Crown, As
coming from the blood Royal from King Henry, and through the Right that God
his grace has sent me; with the help of my Kin, and Friends, to recover the
same, which was in point to be undone, for want of good Governance, and due
Justice: The extract of all, is, that he was chosen by the People and
Parliament then sitting: And allbeit that by the Resignation of Richard the
Second, the Parliament might seem, in strict construction of Law, to be
expired, together with the Kings power, who called them together, yet did not
that Parliament so apprehend the matter, but proceeded, not only to definitive
Sentence of Deposing him, but declared themselves by their Commissaries, to be
the three States, and Representative of the People of England, maintaining
thereby their subsistency by the Consistence of the Members together, although
their Chief was for the present like a head in a trance, till they had chosen
Henry the Fourth to succeed in the Throne, by this means preventing the conceit
of discontinuance in the very Bud of the Notion.

Much like his entry was his continuance, a continual tide of Foreign and
Domesticke War and Conspiracy, enough to exercise his great Courage, although
he was more Wise then Warlike, being loath to take up Arms; (for well he knew,
that a sick Title never sleeps but in a Bed of Peace) and more loath to lay them
down; for besides Victory, whereby he gained upon his Enemies in time of War;
he knew how to make advantage of them in time of Peace, to secure his Friends
to keep others in awe, to enforce such Laws as stood with reason of State, and
the present posture of Affairs, and where Laws failed, to fill up the period
with Dictates of his own will. And upon this Account the Product was a
government full of Ulcers, of Bloodshed, without regard of Persons, whether of
the Lay, or Religious Order, without Legal trial, or privilege of Clerk. So
was Arch Bishop Walden Dethroned, Arch Bishop Scroope put to death, and Dukes
were dismounted without Conviction, or Imputation, saving of the Kings
displeasure: Taxes multiplied, although begotten they were upon the Parliament,
like some monstrous Births shown to the World, to let it know what could be
done; but concealed by Historians, Walsing.
to let it know what may not be done. Yea, the privileges of Parliament
invaded in point of Election: A thing that none of his Predecessors ever
Exemplyfied to him, nor none of his Successors ever Imitated him in; nor had he
purposed it, but that he was loath the People should know more of the
Government then needs must.

To keep off Foreign troubles, he made Peace with France, for longer time then
he lived; yet was ever infested with the Sword of Saint Paul, in behalf of
Richard the Seconds Queen, and with the Factions between the Houses of
Orleance, and Burgundy, in which he had interested himself to preserve the
Foreign Neighborhood in Parties one against another, that himself might
attend his own Security at home. He would have moved the Scots, but they were
already under English Banners; nor could he reach so far, having so many
Enemies even in his own bosom. The Welsh were big with Antiquity, and
Mountains of Defense; they begin to bethink themselves of their Ancient
Principality, hold the Kings Arms at hard Duty, 2 H. 4. cap. 12. 4 H. 4. cap.
26.32. and cap. 19.20, 28.31.
till by Laws enacted in Parliament, they lost their Liberties of bearing
Office Ministerial, or of Judicature, of holding Castle, of Convention without
the Kings License, yea, of Purchase; and so by degrees were brought down from
the height of a Free Principality to be starved in their Power, and inferior
to a Free People. And thus the Welsh on the one side, the discontented Lords on
the other; and Mortimars Title in all, so busied the King, as though he lopped
off the tops as they sprang up, yet they sprang forth as they were lopped; nor
was it the Kings lot all this while to find out the Root of All, or to strike
at that.

Lastly, when time had made all troublers weary, yet he still sits upon thorns;
he was jealous of his Subjects, jealous of his Son, yea jealous of himself. It
being ever the first and last of his thoughts, how to keep his Crown. For the
most part of his Reign, he was troubled with the walking Ghosts of Richard the
second; ever and anon he was alive, he was here, he was there, and so the
Peoples minds were always kept at random; but when all these Spirits are
conjured down, Richard the seconds Ghost is yet within Henry's own breast.
So ruled Henry the fourth, an unhappy confident man, that durst undertake more
then he would, did more then he ought, was successful in what he did, yet
never attained his end; to be sure of his Crown, and quiet of mind. For a
plaster to this sore, he turned somewhat toward Religion; but showed it more
in Zeal to Churchmen, then works of Piety, and therefore may be thought to
regard them, rather as his best friends in right of Arch Bishop Arundell, then
as in relation to Religion; yet as if he overlooked that, Hist. Eccles. Ang.
618.
he desires their prayers, becomes a strict observer of superstitious rights,
is fiery Zealous against the Lollards, intends a journey into the holy Land,
and War against the Infidels, (the common Physic of guilty Kings in those
days.) Briefly, he did will to do any thing but undo what he had done; and
had done more, had his journey to the holy Land succeeded; but (whither hastened
or delayed, by a prophecy of the ending of his days, falls not within my Penn
to censure:) entering upon the work he died; in the beginning of his purposes,
in the midst of his fears, never came to the holy Land, and yet yielded up his
last breath in Jerusalem.

THe Parliament was then sitting, Henry the Fifth.
and was witness of the death of Henry the fourth, as it had been of his
entrance upon the Throne, as if purposed to see to the course of the Crown, in
the doubtful current; between the two Houses of Lancaster, and York, and to
maintain their own honor in directing the Scepter according to their warranty
upon a late intaile by act of Parliament; yet did not all rest upon this; for
the Heir of Henry the fourth was a man every inch of him, and meant not to
Moote upon the point: His Father died a King, and he his Heir; had the Crown,
and was resolved to hold it: A rough young man he had been formerly, and bold
enough to outface small doubts in point of succession, for he could (for a
need) outface common civility it self. This might have lien in his way, for he
that cannot govern himself, can much less govern a Kingdom: Yet a hidden
Providence concluded quite contrary, and rendered him a clear testimony of a
strange change by the anointing oil, like that of Saul that forthwith had the
Spirit of another man: So though not hammered thereto by affliction, as was
Edward the first; yet was he his parallel in Government and superior in
success. Being seated in the Throne, all men thought it dangerous to abide the
adventure of the turn of this Kings Spirit. The Clergy had but yesterday tried
the Mastery with the Laity, and gained it but by one Vote; there was no dealing
with the Clergy, while Arch Bishop Arundell lived, nor with him whiles Henry
the fourth lived, or his merits were in memory, but now they both are dead, the
Clergy, and the Laity, are upon even ground; this might make the Clergy now not
over confident: The Lords looked on the King as a man like enough to strike him
that stands next: The wise men saw he would be doing; all men were tired with
intestine quarrels; and jumped in one, that he that would be in action should
act abroad, where he might get renown, and a purchase big enough for his
Spirit. Scotland was a Kingdom yet incompetent to the Kings appetite. France
was the fairer mark and better game, and though too big for the English gripe,
yet the Eagle stooped, and sped himself so well, as within six years he
fastened upon the Sword and Scepter, and a daughter of France, and might have
seized the Crown; but chose to suffer a blurr to lie upon his title derived
from Edward the third, rather then to incurr the Censure of Arrogance over a
stooping enemy; or to Pluck the fruit from the tree before it was fully ripe;
which in time would fall into his lap, by a better Law then that of the Sword;
otherwise it might be well conceited, that he that has both right and Power,
and will not seize, disclaimes. Besides the King was as well Inheritor to his
Fathers Fate as Crown; still he had success, but the end was so far distant
that he died in the way thereto* The brave Dauphine of France maintaining War
(after his Father, the French King had yielded up the Bucklers to Henry the
fifth) till Henry the fifth died, and the English did foregoe what they had
formerly gotten in France, by the Sword of that great Commander. Nor did the
English gain any thing in the conclusion of this War, but an honorable windy
repute, of being one of the five chief Nations of Christendom, (if honor it be
to be reputed amongst the Nations) a Conqueror of France; the chief Leader unto
the dethroning of three Popes at once, the election of Pope Martin, and of
giving a cure to that deadly wound of the Popedom, which had spent the blood
of two hundred thousand men's lives lost in that quarrel.

These foreign engagements made the King less solicitous, of point of
Prerogative at home; and the rather, because he knew the way to conquer; his
private enemies arms, and his Subjects hearts; without loss of honor in the
one, or reverence in the other. He loved justice above the rank of his
Predecessors, and in some respects above himself; for he advanced Gascoigne
for doing justice, though to the Kings own shame. He liked not to intrude
himself into elections, and therefore though requested by the Monks of
Canterbury, Antiq. Brit.
he would not nominate a Successor to Arch Bishop Arundell, but left the whole
work to them. In the authority of his place, he was moderate, and where his
Predecessors did matters without the Lords consent, Walsing.
when he made his Uncle the Marquis of Dorcet Duke of Exceter and had given him
a pention to maintain that honor, he asked the Lords consent thereto. To the
Clergy he was more then just, if not indulgent, led thereto by his Fathers
example, as being wrapped up in the same Interest as I conceive, rather then
out of any liking of their ways, now growing more bold upon usurpation then in
former times. Or it may be that having prevailed in that work in France, which
to any rational man must needs appear above the power of the King, and all the
Realm of England; he looked upon it as more then humane, and himself as an
instrument of Miracles; and was stirred up in his zeal to God, according to his
understanding in those dark times, to give the Clergy scope, and to pleasure
them with their liberty of the Canon Law, that began now to thunder with fire
and terror, in such manner, that neither greatness nor multitude could
withstand the dint, as was evidenced in that Penance inflicted upon the Lord
Strange, and his Lady, Antiq. Brit. 285.
in Case of bloodshed in Holy Ground, and their hot pursuit of the Lord Cobham,
unto a death of a new Nature, for somewhat done, which was sometimes called
Treason, and sometimes Heresy: And thus became Henry the Fifth baptized in the
flames of the Lollards, as his Father had sadly rendered up his Spirit in the
same. I say, in this he is to be looked upon, as one misled for want of light,
rather then in opposition against the light: For in his last Will, wherein men
are wont to be more serious and sincere; amongst his private regards, he
forgets not to reflect upon Religion to this purpose; We further bequeath
(says he) to the redundant Mercy of the most excellent Savior, the Faith,
Hope, and Charity, the Virtue, Prosperity, and Peace, of the Kings our
Successors, and of our Kingdom of England; that God for his Goodness sake
would Protect, Visit, and Defend them from Divisions, Dissensions, and from
all manner of deceitfulness of Heretics. And thus Piety, Justice, and
Moderation of Henry the Fifth, Adorned and Crowned the honor of his Courage,
and Greatness, with that honorable Title of Prince of Priests; and had he
been blessed with a clearer light, he might as well under God have obtained the
Title of Prince of Princes, wanting nothing that might have rendered him a
president of Fame.

BUt the time is now come, Henry the Sixth.
that the Tide of Englands Glory must turn, and the sudden Conquest in France,
by Henry the Fifth, not unlike the Macedonian Monarchy, must disgorge it self
of what it had hastily devoured, but never could digest. Three things concurred
hereunto, one dangerous, the other two fatal to the flourishing condition of
any Nation.

First, the King is a Minor in the least degree that ever any Prince sat on
English Throne; He entered thereinto, neither knowing what he did, nor where he
was; and some say, he sat therein in his Mothers lap: for his life had been
more in the womb, then abroad. A sad presage of what followed, for many men
think that he was in a lap all his days. Nor are the chief men to be blamed
herein, for its a certain Truth, that its much better that Election of a King
should be grounded upon a rule that is known, though it be by descent of
Inheritance, then upon none at all. For if a Child should succeed, or a
Lunaticke, yet where the Principle of Government rests upon the
Representative of the People, there is the less cause of complaint, the
Government being still the same, both for Wisdom, Strength, and Uniformity;
though it may be the Nation not so active and brave. For a Commonwealth can
admit of no Minority, though a Monarchy by descent may.

Secondly, this deficiency in Nature might have been supplied, but that these
times were unhappy in the great power of the Lords; to please whom, the
Government is parcelled out into two shares: One is made Protector of the
Kings Person, the other Protector of the Kingdom; too many by one: For let
their Persons be never so eminent for Abilities, if they be not as eminent for
Humility, and selfe-Command, their hearts will soon overruled their heads into
a Faction: And therefore though the Earl of Warwick was a wise man, and the
Duke of Gloucester, a wise man, yet the Earl of Warwick with the Duke of
Gloucester were not wise. On the other side, the Protectorship of the Kings
Person, being in the Duke of Exceter, and that of the Realm in the Duke of
Gloucester; things succeeded passing well, for they both had one public aim,
and the Duke of Exceter could comply with the Spirit of the Duke of Gloucester,
who otherwise was not so pliant: But after five years, the Duke of Exceter
dying, and the government of the Kings Person devolving to the Earl of
Warwick, who sided with the proud Cardinal of Winchester, against the Duke of
Gloucester, and so not only consumed the rest of the Kings Nonage in a
restless disturbance of Affairs, but also dispoyled Henry the Sixth, of the
spirit of a King for the future, and so the Kingdom of a King: For it was not
the condition of Henry the Sixth, to be endowed with a spirit of such height,
but might well have been led by advice, and needed not the Earl of Warwick
rugged brow, to overlooke him; who was not content to have the King only
attendant upon his advice; but must likewise have him under his rod, to be
corrected for his faults, and that by a Commission under the Kings own hand
and seal, dated in the eleventh year of the Kings Reign, and so under color
of Curbing, he killed that spirit in the King, which otherwise, doubt less,
had both spirit and pride enough to act himself above his due height, and could
not have been so long a Child, and so little a Man as he was.

It is very true, that Henry the Fifth by Will, seemed to countenance his
Brothers, and it cannot be denied but the Duke of Gloucester, was of such noble
parts, that they could hardly dilate in any work inferior to the government of
a Kingdom. Nevertheless, to yield much to the will of a diseased King in such
Cases, is as ill a President, as the making of a King by Adoption: and it had
been better for the People to have adhered to the Duke of Gloucester alone, then
by joining him with another, bring into president such a luxurient Complement
of State, as a Protectorship of a Kingdom, which is of such little use to a
Commonwealth, and of so bitter Fruit to the Party, as must needs bring
repentance when it is too late: For he that can manage the Protectorship of a
Realm, without anger of good men, or envy of bad men, is fitting to live only
with Angels, and too good for the World. Nor did the Duke of Gloucester meet
with better measure, how wise soever he was, and truly devoted to the good of
the Realm: For after four and twenty years government, so wisely and
faithfully carried on by him, that Justice it self could not touch his Person;
unjustice did, and he received this reward from his Nephew Henry the Sixth,
that he died in the dark, because the Cause durst not endure the light.

Now is Henry the Sixth, persuaded that he is of full age, he had laid aside
his Guardian, the Duke of Gloucester; but forgetting to sue out his Livery, he
betakes himself from the Grace of God, into the warm Sun, (as the Proverb is)
changing the advice of a faithful experienced wise Counselor, for the
government of an Imperious Woman, his Queen, who allowed him no more of a King,
then the very Name; and that also she abused to outface the World: and after
she had removed the Duke of Gloucester out of the way, undertook the sway of the
Kingdom in her own Person, being a Forrainer, neither knowing, nor caring for
other Law, then the will of a Woman.

Thus the glory of the House of Lancaster goes down, and now a Star of the
House of York appears in the rising, and the People look to it. The Queen
hereat becomes a Soldier, and begins the Civil Wars, between the two
Houses, wherein (her English party growing wise and weary) she prays aid of
Ireland, a Nation that like unto Crows, ever wait to prey upon the infirmities
of England. The Wars continue about sixteen years by fits, wherein the first
loss fell to the English party, the pretentions being yet only for good
Government: Then the Field is quiet, for about four years, after which the
clamor of ill Government revives, and together therewith a claim to the Crown
by the House of York is avouched; thereupon the Wars grew hot, for about
four years more, and then an ebb of as long quiet ensues. The Tide at last
returns, and in two years War, Comin. lib. 1. cap. 7.
ends the quarrel, with the death of fourscore Princes of the blood Royal,
and of this good man, but unhappy King. Unhappy King, I say, that to purchase
his Kingdoms Freedom from a Foreign War, sold himself to a Woman, and yet
lost his bargain, and left it to Observation; That a Conscientious man, that
marries for by-regards, never thrives: For France espied their advantage, they
had maintained War with England, from the death of Henry the Fifth, with
various success: The Duke of Bedford being Regent for the English, for the
space of fourteen years mightily sustained the fainting condition of the
English affairs in those parts, and having Crowned his Master Henry the Sixth
in Paris, in the ninth year died, leaving behind him an Honorable Witness,
even from his Enemies, That he was a brave Commander, a true Patriot, and a
faithful Servant, to his Lord and Brother Henry the Fifth, and to his Son
Henry the Sixth. But now the Duke of Bedford is dead; and though France had
concluded a Peace with the English, yet they could not forget the smart of
their Rod; but concluded their Peace upon a Marriage, to be had with a Woman of
their own blood, and interest; and what they could not effect by Arms in their
own Field, they did upon English ground by a feminine Spirit, which they sent
over into England to be their Queen, and in one Civil War (shedding more
English blood by the English Sword, then they could formerly do by all the men
of France) were revenged upon England to the full, Comin. lib. 3. cap. 8.
at the English men's own charge: For what the English gain by the Sword, is
commonly lost by discourse. A Kingdom is never more befooled, then in the
Marriage of their King; if the Lady be great, she is good enough, though as
Jezabell, she will not either reverence her Husband, obey her Lord and King,
nor regard his People. And thus was this Kingdom scourged by a marriage, for
the sin of the Wise men, that (building upon a false Foundation) advised the
King in the breach of Contract with the Earl of Arminiacks Daughter. And thus
the King also for that harkening to such Council, he murdered the Duke of
Gloucester, (that had been to him a Father) yielded up his Power to his Queen,
(A Masterlesse and proud Woman, that made him like a broken Idol without use)
suffered a Recovery of his Crown and Scepter in the Parliament from his own
Issue, to the Line of York; then renewing the War (at his Queens beck) lost
what he had left of his Kingdom, Country, and Liberty, and (like the King
that forgot the kindness of Jehojada) lost his life by the hand of his Servant.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Parliament, during the Reigns of these Kings.
THe interest of the Parliament of England, is never more Predominant, then
when Kings want Title or Age: The first of these was the Case of Henry the
Fourth immediately, but of them all in relation to the pretended Law of the
Crown: but Henry the Sixth, had the disadvantage of both, whereof in its due
place.

The pretended Law of the Crown of England, is to hold by Inheritance, with
power to dispose of the same, in such manner, by such means, and unto such
persons, as the King shall please. To this it cannot be denied, diverse Kings
had put in their claims, by devising their Crown in their last Will; but the
success must be attributed to some Power under God, that must be the Executor
when all is done, and which must in Cases of Debate concerning Succession,
determine the matter by a Law, best known to the Judge himself.

Not much unlike hereunto, is the Case of Henry the Fourth, who like a Bud,
putting up in the place of a fading Leaf, dismounts his Predecessor; First,
from the Peoples regard, and after from his Throne, which being empty, some
times he pretending the resignation of his Predecessor to him; other whiles an
obscure Title by descent, (his Conscience telling him all the while that it was
the Sword that wrought the work.) But when he comes to plead his Title to
Foreign Princes by Protestation, laying aside the mention of them all; he
justifies upon the unanimous consent of the Parliament, and the People in his
own only Person: And so before all the World, confessed the Authority and
power of the Parliament of England, in disposing of the Crown in special Cases
as a sufficient bar unto any pretended right that might arise from the House
of Mortimar. And yet because he never walks safely that has an Enemy pursuing
him still within reach, he bethinks himself not sure enough, unless his next
Successors follow the dance upon the same foot; to this end an Act of
Parliament leads the tune, whereby the Crown is granted or confirmed to Henry
the Fourth for life, and intailed upon his Sons, Thomas, John, and Humphrey,
by a Petition presented, 5. Hen. 4.

7 H. 4. cap. 2. 8 H. 4. n. 38.
Thus Henry the Fourth, to save his own stake, brought his Posterity into the
like capacity with himself, that they must be Kings, or not subsist in the
World, if the House of York prevails; and so he becomes secured against the
House of York, treading on his heels, unless the Parliament of England shall
eat their own word: However, for the present the House of Lancaster has the
Crown intailed, and the Inheritance is left in the Clouds to be revealed in due
time. For though this was the first president of this kind, yet was it not the
last, 39 H. 6. n. 18.
wherein the Parliament exercised a Power by Grant or Confirmation, to direct
the Law and Course of the Crown as they pleased.

The due consideration hereof, will make the things that follow less strange;
For the Parliament according to occasion, as the Supreme power of this
Kingdom, exercised Supreme Jurisdiction in order to the safety of the
Kingdom, 1 H. 6. n. 12, 13
as if no King had been to be found, in issuing forth Writs under the great
Seal; concluding of matters without the Royal assent: 6 H. 6. n. 22. 1 H. 6.
n. 2.4. 9 H. 4. n. 21.
treating of Peace with Foreign Nations, and of other matters, and determining
their Resolves before discovery made to the King of their Counsels; making
Ordinances, and ruling by them, 3 H. 6. n. 29. 2 H. 6. n. 27. 8 H. 6. n. 12.
referring matters determinable in Parliament, to be determined according to
their directions, Authoritate Parliamenti: Confirming Peace made by the King, 4
H. 6. n. 15. Cir. 3. and 4. H. 5. n. 14.
protesting against Peace, made without, or against their consent: making
Ambassadors with power to engage for the Kingdom: making Generals of the
Army, Admiralls at Sea, 3 H. 6. n. 19. 1 H. 6. n. 16. and 4. H. 6. 8 H. 6. n.
27.
Chancellors, Barons, and Privy Counselors, and giving them instructions, 8 H.
4. n. 73. and 76. and 31. 5 H. 4. n. 57. 31 H. 6. n. 21. and binding them to
observance upon Oath, 11 H. 4. n. 19.39. Ordering the Person of the King, 28 H.
6. n. 51. 23 H. 6. n. 51, 52. 17 H. 6. n. 11. 8 H. 4. n. 71.
denying his power of Judicature in Parliament, and ordering his Household and
Revenue; besides many other particulars.

Now if such as these things were thus done, not by one Parliament, which
possibly might be overwayed by Factions, but by the course of a Series of
Parliaments, that mightily labored against Faction, and unworthy ends and
aims, that man shall determine the same to be unjust or indiscreet, should
himself first be determined to be very just, and exceeding wise. Nor was the
Parliament partial in all this, but being in a way of Reformation, it set upon
the work of reforming it self.

Some that are very zealous in the point of Arbitrary and absolute Government
of Kings in this Nation, and all in other, amongst other grounds, rest upon
this one, That an English King has power to call Parliaments, and dissolve
them; to make and unmake Members as he shall please. I do easily grant that
Kings have many Occasions and Opportunities to beguile their People, yet can
they do nothing as Kings, but what of right they ought to do: They may call
Parliaments, but neither as often or seldom as they please, if the
Statute-Laws of this Realm might take place: Nor if they could, is that power
necessarily, and absolutely arising from Supremacy; seeing it is well known
that such power is betrusted by the Superior States in other Nations, to the
Inferior, who daily attend on public Affairs, and therefore can discern
when the general Conventions are most necessary. As touching the dissolving of
Parliaments against the wills of the Houses, its true that sad Presidents have
been of later times in that kind; and so for want of due attendance,
Parliaments have been enforced to adjourn, to prevent a worse inconvenience;
but these are infirmities, better buried in silence, then produced as Arguments
of power, seeing its evident that Kings themselves were no greater gainers
thereby, then an Angry man is by his passions. It is true also that Kings may
make Lords, and Corporations, that may send their Burgesses to the Parliament,
and thus the King may make as many as he will (as the Pope did with the Bishops
in the Council of Trent) yet cannot he unmake them when he pleases, nor take
the Members from the Parliament, without attainder and forfeiture, according to
the known Law: Neither can all these Instances prove, that the Kings of
England have the sole and supreme Power over the Parliament: Nor did the
Parliament in these times allow of any such Authority, and therefore proceeded
for the reforming of themselves, by themselves, in many particulars as the
Statutes do hold forth.

7 H. 4. cap. 15.
And first in the point of Elections, (for an error in that, is like an error in
the first Concoction, that spoils the whole Nutriment, 23 H. 6. cap. 15.
) they ordained that the Election of Knights shall be at the next County Court,
after the Writ delivered to the Sheriff.

That in full Court between the hours of eight and nine in the morning,
Proclamation shall be made of the day and place of the Parliament. That the
Suitors duly summoned, and others there Present, shall then proceed to the
Election; notwithstanding any Prayer or Commandment to the contrary. That the
names of the Persons elected, (whether present or absent they be) shall be
returned by Indenture, between the Sheriff and the Elizors; and that a Clause
to that end shall be added to the Writ of Summons.

This was enough to make the Sheriff understand, 11 H. 4. cap. 1. 8 H. 6. cap.
7. 23 H. 6. c. 15.
but not to obey, till a penalty of one hundred pound is by other Laws imposed
upon him, and a years imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise, besides damages
for false return in such Cases: and the party so unduely returned, Fined, and
deprived of all the wages for his service. Thus the manner of Election is
reduced; but the Persons are more considerable: For hitherto any man of English
blood promiscuously had right to give or receive a Vote, although his residency
were over the wide World.

But the Parliament in the time of Henry the Fifth, 1 H. 5. cap. 1. 8 H. 6.
cap. 7.
reduced these also, (whether they were such as did choose, or were chosen) unto
their proper Counties, or else rendered them incapable to Vote or serve for any
County. And the like Order was made for the Buroughs, Viz. That no Person must
serve for any City or Borough, 23 Hen. 6. cap. 15.
nor give Vote in Electing such as shall serve for that Town, unless they be
both Free, and Resiants within that City or Borough: A Law no less wholesome
then seasonable. For the times of Henry the Fourth, had taught men to know by
experience, That a King that has Soldiers scattered over the Kingdom, can
easily sway the County-Courts, and make Parliaments for their own tooth. Yet
this was not enough, For all Elizors, though of the meanest sort, yet are still
able to do as much hurt with their Vote, as those of the best sort both for
wisdom and public mind, can do good by theirs. This made Elections much
subject to parties, and confusions, and rendered the Parliament much less
considerable.

A remedy hereunto is provided, in the minority of Henry the Sixth, 8 H. 6.
cap. 7.
Viz. That no man should give his Vote in Elections in the County, unless he
has forty shillings yearly in Free Lands or Tenements, and this is to be
testified upon Oath of the Party. And more plainly it is ordered (within two
years after) that each Elizor shall have Frank Tenement of that vallue within
the same County. 10 H. 6. cap. 2.
And thus the Freemen yielded up their liberty of Election to the Freeholders,
possibly not knowing what they did; Nevertheless, the Parliament well knew
what they did; this change was no less good then great.

For first, these times were no times for any great measure of Civility: The
Preface of the Statute shows, that the meanest held himself as good a man, as
the greatest in the Country, and this tended to parties, tumults, and
bloodshed.

Secondly, where the multitude prevail, the meaner sort are upon the upper
hand; and these (generally ignorant) cannot judge of Persons, nor Times, but
being for the most part led by Faction or Affection, rather then by right
Understanding, make their Elections, and thereby the General Council of this
Nation, less generous and noble.

Thirdly, there is no less equity in the change, then policy: for what can be
more reasonable, then that those men only, should have their Votes in Election
of the Common Council of the Kingdom, whose Estates are chargeable with the
public Taxes and Assessements, and with the wages of those persons that are
chosen for the public Service: But above all the rest, this advancing of the
Freeholders in this manner of Election, was beneficial to the Freemen of
England, although perchance they considered not thereof; and this will more
clearly appear in the consideration of these three particulars.

First, it abated the power of the Lords, and great men, who held the inferior
sort at their Devotion, and much of what they had by their Vote.

Secondly, it rendered the body of the people more brave; for the advancing of
the Freeholder, above the Freeman, raises the spirit of the meaner sort to
public regards, and (under a kind of Ambition) to aspire unto the degree of
a Freeholder. that they may be some what in the Commonwealth, and thus leaving
the meanest rank sifted to the very branne, they become less considerable, and
more subject to Coercive power, whiles in the mean time the Freeholder now
advanced unto the degree of a Yeoman, becomes no less careful to maintain
correspondency with the Laws, then he was industrious in the attaining of his
degree.

Thirdly, by this means now the Law makes a separation of the inferior Clergy,
and Cloystered people, from this service, wherein they might serve particular
ends much, but Rome much more. For nothing appears, but that these dead
Persons in Law, were nevertheless Fsee-men in Fact, and lost not the liberty
of their Birthright, by entering into Religion, to become thereby either Bond,
or no Free-Members of the people of England.

Lastly, as a binding plaster above the rest, First a Negative Law is made, 23
H. 6. c. 15.
that the Persons elected in the County must not be of the degree of a Yeoman,
but of the most noted Knights, Esquires, or Gentlemen of the Country; which
tacitly implies that it was too common to advance those of the meaner sort;
whether by reason of the former wasting times, Knights and Esquires were grown
scant in number, or (by reason of their rudeness) in account: Or it may be the
Yeomanry grew now to feel their strength, and meant not to be further
underlings to the great men, then they are to their Feathers, to were them no
longer then they will make them brave. Secondly, the Person thus agreed upon,
his intertainment must be accordingly, and therefore the manner of taxing in
full County, 23 H. 6. c. 11.
and levying the rate of Wages for their maintenance, is reformed and settled.
And lastly, their Persons are put under the Protection of the Law in an
especial manner, for as their work is full of reflection, so formerly they had
met with many sad influences for their labor. 11 H. 6. c. 11.
And therefore a penal Law is made against force to be made upon the Persons
of those workmen of State, either in their going to that Service, or attending
thereupon, making such Delinquents liable to Fine and Imprisonment, and double
damages. And thus however the times were full of confusions, yet a foundation
was laid of a more uniforme Government in future times, then England hitherto
had seen.

CAHP. XV. Of the Custos, or, Protector Regni.
KIngs though they have vast dimensions, yet are not infinite, nor greater then
the bounds of one Kingdom, wherein, if present, they are in all places
present; if otherwise, they are like the Sunn gone down; and must rule by
reflection, as the Moon in the night: In a mixed common wealth, they are
integrall members, and therefore regularly must act; Per deputatum, when their
Persons are absent in another Ligialty, and cannot act, Per se: Partly because
their Luster is somewhat eclipsed by another Horizon; and partly because by
common intendment they cannot take notice of things done in their absence. It
has therefore been the ancient course of Kings of this Nation, to constitute
Vicegerents in their absence' giving them several titles, and several powers,
according as the necessity of affairs required: Sometimes they are called Lord
Warden, or Lord Keeper of the Kingdom, and have therewith the general power
of a King, Rot. Pat. 24. E. 1. m. 4.
as it was with John Warren Earl of Surry appointed thereunto by Edw. the
first, who had not only power to command but to grant, and this power extended
both to England and Scotland. And Peter Gaveston (though a Forrainer) had the
like power given him by Edward the second over England, Rot. Pat. 1. E. 2. m. 2.
to the reproach of the English Nobility, which also they revenged afterward.
Sometimes these Vicegerents are called Lievtenants, which seems to conferr
only the Kings power in the Militia, as a Lieutenant General in an army. And
thus Richard the second made Edmund Duke of York, his Lieutenant of the
Kingdom of England, to oppose the entry of the Duke of Hertford. (Afterward
called Henry the fourth) into England, during the Kings absence in Ireland: And
in the mean while the other part of the Royalty which concerned the revenues of
the Crown was betrusted to the Earl of Wiltshire, Sir John Bush, Sir James
Baggot, and Sir Henry Green, unto whom (men say) the King put his Kingdom to
farm. But more ordinarily the Kings power was delegated unto one, under both
the titles of Lord Gaurdian of the Kingdom, and Lieutenant within the same;
such was the title of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and of Gilbert De clare
Earl of Gloucester, and of Audomar De valentia, Rot. Pat. 4 E. 2. Ps. 1. m. 18.
Earl of Pembroke, all of them at several times so constituted by Edward the
second, as by the Patent Roles appears: So likewise did Edward the third,
make his Brother John of E^tham twice, and the black Prince thrice, and Lionell
Duke Clarence, and his Brother Thomas, each of them once in the several
passages of Edward the third beyond the Sea, in the third, fifth, twelfth,
fourteenth, sixteenth, nineteenth, and thirty third years of his reign
concerning which see the Patent Rolls of those years. 10 Hen. 5. p. 1 m. 9.
And Henry the fifth gave likewise the same title and authority to the Duke of
Bedford, upon the Kings voyage into France; 7 Hen. 5. m. 23
and afterward that Duke being sent over to second the King in the French Wars,
the Duke of Gloucester obtained the same power and place. But Henry the sixth
added a further title of Protector, and Defendor of the Kingdom and Church of
England; 1 Hen. 6. p. 2. m. 3.
this was first given to the Duke of Bedford, and afterward he being made
Regent of France, it was conferred upon the Duke of Gloucester. And toward the
later time of Henry the sixth, it was granted by him to Richard Duke of York.
32 H. 6. m. 7.
This title carried along with it a power, different from that of a King only
in honor, and the Person so adorned may be said to sway the Scepter, but not to
wear the Crown. And therefore in the minority of Henry the sixth, when as the
Government was ordered by the Parliament, and to that end a Protector was made,
and he well guarded with a Privy Council, and they provided with instructions,
one of them was, that in all matters not to be transacted ordinarily but by the
Kings express consent, the Privy Council should advise with the Prorector;
but this is not so needful, in regard that it concerns the power of
executing of Laws, which by right of the liberty of the Subject is the known
duty of the Scepter, in whose hands soever it is holden. And therefore I shall
pass to the Legislative power, wherein its evident that the Protectors power
was no whit inferior to the Kings power. For first the Protector, Ex officio,
by advice of the Council, did summon Parliaments by Writs, even as the Kings
themselves, under their own Test; and if not bear the Royal Assent, yet did
they direct the same, and received Petitions in Parliament to them directed as
to Kings, and every way supplied the room of a King, in order to the
perfecting, publishing, and enforcing of Law to Execution, Secondly, the
Parliaments holden by Protectors, and Laws therein made, are no whit inferior
to those by the King, whether for Honor, or Power: And therefore, if a
Parliament be-holden by the Lord Warden, and sitting the Parliament, the King
in person shall arrive, and be there present; neither is the Parliament
interrupted thereby, nor the power thereof changed at all; though the power and
place of the Wardenship of the Kingdom, does utterly vanish by the personal
access of the King; because in all Cases where the King is subservient to the
Kingdom, or the Commonwealth: The Lord Warden in his absence is conservient
unto him, being in his stead, and not under him, for the very Place supposes
him as not, because not present. And this was by a Law declaratively published
at such time as Henry the fifth was Regent of France, and therefore by common
presumption, 8 H. 5. cap. 1.
was likely to have much occasion of residence in that Kingdom, and it holds
in equal force with all other Laws of the highest Size, which is the rather
to be noted because it is (though under a Protector) obligatory to the King,
and makes his personal presence no more considerable then the presence of his
shadow. For the King spent three whole years in the French Wars, and during
that time never saw England, where nevertheless in that interim three
Parliaments had been holden, one by the Duke of Bedford, and two by the Duke of
Gloucester; in the last of which this Law was made. And in truth if we look
upon this title of the Kingdoms Guardianship in its bare lineaments, without
lights and shadows, it will appear little better then a Crown of feathers
worn only for bravery, and in nothing adding to the real ability of the
governing part of this Nation: Neither were the persons of these Magnificoes so
well deserving, nor did the Nation expect any such matter from them. Edward the
first was a wise King, and yet in his absence chose Edward the second to hold
that place, he being then not above fourteen years of age; afterward Edward
the seconds Queen, and the Lords of her party, were wise enough in their way,
and yet they chose Edward the third to be the Custos regni, then not fourteen
years old, his Father in the mean time being neither absent from the Kingdom
nor deposed, Rot. Pat. 5. E. 3. p. 1. m. 16.
but only dismissed from acting in the adminstration of the Government. Edward
the third follows the same example, he first makes his Brother John of Eltham,
Custos regni, and this he did at two several times, once when he was but eleven
years old, afterward* when he was about fourteen: Then he made his Son
the Black Prince upon several occasions three times Lord Warden of the
Kingdom, once he being about nine years old, and again when he was eleven
years old, and once when about fourteen years old. Lastly, Edward the third
appointed his son Lionell Duke Clarence unto this place of Custos regni, when
as he was scarce eight years old; all which will appear upon the comparing
their ages with the several Rolls of 25 E 1. and 3, 5, 12, 14, 16, 19, E 3. If
therefore the work of a Custos regni be such as may be as well done by the
infants of Kings as by the wisest Councellor, or most valiant man; it is in my
opinion manifest that the place is of little other use to this Commonwealth
then to serve as attire to a comely Person, to make it seem more fair because
it is in fashion, nor does it advance the vallue of a King, one grain above
what his personal endowments do deserve.

Hitherto of the title and power; the next consideration will be of the
original Fountain from whence it is derived, wherein the presidents are clear
and plain, that ordinarily they are the next and immediate offspring of Kings,
if they be present whithin the four seas; to be by them enabled by Letters
Patents or Commission: But whether present or absent, the Parliament when it
sat did ever peruse their authority, and if it saw need, changed, enlarged, or
abridged, both it and them. Thus was the Duke of Gloucester made Lord Warden in
the time of Henry the fifth (he being then in France) in the room of the Duke
of Bedford, the like also in Henry the sixths time, when as the King was young;
for then the Parliament made the Duke of Bedford Lord Warden, and added unto
that title, the title of Protector. Afterward at the Dukes going over into
France, they committed that Service to the Duke of Gloucester (if I forget not
the nature of the Roll) during the Duke of Bedfords absence, and with a Salvo
of his right. Nor unlike hereunto was the course that was taken by the
Parliament in these sullen later times of Henry the sixth, whereof more
hereafter in the next Paragraph.

Lastly, the limitation of this high power and title is different according to
the occasion, for the Guardianship of the Kingdom by common intendment, is to
endure no longer then the King is absent from the helm, either by voluntary
deserting the work, or employment in foreign parts; though united they be
under the Government of the same King; together with this Nation, such as are
these parts of France, and Ireland, and Scotland, then under the English fee:
This is apparent from the nature of that statute of Henry the fifth formerly
mentioned; for if there was need to provide by that Statute, that the Kings
Arrival and Personal Presence should not dissolve the Parliament, assembled
by the authority of the Custos regni; then does it imply, that the personal
presence of the King, by and upon his Arrival had otherwise determined the
Parliament and that authority whereby it sat. But the presidents are more
clear, all of them generally running in these or the like words, In absentia
Regis, or Quamdiu Rex fuerit in partibus transmarinis. It is also to be
granted, that the Kings will is many times subjoyned thereunto, as if it were
in him to displace them, and place others in his absence; yet do I find no
president of any such nature, without the concurrence of the Lords or
Parliament, and yet that the Parliament has ordered such things without his
consent. For when Richard the First, passing to the Holy Land, had left the
Bishop of Ely to execute that place during his absence in remote parts; the
Lords finding the Bishop unfaithful in his Charge, excluded him both from that
place and Kingdom, and made the Kings Brother John, Lord Warden in his stead.

But in the Case of the Protectorship, which supposes disability in the Person
of the King, the same by common intendment is to continue during the Kings
disability; and therefore in the Case of Henry the Sixth, it was determined, 8
H. 6. n. 2.
that the Protectorship does Ipso Facto, cease at the Kings Coronation, because
thereby the King is supposed able to govern; although in later times it has
not so been holden: For Kings have been capable of that Ceremony, as soon as
of the Title, and yet commonly are supposed to be under the rule of necessity
of Protectorship, till they be fourteen years of age, or (as the Case may be)
longer: For although Henry the Sixth was once thought ripe, when he was eight
years old, yet in the issue he proved scarce ripe for the Crown at his two
and twentieth year. Nevertheless, the default of Age is not the only
incapacity of Kings; they have infirmities as other men, yea more dangerous
then any other man; which though an unpleasant tune it be to harp upon, yet it
is a Theme, that Nations sometimes are enforced to ruminate upon, when God
will give them Kings in his wrath, and those also over to their own lusts in
his anger. In such Cases therefore, this Nation sometimes have fled to the
refuge of a Protector, and seldom it is, that they can determine for how long:
When Henry the Sixth, was above thirty years old; Richard Duke of York was
made Protector, and Defendor of the Realm, and of the Church; It was done (if
the Record says true) by the King himself, Autoritate Parliamenti: It was
further provided by the Parliament, that though this was to continue, Quamdiu
Regi placuerit, yet the Duke should hold that place, till the Kings Son
Edward, should come to years of discretion, and shall Declare that he will
take that place upon himself.

Rot. Pat. 32. Hen. 6. m. 7.
The ground hereof is said to be, that the King was, Gravi infirmitate detentus,
which could not be intended of any bodily distemper; for neither does any such
thing appear by any Author, or Record. Nor if such had been, yet had it been
an irrational thing in the Parliament, to determine the same upon the Princes
discretion, and acceptance of the Charge upon himself. It seems therefore,
that it was, Gravis infirmitas Animi, and that this way of the Parliament
tended to a tacit sliding him out of the Government of the Kingdom, by a
moderate Expression of a General incapacity in his Person.

The Conclusion of all that has been said concerning this Title, is double:
One, that both the Custos Regni, and Protector, are not subsistent, but
consistent, with that of a King, because it supposes a King under incapacity.

Secondly, that they tend to teach the people a necessity of having one Chief,
although it may, in truth, seem to be but a trick of State; like some pretty
carved Cherubims in the Roof of a building, that do seem to bear it up,
when as, in truth, it is the Pillars that supporteth both it and them.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Privy Council.
NAtions do meet with their Exigencies as well as Persons, and in such
condition, Resolutions taken up by sudden Conceit, are many times more
effectual then more mature deliberations, which require more time in
composing, are more slow in Conclusion, let slip opportunities, and fall short
of Expectation in the end. Such are the ways of debate in the Grand
Representative of the Kingdom. Add hereunto, that in putting the Laws in
execution, greater discretion is required, then can enter into the head of any
one man, and greater speed then can stand with debate amongst many: And
therefore it is beyond all doubt, that the Conventicles of Council, are no
less necessary in their Degree, then the Assembly of the Estates of this
Nation, in their Grand Convention.

Yet with this Caveat, that one Genius may move in both; for otherwise the
motions of Government must needs be inconstant, inconsistent, and like that of
an Hipocrite, one way abroad, another way at home; neither comfortable to it
self, nor confiding to others: and therefore cannot these privater Counsels,
by any proportion of Reason, be better Constituted, then by the Representative
it self, that it may be a Creature made in its own Image, one and the same,
with the Image of the maker.

This was the wisdom and the practice of these times, 5 Hen. 4. n. 57 8. n.
31. 11. n. 44. 2 H. 6. n. 15, 16. 31 H. 6. n. 31.
more ordinarily then in the former; for the Parliament was no less jealous of
the power of Henry the Fourth, then of the infirmities of Henry the Sixth; nor
more assured in the aims of any of them all, then themselves were in their own
title to the Crown.

Neither was this sufficient, for the Parliament looked upon themselves as a
body that sometimes must retire to rest, and upon the privy Council, as
watchmen subject to change, and therefore they not only give them
instructions, 8. H 6. n. 8.12. 14, 16.
but engage them unto observance. Their instructions were sometimes occasional
but some more general, of which I shall instance only in two, which were to
be of everlasting regard. First, that they should hold no Pleas before them,
that is to say, at the Council table, or at the privy Council, nor before any
of them, unless as Judges in the Chancery Exchequer, or Benches at
Westminster, 8. H 4. n. 76.
so as whatsoever miscarriages were had by the privy Council in Cases of
judicature in the Star Chamber formerly, are now reduced; The second rule was
this, 1. H 4. n. 37. 8. H. 4. n. 73.
that no dispatches should be made at the Council table of any matters there
agitated, but by general consent. Unity gives life to action, carrying
therewith both Authority and Power; and when all is done, must derive its
original from without, and in all good ends from above. And therefore as a
seal to all the rest it was wisely done by the Parliament to draw the minds of
the Privy Council together, and to present them jointly before God, 11. H 4.
n. 14.39.
by an oath oblieging themselves to a solemn and constant observance of their
instructons, and to persevere therein; for the unchangeable God can only stamp
a lasting Image upon the mind, and bind the same (that is so subject to
change) to an unchangeable Law; whereby the People may be made as happy for
continuance as for Righteousness and Peace.

The privy Council thus settled, dressed, and girt, becomes of high esteem,
both for trust and honorable employment in great matters. The Mint is the very
Liver of the Nation, and was wont to be the chief care of the Parliament it
self in all the dimensions thereof; now the Mint is two ways considered, Viz:
either in the vallue of the Metal and Money, or in the coynage.

The first of these and things most immediately concurring therewith, the
Parliament still retains to its own immediate Survey; such as are the
inhibiting of exportation of Gold, and Silver; and of melting of Coin into
Plate or Bullion; the regulating of the current of Foreign Coin, the reducing
of Money, both Eorrain and Domestic, imbased by Counterfeiture, clipping,
washing, etc. The regulating of allay of Gold and Silver; the regulating
exchange, and such like; concerning all which, the Reader may please to peruse
the Statutes, 2 H. 4. cap. 5, 6, 11, 13. 4 H. 4. cap. 16. 3 H. 5. Stat. 1. and
4. cap. 6. and 9. cap. 11. And 2 H. 6. cap. 6.

The second Consideration touching the Mint, 1 H. 6. cap. 1. 9 H. 5. cap. 6.
concerned the election, and government of the Officers, touching the Mint and
Exchange, or the places where they shall be holden, which with some other
matters of inferior Nature, were left to the Order of the Privy Council,
either with the King, or alone, in Case of the Kings absence or disability.

A second power given to the Privy Council, was in point of Trade, and
Merchandise: formerly they had somewhat to do therein, but still the
Parliament set out their bounds in Richard the Seconds time, the people had
liberty of trade in some Commodities, by way of Exportation, 17 R. 2. c. 7.
but the Privy Council might restrain them upon inconvenience to the Public:
Now the same is confirmed, 4 H. 6. cap. 5.
and though it concerned Corn only, yet it was a President that led the way
to a much larger power in the Trade of the Staple Commodities of this Island, to
enlarge or straiten it as they thought meet; and so they became in a fair way
to have a principal power over the Revenues and Riches of this Nation. But
this lasted not long, for within ten years, these Licenses of Transportation
cost the Merchant so much, 15 H. 6. cap. 2. 20 H. 6. c. 6.
as he could make little gains of all his care and pains, and therefore a
rule is set to a general allowance of all Transportation of Corn, till the
price of Wheat came to a Noble, and Barley at three shillings, and no longer.
This being first made Temporary, was afterward made perpetual, 23 H. 6. cap.
5.
and so gave a restraint unto the power of the King and Council. But where no
Positive restraint was made by any Statute, the King and Council seemed to
have the sole power left unto them, to open and shut the passes of Trade as
they pleased: For whereas the Commodity of Butter, and Cheese, was made Staple,
the King and Council had power to stop the sale thereof; notwithstanding, that
the Law gave full liberty to the Subjects to bring all their Staple Commodities
to the Staple: 18 H. 6. cap. 3.
Nevertheless, this power in the King is not Primitive, but derived from the
Parliament, for they had power over the Kings Licenses, and Restraints in such
Cases, as by the several Statutes do appear.

A third power given to the Privy Council, was a power of Summons and Process
against Delinquents, in Cases of Riots, Extortions, Oppressions, and grievous
Offenses; the Summons to be by Privy Seal, the Process, Proclamations, and for
Nonappearance, 31 Hen. 6. cap. 2.
Forfeiture, if the Delinquent be of the Degree of a Lord, if of inferior
rank, then a Fine or Outlary. At the first view the Statute has an
ill-favored aspect, as if it raised up a new Court of Judicature, but the time
is to be considered with the occasion; for it was made for the securing of the
Peace, in a turbulent time. And besides, the Law carries along with it two
Restrictions, which puts the right of Cognizance in the Privy Council to the
question.

First, it saves the Jurisdiction of other Courts, and provideth further, That
no matter determinable by the Law of this Realm, shall be by this Act
determined in other form, then after the course of the same Law in the Kings
Court, having determination of the same; which implies, that some kinds of
Riots, and Extortions are of so high a nature, that though determinable in the
Kings Court, yet are they to be determined before the Lords.

In the next place, this Law provideth that such offenses, as are determinable
by the Law of the Realm, that is by Jury, shall still be so tried.

13 Hen. 4. cap. 7.
Secondly, if Conviction be upon Confession, or by Certificate, in case where
(by reason of Parties, and partakings) Inquisition by Jury can not be had,
there the Lords shall immediately determine the same.

Lastly, if the Certificate be traversed, then the same shall be tried in the
Kings Bench.

But there is another Restriction that undoeth all, in effect, in point of
right, because what this Law setleth therein, it setleth but for seven years,
and leaves the Privy Council to the limits of the Common Law for the future:
In the mean time, the Privy Council may be thought terrible, and very high,
both by this Law, and the greatness of the Lords. Kings Unkles, and Kings
Brothers, are Subjects indeed, but of so high a Degree, that if a little
goodness of Nature, or public Spirit shine in them, they soon become the
Objects of Admiration from the Vulgar, and gain more from them, by their
vicinity, then the King can do at a distance. For the Commons of England, by
the fair demeanor of popular great men, are soon won out of their very
clothes, and are never more in danger to part with their liberties, then when
the Heaven is fair above their heads, and the Nobility serve the King, and
flatter them. Nevertheless, as I said, the season must also be considered of
this power, thus by this Law contracted; for what the Lords gained not by their
Popularity, the Queen did with her power; who now mindful of her contemned
beauty, and opposition from the Duke of Gloucester against her marriage, removes
him out of the way, gets the reins of Government into her hand, and like a
Woman drives on in full careere.

The Duke of York, and other Lords, not liking this gallop, endeavor to stop
her pace, but are all overborn, the Duke taken prisoner, and doubtless had
pledged the Duke of Gloucester, but that the Heir apparent of the House of
York steps in to rescue; and new troubles arise in Gascoigne, to put an end to
which, the Queens party gains, and takes the Duke of Yorkes word for his good
behavior, gets this Law to pass, expecting hereby, if not a full settlement
at Home, yet at least a respite to prevent dangers from abroad, during the
present exigency. And thus upon the whole matter, the Lords and Privy Council
are mounted up by the Commons to their own mischief.

CAHP. XVII. Of the Clergy, and Church Government, during these times.
IT was no new thing in the World, for Princes of a wounded Title, to go to
the Churchmen for a plaster, and they are ready enough to sing a Requiem, so
as they may be the gainers: The Princes therefore of the House of Lancaster,
had offended against common sense, if they had not done the like themselves,
being not only guilty in their Title, but also by a secret Providence, drawn
into one interest together with the Churchmen to support each other. For Henry
the Fourth, and Archbishop Arundell, meeting together under one condition of
Banishment, become Consorts in sufferings, and Consorts in Honor; for Society
begotten in trouble, is nourished in Prosperity, by remembrance of mutual
kindnesses in a necessitous Estate, which commonly are the more hearty, and
more sensible, by how much other Contentments are more scant. But the
Archbishop had yet a further advantage upon the heart of Henry the Fourth,
though he was no man of power, yet he was of great Interest; exceedingly
beloved of the English Clergy, and the more for his Banishment sake: Now
whatsoever he is, or has, is the Kings, and the King is his; the sweet
influence of the Archbishop, and the Clergy, enters into his very Soul; they
are his dearly beloved, for the great Natural Love (as he says to the World)
they bear to him; what he could, he got, what he got, he gave to the Church:
Thus the Family of Lancaster, becoming a mighty support unto the Clergy,
Roman as it was; they also became as stout maintainers of the cracked Title of
that younger House: So was fulfilled the old Prophecy of the Oil given to
Henry the first, Duke of Lancaster, wherewith Henry the Fourth was anointed,
That Kings anointed with that Oil, should be the Champions of the Church. Now
for the more particular clearing of this, we are to consider the Church
absolutely, or in relation to the Political Government of the People.
Concerning the later, many things did befall, that were of a different piece to
the rest, in regard that the Lords, for the most part, were for the Clergy, and
they for themselves; but the Commons began to be so well savoured with
Wickl^^fs way, that they begin to bid defiance to the Clergies self ends, and
aims: and because they could not reach their heads, they drive home blows at
their legs.

A Parliament is called, and because the King had heard somewhat, feared that
the People were more learned then was meet for his purpose, and that the
Parliament should be too wise; he therefore will have a Parliament, wherein the
People should have no more Religion, then to believe; nor Learning, then to
understand his sense, nor wisdom then to take heed of a Negative Vote: But it
befell otherwise, for though it was called the Lack-learning Parliament, yet
had it well enough to discern the Clergies inside, and Resolution enough to
enter a second claim against the Clergies Temporalties, and taught the King a
Lesson, That the least understanding Parliaments, are not the best for his
purpose: For though the wisest Parliaments have the strongest sight, and can
see further then the King would have them, yet they have also so much wisdom,
as to look to their own skins, and commonly are not so venterous, as to tell
all the World what they know, or to act too much of that which they do
understand. But this Parliament, whether wise, or unwise, spoke loud of the
Clergies superfluous Riches, and the Kings wants are paralleled therewith, and
that the Churchmen may well spare enough to maintain fifteen Earls, fifteen
hundred Knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, and one hundred Hospitalls
more then were in his Kingdom.

This was a strong temptation to a needy and courageous Prince, but the
Archbishop was at his elbow; the King tells the Commons, that the Norman and
French Cells were in his Predecessors time seized under this color, yet the
Crown was not the richer thereby; he therefore resolves rather to add to, then
diminish any thing from, the maintenance of the Clergy.

Thus, as the King said, he did, though he made bold with the Keys of Saint
Peter; for he could distinguish between his own Clergy, and the Roman. The
People are herewith put to silence, yet harbor sad conceits of the Clergy
against a future time, which like a hidden fire, are not only preserved, but
increased by continual occasions, and more principally from the zeal of the
Clergy, now growing fiery hot against the Lollards. For that not only the
People, but the Nobles, yea, some of the Royal blood, were not altogether
estranged from this new old way; whether it was sucked from their Grandfather
Duke John, or from a Popular strain, of which that House of Lancaster had much
experience, I determine not. These were the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester;
Bedford was first at the Helm of Affairs at home, whiles the King acted the
Soldiers part in France, as ill conceited of by the Clergy, as they slighted
by him. At a Convocation once assembled against the Lollards, the Duke sent
unto their Assembly his Dwarf, as a great Lollard, though he was a little Man,
and he returned as he went, Antiq. 278.
even as Catholic, as any of them all; Non tam dispectus a Clero, quam ipse
Clerum despiciens atque eludens. This, and some other sleights the Clergy liked
not, they therefore find a way to send him into France, to be a Reserve to his
Brother: And in his room steps forth Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, that was no
less cool for the Roman way then he. Henry the Fifth was not more hearty in
Romes behalf, for although he was loath to interrupt his Conquest abroad, with
contests at home, yet he liked not of advancements from Rome; insomuch, as
perceiving the Bishop of Winchester, to aspire to a Cardinals Hat, he said,
that he would as well lay aside his own Crown, as allow the Bishop to take the
Hat. Nor was he much trusted by the Clergy, who were willing he should rather
engage in the Wars with France, then mind the Proposalls of the Commons,
concerning the Clergies Temporalties, which also was renewed in the Parliament
in his days. Above all, as the Lancastrian House loved to look to its own, so
especially in relation to Rome, they were the more jealous, by how much it
pretended upon them, for its favor done to their House: And therefore Henry
the Fourth, the most obleiged of all the rest, looked to the Provisors more
strictly then his Predecessors had; and not only confirmed all the Statutes
concerning the same already made, 9 H. 4. cap. 8.
but had also provided against Provisors of any annual Office, or Profit, or
of Bulls, of Exemption from payment of Tithes, or from Obedience, 2 H. 4. c. 3,
4. 7 H. 4. cap. 7, 8 4 H. 5. cap. 4.
Regular or Ordinary, and made them all punishable within the Statute; and
further, made all Licenses, and Pardons, contrary thereto (granted by the King)
void against the Incumbent, and gave damages to the Incumbent in such
vexations; for the former Laws had saved the right to the true Patron, both
against Pope, and King.

And thus the English Kings were Servants to the Church of England, at the
charges of Rome, whiles the Popedom being now under a wasting and devouring
Scisme, was unable to help it self, and so continued until the time of Henry
the Sixth; at which time, the Clergy of England, got it self under the power
and shadow of a Protector, a kind of Creature, made up by a Pope and a King.
This was the Bishop of Winchester, so great a Man, both for Birth, parts of
Nature, Riches, Spirit, and Place, as none before him ever the like; for he was
both Cardinal, Legate, and Chancellor of England; and had gotten to his aid,
the Bishop of Bathe, to be Lord Treasurer of England: Now comes the matter
concerning Provisors once more to be revived.

First, more craftily by collogueing with the Nobility, who now had the sway in
the Kings minority, but they would none: An answer is given by the King, that
he was too young to make alteration in matters of so high Concernment, yet he
promised moderation. The Clergy are put to silence herewith, and so continue
till the King was six years elder, and then with Money in one hand, and a
Petition in the other, they renew their Suit, but in a more subtle way: For
they would not pretend Ro^e, but the English Churches liberties; they would not
move against the Statutes of Praemuniri, but to have them explained; it was not
much they complained of, for it was but that one word, 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5.
Antiq. Brit.
Otherwhere, which, say they, the Judges of the Common Law expound too largely,
not only against the Jurisdiction of the Holy Sea, but against the
Jurisdiction of the English Prelacy, which they never intended in the passing
of those Laws: Their Conclusion is therefore a Prayer, That the King will
please to allow the Jurisdiction of their Ecclesiastical Courts, and that
Prohibitions in such Cases, may be stopped. But the King, either perceiving
that the Authority of English Prelacy, was wholly dependent on the Sea of Rome,
and acted either under the shadow Legatine, or at the best, sought an
Independent power of their own: Or else the King doubting that the calling of
one word of that Statute into question, that had continued so long, might
endanger the whole Law into uncertainty, declined the matter, saving in the
moderation of Prohibitions. Thus the English Clergy are put to a retreat, from
their reserve at Rome; all which they now well saw, yet it was hard to wean
them: The Cardinal of Winchester was a great Man, and loath to lay down his
power; but his own Tribe grew weary of him, and his Power: For the greater some
Churchmen are, unless they be better then men, the inferior, and better
Churchmen, are worse then men; at length therefore the Cardinal is
Un-Legated, and that Power conferred upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, a Man
formerly well approved, but by this very influence from Rome, rendered
suspected; which he perceiving, protested against the Exercise of the
Jurisdiction Legatine, without the Kings allowance, and so mannerly crept into
the Chair.

The English Kings and Clergy, having thus attained the right discerning of
each other, begin to take up a new way of Policy; which was to hold nothing of
the Popedom, but the form of Worship, and Discipline; but as touching
Jurisdiction, they held it a high point of wisdom, either to fetch it nigh at
home, or to be silent in the matter; having now found a main difference between
the Popes Will, and the Church Law; and therefore, as formerly, Holl.
the Convocation and Parliament joined in excluding of Forrainers from
Church Livings, under the Notion of Intelligencers to Enemies abroad: So
neither now will they allow any Provisions for English men; and upon this
ground the Deane and Chapter of York refused to admit the Bishop of Lincoln,
to the Sea of York, although designed he was thereto by Pope Martin, and he
the Darling of Nations, being by joint consent advanced to the Triple Crown,
that had been formerly tripled amongst three Popes, and troubled all Europe:
And whereas during the Tripapalty, much money had been Levied here in England,
to serve for the recovery of the Popedom, to one of English Interest: Now by
joint consent, the same is seized upon and stopped, as fuel from the fire,
and spent by Henry the Fifth, in the recovery of a Kingdom in France, that
should have been employed in recovery of a Popedom at Rome: these things
concurred to give a wound to the Popedom, that was never cured to this day.

Nevertheless the English Clergy was no looser by all this, but gained in the
whole sum: for as it made them more depending on the Crown, so it made the
Crown more fast to them, from which they had received more real immunities
and power, then the Pope ever did, or was able to give them, and might expect
to receive many more. What Personal respects these three Kings showed them,
has been already touched: Henry the sixth added one favor, which made all the
rest more considerable: hitherto they had used to meet in Convocation, as upon
the interest of Rome, and little notice was taken of them; now the Nation owns
them, and in some respects their work, and it is granted, That the Clerks of
Convocation called by the Kings Writ, and their Meniall Servants shall have
such privilege, 8 H. 6. cap. 2.
in coming, tarrying, and going, as the Members of the Parliament have: So as
though they be not Members yet they are as Members, if they assemble by the
Kings Writ, and not only by the power of the Legate or Metropolitan. 4 Instit.
c. 74.
The antiquity of this Court is great, yet not so great as has been supposed;
nor is it that Court of the Ordinary, called the Church Gemot, mentioned in the
Laws of Henry the first, as not only the work thereof, therein set down, do
sufficiently declare, but also its evident, that in Henry the seconds days the
Grand Counsels of this Kingdom were Jointly mixed both of Clergy and Laity,
nor could the Clergy shut the Laity from their Councels, till about the times
of Richard the first, or King John. From which time forward the Laity were so
far from protecting of them (till these times now in hand) that all their care
was to keep them from violating the liberty of the People. That they were many
times notwithstanding called together by the Kings Writ before these times, Mr.
Will: Prynne.
has been also cleared by another Penn. That their work at such times was to
advise concerning such matters as should be propounded to them by the King in
Parliament, their summons do show; the particulars whereof, for the most part,
concerned supplies of Money from the Churchmen, and yet sometimes matters of
great moment were debated therein: as in a Convocation summoned by Henry the
Fifth in his ninth year, the pre-eminence of Pope Eugenius above the Council
of Bazill was debated, and as much as they could, determined the same: the
credit of their decisions in former times, I believe, was not much amongst the
People, because the men were looked upon with an evil eye: Now that the
Parliament seems to own them in their way, and to protect them; their
determinations are somewhat: The Churchmen espy their opportunity, and whiles
the benevolent influence of the State is in its first heat, they improve it in
this manner. The times were now come about wherein light began to spring forth,
conscience to bestirr it self, and men to study the Scriptures; This was
imputed to the idleness and carlesnesse of the Clergy, who suffered the minds
of young Scholars to luxuriate into errors of Divinity, for want of putting
them on to other Learning, and gave no encouragement to studyes of human
Literature, by preferring those that were deserving. The Convocation taking
this into consideration, do decree, Antiq. Brit.
that no person should exercise any jurisdiction in any Office, as
Vicar-generall, Commissary, or Official, or otherwise, unless he shall have
first in the University taken degrees in the civil or canon Law: A shrewd
trick this was to stop the growth of the study of Divinity, and Wickleifs way:
and to imbellish men's minds with a kind of Learning that may gain them
preferment, or at least an opinion of abilityes beyond the common strain, and
dangerous to be meddled with, like some Gallants that wear Swords as badges of
Honor, and to bid men beware, because they possibly may strike, though in
their own persons they may be very Cowards; and no less mischeivously intended
was this against the rugged common Law, a rule so nigh allied to the Gospel
way, as it favoreth liberty, and so far estranged from the way of the civil
and canon Law, as there is no hope of accommodation till Christ and Antichrist
have fought the field.

Thus much of the Church of England, in relation to the State, now as it is
absolutely considered in regard of the several degrees of Persons therein.
Although these three Kings were much indeered to the English Clergy; yet the
difference between the Laity and them growing high, the Kings principal care
is now, to keep an even hand between them both, for he that will back two
Horses at once, must keep them even, or put his joints to the adventure: First,
Henry the fourth grants, that no more shall be paid to Rome for the first
fruits of Archbishops and Bishops, 6 H. 4. cap. 1.
then has been anciently used. The occasion hereof was to prevent the horrible
mischief and damnable custom of Rome; for such are the very words of that
Statute, unto which the Clergy gave their Vote, if not the first vote; and
therefore certainly did neither believe, nor honor that infallible Chair as
their own Mother; nor did they bear her yoke further then their own
benefit, and reason of State did require, for though the immediate benefit of
this Law did descend upon the Prelacy; yet it also much concerned the interest,
both of the honor and benefit of the Nation, that the Clergy should not be at
the Popes pleasure to tax and assesse as he thought good.

2 H. 5. cap. 1.
Secondly, Henry the fifth added unto the Prelacy some kind of increase, both
of Honor, and Power, Viz. To visit Hospitalls that were not of the Kings own
foundation, and to reform abuses there; for the Patrons either had no Power to
punish, or will or care to reform them; and thus upon the point, although they
lost a right, yet they gained ease.

3 H. 5. cap. 8.
Thirdly, the same King confirmed by a Statute unto Ordinaries, the Cognizance
of accounts of Executors, for their Testators Estates, which formerly was
granted by the Canon Law, but they wanted power to execute, and a right to have
and receive: In all these the Clergy or Prelacy were the immediate gainers. In
as many other things the People were made gainers, and yet the Clergy were no
loosers, otherwise then (like the Kite) that prey which was none of their own.

First, they refused formerly to grant copies of Libells, either thereby to
hinder the course of Prohibitions, or to make the copies the more dear, and
Money more Cheap with them. Henry the fifth finding this a greivance to the
People, passes a Law, that all Ordinaries shall grant the copies of Libells at
such time as by Law they are grantable.

2 H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 1.
Secondly, as the Probate of Wills had anciently belonged to the Ordinary, by
the Canon Law, and formerly also confirmed to them by the Parliament, so it
also regulated and settled the Fees for such Service: But the Clergy having been
ever under the nouriture of their Mother Rome, that loved to exceed, they
likewise accounted it their liberty to take what they could get, but the nigher
they come to engage with Kings in their government according to Law, the more
reformed they grow: Formerly Edward the third had settled their Fees, but they
would not hold to the rule, now the Law is redoubled by Henry the fifth, with a
penalty of treble damages against delinquents. 3 H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 8.
Furthermore the very Priests could not contain, their Paternosters, Requiems,
Masses, and such wares, they had engrossed, and set thereof what price they
pleased: The Market was risen to that height, that Edward the third undertook
to set a rate upon those commodities, but that also would not hold long; Henry
the fifth he sets a certain Stipend somewhat more then Edward the third had
done, 2 H. 5. Stat. 2 cap. 2.
and yet less then the Priests had formerly.

Lastly, some Laws were made, wherein the Commonwealth gained, and the Church
were loosers. First, whereas the Churchmen formerly held all holy things
proper and peculiar to their own Cognizance, especially such as concerned the
worship of God, the Parliament now began to be bold with that, and never asked
leave. It had now for a long time, even since the Saxon times, been the unhappy
condition of this Church of England, amongst others, to decay continually in
Piety and right devotion, but through the light that now revived, and Gods
goodness, it in these times came to pass, that the People did entertain some
sense of their duty toward God, more then formerly, and begin to quarrel the
abuses done to the Lords day, in the manner of the keeping thereof: London has
the honor for beginning this reformation by an Act of their Common Council.
The Parliament within seven years after that, 27 H. 6. cap. 5.
engage the whole Kingdom in that service (though therewith also are adjoined
other holy Feasts then holden) And all Faires and Markets are enjoined to cease
on that day, under pain of forfeiture of Goods exposed to sale, excepting
Victual, and excepting the four Sundays in Harvest. And thus though places
had their consecration allowed by the Parliament, and immunity from trading in
Faires, and Markets, by the space of 160. years before this time, yet that
time which God by his own Law had reserved to his own self, never came under
regard to be allowed till now, and yet not by the motion of the Clergy, nor by
their furtherance; for by their thrusting in the holy days, they made them
equal with the Lords day, and in Harvest time superior, by preserving them in
force, when as the Lords days were set aside: So God had somewhat of these
men, but the Pope more. Secondly, as the Churchmen lost in the former, so the
Prelacy in this that follows.

The Prelates had long since obtained the trial of Bastardy, and therein could
strain themselves so far, as to put the Case of inheritance into danger, where
the point otherwise was clear enough; and this grew to that height that it
endangered the disinheriting of the heirs of the Earl of Kent. 9 H. 6. cap.
11.
It is therefore now provided, that before the Ordinary in such Cases Proceed
to trial, Proclamations shall be made in Chancery, to summon all pretenders of
Interests or Titles to come before the Ordinary, to make their Allegations, and
all trials of Bastardy otherwise made shall be void; so as whatever the Canon
did, the Parliament would not trust to the Ordinaries Summons, nor allow of
their power in any other manner, then the Parliament thought meet. One thing
more remains, wherein the true Church of Christ seemed to lose and yet gained;
and the Clergy joining with the King seemed to gain and yet lost; this was the
point of worship, which had long stumbled the minds of the People, and was now
grown to that strength, that nothing but an Act of Parliament can keep it
under. This opinion concerning worship, was at the first so young, that it was
not yet baptized with any proper name, but called, Opinion contrary to the
Church determinations, or Catholic faith. And against this the Clergy now
stormed, more then ever formerly, because it was grown to such a height as if
it meaned to overtop theirs. To this end they procure an Act to pass,

2 H. 4. cap. 15.
That all Preachers, Teachers, Writers, Schoolemasters, Favorers; or
notoriously defamed Persons, for the maintenance of such opinions, shall be
(upon conviction before the Ordinary, according to the Canons) imprisoned in
the Diocessans Prison, Fined according to the Diocessans discretion.

If upon Conviction, he shall not abjure, or shall relapse, he shall be
delivered unto the Seculer Power, and be burned.

And that Preachers without License of the Diocessan, should be restrained.

Concerning which Law, I shall first show what change in the Laws of this
Kingdom was endeavored, and what was really effected.

First, it is an undeniable ground, 42 E. 3. cap. 3.
that no Freeman can be put to answer before any Judge, but upon Presentment,
or other matter of Record foregoing, and by due Process of Law; and yet it
has been ruled, that strong presumption, and complaint of credit after it is
entered, 10 H. 7. fol. 17.
is sufficient Record, to ground proceedings in this Case; to attache the Party
to answer. But by this Law a Trial is introduced, that neither rests upon
any peremptory accusation, or proof of witness, but merely upon Inquisition,
upon the Oath and Conscience of the Party suspected; which in the later days
has been called the trial upon the Oath, Ex Officio; for such was the trial
allowed by the Canon in these times; Otho de Jur. Jur. Calumn.
as appears in the Constitutions of Otho, and the Decrees of the Archbishop
Boniface, by whom it was endeavored to be obtruded upon the Laity, about the
times of Henry the Third, or Edward the First; but even the Clergy then
withstood it, as Lindwood confesses. Lind. de Jure Juran. 2.
And Otho in his very Constitution, does hold this forth by that Clause of his,
Nonobstante obtenta consuetudine.

Secondly, this Law does endeavor to introduce a new Judge, with a power to
Fine and Imprison according to discretion, and a Prison allowed to him as his
own peculier, and yet the Writ De cautione admittenda, still held its power, to
regulate that discretion as formerly it had done; which by the way may render
the power of this Law suspicious.

Thirdly, the Clergy are not content to have the Estates, and Liberties of the
bodies of the People at their discretion; but they must also have their lives,
although no Free-mans life could by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom,
come to question, but by the judgment of his Peers; nor could the Clergy by
their own Canons interesse sanguine, Viz. They cannot put any man to death,
but by this Law they may send any man to death by a Sentence, as sure as death,
Tradatur potestati seculari: And such a death, not as the Civil Magistrate is
wont to execute by a speedy parting of the Soul from the Body, by loss of
blood, stop of breath, or such like; but the Clergy must have blood, flesh,
bones, and life and all, even to the edge of nonentity it self, or they are not
satisfied: And thus the Writ, De comburendo Haeretico, entered into the World.
True it is, that some sparks of this fire are found in former times, and
Bracton touches upon such a Law, in Case of a Clerk convict for Apostasy,
Primo degradetur, and post per manum Laicalem Comburatur, which was indeed the
Canon, and that by his own Confession; for it is grounded upon one, Secundum
quod accidit, in the Synod at Oxford, under Archbishop Becket: but that Case
concerns a Clerk, who by his Profession has put himself under the Law of
the Canon, and it was only in Case of Apostasy, himself being turned Jew; and
this also done upon a sudden pang of zeal and power of an Archbishop, that
would know no Peer; nor do we find any second to this President by the space
of two hundred years next ensuing; neither does the Decree of Archbishop
Peckham, who was not long after Becket, Lind. lib. 5. de Apostat.
treating about Apostasy in Laymen, mention any other punishment then that
they are to be reclaimed, Per censuras Ecclesiasticas; nor yet that of
Archbishop Arundell, amongst the Constitutions at Oxford, not long before this
Statute, who treating about the crime of Heresy, he lays the Penalty upon the
forfeiture of goods, with a Praesertim, Lind. lib. 5. de Heret. fol. 159.
as if it were the Grand punishment: And Lindwood in his gloss upon that
place, setting down the Censures against Heresy, Hodie sunt (says he)
damnandi ad mortem, as if it were otherwise but as yesterday.

Fourthly, the next endeavor is to bring the Cognifance of all, wholly to the
Ecclesiastical Court, without further appeal; for so the words concerning
Conviction of Heresy are: Whereupon credence shall be given to the Diocessan
of the same place, or his Ordinary in that behalf.

These changes, I say, were endeavored to be brought upon the Government of
this Kingdom; and yet the Law for all this, suffered no change, nor did the
House of Commons (however the name is thrust into the English Ordinary Print)
ever yield unto the passing of the same, but in the Parliament next ensuing,
complained thereof, and protested they would not be bound by such Laws,
whereto the House of Commons had not given their consent; and this dashed the
Law quite out of countenance (although it holds the place still amongst the
number) for within four years after, 8 H. 4.
the Clergy bring in another Bill of the same nature in general, though
varying in some particulars, but the same was again rejected.

All the strength therefore of this Law, rests upon the King, and House of
Lords, engaged by the Clergy, to whom they trusted for their Religion (for
Book-learning was with them of small account) and no less by the King, who
knew no better way to give them content, that gave him so much as to set the
Crown upon his head; nor to discharge his Royal word, passed by the Earls of
Northumberland, Antiq. Brit. 273.
and Westmerland, in his behalf unto the Convocation, Viz. That they were sent
to declare the Kings good will to the Clergy, and Church Liberties, and that he
was resolved to defend all the Liberties of the Church by his Kingly Power, and
to punish Heretics, and the Churches Enemies, in such manner as the Clergy
should think meet; and therefore desired their daily Prayers, for his own,
and the Kingdoms safety. Walsingham, Ypo. Neustr. 157.
And yet for all this, the People were not of this mind; no small part of the
Kingdom being overspread with these Opinions.

After Henry the Fourth, comes Henry the Fifth, and he also makes another
assay; the former opinions then known only by the general name of Heresy,
are now baptized, by the new name of Lollardry, and grown so overspreading,
that all the troubles of these times are still imputed to them. It was indeed
the Devils old and common trick, thus to inrage earthly powers against these
men, although he be hereby but an instrument in the hand of the Chief Builder,
that in laying a sure foundation, does as well ram down, as raise up; for
the malice of these men made the People of God to multiply: Henry the Fifth,
also published a Law to this same:

2 H. 5. cap. 7.
That all Persons in place of Government, shall swear to use their diligence,
to destroy all Heresies, and Errors, called Lollardries.

That all Lollards convict by the Clergy, (left to the seculer power, according
to the Laws of Holy Church) shall forfeit their Lands, and Tenements to their
Lords: And the King to have the year, and day, and waste, and all his Goods
and Chattels.

If the Lord be the Ordinary, the King shall have all.

No forfeiture to be, till the Delinquent be dead.

They shall be found by Indictment, before the Justices of the Peace.

This Indictment being found, shall be sent to the Ordinary with the Prisoner.

The Indictment shall not be for Evidence, but only for Information.

These are the Principal things contained in this Law, which by the manner of
the Composure, seems to be of an uncertain color, neither made by the
Clergy, nor Laity, but spoiled between them both. The intent thereof seems to
be principally to draw on the House of Commons to pass the Law, under hope of
gain by the forfeitures; for the penalty is like that of Felony, though the
Crime be not expressly declared to be Felony. But the intent fell short in
event.

For first, the nature of the Crime is not defined, nor declared by any Law,
and therefore can no man by Indictment be found to be such.

Secondly, no penalty of death, has been by any former, or by this Law
determined upon such as are guilty, for its not enacted by any Law, that such
Person shall be delivered to the Seculer power, etc.

Thirdly, this Statute determining the forfeiture to be not till death, and
neither that, nor any other Law of this Kingdom determining death; then is no
forfeiture determined.

Fourthly, though this Law takes it for granted, That Heresy and Errors
belong to Ecclesiastical Cognizance, yet the same allows of no further
proceedings, then Ecclesiastical Censures.

Lastly, by this Law, there can be no proceeding, but in case of Indictment,
(for otherwise, without Record, no forfeiture can be) therefore, where no
Indictment is, there is no forfeiture. In all which regards, its evident that
the Clergy could by this Law, neither get fat nor blood; Fox Marturel. 589.
and therefore at their Convocation in the next year following, they took
another course, and ordered that three in every Parish, should make presentment
upon Oath, of such Persons as are defamed for Heretics, and the truth so far
as they can learn; which puts me in mind of a Presentment, that I have seen
by some of Saint Mary-Overies in these times: Item, we saine, that John Stevens
is a man we cannot tell what to make of him, and that he has Books, we know
not what they are: This new course shows plainly, that the former held not
force as they intended it. So God blasted the practices of the Clergy at this
time also, rendering this Law immateriall that had the form, as the other
missed in the form, and had the matter.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Court of Chancery.
IT often befalls in State Affairs, that extraordinary Exigencies require
extraordinary remedies, which having once gotten footing, are not easily laid
aside, especially if they be expedient for Prerogative. The Privy Council in
the Star Chamber, pretending default of the Common Law, both in speed, and
severity, in Cases whereby the State is endangered: The Chancery pretends
default by the Common Law in point of equity, and moderation: The People taken
with these pretenses, make that rod more heavy, which themselves had already
complained of: What the Chancery was in times past has been already showed;
still it is in the growing and gaining hand.

4 H. 4. cap. 8.
First, in the Judicatory power it prevailed in relation to the Exchequer,
exercising a kind of Power to survay the proceedings thereof, in Cases of
Commissioners distrained to account, for Commissions executed, or not executed;
for it was no easy matter to execute Commissions from the Exchequer in those
times of Parties; nor were men willing with such unwelcome occasions, between
Friends, and Neighbors; and it may be, they grew weary of imbroyling themselves
one against another, and of being Instruments of the violent counter-motions of
Princes, and great Men.

Secondly, it gained also upon the Admiralty, which by former Laws had
Jurisdiction in all Cases incident upon the great Sea; but now either through
neglect of the Admiral, or the evil of the times, occasioning Piracies to
grow Epidemicall, the ill government upon the Sea became dangerous to the
State, trenching upon the Truce made between this and other Nations.

2 H 5. cap. 6.
For a remedy whereof, first Conservators of the Truce were settled in every
Port, who had power committed to them to punish Delinquents against the Public
Truce, both by Indictment at the Kings suite, and according to the course of
the Admiralty by complaint, saving matters of death to the Cognizance of the
Admiral. But this was soon found defective, for Justice done in the dark, is
many times more respective, and less respected, and therefore within a few
years, it is provided, that Offenders against the Kings Truce upon the Sea, or
in any of the Ports, 29 H. 6. c. 2.
shall be proceeded against in the Chancery, before the Chancellor, who has
power given him, calling to his Assistance some of the Judges to execute the
Statute of 2 H. 5. foregoing, by a handsome contrivance: 14 H. 6. cap. 8. 20 H.
6. cap. 11.
For that Statute was once and again suspended for the rigor that was used by
the former Conservators, who being Borderers upon the Sea, for their own peace,
spared as few as they could, which had so discouraged the Seamen, that the
Kingdom had been almost utterly bereaved of its strength at Sea.
Nevertheless, all this while, these Laws were but penal, and not remediall,
for the Parties wronged: And therefore another Law is made, 31 H. 6. cap. 4.
to give the Chancellor and Judges power to make restitution and reparation.

Thirdly, the Chancery gained upon the Ecclesiastical Court; for whereas by
the Canon, the Churchmen were to be judged by their Superiors, according to
Ecclesiastical and Ordinary Jurisdiction; and the iniquity of the times, was
again returned to that height, that Parents could not enjoy their own Children;
but the little ones were allured, stolen away, and detained in Cloisters; nor
did the Churchmen afford remedy in such Cases: A Law was made, 4 H. 4. cap. 17.
that upon complaint hereof made to the Chancellor, the Provincial should be
by him sent for, and punished according to his discretion.

Lastly, the Chancery incroached upon the Common Law: For whereas the stirs
between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, began to rise, Men made their
dwellings in places of security, and strength; Women likewise, and other
persons flying, thither for refuge; especially, such of them as had most to
lose; these were contrary to the Law of common honesty, urged to engage their
Estates unto the desires of such, to whom they had fled for refuge, and some
times compelled to marry, before they could gain their liberty. 31 H. 6. cap. 9.
It was now provided, that all such complaints should be heard and determined
by the Chancellor.

4 H. 4 cap. 8. 13 Hen. 4. cap. 7. 2 H. 5. cap. 9.
Secondly, as touching the Ministerial power of the Chancery, this likewise was
enlarged in making of Process to compel appearance in cases of forcible
Entries, Murders, Manslaughters, Robberies, Batteries, Assemblies, in nature of
Insurrections, Riots, and Plunder, committed by Servants upon their Masters
goods, before their Masters death, and such like Offenses, now grown common,
and in need of sudden remedy.

Thus as the work and power of the Chancery grew, so did the Place and Person
of the Chancellor grow more considerable, raised now from being the Kings
Secretary, (for no better was he in former times) to be the Kingdoms Judge,
and of such Trust, that although the King might make election of his own
Secretary, yet the Parliament would first know, and allow him, that must be
trusted with the power over the Estates of so many of the People: And therefore
did in these times, both place, and displace him as they saw expedient.

2 H. 4. cap. 11.
In a word, he is become the Kingdoms Darling, and might be more bold with the
Common Law, then any of his Peers.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Courts of Crown Pleas, and Common Law.
AS the Chancery on the one side did swell and increase, so was the Kings Bench
in an Ebb; the Council Table in the Star Chamber on the one side, and the
Itenerant Courts in the Country intercepted, and drew away much to their own
shares: Making themselves fat, the Kings Bench lean, and the Rural Courts for
Crown Pleas almost to starve. The Crown Pleas formerly had been determinable in
the King's Bench, Goale-Delivery, Oier and Terminer, and many of them by
Justices of the Peace, Coroners, and Sheriff. The Goale-Delivery was
afterward united to the Judges of Assize, and if one of them were a Clergy
man, then to the other, and chief men of the County. This was useful for the
Public, but not beneficial for some men; and therefore they labored for
Commissions, especially directed to parties, that they thought would partake;
but these were found soon to be dangerous, soon taken away, 2 E. 3. cap. 2.
and the Goale-Delivery restored to the Judges of Assize, as formerly. The
Commissions of Oier and Terminer were sued forth upon extraordinary
immergencies, and offenses, wherein the State was much concerned for speedy
Execution. In former times both these and Goale-Deliveries were but rarely had
and then granted unto some, that perchance knew more of the Case, then before
hand was meet to be known. Edward the Third amended this error, and ordered
that no Commissions of Oier and Terminer should issue forth, but unto
Commissioners named by the Court, 34 E. 3. cap. 1.
and not by the party complaining. But the Judges of Assize are now in the
growing hand, hoth for Honor, Use, and Power, the rather, because their
Persons are of high repute in the Benches at Westminster, which are the
Master-peices of Judicature, and their Iters are constant and ordinary:
Nevertheless, the Judges of Assize, though they have the Goale-Delivery
annexed to them, yet have they not that absolute power of the King's Bench; but
are still under the rule of their Commission, which is not alterable, but by
Parliament, and which by it was altered, by way of adding of new powers, as new
crimes arose, that required the eye of the State to provide, and so the Judges
of Assize by degrees grew to be the ordinary Administrators of Justice
throughout the Kingdom, yet holding still forth to them a limited power, to
hear and determine in some Cases; but in others only, 11 H. 4. cap. 1.
to inquire and certify, as in the Case of false returns by the Sheriff, of
persons elected for the Parliament: And also in Cases concerning the Statutes
of Laborers, 2 H. 4. cap. 21. 13 H. 4. cap. 3.
and unlawful games, and pastimes; in which case the Certificate is to be made
to the Chancellor: And also in Cases concerning Liveries, contrary to the
Statutes, wherein the Certificate is to be made to the King's Bench; which power
in this last Case, continued in that manner by the space of thirty years; 8
Hen. 6. c. 4. 4 Hen. 5. c. 7.
and then by another Statute, they had the power to determine such cases before
themselves: In like manner they had power to hear and determine cases of
falsehood, in counterfeiting and corrupting of money, by washing, clipping, etc.
And also defaults committed by Sheriffs, 8 Hen. 6. c. 9.
Bailiffs, and their Officers against the Statutes of forcible Entries, and of
wearing of Liveries, as aforesaid.

These were signs of much confidence and trust in them, and yet
notwithstanding, in these, nor none of these, were the Penalties by Fine left
to the Arbitry of the Judges; no, nor to the Justices of the King's Bench, but
were by the very Letter of the Law determined. 13 Hen. 4. c. 2.
Nor would the Parliament trust these men with doing Justice in the cases
aforesaid, in their own Counties where they dwelled, nor did it think expedient
to allow the chief Justice of the Kings Bench unto that Service in any of them
all, but only once in the County of Lancaster, and then only at the Kings
pleasure; otherwise, 50 E. 3. n. 113 8 Rich. 2. cap. 2.
it was to be as was used by the space of one hundred years foregoing;
possibly because his power was too great to be trusted amongst the People.

Lastly, the Judges of Nisi prius, Westminster. 2. c. 30.
were anciently made by Edward the First, by whom also the Assizes were settled
at certain times of the year, and afterward by the Statute at York, the Nisi
prius in smaller cases was granted, 12 E. 2. cap. 3.
before one Justice of the Bench, where the Plea depends, and one
substantial man of the County; but those of greater concernment were to be had
before two Justices of that Bench, or in case they were wanting, then before
Justices of the other Bench, or in default of them, before the chief Baron, if
he were a man of Law, and in default of that, 14 E. 3. c. 16.
before the Judges of Assize. Therefore in those days, the Justices of the
Benches in their Iters in the Counties, divided in their power; Some being for
Assizes, others for Nisi prius; and in some times, and cases, some were for
both: For in those times of Edward the Third, 4 E. 3. cap. 11.
Judges of Assize had power to inquire in some matters that concerned the
Crown, or to try Nisi prius, nor were these powers united, till in Henry the
Sixths time, Justices of Nisi prius had the power of Oier and Terminer annexed
to them, in all cases of Felony, and Treason.

What was formerly provided by Edward the Third, and Richard the Second, for
Instruction to these Judges, 2 E. 3. cap. 8. 14 E. 3. c. 14. 20 E. 3. cap. 1. 8
R. 2. cap. 3. 9 R. 2. cap. 1.
and to bind them thereto by solemn Oath, I shall not particularly mention,
but shall leave the consideration of the Original of the whole Judicature of
this Nation, unto the Readers observation upon the Premises.

CHAP. XX. Concerning Sheriffs.
HEnry the Fourth, after a small rest in his Throne, though he always sat
loose, sought after the civil Peace, as the corner Stone of his subsistence;
and that by a way of Justice, which found more acceptance with the Vulgar, then
the common Education of the greater number in these times could promise; for
the worst of men cannot endure to suffer injustice, though themselves will do
it. Now because where Kings are reputed to be the Fountain and Life of Justice,
Sheriffs may be reputed to be the breath thereof; and by their irregularities,
do render the Government of the King, as loathsome, as unsavory breath does
the Person whose it is: Therefore Henry the Fourth chose rather to be a looser
in his Farme-Rents of the Sheriffwicks, then to occasion the Sheriffs to save
their bargains by oppression: 1 Hen. 4. c. 11.
And to this end he took away the course of forming of Sheriffwicks, and made
the Sheriffs bare accountants for the Annual profits; 4 Hen. 5. c. 2.
and as touching the casual profits, the Sheriff discharged himself upon
Oath. This was a good security to the King, but yet the People was not herewith
satisfied; For though the Sheriffs might not take to Farm, yet what they had,
they might let to Farm; And then wherein are the People the better for these
Laws? Seeing its all one for them to be oppressed by the Sheriff immediately,
and by the Proxy.

For preventing of this inconvenience, another Law is made; 4 H. 4. cap. 5.
That the Sheriff shall not let his Bailywicke to Farm, nor be Nonresident,
and to this he must bind himself by Oathe: So as now the Sheriff is double
girt, and may be fairly ridden, without danger to the King or People. But men
ride horses for ease, and pleasure, and he that must bend his mind always to
watch his horses motion, will choose rather to go on foot; and therefore
Henry the Fifth renewed the Law of Richard the Second, 1 H. 5. cap. 4.
that Sheriffs shall be but for one year, and then not to be chosen again, nor
serve for three years next following. This Order continued for the space of
eight years, within which time, War, and Pestilence had consumed so many of
the richer sort of People, that a Dispensation is granted, 9 H. 5. cap. 5.
that Sheriffs may continue in their places for four years. And it was above
twenty years after, ere the Stock was recruted again; after which time, the
substance of the former Statutes of Edward the Third, Richard the Second, and
1. Henry the Fifth is revived again, 23 H. 6. cap. 8.
with a penalty upon the Sheriff, his Deputy, or Clerk, that shall execute
that place above one year; so the custom of holding that Office ten or
twelve years, by occasion of the Dispensation for four years was laid aside:
But the Cure would never be perfect, so long as Sheriffs held by Inheritance:
For it was easy to find new Deputies, but not to lay down old Customs, nor
could it be lasting, unless the penalties also had been annexed to the
particular crimes.

For a Sheriff before he is a year old, by experience formerly had, becomes
too cunning for all these Laws; and therefore Laws are made also against the
ordinary corruption of these places, such as are extorting of Fees, 4 H. 6.
cap. 1. 6. cap. 4. 15. c. 5. 18. c. 14. 23. cap. 10. 28 E. 3. c. ult.
false making of Juries, false returns of Writs, etc. and damages in such
cases given to the party wronged; and when all is done, he is not trusted with
taking of Indictments. Thus with much ado, a Sheriff is made a tolerable
Officer, and his place by Degrees so hedged in, that what was in former times
hard to pluck up, is now become hard to set.

CAHP. XXI. Of Justices and Laws concerning the Peace.
THe faint title of Henry the fourth to the Crown, made him ever tender of the
Civil Peace, without breach whereof, he was sure to be quiet in the Throne; he
undertook not this work by any superlative power, from and by himself, but
uses the help of the Parliament, and Laws, wherein he was industrious;
pretending love of Unity amongst his People, which nevertheless he liked not,
unless in order to quiet between himself and them. The former way of Justices
of Peace he followed close, reducing the Persons to their ancient
qualifications. 1 H. 5. cap. 10.
The most sufficient Persons, 18 H. 6. c. 11.
Inhabitants in the County, worth at least twenty pound yearly, unless they be
Lawyers, or such as are Justices in Corporations; 2 H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 1.
nor is the King troubled or trusted with the naming or electing of these men,
but the Chancellor, or the Kings council; so as now by Law the King can
neither be Justice, nor make Justice, Jure proprio, but as his interest with
the Council is more or less prevalent, and that power* that first gave it to
the Crown, the same power took it away, or imparted, and placed it elsewhere.
But as touching the Work or Power of the Justices themselves, 2 H. 5. cap. 4.
3 cap. 7. 4 H. 6. cap. 1.
it grew exceedingly, much wheerof was only of inquiry and to make
Certificate, as of Herisie, Treason, Falsehood of Sheriffs, etc. But more of
Oier and Terminer as in Case of Watches, deceitfulness in Trades; as of making
arrow heads, 5 H. 4. cap. 3. 7 H. 4. cap. 7. 8 H. 5. cap. 3. 2 H. 6. c. 7, 14.
guilding of Metal, tanning of Leather, inbasing of Silver, selling of waxen
Images and Pictures, etc. for the superstition of these times was such, as
these petty Gods were not set at so high a Price by the Seller, but at a higher
price by the Buyer; the Parliament therefore set a truer vallue of them, Viz.
For the Wax, so much as the Wax is worth by weight, and but four pence for the
Godhead; so as it seems, the Parliament was not very superstitious in their
House, what ever they were at Church. Further-more, the Justices of the Peace
had power to punish deceit in Measures, Weights, forcible entries, and
Detainers. 1 H. 5. cap. 10. 9 Stat. 2. ca. 8. 2 H. 6. cap. 11. 11 H. 6. cap. 8.
13 H. 4. cap. 7. and 2. 4 H. 5. cap. 8.
In many of which Cases, the Penalty being fine and imprsonment, became a snare
to many of the Justices, especially such as were of the greater and higher
rank, who having Castles of their own, under color of justice, imprisoned
Delinquents, in their own Castles, and ransomed them at their own pleasure;
which proved a great oppression to the People; and occasioned a Law, that no
Justice should commit any Delinquent to other then the County Goal, saving
Franchises to the Lords. 5 H. 4. cap. 10.
Those times are happy when justice waits not altogether at Court, but grows
up in the feilds, and Justices of Peace, as the Kings arms upon the Royal
Mace are terrible only to the bad; and not as they are pictured before an
Alehouse door to invite men to transgress.

The Laws for the preservation of the Peace concern either punishment of
Crimes committed, or prevention of them from being committed: There is a
succession of Crimes, as of men and ages, because the Scripture tells us, that
the hearts of all are fashioned alike, yet it is with generations as with men,
some incline to some Crimes more then other, and that is the reason that the
title Treason, sometimes is set forth in Folio, sometimes in a lesser Volume.
Its evident in Story, that the violent times of Richard the second, had raised
the vallue of that, amongst other offenses, above measure; not long before his
time, his Father had reduced that wild Notion of Treason to a certain rule,
that formerly wandered in a Wilderness of opinion. But Henry the fourth, either
to save his own Stake, or to take the People, or both, 1 H. 4. cap. 10.
reduced it again to the Statute rule of Edward the third, and made void that
Statute of his Predecessors, which had made a former Act of Parliament, (and
all the service thereby done) Treason. The dimensions of Treason thus clearly
limmed and declared, taught ill disposed minds to keep out of the Letter, and
yet to be bold with the sense; counterfeit Money they durst not, yet to
diminish the same they thought came not within the circle, 3 H. 5. cap. 6.
and so it became a common greivance, till a Law was made, that all purposed
impairing of Money shall be Treason. And so the Parliament held forth to all men
that they had a power to declare Treason, without the bounds of the Statute of
Edward the third. The like power it held forth in the time of Henry the sixth,
for men knew that Burglary and robbery were mortal crimes, they would no more
of that, now they devise a way to spoil, and prey, for themselves, and yet
neither to rob, nor break house. To this end they would scatter little Scrolls
in writing, requiring the party that they intended to prey upon, to leave so
much Money upon such a day, at such a place, and this was, 8 H. 6. cap. 6.
Sub paena, of burning the parties house, and goods; which many times did ensue
upon default made, this practice was at once made Treason, to prevent the
grouth of such an evil. And the like was done with Robberies and
Manslaughters, contrary to the Kings Truce, and Safeconduct. 14 H. 6. cap. 8.


As many or more new Fellonies were also now created.

One was the cutting out of men's tongues, and plucking out of eyes, 5 H. 4.
cap. 4.
a strange cruelty; and that showed the extreme savagenesse of those times, so
much the more intolerable, by how much the poor tortured creature could
hardly be either eye, or ear witness, of the truth of his own wrong.

18 H. 6. c. 15.
A second Felony was, the customary carrying of Wool, or Wool-fells out of the
Realm, to other places; except Callis.

Another Felony concerns Soldiers, which I refer over to the next Chapter.

The last was, Servants plundering their Masters Goods, and absenting
themselves, 33 H. 6. cap. 1.
if upon Proclamation made, they appear not, this was also made Felony.

In the next place, as touching forcible entries and riots, the remedies so
often inculcated, and new dressed, show plainly the nature of the times: These
kind of crimes commonly are as the light Skirmishes in the beginning of a War,
and follow in the conclusion also, as the faintings of a battle fought till
both sides be weary.

I shall not enter into each particular Statute, diverse of them being little
other then as asseverations, annexed to a sentence, to add credit and stir up
minding in men, that otherwise would soon forget what is said or done: The
remedies formerly propounded are now refined and made more effectual.

First, in regard of speed, which is as necessary in these forces as the
stopping of the breaches of waters, in the first Act, and therefore one Justice
of the Peace may proceed upon a holder by force, or breaker of the Peace, with
a Continuando, 8 H. 6. cap. 9.
but Riots are looked upon as more dangerous, and the first opposition had need
be more stiff, least being uneffectuall, aggravates the violence, and
therefore its required that two Justices, and the Sheriff should join in the
work, to carry one the work with more Authority, and Power. And what they
cannot do in the punitive part, they must certify to the King and his Council,
31 H. 6. cap. 2. 2 H. 5. cap. 9.
or to the Kings Bench if traverse be made: So as though the Power of the
County be annexed to the Sheriff, Jure ordinario, to maintain the peace, yet
the Parliament did delegate the same upon Justices, as it thought most
expedient.

To maintain and recover the Peace when its broken, shows more Power, but to
prevent the breach, shows more Wisdom, and therefore to all the rest, the
Wisdom of these times provided carefully,

First, for Guards, and Watches, according to the Statute at Wint: 5 H. 4. cap.
3.
and committed the care thereof to the Justices of the Peace.

And secondly, against the gendring of parties, for its commonly seen, that
such as are admired for excellecies of Person, are so far adolized of some, as
that their gestures, actions, and opinions, are observed; tokens of favor
(though never so small) are desired from such and the Idol likes it well,
gives Points, Ribbons, it may be Hats, and with these men are soon gained to be
Servants in the fashion, and not long after to be servants in Action, be it War
or Treason, or any other way. This manner of cheat, the former times had been
too well acquainted with; Knights, and Esquires, are not feared, in times where
the word Lord carries the wonderment away, their offenses against the Statutes
of Liveries, are all great, though in themselves never so small; 1 H. 4. cap.
7. 8 H. 6. cap. 4.
and therefore are sure of Fine, and Ransom, and its well if they escape a
years Imprisonment, without bail, or mainprize. Lords may wear the Kings
Livery, but may give none; Knights and Esquires may wear the Kings Livery in
their attendance upon his Person, but not in the Country: 2 H. 4. cap. 21.
The King and Prince may give Liveries to Lords and meniall Servants. The sum
is, that Liveries may be given by the more public Persons for State, not to
make parties; and Men may wear Liveries in token of Service in Peace, and not
in Arms.

One thing must be added to all, which may concern trial in all, 20 H. 6.
Stat. 2. c. 6.
Viz. A Law was now made, that Noble Ladies shall be tried by their Peers; a
Law now of the first stamp, and strange it is that it never came before now
into the breast of the Law, but that it came now, it is not strange; no meaner
Person then the Duchess of Gloucester is first charged with Treason; when that
could not appear, then for Necromancy, very fitly, that she might be tried by
the Ecclesiastical way of witnesses; She is found guilty, and a Sentence of
Penance, and imprisonment or banishment passed thereupon after such a wild
way, as both Nobles, and Commons passed this Law, for the Vindication of that
Noble Sex, from such hudling trialls for the future.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Militia during these times.
THe Title of Henry the Fourth to the Crown, was maintained principally by his
Tenures, which the Courtiers call Knight Service, but the Common People, force
of Arms; and that which destroyed many a man, was the principal means of his
subsistence. Otherwise its clear, that his Title was staring naught; nor could
he outface Mortimars Title, without a naked Sword, which he used warily; for he
had Enemies enough to keep his Sword in hand, and Friends enough to keep it
from striking at random: for coming in by the Peoples favor, he was obleiged
to be rather remiss, then rigorous, yet his manner of coming was by the
Sword, and that occasioneth men much to debate about his absolute power in the
Militia, as supposing that what power he had, other Kings may, De jure,
challenge the same; and let that be taken for granted, though it will not
necessarily follow in true reasoning: And let it also be taken for good, that
Henry the Fourth, entered the Throne by his Sword, yet is there not any
Monument in Story or Antiquity, that favors any absolute right in him over
the Militia, but the current is, I think, somewhat clear against it.

First, because Henry the Fourth, De Jure, could not compel men to serve
beyond the Seas, but raised them by contract, and therefore by Act of
Parliament, he did confirm the Statute, 1 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 5. 4 H. 4. cap.
3.
which Statute was purposely made to that end: And the same also is
countenanced by another Statute made in these times, 18 H. 6. c. 19.
whereof we now Treat; by the words whereof appears, that the Soldiers for
the Foreign Service were levied by Contract, between them and the Captain, who
undertook to Levy them by wage; so as none were then compelled to enter into
Service by impressed, or absolute command; nor is there any authority amongst all
those cited in Calvin's Case, that does mention any such thing; but contrarily,
that Opinion of Thirning is express, 7 H. 4. Fitzherb. Protect. 100.
That the King cannot send men beyond Seas to Wars, without wages; and
therefore no man is bound to any such Service, by any absolute Legiance, as the
Reporter would understand the point; but if he receives wages thereto, he by
that Contract binds himself.

Secondly, it seems also to be granted, that such as went voluntarily in the
Kings Service, ever had the Kings pay, after they were out of their Counties,
if the King ruled by his Laws, for by the Statute formerly mentioned, the King
did likewise confirm the Statute of 18 Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 7. which is
express in that point, and the matter in Fact also is evident upon the Records.

Thirdly, touching the Arming of those that were thus Levied, as their was a
certain Law, by which all men were Assessed to certain Arms, either by the
Service and Tenure of their Lands, or by Parliament; for such as were not bound
to find sufficient Arms by their Tenure, according as is contained in the
Statute, 4 Hen. 4.
25 Ed. 3. Stat. 5* cap. 8. So did Henry the Fourth, by the Statute formerly
mentioned to be made in his time, Confirm that Law of Edward the Third. In the
Argument of Calvin's Case, it is much insisted upon, to prove the Legiance of an
English man to the King, to be absolute, because he has power to send men to
War at his pleasure, and he has only power to make War; and if so, then
has he absolute power in the Militia: As touching the power of sending men to
War, has been already spoken; but as touching the power to make War, there
is no doubt, but where a King has made a League with another King, he only
can break that League, and so make War; and that Opinion of Brian must be
agreed for good in that sense. 19 E. 4. fol. 6.
But if a League be made by Act of Parliament, or if the King will have War,
and the Parliament will make a League without him; no authority does in such
case avouch, that it is the right of the King, or that he has a Legal Power
to break that League as he pleases: Neither in the next place, has the King
any right or Legal power to make War with his own Subjects as he pleases, but
is bound to maintain the Peace, not only by his Oath at his Coronation, but
also by the Laws whereto he is bound, if he will reign in right of an English
King: For every man knows, that the grounds of the Statutes of wearing of
Liveries, was for the maintaining of the Public Peace. And Henry the Fourth,
1 H. 4 cap. 7.
amongst other provisions made against that trick, has this; That the King
shall give only his Honorable Livery to his Lords Temporal whom shall please
him, and to his Knights and Esquires meniall, and to his Knights and Esquires
which be of his retinue, and take of him their yearly Fee for Term of Life,
and that no Yeoman shall take or wear any Livery of the King, nor of none
other Lord. And another Law was made within one year ensuing, confirming the
former, 2 H. 4. cap. 21.
and providing, the Prince may give Liveries to such Lords as he pleases, and
to his meniall Gentlemen, and that they may wear the same as in the Kings
Case. By both which, the King and Prince are both in one Case, as touching the
power of giving Liveries, if the one has absolute power, then has the other
the like; If one be under the Directory of Law in that point, then is also the
other: For it is clear, that the King is intended by the Statute to be bound
from giving Liveries, and the people from wearing them, otherwise then in
especial Cases; and then the Conclusion will be, that if the King may not give
Liveries to prejudice of the Peace, then may he much less break the Peace at
his pleasure; or Levy Men, Arms and War when he shall think most meet. Take
then away from the King absolute Power to compel men to take up Arms,
otherwise then in case of Foreign Invasion; power to compel men to go out of
their Counties to War; power to charge men for maintenance of the wars, power
to make them find Arms at his pleasure; and lastly, power to break the Peace,
or do ought that may tend thereto: Certainly the power of the Militia that
remains, though never so surely settled in the Kings hand, can never bite this
Nation.

Nor can the noise of the Commission of Array, Entitle the King unto any such
vast power, as is pretended: For though it be granted, that the Commission of
Array was amended by the Parliament in these times; and secondly, that being so
amended, it was to serve for a President or Rule for the future; yet will it
not follow, that Henry the Fourth had, or any Successors of his, has any
power of Array originally from themselves, absolutely in themselves, or
determinatively to such ends, as he, or they, shall think meet.

First, as touching the amendment of the Commission, it was done upon complaint
made by the Commons as a greivance, that such Commissions had issued forth, as
had been grievous, hurtful, and dangerous; And the King agrees to the
amendments, upon advice had with the Lords, and Judges: Exact. Collec. p. 406.
and if it be true that the amendments were in the material Clauses (as it is
granted) then it seems that formerly a greater power was exercised then by
Law ought to have been; and then has not the King an absolute power of Array,
for the just power of a King, can be no greivance to the Subject.

P. 407.
Secondly, if the Commission of Array thus mended, was to serve as a rule of
Array for the future, then there is a rule, beyond which, Henry the Fourth, and
his Successors may not go; and then it will also follow, that the power of
Array, is not Originally, nor absolutely, in the King; but from, and under the
Rule and Law of the Parliament: which rule was not made by the Kings own
directions, Ibid. fol. 406.
but (as we are told) beyond expectation, alterations were made in material
parts of the Commission, and the powers in execution there, whereof no
complaint of greivance had been made. The issue then is, if the King had an
Universal Power in the Array; the Parliament likewise had a general Liberty,
without any restriction to correct that power.

Lastly, suppose that this power of the Parliament is executed, and concluded,
by the Commission thus amended, and that thereby the Kings Power is
established, yet can it not be concluded, that this Power is Originally or
absolutely in the King: Its not absolutely in him, because it is limited in
these particulars.

First, its not continual, because its only in case of eminent danger.

Secondly, Its not general upon all occasions, but only in case of a Foreign
and sudden invasion and attempts.

Thirdly, the powers are not undefined, but circumscribed. 1. To Array such as
are Armed, Collect. 4.24.
so as they cannot assesse Arms upon such. 2. To compel those of able Bodies
and Estates to be Armed, and those of able Estates, and not able bodies, to
Arm such as are of able Bodies, and not Estates: but this must be Juxta
facultates, and salvo Statu. 3. Whereas they strain themselves to make the
Statute of Henry the Fourth, and the Commission of Array, to consist with the
Statutes of 13 E. 1. 1 E. 3. and 25 E. 3. thereby they affirm so many more
restrictions unto this power of Array, as those Statutes are remediall in
particular cases; yet do I not agree to their Glosses, but leave them to the
debate already published concerning the same.

Secondly, as this power was not absolutely in the King, so was it not
originally from themselves, because they had not the Legislative Power
concerning the same; but the same was ever, and yet is, in the Parliament;
hereof I shall note only three particular instances.

First, the Militia is a Posture, that extends as well to Sea, as Land: That
which concerns the Sea, is the Law of Marque, and Reprisall, granted to such
of the People of this Nation, as are pillaged by Sea, by such as have the Kings
Conduct, or public Truce. And by this Law, 4 H. 5. cap. 7.
the Party pillaged, had to recompense himself upon that man that had pillaged
him, or upon any other Subject of that Nation, in case upon request made of the
Magistrate in that Nation, satisfaction be not given him for his wrong, it was
a Law made by the Parliament, whereby the Chancellor had power to grant such
Letters or Commission, upon complaint to him made.

Mag. Cart. cap. 32.
This was grounded upon the Statute of Magna Charta, concerning Free Trade,
which had been prejudiced by the rigor of the Conservators of the Truce,
against the Kings Subjects, although what was by them done was done in their
own defense: And by which means, the Forrainers were become bold to transgress,
and the English fearful in their own Charge, and many laid aside their Trade
by Sea, and thereby the strength of the Kingdom was much impaired: Nor is the
Equity of this Law to be questioned, for if the Magistrate upon complaint made,
grants not releif, the offense becomes Public, and the Nation chargeable, in
nature of an Accessory after the Fact, and so the next man liable to give
satisfaction, and to seek for releif at home.

The King then has a power to grant Letters of Marque, by Sea or Land, and
this power is granted by Parliament, and this power is a limited power, only
in particular cases, in regard that many times these prove in nature of the
first, light skirmishes of a general War.

Two other Instances yet remain, concerning the Order and Government of the
Soldiers in the Army; the one concerning the Soldiers Pay, Viz. That Captains
shall not abate the Soldiers Wages, 18 H. 6. c. 18.
but for their Clothing, under peril of Fine to the King. The other concerning
the Soldiers service, cap. 19.
That they shall not depart from their Colors without leave, before the time
of their Service be expired, unless in case of sickness, or other good cause,
testified and allowed by the Captain; and such as shall do otherwise, shall
suffer as Fellons. Which Laws could not have holden in force, had they not
been made by Parliament, in respect that the Penalties concern the Estates and
Lives of Men, which are not to be invaded but by the Law of the Land: so as
both Captains and Soldiers, as touching the Legislative power, are not under
the King in his Personal Capacity, but under the Law of the Parliament.

Lastly, as the rule of War was under the Legislative power of the Parliament,
so was the rule of Peace; for whiles Henry the Sixth was in France, which was
in his tenth year, from Saint Georges day, till February following: The Scots
propound terms of Peace to the Duke of Gloucester, Hall. 10. H. 6
he being then Custos Regni, which he referred to the Order of the Parliament,
by whom it was determined, and the Peace concluded in the absence of the King,
and was holden as good and effectual by both Kingdoms, as if the King had
been personally present in his full capacity.

CHAP. XXIII. A Survey of the Reigns of Edward the Fourth, Edward the Fifth,
and Richard the Third.
THe reign of Henry the Sixth, was for the most part, in the former parts of
it, like fire buried up in the ashes; and in the later parts breaking out into
a flame: In the heat whereof, the Duke of York, after Fealty given by him to
Henry the Sixth, and dispensation gotten from the Pope, to break his Faith,
lost his life; and left his Son the Mark-grave, to pursue his Title to the
Crown, which he claimed by Inheritance, but more especially by Act of
Parliament made upon the agreement between Henry the Sixth, and his Father.
This was Edward the Fourth, who nevertheless reserved himself to the Election
of the Lords, and was by them received, and commended to the Commons in the
Field, by which means he gaining the Possession, had also encouragement to
maintain the same, yet never held himself a King of full age, so long as Henry
the Sixth lived, which was the one half of his reign: Nor did he, though he
held many Parliaments, scarce reach higher then at reforming of Trade, which
was a Theme well pleasing to the People, next unto their Peace, which also the
King carefully regarded. For although he had been a Soldier of good
experience, and therewith successful, yet as one loath to trust too far,
either the constancy of the People of his own dominion, or the fortune of War
with his neighboring Princes, he did much by brave countenance and discourse:
and yet gained repute to the English for valor, after the dishonorable times
of Henry the sixth. He had much to do with a wise King of France, that knew how
to lay out three or four calm words at any time to save the adventure of his
Peoples blood, and make a show of Money to purchase the peaceable holding of
that which was his, only by force, until the wind proved more fair to bring
all that continent under one head.

In his Government at home he met with many cross gales, occasioned
principally by his own rashness, and neglect of the Earl of Warwicks approved
freindship, which he had turned into professed enmity: And so weakened his own
cause thereby, Com. lib. 3. c. 4. and 5. and. 6.
that he was once under Water, his Kingdom disposed of by a new intaile upon
the Heirs of Duke Clarence, and so the Earl of Warwick remained constant to
the House of York though this particular King was set aside. Nor did he in all
this, gain any thing but a Wife, who though his subject, and none of the
greatest family, neither brought any interest unto her Lord and Husband amongst
foreign Princes, brought nevertheless a Pearl, which was beyond all; which
was the purchase of the Union between the two Houses of York, and Lancaster,
and a peaceable succession in the Throne for a long while to come. It must be
granted, that there fell therewith an unhappy inconvenience in the raising of a
new Nobility of the Queens kindred, of whom the ancient stock of Nobility
thought scorn, and yet they were so considerable, as to be envied. A wound hard
to be cured, and yet easily avoided, by such as know how to deny themselves.
And therefore can be no prejudice unto that conclusion: That for an English
King to marry his own Subject, is more safe for the King, and beneficial for
the Kingdom, then to marry a Stranger.

But Edward the fourth did not long lie underneath; upon the next fair Gale he
comes from beyond the Sea, and (like his first predecessor of the House of
Lancaster) claims only his Duchy, which no man could in reason deny to be his
right, and therefore were the sooner engaged with him in that accoust. This was
an Act that in the first undertaking seemed modest, but when it was done,
appeared too bold to adventure it upon the Censure of Henry the sixth; and
therefore they were not more ready to engage then slack to disingage, till they
were secure in the Kings interest, which not long after ensued, by the death of
Henry the sixth. Thus Edward the fourth recovered the Crown to save his
Duchy. His Government was not suitable; for he came in by the People, but
indeavored to uphold himself by foreign dependences; as if he desired to spread
his roots, rather wide then deep, how ill this choice was, the event showed;
for plants that root wide may be strong enough against an outward storm, but
they soon grow old, barren, and ro^t irrecoverably from beneath: Such was the
end of this man's Government, himself lived and died a King, and left Issue,
both male and female, the one tasted the Government, the other kissed it, but
neither of them ever enjoyed further then a bare title. Nor was the Government
of Edward the fourth so secured by these engagements of Forrainers, for as he
sought to delude so he was deluded, Comin. lib. 3. c. 4.
both by Burgundy and Scotland, to the prejudice of all three. Toward his own
People, his carriage was not so much by Law as by Leave; for he could fetch a
course out of the old way of rule, satisfy himself, dissatisfie others, and
yet never was called to account: What was done by entreaty no man could blame,
and where entreaties are countenanced by Power, no man durst contradict. Thanks
to his Fate that had brought him upon a People tired by Wars, scared by his
success, and loath to adventure much for the House of Lancaster, in which no
courage was left to adventure for it self. The greatest error of his way was
in the matter of Revenue; the former times had been unhappy in respect of good
husbandry; Comin. lib. 3. c. 5.
and Edward the fourth was no man to gather heaps: His occasions conduced
rather to diffuse, and his mind generally led the way thereto, so as its the
less wonder if he called more for accommodations then the Ordinary Treasury of
the Crown could supply: Hereto therefore he used expedients, which in his
former times, were more moderate; for whiles Henry the sixth lived, he did but
borrow, 12 E. 4 cap. 2.
by privy Seal, and take tonnage and poundage by way of hire: Afterward when
no Starr appeared (but what was enlightened from his own Sun) he was more
plain, and tried a new trick, called Benevolence: unwelcome it was, not only
in regard of its own nature, but much more in the end, Comin. lib. 4. cap. 1.
for it was to serve the Duke of Burgundy in raising a War against France in
the first view, but in the conclusion to serve his own purse, both from friends
and foes: And yet this also passed without much control, for when displeasure
was like to ensue, he could speak fair, and feast, and if need was, kiss away
all discontent. Toward his end, as stale drink, he grew sour: For as in the
first part of his reign he had been supplied by good will against Law; so in
his later times, he had gotten a trick of supply by Law against good will: This
was by penal Laws, which are a remedy if they be used, Ad terrorem, but if
strained beyond that, the remedy proves worse then the disease; in their first
institution they are forms of courtesy from the People to the King, but in
the rigorous execution of them, are trialls of mastery of the King over the
People, and are usually laid up against days of reckoning between the Prince
and them.

Those penal Laws are best contrived, that with the greatest terror to the
Delinquent bring the least profit to the Kings Coffers. Once for all, this
Kings Acts were many, his enterprises more, but seldom attaining that end
which they faced. He was a man of War, and did more by his Fame then his
Sword, was no sooner resolved in good earnest but he died, left a Kingdom
unassured, his Children young, and many friends in show, but in truth very few.

Edw. 5. Rich. 3.
Now if ever was the Kingdom in a trance, Edward the fourth left a Son, the
Prima materia, of a King, and who lived long enough to be enrolled amongst
English Kings, yet served the place no further, then to be an occasion to fill
up the measure of the wickedness of the Duke of Gloucester, and a monument of
Gods displeasure against the House of Edward the fourth; whether for that
breach of oath, or treachery against Henry the sixth, or for what other cause,
I cannot tell. But at the best this Prince was in relation to his Uncle the
Duke of Gloucester, little other then as an Overseer to an Executor, that might
see and complain, but cannot amend: For the Duke ruled, overruled, and
mis-ruled all under the name of Edward the fifth, and left no monument of good
Government upon record, till he changed both the Name and Person of Edward the
fifth to Richard the third; his Fame had lifted him up, and might have
supported him had he regarded it. But as no man had more honor before he
ascended the Throne, Fercat. de Gallar. Imper. lib. 3.
so no man ever entered and sat thereon with less; his proceeds were from a
Protector to an Usurper, and thence to a Tyrant a scourg to the whole Nation,
especially the Nobility; and lastly an instrument of Gods revenge upon himself,
a man made up of Clay and Blood, living not loved, and dying unlamented. The
manner of his Government was strained, having once won the saddle, he is loath
to be cast; knowing himself guilty all over, and that nothing could absolve his
Fame but a Parliament, he calls it, Courts it, and where his wit could not
reach to Apologize, he makes whole by recompense, takes a way benevolences; 1
Rich. 3. c. 2.
he is ready to let them have their present desires, what can they have more:
He promises good behavior for the future, which he might the better do,
because he had already attained his ends: Thus in one Parliament (for he could
hold no more) he gave such content, as even to wonderment, he could as soon
find an army in the field to fight for him, as the most meritorious of his
Predecessors. His ill title made him very jealous, and thereby tought his best
friends, to keep at a distance, after which time few escaped that came within
his reach, and so he served Gods judgment against his adjutants, though he
understeod it not. Amongst the rest, the Duke of Buckingham (his great
Associate, both in the Butchery of the two young Princes, and usurpation of the
Royal Scepter;) he lived till he had laid the Foundation of better times in
the Person of Henry the seventh, and then received his reward: But an ill
Conscience must be continually fed, or it will eat up its own womb.

The Kings mind delivered from fear of the Sons of Edward the Fourth, now
dead, torments himself with thoughts of his Daughter alive; ashamed he is of
Butchery of a Girl, 1 Rich. 3. cap. 15.
he chooses a conceit of Basterdizing the Children of Elizabeth Graye, that
calls her self Queen of England; but this proved too hard to concoct; soon
after that, he goes a contrary way: The Lady Elizabeth Graye is now undoubted
Wife of Edward the Fourth, and her eldest Daughter, as undoubted Heir to the
Crown. And so the King will now be contented to adventure himself into an
incestuous Marriage with her, if his own Queen were not in the way, only to
secure the Peace of the Kingdom; which, he good King, was bound in Conscience
to maintain, though with the peril of his own Soul; and in this zeal of his
Conscience, his Queen soon went out of the way, and so Love is made to the
young Lady. But Henry Earl of Richmond was there before, and the Lady warily
declined the choice, till the golden Apple was won, which was not long after
accomplished; the King loosing both the Lady, his Crown, and own life
together, put an end to much wickedness, and had the end thereof in
Bosworth-Feild.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Government in relation to the Parliament.
THe seasons now in Tract were of short continuance, lives passed away more
speedily then years; and it may seem useless to inquire what is the nature of
the Government in such a time, when as the greatest work was to maintain life
and soul together; and when all is done, little else is done. For though the
Title of the House of York was never so clear against that of Lancaster; yet
it had been so long darkened with a continual Succession of Kings of the
Red-Rose, that either by their merit had gained a Throne in the Peoples hearts,
or by their facility had yielded their Throne up to the Peoples will; as it
proved not easy to Convince them that liked well their present Lot, and were
doubtful of change, or to make them tender of the right of Edward the Fourth
above their own quiet. Above threescore years now had England made trial of
the Government of the Lancastrian Princes, and thereof about thirty years
experience had they of Henry the Sixth; they saw he was a gentle Prince. On the
other side, Edward the Fourth, newly sprung up out of a Root, watered with
blood; himself also a Man for the Field.

This might well put the minds of the People to a stand, what to think of this
Man, whose nature and ends are so doubtful, and brought nothing to commend him
to the good wills of the People, but his bare Title; which the common sort
usually judge of, according as they see it prosper, more or less. Add hereunto
that Divine Providence did not so clearly, nor suddenly, determine his secret
purpose concerning this change, by any constant success to either part, by
means whereof the one half of Edward the Fourths reign was spent, while as yet
Henry the Sixth was in veiw, and the minds of men left unassured, neither
trusting much to Edward the Fourth, nor he to them: and after that Henry the
Sixth was gone out of the way, Edward the Fourth, could not readily change his
posture, used Arguments of force and power, and for the most part, looked like
a Man in Arms, with his hand on his sword, ready to draw upon the next man
that stands in his way.

1 E 4. n. 30.
Thus are the People partly driven, and partly drawn, into an Oath of Allegiance
unto Edward the Fourth, under peril of Attainder; and the Parliament assured
unto him once more: For immediately upon the departure of Edward the Fourth
beyond Sea, after ten years of his Reign, the Parliament (never staying for
the issue of Providence) declared the Throne void of Edward the Fourth, and
Henry the Sixth King. The Judges likewise of the Courts at Westminster
determined the same thing, as may appear by the Law Reports of those times in
Print: wherein Re-attachments were often granted by them upon discontinuance of
process by this Demise of Edward the Fourth. And thus Henry the Sixth is once
more King for six months, Viz. from October to April, at which time the
balance turns, Edward the Fourth returns, gets into the Throne; Henry the
Sixth is again Dethroned, all things are as they were, and all confirmed by Act
of Parliament. For that Body is ever wise enough to side with power, rather
then to spend much time upon fruitless Orders and Votes, that will pierce no
Armor; and therefore like the times, must needs be subject to fits of
distemper at the coming in of every Tide, and did build, and pull down, Enact
and disenact, turn and return, the English Crown, from York to Lancaster, and
back again, and in conclusion, for some time did do little but undo. Nor can
they be justly censured herein; for Counsels of men are not ordained to hinder
Divine Providence, or overruled Fate, but to foresee, and close with occasions,
in the most advantageous way for the Public good, and when both winds and
Currents are uncertain, to ride at flote, till they can discern the most
commodious Haven to Winter in. To impute therefore fault unto the Parliament in
such Cases for want of Uniformity, and Immutability of Counsels, is somewhat
like the Notion that Batchelours conceit of Wives, they would have, but they do
not know what other, then an Idea of their own Fancy

Now if it be inquired which course prevailed, in order either to the Kings
Royalty, or the Peoples Liberty, I shall answer neither of these; but the House
of York prevailed to hold the Crown, and might have advanced the Authority
thereof, had they not fallen out amongst themselves for the spoil; and Edward
the Fourth was not altogether disposed thereto: The success that he had in the
Field, and his Soldiery, made him look big like a King of the greater size;
but Kings sleep not securely upon such pillowes; when the Militia is on
hors-back, it is as ready to be a Guard upon the King, as for him, and when it
is most sober, not so easily governed as a Commonwealth. And therefore Edward
the Fourth, now in Arms, though he found it a hard Notion to maintain the
Peoples Liberty, where no man is free from the Soldier, yet he inclined
thereto: we read of multitude of Taxations of all sorts, and of benevolences,
the worst of all those sorts: for Soldiers must have money, or if not, they
will have it, but the King would not force things so far as his power could
reach, he will have money, but it shall be by Order of the Parliament. He might
have pretended much upon the Commission of Array, 12 E. 4. n. 8.
yet did it not, but chose rather to be Lord of the Seas: and because it was
too great a Farm for his private purse, he prays aid of the Parliament by the
way of Tonnage, and Poundage, 12 E. 4. cap. 3.
which was in demand nine years, before the Parliament granted it; and when it
was granted, it was with such restrictions, that it is evident the King
preferred the right of the Parliament therein, above his private Honor.

Secondly, Titles of Honor are but windy Notions, and every one knows what
claim is made by Kings, to have the sole interest in conferring the same; 17 E.
4. n. 10, 16.
this Edward the Fourth neglected so far, as he interested the Parliament, both
in the in the conferring of them, and resuming of the same.

Thirdly, the course of Trade was now more especially looked to, not by the
King and Privy Council, but by the Parliament; and because it was much
decayed, partly by reason of the ill Government thereof, and partly by the
excessive lavishnesse of these times, many Laws are made for remedy of both.
And first, the Staple was settled sometimes at Callis alone, 3 E. 4. cap. 1. 4
E. 4. cap. 2. 14 E. 4. cap. 3, 5.
sometimes at it, and Middleburrough, and by this means England gained Trade
from both Nations; but the principal thanks is to be given to the interest
between the King and the House of Burgundy. Then course is taken for the
bringing of the Staple Commodities only to those places, 3 E. 4. cap. 1.
and the return to be made in money, and not commodity by exchange. Then for
the well making of Staple Manufactures, 1 R. 3. cap. 12. 4 E. 4. cap. 1, 2, 3.
17 E. 4. cap. 1.
and restraining Importation of Foreign Manufactures of such kinds. Then
against transporting of English Coin, and Importing of Foreign Coin, other then
Bullion.

And as touching the second greivance, it seems gallantry, or vanity of
Apparel was a sore disease of these times, which were become times of
Fashions, and wherein the King led the way by his own example; for he desired
to be brave, and that he might be more brave, he passed Laws that the People
should be less brave, assessing a sort of Apparel for every degree, 3 E. 4.
cap. 5. 22 E. 4. cap. 1. 17 E. 4. cap. 1.
and therein stooped so low, as to define the fashions of their very shoes.

Fourthly, the Parliament retained their ancient right of reducing the course
of Judicature; for whereas Sheriffs had hitherto holden their course of trial
of the meaner sort of Fellonies, and Trespasses, and Offenses, determinable
only by Imprisonment, or Fines and Amerciaments; whereby men's Estates did lie
under the continual pillage of these covetous and extorting Officers: It was
established by the Parliament, that these men should have for the future, only
power of inquiry, 1 E. 4. cap. 2.
and to certify at the next Sessions, and there the Trial to be, and Fines
and Amerciaments to be set, taxed; and estreated, unto the Exchequor, and from
thence to be levied, and thereof the Sheriff to give account; this was a great
security to the Peoples estates, but gave them not a full remedy: for though
the Trial was now more fair, yet these Officers were Judges of suspicion, and
had still power upon suspicion to imprison their persons, and seize their
Estates, under color to save them for the King, in case Conviction followed.

For remedy hereof, 1 R. 3. cap. 3.
the Justices of the Peace have now power given them to Bail, in Cases of light
Suspicion, and it is further declared, that no man's Estate shall be first
seized, till Conviction and Attainder first be had. And because Estheators grew
no less burdensome in their way; it was therefore Ordered, that no man shall
be allowed in such Office, unless he has Lands to the vallue of twenty pounds
per annum, 12 E. 4. cap. 9.
and that he shall be responsable for such wrong done by himself, or by his
Deputy and Farmer.

Thus Edward the Fourth quitted himself like a King in many regards, but soon
ran himself out of breath, gave his Lamp to his Son, that was too weak to
hold it; a Third snatches it away, and for two years carrying it exceeding
well, yielded up all incroached Royalty to the People, 1 R. 3. cap. 2.
and his Crown and Life to his Successor.

CHAP. XXV. The Condition of the Clergy.
IF any gains were had in these uncertain times, the Churchmen might seem to
have them, having now this advantage, that the Commonalty was distracted with
uncertain Interests of the Succession of the Crown: And themselves only united
under the Popedom, now freed from all Schism: and the Popedom managed by
Sixtus the Fourth, who had the hap to be accounted more virtuous, then any of
his Predecessors had been, Naucler.
and to have all the Christian Princes wholly at his Devotion,

And lastly, both the Clergy, and the Kings were now jointly engaged against
the rising power of Religion, then called Heresy, in order whereunto, the
Clergy leading the way, had the applause of them that followed upon an
implicit Faith, that whatsoever was done, was exceeding well done.

Nor was it wisdom for Kings that sat loose in their Thrones, to stumble the
good Opinions of so considerable party toward them. And therefore Edward the
Fourth, in his first entrance, granted to the Clergy, that which could never be
by them obtained from any of the foregoing Kings, Viz. Antiq. Brit. 294.
Free liberty of Process in all Cases Ecclesiastical, and in Tithes of Wood
above twenty years growth; and in Case they were troubled upon the Statutes of
Provisors, they should have their remedy in the Chancery, against those Judges,
and their proceedings in such Cases to be there Cancelled. This was done by
Charter, and was sufficient to show what the desire of the Clergy, 9 H. 6. fol.
56. Per Paston.
and the intention of the King was, Viz. At once to favor the Church, and
under color of favor done to the Clergy ^o cancel both Common and Statute
Laws of the Kingdom, by the power of the Chancellors Decree; nevertheless,
all this was but the Kings breath, the policy changed never a whit the more.
For the Common Law held on its course, not only in Cases depending before the
holy Chair, but also even before the Bishop of the Diocese at home; so as
neither the King was concluded from his Suit, 5 E. 4. fol. 6. 9 E. 4. fol. 3. 7
E. 4. fol. 2. Per Littleton.
nor the party endammaged from his Action by any such Charter. And so far was
the Judges of the Common Law from being bound by the Chancery in such Cases,
that they professed they would not delay to grant the Habeas Corpus, to deliver
any Prisoner by Decree of the Chancellor, 22 E 4. f. 37.
in any Case triable at the Common Law: Much less did the Parliament favor
these men so far, as to give them any countenance in any way of gain upon
themselves, but rather made bold with what the Churchmen in former times
challenged as their own, and upon this Account, whereas formerly it had
inhibited Fairs and Markets upon the Lords Day: Now it inhibited the sale of
Boots, Shoes, etc. upon that day, though done never so privately, which they
did at the first, only within the City of London, and three miles thereof. I
suppose it was made only by way of Trial, it being dangerous in such times to
give a stop to all England at once, otherwise it might be wondered, why Gods
Honor should be better regarded in London, then all the Realm besides: Of this
Inchroachment we find no complaint made by the Churchmen; another touched
them to the quick, although it befell only the Archbishopricke of York.
Hitherto that so held ordinary Jurisdiction over all the Bishops of Scotland,
as being their Provincial. Now it is disclaimed by them all, and they are
backed therein by their King, under pretense of great inconvenience to his
Bishops in their so far travells; but in truth, not unlike to Jeroboam, though
he pretended it was too much for them, yet he thought it unsafe for himself,
that his Bishops should owe Canonical obedience to the Subject of another
Prince, and upon this ground prevailed with Pope Sixtus the Fourth, to make the
Divorse, and left it to future Ages, to try the validity thereof, if they would.

This is all that I shall observe of the Government of these three Kings, whose
Reigns in the whole, exceeded not twenty six years, and their complete power
therein, not much above half so many.

CHAP. XXVI. A short sum of the Reigns of Henry the Seventh, and Henry the
Eighth.
THe course of English policy hitherto wandering in the different Currents,
springing from the double head of Monarchy, and Democracy, and in them
likewise, often tossed up and down, partly by the blasts of windy Titles and
Pretentions, and partly by the raging Tides from the Roman Sea, now begin to
come to Anchor within veiw of Shore. Happy England, if the same prove good
Harbarage for a fainting Nation. Two Kings now undertake the Stearage; the
work of the first was to still the Winds, the other the Seas, and so to bring
the Adventure safe home. Henry the Seventh, happened upon a good preparative for
this work, in that he delivered the Kingdom from a Tyrant, whose irregular and
bloody way was so odious to the People, that it set a foil upon his Successors
Government, and made his Wisdom, Valor and Justice, appear greater then
possibly it was. His Valor made way for the other two, he had enough thereof
to serve a wise Man in case of Extremity; at other times he made more use of
his Majesty, then Manhood; being confident that the People knew not where to
mend themselves, but would be at his Devotion, so long as he was better then
his Predecessor, though he cared not how little. His Wisdom was his greatest
part, of which, upon all occasions he made the greatest improvement he could,
without reflecting upon Conscience, or Religion, whereof he had tasted no more
then would render him a civil man, whereunto his Education did lead the way:
thus, though his Valor brought him to the Crown, yet it was his wisdom that
settled him in the Throne. For though he loved himself so well, that he was
loath to pretend allowance of any access of Foreign help to his own
atcheivement in his Title, or that he was guilty in the least manner in his
Entry upon the Throne; yet to keep danger far off, he provided one guard for
his Person, and many for his Title.

That of his Person he pretended only as a Ceremony of State brought from the
French Court, and yet its strange that it went so well down with a Free People:
For that Prince that will keep guards about his Person in the midst of his own
People, may as well double them into the pitch of an Army whenever he pleases
to be fearful; and so turn the Royal power of Law into force of Arms: but it
was the French Fashion, and the Kings good hope to have all taken in the best
sense.

His Title (setting aside the saying of Phillip the hardy, Thevet. lib. 4. cap.
32.
That Kingdoms only belong to them that can get them) would hardly endure the
touch, till Pope Inocent by his Bull, confirmed the Crown to him to hold by a
sixfold right, Viz. Of Inheritance, of War, of Espousals, of Election, of
gift by Parliament, and lastly, of Pontificiall Benediction; which the King
liked mavelous well, and the rather because his Title by marriage was buried
up in the middle, and so made the less noise. For though it was his best
guard, yet he liked not that it should be so reputed, least his Title should
seem rather conferred upon him, then gained by him, and so should hold by a
Woman, or at the best, by the Courtesy of England, if the Peoples favor
should so far extend the Law in that Point, by both which he holds the Honor
of a complete English King diminished: His Title by Inheritance is much
disputable, if the right Heirs of John of Gaunt be inquired after: and much
more that of War, for although that brought the Possession, yet no right or
Title, but by wrong; which may indeed be plaistred over by Election, or Act of
Parliament, but then he must be Tenant to the People. As touching the
Pontificiall Benediction, himself took that but as a redundancy, that might
sway with the Clergy, and do his Title no hurt. Nevertheless what severally
they cannot do, by joint concurrence he accounts so fully done as if he were a
King against all the world, and more, Jovius Brit.
yet is he not sure enough, but as one jealous is more tender, so is his eye
ever upon his Title; there is his guard and regard, as if it were the outworks
of his Crown, which once lost, the Crown cannot hold out long. In this work he
minded so much his greatness, that he lost the repute of his goodness, then
casting his eye upon the government and finding it of a mixed temper, wherein if
Royalty prevails not, popularity will; like a good Soldier whiles his strength
is full he sallies upon the peoples liberties, in regard of their persons with
such cunning conveyance, as he taught the people to dance more often and better
to the tune of Prerogative and Allegiance, then all his Predecessors had done;
nor did the People perceive it til they were over their shoos, and then they
clearly saw their condition, and that it was in vain for them to wrangle with
their own acts, of which more particularly in the next Chapter. The Legiance of
persons of the People once gained, their Estates more easily follow, and
therefore though in the former he wrought by Ambuscado, in this he may be more
brave, and charge them in the Van; yet this also he did by degrees, first by
light Skermishes of borrowing smaller sums of Money (possibly when he had no
need) and paying them again, thereby to gain credit for greater sums, of which
he intended not so sudden return. Then he charges them home with Benevolences
(a trick gained in right of his Wife from her Father) for he hoped that the
Person of Richard the third was now become so abominable as his Laws would be
the less regarded. But in this course he gained nothing but wind; then (as
Edward the fourth) he falls upon Malevolences of penal Laws; things made, in
terrorem, to scare men to obedience, rather then to compel them; but are now
executed, Ad angorem, and the people find that he is but a word and a blow with
them, and thus serving his Prerogative with Power, and his Purse with his
Prerogative, Jovius Brit. fol. 9.
he made all serve his own turn, Humanitatem omnem vicente periculo.

In the field he always put his Wisdom in the Van, for as he was parcimonious
in expenses of Money, so much rather of Blood, if he could prevail by wit;
Generally he was the first in arms, to make men believe he was more ready to
fight then they: Thus he many times gained the advantage of his adversaries,
and sometimes came off without blows. In the Battle he did put on courage as
he did his armor, and would dare to adventure just as far as a General should,
as if he had ever regard of his Crown, rather then of the honor of a forward
Soldier, which nevertheless was also so dear to him as he is seldom found in
the rear, although his judgment commanded in chief rather then his courage.
In the Throne he is much more wise, because he was willing it should be known.
In doing Justice he is seldom suspected, unless where himself is party, and
yet then he is also so shamfaced as he would ever either stalk behind some Law
that had a semblance to his ends, or when he meant to step out of the way he
would put his Ministers before; not so much that his finenesse might be known,
but his royalty. For the Lion hunts not his own prey, nor is it regal for a
King to be seen in catching of money, though he be understood; besides it was
needless, he had Lords, Bishops, Judges, and other instruments of malevolent
aspect, as so many furies, outwardly resembling men for the Commonwealth, but
working for the common mischeife; like some pictures one way looking right, and
another looking wrong; and thus the King comes lawfully by what he catched,
though his instruments did not, and must be still holden for a good King,
though it be his hard hap to have ill Servants. Take him now amongst the People
he is alike to all, yea in some things that might seem to brush upon the Kings
own train; for he had some of his suite that were not altogether of his
mind, and these he would spare to the Course of Justice if need were; as it
befell in the Case of the Duke of Suffolk, whom he suffered to be tried at the
Kings Bench bar, for a murder done upon a mean person, and by such means
obtained the repute of a Zealous Justiciar, as if Justice had been his
principal virtue. All this suited well with his maine end; for he that will
milk his cattle must feed them well; and it incourages men to gather and lay
up, when they have Law to hold by what they have.

His religion I touch upon in the last place, as most proper to his temper, for
it was the last in his thought, though many times the first in the acting; but
where it stood in his way he turned it behind him, he made Churchmen his
instruments, that the matter might better relish, for who will expect ought save
well from men of religion, and then if the worst come, he was but misled by
such, as in common reason ought to be trusted. And it is his unhappynesse to
meet with Clergy men to serve a turn, and a Pope to give his benediction to
a^l. Nor was this Gratis, for there were as many mutual engagements between
the Clergy and him, as any of his Predecessors of the house of Lancaster besides.
Lastly, it may well be supposed however wise this King seemed to be, that many
saw through him, which procured him a troublesome reign; though many times
occasioned by his own interposing in foreign Interests, wherein he suffered
more from others then they from him. Amongst the rest the Duchess of Burgundy
(though a Woman she were) mated him with Phantomes and apparitions of dead
bodies of the House of York, the scare whereof put the King and all his people
in alarm, and striking at idle shadows slew one another. All which, together
with the appearances of Collections, Taxes, and other accoutrements, to furnish
such employments, were enough to disturb that ease and rest that the King aimed
to enjoy, make him burdensome to his People, and both himself and them weary
of each other; and so he went down to the grave with but a dry funeral,
leaving no better testimony behind him then that he was a cunning man, rather
then a wise English King: and though he died rich, yet is he since grown into
debt to the Penmen of his story, that by their own excellency have rendered
him a better King then he was.

HEnry the Eight was a conception, in whom the two Bloods of York and
Lancaster did meet, Hen. 8.
both of them unconquered, both of them predominant; and therefore no wonder if
he was a man beyond the Ordinary proportion of other men in stature of body,
and in qualities of mind not disproportionable. Its regularly true that great
bodies move slowly, but it holds not where much spirit is, and it was the
condition of this Prince to have a Spirit of the largest size that acted him
into motion with no less speed then mighty Power. This himself understood
right well, and therefore might be haughty upon a double title both of purchase
and inheritance; nor did he fail of expectation herein, for he could not
endure that man that would own his right in competition with the Kings aims,
and therefore would have his Kingdom be like his doublet to keep him warm,
and yet sit loose about him that he might have elbow room; suitable hereunto
were his undertakings, invited thereunto by the inordinate motions or rather
commotions of his neighboring Princes; for it was now full Sea in all
Countries; and though England was inferior to some of them, yet the King held
it dishonorable for him not to adventure as far as the bravest of them, and in
the end outwent them all: What he wanted in number, he supplied in courage;
wherein he so exceeded that he avoided dangers, rather out of judgment then
fear. His thoughts, resolutions, endeavors, and actions, were all the birth of
occasion, and of each other; as if he had obtained a general Pass from
Providence, with warranty against all Counterguards whatsoever.

His Wisdom served him to espy present opportunities, rather then to foresee
them, and therefore was not so crafty as his Father in preventing occasions,
yet more dexterious in giving them the rout. For he could manage his hand and
foot better then his Father, strike downright blows, and rather then he
would fail of his ends would make one, as many times he did.

Another advantage he had of his Father, for considering the times, he was a
learned King, which made his Actions carry more Majesty, and like a well
feathered Arrow from a strong hand drive through the wind stedily to the
mark, when as his Father like a weak Archer must raise his compass, and crave
aid of the wind to help him to be right in the end.

Its affirmed by some, that Henry the Eight was courteous and debonaire, if so,
he must thank his Education; but it may be rather supposed, that upon occasion
he used the Art of Insinuation, which he might learn both from the Father side,
and Mother side; but he neither practiced it much, nor did he rely upon that
skill, for his resolution led him to cut the knot that he could not unty. His
learning led him most to Divinity, and therein showed him light enough to see
much into the Mystery of iniquity, which he did explain to the World passing
well; but as touching Devotion, he left that to the care of the Churchmen.

He was very well accommodated with money; First, from the full Coffers left by
his Father, much whereof he spent in pastimes and gallantry, as he was Heir to
Edward the Fourth, and much also in his Devotion to the Pope, as he was Heir
to Henry the Seventh, in liew of all which, he was rewarded with a Title,
Defender of the Faith; and so much ill gotten, was much ill spent. But a better
supply he had when Rome and he parted asunder, and the Current of the riches of
the Clergy was stopped from running at waste, and returned into the Kings own
Treasury, and so might have died the richest Prince in the World, but that he
wanted the main Clause in the Conveyance, To have and to hold. The wisdom of
God so ordered it, for these felicities were too great and many for any
moderate spirit to bear gently, much more for the Kings Spirit, that was ever
on the Pinnacle, and grown to that height, that like an embossed Stagge, none
must cope with him, he must run and outrun all; none must cross him under
extreme peril, no good is to be done but by following afar of; nor is it a
full wonder if in this his heat, he knows neither faithful Servant,
Counselor, nor Wife, but strikes at all that stands in his way.
Nevertheless, in his cool temper, and when he was entangled with some
perplexed occasion, he could use the advantage of good Council, and the wits
of others that were more crafty then himself, wherein it was his good hap to
have some ever nigh him that were for his turn, and unto them committed much,
that himself might be at ease to hear good news of successful dispatches.

In his youth he was served by the wise Counselors trained up by his Father,
and he then willing enough for his pleasure, was contented by their advice to
serve his People for a time, that they might be his servants for ever. The two
great Conduit Pipes of this Treasury, which he had from his Father, he cut off
at his Peoples request, as if he loved his People above all his riches; and
after that, he laid aside his pleasures, and youthful company to apply himself
more closely to the Affairs of his Kingdom, as if he loved that above all
pleasure: which nevertheless stuck to him so long as he lived, and swayed too
much in the greatest Affairs of his Government.

Thus the first heat of his course was run well; so long as the Privy Council
continued moderately poysed: But no sooner began one of them to put up beyond
his place, and to bid adue to the advice of all the rest; but he gets the
uppermost seat in the Kings Head, makes a footstool of the Kings Heart, and
then its two to one that the People in such cases must bear the greater burden;
for who ever first said it, he said most true, That Prerogative in the hand of
a King, is a Scepter of Gold, but in the hand of a Subject, it is a rod of
Iron. The reign of this King Henry the Eighth, serve us with much experience
of this kind, for if the consideration of the Affairs of this Government
should be divided, the same would be double; the one under the Regiment of
Cardinal Woolsy, the other of the King, by Cromwell, Cranmer, Gardner, and
others interchangeably. I call that of Woolsy a Regiment, for he was in nature
or condition of a Pro Rex, during the Kings Juvenility. This Temporizer thus
super-induced upon a Cardinal raised from mean Degree to be Legate e Latere,
Thuan. lib. 1.
courted by Foreign Princes, flattered by the Emperor with Titles of Son and
Cousin, made him lead a dance, that the King (however active he was) is put to
his Carreere to hold him company; which the King perceiving, tripped up his
heels, and left the Archbishop, the Chancellor, the Cardinal, the Legate,
and many more with him, lying on the ground: No pride like to that of the
Clergy, whose parts are more sublime, and apprehensions clear: If God adds
not a Superior work to rule over all, A little Honor will blow up all with a
powder. The King having thus matched the Cardinal, forgot his former natural
pace, and once in a heat, could cool no more, till Death cooled him. He knew
by experience, that the Cardinal could overawe the People; why should not the
King do as much, if the Lords stooped to the Cardinal, why not much rather to
the King? The Cardinal pulled down, reared up, turned square to round, why
should he be less then his Subjects? Such conceits as these soon wound up the
Kings mind to that height, that its death to him to stoop one inch lower to
more moderate advice, though he loved their persons never so well; but all must
be content with the weight of his Arm, though it were no small one; and yet in
point of Religion, Affairs tended to a kind of Reformation all this while.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the State of the Crown.
THat the Crown of England now abounded more in Flowers then Crosses, the face
of Story does hold forth to ordinary Observation; and yet few are satisfied,
either in the true nature of the particular advantages, or in the manner how
they were obtained, or in their continuance. I must therefore make a little
stop upon them, because in the true discerning of them, the discovery of the
nature of the Government in later days does much depend. Hitherto the Crown
came short of absolute Power over the people, upon two grounds in observation;
one relating to the Clergy, the other to the Laity.

The Churchmen were heretofore under a Foreign power, and a Foreign Law,
against which, Kings durst not deeply engage; either not being assured of their
own Title, or employed in pursuit of other game, or being of a weak Spirit,
were scared with the Thunderbolt of the Popes Curse: But the Laity were under
another Law, and such an one, as by clear and unquestionable Custom, had
established bounds, between the way of Kings, and the rights of the People:
Neither did Kings directly invade those Borders, either led thereto by a kind
of Conscience in such of them as were Morally inclined, or in others by a kind
of fear of raising up Earthquakes from beneath, which commonly does overthrow
high Towers sooner then winds from above. But now such interests are laid
aside fast asleep, by two Kings; whereof one cared not much for fear, and
neither of them for Conscience: For Henry the Seventh, having leisure to study
the Nature, and contemplate the Fashion of the English Crown, dislikes the
Model in some particulars: It was not rich enough, nor well poysed to his
mind, which ever was not to be poor, but toward his later time to be
exceeding rich; as supposing that to be the only way to be more desirable to
Friends, formidable to Enemies, and absolute over his People. And this opinion
of his missed in the main end, though it attained his immediate desire; for by
mistaking the right way, it made a rich King, but not a rich Crown; he
delighted more in the riches of his People, then in a rich People; and this
bred no good blood, because the People thought that the Law was not on his side
in that matter. They suffered him to visit their purses, but are loath it
should prove Customary, least they should loose their common right, they
therefore choose rather to give him power by Act of Parliament, to revoke
Letters Patents, and Grants, and make resumptions of Offices, Fees, Annuities,
and the like, that he might rather repossesse his own, then possess theirs;
many penal Laws likewise of a limited and Temporary regard are made; and as
Cheese after a full dinner, they close up all with Subsidies: For it was
evident to all men, that the Royal mind of the King served no further then to
take what was given; provided that the people would give what else would be
taken. By this means Henry the Seventh left rich Coffers to descend to Henry
the Eighth, but the Crown was still the same in price.

In this Act of the Play, the People carry away the plaudite: The second Act
was the Point of Allegiance, wherein both parts carry themselves so cunningly,
as its hard to adjudge the Garland, yet it may be thought, the King observed it
rather, because he offered all the play, whiles the People did only lie at
their close guard. The whole Project consisted in this, to gain a more
absolute Allegiance from the English to their King: and because this is
exemplified partly in War, and partly in Peace, that part which concerns
War, will more properly fall under the consideration of the Militia; and
therefore I shall refer the same to that head in the 32. Chapter ensuing, and
will come to the second consideration of Allegiance, in relation to Peace, and
therein touch upon the Kings power in making of Laws, and of Judicature
according to those Laws. As touching the making of Laws, the ingenuity of
Henry the Seventh, could not suffer him to make any claim thereto in any
Positive way, yet his Actions declare that his heart was that way: For being
beset with troubles, he could often fancy dangers, and Arm himself; then call
a Parliament, who were wise enough to grant as readily as he asked, rather then
to be compelled thereto: so he had Laws made according to his own will, though
he made them not.

The matter of Judicature comes next, and therein he made his Judges appear,
and not himself, though they did not only represent his Person, but his
mind; so things were done according to his mind, though he did them not: And
thus his Excellency seemed more eminent in finding and making instruments
fitting to do his work, then in doing his own work. Nevertheless, all this was
but from hand to mouth; no fundamental Law is altered all this while; if the
Laws were made by Parliament, the King made them not; if the Judges turned the
Law to the Kings ear, the Law was still the Crown, though the King wore it.
But Henry the Eighth was no such man, he had not this skill of undermining, nor
desired it; he was tender of the least diminution of his Honor, industrious in
finding out the occasion, and a most resolved man to remove it out of the way,
though it reached as high as the Triple Crown; a man underneath many Passions,
but above fear: What need ^he care for pretenses, his Father loved Riches, he
Power; when he came to traverse his ground, he found quickly where the
Churchmen trespassed upon him, and began with them, resting upon the wisdom of
his Father, and the infallibility of the Pope. Henry the Eighth, had taken to
Wife Katherine his Brothers Dowager, and continued in that condition eighteen
years without wrinkle of Fame, till the great success of Charles the Fifth,
the Queens brother against the Pope, and French, scared the King into a
jealousy of his greatness, and the Emperors failing in courtesy to
Cardinal Woolsy, the Kings Achates, stirred the Cardinals Spirit to revenge,
for the loss of his hopes in the Popedom. For the Cardinal finding the Kings
mind to linger after another Bedfellow, by whom he might have a Son, he made
the French Ambassador his instrument to mind the King of his unlawful
marriage with the Queen, and to mention unto him Margaret D' Allanson a
Princess of France, both in blood and beauty. Thuan. lib. 1.
The King liked the Notion of Divorse, but disliked the motion concerning the
French Lady, himself being prepossessed with a fair Object at Home, the Lady
Anne Bullen, Jov. hist. fol. 31.
then attending upon the Queen; and thus being moved, entered into a scrutiny
concerning the condition of his marriage, wherein he had been formerly touched,
both by the French and Spaniards themselves upon several motions made.

Fox. Sleyden. lib. 9.
First, between Charles the Fifth, and afterward between the Dauphine and the
Lady Mary, afterward Queen; Hereat the Cardinal winked all the while, till
the infallibility of the Chair at Rome came upon the Stage; then bestirring his
wits, he lodged the Case upon appeal thither, as he hoped beyond all further
appeal, and so held the King there fast, till himself might accomplish his own
ends. But the wheel once set a running would not stay; the King espies the
Cardinal in his way, and bears him down, then finding the fallacy of the
infallible Chair, he hearkens after other Doctors, follows their light; and
being loath to hear what he expected from Rome, he stopped the way to all
Importation of such Merchandise, as might be any ways prejudicial to the
Prerogative Royal, with the penalty of loss of Land, or Liberty and Fine, the
two later being formerly warranted by Law: The first served as a scare, for
(though it were but by Proclamation) men might justly fear that he that was so
stout against the Pope, would not stick to scourge his own Subjects out of his
way in the time of his heat.

The King thus entered the Lists, both against Pope and Cardinal, now under
Praemuniri (whereof he died) meets the English Clergy, (thus loosing their
top-gallant) standing up in the rear against him, and talking at large.
Nevertheless, the King stops not his carreere, puts them to the rout for
maintaining the power Legatine. They soon submit, crave pardon, give a sum of
money, and perfume their Sacrifice with that sweet Incense of Supreme Head of
the Church of England. This was done, not by way of Donation, 1531. Ann. Antiq.
Britt.
(for the Convocation had no such power) but by way of acknowledgement in flat
opposition to the Jurisdiction of the Pope: It became the common subject of
discourse amongst all sorts, Jovius Brit. f. 20. Royden. lib. 9.
but of wonderment to the Pope: Yet for fear of worse, he speaks fair, for he
was not in Posture to contest, but all would do no good; the Queen had appealed
to Rome, the Pope by Woolsies advice makes delays: The Parliament espying the
advantage; at once took all appeals to Rome away, 24 H. 8. ca. 12.
and established all sentences made or to be made within this Land,
notwithstanding any Act from Rome; and enjoined the English Clergy to
administer the several acts of public worship, notwithstanding any
inhibition or excommunication from any foreign pretended Power: The grounds
upon the preamble of the Law will appear to be two.

First, that the King of England is supreme head in rendering Justice within the
Nation in all causes therein arising, which is more then the recognisance of
the Clergy two years before this Act did hold forth, yet this acknowledgment
is not absolute, but in opposition to Foreign pretentions.

Secondly, that the Clergy in England having Power, may in matters spiritual
determine all doubts without foreign help, and administer such duties as to
their place do belong; not hereby determining that the Churchmen ever had such
Power by Law, nor that they ought originally to have such Power. They never had
it, for no sooner were they disjoined from the Laity in these affairs, but
immediately they were under the Pope, and received their Power from him. And,
De jure, they cannot challenge such power, but by a positive Law, such as this
Law of Henry the eighth, which also gives but a restrictive and limited power,
Viz: In matters testamentary, of divorce, matrimony, tithes, oblations, and
obventions. So as if they will challenge such power, they must thank the
Parliament for it and use the same accordingly as persons deputed thereunto; and
not in their own right or right of their places. In all this the Kings
supremacy is but obscurely asserted, and rather by implication, showing what in
reason may be holden, then by declaration of what was, making way thereby,

First, into the opinions of men before they were enjoined to determine their
actions, but within two years ensuing or thereabout, the Law is made positive,

The King shall be taken and accepted the only supreme 26 H. 8. cap. 1.
head on earth of the Church of England; and have power to visit, correct,
repress, redress, reform, restrain, order, and amend, all such errors,
heresies, abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities, as by any manner of
spiritual authority, or jurisdiction, ought or may lawfully be reformed.

Which in the preamble is said to be made to confirm what the Clergy in their
Convocation formerly had recognized. The corpse of his Act is to secure the
Kings Title, the Kings Power, and the Kings Profit. As touching the Kings Title
it is said, that in right it did formerly belong to him, which is to be
granted by all so far as the Power is rightly understood. But as touching the
Kings Profit it cannot be said that the whole lump thereof did belong to the
King, because much thereof was not so ancient, but, De novo, raised by the
Popes extortion; and therefore the true and real Profits are by particular
Acts of Parliament ensuing in special words devolved upon him. The nature of
this power is laid down in this Statute under a three fold expression.

First, it is a visitatory, or a reforming Power which is executed by inquiry
of offenses against Laws established, and by executing such Laws.

Secondly, it is an ordinary jurisdiction, for it is such as by any Spiritual
authority maybe acted against irregularities; and thus the Title of supreme
Ordinary is confirmed.

Thirdly, it is such a Power as must be regulatd by Law, and in such manner as
by any spiritual Authority may lawfully be reformed. It is not therefore any
absolute arbitrary Power; for that belongs only to the supreme Head in
Heaven. Nor is it any legislative Power, for so the Law should be the birth of
this Power, and his Power could not then be regulated by the Law: nor could
ever Ordinary execute such a Power, nor did Henry the eighth ever make claim
to any such Power, though he loved to be much trusted.

Lastly, this Power was such a Power as was gained formerly from the King by
foreign Usurpation, which must be intended, De rebus licitis, and once in
possession of the Crown, or in right thereto belonging according to the Law,
for the King has no Power thereby to confer Church Livings by Provisorship, or
to carry the Keys and turn the infallible Chair into an infallible Throne. In
breife, this Power was such as the King has in the Commonwealth; neither
legislative, nor absolute in the executive, but in order to the Unity and Peace
of the Kingdom. This was the right of the Crown which was ever claimed; but
not enjoyed further then the English Scepter was able to match the Romish
Keys: And now the same being restored by Act of Parliament, 28 H. 8. c. 10. 35
H. 8. c. 1.
is also confirmed by an Oath enjoined to be taken by the People, binding them
to acknowledge the King under God supreme head on earth of the Church of
England, Ireland, and the Kings Dominions, 35 H. 8. c. 3.
in opposition to all Foreign jurisdiction.

And lastly, by a Law which bound all the People to maintain the Kings Title
of Defender of the faith, and of the Church of England and Ireland, in earth
the supreme head, under the peril of Treason in every one that shall attempt
to deprive the Crown of that title.

We must descend to particulars, for by this it will appear that these
general Laws concerning the Kings refined title, contained little more then
matters of Notion, otherwise then a general bar to the Popes future
interests: And therefore the Wisdom of the State (as if nothing had been
already done) did by degrees parcel out by several Acts of Parliament the
particular interests of the Popes usurped Authority in such manner as to them
seemed best.

And First, concerning the Legislative Power in Church government; It cannot be
denied but the Pope; De facto had the Power of a negative vote in all Councels
and unto that had also a binding Power in making Laws, Decrees, and Decretalls
out of his own breast; but this was gotten by plunder, he never had any right
to headship of the Church, nor to any such Power in right of such preferment,
nor was this given to the King as head of the Church, but with such limitations
and qualifications, that its evident it never was in the Crown, or rightly
belonging thereto.

First, nigh three years after this recognition by the Clergy in their
Convocation, it is urged upon them, and they pass their promise, 25. H. 8. ca.
19.
In verbo sacerdotii.

And lastly it is confirmed by Act of Parliament, that they shall never make,
publish, or execute any new Canon or constitution provincial or other unless
the Kings Assent and License be first had thereto; and the offenses against
this Law made punishable by fine and imprisonment: So as the Clergy are now
holden under a double bond, one the honor of their Preisthood which binds their
Wills, and Consciences; the other the Act of Parliament which binds their
Powers, so as they now neither will nor can start. Nevertheless there is
nothing in this Law nor in the future practice of this King that does either
give or assert any power to the King and Convocation to bind or conclude the
Clergy or the People, without an Act of Parliament concurring, and enforcing
the same: And yet what is already done, is more then any of the Kings
Predecessors ever had in their possession.

A second Prerogative was a definitive power in point of doctrine, and worship.
For it is enacted, that all Determinations, 32. H. 8. ca. 26.
Declarations, Decrees, Definitions, Resolutions, and Ordinances according to
Gods word, and Christ's Gospel, by the Kings advise, and confirmation, by
Letters Patents under the great Seal, at any time hereafter made, and
published by the Archbishops, Bishops, and Doctors, now appointed by the King
or the whole Clergy of England, in matters of the Christian faith, and lawful
rights and ceremonies of the same, shall be by the People fully believed and
obeyed under penalties therein comprised: Provided that nothing be done
contrary to the Laws, and Statutes of this Realm. A Law of a new birth, and
not an old Law newly revived, or restored. This the present occasion, and the
natural constitution of the Law do fully manifest: The occasion was the
present Perplexity of the People, for in stead of the Statute, Ex officio which
was now taken away, 25 H. 8. ca. 14.
the six articles commonly called the six stringed whip was gotten into power
by a more legal and effectual original. The Parliament had heard the cries
of the People concerning this, and having two things to eye at once; one to
provide for the Peoples liberty, 31 H. 8. ca. 14.
and further security against foreign pretentions; the other (which was more
difficult) for the liberties of the consciences of multitudes of men of
several opinions (which could not agree in one judgment, and by discord might
make way for the Romish party to recover its first ground) and finding it
impossible for them to hunt both games at once, partly because themselves were
divided in opinion, and the bone once cast amongst them might put their own
co-existence to the question, and partly because the work would be long,
require much debate, and retard all other affairs of the Commonwealth, which
were now both many, and weighty. In this troubled wave they therefore wisely
determine to hold on their course in that work which was most properly theirs,
and lay before them: And as touching this matter concerning doctrine, they
agreed in that wherein they could agree, Viz. To refer the matter to the King
and Persons of skill in that mystery of Religion, to settle the same for the
present till the Parliament had better leisure, the People more light, and the
minds of the People more persuaded of the way. Thus the Estates and
Consciences of the People for the present must endure, In deposito of the King
and other Persons, that a kind of Interim might be composed, and the Church for
the present might enjoy a kind of twilight rather then lie under continual
darkness, and by waiting for the Sun rising be in a better preparation
thereunto. For the words of the Statute are, that all must be done without any
partial respect or affection to the Papisticall sort or any other sect or
sects whatsoever. Unto this agreement both parties were inclined by diverse
regards. For the Romanists, though having the possession yet being doubtful of
their strength to hold the same, if it came to the push of the Pike, in regard
that the House of Commons wanted faith, as the Bishop of Rochester was pleased
to say, in the House of Lords; and that liberty of conscience was then a
pleasing Theme, as well as liberty of Estates, to all the People. These men
might therefore trust the King with their interests, having had long experience
of his Principles: And therefore as supreme Head, they held him most meet to
have the care of this matter, for still this title brings on the Vann of all
these Acts of Parliament. On the other side, that party that stood for
reformation, though they began to put up head, yet not assured of their own
Power, and being so exceedingly oppressed with the six Articles, as they could
not expect a worse condition, but in probabililty might find a better; they
therefore also cast themselves upon the King, Sleyden, lib. 9. Ann. 1535.
who had already been well baited by the German Princes, and Divines, and the
outcries of his own People, and possibly might entertain some prejudice at
length at that manner of woship that had its original from that Arch enemy of
his Head-ship of the Church of England. Nor did the issue fall out altogether
unsuitable to these expectations: For the King did somewhat to unsettle what was
already done, and abated in some measure the flame and heat of the Statute,
although nothing was established in the opposite thereto, but the whole rested
much upon the disposition of a King subject to change.

As touching the constitution of this Law; that also shows that this was not
derived from the ancient right of the Crown now restored, but by the positive
concession of the People in their representative, in regard it is not absolute,
but qualified and limited diversely.

First, this power is given to this King, not to his successors, for they are
left out of the act, so as they trusted not the King; but Henry the eighth, and
what they did was for his own sake.

Secondly, they trusted the King, but he must be advised by Council of men of
Skill.

Thirdly, they must not respect any sect, or those of the Papisticall sort.

Fourthly, all must be according to Gods Word, and Christ's Gospel.

And Lastly, nothing must be done contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm. And thus though they trusted much, yet not all, nor over long. For it
was but a temporary Law, and during the present condition of affairs. Nor did
the King or People rest upon this Law, for within three years following,
another Law is made to confirm what was then already done by the King; and a
larger power granted to the King, to change, and alter, 34. and 35. H. 8. cap.
1.
as to his Wisdom shall seem convenient. Thus the Kings injunctions already
set forth were established, all opposall to them inhibited, and the King has a
power of Lawing, and Unlawing in Christ's Kingdom, and to stab an Act of
Parliament in matters of highest concernment: And the reason is, the King will
have it so and who dares gainsay it, as Cranmer said, the King loves his
Queen well but his own opinion better, Antiq. Britt.
for new things meeting with new love, if it be once interrupted in the first
heat, turns into a displeasure as hot as the first love, nor had either party
great cause to boast in their gainings; for none of them all had any security,
but such as kept close to a good conscience.

All this, though much more then any of his Predecessors ever attained, was
nevertheless not enough till his Title was as complete. The Pope had fashioned
him one now above twenty years old for his service done against Luther and
others of that way, and sent it to him as a Trophee of the victory, this was
Defender of the faith, which the King then took kindly, but laid it up till he
thought he had deserved it better; and therefore now he presents it to the
Parliament, 35 H. 8. c. 3.
who by a Statute annexed it to the Crown of England for ever now made triple
by the Royallizing of that of Ireland amongst the rest.

A third Prerogative concerned the Kings Power in temporal matters, and now
must England look to it self, for never had English King the like advantage
over his people as this man had. His Title out-faced all question: Left rich by
his Father, trained up in the highest way of Prerogative, absolute Lord of the
English Clergy and of their Interest in the People, of a vast spirit, able to
match both the Emperor and French abroad, and yet more busy at home then all
his Predecessors. A King that feared nothing but the falling of the Heavens;
the People contrarily weary of civil Wars enamored with the first tastes of
Peace, and Pleasure; whiles as yet it was but in the blushing childhood,
overawed by a strange Giant, a King with a Pope in his belly; having the
temporal Sword in his Hand the spiritual Sword at his command. Of a
merciless savage nature, but a word and a blow; without regard even of his
bosom companions, what can then the naked relation of a Subject do with such
an one, if providence steps not in and stops not the Lions mouth, all will be
soon swallowed up into the hungry maw of Prerogative. To set all on work comes
Steven Gardener from his Embassage to the Emperor, sad apprehensions are
scattered, that the motions abroad are exceeding violent and sudden, that the
Emperor and French King are fast in nothing but in change according to
occasion, that like the Eagle they make many points before they stoop to the
prey. That if the motions at home do wait upon debates of Parliament, things
must needs come short in execution and the affairs of this Nation extremely
suffer. A dangerous thing it is that the King should be at disadvantage either
with the Emperor or French King for want of power in these cases of sudden
exegencies, and for some small time, during the juncture of these importent
affairs, that seeing likewise at home the point concerning Religion is coming
to the Test, the minds of men are at a gaze; their affections, and passions
are on their tiptoes. Its reason the King should steare with a shorter Rudder,
that this care might meet with every turn of providence, which otherwise
might suddenly blow up the Peace, and good Government of this Nation. These
and the like represented a fair face to that which followed, and made way for
the King without shame to ask what no King before him suffered ever to enter
into conceit, I mean a Legislative power to this effect, That Proclamations
made by the greater part of the King for the time being and his Council, whose
names hereafter follow, 31 H. 8: ca. 8.
with such penalties as by them shall be thought meet; shall be of equal force
to an Act of Parliament, provided it shall not extend to forfeiture of Estates,
or Privileges; nor to loss of Life (but in cases particularly mentioned in
the Law) provided no Proclamation shall cross any Statute or lawful or
laudable Custom of this Realm: All which at length comes to be demanded by a
formal Bill with as ill favored a preface as the matter it self, which was
much worse ere it was well licked in the House of Commons, and when all was
done proved a Bare still: Whatever it was it passed in manner above said,
neither much to the desire of the Commons that so much was given; nor to the
good liking of the King that there was no more: For in stead of a Legislative
power which he grasped at for himself, he received it in common with his
Council; and so becomes engaged neither to alter nor destroy that
Brotherhood, if he intended to reap any fruit of this Law, leaving the point
in doubt whither his gain or loss was the greater. For this Law thus made for
this King, these Counselors, and these times, and occasions, can be no
president to the future, unless to inform Kings that the Parliament has a
power to give more Authority and prerogative to Kings then they or the Crown
have by common right, and to give it with such limitations* and qualifications,
as seems good to them.

And secondly, that even Henry the eighth acknowledged that the Legislative
power was not in the Crown, nor was the Crown capable thereof, otherwise then
it was conferred by the Parliament. Only Steven Gardener might glory in this
atcheivement, having for the present obtained much of his ends by persuading
the King that foreign Princes estranged from him, not so much for his departure
from the Pope, as for some apprehensions they had of his departure from that
way of Religion, and Worship, which they apprehend every Christian ought to
maintain. And therefore if he meaned to gain better correspondency amongst
these Princes, he must engage more resolvedly to the fundamentalls of the
Worship, though he shook of some sleighter ceremonies with the Romish
supremacy, for he knew that they were willing enough with the later, though the
other could not go down with them; thus did foreign correspondency float
above, when as the Church as then it stood was underneath, and gave the
tincture to every wave. And it was holden more safe by the Romish party to
trust the King (thus attempered) with the legislative power in the Church
matters, then the rough Parliament, whose Course steered quite wide from the
Roman shore, as if they never meant to look that way any more, though Cranmer
and the chief Officers of State, and of the Household, were by the Law Judges of
the matter in fact as well as the King, yet in the conclusion the King only was
of the Quorum; all this yet further appears in the penalty, for by a Provisor
it is moderated as to all forfeitures of Life, Limb, or Estate; and in the
conclusion extended only to Fine and Imprisonment; unless in some cases
mentioned, and excepting offenses against Proclamations made by the King or his
Successors concerning Crimes of Heresy. For it is the first clause of any
positive Law that ever intimated any power in the King of such Cognizance and
punishment of Heresy; too weak a principle it is to settle a prerogative in
the King, and his Successors, as supreme head of the Church, thus by a side
wind to carry the keys of Life and Death at their girdle, and yet a better
ground cannot I find for the martyrdom of diverse brave Christians in those
times, then this touch of a Law glancing by: All which passing, Sub silentio,
and the Parliament taking no notice thereof, made way for the Statute 32. H. 8.
ca. 26. Formerly mentioned to come more boldly upon the Stage.

This was one wound to the legislative power of the Parliament thus to divide
the same: Another ensues that in its consequence was no less fatal to that
power which remained, and it was wrought by some Engine that well saw that the
disease then so called grew to be epidemicall amongst the more considerable
party in the Kingdom; that the Lady Jane Seymor (now Queen) was no friend to
the Romanists; that she was now with child, which if a Son (as it proved to
be) was like to be Successor in the Throne, and be of his Mothers Religion, and
so undo all, as in the issue all came so to pass: To prevent this,
nevertheless they fancy a new conceit, that Laws made by English Kings in
their minority are less considerately done, then being made in riper years.
And so by that one opinion countenanced a worse, which was, that the
Legislative power depended more upon the judgment of the King, then the
debates, and results of the Parliament; a notion that would down exceeding well
with Kings; especially with such an all-sufficient Prince as Henry the eight
conceived himself to be; upon this ground a Law is made to enable such of the
Kings Successors, by him appointed, as shall be under the age of twenty and
four years, when Laws by him are made, 28 H. 8. c. 17.
to adnull the same by Letters, Patents, after such Prince shall attain the
said age of twenty four years. Thus the Arms of the Parliament are bound
from settling any Reformation, let them intend it never so much; a Muse is left
open for the Romish Religion still to get in, when the Season proves more
fair. The Parliament was now in its minority, and gives occasion to the Reader
to bewail the infirmities of the excellency of England.

A fourth advance of Prerogative concerned the executive Power in the
Government of the Church. This had formerly much rested in the Prelacy, and
that upon the chief Praelatissimo at Rome; now there is found in England a
Prelater then he; the Pope was already heheaded, and his head set upon the
Kings shoulders: To him it is given to nominate all Bishops, and Archbishops
within his dominions, by long desire, 25 H. 8. c. 20.
and that the party once elected shall swear fealty, and then shall be
consecrated by Commission, and invested, but if upon the long desire, no
election be certified within twelve days the King shall by Commission cause his
own Clerk to be consecrated and invested. The occasion that first brought in
this President, was the access of Cranmer to the Sea at Canterbury, for though
the head-ship had been already by the space of two years translated from Rome
to England, and yet the course of Episcopizing continued the same as formerly
it had been. I mean as touching the point of Election: For though in their
original, Bishops were merely Donatives from the Crown, being invested by
delivery of the Ring and pastoral staff, and until King John's time, Rot. Pat.
17. Jo^. 35 E. 1. St. Carl. 25 E. 3. De Provis. 13 R. 2. ca 2.
the Canonical way of Election was disallowed, yet King John by his Charter,
De communi consensu Baronum granted that they should be eligible, which also
was confirmed by diverse public Acts of Parliament in after times; and now by
this Law last recited, and with this way the King was contented for the space
of six years, for the Reformation intended by the King, was not done at once
but by degrees; and therefore though this course of long desire was brought
into use, yet the Parliament being of six years continuance (a necessary thing
in times of so great change of policy) began this course of Election, Antiq.
Brit. vit. Cranmer.
by giving the King Power to nominate, and allowing of the Pope Power to grant
to such his Bulls or Pall at his own will; otherwise they should be
consecrated by Commission without his consent, and this at the first, the Popes
concurrence was not excluded, though his Negative was. In this posture of
Affairs comes Cranmer to be consecrated Archbishop: And being nominated
thereunto by the King, the wily Pope knowing the Kings aim, meaned not to
withstand, least he should loose all, but granted the Pall as readily as it was
desired, so as Cranmer is thus far Archbishop of Canterbury, without all
exception: yet he must go one step further, and take the old oath to the Pope
which the King allowed him to do, Pro more, and which he did, Renitente
conscientia, say some, and with a salvo, say others, and all affirm, it was
done, Perfunctorie, like some worn Ceremony, or civil Complement.
Nevertheless it was not so soon turned over, the Archbishop loved not the
Office, the King loved no partnorship in this matter; and it was evident to all
that no man could serve these two Masters any longer, an agreement is soon
concluded in Parliament to exclude the Popes Power quite out of this game, and
all is left to be done by the King and his Commissioners, by the Law formerly
propounded. In all this the Pope is the looser, the English Clergy the savers,
for the Pall cost Cranmer nine hundred marks. And the Crown is the great
gainer; for hereby the King got the men sure to him, not only by their own
acknowledgment and submission, but also by a Statute Law.

And lastly by Oath, which to make sure was treble twined, once upon their
first submmission in the Kings twenty second year, when they had been under
Premuniri.

Secondly, soon after the decease of Queen Katherine Dowager, in the twenty
sixth year, which Oath was more complete then the former; containing,

First, A Renunciation of all fealty to the Pope or any sorraine Power.

Secondly, an obligation to adheare to the cause of the King and his Successors.

Thirdly, a disavowing of the Pope, otherwise then as another Bishop or fellow
Brother.

Fourthly, an engagement to observe all Laws already established against the
Popes Power.

Fifthly, A disavowing of all appeals to Rome.

Sixthly, an engagement to inform the King of all Messages, or Bulls, sent
from Rome into England.

Seventhly, An engagement not to send, or be privy to the sending of any
message to Rome for any such purpose.

The third oath was that of fealty, which anciently was due to Kings, and now
revived to be taken by all Bishops upon their admission. And thus the English
Prelacy, having been sworn slaves to the Papacy ever since Beckets time, are
now preferred to a more Royal service, and the persuit by Kings after their
right being laid a side by the space of 300. years, is now renewed, and the
prey seized upon by the Lion, we found it upon a better title, and in better
condition by much then when at the first it was lost, for it was upon some
semblance of reason that the Archbishop and Clergy gained it, but being
afterward dispossessed thereof by the Pope, and yet without any other shadow
of Title, but the Power of his own gripe, for the present he is the occupant,
and becomes Proprietor by prescription: Till now the felon apprehended, the
stolen goods are the Kings in right, and by Remitter, whereunto the Parliament
were by the Statute adding their conveiance, establishes the same by an
unquestionable Title; nevertheless their service is no less servile to this
Crown then it had been to the Romish Miter; formerly they asserted the Popes
infallibility, now the Kings supremacy. They are now called by the King, made
by the King, sent by the King, maintained by the King, whatsoever they are,
whatsoever they have, all is the Kings: He makes Bishops, 31 H. 8. c. 9.
he makes new Bishop-ricks; and divides or compounds the old as he pleases, by
a power given to Henry the eighth by Parliament, which oath was never in any
Prince before or after him that I can find; so as the Crown had it not, but
the man, and it died with him.

The King thus laden with Power, and Honor, above all his Predecessors (if
without proportionable maintenance to support the one, and act the other) must
needs consume himself (as one in a Tympany) by growing great: For though he was
left rich by his Fathers Treasure, yet his Zeal to Rome in its now Poor
captived condition under the Imperial power, stirring up in him great
underrakings abroad (besides his own pleasures and gallantry at home) exhausted
that, and doubtless had starved these his grand designs, had he not found the
hidden Treasures of the Cells and Monastries; the sight whereof so rouzed up
his Spirits, that he adventured upon the purchase, though he knew difficulties
enough to have stopped his undertakings, if he had not resolved, both against
fear and flattery. It was not done without deliberation, for the thing was
felt as a greivance before the Norman times, and complained of in Parliament
above a hundred and forty years ago, and diverse times since, but Kings either
understood not, or believed not, or durst not give remedy, or had much else to
do. But now the King is beyond all his Predecessors, he knows much, dares do
more, and is at leisure, he will go as far as Emperor or French King, and
beyond them also, but would not try masteries with either, for they were all
Cocks of the game.

The first occasion that discovered the wroke feasible, was a president made by
Cardinal Woolsie, whose Power was enough to dissolve some petty Cells, and no
opposition made. The King might well expect the work would be as lawful for
him, and not much more difficult, or if any storms ensued, the People that had
so long complained, and felt the burden of these excrescences of the Clergy,
would soon find out a way to Calm them, the King need do no more then speak,
and the people will do. This opened the door, but that which brought the King
in, was the hold the Pope had in this Kingdom by these Cloystered People, who
were persons dead in Law, and dead to all Law but the Canon; and upon this
account the Kings Ancestors had possessed themselves of the Cells in the hands
of Forrainers in times of War, and now a deadly feud is stirred between Henry
the eighth and the Pope their holy Father; the Children cannot expect to
thrive, when as their Father is cast out of doors; and so all must out
together: yet the manner is observable, they must not be cast out, but must go
out; the inferior and greater part are dead persons, have learnt obedience,
they can neither bark nor bite, and therefore they may sleep, and what is don
must be don with such of them as are alive. Upon a Visitation these are brought
under the Test, and found in such a condition that they had better give way,
and voluntarily surrender, then abide the trial: 27 H. 8. c. 27.
Once more the smallest are picked out whiles the greater stand by and wonder,
but either do not foresee, or (in despair of altering the Kings resolution) do
nothing but expect the sad hour, which within four years comes upon them all;
31 H. 8. c. 13.
every one of them choosing rather to surrender, and expect the Kings mercy for
maintenance during life, then adventure against the dint of his Justice, and
Power, and so loose all; for they were ill befreinded amongst all sorts of the
People. Thus came the personal Estate and Stock of these Houses to the Kings
immediate Treasury, and their yearly maintenance to the disposing of the
Crown, which might have advanced the same, well nigh to the value of two
hundred thousand pounds yearly, but that the King intended to let the People
enjoy the fat as well as he, that they might be mutually engaged to maintain
hold of the prey that they had jointly gotten. Out of all which nevertheless
the Crown had a small rent, or service annual, for the acknowledgement of
their tenure besides, the first fruits of the spiritual dignities, and the
tenths, 26 H. 8. c. 23.
both which he formerly had already obtained.

The first whereof was but casual, and occasional in the payment, arising
only at the entrance of the party into his promotion; and which was gained by
the Pope from Edward the first, Fox. Mart. fol. 322.
although at his Parliament at Carleile, in his thirty fourth year he
withstood the same: This was above three hundred and twenty thousand pounds in
the whole sum. The later was annual, and amounted to above thirty thousand
pounds: And thus the Popes Usurpaons are turned into duties to the Crown, but
were much lessened in regard that these Cells and Monastries were accounted
amongst these Ecclesiastical promotions, which by their dissolution fell off
in that account. Nevertheless the advancement that might by a parcimonious
King have been made of the fall of this Ceder, was such, that the Crown might
have been rendered of it self absolute and all-sufficient. But Henry the eighth
was not thus minded, the affairs of Europe were gotten into a high pitch;
Princes generally over active; Henry the eight inferior to none of them; what
comes in goes out, and he is a rare example of that Divine proverb; As Riches
increase, so do the mouths of them that eat; he still stands in need of his
Peoples Love, Purses, and Power; so Divine providence orders the matter, that
Kings can never attain further end of their undertakings without the aid of
the people, then their labor, least they should be too big to be Christians,
and the people too mean.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Condition of the Parliament in these Times.
THey are no good Expositors that consider their Text by peice-meale only, nor
they good Historians, that will tell you the bare journall of Action, without
the Series of occasion: such as these will speak much of the Actions of Henry
the Eighth, what advancement he brought to the Crown, and make it a complete
Monarchy, wherein the King may Act what he resolves; resolve what he pleases;
and please what he lusts; when as in truth, the thing is nothing so: for
though many of his actions, in relation to particular Persons, cannot be
justified by any Law; so in truth, did they never proceed from any Law, but
merely from the passion or will of the man, and connivance of the people, who
could bear that from this King, that their Ancestors would never endure under
any other. And yet in all the Grand concernments of the Nation, the Law kept
still upon the top, nor did the King enter into any Competition therewith, or
lead the way thereunto, other then by especial allowance of the Parliament.

For first, its evident, though the King was Supreme Head of the Church, yet
this was not like the head of a mad man, led by phaney without the Law of
reason, or reason of Law; But it was defined, circumscribed, and formed
thereby, with Qualifications and Limitations, as has been already expressed in
the former Chapter.

Secondly, it is no less clear that the Legislative Power rested in the
Parliament, and not in the King, when he was in his greatest height; for as
head of the Church, he had no such power in Church matters, or if he had such a
right, it was taken away by the Acts of Parliament; nay, when the Pope was yet
possessed of this Headship, the Parliament did determine the manner of the
Worship of God, in some particular cases, as in the keeping of the Lords Day,
the Statute of Edward the Fourth, 4 Edw. 4.
to the honor of God did provide for the observing thereof, and to the honor
of God, it was taken away by a Statute in the time of Henry the Eighth, 15 H.
8. c. 9.
if the words of either Statute may be believed. But more especially, 25 H. 8.
c. 19.
after that this Headship was translated to the King, the Parliament provided,
that the Canons should be examined and allowed by the King, and thirty two
Persons, one part of the Clergy, the other of the Temporalty, chosen by the
King. And those that shall be assented unto and confirmed by the King, and the
thirty two Persons, or the major part of them shall be obeyed, and put in
execution, the residue shall be void: Provided nothing shall be done contrary
to the Kings Prerogative, or the Laws and Customs of this Realm: So as the
King had much, but he had not all; and what he had, the Parliament gave him by
a Law, that was Executory all the days of Henry the Eighth, 27 H. 8. c. 15. 35
H. 8. c. 16.
by diverse continuances, and was not any power devolved to the Crown, under
the Title of Supremacy, nor by Virtue of the Act of Parliament concerning it,
but by the continual influence from the Parliament upon the Crown, as well
before that Act as after, derived upon it. The King has then this right of Law
making, but it is with the thirty two he has it, but not his Successors.

And lastly, he has it but by a derivative power from the Parliament, and as a
Committee for that service: and in a word, he has the Power, but the
Parliament has still the Law of that Power.

The second Privilege of the Parliament hitherto, concerns only Laws
concerning Church Government. In the next place comes to be considered the
Legislative Power in point of Doctrine, which doubtless issues from the same
principle of Power with the former. For if the Church (which as a pillar and
ground holds forth the truth) be the company of professing Believers; then
ought it not seem strange if these in their representative do intermeddle with
this Power, or rather duty; and for the matter in fact, neither did the King
challenge this power, nor did the Parliament make any difficulty of Conscience
in executing the same, and yet there were many Learned and Conscientious men of
that number.

They therefore, as touching the doctrine, proceed in the same way, with that
formerly mentioned concerning the discipline: And a Committee also is by them
made of the King and Learned men, to set down rules for Faith and obedience,
and for the order of the public Worship of God, 32 H. 8. c. 26.
according to the word of God; and these rules are confirmed by a Statute, so
as the King has a power in the point of Doctrine, but it is a derivative
power, it is a limited power to himself and not to his Successors, and to
himself and others joined with him.

And Lastly, nothing must be done contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom.

Secondly, the Parliament has not only a right to grant and limit this power
unto others, but also to execute the same immediately by it self; and therefore
before they granted this power to this Committee, whereas formerly the Pope
usurped the power to be the Omega to the resolves of all Councills, the
Parliament intercepted that to their own jurisdiction in flat opposition to the
infallibility of the Roman Chair, 5 H. 8. cap. 14.
so far as to Disherize some opinons which by the sentence of that infallible
mouth, had been marked with that black brand of Heresy. And what they did
before this Act of Delegation to the King and other Committees for this work,
34 H. 8. cap. 1.
they did afterward as not concluding their own power by any thing that they
had so don as may appear by their Censure of the translation of the Bible, made
by Tindall: By their establishing another translation: By their ordering and
appointing what persons might read the same: 35 H. 8. cap. 5.
By their qualifying the six Articles, and the like. The Parliament then has a
power which they may grant, and yet grant nothing away; they may limit this
power in others as they will, and yet not conclude themselves. And the King by
accepting this limited power, must disclaim both the original and absolute
right, and cannot claim the same by right of head-ship or supremacy. This was
one great windfall which the Parliament had from the ruins of Rome, not by way
of usurpation but re-seisure, for their possession was ancient, and though they
had been dispossessed, yet that possession was ever under a continual claim,
and so the right was saved.

A second that was no less fatal unto that See; was the loss of all power
over Ecclesiastical persons in this Kingdom: For whereas the Popedom had
doubly rooted it self in this Nation, one way by the Regulars, the other by the
Seculars; the Parliament by the dissolutions of Monastries, etc. consumed one
to ashes, and by breaking the fealty between the other and the Pope, parted the
other root and the stock asunder, and thence ensued the downfall of this tal
Cedar in this Nation; and Prelacy now left alone must fawn elsewhere or lie
along, a posture wherein that rank of men can never thrive: Up again they
peep, and espying a King that loved to tower aloft, they suddenly catch
hold, promising their help to maintain his flight, and so are carried up, and
like a Cloud borne between Heaven and Earth, making the Commons beholding to
them for the Kings Sunnshine, and the King for their interests in the People,
and for his superlative advancement above them all. Now though the English
Prelates may think their Orb above the winds, yet were they herein deceived.
The Parliament had power in their Election, before the Pope usurped that to
himself; now that they are discharged, Kings are possessed of them by long
desire, but it is not by way of restitution, for Kings were never absolutely
possessed of any such power, but as Committees of Parliament and by delegation
and concession from them, and therefore must render an account to them, and
abide their judgment when they are thereto called.

Thirdly, the Parliament had the disposing and ordering, of all the Church
Revenues, as the Laws concerning Monastries, Sanctuaries, Mortuaries, First
Fruits, Tenths, Annates, and such like, sufficiently manifests.

Fourthly, the Parliament had the power of granting Licenses, Dispensations,
and Faculties, setting a rule thereunto, 21 H. 8. c. 13. 25 H. 8. c. 16. 28 H
8. c. 13.
as in case of Nonresidency, and delegating the power to Committees, whereof
see more in the Chapter following concerning ordinary jurisdiction.

Fifthly, the Parliament reserved the Cognizance of all appeals for final
sentence unto themselves, and disposed of all the steps thereunto, as unto them
seemed most convenient: 24 H. 8. c. 12.
For though it be true in some cases the Archbishop of Canterbury had the
definitive sentence, and in other Cases the Convocation, yet was this but by a
temporary Law, and this also granted to them by the Parliament, which took it
away from the Pope, and never interested the Crown therein, but made the
Archbishop and the Convocation their immediate Delegates so long as they saw
good. Afterward when they had done their work, Viz. The determining the appeal
and Divorce of Queen Katharine, and some other matters, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
the same hand that gave that power took it away and gave it (not to the King
or Crown) but to Delegates from the Parliament from time to time to be
nominated by the King, and may as well alter the same and settle the power
elsewhere when they please. And therefore after the appeal of the Dowager thus
determined, and the sentence definitive thus settled upon Delegates: The
Parliament nevertheless determined the other causes of the Marriages of the
Lady Anne Bullen, and the Lady Anne of Cleve, the jurisdiction of the Crown
never intermedling therein; so as upon the whole, it must be acknowledged, that
however the King was supreme head of causes Ecclesiastical, yet had not the
definitive sentence in Appeals, nor absolute Supremacy, but that the same was
left to the Parliament.

Sixthly and Lastly, what attempts the Parliament had met with, partly from the
designs of some great men that sought their own ends, and partly from the
endeavors of these Kings that sought their own height and greatness, above
their Peoples good, has been already related, and the utmost issue has been
truly stated, Viz. That the gains have come to the Kings Persons and not to
their Crown, and that therein they have put their Seal to the Law, and made
their submission to the Parliament, as touching both their Persons, and Power.
Add hereunto, that however Henry the eighth aimed much at himself in his ends
in two other maine Interests that most nighly concerned him, yet the chief
gain came to the Parliament.

The one concerned his own Wife, which-however so nighly related to him as
next to his own Person, and under the determination of the immediate Law of
God, yet was so cast upon their sentence, as if he durst adventure his own
Soul at their direction.

The other concerned the Crown, to which he ought relation above his own
person, which he laid down at the feet of the Parliament, seeking to their
power to fulfill his own pleasure: The ball is tossed up and down, sometimes
amongst the issue between the King and the Lady Ann Bullen, 25 H. 8. c. 22.
another while amongst the issue between him and the Lady Jane Seymor, 28 H.
8. c. 27.
or such as the King should nominate by Letters Patents or last Will. After
that, to the Ladies Mary and Elizabeth, 35 H. 8. c. 1.
to perform conditions declared by the Kings Letters Patents, or his last
Will. The King then is trusted, but he has his trust from the Parliament, the
Crown is intailed (as it has been ever since Richard the seconds time) but
it is done by the Parliament: The reversion is in the the Clouds, but the right
of inheritance much more. The Conclusion of all is this, the Parliament by
serving these Kings turns, turned their turns into their own.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the power of the Clergy, in their Convocation.
THe Convocation of the Clergy, like some froward Children, loves not new
dressing, though it be a gainer thereby. Before the Pope and Henry the Eighth
were fallen asunder, their masters, their minds, their work, all was double;
their Councels uncertain, their Conclusions slow in Production, and slight in
their Fruit and Consequence; sometimes displeasing to the Pope, sometimes to
the King, generally to themselves; who naturally lingering after their own
interests, were compelled to feed that body that breathed in them, rather then
that wherein themselves breathed; and so like hunted Squirrells, from bough to
bough, were ever well tired, yet hardly escaped with their own skins in the
conclusion. Now Henry the Eighth tenders them better conditions, both for ease
and Honor, and more suitable to their own Interest; yet they are loath to
accept, because they had been slaves by prescription.

Formerly, they were troubled with multiplicity of Summons, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
but the Kings, and that by Writ, both Provincial, and Legate e Latere, must
meddle no more.

Formerly, its taken for granted, that Kings have no Vote Statu quo, it is
granted; 21 E. 4. fol. 46
nor can he interpose his Dissent, nor do they much care for his Consent: But
whether the King be concerned or not concerned, what they conclude, they must
maintain, Vi and Clavibus, although in right, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
his Prerogative is above theirs. Now by the Statute, the Kings Vote is
asserted, and a Negative Vote restored, and himself made as well Head of the
Convocation, as the Church: nothing can pass there without his Concurrence,
nor come to the Consideration of the Parliament, without his pleasure; and thus
the King has a double Vote in every Church Ordinance: One, as in the
Parliament, to pass the same as an Act of Parliament, of which I conceive the
Opinion of that Honorable Judge is to be understood; the other, Instit. 4.
fol. 323.
as a Member of the Convocation, to pass their advices to the Parliament; and
therefore he might either sit in person amongst them, or by his Vicar, as Henry
the Eighth, did by the Lord Cromwell: By the First, the whole Kingdom was
engaged* By the Second, the Convocation only, and that as a Court only, and
not the representative of the Clergy, because as they had a Spiritual
relation, so also they had the Common right of Freemen, and therefore could
not be bound without the Common consent of the Freemen.



to bring all Spirits within the Verge of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and to
leave the Civil power to rule only dead Carkases; much less can any other
thing, which by prescription has not been of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, be
called Spiritual.

But to come to particulars, because generals edify not: The Convocation
claimed formerly power, as Originally from it self, to impose rules for
government upon Churchmen, and Church Officers, and upon the Laity, so far as
extended to their Service of God: And also to charge the Estates of the Clergy;
and concerning Matrimonial, and Testamentary Causes: They claimed also a power
to determine Doctrine and Heresies. Yet De Facto, diverse of these they never
acted in that right, wherein they claimed to hold Cognizance.

First, as touching the charging of the Estates of the Clergy; If it was for
the Kings Service, they were ever summoned by the Kings Writ, yet was not
their Act binding immediately upon the passing of the Vote, till the Parliament
confirmed the same; and therefore the old form of granting of Dismes, was, Per
Clerum and Communitatem, as by the pleading in the Abbot of Walthams Case
appears; 21 E. 4. fol. 45.
for without their concurrence, they had no power to charge any Freeman, nor
to levy the same, but by their Church Censures, which would stand them in no
stead. And in this, the Convocation suffered no alteration, either in right or
power, by the change thus wrought by Henry the Eighth.

Secondly, as touching imposing Laws upon the Laity, 20 H. 6. fol. 14. Per
Neuton.
in points of Worship and Doctrine, its evident, though they claimed such
power, they had it not; for when all is done, they were contented at length to
get the Support of the Statute-Lawes of this Kingdom, as may appear in the
particular Laws concerning the Lords Day, and proceedings against Heretics,
settling the Popedom in the time of the great Scisme, etc. But now all Title of
claim is quite taken from them, and all is left in the Supreme Legislative
power of this Nation, as formerly has been already manifested.

Thirdly, as touching Matrimonial causes, their former power of making Laws
concerning them and Testamentary causes, is now absolutely taken away; only
concerning Matrimonial matters, they had so much of the Judicatory power
concerning the same put upon them, as might well serve the Kings own turn; and
that was for determining the matter between himself, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
and the Lady Katharine Dowager, depending before Archbishop Cranmer: For the
King supposed the Pope, a party; and therefore meaned not that he should be his
Judge: And thus, though the Clergy had acknowledged the King to be their
Supreme Head, yet in this, he was content to acknowledge their Supremacy above
him, to judge between himself and his Queen, and in other matters concerning
himself: So as upon the whole matter, the Convocation were gainers in some
things, in other things, they were only loosers of that, which was none of
their own.

CHAP. XXX. Of the power of the Clergy, in their Ordinary Jurisdiction.
THose Spirits are truly degenerate, that being sensible of misery, cannot
stir up desires of change, although the way thereto lies open before them: and
this shows the nature of the Romish yoke, that it lay upon the Spirits of Men,
did intoxicate, and make them drunk with their condition; otherwise the
Usurpations, Oppressions, Extortions, and Encroachments of the Popedom, upon
the Bishops Sphere, and the People under their charge, could never have
provoked such complaynings amongst all sorts, in several Ages, from time to
time. And now that Henry the Eighth, undertakes to set them free, so as they
would acknowledge his Supremacy, they all are struck dumb, till a Premuniri
taught them to speak; and so were scared into a better condition then they
would have had, and into a more absolute Estate of Jurisdiction, then they
received from their Predecessors. The Pope had now usurped a power, supra
ordinary over all Appeals, gained the definitive Sentence to the Roman See* and
had holden this power by the space of four hundred years, and the King finding
the root of all the mischief to his Crown from abroad, springing from that
Principle, meaned not to dispute the point with the Casuists, but by one
Statute, took away all Appeals to Rome, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
and determined Appeals from the Bishops Court, in the Archbishops Court, and
the Appeals from the Archbishops Commissary, in the Court of Audience: So as
though in the Kings own Case, the Convocation had the last blow; yet in matters
concerning the Subjects, the Archbishop was either more worthy, or more
willing with that trust: For though the Convocation might have as well
determined all, as well as the Pope; yet for dispatch sake of a multitude of
Appeals, now depending at Rome, and to prevent long attendance on the
Convocation, that now had much to do in matters of more public nature, the
utmost Appeal in such Cases is made Provincial. This, (whether privilege or
prejudice) the Ecclesiastical Causes gained above the Civil, whose definitive
Sentence was reserved to the Parliament. And thus is the Archbishop made Heir
to the Pope, in the greatest privilege of a Pope, to be chief Judge on Earth
in matters Ecclesiastical, within his own Province. A trick that in my opinion
much darkened the Glory of the Kings Title of Supreme Head, which the
Churchmen had formerly offered up to the Honor of the Crown of this Realm.
For be it so, that the Title is in the Crown by Remitter: yet cannot the same
carry along with it any more then a lawful power, and whether all the Popes
former power allowed him by the Canon, or gained by Usurpation and Custom,
shall be said a lawful power, or whether the power of Review by Appeal, shall
be derived to the Crown, under the general Notion of Supremacy upon the
Clergies submission, is to me a doubt (albeit, Instit. 4. fol. 344.
I must give Honor to the Judgment in Print) in regard that after the
submission of the Clergy, the matter concerning the Divorce of the Lady
Katharine Dowager, came before the Pope by Appeal, and there depended the King
himself also, waiting upon that See for Justice; and a definitive Sentence in
that matter, and thereby acknowledged the Popes power, De facto:
Notwithstanding, the Clergies foregoing submission, and being occasioned by the
delay at Rome, he procured this Statute concerning Appeals to be made, whereby
at one breath he took the Appeals to Rome away, and settled them as formerly
has been mentioned; all which was done two years before the Title of Supremacy
was annexed, or declared for to be to the Crown, by Act of Parliament.

And therefore, as to me it appears, the power of supreme Cognizance of appeals
was not in actual possession of the Crown by the Clergies submission; so was
it actually vested in the Archbishop, before the Title of Supremacy was
confirmed by Act of Parliament; and so it never was in the Crown actually
possessed, much less had the Crown the same by Remitter: For the Kings turn
once served by the Convocation, and the matter of the Divorce of Queen
Katharine settled, the King perceiving the slow Progress of the Convocation,
the Members of the same not being yet sufficiently tuned to the present
Affairs: And moderate Archbishop Cranmer, likewise foreseeing, that the Odium
of these Definitive Sentences would be too great for him to bear; another
Appeal is provided, more for the Honor of the Crown, to be from the
Archbishop to Delegats, to be appointed by the King, his Heirs, and
Successors, so as though their Nomination be the Kings, yet their power is
deduced immediately from the Parliament, which took the same from the
Archbishop, and conferred it upon them.

25 H. 8. c. 19.
A second advantage not inferior hereto, which the Archbishop gained out of
the ruins of the Popedom, was the power of Licenses, and Dispensations, or
Faculties. In the Pope, it was a transcendent power without any rule, but what
was tuned to him by the Bird in his own breast; and was the ground of much
license, or rather licentiousness in the World: But in the Archbishop, they
seem to be regulated.

To be First, 25 H. 8. c. 21.
in Causes not repugnant to the Law of God.

Secondly, such as are necessary for the Honor, and Security of the King.

Thirdly, such as were formerly wont to be remedied at the Sea of Rome; yet in
truth, left as much scope for the Conscience of the Archbishop to walk in, as
the Pope had in former times; a large Teather, and greater privilege then ever
the Crown had; by which, although the King himself be like Saul, higher by the
head, then all the People, yet in many things Samuel is higher then he. The
moving cause hereof, is not difficult to find out: the King had but lately
married the Lady Anne Bullen; a thing that many startled at, and the King
himself not extremely resolved in; he would therefore have his way like that of
the Zodiac, broad enough for Planetary motion of any one that could not
contain himself within the Eccliptick line of the Law, and so shipped over the
Popes power to the Chair of Canterbury, and had made a Pope, in stead of an
Archbishop, but that the man was not made for that purpose. What the Ordinary
Jurisdiction got, or lost we come in the next place to observe.

First, they had still their Courts and Judiciary power, but upon what right,
may be doubted: Their first foundation was laid by the Civil power of a Law,
in the time of William the first Norman King; yet the power of the Pope and
Bishop growing up together, they came to hold the Power of the Keys by a
Divine right, and so continued, until these times of Henry the Eighth, wherein
they have a Retrospect to the Rock, from whence they were first hewn; and many
seem to change their Tenure, and therewith therefore are in right to change the
Style of their Courts, and Title of summons, but the times not being very
curious and the work of Reformation but in fieri; the more exact lineaments
must be left to time to finish and beautify. A greater blow did light upon the
Law of these Courts, which was left as doubtful as the Canons; all which are
now put to the question, and to this day never received full resolution, but
were left to the Parliament to determine them at leisure; and in the mean time
to the Judges of the common Law, to determine the same Lawful or Unlawful, as
occasion should require: Nevertheless the Courts still hold on their course
according to their old Laws, and Customs, for their form of proceedings,
some say by prescription, yet more rightly by permission; it being a difficult
matter to make prescription hold against a Statute Law: As touching the matters
within their Cognizance the Law settled some, and unsettled others.

First, as touching Heresy, the Churchmen formerly thought scorn the Lay
Magistrate should intermeddle, but not being able to stop the growth thereof by
their Church Censures, prayed aid of the Civil Magistracy; so by degrees arose
the penalties of Imprisonment, and burning, which brought the whole matter into
Cognizance before the Civil Magistrate, because no Freeman might be proceeded
against, for loss of Life or Liberty, but by the Laws of the Nation; Mag.
Cart.
and for this cause the Civil Magistrate granted the Writ of Habeas corpus,
and releived many times the party Imprisoned wrongfully or granted prohibition
as they saw cause: Instit. 3. fol. 42.
And therefore it cannot be said rightly, that the sole or supreme Cognizance
of this Crime of Heresy belonged to the Clergy before these times. Nor did
their proceedings upon the Writ of Burning Warrant any such thing, partly
because till these times the Canon Law was the best ground that these
proceedings had, and the course therein was not so Uniforme as to permit the
Title of a Custom to warrant the same: Conviction being sometimes by jury,
sometimes according to the Canon, sometimes before the Ordinary, sometimes
before the Convocation, sometimes before the King, sometimes before special
Delegates, as the Histories of the Martyrs more particularly set forth, and no
Act of Parliament positive in the point. But the time is now come when nighest
reformation, that the thing is settled more to the prejudice of reformation
then all the endeavoures foregoing; like to the darkness of the night, that is
at the Superlative degree when nighest break of Day. A Statute is now made,
that indeed quite blotted out the very name of the Statute of Henry the fourth,
De haeretico comburendo, 25 H. 8. c. 14.
but made complete that Statute of 5 Rich. 2. and the other of 2 Hen. 5. both
which were formerly neither good in Law, nor effectual, otherwise then by
Power; and gave more settlement to the Ordinaries proceedings in such Cases:
For the Delinquent might be convict before the Ordinary by Witnesses, or might
be indicted at the Common Law, and the indictment certified to the Ordinary as
Evidence: yet did the Parliament carve them out their work; and in express
words declared, That opinions against the Authority and Laws of the Bishop of
Rome were not Heresy, and by the same reason might have done more of that
kind, but that was enough to tell all the World that the Parliament could
define what was not Heresy, although they did not then determine what was
Heresy: And thus the judgment of the Roman Church is called into question in
one of their fundamentals, and the Clergy left in a Muse, concerning the rule
upon, which they were to proceed against this Crime.

The Parliament within six years after, undertakes, though somewhat unhappily,
to determine and define certain points of Controversy, which had some relation
to the Worship of God, and the public Peace, and declared the contrary to
these determinations to be Heresy, 31 H. 8. c. 14.
and the punishment to be Death and Forfeiture, and the trial to be before
Commissioners by Jury or testimony of two Witnesses, or by examination in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or inquisition in the Leete, or Sessions of the Peace.
Upon the whole matter therefore the Ordinary had a particular Power to
determine Heresy; but the Parliament determined such Heresies as were
punishable, with Death and Forfeiture, by enumeration in the six Articles. This
was the Clergies Primmer, wherein they employed their study, as making most for
their design, and laid aside thoughts of all other Heresies as dry Notions,
or old fashions laid aside, and not worthy the setting forth to common sale.

Secondly, the Lesson concerning Marriage was no less difficult for the Clergy
to take out: They were put by their former Authority derived from abroad, and
their ancient rule of the Canon Law; with the Kings leave they do what they do,
35 H. 8. Rat. Pat. p. 15.
and where they doubt they take his Commission, so did the Archbishop of
Durham in the Case between John and Jane Fisher; in the Kings Case the
determining part is put to the Parliaments Conclusion; and for a rule in other
Cases, 15 H. 8. c. 8.
some persons are enabled to Marry which formerly were not, Viz: Masters of the
Chancery, and Doctors of the Civil Law; 37 H. 8. c. 17.
and some forbidden Marriage, as all Priests by the Statute of the six
Articles. And unto the rest concerning degrees of Consanguinity, 28 H. 8. c. 7.
32 H. 8. c. 38.
or Affinity, a particular enumeration is appointed to be observed; within
which, Marriage is declared unlawful, all other further off are made lawful.
In all which regards the Cognizance of Matrimonial Causes is theirs only by
leave.

Thirdly, Residency, and Nonresidency, was a Theme formerly learned from the
Canon Law, in which as also in the thing it self the Clergy were the only
skillful men. The rule of the Canon Law was strict enough, considering the
times, but it was not steel to the back. The Parliament now undertakes the
cause; and though it gave, in some respects, more liberty then the Canon, yet
stood it better to its tackling, and kept a stricter hand upon the reins, then
was formerly used, and by giving a general rule for Dispensation, 21 H. 8. c.
13. 25 H. 8. c. 16. 28 H. 8. c. 13.
took away all arbitrary Dispensations, and Licenses, which were formerly
granted beyond all rule, but that of Silver or Gold; and made all practices
contrary to the rule damageable to the party. Thus far concerning the matters
in Cognizance; now touching the Power of the Keys, English* Prelacy having
laid aside the pretentions of Rome, they put the World to a gaze, to see which
way they would go. In the inocent infancy of Prelacy it was led by the hand, by
the Presbytery; and would do nothing without them, afterward having gained
some degree of height, and strength, they entered themselves to be Chariot
Horses to the Roman Sun, till they had set all on fire; now unharnest, it is
expected they should return to their former wits; nevertheless forgetting
their ancient yokefellowes, the rural Presbyters, they stable with the King,
use his name sometimes, but more often their own; serving him with Supremacy
as he them with Authority beyond their Sphere; they raise him above
Parliament, he them above Councills; Antiq. Britt.
so as they do what they list, let the Plebeian Presbyter will or nill; they are
the only numerall Figures, and the other but Ciphers, to make them, Omnibus
numeris absoluti: Nevertheless the Canon still remains the same, Episcopi se
debent scire Presbyteros, non Dominos nec debent in clerum dominari, Episcopus
se sedente non permittat Presbyterum stare. Distin. etc. c. 5. Esto and 3. c.
Ead. Did. Episcopus.
Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispensatione Presbyteris
majores, Kings may make them Lords, but as Bishops they hold their former rank
assigned by the Canon, as Lords the King never gave them the keys, and as
Bishops the Canon did not; yet as under the joint Title of Lord Bishops, they
hold themselves privileged to get what power they can; two things they reach
at, Viz. The absolute power of Imprisonment, Instit. 3. fol. 40.
and of Excommunication in all causes Ecclesiastical. The common Law would
never yield this; some Statutes in some cases did pretend:

First, as touching Imprisonment, the Statute of Henry the fourth concerning
Heresy does lispe some such Power; of what force the same Statute is has been
already observed, 1 H. 7. cap. 4.
in case of incontinency of Churchmen, it is more directly given them by a
Statute in Henry the sevenths time, before which time the Statute it self does
initimate, that an Action did lie against them for such imprisonment, which Law
also was made useless by another in Henry the eighths time, who gave away to
Statutes for the punishing them at the common Law.

31 H. 8. c. 14. 32 H. 8. c. 10.
First, with Death, which continued for some Months, and that being found too
heavy, it was punished by another Law, with Forfeiture and Imprisonment. And
the same King likewise gave way to a law for the like punishment in case of
Heresy. By that Law that revoked the Statute of Henry the fourth formerly
mentioned, although till trial, the same was bailable: And thus continued till
the time of Edward the sixth.

But as touching Excommunication, it was to no purpose for them to struggle,
the common Law would never permit them to hold possession quietly; but did
examine their Authority, 14 H. 4.14. 30 E. 3. Ass. 19. 22 E. 4. f. 29. Hill. 13.
H. 7. pl. 15. 26 H. 8. c. 3.
granted prohibition, enjoined the Ordinary to grant absolution where it saw
cause; nevertheless in some cases Henry the Eighth gives way to some Statutes
to allow them this power, as in the levying of Tenths. In the next place the
Prelacy had not this Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in themselves so as to grant
it to others but the Parliament did dispose thereof, not only to Bishops but to
Chancellors, Vicars general, Commissaries, being Doctors of the Law, and not
within holy Orders, 37 H. 8. c. 17.
and limiting their jurisdiction in cases concerning the Papal jurisdiction;
and their manner of sending their process and Citations, to draw men from
their proper Diocese, 23 H. 8. c. 9.
and also their inordinate Fees in cases Testamentary. 21 H. 8. c. 5.
The Prelates therefore might possibly make great claim hereof, for generally
they were still of the old stamp, loved to have all by Divine right and lived
they cared not by what wrong: But the Laity inclining too much to the new
Religion, as then it was termed, refused to yield one foot unto their
pretentions: And so like two Horses tied together by their Bits, endeavor after
several courses, ever and anon kicking one at another, yet still bestrode by a
King that was joynted for the purpose; and so good a horseman that neither of
them could unhorse, him till Death laid him on the ground. And thus was the
Roman Eagle deplumed, every Bird had its own feathers, the great men the
Honors and Privileges, the meaner men the profits, and so an end to Annates,
Legatine levies, Peterpence, Mortuaries, Monestries, and all that retinue, the
vast expenses by Bulls and Appeals to Rome, to all the cares, expenses, and
toil in attendance on the Roman Chair: The beginning of all the happiness
of England.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Judicature.
THese two Kings were men of towreing Spirits, liked not to see others upon the
wing, in which regard it was dangerous to be great, and more safe not to be
worthy of regard: Especially in the times of Henry the eighth, whose motion was
more eager; and there was no coming nigh to him, but for such as were of his
own train, and would follow as fast as he would lead; and therefore generally
the Commons had more cause to praise the King for his Justice then the Nobility
had. Both the Kings loved the air of profit passing well (but the later was
not so well breathed) and therefore had more to do with Courts which had the
face of Justice: But behind were for the Kings Revenue: Such were the Court of
Requests, of mean original, mean education, yet by continuance attained to a
high growth: The Court of Tenths and first fruits: The Court of Surveyors: The
Court of the Lord Steward of the household: The Court of Commission before the
Admiral: The Court of Wards; The Court of the President of the North: The
Prerogative Court: The Court of Delegates: The Court of Commission of Review:
Others of more private regard: and (that which might have given the name to all
the rest) the Court of Augmentation. Besides these there were some in Wales;
but that which concerned more the matter of Judicature, was the loss of that
grand liberty of that Country formerly a province belonging to this Nation and
now by Henry the eighth incorporated into the same, 28 H. 8. c. 3.
and made a Member thereof, and brought under the same fundamental Law; a work
that had now been long a doing, and from the time of Edward the third brought
on to perfection by degrees.

First, by annexing the Tenure of the Marches to the Crown: Then upon occasion
of their rebellion by loss of many of their wonted liberties. Afterward Henry
the eighth defaced the bounds of diverse the ancient Counties and settled them a
new and the bounds of the Marches also, and appointed Plees in Courts of
Judicature to be holden in the English tongue.

And last of all reunited them again to the English Nation, giving them vote in
Parliament as other parcel of the English Dominions had. Rot. Claus. 20 E. 2.
m. 3.
True it is, that from their first submission even unto Edward the first they
were summoned unto Parliament, and had vote there, but only in order to the
Interests of their own Country, 15 E. 2. In Dors. m. 13.
now and henceforth they possess one and the same vote as English men.
Secondly, as Courts and Judicatories multiplied, so some also of those that
were ancient enlarged their Jurisdiction, especially such of them as most
nighly related to Prerogative; amomgst others, the privy Council leads the
way: Who now began to have too much to do, in a double capacity, one at the
Council Table, the other in the Star Chamber: For now their Power began to be
diversely considered. In their first capacity they had too much of the Affairs
of the Common Pleas, in the later they had too much of the Crown Pleas; both of
them serving rather to scare men from doing wrong, then to do any man right.
And therefore though some men might seem to have some recompense, yet the
greatest gain fell to the King and his Courtiers, and thus became Majesty, or
State, or Prerogative, to be more feared then beloved. What the Power of the
Council was formerly has already been manifested, that which both these
Kings conspired in, and whereby they gained more Power over the People then all
their Predecessors, was this, that other Kings stood too much upon their own
legs, these leaned much upon the Lords, and gained the Lords to stick close to
them; and in this they had both the Kings Love and the Peoples Leave, who now
disjoynted upon several Interests, especially that of Religion, must be
contented to let go that which they had no heart to hold. And thus they
obtained a judicatory Power over the people; like that of great men whose
Censures are commonly above capacity, and not like to that of the Peers. This
was begun in Henry the sevenths time, who taking occasion to complain of
corruption and neglect in ordinary Trialls of the Common Law, gets the People
to yield to the Council, or some of them, a Power of Oier and Terminer, by
examination upon Bill or information in matters concerning Maintenance,
Liveries, Retainders, Embraceries corruption in Sheriffs, and Juries, Riots, 3
H. 7. cap. 1.
and unlawful Assemblies, Crimes all of them of the same Blood with rebellion,
which the King as much hated as the thought of his Title to the Crown; and
therefore would have it feared, as much as the punishment by such a mighty
Power; and a Trial of a dreadful Nature could effect. A Trial I say, wherein
both the guilty and the guiltless adventure their whole Estates, against the
edge of the arbitrary wills of great men of unknown Interests, in an unknown
way, at unknown places; having no other assurance, how, or when to come off,
but a Proclamation to tell the People, that the King above all things delighted
in Justice. A bitter pill this was for the People to swallow, yet it was so
artificially composed, that at the first taste it gave a pretty relish, the
King delights in Justice, 4 H. 7. cap. 12.
the Chancellor has his Conscience, the Archbishop brings Religion, the
Judges bring Law, so as its probable nothing will be done but according to
Justice, Conscience, Religion, and Law; a very fair mixture but that there was
a Treasurer in the Case, yet the success answered not expectation, the Persons
offended were many times inferior and their estates not great, the Offenders
more mean and of desperate fortunes; for great men were too wise to try this
new way, or to taste of their entertainment. Therefore within nine years the
Judges of Assize are betrusted with all, and that Court so continued for as
many years more; 11 H. 7. c. 3.
and then the King marked out one Crime amongst the rest for his own tooth,
belonging to the great men only, for they only are able to commit the Crime,
and to give recompense suitable to the Kings Appetite: It is giving of Liveries,
and Retainders, a sore evil in the eyes of a jealous King, tending to draw the
inferior sort to honor and admire, and be of the suit of those of the greater
sort, and then beware the Crown. These therefore must be tried before the King
himself and his Council, that he may know whom he is to fear, 19 H. 7. c. 14.
and of whom to take heed. And herewith is a strange power given, to summon
upon a mere Suspicion: To proceed without information: To examine the
Defendant upon Oath and make him his own Accuser. To punish according to
discretion, by fine and Imprisonment; and thus the King and his Council have
gotten a power under color of Liveries and Retainders, to bring the whole
Kingdom to be of their Livery, or else they can suspect whom they please;
apprehend whom they suspect, put him presently to the rack of confession, and
so into prison till he has satisfied both displeasure, and jealousy, and
covetousness it self. Never was England before now in so low a degree of
thraldom, bound under a double knot of self-accusing, and arbitrary Censure,
and this out-reached, not only in matters merely civil, tending to the common
Peace, but was intruded also into matters Ecclesiastical in order to the Peace
of the Church. All bound unto the good behavior both in Body and Soul, under
peril of loss of all that a man has dear to him in this World. The plot of
all this was first laid by Henry the seventh, and was followed by Henry the
eighth, who put that into practice (which his Father had in design) being led
thereto by such a skillful Guide as Cardinal Woolsie was, who, though of mean
Birth, yet of a Spirit above a King, and equal to the Popedom, strained the
string of Prerogative to its utmost height, and then taught the King to play
thereon; which he did after his blunt manner till his dying day. And thus
though the Clergy are brought a Peg lower, and the Nobility advanced higher,
yet was it the policy of these Kings to make them all of their own Livery and
Retaindership, to keep them in an upper region, looking on the poor Commons at
a distance far below; and well it was for the Commons thus to be, till the
influence of these blazing Stars grew cooler.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Militia.
IT may fall within the verge of opinion, that the guilty Title of Henry the
seventh to the Crown of England, galled his mind with jealousy the greatest
part of his Reign: Whether it were that he had not declared himself so fully
upon his Title by his Wife, or that as yet he feared some unknown Plantagenet
would arise and put his Crown to the question: This made him skillful in the
point of Fortification (wherein he likewise spent the greatest part of his
Reign) not so much by force of Arms (for he cared not much for that noise,
well knowing that Peace is the safer condition for a King that comes in by
power) but principally by way of gaining Concessions and acknowledgment from
the Subjects, a Music that he much delighted to hear, well knowing it would
conclude those amongst them that knew too much, and instruct them that knew too
little; and so in time he should pass for current amongst them all. It was no
hard matter for the King to accomplish this, the greater part of the Kingdom
being pre-ingaged unto his Title, and of them many depending upon him for
livelihood, if he failed they must look to loose all. But the present occasion
urged more importantly; the Title to the Crown was already put to the question,
by the pretentions of one that named himself Duke of York: And its now high
time for the Law to declare it self, to direct the People in such a Case: What
shall the People do where Might overcomes Right, or if days come like those of
Henry the sixth, wherein the Subjects should be between two millstones, of one
King in Title and another King in possession, for whom must they take up Arms,
if for Edward the fourth, then are they Traitors to Henry the sixth; if for
Henry the sixth, then are they Traitors to Edward the fourth, and so now if for
Henry the seventh then they may be Traitors to the Duke of York, if for the
Duke of York, then are they Traitors to Henry the seventh. For though the Duke
of York was said to be but a contrivance of the House of Burgundy; yet a great
part, both of the great men and others were of another opinion, and the King
himself was not very certain of his condition for the space of six years
thereby. This puts the Title of allegiance and that power of the Militia to the
touch; at length both King and Parliament come to one Conclusion, consisting of
three particulars.

First, that the King for the time being (whether by right or wrong) ought to
have the Subjects Allegiance, like to that of the wise Councellor, of that
brave King of Israel, Whom the Lord and his People and all the men of Israel
choose, his will I be. And this is not only declared by the express words in
the Preface of the Law, but also by the Kings own practice; 11 H. 7. c. 1.
for he discharged such as aided him against Richard the third then King, 1 H.
7. cap. 6.
by pardon by Parliament, but such as aided him being King by declaration of
the Law.

Secondly, that this Allegiance draws therewith engagement for the defense of
that King and Kingdom.

Thirdly, that the discharge of this Service, whereto the Subjects are bound by
allegiance, ought not to be imputed unto them as Treason: Nor shall any person
be impeached or attainted; therefore the first and the last of these need no
dispute.

The second is more worthy of consideration, in the particular words set down
in the Statute, Viz. That the Subjects are to serve their Prince in his Wars,
for the defense of him and the Land, against every rebellion, Power, and Might,
reared against him, and with him, to enter and abide in Service in Battle.
Wherein two things are to be considered, the Service, and the time or occasion.

The Service, is to serve the Prince in his Wars, and with him to enter and
abide in Service in Battle; which is the less to be stood upon, because there
is a condition annexed, if the case so require, which must be determined by
some Authority not particularly mentioned, albeit that whatsoever is therein set
down is only by way of supposal in a Preface annexed to the Law, by the King,
and permitted by the Commons, that were as willing the same should be allowed,
as the King himself, both of them being weary of wars, and willing to admit
this Conclusion for the better security of them both in these doubtful times.
But to lay all these aside, for the Case is not stated till the Cause be
considered. All this must be only when and where the Kings Person and Kingdom
is endangered by Rebellion, Power, or might, reared against him. So as the
Kings Person must be present in the War for the defense of the Kingdom, or no
man is bound by his allegiance to hazard his own Life, and then this point of
allegiance consists only in defending the King in the defense of the Land,
or more particularly in defending the Kings Person, he being then in the
defense of the Land; and defending him in order to the defense of the Land. So
as no man can rationally infer from hence, that the King has an universal
power of Array when he pleases, because the King when he pleases may not levy
War, nor make other War then a defensive War when the Land is endangered, or
when need shall require, 11 H. 7. c. 18.
as another Statute has it. But who shall determine this need or danger,
neither in these or any other Laws is mentioned; either out of want of occasion
or by reason of the tenderness of the times, wherein both Prince and People
were willing to decline the question.

Secondly, the Persons that are to do this service are to be considered of, and
although they are indefinitely set down under the word Subjects, it may be
supposed that the word is not to be taken in so large a sense as to comprehend
all of all ages, Sexes, Callings, and Conditions; in regard that even by the
Common Law some of each of these sorts are discharged from such service. But it
may seem the King was neither satisfied with the oppressions of this first Law
concercerning the occasion or time of this Service; nor did he see sufficient
ground under the Notion of bare allegiance to desire more: New ways are by him
found out, his Patentees were not a few, and although few or none could ever
boast much of any cheap purchases gained from him (for he was wont to be well
paid before hand for his Patents either by Money or that which was as
beneficial to him) yet he was resolved that their holding should be no less
advantageous to him then their having, and therefore in plain words he lets
them know, that notwithstanding former consideration, upon which they had their
Patents at the first, they must fight for him if they will live upon him; and
either adventure their Lives or their Benefit, 11 H. 7. c. 18.
choose they which, and if they find fault with their condition he touches
them with the Law of their allegiance; and thus he makes way to intimate a
claim of a more absolute allegiance, for being to show the Equity of the Law in
regard of their Allegiance, he tells them that every Subject is bound by his
Allegiance to serve and assist his Prince and Sovereign Lord, at all seasons
when need shall require; general words, that affirm nothing in certainty, yet
do glance shrewdly upon an absolute and universal assistance. Then coming to
drive the nail home, it is said that the Patentees are bound to give their
attendance upon his Royal Person, to defend the same when he shall fortune to
go in his person in Wars for the defense of the Realm or against his Rebels
and Enemies; (and as another Statute adds) within the same Realm, or
without, and according to their Allegiance, and not to depart without especial
license, or until general Proclamation of dismission. In show therefore here
is a new Militia, as touching the Kings Patentees they must attend the Kings
Person whither ever the King will lead them, either within the Realm, or
without; whether against such as he will suppose to be his Enemies abroad, or
if he will mistake his Subjects for his Enemies at home: And this under the
color of Allegiance published in doubtful expressions, as if it were not meet
that Henry the seventh (that loved not to yoke himself to the Law should yoke
his Laws under the Laws of plain language: Or rather that he held it a point
of policy to publish his Laws in a doubtful style, that such as durst question
his Laws might have no positive charge against them; and such as dared not to
enter into the lists with him, might not be bold to come nigh the breach of
them. Nevertheless neither does the glance of allegiance in the Preface of the
former, 11 H. 7. c. 18.
nor in the body of the later Statute any whit confirm, that what is in them
enacted is done upon the ground of Allegiance, 19 H. 7. c. 1.
but contrarily when as the first Statute comes to the point, it Startles
from the ground of Allegiance, and flies to the ground of a kind of Equity or
reason. And the second resorteth to the first as its proper ground, as being a
suppliment thereunto in cases forgotten and so omitted; though it may be rather
thought that the King creeping up into his height by degrees, made the former
only as an essay to prepare the way for the later, like the point of the Wedge
that makes way for the bulk and body thereof. The truth of this assertion will
be more manifest from the nature of both these Laws, being limited, both in
regard of time and person. In regard of time, for both these Laws are but
temporary and to continue only during the Life of Henry the seventh, in regard
the advancements therein mentioned, as the moving cause, are only the
advancements made by himself. In regard of the person, for all persons that
received advancements from him are not bound thereby, namely those that come in
to such advancement by purchase for Money: Neither are Judges and other
Officers excepted persons in the said Statutes. If therefore Allegiance had
been the ground of these Laws, it had equally bound all who are under that
Bond, and no Equity could have given a general rule of discharge unto such
condition of men: It had likewise bound as well formerly and afterward as
during this Kings Reign, and therefore what ever semblance is made therein
concerning Allegiance, there had bin no need of such Law if Allegiance could
have done the Deed, or if the power of Array had been of that large extent as
it has lately been taken. In my conceit therefore these two Laws do hold
forth nothing that is new, but a mind that Henry the seventh had to fill his
Coffers, though his mind would not so fill; he would have Soldiers but they
must be his Patentees, not for any skill or valor in them above others, but he
hoped they would compound with him for Licenses to absent, rather then to
adventure themselves, and so he might get the more Money that could find pay
for Soldiers more and better then they were or would be; for otherwise the
Patentees might by the Statute have been allowed to serve the King by their
Deputies which would have done the King better Service in the Wars then
themselves could have done, and for this very purpose much use was made of
these Statutes, as well by Henry the seventh as Henry the eighth, both for
Licenses and Pardons, for composition in such Cases as their Records do
plentifully show.

Secondly, let the Claim of Kings be what they will, yet the matter in fact
show plainly that they never had possession of what they claimed: Both these
Kings pretended a Forraine-Warr, each of them once against one and the same
Nation, and to that end advanced unto one place with their Armies; although the
one went in good earnest, the other in jest: Their Armies were not gathered by
Prerogative but of Volunteirs, this not only the Records but also the Statutes
do clearly set forth. Some soldiers served under Captains of their own
choice, and therefore the Law inflicteth a penalty upon such Captains as bring
not their number complete according to their undertaking, 7 H. 7. cap. 1.
other Soldiers are levied by Commission by way of impressed; which in those
days were Volunteirs also, and expecting favor from the public, the rather
because they devoted themselves thereto without relation to any private
Captain; willingly therefore received impressed Money: And of this course the
State saw a necessity, both for the better choice of men, and for the more
public owning of the work: For such as had been usually levied by the
Captains were fit only to fill up room and make up the number, and yet many
times there was a failing in that also; and this manner of raising the Infantry
was continued by Henry the eighth, 3 H. 8. cap. 5.
as by the like Law in his time may appear. As touching the levying of the
Horse, although diverse Statutes were made for the maintenance of the breed of
Horses, and Persons of all degrees of ability were assessed at the finding and
maintaining of a certain number of Horses, 32 H. 8. c. 13. 33 H. 8. c. 5.
yet do none of them tell us that they shall find and maintain them armed
completely for the Wars, nor shall send them forth upon their own charge, and
therefore I suppose they were raised as formerly; these two Kings had the
happiness to be admired, the one for his shrewd cunning Head, the other for a
resolute and courageous Heart: And it was no hard matter to find men that
loved to ingratiate themselves, and endeavor to catch their favor, though
with the adventure of their Lives, especially if they looked after Honor and
Glory, which as a Crown they saw pitched at the Goal of their Actions.

Thirdly, Concerning the pay of the Soldier, the Law was the same as formerly,
the same was ascertained by the Statute Law; 7 H. 7. c. 1. 3 H. 8. c. 5.
the payment was to be made by the Captain, under peril of imprisonment and
forfeiture of Goods and Chattels, and the true number of his Soldiers to be
maintained and listed, under the like peril.

Fourthly, As touching the Soldiers service, the same course also was taken as
before; if they dissert their Colors, they shall be punished as Felons, and
the manner of trial to be at the Common Law.

Fifthly, For Fortifications, the power properly belongs to the supreme
Authority, to give order therein: For the people may not fortify themselves
(otherwise then in their particular Houses, which are reputed every man's
Castle) because public Forts are enemies to the public peace, unless in
case of public danger; concerning which, private persons can make no
determination. And furthermore, no Fortifications can be made and maintained,
without abridgement of the Common liberty of the people, either by impairing
their Freehold, or exacting their labor, or other Contribution, none of which
ought to be done, but by public Law; and therefore when the Inhabitants of
the County of Cornwall were to make defense against Invasion and Piracy, from
the Coast of Little Britain, in regard they were a long slender County, and
upon sudden surprisals, people could not so readily flock together for their
joint defense, they obtained an act of Parliament to give them power to
fortify the Sea coasts, 4 H. 8. cap. 1.
according to the direction of the Sheriff and Justices of the Peace.

Lastly, Wars once begun, must be maintained at the charge of the undertakers:
If they be the Kings own Wars, he must maintain them out of his own Treasury,
till the benefit of them do prove to the common good; and in such cases the
charges have been sometimes provided before the work, by Act of Parliament, and
sometimes after.

Henry the Seventh, and Henry the eighth, both of them at their several times
went to Boloigne with their Armies: Henry the seventh with an intent to gain
profit to himself by an advantageous peace, and had his ends therein, and was
ashamed to ask aid of the people toward the charges of that War.

Henry the Eighth went upon his own charge also with his Army, trusting to the
Parliament for consideration to be had of his employment (wherein his
expectation did not fail) and in his absence, made Queen Katharine General of
all the Forces of England in his absence, and gave her power, with other five
Noble Personages, to take up Money upon Loan, as occasion should require, and
to give security for the same, for the maintaining and raising of Forces, if
need should require, as is more particularly set forth in the Patent Rolls of
these times. Nevertheless the War at Sea, Infra quatuor maria, was ever
reputed Defensive as to the Nation, and under the public charge, because no
War could be there, but an Enemy must be at hand, and so the Nation in eminent
danger; and therefore the maintenance of the Navy Royal in such cases, was
from the public Treasury.

To conclude therefore, If the Parliament and Common Law in all these cases of
Levies of men for War, 7 H. 8. cap. 2. 23. cap. 7. 32. cap. 14.
payment of Soldiers, and their deportment, in cases of Fortifications, and of
maintenance of Wars at Sea, and the deportment of such as are employed
therein; I say, if they give the Law, and carry the supreme directory, then
certainly the Law rules in that which seems most Lawless; and though Kings
may be chief Commanders, yet they are not the chief Rulers.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Peace.
PEace and War originally depend upon the same power, because they relate each
to other, as the end to the means, and receive motion from one and the same
fountain of Law, that rules both in Peace and War: It is very true, that
several Ages hitherto have been troubled with arbitrary exhalations; and these
very times whereof we now treat are not altogether clear from such an air.
Two Kings we have at once in view, both of them of an elate spirit; one working
more closely by cunning, the other more openly by Command, yet neither of them
pretending so high as to do all, or be all in all. Peace suited more with
Henry the seventh then with his Son, who delighted to be accounted terrible
rather then good; yet both of them were glad enough to be at peace at home, and
were industrious to that end, though by several means. Henry the seventh
pretended Justice and Peace (a welcome news to a people that formerly accounted
nothing theirs, but by the leave of the Soldier) and therefore sets upon the
reformation of the Sheriffs Courts, 11 H. 7. c. 15. 19 H. 7. c. 16.
in the entering of Plaints, and making of Juries suitable to that present time,
wherein men of Estates were very scarce, and much of the riches of the Nation
evaporated into the Wars, both Civil and Foreign; although the continuance
of that order concerning Juries in the succeeding times of opulency, has
brought these Courts into contempt, and made way thereby for the Kings Courts
to swell in glory, and to advance Prerogative, even above it self.

Secondly, He reformes Goales, as well in their number as their use: During the
Civil Wars, every small party of men that could get a strong place, made the
same, not only a Castle, but a Goal, and usually imprisoned and ransomed at
their own pleasure: For remedy whereof, Henry the seventh restores all Goales
to the Sheriffs, 19 H. 7. c. 10.
saving such as hold hy Inheritance; and gives power to two Justices of the
Peace, 3 H. 7. cap. 3.
one being of the Quorum, to take Bail in cases bailable, 3 H. 7. cap. 1.
and Recognisances of the Peace, to be certified at the next Sessions, or
Jail-delivery.

Thirdly, Both Kings concur in providing against such disorders, as more
immediately did trench upon the public Peace, and reached at the Crown it
self, by laboring to prevent by severe punishing; and lastly, by regulating
the proceedings of Judicature in such cases.

These disorders were two; Inordinate wearing of Liveries, and unlawful
Assemblies: The first being in nature of unlawful assembly of minds and
spirits of men, the second of their bodies and persons: Both these had formerly
been provided against, but the Judges of the Common Law, unto whose Cognizance
these Crimes were holden, did restrain their punishments to the rule of the
Common Law, then thought to be too facile and mean for disorders that did fly
at so high a pitch; and therefore they are reduced before a higher tribunal,
as matter of State, 3 H. 7. cap. 1. 19 H. 7. c. 14.
as has been already mentioned. The severity of punishment consisted not so
much in aggravating the pain, as the Crime, matters of injury being made
Felonies, and those Treason.

This crime of Treason, at first it concerned matters acted against the Nation,
afterward it reached to matters acted against the King; now it reaches even
to the very thoughts and imaginations of the heart, not only of bodily harm
to the King, but of the Queen or their heirs apparent, 26 H. 8. c. 13.
or tending to deprive them of their Title or Name of Royal Estate: 3 H. 7. c.
13.
This crime was formerly made but Felony by Henry the seventh, and then only
extended to such offense committed by one of the Kings household against the
Person of the King, or a Lord, or any of the Council, Steward, Treasurer, or
Controller; so as the person of the Queen was not then in the Case, and yet
then newly Crowned, and at that instant bearing in her womb that royal seed
which was then the only earnest of the stability and glory of England; and
therefore is it a subject of wonderment, unless it were out of extremity of
Jealousy, least he should seem to make too great account of her title, and
thereby disparage his own; and then is it a piece of wit, but not without
weakness; for he that is jealous of the slightings of other men, shows
himself unresolved in his own pretentions. Now Henry the Eighth, not only
raises the price, but adds to the thing, and not only puts the Queen,
but the Prince or Heir apparent into the Case, making the same Treason: So as
it implies, that English Allegiance tyeth the Subject, not only to the safety
of the Person of the King, but also of the Queen and Heir apparent; otherwise
the offense is made and declared Treason against the King.

Secondly, the Election of the object is to be considered, for whether the one
or other Statute be observed, it will appear that although the King was the
next object expressed, yet a further was intended, and that the Crime is not
intended in regard of his natural Capacity as a man, but of his politic
Capacity, and in relation to the Common good of the Nation, and this is
evident, not only from the several Prefaces of the Laws, but also from the
manner of Election, whereby the Title of Heir apparent is taken up, and not
the eldest Son or Daughter, or these, and not the other Children, all which
are equally dearly beloved in Natural regard.

Thirdly, though at the Common Law Treason be properly a Crime against
Allegiance, yet as in cases of Felony Crimes may be by the Statute made as
Treason, which at the Common Law are not against the legiance of an English
man, for this remains ever one and the same, but one and the same fact may be
made Treason and unmade by the Statute Law, as befell this Law of Henry the
eighth, by a Law within twenty years after; like as also in former times one
and the same fact has many times received the like measure. Other Treasons
besides these already mentioned were by Henry the eighth created, 28 H. 8. c.
18.
as Marriage with any of the Kings Sisters, Daughters, or Aunts of the Fathers
side, or the Daughters of his Brethren or Sisters, without consent first had of
the King: 4 H. 7. c. 18.
Counterfeiting of current Money, not of the Kings Coynage, was likewise made
Treason by Henry the seventh, 27 H. 8. c. 2.
who was well seen in that Mystery of Money-Trade, and the like also became of
Counterfeitures of the Kings Privy Signet and sign manuell.

22 H. 8. c. 9.
And Lastly, that horrid trick of poisoning was reduced to this Category, rather
that the Penalty might be more terrible in the Death (which was by boiling)
then for any Tincture in the Nature of the Crime, or in any Forfeiture of
Estate.

33 H. 8. c. 8.
The policy of these times thus irritated against Treason had proved very
irreguler, if the same had not been as rigid in cases of Felony: diverse new
ones of that kind are also dubbed, amongst which Conjuration or Witchcraft
comes first; an old Felony in the Saxons time, but since had gotten its Clergy,
now well nigh for the space of five hundred years, and they it, so as it never
walked abroad amongst the Laity but under the favor of the Cloystered People,
nor ever came before the Civil Power till now Henry the eighth brought it
forth into its own ancient and proper regiment. Other Crimes being those of the
season are made into the the same degree: Such as were taking of women into
captivity; unlawful huntings with disguises; 3 H. 7. c. 2. 1 H. 7. c. 1. 22 H.
8. c. 11. 21 H. 8. c. 7.
malicious breaking of the Dikes and Banks in Marshland; Servants embezzelling
their Masters Goods to the value of forty shillings or upward, which (besides
that of Heresy, whereof formerly) though of a new stamp, yet of so good a
constitution, that they remain unto this day under the same brand.

But let the Laws be never so severe, if they have not free liberty to walk at
large they are soon ghostlesse, and therefore these two Kings, especially the
later, gained that Honor above their Predecessors that they gave the Law a
free and full scope over all persons but themselves and their Assignees, and in
all places. First, Concerning places, every one knows the Notion but few
considered the extent of Sanctuary ground in England, that could sanctify any
Crime or Criminal person in such manner, that though the eye of Justice could
see yet the hand of Justice could never reach them* till Henry the eight
plundered them of all their sanctity, and made all places common, so as no
Treason could hide it self but where the Act of Parliament did appoint, 26. H.
8. c. 13. 27 H. 8. c. 19. 32 H. 8. c. 12.
and turned their names from Sanctuaries to privileged places. The sanctity of
the person was yet more mischivious and hard to be reformed, it had been often
attempted before, these times with little success. Henry the seventh gained
some ground herein beyond his Ancestors; the Delinquent might have his Clergy
once, 4 H. 7. c. 13.
but not the second time (though he fled to the horns of the Alter) and was
ever after known by a brand in the hand. Thus far did Henry the seventh go, and
would have done more even as far as unto those in holy orders. But Henry the
eighth coming on, in point of Treason made all persons common without respect
of their orders or profession. 23 H. 8. c. 1.
Death makes an equal end of all. In cases of Murder, 4 H. 8. c. 12.
Robbery, Burnings of Houses, Fellonies done in holy ground, high Way, or
Dwelling House; refusal of trial, 25 H. 8. c. 3.
peremptory challenge of above twenty of the pannell; Servants, imbezzelling
their Masters Goods in value forty shillings or upwards; in all these Cases no
Clergy could be allowed, 23 H. 8. c. 1.
but to persons in holy Orders, and those also to be perpetually Imprisoned in
the Ordinaries Prison; and yet this exception held not long in force, but these
men also were equally wrapped up in the same course, 32 H. 8. c. 3.
to have their Clergy and endure the brand even as other men.

Two difficulties yet remain which hindered the execution of the Laws against
Treason. One concerning the place, the other the person.

The place many times of the plotting and beginning of the Treason befalls to
be without the walk of the Kings Writ, in which case by the Common Law it
cannot be inquired or tried, or it may be that the men of the place be
generally disaffected, and then no hope of finding out the matter. In such
cases therefore it is provided, 28 H. 8. c. 15. 33 H. 8. c. 22.
that be the Crime wheresoever the Delinquent will, it shall nevertheless be
inquired and tried where the King will.

The Person of the Delinquent also many times changed its condition; it might
be sober at the time of the Delinquency, and afterward upon discovery, prove
lunatic, and thereby avoid the Trial, this whether in jest or earnest, by a
Statute is made all one, 35 H. 8. c. 2.
and it is ordained that in case the fact be confessed by the Delinquent before
the Lords of the Council, at such time as the party accused was of sound
mind, and the same be attested under the hands of four of those Lords, the
same shall be a good ground to proceed to inquisition before Commissioners, and
the same being found, to try the Delinquent without answer or appearence,
saving unto Barons their Trial by their Peers. And thus however in their
Fits, the Will of the Persons of these Kings was too hardy for the Kings to
manage according to rule, yet the Law still in Title kept the saddle, held the
Reins, and remains the chief Arbitrator unto every man.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the general Government of Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth.
WE are at length come within sight of the shore, where finding the Currents
various and swift, and the Waves rough, I shall first make my course through
them severally, and then shall bring up the general account of the Reigns of
one King and three Governors.

The King was a Youth of about ten years old, yet was older then he seemed by
eleven years; for he had all the Ammunition of a wise King, and in one respect,
beyond all his Predecessors, that made him King indeed, By the grace of God. He
was the only Son of Henry the Eighth, yet that was not all his title, he being
the first President in the point of a young Son and two elder Daughters by
several venters; the eldest of whom was now thirty years old, able enough to
settle the Government of a distracted Nation; and the Son so young, as by an
Act of Parliament, he was disabled to settle any Government at all, till he
should pass the fifteenth year of his Reign: But the thing was settled in
the life time of his Father, whose last Will, though it speak the choice, yet
the Parliament made the election, and declared it. The condition of this Kings
Person, 28 H. 8. c. 7. 35 H. 8. c. 1.
was every way tender; borne, and sustained, by extraordinary means; which
could never make his days many, or Reign long: His spirit was soft and
tractable, a dangerous temper in an ill air, but being fixed by a higher
principle then nature yielded him, and the same, beautified with excellent
indowments of nature, and Arts, and Tongues, he outwent all the Kings in his
time of the Christian World. His Predecessors provided Apparel and Victual to
this Nation, but he Education, and thereby fitted it to overcome a fiery trial,
which soon followed his departure. The model of his Government was as tender
as himself, scarce enduring to see his Funeral; ready for every change,
subject to tumults and Rebellions, an old trick that ever attends the beginning
of Reformation, like the wind the Sun rising. The diversity of Interests in
the Great Men, especially in point of Religion, for the most part first set
these into motion; for some of them had been so long maintained by the Romish
Law, that they could never endure the Gospel: and yet the different Interests
in matters of State, made the greater noise. All was under a Protector fitly
composed to the Kings mind, but ill matched with rugged humorous aspiring
minds; whereof one that should have been the Protectors great Friend, became
his fatal Enemy, and though he were his Brother, to prejudice his Interest,
pawned his own blood: The other which was the Duke of Northumberland, had his
will, but missed his end; for having removed the Protector out of the way, and
gotten the chief power about the King, yet could he not hold long what he had
gotten; for the King himself, after sixteen months decaying, went into
another World, and left the Duke to stand or fall before some other power,
which came to pass upon the entry of the next Successor.

The greatest trouble of his Government arose from the prosecution of a design
of his Grandfathers, Henry the seventh, for the uniting of the two Crowns of
England and Scotland, by marriage, and settling an enduring peace within this
Isle; and unto this work all were ayders in both Nations, but the Enemies of
both: But Gods ways are not as Man's; its a rare example to find out one
Marriage that did ever thrive to this end. England meaned well in profering
Love, but the wooing was ill favoredly carried on by so much Blood.

Lastly, As the Government was now tender; so was it carried with much
compliance with the People, which ever gives occasion to such of them that are
irregular, to be more, and such as are well governed to be less, because though
pleasing it be, yet it is with less awe and spirit, which renders their
obedience at the best but careless and idle, unless such as are very
conscientious be the more careful over their own ways, by how much their
superiors are the less.

NOt thus was Queen Mary, Q. Mary.
but (like a Spaniard) she overruled all relations and engagements by design;
she was about forty years old, and yet unmarried when she came to the Throne,
it may seem she wanted a mind to that course of Life from natural
abstinency, Thuan. vol. 1. lib. 13.
or was loath to adventure her feature (which was not excellent) to the Censure
of any Prince of as high degree as she held her self to be; or her value was
unknown, so as to persons of meaner Interests she might seem too much above,
and to those of greater too much beneath: Or possibly her Father was loath to
let the World know her Title to the Crown till needs must, or to raise up a
Title for an other man so long as he had hope of a Son of his own to succeed
him, and yet had formerly designed her for a wife to Charles the fifth, Thuan.
vol. 1. lib. 1.
and afterward to the Dauphine of France: Or it may be her self had set a
command upon her self, not to change her Estate till she saw the course of the
Crown, either to or fro; Fox.
however the time is now come that she must marry, or adventure her Woman-hood
upon an uncertain and troublesome state of Affairs: She liked the Lord
Courtnoe above the Prince of Spain, but feared he would not design with her:
She held him not unmeet for her degree, for she feared he was good enough for
her Sister, that then also had the Title of a Kingdom waiting so nigh her
person, as she was an object of hope to her Friends, and fear to her Enemies.
And yet Queen Mary married the Prince of Spain: It may be it ran in the blood
to marry into their own blood, or rather she was thereto led by reason of
state, partly to enable her with greater security in the reseisure of her
Kingdom in the Popish Religion, wherein she knew she had to do with a People
not easy to be reduced, where Conscience pretended reluctance; and partly to
assure her Dominion against the outworks of the French and Scottish designs.
And so she yielded up the Supremacy of her Person to the Prince of Spain, but
(thanks to the Nobility) the Supremacy of the Kingdom was reserved to her own
use, for it was once in her purpose to have given up all to the man, rather
then to miss of the man. And yet their condition was not much comfortable to
either: the peoples dislike of the match sounded so loud abroad, that when the
Prince was to come over, the Emperor his Father demanded fifty Pledges for his
Sons safty during his abode in this Land, which was also denied, Bodin. Rep.
lib. 6.
when he was come over, the English Fear the Spanish Tyranny, and the Spanish
the old Saxon entertainment of the Danes; so both ly at their close guards, as
after some time the King and Queen did no less, for the Queen was either never
earnest in her affection, or now much less, finding his Body diseased and his
Mind lingering after unlawful game. On the other side, the King not finding
that content in her Person (especially after her supposed Concepcion) that he
expected, looked to his own Interest apart from hers, and thereby taught her
to do the like; and this she thought cost England the loss of Callis and he
Spain the loss of many advantages that might have been obtained, and was
expected from this conjunction. Thus by the several interests between the
King Regnant and the Queen Regent, the Government of England became like a knot
dissolving, neither fast nor loose.

Toward the People she might well be reserved, if not rigid, for she knew her
entry was not very acceptable though accepted; and that her design was
contrary to her engagements; and therefore it was vain to think to please her
self and pleasure them. Nor did she much busy her thoughts therewith, that
abominated trick of Impost upon Merchandise she brought into fashion, C. 2.
Instit. fol. 61.
which had by many public acts been damned for the space of two hundred
years; this was done without either shame or fear, for if the People turned
head, she knew she had a good reserve from Spain, and the People might very
well consider of that, though for her part she desired not much to improve that
Foreign Interest; because she might well see that Spain designed to keep
England so far beneath, that France might not get above: And that Phillip
neither loved the double Crown of England, no nor the triple Crown at Rome,
otherwise then in order to that of Spain.

This distance between her and her King, wrought her to a more nigh dependency
upon her Council and English Nobility, and so became less discerned in her
Government; although questionless she did much, and wanted not Wisdom or
courage to have done more, but that she was not wholly her own Woman: All men
do agree that she was devout in her kind of profession, and therein as deeply
engaged as her Brother Edward had been in his; though it may be out of
tenderness of Conscience, but she out of a Spanish kind of gravity that
indures not change: and whereunto she was well aided by her Clergy who were her
beloved for her Mothers sake, and now also so much the more sour, by how much
the nigher to the bottom: Its the less wonder therefore if the zeal of these
times burnt into a flame, that at length consumed even those that kindled it.
In one thing more above all the rest she acted the part of her Sect, rather
then her Place, and the same contrary to the advice of her Ghostly Fathers and
all rules of policy, and the agreement between her King and self upon Marriage;
which was the ingageing of England in the War at Saint Qui ntins, against the
French, contrary to the National league formerly made: Nevertheless the issue
was but suitable, for though the English obtained their part of the honor of
that day, yet in the consequence they lost Callis, the last foot that the
English had in France; henceforth England must be content with a bare Title: As
this was deserved, so was it also reserved by the Queen, to make the World
believe that she died for grief therefore as a Mother of her Country; although
her bodily disease, contracted by a false Conception, wherein she beguiled both
her self and the World, concurred thereto. In sum, the worst that can be said
of her, is this, That she was ill principled, and the best, that she acted
according to her principles, and so lived an uncomfortable Life, shaped a
bloody Reign, and had but a dim Conclusion.

The Night was now spent, and Queen Elizabeth like the morning Star rising into
the Throne, sent forth the benignant Influence of both her Predecessors, and
many ways excelled them both, she was begotten in a heat against Rome, wherein
also she was borne and trained up by her Father and Brother Edwards Order, and
saw enough in her Sisters course to confirm her therein. For Queen Mary was
not very Catholic in her Throne, though she was in her Oratory. Nevertheless,
Queen Elizabeth's Course hereunto was very strange, and might seem in outward
respects to lead her quite wide, for her youth was under a continual yoke, her
Mother dead whiles she was at the breast; her Father owning her no further then
as his Child born of a rebellious Woman, never intending her for the Crown, so
long as any hope was left of any other; with her age the yoke grew more heavy,
her Brother Edward being but of the half blood, except in point of Religion,
might repect her at a distance beyond his Mothers family, but this lasted not
long, her Sister Mary comes next, of a stranger blood to her then her Brother
was; looking ever back upon her as one too nigh her heel, and more ready to
tread upon her Train then support it, the difference in Religion between them
two added yet further Leven, and this occasioned from her Sister, to her many
sour reflections, bitter words, harsh usage, concluding with Imprisonment, and
not without danger of Death: All which Queen Elizabeth saw well, made the less
noise in Religion, walked warily, and resolved with patience to endure the
brunt; for she might perceive by her Fathers Will that her way to the Crown, if
ever she arived at the end, must be through a field of blood, and though she
knew her change of Religion might make the way more plain, yet God kept her in
a patient waiting, until the set time was come. Thus passing over her Minority
with little experience of youthful pleasures, she had the happiness to have
the less sense of youthful lusts, which meeting with natural Endowments of
the larger size, rendered her the goodliest mirror of a Queen Regent that ever
the Sun shone upon, God adding thereto both Honor and continuance, above all
that ever sat in that Throne: Her entrance was with more joy to others then
her self, for she kept her pace as treading amongst thorns, and was still
somewhat reserved, even in matters of Religion, though she was known to be
devout. She had observed that the hasty pace both of her Brother and Sister
brought early troubles before either of them were well settled in their Throne.
And therefore whereas her Sister first set up the Mass, and then endeavored
to settle it by disputes, she contrarily first caused the point to be debated,
and thereby gained liking to lay it aside. Its true the moderatorship in that
dispute was imposed upon a Lay man (as their term is) but his work being to
hold the Disputants to order in debate, and not to determine the point in
Controversy (which thing was left to the Auditory) might therefore more
rationally be done by him, then censured by any Historian that shall undertake
to judge them all.

The first step thus made, one made way for another, till the whole became
levened; her proceedings against Opposers were with much lenity, rather
overlooking, then looking on; and such as stood more directly in her path she
would rather set a side then trample down: And be fair to all (without respect
to difference of Religion) that would be fair to her. Much of her happiness
depended upon Election of her Council, Forcat. de Gal. imp. lib. 7.
more in observing their advice, that whether she did rule, or were ruled, or
did rule by being ruled, might deserve some consideration: This she did to give
satisfaction to such as took prejudice at her Sex, rather then out of any sense
of imbecility in her own intellectuals, for therein she equalled the best of
her Predecessors, and in learned Endowments exceeded them all. Generally she
was of a public mind, if not populer, she loved to be seen of the People,
Quint. lib. 1. cap. ult.
and yet kept her distance: Her Sex taught her to use her tongue much, and her
education to use it well and wisely: That, with a reserved carriage was her
Scepter, winning thereby applause from the inferior sort, and awe from the
greater^ A wise man that was an eye witness of many of her Actions and of
those that succeeded her, many times has said, That a Courtier might make a
better meal of one good look from her then of a good gift from some other
King. Anothet felicity She had beyond others of her place, She loved not to be
tied but would be knit unto her People. To them She committed her confidence
under God, and they to her their chiefest Treasure on Earth, Viz. Their hearts
to her Parliament which was the most considerable party that She had to deal
with, She could personate Majesty equal to any Emperor, and advise, commend,
yea and chide if She saw occasion: And yet ever had a trick to come off with a
kind conclusion without blur of Honor. So as of thirteen Parliaments called
during her Reign, not one became abortive by unkindness; and yet not any one
of them passed without Subsidy granted by the People, but one wherein none was
desired: And sometimes the aid was so liberal that She refused the one half,
and thanked the People for the remnant; Bodin. rep. l. 6.
a courtesy that rang loud abroad to the shame of other Princes. She would
often mention her Prerogative, and yet not hold her self wise enough, either to
interrupt the Judges in their way, nor the Bishops in theirs: Abeit She spared
not also, as She saw occasion, to check the best of them for their
irregularities; She had no Beloved, yet entertained Favorites at a cheaper rate
and in better order then Kings use to do, for She had a preferment within her
power beyond the reach of them all, and passion also soon at command, or rather
sometimes beyond command: Yet if calmely taken, it ever proved good for that
party (that suffered) in the conclusion. However, her love She held under her
own power, and therein excelled her Forefathers; She had the President of her
Sister (that adventured upon a Prince for her Bed, and missed what she
expected, and lost what She had) and thereby learned to call into question the
possibility for her to gain the private contentments of a married Life, and
therewith maintain her public Interest in the Kingdom; and therefore
resolved rather to sit alone then to sit below, and to refuse the help of any
Consort, rather then to part with any one jot of her Interest in the people: So
She remained above the People and her self, and thereby enjoyed both. But
Custom in Government growing, together with infirmities of age, made her
Regency taste somewhat stale and spiritless, and gave occasion to men's Minds to
wander after the next Successor; before She had been nine years Queen this
scrutiny was once begun; but it received a fair answer of delay, because it
was then taken as don in love, now the apprehensions hereof according to her
age are more sad; She thinks them weary of her, and thereupon She is weary of
her self and them: She supposes She can no longer give them content; the Lords
have the power, they will not be ruled; and such like dark thoughts working
upon an aged body, weakened with other infirmities, wasted her spirits and
hastened a conclusion unto a weary life, her self not unwilling herewith, and
her Courtiers less, who expecting more from Successors then they find, lived
to disdesire and unwish their former choice by late repentance; thus making the
ending of her days the renewing of her Reign in the hearts of all that
observed her alive, or consider her (now dead) in the written Registers of her
Fame.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Supreme Power during these Times.
THe Supreme Power, but ere while monstrous in the two former Kings times for
Greatness, now suffers as great a diminution, over-shadowed by infancy,
woman-hood, and Coverture; and gives the People breath to beware for the
future, Ne potentes si nocere velint non possent; nevertheless the loss was
only of the Hydropical humor, and the Government came forth more clearly like
it self. In the point of Infancy, Edward the sixth bears it forth, being the
seventh President of Infancy, ruling under Protectorship, since the Norman
times; yet beyond all the rest in managing his Supremacy in Church matters,
which none of them all did ever engage upon before him.

English Prerogative and Supremacy are Notions of a sublime Nature, and
commonly looked upon as the holy Mount at the Delivery of the Law, at a great
distance, for fear of death or undoing; and yet it is such a thing as a child
may handle without hurt done, either to the Estates, Persons, or Consciences of
any Man; because its presupposed he does nothing but what the Law first
dictates by his Council unto him. There is then no infancy in the Crown, though
in the Person, because the wisdom of the Crown is not intended to rest in one
Person, but in the Councels of many, who are equally wise, whether the Person
of the King be old or young. 28 H. 8. c. 17.
And that Statute made by Henry the eighth, by which this King had power by his
Letters Patents, after the age of 24 years, to adnull any Act of Parliament
made by him before that time, was not grounded either upon Principles of Law or
general Reason of State, but upon some particular Circumstances of the state of
the Affairs as then they stood; and therefore is this power limited only to
such Heirs or Assignees of Henry the eighth, to whom the Crown shall come by
his appointment. Nor did it ever thrive to that desired end whereto it was
intended: for upon the entry of Edward the sixth, the Councels changed, 1 E. 6.
cap. 11.
and the Parliament took this Statute away, as scandalous to the fundamental
Government of the Nation, and in stead of the power of Adnulling, allowed of
the power of Repealing; yet so as until such time of Repeal the said Statutes,
and all Acts thereupon done, shall for ever be deemed warrantable and good.
This was too much, but that the Times were yet in Equi lubrio, and men were
loath to part with their Interests, which they did hang upon that Power of
Reserve, unto the Kings Letters Patents: yet in that the Power is limited, not
only in regard of the manner and time, but of the persons, and also of the
Statutes that are to be repealed: it is sufficient to vindicate the nature of
this Prerogative (if such it were) to be no ways inherent, but acquired by
Concession. But as touching the Legislative Power, they would not trust it in
the least manner to any other King. The Parliament had crowned Proclamations at
the instance of Henry the eighth, with that royal Title of Laws, 31 H. 8. ca. 8.
in manner as formerly has been noted. Now all Interests, both of the Popish
and of the Reformed parties of this Nation, are against it; the former because
they saw the Kings present way to be against them, and both it and the later
because the thing it self was abominable unto the Liberties of the People, and
therefore it is soon taken away by Repeal, and the Legislative Power is wholly
reassumed to themselves, 1 E. 6. cap. 12.
as formerly: for though in matters Ecclesiastical the Power of the Crown might
seem to be more pre-eminent in regard of the Supremacy, 1 E. 6. cap. 2.
and some particular Powers in making Bishops by Election without Conge
destire, yet did the Parliament neither yield or acknowledge any Legislative
Power to be in the Crown thereby, but proceeded on in that way of the thirty
and two Commissioners formerly agreed upon by them, in the time of the Kings
father. Thus the King, 3 and 4 E. 6. c. 11.
though an Infant, was a Gainer, and the Crown nevertheless still the same.

Secondly, that Crown that may be worn by an Infant may much rather be worn by
a Woman, whose natural Indowments do far exceed the other, and are not inferior
unto the most of men: of this we have two Examples in these Times, Queen Mary
and Queen Elizabeth, of several professions in matters of Religion, and liable
to Exceptions, in regard of their Sex, by men of the counter-profession on both
sides; yet both upheld the honor of the Crown, though therein the one more
especially, being neither engaged in the Roman Cause, nor in the Estate of
Marriage, as the other was. This was Queen Elizabeth, in person a Woman, but in
mind endowed with all the perfections of a man; she could not endure to abate
one hairs breadth of her State; and yet upon the sole regard of her Sex she
submitted her Title of Supremacy to a more moderate name of Supreme Governor,
whereas her father would be called Supreme Head, as if it were not only
hazardous, but hideous for a Woman to be Supreme Head of the Church; 26 H. 8.
cap. 1.
and for this cause would she not revive that Statute made by her Father, and
continued by her Brother Edward the Sixth, and repealed by her Sister Queen
Mary: 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
nevertheless such as she was, she had all such Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Superiorities, and Pre-eminencies, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as by any
Ecclesiastical Power or Authority formerly had been, or might be lawfully
exercised, for Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for
Reformation, Order, and Correction of the same, and of all manner of Errors,
Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities; she had
therefore neither absolute Empire, nor absolute Jurisdiction over the Churches;
neither Power to make, declare, alter, or repeal any Law; neither did she ever
exercise any such Power, but only by Act of Parliament: 1 Eliz. cap. 3.
she had a Power over Ceremonies in the Worship of God, which was given her by
the Parliament to execute by advice, and therefore was limited, as also was all
the remainder of her. Power in Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical; for she could do
nothing in her own Person, but by Commission: and these Commissioners must be
Natives and Denizons, not Forrainers; and the same to be but in certain Cases,
and with certain Process. Some Cases of Ecclesiastical Cognizance were referred
to Trial at the Common Law, 13 El. ca. 12. 23 El. cap. 1.
viz. Such as concerned the public Worship of God in Cases of Forfeiture and
Imprisonment.

Lastly, neither had the Queen, nor her Commissioners, nor Bishops, absolute
Power over the Church Censures; no Censure was regarded but Excommunication,
and that no further then in order to the Writ, De Excommunicato capiendo, and
in all Cases the same was to be regulated according to the Statute in that Case
provided, 5 Eliz. ca. 23.
or by the Common Law in Case of Action: in all which we find no Jurisdiction
in Cases Ecclesiastical that is absolutely settled in the Crown: In matters
Temporal the thing is yet more clear; she never altered, continued, repealed,
nor explained any Law, otherwise then by Act of Parliament, whereof there are
multitudes of Examples in the Statutes of her Reign; and what she did by her
Judges was ever under Correction. A Woman she was, and therefore could be no
Judge, much less in the Cases of Difference concerning her self and her Crown.
18 Eliz. ca. 8.
A Queen she was, and might make Judges, but she must go according to the Law;
new Judicatories she could make none; nor judicially make, declare, alter, or
determine the Power of any Court or Judge in Case of Difficulty, but by her
Parliament; 5 Eliz. ca. 18. 13 Eliz. ca. 9. 39 Eliz. ca. 6. 18 Eliz c. 12. 43
Eliz. ca. 4.
as in the Cases concerning the Power of the Lord Keeper, the Powers of the
Commissioners of Sewers, and charitable uses, the Courts at Westminster, and
the County Courts, in the several Statutes concerning the same may more fully
appear. And which is yet of a meaner size, her Power extended not to redress
any inconvenience in process of Error, or Delay, in Courts of Law, nor to
remedy Errors in Judgments, Fines, Recoveries, Attainders, or other matters
of Record, or Trial, whereof the Statutes of her time are full, and also the
opinions and judgments of the Judges of the Common Law concurring therewith: I
mention not the power of life and member, which without all contradiction has
ever been under the protection of the known Law; so as upon the whole Account
it will be evident, that this Queen had no absolute Pre-eminence in all Cases,
but either in contra-distinction to foreign Power, or the power of any
particular person, and not in opposition to the joint interest of the
Representative of England.

Queen Mary comes next, although a Woman as well as she, yea her elder sister
and predecessor, yet came short of her in the point of Supremacy, by a double
submission, both unto the Law of a Husband, and of a foreign power in cases
Ecclesiastical; although the same was with such qualifications as it was much
more in Title and pretense then in reality; and so in the conclusion, neither
approved her self to be good Wife, good Catholic, nor good Queen. She could
be no good Wife, because she was too great for her Husband within the Realm,
and resolved not to be without. A Catholic she was, but the worst that ever
held her place: her Father appeared what he was, spoke plain English, and was
easily discerned. But she told the Pope a fair Tale of disclaiming Supremacy,
and reconciling her Kingdom; yet none of her Predecessors did go beyond her in
irregularity of her proceedings. Before ever she called Parliament, she settled
the great Work of Reformation, or rather Deformation in the Worship of God, by
single Proclamation; and not only took away the partition wall of Doctrine by
the like power, but gave way, and power to Persecution thereupon, to arise
before any power or Order from the holy Sea, then so called, enabled her
thereunto. And after that she declared her self convinced, that she ought not
to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and by her Instructions forbade the
Bishops to use in their Process that Clause of Regia Autoritate fulcitus, yet
even these Instructions had no other Authority then her own; and nevertheless
she still enforced the Execution of all matters concerning the public Worship
of God, and Government of the Church, when as yet the Pope had no admittance
unto his ancient claim. It is very true, that the Pope long ere now had made a
fair offer, and the Queen had lent her ear, but her Train was too great to move
as fast as was pretended, so as no meeting could be had till the Queens
Marriage with Spain was past, and such as were disaffected, found it was
bootless to stop the Current of two such mighty streams of Power, now joined
into one; and so that unclean spirit returned seven times worse then when he
went out, and took Seisin, merely upon Repeal of the Laws made by Henry the
eighth, in the Negative, without further Grant or Livery: for though an express
Embassage was sent to Rome, to perform the solemnity of the submission, yet the
Pope died before the arivall of the Embassy, and the solemnity failing, left
the Title of the Crown much blemished, yet was it not wholly defaced; for if
the Statutes in Henry the eighth and Edward the sixths time, did but confirm
the possession, its evident that the repealing of those Statutes took away no
right from the Crown, nor gave legal possession to the Pope, that had formerly
neither possession nor right, but left him to his Remitter, as in his ancient
right, or rather in his ancient wrong. Yet right or wrong, de facto, he both
did win and wear the Keys so long as the Queen lived, and so far as she
pleased; for her devotion would not allow of absolute obedience in that kind,
nor all for Gospel that the Pope said or did; but by her self and Council
executed the powers of Supremacy of Jurisdiction in Church matters, not only
in pursuance of the Papal Authority, but in crossing the same where the Popes
way crossed her opinion, as in the cases of the War between her Husband and
France, and the Power Legatine of Cardinal Pool, her condemning of Doctrines
and Books to be Heretical by Proclamation, establishing both Prayers and
Dirges, and other Orders of public Worship, whereof more fully in the
public Histories of those Times, Fox Martyrol.
and in the Queens Injunction upon occasion of the Death of Pope Julio, is to
be seen.

Lastly, she was no good Queen, not only because she gave up the Peoples
Liberties in Ecclesiastical matters to the foreign Jurisdiction of Rome, but
undertook too much therein by far upon her own account, and in Civil Affairs,
though De jure, She was not inferior to any of her Progenitors; yet She would
have it declared by the Parliament, as if the consideration of her Sex or
birth, had made some hesitation in her mind, 1 Marl. Parliament 2. ca. 1
and when she had made all clear, she commending her self thereby to the Prince
of Spain, with her self, endangered likewise that trust of the Nation which she
had received, and cast such a shadow upon her own Supremacy, as in many things
it is hard to be discerned.

Lastly, In her whole course uneven, sometimes appearing like the eldest
Daughter of Henry the Eighth, at other times like a Fem covert, led by the will
of her Lord and Husband, that wanting Supremacy himself, rendered her thereby
beneath her self.

For First, She married by Act of Parliament, as if She were not at her own
disposing, professing as much in her speech to the Londoners, upon the Kentish
rebellion; so a difference was made between the two Sisters, the marriage of
the one being by advice of Parliament, and the abstinence of the other against
the same. Nor is the same altogether irrational, for by the one the Government
of the Nation is endangered, and by the other otherwise.

Secondly, By her marriage She became doubly married, one way relating to her
Person unto her King; the other relatintog her trust unto her Council: For
where a Foreign mighty King is so nigh the Helm, its dangerous to trust the
same to his Wife without the joint concurrence of the Lords. The matter in fact
declared no less, for many times She had steered quite wide, had not the Lords
been more stiff to their principles then She.

The first year of her marriage was Hony-moon with her, She thought nothing
too dear for the King, and that her self was but meanly married unless her
Husband were as complete a King in her Nation as any of her Predecessors,
although contrarily the higher he was advanced the meaner She became.

Thirdly, By her marriage She adventured her Title of Supremacy of
jurisdiction: For Phillip as King had the Honor, style, and Kingly name, and
so had the precedence; he had to do also with the jurisdiction, for by the
Articles of the marriage he was to aid the Queen in her administration of the
Kingdom and maintenance of the Laws, Writs, and Commissions, passed under his
name: He also sat in Parliament, voted therein and joined in the Royal Assent.

Lastly, Joined in the publication, and execution of all Laws. To him also was
Allegiance due, and therefore the Crime of Treason was equally against his as
the Queens Crown and Dignity, saving that it was reserved to be as against him
only during the time of Coverture, and yet had the Queen left issue by him it
would have been a hard adventure for the Lawers to have given their opinion in
that case, 1 and 2. Phil. and Mary cap. 10.
seeing the King had been Guardian to his Children during their minority.

Lastly, The whole power and jurisdiction resting in them both jointly, could
not enable them to make or dissolve Courts at will nor conclude orders and
directions in cases of Plea and conveyance, nor process concerning the same. 1
Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 11. and cap. 5. and 7. and ca. 12.
I shall sum up all in this on econclusion, if neither of these three had an
absolute Legislative power, either in matters concerning the Church or
Commonwealth, if no absolute jurisdiction in case, either of Life, Member, or
Estate. If they neither can create, unite, or alter any Court, either
concerning the Trial and determining the Estates of the People or their own
Revenue. If not alter, or make any new process in Courts of Law: If not order
common assurances of Lands or Estates.

And Lastly, If they have no power in determining the last appeal and
definitive sentence in matters of controversy, but all must rest upon the
sentence by Parliament, there must certainly be found out a further sense of
that grand Title of Supremacy of jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence
and Authority, then by the common vogue has bin made. The Title of supremacy
was first formed in the behalf of Henry the eighths Claim in matters
Ecclesiastical, which by the Statute, is explained under these words of power,
To visit, 26 H. 8. ca. 1.
correct, repress, redress, Offenses and Enormities: This Power and no other
did Queen Elizabeth claim, witness the words of the Statute in her own time. 5
Eliz. ca. 1.
But in the framing of the Oath of Supremacy in her time, not only in causes
Ecclesiastical but temporal (which never came within the Statutes and public
Acts in Henry the sevenths time) are inserted; and if any thing more was
intended it must come under the word Things, which also was inserted in the
said Oath, and yet if the words of the Statute of Queen Elizabeth formerly
mentioned be credited, the word Things ought to comprehend no more then the
word Causes, and then the Power of Queen Elizabeth in the Commonwealth will be
comprehended in these words of Supremacy, to visit, correct, repress, redress,
Offenses and Enormities, for the Supremacy in the Church and Commonwealth, is
the same in Measure, and what more then this, I cannot understand out of any
public Act of this Nation. Now in regard Offenses and Enormities are properly
against Laws, the power to visit and correct must also be regulated according
to Laws, either of War or Peace, nor do these five words Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, and Authority, contain any more Supremacy, or other
sense; for two of them speaks only the rank or degree of the Queen in
government, Viz. Superiority and Pre-eminence belongs only to her, and not to
any other Foreign power: And two other words do note her Right and Title
thereto, by Power and Authority committed to her: And the other word denotates
the thing wherein She has Superiority and power, Viz. In jurisdiction: the
nature of which word Vlpian (speaking of the nature of a mixed government)
explaineth thus, Quando servata dictione juris judiciorum fit animadversio, so
as this supreme Authority in jurisdiction is no other then supreme power to
visit, correct, redress, Offenses, or determine matters in doubt by deputing
fit persons to that end and purpose according to the Law, and this is all the
Supremacy that appears to me belonging to the Crown in these times

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Power of the Parliament during these times.
WHen the Throne is full of a King, and he as full of opinion of his own
sufficiency and Power, a Parliament is looked upon as an old fashion out of
fashion, and serve for little other, then for present shift, when Kings have
run themselves over Head and Ears. A condition that those of that high degree
are extremly subject unto, but where the Crown is too heavy for the wearer by
reason of infirmity, the Parliament is looked upon as the chief supporters in
the maintaining both the Honor and Power of that Authority, that otherwise
would fall under contempt: A work that must be done with a curious touch; or a
clear hand; or they must look for the like Censure to that of a King to a
great Lord that Crowned him. My Lord, I like your work very well but you have
left the print of your fingers upon my Crown: Such was the condition of these
times, wherein a Child and two Women are the cheifs, but ever under the
correction and direction of the Common Council in matters of common
concernment. Two things declare the point, the course of the Title of the
Crown, and the order of the powers thereof.

The Title ever had a Law which was at the Helm, although diversely expounded.
Kings ever loved the rule of inheritance, and therefore usually strained their
Pedigree hard to make both ends meet, though in truth they were guilty
oftentimes to themselves that they were not within the degrees The People ever
loved the Title of Election, Bodin. rep. l. 6.
and though ever they joined it to the Royal blood, and many times to the
right Heir to make the same pass more current without interruption of the
first love between them and their Princes; yet more often had they Kings that
could not boast much of their birthright, in their first entry into their
Throne: Of three and twenty Kings from the Saxons time, four of the former had
no Title by inheritance; the two Willams, Henry the first and King Steven; of
two others, Viz. Henry the second and Richard the first had right of birth, yet
came in by compact. The seventh which was King John had no title but election.
The eight, Viz. Henry the third came in a Child, and contrary to compact
between the Nobility and the French Jews; the ninth and tenth succeeded, as by
unquestionable Title of descent, yet the Nobles were preingaged: The eleventh
which was Edward the third, in his entry eldest Son but not Heir, for his
Father was alive, but his Successor, was his Heir; its true there were other
Children of Edward the third alive that were more worthy of the Crown, but they
were too many to agree in any but a Child that might be ruled by themselves.
Three next of the ensuing Kings were of a collatterall line. Their two
Successors, Viz. Edward the fourth and Edward the fifth were of the right line,
yet Edward the fourth came in by dissesin, and Edward, the fifth by permission;
Richard the third and Henry the seventh were collatterall to one another, and
to the right blood, Henry the eighth, though when he was King might claim from
his Mother, yet came in as Heir to his Father. And if Edward the sixth was
right Heir to the House of York by his Grandmother, yet cannot the Crown be
said to descend upon the two Sisters, neither as Heirs to him, nor Henry the
eighth, nor to one another, so long as the Statute of their illigittimation
remained, 28 H. 8. ca. 7. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 1.
which as touching Queen Mary was till three Months after her entry upon the
Throne, and as touching Queen Elizabeth for ever; for that Virago provided for
her self not by way of repeal (as her Sister had done) but more tenderly
regarding the Honor of her Father and the Parliament, then to mention their
blemishes in Government by doing and undoing: She overlooked that Act of Henry
the Eighth and the Notion of Inheritance and contented her self with her Title
by the Statute made by her Father in his thirty fifth year which to her was a
mere purchase, 35 H. 8. cap.
and was not ashamed to declare to all the World, that She did have and hold
thereby, and that it was high Treason for any Subject to deny, that the course
of the Crown of England is to be ordered by Act of Parliament. 13 Eliz. ca. 1.
And this power did the Parliament exercise, not only in ordering the course
of the Crown to Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, but during the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, so far as to dis-inherit, and dis-able any person who should pretend
Right to the Crown, in opposition to the Right of Queen Elizabeth; and upon
this point only did the whole proceedings against Mary Queen of Scots depend,
who claimed to be, Thuan. vol. 1. lib. 20.
and doubtless was Heir unto Henry the eighth, after the determination of his
right Line, and yet She was put to death for pretending Right by the Common
Law, in opposition to the Act of Parliament. True it is, that this Doctrine
does not down well with those that do pretend to Prerogative, aided (as they
say) by the Act of Recognition, made to King James, 1 Jac. cap. 1.
and the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which do make much parley concerning
Inheritance and Heirs: nevertheless it is as true, that the Act of Recognition
made no Law for the future, nor does the same cross the Statute of 13 Eliz. nor
does it take away the power of the Parliament from overruling the course of
the Common Law for after Ages. Nor do the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
hold forth any such Obligation unto Heirs, otherwise then as supposing them to
be Successors, and in that relation only. And therefore was no such Allegiance
due to Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth, until they were
actually possessed of the Crown, as may appear by the Oath formed by the
Statute of Henry the eighth touching their Succession. 35 H. 8. cap. 1.
Nor did the Law suppose any Treason could be acted against the Heirs of Edward
the sixth, Queen Mary, or Queen Elizabeth, until those Heirs were actually
possessed of the Crown, 1 E. 6. cap. 12.5 and 6 E. 6. cap. 11.1 and 2 Phil. and
Mar. cap. 10. 1 Eliz. cap. 6.
and so were Kings and Queens, as by express words in the several Statutes do
appear. Nor did the Recognition by the Parliament made to Queen Elizabeth,
declare any engagement of the People to assist and defend her, and the Heirs of
her Body, otherwise then with this Limitation, Being Kings and Queens of this
Realm, as by the Statute in that behalf made does appear. 1 Eliz. cap. 3.


And lastly, (had these Oaths bin otherwise understood) the Crown had by the
virtue of them been pre-ingaged, so as it could never have descended to Queen
Mary, Queen Elizabeth, or King James, but must have remained to the Heirs of
Edward the sixth for ever.

Secondly, the same power that the Parliament exercised in ordering the course
of succession in the Crown, they exercised likewise in determining and
distributing the Powers and Privileges belonging to the same: for these Times
were full of Novelties. The Crown had formerly fitted a childs head more then
once, but it never tried to fit a Woman's head since the Saxon Times, till now,
that it must make trial of two. France might afford us a trick of the Salique
Law, if it might find acceptance. And the unsettled estate of the People,
especially in matter of Religion, might require the wisest man living to sit at
the Helm, and yet himself not sufficient to steer a right course to the
Harbor. Nevertheless the Parliament having the Statute of Henry the eighth to
lead the way, chose rather to pursue a Rule then to make one, and soon
determined the point, viz. That the Crown of England with all the Privileges
thereof equally belong to a Woman in possession as to a Man or Child. A bold
Adventure I say it was; 1 Mar. Parl. 2. cap. 1.
but that Henry the eighth was a bold Leader, and yet the bolder it was, if the
consequence be considered: for Queen Mary as a Woman, brought in one new
President, but in her Marriage a worse, for she aimed not only at a foreign
blood, but at a Prince in Power and Majesty exceeding her own, and thereby
seeking advancement, both to her self and her Realm, endangered both. The
matter was long in debate between the Spanish and English, and now had busied
their wits above ten years, Sleiden.
at length a Supremacy is formed suitable to the Lord and Husband of Queen Mary,
that could not be content to be one inch lower then her self. Philip had the
name of a King, and precedence, and in many cases not without the Allegiance of
the English. Their offenses against his person equally Treason with those
against the Queens own person; and Indictments run, 1 Ph. and Mar. Parl. 2. ca.
10.
Contra pacem and coronam D. Regis and Reginae. That in some cases he
participated in the Regal Power may appear, 1 Ph. and Mar. Parl. 2. cap. 1.
in that by the Articles, he was to aid the Queen in the Administration of the
Kingdom; he joined with the Queen in the royal Assent, and in Commissions,
Letters Patents, and in Writs of Summons of Parliament, as well as others; yet
in the words the Crown is reserved only to the Queen, and she must reign as
sole Queen. Now if the King had broken this Agreement, either the Parliament
must overruled the whole, or all that is done must be undone, and England must
bear the burden. A Queen Regent is doubtless a dangerous condition for
England, above that of an Infant King, unless she be married only to her
People.

This was observed by Queen Elizabeth, who therefore kept her self unmarried:
nor did the People otherwise desire her Marriage, then in relation to
Posterity. Few of them liking any one of their own Nation so well, as to prefer
him so highly above themselves, and fewer any Forrainer. This was soon espied
by foreign Princes; and the Queen her self perceiving that she was like to
receive prejudice hereby in her interest amongst them, signified by her
Ambassadors, that she never meaned to stoop so low as to match with any of her
Subjects, Bodin de Rep. lib. 6.
but intended to make her choice of some foreign Prince, who neither by Power
or Riches should be able to prejudice the interest of any of her neighboring
Princes. A pretty Complement this was to gain expectation from those abroad,
and better correspondency thereunto. Upon this ground diverse Princes conceived
hopes of more interest then by trial they could find. And the Archduke of
Austria began a Treaty, which seemingly was entertained by her, but her
Proposals were such as silenced all those of the Austrian Interest for ever
after, viz.

1. That the Romish Religion should never be admitted into England. 2. That no
man that she married, should ever wear the Title of King. 3. That no Forrainer
should ever intermeddle in the Rule and Government of the Church or
Commonwealth, nor in the Ministry of the Church. 4. That if he survived the
Queen he should never challenge any Title or Interest in the Government, or any
Possession in England. 5. She would never marry any one that she might not
first see.
So as either she aimed at some inferior Prince, that durst not look so high,
or else she did but make semblance till she was nigh forty years old: and in
all declared that she liked not her Sister Mary's choice.

To these two Powers of Determining and Distributing, I shall add a third of
Deputing, which the Parliament exercised as formerly it had done. Henry the
eighth had in Ecclesiastical matters exercised a Power beyond the reach of Law,
and yet by Parliament had provided positive Laws, by which the same ought to
have been ordered; these were also confirmed in Edward the sixths time, with
some Additionals. 3 and 4 E. 6. cap. 11. 1 El. c. 1 and 2. 1 E. 6. cap. 1. 1 E.
6. cap. 2. 5 and 6 E. 6. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. ca. 20.
By these, particular Commissioners were appointed for the making of
Ecclesiastical Constitutions; and the King himself had a power Episcofactory,
without Conge deslire. They likewise limited the power of Ecclesiastical
Courts, altered their Process, reformed their Censures, even that grand Censure
of Excommunication it self. The like, or much more may be said of their
deputing power in Civil Affairs, as well enlarging the Kings power, as in
abridging the same for whereas some of the Successors of Henry the 8. had power
by virtue of his Letters Patents, after 24 years of age, to annull any Act of
Parliament by them made before that Age. In the time of Edward the sixth,
notwithstanding the Proviso in that Law, and although Edward the sixth was not
then twelve years old, 1 E. 6. ca. 11.
yet the Parliament repealed all, and restored to Edward the sixth only that
power for the time to come, but not to any of his Successors; and whereas Henry
8. had gained to himself and his Successors a Legislative Power by
Proclamation; 1 E. 6. ca. 12.
the Parliament in Edward the sixths time took the fame quite away, and reduced
Proclamations into their former sober posture. The like may be observed of the
power of the Parliament, in ordering the Lives, 7 E. 6. cap. 2. 1 Mar. Sess. 2.
cap. 10 and 12. 1 E. 6. cap. 7. 1 E. 6. cap. 10. 3. cap. 28. 5 and 6. ca. 26.
Members, and Estates of the People in matters criminal; and in making and
altering Courts of Justice, and bounding their power, altering their Process,
abridging their Terms for Judicature, reforming Errors in pleading, amending
common Conveyances, and Assurance, as in passing Fines with Proclamations;
their course in the County Palatine; Limitations of Prescription; fraudulent
Deeds; Recoveries by Collusion, etc. in all which the Crown had no power, but
in and by the Parliament. Many particulars more might be added, if the matter
so required; for the Statutes are more full in these later Times then formerly,
and may soon lead us beyond a just Period in so clear a matter.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in these last Times.
IN the general, and in relation to the foreign Jurisdiction of Rome, it was
like a Child in an Ague, under Fits of Heat and Cold; but in it self under the
Prelacy, still growing in stature, though not in strength. Edward the sixth
came in like a storm that tore up Episcopacy by the Roots, yet a Top-Root
remained entire with the stock, bearing show of a kind of Divinity, that
though bared of the old Soil of the Papacy, yet transplanted into the new
Mould of Royalty, soon conveyed a new life, which made the stock still
flourish, and grow into a better condition then formerly it had. Their
Legislative power in matters concerning their own interest, though in outward
view seeming their own, yet was doubly disturbed from the Pope and the King,
who though many times opposed one another, yet evermore were both of them in
opposition to the Church, and with the greater bitterness by their own mutual
Emulations. But now the Church is come under the control, of only one that
joined with it for their mutual interest, as being both of them imbarqued in
one and the same Ship.

Two things concurred to the furtherance hereof.

First, the Times were tender, and scarce able to digest the change of Worship
(now patronized by Edward the sixth) much less able to digest the change of
Government, if the same had been undertaken in a different way from what it was
formerly.

Secondly, the Times were also dark, and few saw the bottom of Prelacy, but
lodged all the prejudice in the persons that managed that calling; and
certainly they had the less occasion to doubt of their own judgment therein;
because Edward the sixth had the good providence of God to lead him to make use
of such men in that place, that were meek, and holy, and themselves attempered
in the fire of Persecution, and therefore more tenderly affected to others in
that condition; and these carrying themselves like tender nursing Fathers in
their places, wrought in the people a good opinion of their places, and that
Form of Government for their sakes; yet even in those first Times of
Reformation, somewhat appeared in that very quintessence of Episcopacy; in
matters about Ceremony and Conformity, that might have taught wise men to
beware. Upon such grounds as these it went well with Episcopacy in these first
Times of Reformation, but ill with the Church in the issue. That Prelacy was a
Gainer by the change in Henry the eighths time, has already appeared; and that
it still gained, may further appear, in these ensuing Considerations.

First, whereas formerly Bishops were regardant both to the Crown and
Presbytery (for so may the Dean and Chapter be accounted) in the point of
Election by Conge deslire; now they are made the birth of the Kings own breath,
1 E. 6. c. 2.
which thing was never deduced from the ancient Right of the Crown (saving due
honor to the air of the Preface of that Statute) for in the best Times it
never had more then a power of investure: but from the necessity of the times
so corrupted that Deanes and Chapters generally were of the Roman spirit, and
gave little hope of good Elections by themselves, besides the state of
Learning, and Holiness, was now at the low water mark, so as little supply
being looked for to begin the work of Reformation from beneath, they began
above, and so it proved but a weak building, for the longer time. And thus a
lesson is left to future Parliaments, that in Cases of Reformation they are not
to be strictly holden to rules of Law or President.

Secondly, the Prelates hereby had their Authority confirmed by Act of
Parliament, and so were now built upon a foundation that formerly did hang
only upon a pin of power from Rome: For jurisdiction without Authority is but
a dropsy that brings inevitable consumption in the conclusion. And thus the
Prelacy are enabled to hold Courts without contradiction, and directed in their
process who formerly had no good Title to either, in that course that they held
the same.

Thirdly, Though their jurisdiction was defined by the Statutes, yet in larger
bounds then ever the Statute-Lawes formerly noted; and in what they claimed
power, they did it not altogether upon Civil Right, but still kept an awful
regard to their Persons and Powers, as under the sway of a Divine donation, and
therefore as in those matters to them, by the Statute allowed, they did proceed
in the Name and under the Seal of the King, so in other things of collation,
institution, induction, orders, excommunication, and such like, they proceeded
in and under their own Name and Seal; and which was a Crown to all the rest,
power is still given to the Archbishop of Canterbury in cases of faculty and
dispensation, to proceed under his own Seal, and not the Kings, as if it were a
power independent upon the Crown, and belonging unto the man, neither by
Statute, nor Commission, but coming by some secret Influence from the very
place it self; although in the clear sense it is no more then a power of Non
obstante, in the point of obedience to the Canon Law, which by a Statute in
Henry the Eighths time is declared no Law: But let this pass as a mole in this
fair face of Church Government. The Prelates are now become of the Vicinage,
Probi and legales homines, they have their jurisdiction by Law established,
what they loose in breadth they gain in height and goodness of their
foundation: Yet their Attire looks ill favoredly in Queen Mary's eye, she will
have it of the old cut again, and though Cardinal Poole was well seen in the
Roman fashion, yet when he had done all, he did no more then shape a garment to
serve the present Interlude, neither fit to the body nor easy to be worn, and
therefore after four or five turns upon the stage it is thrown away.
Nevertheless during the time that England was thus dancing the Italian
measure, Prelacy in England held its own domestique garb so well, that neither
Poole (being of English blood, not much distant from the Crown, and then also
holding the Chair legatine, as little inferior to the Throne) would not
impose too much, nor Queen Mary, a Woman of a stout Spirit, yield further then
she liked: By means whereof the Prelacy looking no more to Rome then the power
in appeals; and therein little more then the bare Title, played Rex all the
while with the People, under color of Heresy and the Canon Law: Which now was
again made their rule; and thus as touching their Election, and Jurisdiction,
they were as before. For Queen Mary did nothing but by single repeal. But
Queen Elizabeth being true English, both by Father and Mother, liking not this
retreat, faced about, routed the Roman fashion out of fashion; put Prelacy to
its close gaurd, and received it upon capitulation, not only to mercy but
favor, and so became her Vicar to exercise her Ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
Per saltum: For it is hard to find by what steps they gained this pitch; Henry
the Eighth was supreme head by submission of the Clergy, by resumption, and by
Act of Parliament; and as such, the Power of Bishops formerly derived from Rome
ceased, and Henry the eighth after restored it anew, and settled the same by
several Acts of Parliament; which Edward the sixth confirmed with diverse
additionall Acts of further benefit to them, as has been already noted. But
Queen Mary altered all by repeal of the former Laws, and so left all in
Remitter as before the alteration by Henry the Eighth, and did neither give or
grant any jurisdiction to the Pope. Last of all com^ Queen Elizabeth, and by
repeal and resumption possessed her self of jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, and
granted Election of Bishops by Conge deslire, but never granted to the Bishops
ordinary jurisdiction by any express act, other then permission of them to
continue in their former course, notwithstanding that the foundation of their
jurisdiction had been altered twice, and so it will be difficult for it to hold
by prescription or custom, or any other way then by a kind of Divine right
which began to be pretended; yet to this day could never be made evident to the
World. Whatever the ground was, the thing is plain, that Prelacy in Queen
Elizabeth's time had this Honor allowed thereunto, that it was upholden by
Election from Ecclesiastical men, and held its jurisdiction as from it self,
and in the name of the Bishop as Ordinary; and the power of Excommunication by
a saving in the Statute Law, and not by express donation; notwithstanding the
late President in the time of Edward the sixth to the contrary.

Secondly, The rule of this jurisdiction was no less at large, for the Canon
Law was determined by Henry the eighth and Edward the sixth, and was not
revived by any Act of Parliament by Queen Mary or Queen Elizabeth, who neither
pursued the Medium of the thirty two Commissioners, nor settled other rule, but
a few Canons, which (after some time) by Queen Elizabeth and her Clergy were
agreed upon, but never confirmed by Act of Parliament: And so could never bind
the Subject, and which in general set forth a kind of form of Church policy,
yet no fashion of jurisdiction or rule of proceedings in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, but in such Cases left them to the Canon Law which was hidden in their
own breasts, and could be made strait or wide as they pleased.

Thirdly, their Censures now grew more sharp; for whereas at the utmost
formerly they could do no more but imprison, or deliver over to the Secular
power, and that only in case of Heresy, and yet had scarce ground of Law for
what they did; 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
now they have an additional power, to fine and imprison in cases of inferior
nature, and so can reach all that a man has, even to his skin; nevertheless
this was not annexed unto the ordinary Jurisdiction, but given by extraordinary
Commission, called the High Commission, wherein, though many others were named,
yet the Clergy and Canonists did the work, the rest being but in nature of a
reserve to them, in case they were put to the Rout. The power of these
Commissioners was to execute the Queens Jurisdiction in Causes Ecclesiastical,
so as the Bishops are doubly interested in this work; one way, by supposed
Commission from God, as Ordinaries within their own Diocese only, and so may
proceed to Excommunication or Deprivation; the other way, by Commission from
the Queen, as Members of the High Commission (for so many of them were such as
the Crown would please) and so they might fine and imprison. They might and
did, I say, by their Commission, but not by the Statute that gives Authority
thereto, and therefore cannot be said to be done legally.

Fourthly, besides the contracted power of making Canons in the Convocation by
the power of the Royal Assent; the Queen had a power of making Laws by their
consent, in matters of the criminal part of the Worship of God.

This might be tolerable for the Life of one Queen, who might be presumed,
would (if she lived a few years) settle all things; but to subject the
consciences of all the people to the opinion of one Metropolitan, that might
opinionate strange things, and that the Successors of the Queen should usurp
this as a flower of the Crown, to determine what is for Gods glory in such
cases, and to be always altering and patching up a Form, as he and his
Metropolitan, or one of them alone shall think meet, 1 Eliz. cap. ^.
is neither commendable upon any grounds of Divinity or humane Policy.

Now amidst the flourishing Estate of Prelacy, its no wonder if* the Churches
be no Gainers, but like Plants spending their Natures in luxurient branches,
either are over-turned by the next blast of wind, or do wither upon the least
change of Sky: That the whole ordering of the Church Affairs rested originally
in the Parliament, no man can question, considering what ever the Queen did, or
had therein, was from the power of Acts of Parliament. And that the power of
Excommunication it self, notwithstanding that the Church held it by way of
reservation or saving, and not by donation from the Parliament by any express
Act, yet was that saving with such Limitations, as that it releived but a lame
power in comparison of what it claimed, and exercised in former Times; for
whereas formerly the Churchmen had the Writ, De Excommunicato Capiendo, at
their own beck; now it will not come but upon Articles and certain Conditions.

1. In cases of Heresy. 2. Of deserting of the Sacrament. 3. Deserting of
public Worship. 4. Maintenance of Error. 5. Incontinency. 6. Usury. 7.
Simony. 8. Perjury. 9. Idolatry.
In other matters the Spirtual Sword must find or make their own way, or else
be quiet.

Secondly, the Church was now no less under the Chair and Throne, then under
power of the Parliament; nor is it a wonder if it could not thrive when it was
so overdropped: for Prelacy by the Kings arms is lifted up so high above the
other Clergy, that the rest of the Clergy are as much underlings to the
Prelacy, as the Prelates are to the King: they dare not offend the Crown, least
they should loose their honors, nor the inferior Clergy them, least they
should loose their Livings and Liberties; and so the Prelates speak the sense
of the Clergy, and make the Crown their Oracle. Thus in the Church matters the
Crown is all in all.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Militia in these later Times.
IT cannot be denied, but as in the sober Government of this Nation, there is a
Supremacy of Command, so also in the rudest Times of War; and wheresoever the
same is settled, there must the Militia also be.

The word Militia is a general notion, sufficient enough for a name or title,
but not to define the thing, I take it for nothing else, but the Government of
the Commonwealth when it is in anger, or War, or in order thereunto. It
consists in the raising, arming, ordering, and paying of the Soldiery. The
Title of the Supreme Power in all this work has been of late put to the
question, and brought us to this sad condition of trial by Battle, and by
fighting, to find out who has the chief power to fight: a Lesson that might
have been learned from former Generations foregoing, at a far cheaper rate,
when England is well in its wits. Where the Law of Peace is settled, there also
is the Law of War; and in what condition the Crown stands, in relation to the
Legislative power, in time of Peace, may be seen in the foregoing Discourse. In
war he is the Peoples General by his place; yet if any impediment do befall,
either by natural Disabilities, or civil, to render the person incapable of the
managing of the Service, there is no question but the People may order the
matter as they please. Examples hereof these Times are full, wherein we have a
Child, a Virgin, and a married Woman to sway the Work, all of them in a very
unmeet condition for such a Trust, and yet by the help they had, they managed
it well enough. The power of him as King or General in the Army, is all one;
but before it is imbodied, as a King only, he may do some things in order
thereto, according to the Law and Custom of the Nation; yet this false under a
double consideration of the time and occasion. In the recess of the Parliament,
he is the first mover, and ought to move by the advice of his Council, if
occasion do provoke to Arms; but if the same befall the Parlaiment then
sitting, no History or Record do mention that ever he moved but by their
concurrent advice and direction. The occasion either provokes offensive or
defensive War with other Nations, or with the People of his own Nation, in the
case of Insurrection. Examples of War with other Nations, that may be called
offensive Wars: we have but two, one in Edward the sixths time with Scotland,
and which was but in pursuance of a War begun by his Father, and wherein the
Kingdom stood engaged, in a case that concerned the public good and safety,
viz. the Marriage of their King refused after promise made. The other was in
the time of Queen Mary with the French, which somewhat reflected also upon the
public safety, but more upon the dishonor of the same. In none of these did
either of the Supreme Powers array or raise men by Prerogative, but only such
as were Volunteir in that Work. And because the People were ill principled in
Edward the sixths time, in regard of the change of Religion, he was induced to
hire foreign aid out of Germany. The Wars in the time of Queen Elizabeth were
in order to the Defense of this Nation, being ever under a malignant Aspect
from abroad, especially from Spain, in Ireland, France, and the Low Countries;
yet were these Wars served only by Volunteirs, nor did any Commission give
power of impresting men to serve against their wills, in any Expedition made to
any of those places, as the Commissions upon Record do testify. If any Levies
of Men were otherwise made, or compulsory means used for such ends, they are to
be reckoned up amongst the errata, whereof the Parliament took no notice, in
regard it saw the ends and issues of such reflections in Government to be
succesfull and honorable, and that all was done by Council, and a Woman
popularly affected, and therefore less feared invasion upon their Liberties; or
otherwise they are to be imputed to the condition of those places, being
Members of the Commonwealth; as the cautionary Towns in the Low Countries,
and the Irish Plantations were, and so befall under another consideration of a
defensive War in case of invasion and common danger thereby, or by intestine
broils, during which condition, as it is the Kings duty to levy and array men,
so is it the duty of the People to be ready to assist one another in all such
exegencies, and to defend the public Liberty, nevertheless these Arrays are
not left wholly at the Will of the King, but to discretion of the Council, how
far the same shall extend: For never were general Arrayes made, where but one
Coast was in danger, and where no conquest is in pretense, but only piracy or
plunder. But if the disease were general, as it was in the year 88. the Array
was general, and yet it was of none, but those that were of the Trained bands,
besides such as were Volunteir.

Secondly, The arming of these men was also diversely, there was no general
rule or Law for the arming of men since the times of Edward the first to the
time of Queen Mary, but the Statute at Winton; the course of Tenures, I mean of
such men as were of the Militia of this Kingdom: So as when they were raised,
they were raised in their own arms: But for such men as passed the Seas for
foreign Service, as they were Volunteirs, or sent over by the Parliament these
were armed acccording to special contract. But Queen Mary having gotten a safe
reserve from Spain upon all adventures, and a strong Interest amongst the
People, by upholding the Catholic party, made no bones to innovate in the
point of arming of the Militia, although it cost the People much more then was
imposed upon their Ancestors. The pattern hereof was taken from the Spanish
Cabinet, the Q. being loath to be inferior to her own Husband, in bringing as
much strength to him as he to her, and both of them willing enough to appear
potent in the eyes of France that then stood in competition with them both: A
yoke it was, yet neither the King nor Queens Will, but the Parliament put it on
and ere an age expired was cast off again: For the better understanding, see it
in this Scheme.

Per Annum. Lances. Light Horse Corslets. Bows. Hacquebuts Bills. 1000. l. 6.
10. 40. 30. 20. 20. 1000. marks. 4. 6. 30. 20. 10. 10. 400. l. 2. 4. 20. 15. 6.
200. l. 1. 2. 10. 8. 3. 100. l. 2. 3. 3. 2. 100. marks. 1. 2. 2. 1. 40. l. 2.
1. 2. 20. l. 1. 1. 1. 10. l. A Coat of Plate. 1. 1. 5. l. A Coat of Plate. 1.
1. Goods.
1000. marks. 1. 1. 2. 4. 3. 400. l. 1. 1. 2. 1. 200. l. 1. 2. 1. 100. l. 1. 2.
40. l. Two Coats of Plate. 1. 1. 20. l. One Coat of Plate. 2. 1. 10. l. 1. 1.

The Lances were to be completely harnised, or the one half of them, the
Corcellets furnished* with Coats of Maile and Pikes: the Bows with an Iron
Cap and a sheaf of Arrows. The Hackbuts with Sallets; all which was to be over
and besides such Arms as men were bound unto by Tenure, or Covenant with the
Landlord, or by virtue of the Statute 33 H. 8. ca. 5. besides town-ships which
were charged with joint Arms; Annuities and Coppy-holds were charged as goods.
If the Arms were lost in the Service the owner must make them good again: The
defaults were punishable with fine by the Justices of the Peace, who had the
view, and might present them at the Sessions to be procceded upon as in other
Cases. Here is provision enough, yet not as the Arms of the Militia of the
Kingdom, but as a Magazine in the hands of every particular man, and as his
proper goods, to be employed for the public Service, either upon sudden
invasion in a defensive War, or when the Parliament shall send them abroad.
And yet it is also a rule unto the Crown against arbitrary Assessments upon
discretion, from which it cannot recede if it mean to do right. It might now
very well stand with the Justice of Queen Elizabeth, to grant Commissions of
Array, Secundum formam Statutorum, and do hurt to no man; its true, her
Commissions of Lord Lievtenancy wanted that limitation in words, yet they
carried the sense, for if the Crown were bound by the Law, the Lord Leivtenants
were much rather, but the danger arose after the death of Queen Elizabeth; for
when King James came to the Crown, under color of pleasing the People, and
easing them of a burden, he pleased himself more, and made the yoke upon the
People much more heavy in the conclusion; for where no declared Law is, there
the discretion of them that have the care lying upon them must be the rule; and
thus came the Scottish blood to have pretentions to a greater Prerogative then
all their Predecessors had, upon this supposal that the Statute of Queen Mary
took away all former Laws of that kind, and then the taking away of the
Statute of Q. Mary takes away all declared Law as to that point: But more truly
it may be inferred, that if all Statute-Laws be taken away, then the rule of
Tenures at the Common Law must remain in force and no other. Nevertheless this
Statute of Queen Mary, though in force for the present, was not a general rule
for Arms in all places of this Nation; for the Marches of Scotland were a
peculier jurisdiction as to this point. They stood in more constant need of
Arms then any other part of this Nation, in regard of their uncertain
condition, in relation to their Neighboring jurisdiction, and therefore were
the Farms of these parts generally contracted for, upon a special reservation
of Arms for each particular, which being now decayed are, again reduced by
Queen Elizabeth to their ancient condition in the time of Henry the eighth. 23
Eliz. c. 9.


A second thing which may come under this general consideration of arming, is,
the arming of places, by making of Forts and Castles; which was not in the
immediate determinate will of the Crown to order as it pleased, for though they
may seem to be means of Peace and present safety, yet they are Symptoms of
War, and in the best times are looked upon with a jealous eye, especially such
as are not bordering upon the Coasts: Because that Prince that builds Castles
within the Land is supposed to fear the Neighborhood. This was more
especially regarded in the days of Phillip and Mary: For when that marriage
was to be solemnized, it was one of the Articles to provide for the safety of
such Forts and Castles, as then were maintained, to the end they might be
preserved free from usurpation, for the Use, Profit, Strength, and Defense of
the Realm; 1 Mar. Parl. 2. cap. 2.
only by the natural borne of the same. And afterward when occasion was
offered, for the building of more of that nature; a new power is given to King
Phillip; 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. cap. 1.
and Queen Mary, to re-edifie or make Forts and Castles, which must be executed
by Commission to the Legies for ten years, and only within the Counties
bordering upon Scotland, and these perticularly named in the Statute, so as the
Crown had not power to build in all places, nor to any end they pleased, nor to
place therein, or betrust the same to whom it would. Nor yet had Edward the
sixth that absolute power, although not engaged in foreign interests, as his
sister Mary was; and therefore whereas Castellanes had been made for life, by
Patent, 2 ^. 6. cap. 16.
and so the absolute power of the Crown was barred in the free disposal of the
same during such time. The Parliament gave the King power to remove such as
were not liked, or thought faithful to the public interest, although they
gave no cause of Seizure by any disloyal act. The like also may be observed of
the Ships and Ordnance; for they also do belong to the State, as the Jewels of
the Crown, and therefore upon the Marriage of Queen Mary, they also are by
Articles preserved and saved, for the use, profit, strength, and defense of the
Realm, by the natural born of the same.

Thirdly, as touching the ordering of the Soldiery, the matter is not much to
be insisted upon, for little doubt is to be made, but that power that raises
them also orders them to the same ends that they are raised: and therefore as
the sole power of the Crown does not the one, so neither does it the other, but
in cases formerly mentioned; and yet in no case, though the War b be never so
absolutely defensive, and the Soldiers raised by the Kings own and only
power; yet has not the King absolute Authority, and arbitrary power, in the
ordering of them when they are raised, but he must so behave himself to them,
as to Freemen, according to Laws made by themselves in their Representative in
Parliament, and therefore are particular Laws made to that end, 4 and 5 Phil.
and Mar. cap. 3.
against undue levying and discharging of Soldiers, and Defaults in paying of
them; as also against the Soldiers departing from their Service without
License, 2 and 3 E. 6. cap. 2.
or wasting their Arms, and such as wilfully absent themselves from Musters; 4
and 5 Phil. and Mar. cap. 3. 5 E. 6. cap. 11. 14 Eliz. ca. 1.
as also for the preserving the Castles Forts, Ships, and Munition for War,
from being withheld from their due use, or from burning or destroying.

Lastly, as touching the charge of the War, and pay of the Souldies. Its
evident, that in all offensive Wars the Soldier was paid by the Crown,
although they might be said in some manner to be in order to the Defense and
Safety of the Nation; nevertheless where the same was so apparent to the
people, it was the common course in these Times to have often Parliaments, and
often Subsidies, which were no less in a good measure satisfactory to the Crown
for the Charges of the War, then Testimonies of the Peoples good Acceptance of
the Government of Affairs, and so accepted at their hands: The particular
Records will warrant all this. For of all the Wars in these Times (that of 88.
excepted) not any of them were ever managed at the Peoples charge by
Contribution, but by Retribution. So happy were these Times, wherein the People
looking upon the Crown, as under a kind of infirmity of Childhood or
Womanhood, did therefore bear a kind of compassionate regard thereunto,
without jealousy at Prerogative, could condescend and allow the Crown its full
Grains, and somewhat more, yea more then was meet for some other Princes to
desire, or the People to give up; and yet more happy were they, wherein the
Crown knew no interest but in dependence upon the People good, and so
understanding were rightly understood.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Peace.
IT is but little that can be said of Peace in these Times, wherein so little
freedom was found from foreign pretentions, and intestine irregularities, or
both; and yet the People were never more resolved against the former, nor
secure against the later, and had God to Friend in all. But most apparently was
this observable in the Times of Queen Elizabeth, whose Government took up four
parts of five of these Times, whereof we now treat. She was a complete
Conqueror of War and Treason, and therein the true Inheritor of the Fate of
her Grandfather Henry the seventh, with advantage, for she out-faced all
Dangers by her only presence, having thereof had more experience then any
Princes that ever possessed her Throne; yet she was wise enough to beware
against the future; considering her condition to be the last of her Line; that
the next behind her was rather likely to trip up her heels then support her
Train; that the Pope narrowly watched every opportunity; the distance between
him and the Throne, being no greater then the breadth of her only Person. It
may well therefore admit of excuse, if the Statute of the 15. of Edward the
third, concerning Treasons did not give satisfaction, although therein if she
were solicitous, her Subjects were more. Some kinds of Offenses were made
Treason by Statute-Laws, which formerly appeared not such, because they
appeared not at all; and yet in the opinion of her People the Queen was too
slack in the making, and more slack in the execution of them. The People had
engaged themselves deeply against the Queen of Scots, and it was not safe for
them to go back; they go yet deeper, and without any positive Authority,
leading the way, they enter into an Association amongst themselves, for the
Queens safety; and it was well liked by the Queen, because she knew it was well
meant, although by some it was mistaken; 27 Eliz. cap. 1.
nevertheless to take away all Exception, a Law is made in pursuance thereof,
and so the Work is reduced under an ordinary rate, though the public Danger
was such, as might well have digested an extraordinary undertaking.

I intend not to enter into the particulars of these Treasons of the new stamp,
because they are but temporary, and in their ultimate reach tend only to the
safeguard of the Queens person, in order to the intentionary sense of the
Statute of 25. Edw. 3. although not within the explicit words of that Law.
Only this is observable, that though the Times were full of malice, yet was
not all malice looked upon as fatal, nor every Expression thereof Treason, or
privity thereto Treason (although the Crown it self was not a little concerned
therein) but reduced to an inferior degree, called Misprision, as if they were
willing rather to construe undertakings for mistakings, and thereby overlook
much of the malignity of those Times, then to make strict inquisition into
every Punctilio of Offense.

As touching Felony, the Rules were various; some were of a new original, as
that of Gypsies; others formerly such, 5 Eliz. ca. 20.
afterward said aside, are now revived with advantage, as Conjuration, and
Buggery: cap. 16, 17.
but Imbessellings by Servants of their Masters Goods, made Felony for a time
by Edward the sixth, is by Queen Elizabeth made perpetual. 2 E. 6. cap. 29. 5
Eliz. ca. 10.
Some Felonies are made such within a certain precinct, as Men-stealers, and
other Crimes upon the Scottish Borders. Others formerly made Felony are now
unmade, cap. 15.
as that concerning Prophesies, and diverse formerly protected under the refuge
of Clergy, are now barred of that reserve. Such as are those that command
Council, or hire others to commit Petty Treason, Murder, or Robbery, 4 and 5
Phil. and Mar. cap. 4. Stealers of Horses, Geldings, or Mares, 2 E. 6. cap. 33.
Robbers of Houses, Booth, or Tent, by Day or Night, 5 E. 6. cap. 9.
Pick-pockets, or Cut-purses, 8 Eliz. cap. 4. And Women-stealers, 39 Eliz. cap.
9. And some Crimes made Felony impeachable, only within a certain time, and
not upon a cool suite; so as upon the whole heap of the Account, the zeal of
the Times will appear to be more hot, by how much iniquity appeared more
heinous, and that wicked men waxed worse as the Times waxed better. More
particulars of this nature, and of other Offenses of inferior note might be
superadded; as also of Laws, of alteration and amendment of Process and Trial,
and of Common Assurance and Conveyance of Estates, of particular Revenue; all
which might be insisted upon, if need were, to clear out yet further the
conclusion of the whole matter, which I hasten to accomplish, led on by a
natural motion, that grows in speed the nigher it comes to its end.

CHAP. XL. A summary Conclusion upon the whole matter.
IN the stating of this whole account; I shall first glance upon the natural
constitution of the People of England, and then gather up the scattered Notions
into one form, because the one does not a little illustrate the other, and show
the same to be radical and not by any forced inoculation.

The People are of a middle temper according to their Climate: The Northern
Melancholy, and the Southern Choler, meeting in their general Constitution
does render them ingenious and active; which nourished also under the wings of
Liberty, inspires a courage generous and not soon out of breath. Active they
are, and so nigh to pure act that nothing hurts them more then much quiet; of
which they had little experience, from their first transmigration till the time
of King James; but ever were at work either in building (as before the Norman
times) or after in repairing their ruins, occasioned by tempestous pretentions
from Rome, and Foreign Princes, or by earthquakes of Civil contention about
the Title between the two Houses of York and Lancaster, or intrenchments of
the Crown upon the Liberty of the People. But King James conquering all enmity,
spoke Peace abroad and sang Lullaby at home: Yet like a dead calm in a hot
spring, treasured up in store sad distempers against a back Winter. Their
Ingenuity will not allow them to be excellent at the cheat; but are rather
subject in that kind to take then give: and supposing others as open hearted
as themselves, are many times in Treaties overmatched by them whom they
overmatch in Arms. Upon the same account they are neither imperous over those
beneath, nor stubborn against them above; but can well discern both person and
time. Man, Woman, or Child, all is one with them, they will honor Majesty where
ever they see it. And of the twain tender it more when they see it set upon
infirmity: as if they knew how to command themselves only in order to the
public good.

Nevertheless they love much to be free, when they were under awe of the Popes
Curse, they bore off designs by the Head and Shoulders; but afterward, by
watchfullnesse, and foresight; and having attained a light in Religion that
will own their Liberties, of them both they make up one Garland not to be
touched by any rude hand, but as if it were the bird of the eye the whole body
startles forthwith, the alarm is soon given and taken, and whether high or
low none are spared that stand in their way. This they do owe to the Eastern
People, from whom they fetch their Pedigree. So as the only way to conquer them
is to let them have their Liberties, for like some Horses, they are good for
carriage, so long as their burdens are easy and sit loose upon them, but if
too close girt they will break all, or cast their load, or die. And therefore Q.
Elizabeth gained much to the Crown by fair carriage, good words, and cleanly
conveyance, which was not soon discoverd nor easily parted with. But Henry the
eighth by height of Spirit and great noise, and therefore was no sooner off
the stage but what was gotten by the snatch was lost by the catch, and things
soon returned into their ancient posture again.

The first Government of the People before their departure out of Germany, was
in the two States of Lords and Commons. The Clergy came not into pomp, and
power, till Austins time, and soon came to the height of a third state
appendent to the former, and so continued till Henry the eighths time; then
they began to decay in power, and in Queen Elizabeth's time utterly lost the
same, and so they can no longer be called a State although they still keep
state.

The two States of Lords and Commons in their transmigration, being then in the
nature of an army of Soldiers, had a General by their Election, under whom
after they had obtained a Peaceable settling, they named anew by the name of
Konning, or the Wise man, for then was Wisdom more necessary then Valor. But
after the Clergy had won the day, and this Konning had submitted himself and
his people to their Ghostly Father, they baptized him by a new name of Rex, and
so he is styled in all written Monuments which we owe only to Ecclesiastics;
although the vulgar held their appellation still, which by contraction, or
rather corruption, did at length arive into the word King; a notion which as
often changes the sense as the air: some making the person all in all, others
some in all, and some nothing at al but a complement of State. The Clergy gave
him his Title in the first sense, and are willing he should have a power over
the Estates in order to their design, which then was to rule the King and by
him all his People, he doing what be lists with them, and the Clergy the like
with him. The Saxons take the word in the second sense, for though they had put
upon the Commonwealth one Head, and on that Head one Crown, yet unto that Head
did belong many eyes and many brains, and nothing being done but by the common
sense; a power is left to him much like to that of the outward Members,
Executory.

In time of War, how unruly soever the humors be, yet must the Law be his rule;
he cannot engage the People either to make, continue, or determine, any
offensive War, without their consent; nor compel them to arm themselves, nor
command them out of their Counties for War, nor impose Military charge upon
them against their free consent, or contrary to the known Law.

In calmer times much rather, he can neither make new Law nor alter the old;
form new Judicatories, Writs, Process, Judgments, or new executions, nor enable
or disable any conveyances of Estates. He may seem possessed of more power in
Church government, yet De jure, can neither make nor alter Doctrine, or
Worship, or Government in the Church: nor grant dispensations, or Licenses
Ecclesiastical; nor Commissions of jurisdiction other then according to the
Law. And as a close to all, by one oath taken at the Coronation he not only
gives to the People security of the Peace and good behavior, but bears
witness that he owes Allegiance both to the Law and the people, different from
that of the Peoples in this, that the Kings Allegiance is due to the Law, that
is originally from the Peoples Election, but the peoples to the King, under a
Law of their own framing.

This leads on the consideration of a higher degree of power then that of
Kings: For though Law as touching morallity in the general be of Heavenly
birth; yet the positive Laws arising from common Prudence concerning the
Honor, Peace, and profit, of every Nation; are formed by humane constitution,
and are therefore called Honesta, or justa, because by common vote they are so
esteemed, and not because any one man supposes them to be such. The words of
the Summons to the Parliament does hold for this, Quae de communi consilio
ordinari contigerint, and the words in the Coronation Oath, Quos vulgus
elegerit, do speak no less, whether they be taken in the Preterperfect tence or
Future tence, the conclusion will be the same: True it is that in all, Kings
are supposed as present; yet is not that valuable in the point of Council,
which is the foundation of the positive Law. For as the best things under
Heaven are subject to infirmity; so Kings either short or beyond in Age, or
Wit, or possibly given over to their lusts, or sick, or absent, (in all which
the name of a King adds little more to the Law then a sound) yet all the while
the Government is maintained with as much Honor and Power as under the most
wise and well disposed King that ever blessed the Throne.

This is done in the convention of States, which in the first times consisted
rather of Individuals rather then Specificalls. The great men doubtless did
many things even before they saw the English shore; that Tacitus notes, yet in
the public convention of all, did nothing alone til of one House they became
two. The particular time of the separation is uncertain, and the occasion more:
It may be the great Lords thought the mysteries of State too sacred to be
debated before the vulgar, least they should grow into curiosity: Possibly also
might the Commons in their debates wish the great men absent that themselves
might more freely vote without angering their great Lords: Nevertheless the
Royal assent is ever given in the joint convention of all, but how a double
negative should rest in the House of Lords, one originally in themselves, the
other in the sole Person of the King, when as in no case is any negative found
upon Record, but a modest waving to answer of such things as the King likes
not, is to me a mystery, if it be not cleared by usurpation: For it is beyond
reach, why that which is once by the representative of the People determined to
be Honestum, should de disdetermined by one or a few, whose Counsels are for
the most part but Notionary, and grounded upon private inconveniences, and not
upon experimentalls of most public concernment; or that the vent or Soit
fait, which formerly held the room only of a Manifesto of the regal will to
execute the Law then made (as his Coronation Oath to execute all Laws formerly
established) should now be taken to be a determination of the justness or
honesty of the thing: When as this Royal assent is many times given by a King
that knows no difference between good and evil, and is never competent Judge
in matters that in his opinion do fall into contradistinction between his own
private interest and the benefit of the People.

However unequal it may seem, yet both that and other advantages were gained
by the House of Lords after the separation was once made, as many of the
ancient Statutes (by them only made) do sufficiently hold forth, which although
in the general do concern matters of Judicature, wherein the Lords originally
had the greatest share, yet other things also escaped the Commons Vote which in
after ages they recovered into their consideration again. And the condition of
the People in those times did principally conduce hereunto: For until the
Norman times were somewhat settled, the former ages had ever been uncertain, in
the changes between War and Peace, which maintained the distance between the
Lords and their Tenants, and the Authority of the one over the other, savouring
of the more absolute command in War. And after that the Sword was turned into
the plough-share, the distance is established by compact of Tenure by Service,
under peril of default, although in a different degree; for the Service of a
Knight, as more eminent in War, so in Peace it raised the mind to regard of
public Peace: but the Service of the plough supporting all, is underneath
all, yet still under the common Condition of free men equally as the Knight.
Peace now had scarcely exceeded its minority before it brought forth the
unhappy birth of Ambition; Kings would be more absolute, and Lords more Lordly;
the Commons left far behind seldom come into mention amongst the public Acts
of State, and as useless set aside; this was the lowest ebb that ever the
Commonage of England endured, which continued till Ambition brought on
contention amongst the great men, and thence the Barons Wars, wherein the
Commons parting asunder, some holding for the King, who promised them Liberty
from their Lords; others siding with the Lords, who promisied them Liberty from
the King; they became so minded of their Liberties, that in the conclusion they
come off upon better advantage for their Liberties then either King or Lords,
who all were Loosers before their reckoning was fully made. These Wars had by
experience made the King sensible of the smart of the Lords great Interest with
the People, and pointed him to the pin upon which the same did hang; to take
which away, a Design is contrived to advance the value of the Commoners, and
to level the Peerage, that they both may draw in one equal yoke the Chariot
of Prerogative. The power of the Commons in public Counsels was of some
efficacy but not much Honor, for their meetings were tumultuary; time brought
forth a cure hereof, the flowers of the People are by Election sent to the
Representative; and so the Lords are matched if not over-matched, the People
less admiring the Lords, and more regarding themselves. This was but a dazzle,
an eclips ensues; for Kings having duly eyed the Nature of Tenures between the
Lords and Commons, look upon it as an out-work or block-house in their way of
approach: Their next endeavor is therefore to gain the Knighthood of England
within the compass of their own Fee, and so by priority to have their Service
as often as need should require, by a trick in Law; as well for their own
safety in time of War, as for their benefit in time of Peace: This was a work
of a continuing Nature, and commended to Successors to accomplish by degrees,
that the whole Knighthood of England is become no more the Lords till Kings be
first served; and thus the power of the People is wholly devolved into the
Kings Command, and the Lords must now stand alone, having no other foundation
then the affections of the People gained by beneficense of Neighborhood, and
ordinary society, which commonly ingratiates the inferior rank of men to those
of higher degree, especially such of them as affect to be popular. Henry the
seventh found out this sore, and taught his Successors the way to avoid that
occasion of jealousy, by calling up such considerable men to attend the Court,
without other wage but fruitless hopes; or under color of Honor to be had by
Kings from the presence of such great men, in their great Trains; or of other
Service of special note to be done only by men of so high accomplishment. And
by this means Lordship, once bringing therewith both Authority and Power unto
Kings, before Kings grew jealous of their greatness, in these later days is
become a mere jelly, and neither able to serve the Interest of Kings (if the
People should bestir themselves) nor their own any longer: henceforth the
Commons of England are no mean Persons, and their representative of such
concernment, as if Kings will have them to observe him, he must serve them with
their Liberties and Laws; and every one the public good of the People: No
man's work is beneath, no man's above it, the best Honor of the Kings work is to
be, Ae^ian. lib. 2. Var. hist. cap. 20.
Nobilis servitus (as Antigonus said to his Son) or in plain English, supreme
Service above all and to the whole. I now conclude, as I found this Nation a
Commonwealth, so I leave it, and so may it be for ever; and so will it be, if
we may attain the happiness of our Forefathers the ancient Saxons, Quilibet
contentus sort propria. Tacit


A Table of the Principal Matters contained in this Book.
A
A Betting of Felony made Felony. 299 Administration granted to the next of the
Kindred. 51 Admirals power from the Parliament, 41. formerly under many,
brought into one, 42. once gained jurisdiction to the high water-mark, 44. and
his Power regulated by Law, ibid. over Seamen, Ports, and Ships. 44 Allegiance
according to Law, 18. vide Supremacy, the nature thereof in general, 79. its
not natural, 79, 89. not absolute or indefinite, 82. not to the King in his
natural capacity, 86. it obliges not the People to serve in foreign War, 10^.
it is due to the person of the King for the time being, 246, 279. what it is in
time of War, and relation thereunto, 247. Henry the seventh, and Henry the
eighth endeavored to advance it in relation to the Crown, but effected it not,
204. Appeals in cases Ecclesiastical restrained from Rome, and given in the
Kings case to the Convocation and in the cases of the People, the Archbishop
afterward to the Delegates, and were never settled in the Crown 227, 233. vide
Archbishop. Archbishop has the lawful power of the Pope in Appeals, and
Dispensations, Licenses, and Faculties, 233. the Archbishop of York loses his
jurisdiction over the Scottish Bishops. 193 Arrays, Commission of Array, 178,
vide War. Assent of the King to Acts of Parliament, serves only to the
execution of the Law, and not to the making thereof 21 Association of the
People for the common safety, before the Statute inabling the same, 298
B.
BAstardy, not to be determined by the Ordinary before Summons to the
Pretendors of Title to be heard. 156 Bench, the Kings Bench at Westminster
abated in power by the Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and Gaol delivery. 92,
165 Benevolence, first used by Edward the fourth, 184. taken away by Richard
the third, 185. taken up again by Henry the seventh. 196 Bishops, not
impeachable before the civil Magistrate, 49. their Temporalties to be neither
seized nor wasted in the vacancy, 50. vide Ordinary. Buggery made Felony. 299
C.
CAnons, their power anciently in debate, 61. such as are not according to the
Law are taken away. 236 Castles and Gaols restored to the County, 113. vide
Forts and Fortifications. Chancery, once an Office, afterward a Court, 35. the
power grows by Act of Parliament, 36, 162. the manner of the Proceedings, 38.
Keeper of the great Seal increases in power. 162 Chancellor elected by the
Parliament. 39 Cheshire made a Principality. 11 Children carried into Cloisters
remedied. 163 Clergy, privileged from Arrest, 52. discharged of purveyance and
free quarter, 52. their Temporalties in question, 63. the Commons love not
their persons, 147. their first declining from Rome in the matter of Provisors,
150. they gain free process in matters Ecclesiastical, 192. their defection
from Rome, and submission to the Crown. 206 Clergy upon Trial but once
allowed, 257. in some cases disallowed. 250, 298 Commissioners Ecclsiastical,
288. High Commission. ibid. Conjuration, vide Witchcraft. Conservators of the
Truce. 162 Constables Court, vid. Marshals Court. Convocation established by
Parliament, 151. it then undertook great matters, but much more after the
Clergies forsaking the Pope. 229 Councels, the Privy Council ordered by
Parliament, 21, 33, 141. of use for sudden motions, 27. their Oath, 29. and
jurisdiction, 31. and power. 142 Magnum Concilium, or the grand Council of
Lords. 28 Crown entitled not by Descent, 128, 277. but intailed, 128. vide 188.
Womanhood, 270. Coverture. 273 Custos Regni, a formality of State under the
Parliaments Order, 134. many times conferred upon Children, 137. and upon a
Woman. 252
D.
DElegates, though named by the King, yet by Authority of the Parliament. 227
Defender of the Faith, 213 Dispensations, Licenses and Faculties, never in the
Crown, but by the Parliament given to the Archbishop under Limitations. 234,
238 Duels, ordered by the Martial as Subservient to the Common Law. 108
E.
EDward the third his Reign, 3. his Title upon Entry by Election. ibid. Edward
the fourth his Reign, though had Title of Inheritance, yet entered by Election.
181 Edward the fifth approached the Crown by Inheritance, but never put it on.
184 Edward the sixth his Reign, his Title, and Possession did meet, though he
was a Child, and his Sister Mary grown in age. 259 Ecclesiastical power, vide
Prelacy and Prelates. Elizabeth Queen, her Reign, 264. her Title by Election.
278 Englishire taken away. 95 Episcopacy, vide Prelates and Prelacy. Errors,
vide Heresy. Exchange ordered by the statute. 75 Excommunication, 271. the
Writ de excommunicato capiendo ordered, 289. vide Parliament exportation. 72
F.
FAlse News punished. 112 Felony by riding in armed Troops. 95, 113, 172, 257,
299 First Fruits regulated, 153. taken away from Rome. 222 Forcible Entries.
173 Forts, Fortificacations, and Castles, ordered by Parliament. 252, 295
G.
Jail-deliver by the Judges of the Benches, 92, 165. vide Judges. Gaols
regulated. 113, 254 Guard for the Kings Person brought in by Henry the seventh.
195 Gypsies made Felons. 299
H.
HEnry the fourth his Reign, doubtful in his Title, but rested upon Election,
chosen by Parliament, sitting when there was no King. 116, etc. Henry the fifth
his Reign, his Title by an Intail, by the Parliament. 119, etc. Henry the sixth
his Reign, his Title by the Intail last mentioned, though a Child, he is
admitted to the Crown. 123, etc. Henry the seventh first settled a constant
Guard, his sixfold Right to the Crown, and his gaining Prerogative in the
Person and Estates of the People, ibid. 194, etc. Henry the eighth his natural
Endowments, 199, etc. his power in the matters Ecclesiastical, 206, etc. in
Tempoporals. 213, etc.
H.
Heresy and Error in Doctrine under the cognizance of the Civil Magistrate,
62, 156. not punishable by death by Law till Henry the eighths time, 216, 236.
the Writ De Heretico comburendo has no legal ground in any of those former
Times, 63, 158, 161, 216, 236. Honors, vide Parliament. Hospitals visited by
the Prelacy. 154
I.
IMportation. 70 Judges of Assize. 165, 244 Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical not
originally in the Prelacy, nor absolutely. 235 Justices of the Peace, their
residency and quality, their number various, their work also, 109, 171. one
Justice, 112. and the settling of their Sessions, ibid. their power to take
Bail. 254
K.
KIngs, vide Parliament, Allegiance, Supremacy, Militia.
L.
Laborers, their Work and Wages, 70. ordered by the Justices of the Peace. 110
Lancaster, the Princes of that House friends to the Clergy in policy. 146 Laws
made by the Successors of Henry the eighth, during their minority annulled,
217. Ecclesiastical Laws, vide Parliament. Leiges by Birth, though not born
within the Allegiance of England. 97 Liveries and Tokens inhibited to the
Lords, 112, 177. and limited in the Kings person, 177. means of jealousy
between the King and his People. 244 Libels in the Spiritual Court to be
delivered in Copies upon demand. 154 Licenses, vide Dispensations. Lords, their
power and jurisdiction in the Parliament, 23. in Council. 29, 242 Lunacy, no
impediment in Trial of Treason. 258
M.
MAry Queen, her Reign, 261. her Title by Election, 278. she prejudiced her
Supremacy by Marriage. 275 Marque and Reprisal. 279 Martials Court. 107
Matrimonial Causes after the Reformation by Henry the eighth, in the Cognizance
of the Clergy by leave. 238 Militia, 98, 175, 245, 290 vide War. Mint, 74,
142. vide Parliament. Monastries dissolved, 220 maintained by Henry the fourth.
147 Money out of England to Rome stopped. 54
N.
NAvy Royal, as Forts for the public safety maintained at the public
charge. 253 Nisi prius. 167 Non-residency. 238 Noble Ladies Trial. 174
O.
OYer and Terminer. 92, 165 Ordinary not to be questioned in the Civil Courts
for things under Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, 47, 49. has Cognisances, of
Usury, 47. of Avoidances, Bigamy, and Bastardy, 48. grant Administration, 51.
visit Hospitals, and call Executors to account, 154. has power to fine and
imprison, 157, 239. to keep Courts, but the Authority doubtful, 235. have
Cognizance of the Heresy 156, 236. Matrimony, Non-residency, 236. In Queen
Elizabeth's time their jurisdiction left in doubt, 286, etc. Oath ex Officio
first brought in by the Churchmen in matters Ecclesiastical, 157. afterward
by the Parliament into the Star Chamber, in cases criminal. 244
P.
PArdon of Crimes not absolutely in the King. 19 Parliament without the King
consisting of three States, 117. without the Clergy. 58 Parliaments power in
ordering of the Crown, 127, 228; 277 In ordering the Kings Person by
Protectors, 14. vide Protector. In ordering their children. In ordering their
Family. 15, 129 In ordering their Revenues. 16, 129, 115 In ordering their
Council. 141 In the Militia, vide Militia and War. In conferring places of
Honor and Trust. 20, 39 In ordering the Mint, vide Mint. In making
Ecclesiastical Laws. Concerning Church Government. 224, etc. 208, 281
Concerning Doctrine. 211, 224, 236, etc. Concerning Worship. 224 Concerning
Church Censures- 240 In granting Licenses and Dispensations. 234 In final
Appeals. 227 In ordering it self. 24, 130 In judicature. 25, 190 Parliament not
inconstant, though mutable. 188 Peace, Justices and their Sessions. 109, etc.
170, etc. 253, etc. 297, etc. Penal Laws executed to get money. 184, 196
Pleadings in English. 98 Popes power in England abated, 56, etc. vide Ordinary,
Supremacy, Archbishop. Prelacy not favored by the Canon, 239. their power
since the time of Queen Mary, 283. their dignity and power distinguished. 46,
58 Priests Wages. 70, 155 Praemunire and Provisors. 54, 58, etc. 151
Proclamations made equal to Laws, 214. altered, 269. Protectors, variety of
them makes a doubtful Government. 4, 8, 123 Purveyance regulated. 53, 65
R.
RAvishment consented to, forfeits Jointure. 96 Requests Court established by
Cardinal Woolsey. 241 Richard the second his Reign, 6. endeavors to overruled
the Parliament, but failed in the Conclusion. 11 Richard the thirds Reign, 184.
his Title by Usurpation, and Murder. ibid. Riots. 173
S.
SAnctuaries changed into fewer privileged places. 257 Servants imbesselling
Felony. 258, 299 Sheriffs Courts regulated, 254. Election of Sheriffs, 93. Farm
of the County, 168. continuance in service, ibid. Extortion. ibid. Soldiers,
vide War. Staple. ^72, etc. ^90 Star Chamber. 31, etc. 242 Stealers of Men and
Women Felony. 299 Supremacy, supreme Head, 206. certainly not absolute or
arbitrary power, nor a Legislative power, 208, etc. Supreme Governor, 270. in
causes Ecclesiastical, 270, etc. in Temporal. ibid.
T.
TEnths and first fruits. 222 Torniament. 108 Tonnage and Poundage. 189 Trade.
64, 190 Treason, 76. etc. By thoughts, by marriage, and counterfeiture, 255,
256. tried where the King will, 258. Petty Treason, 94.
W.
WAles subdued by Henry the fourth, 118. United to the English Crown by Henry
the eighth. 241 War by advice of Parliament, 98, 175. Levying of men, 101,
176, 248, 290. Jurati and obligati ad arma, taken away, 100. Arming of men,
100, 290. Conduct to their Rendezvous, 101. Running from their Colors, 101,
180, 296. Plunder satisfied, 101. Their pay, 176.251, 296. Offensive and
defensive, 291. Watches, inquired into by Justices of the Peace, 173. Wickleif,
60. Wills probate, 154. Witchcraft made Felony, 257, 299.
FINIS.

