The Reminder of Books written BY Jacob Behme viz.

I. The First Apology to Balthazar Tylcken for the AVRORA written Anno 1621.
II. The Second Apology in Answer to Balthazar Tylcken; for Predestination. And
the Incarnation and Person of CHRIST, and of the Virgin MARY. Dated 3. July
1621. III. The Fouer Complexions written in March: 1621. IV. The Considerations
upon Esaiah Stiefel's Book concerning The Threefold State of Man and the New
(...). Dated 8. April 1621. V. The Apology in Answer to Esaiah Stiefel
Concerning Perfection. Dated 6. April 1622. VI. The Apology in Answer to
Gregory Rickter Primate of Gerlitz. for the way to Christ, etc. 10. April 1624.
VII. Twenty five Epistles more then the 35. formerly Printed in English, with
2. as prefaces before other of his Books, the last of those here printed is
Dated 23. May 1624. 5 more after without Date, which make 62. in all, also 1.
Epistle more of his own hand writing: and 1. of Dr. Charles Weisners, relating
much of J. B's. Life.
Englished BY JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the Black Spread
Eagle, at the West End of St. Paul's. 1662.

The Englishers Preface to J. B's. Apologies.
Courteous Reader.
IN the Life time of Jacob Behme, some Learned Men there were of his own
Country, that highly prized and Esteemed his writings though others Judged and
found fault with them; to whom the Author in his Answers has clcerly made it
appear, they have NOT understood his Meaning, but injuriously made their own
mistaken Sense, the Ground of their Censure; it is no wonder therefore, that
among us of another Language, who have but a Translation, wherein much of the
accuratenes^^ and apt expression of an Author is lost, that men here also find
such fault with them as they do; but if it be examined, their want of the true
apprehension of them, will be known to have caused that negligent and heedless
Opinion, that his writings are not to be understood, yet it has proceeded so
far, that those, who think they apprehend his Deep Matter are suspected by
some Academick wits, to be but miss-led into such a conceit: But those Eminent
persons his countryMen, and adversaries have not once charged him with writing
things not Intelligible, though indeed themselves have not rightly perceived
the Authors meaning, as is apparent in these FOUR Books of Apology or Defense
in answer to the few objections to some things contained in that Doctrine, set
down at Large in the Treatises of his Sublime Mysteries, if they be read and
weighed in the Balance of Due Consideration.

The FIRST Apology was an Answer to Balthazar Tylcken, who wrote a treatise
against several Clauses in the Aurora, concerning the knowledge of God in and
by Nature, whereas, though God in himself be totally Incomprehensible and
unmanifested in his Abyss; yet Nature is his Manifestation or Revelation; for
if his Omnipotent power did not show it self by making it self discernable, it
would never be known, but remain hidden Eternally, and indeed all the effects
which we perceive to be wrought and produced at anytime in sensible things, are
brought to pass, by the same Powers, that have and do and will work from
Eternity to Eternity perceptibly in GOD.

All that is in GOD is only Goodness, his very wrath is his Fire, and the cause
of his Light and Glory in himself, and therein is most just and Good, also for
the punishment of the perverseness of his Creatures, whom he made like himself
very Good, and gave them power to Continue so; but they being Creatures were
made out of Darkness and being Created and brought into the Light, could and
did love themselves, and all Creatures without the Light or that loose the
Light, are but Darkness, and by that means Exalted their Darkness above the
Light in them, which is truly Self-love, and the root or spring of all Evil,
which God cannot DO, nor BE, but that we might be able to get out of the
perdition we are fallen into, God in his infinite Love and Mercy, to all men in
and from Adam and Eve, (they two being one Flesh,) has given, in the Light of
their Life, the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of Christ his Son, the Seed
of the woman, the Promised word, the word of Faith in our Hearts; which in US
has Power to overcome all the works of Darkness, and to bring us to his
marvelous Light, the Light of Eternal Life; which also teaches us to deny our
selves, and all ungodly Lusts of the Flesh, to take up our Cross with Patience
and so follow or imitate Christ, in Newness of Life, and inward hearty Holiness
of Conversation; God indeed Cannot deny himself, because his Darkness that is
his wrath is always, subservient to his Light and Love which Eternally is his
Life, and cannot be otherwise: but WE must Deny our selves, and then our
Darkness will give it self up into the Light, also, in us.

If we follow or be like, his Light, we are Children of the Light which rules
in us, and if we live according to his Darkness we are Children of Wrath, and
at length if we convert not shall be confirmed Children of Perdition; All that
have the dispositions or qualities inwardly or Outwardly, of Love and
Gentleness, Kindness, lowliness or humility, sincerity, Truth, righteousness,
virtue, honesty, chastity, temperance, purity and Holiness, are undeniably
GOOD: On the Contrary, the wrathful, fierce, Envious, proud, surly, churlish,
wanton, vain, stubborn, obstinate, crafty, false Liars, injurious,
intemperate, violent, are accounted bad or EVIL, and they are so indeed; now
that which is Evil cannot be like Gods Love, but here is the general mistake,
all Men consist both of an Outward and Inward Man; that which the outward,
Esteems Good, is so as it is a similitude of that which is inwardly Good, but
since the outward Man which is framed of the Earth, has gotten the
Predominancy in the Fall of Adam, who thereupon dyed to the Inward Man, that
which most pleases the outward, does make it the more strong and rebellious
against the power of the Inward, and so by outward Good things, not knowing how
to use them, by little and little, destroys the Inward, and therefore God in
his Bowels of Compassion, sends us that which is fittest for us, to the
weakening or daily Killing and slaying of our Outward Man, by tribulations
afflictions Crosses and Contradictions or oppositions, from others, for the
making us Conformable to the Image of CHRIST, who was Tempted, persecuted, and
afflicted, and as the Apostle says, he that will live Godly in this world, must
suffer Persecution; this measure our Author had from some, as is manifest by
their Objections, and striving to bring his marvelous Gifts into dislike with
those that knew not but the Censures cast upon him were right, thereupon, for
the vindication of the Truth, and for the sakes of those that were but
beginners in the ways of Christ, he then answered to the things that were laid
to his charge, with such evidence that even his adversaries may be convinced
and reconciled to acknowledge the same truth with him.

The SECOND Apology was in answer also to a Book of Balthazar Tylckens,
against Jacob Behme's hints of Predestination, mentioned in some of his
treatises written before the year 1621. whereby the great Controversies
between the Lutherans and Calvinists about the will of God, and of Man, are
kindly Reconciled, but he not apprehending the Ground and depths in them, which
resolve those Questions, did very much oppose this Author, also the Tutour to
his children whose name was Dr. Charles Weisner, did take great distaste at him
likewise, as may be seen by a Letter at the End of the Epistles, herewith
printed, but by personal Converse with J. B. he received such Satisfaction and
Content, that he asks God forgiveness, for his former hard Opinion of the
Author: But Balthazar Tylcken, wrote also against the Book of the Incarnation
and Person of CHRIST and of the Virgin MARY, to all which, the Author has
answered particularly in this Apology.

The Next Treatise is concerning the Four Complexions, Compiled at the Desire
of some friends upon the necessary Occasion of a Person that was very much
tempted afflicted and perplexed by Satan, and therein he has very exactly
deciphered the Nature of the Choleric, Sanguine, Phlegmatic, and Melancholy,
complexions, with their Effects upon the Soul that inhabits them as a House,
in this outward Tabernacle, also the Cures and Remedies to make them
advantageous to the Souls progress in the way to Eternity, while it is in this
Life: that, never any treatise was written before so fully briefly and yet
convincingly, as far as has been Commonly known either among the books of
Philosophy or Divinity: it was formerly translated into English by a worthy
Person, in very Elegant language, which notwithstanding was thought to be the
writing of another author, by those that delighted to read him, not having
the same Phrase with his other Books, for which cause I was induced to
retranslate it, though not in so good a style, into that kind of Expression
which makes it known to be one of his works.

The following Piece, was his Considerations upon a Book set forth by Esaias
Stiefel, concerning the Threefold State of Man, and of the Newbirth, of the
River flowing out of Sion, and the New Jerusalem, wherein are handled
distinctly that Threefold State and Condition of Man; also of the Resurrection
at the Last Day, what that Body is, IN this Corruptible Body, which shall rise
again and put on Incorruption, and in what Manner, with more plainness as I
conceive then in his other Books.

After that, is here placed, his THIRD Apology, in Answer to a Book of the
same Esaias Stiefel, concerning Perfection: showing what the Inward and Outward
Perfection is, which is attainable in this Life, and which way we are to
demean our selves, for the avoiding of the Errors incident thereto, and for
the establishing and Consirming the Truth: Great Perfection was attained by
some mentioned in the Holy Scriptures; as Enoch, in his walking with God, and
his Translation; Moses, when his Face shone like the Sun, when he desecended
from seeing but the glory that was left after God was passed by the Clift of
the Rock, whereinto God himself had put him, least he should be consumed before
that Glory of Gods Face; Eliah in his Miraculous Life and taking up alive in a
Chariot of Fire into Heaven; Christ's Transfiguration when his Face also shone
like the Sun and his Garments were Bright like lightening, in the presence, of
Peter, James, and John, in Mount Tabor, before his Death; Stevens Face shining
as an Angel when they Stoned him that he dyed; and all the Prophets and Holy
Men in their Miraculous Conversation upon Earth; All these attained High
Perfection in this Life, our not such as when Mortality shall be swallowd up of
Life: yet the least among the children of God are of a perfect Heart. Other
many excellent enquiries are unfolded in this Treatise, about the purity and
impurity of the Holy Matrimonial Propagation, as when Moses said to the
outwardly Holy Miraculous people, after they were brought out of Egypt with a
mighty hand, and were to have the Law declared to them, be said come not at
your wives; and David and his Men when he desired Bread of the High priest, was
asked by him if the young Men had kept themselves at least from women, to whom
David answered, the women have been kept from us these three days, by which a
great Mystery is hinted, and exactly resolved in this Treatise.

The FOURTH of his Apologies answers the scandalous reproaches of Gregory
Rickter Chief Minister of the City of Gerlitz, and Primate of the Country of
Lusatia in Germany, under prince Electour of Saxony: wherein this Authors rare
temper of Spirit, and his deep decision of the Matters laid against him, are
evident; In it Men may see as in a LookingGlasse, the great hurt any do to
their own Souls, who revile and reproach another contrary to the precept and
example, of our blessed Lord and savior Jesus Christ, who said, when men
revile you, revile not again: But Love your Enemies, do good to them that
Hate you and persecute you, and pray for them that DESPITEFULLY use you, that
you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven: If we did know, how
the wrath gets the upper hand, when we forbear earnestly to exercise our
selves in the sincere love to every one, without partiality and by respects, we
would be more diligent and watchful over our own vile Hearts, that we might
preserve our Crown of rejoicing which shall be put on to us in the World to
Come, from being defiled here by our remisseness, it is worth our watching,
that neither the Devil nor Man may hinder or disappoint us of it.

The Last treatise is the residue of his Epistles to his friends wherein are
many heavenly advices and Instructions in the ways of God, and of the New
Birth, also they inform us, somewhat of his Conversation with Great Persons
and Officers of the Emperor and of the Prince Electour of Saxony, a little
after his Banishment out of Gerlitz: among whom he was lovingly received and
his writings and discourses well approved of, by the Prince Electour himself,
also by his Councillours and Learned Doctors and other; at the End of all is a
letter from Dr. Charles Weisner about the whole transaction of that affair
between Gregory Rickter and Jacob Behme, together with the opinion of Dr. Hoe,
one of the Chief preachers to the Prince Electour: which signifies how loath
they were to Judge a Man whose Gifts they understood not, but it does no were
appear they either thought the Author did not himself understand them, or that
they could not be understood by others, as some among us do.

These are the total Remainder of of all his works Extant either in Print or
Manuscript, which make up the Catalogue at the End of the 40. Question of the
soul: and here at the End of this Book; so that now all his works are printed
in the English Tongue.

Judge not according to the appearance, but read, weigh, examine, and Judge
righteous Judgment; Or rather Judge not that we be not Judged, which was one of
the precepts of CHRIST, and the Apostle Paul says: If we would Judge our
Selves, we should not be Judged. Judgment is the Mental framing or denouncing
of the sentence and severity of the Consuming fire of Gods wrath, what in
Reallity any one is capable of and will certainly receive at the Last day:
which to do upon others whom we cannot know so well as we do our selves, does
awaken that fiery wrath in our selves, which ought not to be, for if the
Eternal Fire which is in our hearts and souls, be kindled, against a Person
that is not liable by his Guilt, if it burn not him, it may and will burn Our
selves; but if we kindle that fire of Indignation against our selves, as justly
and deservedly we may, it will consume Self-Love, and all the Dark matter of
our Sonles; and so change it into Light as fire does Iron; and then the
Eternal fire will have no Fuel to kindle upon, in us, now, or, at the Last
Day, but we shall be able to dwell with Everlasting Burnings as the Light does
in the Fire, having Judged and Condemned our selves, for we shall walk in
righteousness, and speak in uprightness, we shall despise the Gain of
Deceits, and shake our hands from holding of Bribes, and stop our Ears from
hearing of Blood, and shut our Eyes from seeing of Evil, and then we shall
dwell on High; our Defense shall be the Munition of the Everlasting Rock of
Ages.

For a close, I offer a Similitude of the Manner how the last Judgment will be
effected, to be Considered of: All Seeds sown, will come up the same that they
were sown, whether Good wheat or weeds, this Life time is the sowing of
Thoughts words and Actions, in our Spirits, souls, and Bodies, whatsoever is
retained and Nourished, grows up in our Lives and Conversations, the other
Dies, be it the Good or the Bad, and the power is fixed in the fruit of what
Grows in us here, and at the time of the Last Harvest the Seed will present
its Fruit ready, and all will appear in the Effect, what has been suppressed
and what has been cherished, if good, it is well with us; if Bad we are fit
Fuel for the Eternal Fire, If our Desires which are the sprouting of our
seed be infected with liking the Evil, or disliking the Good, when the Flower
or Fruit comes to appear, we shall see the Effect apparently in One Moment, of
what was hiddenly in the Seed from the first being of the Thought, word or
work, in us: Thus every Heart may Judge of it self in this Life and amend in
time, but however then they will be laid Open to the Eyes of our Selves and All
Others, as the FLOWER in one instant shows the effect of all the virtues and
powers that lay hid in the Seed, though they were really there before: as when
we sow; it may be we Expect Rare Tulips, or whatsoever flower is most
excellent; when it is full blown it appears either of a pale dead wan Color,
or of a Dull and distorted shape or figure, or else of Orient strong various
exact Colors and delightful Figures, which shows, it sucked in, and nourished
it self with, barren cold juice of the Earth, or drew in the Infection of the
Air and Evil influences, or Else the strong fat warm Sap of a fertile Soil,
and the Good Influences of the Stars of Heaven. Our Soul has in it the Seed
of Gods Image planted and sown in the Inward word of the Heart, and it springs
up in Good Thoughts Words and Works are Gods.
Good Thoughts, which Image is righteousness and Holiness, and will shine far
brighter then the Sun: But if we suffer vices and Evil thoughts to possess our
Hearts, Evil Thoughts Words and Works only are our Own.
our Image will be dark, and that will form us into ugly deformed Beasts or
Devils, and we shall no more appear in the right Colors, figures, Isai. 55.
7. 8.
forms, beauty and brightness, but be as the Blackness of Darkness in anguish
and Torment thence sorth and for Evermore: Chapter 59. 7.
As when we have a Sickness, our beauty decays, the Blood is corrupt, looks
pale, yellow and sometimes Black, by the distemper of the Fever, which
disturbes the whole constitution of a Man, so that the Light of the Sun,
Garden, Pictures, Music, or any thing that delights us most in health, is
Irksom to us, then Darkness, the Night and Sleep does most affect us, but then
also the Fire of the Disease in the Corruption of our Mortal Body of Flesh,
troubles us within, and the most pleasing Thoughts we have had, do much molest
us, which shows that the inward Corruption and the wrath of God, has gotten a
life in Our Bodies, so also if it get a life in our Souls, it is much more
grievous, even to Eternity; which will manifest it self in the Judgment, when
all the Good that now allayeth the Evil in us, shall be separated distinct
apart by it self, and will be the life of all Misery, which is the second or
Never Dying Death: On the otherside; Health in this Life, gives alacrity,
beauty and pleasantness, which is a true Emblem of the health in the Soul,
that shall make it full of Joy and bliss: If the matter that is grown in it
here, be good and Holy, we should be able to Endure the sharpest Cold as a
refreshment, and the Greatest heat Would be our life; as Daniel's Companions,
Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah.
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, walked in the Hot fiery furnace of
Nebuchadnezzar, and a Hair of their Head was not singed, Dan. 1. 5. 7. 17.
nor the smell of fire upon their Clothes, the Heavenly substance was but the
more effectual and delightful to them by that Fire, Chapter 2. 17. 49.
though heat seven Times hotter then formerly it use to be; Chapter 3. 22. 27. 28.
whereas those that cast them in, in whom the Love of God had not Gotten a
Life, were slain by the Flame that caught hold of them; by this we may collect
the great power of the Inward Heavenly Substance; Also of the Hellish Fire; in
their Effects, at the Great Day: But then Gods brightness in all Things, will
be Joined to himself, and his holy ones will enjoy it in their Measures, but
the Darkness and filth of Corruption, will remain with the Devil and his
Angels, and so the SEPARATION, will be undeniably of like to its Like: when the
unquenchable Fire shall swallow up the Dross, Chafe, and Weeds, and the
Light receive that which is pure, solid, sweet, and good Wheat, and retain
it for Evermore.

When I consider how long have known, more then some others, the inevitable
danger of loving my Sinfulness, together with my careless negligence, in my
endeavors to forsake it, and in that regard, how short I come of the precise
Judging of my self, and of the amendment might be expected in me; and so how
much I want of the Infinite effect of being able to dwell with the Eternal
Burnings, I may well account my self one of the unworthiest of the children of
Men,

John Sparrow.

The First APOLOGY To Balthazar Tylcken Being An Answer of the Author,
concerning his Book the AVRORA Opposed by an Enemicitious Pasquil or
Opprobrious Libel.

This Answer Written Anno 1621.

By Jacob Behme Also called Teutonicus Philosophus.

Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the BlackSpread-Eagle at the West end of St. Paul's. 1661.

A brief, and well intended Answer of the Author concerning his Book AVRORA,
against the enimicitions Pasquil or Libel; in respect of some opposed and
falsely recited Articles or Conclusions, and ill-understood by this Libeller.
1. INto what Calamity, Misery, Anxiety, and great Perplexity, we are plenged,
by the heavy fall of Adam, is daily demonstrated, in that we have not only
thereby obscured and darkened our Noble Image; so that we cannot any more see
or apprehend the Divine Light; unless, we become borne of God again; but also
we have thereby, awakened and made stirring in US, the Original fierce Wrath
of the Eternal Nature, so that, the fierce wrath venom and poison thereof, is
become Springing up and burning in us.

2. Which is rightly called GODS Anger-Fire, which should not become stirring
and Manifest, but continue shut up in the Center: for it should remain shut up
in the Love in the Divine Light, and be only a cause of Life and Mobility.

3. Which so long as it remains shut up in the Light, is a Spring or
Fountain of Joy and Knowledge: but if the Light Extinguisheth, is an Evil
Opposite Poison, wherein nothing qualifyeth or operateth, but mere self Enmity
or Hatred; where instantly all Love and desire of Good has an End.

4. As we poor Children of Eve, must now feel in us with great pain sorrow
and Misery, how that fierce wrath stirs drives and vexes us; so that now
we no more converse one with another in Love as Children of God, but very
venomously, spitefully, hatefully, murtheringly and enimicitiously, do
maliciously persecute, despise slander and reproach, also rob Murder and do
all manner of Evil, and always wish death, fierce wrath and all Evil one to
another.

5. Which great Misery and Evil is sufficiently to be traced in this Libell,
and out of what manner of Mind knowledge and Will it is flowen forth, in that
he undertakes, not only to Misconstrue the words, but also to wrest the whole
understanding into a false meaning or sense, and to pronounce the Author to be
a Devil, and in a very vaunting reproachful, spiteful, Malicious and Odious
manner, likeneth the Authors Will or Intent, thought or sense and mind, to the
Devil, without any knowledge of him, who he is, how he is, or what Spirit's
Child he is; whether he seeks God, or this World.

6. Thus he takes upon him to infinuate his innate poison, into the Heart
thought or sense and Will or intention of the Author; all which is very
horrible, lamentable and Miserable, in that he knows not himself, or from
what Mind his Zeal proceeds, and in whose driving he runs.

7. He cannot see, that his whole writing, is a mere venomons Pasquil or Libel:
and Evil meaning or intention; for though that which is spoken is not
reproveable by him, yet he can not leave it unreproached: whereby a man may
clearly see, out of what Spirit, and Mind it is flowen forth, and how the
miserable fierce wrath has ruled in him; and yet he dares set in his Title;
that it is Christian-like, and well intended.

8. But if he would set any thing better in the room of it, it might indeed be
born with. But I can find in all his Writing no Divine Knowledge and Light;
which yet he highly boasts of; as if he had an enlightened Mind and Thoughts,
and were Exercised therein.

9. An Enlightened Mind or thoughts (if the Light be from God) proceeds
friendly, and lovingly, and instructs a Man, what he should Do and leave
undone; it owneth others in a brotherly Duty; it hunteth not Men's Minds into
the Jaws of the Devil, but they are Gentle in reproving and teaching, with
Good instruction: They reprove in Generally, they catch not hold of a Man
Privately particularly and Singly, and make not a Den of Theevery or Murder,
by the Good Way side.

10. An Enlightened Mind, which has Exercised Thoughts (as the Libeller would
seem to have), knows the Gifts of God, that they are without End or Number;
that God Leads his Children Wonderfully, and gives to one a Diverse gift to
Express, than to another: as the Apostle also witnesses the same.

11. That 1 Cor, 12. 10, 11.
God gives to one from the gift of his Spirit to do Miracles or Wonders; to
another, to interpret Tongues; to a Third to Prophecy; to a Fourth to speak
with Tongues, etc. and all from the One only Spirit of God: which thus speaks
from the Great Wonders of the eternal Wisdom of God, and thus Drives and
teaches the Children of God, that the unmeasurable Wisdom of God may appear
in his Children.

12. If the Spirit of God rules in a Man, then he is NOT Crafty subtle
Deceitful Tuckisch.
treacherous Lying, astonishing, ambitious, but reproveable teachable and Meek;
he is not thorney prickley, Misconstruing and vainly frivolous, he suddenly
apprehends what is in a Man, and from what Spirit he Speaks: For the Spirit
of God it self knows it self very well in a Man, it needs no Witness, it
Psalm. 7. 9.
tries the Heart and the Reins, Soul and Body, it speaks the Truth and
disgraceth or reproacheth no man, it drives on all to that which is good, and
proveketh Men to Righteousness.

13. But this whole Libell or Pasquil, is nothing Else but a Misconstruing,
poisoning and disgracing; he draws the Scripture by the hair of the Head, and
corrupts it, that he may but take occasion to prick with Thorns: besides he
has no right understanding of the Scripture, that must serve him as he will
have it mean; that he may therewith satisfy his fierce wrath, and bring it as
fuel to his ficrce Fire, that it may burn far and near, and so make show of
his Deep knowledge, though he should thereby tread his Brother Abel under his
feet.

14. And yet his knowledge which he has here brought forth to the Day Light
Concerning GODS Will, is as to one part in Bibell, and he largely builds the
Babylonish Tower therewith, as it shall be set before his eyes: which for my
part I do unwillingly, but now necessity requires, I must do it.

15. Not for my own sake, but for the sake of those. whom he has kindled with
his envious fire, and poisoned, and has insinuated into them very Erroneous
Opinions, especially concerning Gods Predestination.
Election of Grace: therefore it behooves me to clear my meaning, how I have
apprehended it, in Divine knowledge, and how also it is the True Ground, and
Apostolic Foundation.

16. His reproaching and contempt, gives me and My Conscience no stumbling
block, but it rejoices me that I shall suffer reproach and contempt for the
sake of the Dear Name of JESUS CHRIST; and I account it as sent from God, and
an Exercise of Faith.

17. For, our Savior CHRIST left us this at last, that Math. 5. 11.
when they would persecute contemn despise reproach us, and speak all manner
of Evil of us for his Name sake, if it be false, that we should then rejoice
and be glad; Math. 10. 25.
For if they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub; what will they may
they not do concerning them of his Household: Math. 10. 24.
the Disciple is not better then his Master.

18. Acts 14. 22.
In Persecution, the Cross, and Tribulation, we shall Enter into the Kingdom
of God; Note.
The Cross Drives us on to Consider, that we should continually Cruefie our
Corrupt perished Man, and give our selves up continually into the Love of God
in Christ, that the New Man in us may arise, grow, and Live, in God.

19. Also I Desire not to rage against the Writer of this Libel: or to contemn
him, but to answer for my self against his Malicious charge against me: for he
treats therein against God and the Love of our Neighbor, also against his
own Conscience, in that he lays to my charge, and falsely wresteth my Writings,
which he himself does not understand; therefore he judges his own Heart,
seeing he knows nothing of me, and yet pronounces me a Devil.

20. Surely, that I should write concerning my self as if I were a Great Master
of the Scriptures or Arts and Sciences of the Schools or Universities of this
World, that is NOT so. I am a poor simple Man, and have my Skill and high
knowledge, not from Art or from Reason, neither have I sought so Great Art, but
from my Youth up have sought only the salvation of my Soul, how I might inherit
and possess the Kingdom of God.

21. But after I found in me, a powerful Opposition, viz. the Driving in Flesh
and Blood, and the Mighty strife between the Woman's and the Serpents Seed, I
then once set my self so hard in strife against the Serpents Seed, and my own
Corrupt Nature, yet through the assistance of God, that I supposed I should
overcome and break that innate evil Will and Inclination, and unite my self to
the Love of God in Christ, to hide my self in the Heart or Bosom of God, from
the terrible Tempest of the Anger of God, and the fierce wrath of the Devil,
that, Gods Spirit might rule Drive and Lead me.

22. I purposed, to keep my self as Dead in my innate form and Condition, till
the Spirit gat a form in me, and that I laid hold on him, that I might lead my
Life through and in Him.

23. Also I purposed, to Will nothing, but what I apprehended in his Will and
Light; he should be my Will and Deed: which indeed was not possible for me to
Do, and yet I stood in the Earnest purpose and resolution, and in very earnest
strife and Battle against my self.

24. And what thereupon came to pass, none may well know but God and my
ownsoul: for I would rather lose my Life, then Depart from that.

25. Thus I wrestled in Gods assistance, a good space of Time, for the
victorious Garland or Crown of Victory, which I afterward with the breaking
open of the Gate of the Deep in the Center of Nature, attained with very great
Joy, whereupon in my soul a Wonderful Light Sprung up, which was strange to
the wild Nature.

26. Wherein I first apprehended, what God, and Man, was, and what God had to
Do with Man; Which I never understood before, neither did seek in such a way:
but as a Child that hangs to its Mother, and longs after her, so did my
soul after this Light, but with no knowledge beforehand, what should or would
come to pass, but as as a simple Child.

27. I little understood the high Articles of Faith; before only after the
Manner of poor Lay people: much less Did I understand Nature, till the Light
in the eternal Nature began to shine to me, whence I became so very much
Delighted and ravished, that I began, and would needs write down my knowledge
for a Memorial.

28. For the Spirit picrced through and through like Lightning, and saw into
the Ground of the Eternity, or as a Tempest passes on, what it Drives that it
Drives: so it went in me, I began to write as a Child at School, and I wrote
thus in my apprehension and zealous Driving, continually on and on, and only
for my self.

29. I supposed all my life Long, not to be known thereby to any Man, but
minded, to keep it by me all my Life long for a Memorial; though indeed it was
continually given to me to write of Things to Come, as if it were for Many, as
if it were a work laid upon me, which I must undergo.

30. I found mightile the will of the New kindled Light-spirit: but my soul
was, to it, and in it, as a Child, without understanding. It went thus into its
Mothers Garden of Roses, and Did as a Servant in Obedience; and all was given
me after a, After a hidden Mystical Manner or by way of Similitudes.
Magical Manner, to set it Down in Paper.

31. For I wrote only my Mind sense or Thoughts, as I understood in the Deep;
and made no Exposition upon it; for I supposed not, that it should come to be
read by other; I would keep it for my self, else, if I had known, that it
should have been read abroad, I would have written more clearly.

32. Also the Labor of my Spirit in it and with it, was a continual Exercise;
wherein my soul Dived the longer the deeper into the Mystery of the Eternal
Nature, as a Scholar which goes to School, and strenuously execiseth himself.

33. For, the Spirit of the Light loved my Soul exceedingly, as the impartial
Reader will see therein, how the Spirit has exercised it self, and repeated
many things very often and ever Deeper and Cleerer, from one step to another,
it was the right Jacobs Ladder, upon which my soul climbed up, through Gods
Will, whom it also pleased so to exercise me, and to bring me into the Heavenly
School, into the Holy Ternary.

34, Concerning which, the Libeller knows Nothing, as his reproachful writings
testify, that he understands nothing therein, but writes, like a History,
from the School of this World, which I leave to its own worth; but he boasts
unjustly of Enlightened Eyes, seeing he uses them for a reproach against the
Children of God.

35. Now this is THAT The AVRORA.
Book, which I wrote in my Childhood, when I was but an A. B. C. Scholar,
which the Libeller takes upon him to Judge. But it was taken away from me by
Satan's Suttlety, who thought to make merry with it, so that I knew not of it in
Three Years, where it was; I supposed it was quite gone a great while before.

36. Moreover I was bereaved of it before it was completed, so much did Satan
hasten to make merry with it, or a Bonfire of it, and heaped Crosses and
tribulation, also Enemies enough upon me, of purpose to Rob me of my Noble
Pearl.

37. He exceedingly also covered me with his Thorn bush, by my Opponents, that
he might bereave me of my Jewel: till after THREE Years, it was sent to me
Written from highly Learned People, out of my writings, who earnestly exhorted
me to finish it; Then I saw that ym writings were still Extant, and wondered at
it, that it had so hapened to them, and understood, that they had had them in
their hands for TWO Years before, and that all along One Good Friend had given
them to another to write out Copies of them.

38. I understood Also, that they were in the Hands of Many Men altogether
unknown to me, and that Many enlightened and Honest Pious Hearts had great
satisfaction therein, who sought not Poison, but a right may to the Divine Life
and Christian Conversation therein.

39. Who doubtless had not such venomous Eyes, that the Aspect of the Serpent,
so suddenly slipped into the Center of their Mind, and sought to pervert it,
but have left it to the Spirit of God, and asked Instruction, which also they
obtained.

40. But some of them are so highly Learned and wise persons that the Libeller
may not well compare himself with them, but I have not heard that any of them
should say, that the Devil was sitting therein. I firmly believe, that he is
sitting in the Libeller, in Mind Eyes Heart and Thoughts, and suddenly infected
him, and drove him on to strife.

41. For, he acknowledges himself, in the Introduction, that he read it over
in haste, and had not leisure enough; surely, the Serpent had very suddenly
captivated him, and after that left him no time to ponder it, but only to make
Sport with it. Certainly, if the Libeller, had searched further, he had found
out the Author.

42. And if he had written to me never so little, to know how I came by such
Meanings and Writings, I would have written to him of it very friendly and
Christianly; this would have become a Christian well, especially an enlightened
Mind.

43. But Sr Libeller, I conceive thereby, that your Artfull Mind, is standing
in BABEL, and would thereby slay ABEL, therefore you must answer it before the
Judgment of God, let this betold you, you must know that you have opposed the
A. B. C.

44. God has bestowed so much Grace, that in the The Three Principles.
Second Book which is made, we have written much cleerer then in the The Avrora
Pirst, and also, then you have written in yours; The sense is a little Deeper
opened to US, then to YOU.

45. You must know, that I see YOUR Writings much better then your self
understand them; you would flee or soar alost, to show your self, and yet your
writings are but a fighting with a shadow, in the Mystery of God: all would be
well, and men would be at peace, if you were not found to be a Scorner; as also
having a proud unchristian Mind.

46. Read my Three Books of the Becoming Man or Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST,
how we must be conceived and enter into, the becoming Man or Incornation of
Christ, and become Newborn in Christ, and how we with Christ must enter into
his Death, and be buried with and in him, dye with him, and Continually slay
the Old Man, also continually rise with and in Him, and Eternally live in Him.

47. Also; read the Book of the Threefold Life of Man, and ye will find the
Elernall Divine Nauture, and also the Outward Nature of the Stars and
Elements a little deeper and More fundamentally Described, then in your Libell
or Pasquill: you will well see what Divine knowledge is, Moreover, what man is
to do and leave undone, and What Faith and Blessedness or Salvation is.

48. Also you will find your Crippled, and altogether Misexpounded
Predestination.
Gracious Election, rightly in the Ground: that will better accord with the
Apostolic Faith and understanding, then yours.

49. Yours, brings Men to Desperation, to vanity, and into mere anxiety of
Spirit, and not out of it again; but mine brings them to the Light, that they
may see what the Holy Scripture understands by Gods Election.

50. Also you find therein, right knowledge of God; and of the substance of all
Substances; whereas, with you there is still a great Mist before it: you boast
of your knowledge, yet Divine skill and knowledge stands not in Reason, but
in the Light of God.

51. If you will speak so highly of God, you must understand and fundamentally
know ALL the THREE Principles; else your Speech continues to be only a fighting
with a shadow, and satisfies not the Hungry Mind; Read my Book of the Three
Principles of the Divine Substance; what will that avail, you shall see,
whether I am a Man or no, you should not seek in ME for a Devil, as you have
done in a very unchristian Manner, toward me, which ought highly to be
reproved in you. If you will rightly seek the Heretic whom you reproach, you
will find him in your own Bosom.

52. For he is a HERETIC, that wresteth the Scriptures falsely: and you do it
not only to my meaning, and with my words, that are hidden to you, which stand
yet partly in a Magic understanding, but you pervert the Scripture and draw it
falsely to your Meaning, of the Predestination.
Election of Grace, and cast only a Mist before Men's Eyes, driving them into
Gods Anger and there let them Lie: and go your way, and moreover forbid any Man
to search further about it.

53. Yes indeed, the Devil might thereby be manifested or revealed; and that
he would not have: or likely my Book has hit you upon the Calvinist Vein.

54. I cannot remedy that, if you or others will not read my Book, let it
alone; it is not Printed; who bid any, write a Copy of it? leave it to me, I
have written it only for my self; it is nothing to you: I have not run about
with it, and presented it to any body, it is come forth without my will and
Desire, and without my knowledge; as they that first came by it, well know.

55. But now that you lay to my Charge; I have sought my same by it; that is an
untruth; A Christian seeks not his own honor, but Gods honor, and, in his
Love, his Neighbor's; CHRIST sought not his own honor but his Father's: He
desired no honor from Man: what should it be desired for then by me?

56. The True knowledge of God is not from this World, but from God, why should
a lodging then be sought for it here: behold and Consider your self.

57. I say with good ground, in such a way you have no understanding of my
writings; you do but fully them for me, with a strange understanding; as here
further shall be set before your Eyes: yet briefly, and for the Readers sake;
who reads the reproachful Paper of yours; that he may discern us both.

58. He that desires a full Explanation, let him read the book of the
Threefold Life: he will find more then he would search for, especially in the
Three Principles; which the Libeller or Pasquiller, dare not well believe: yet
if he will be called a Christian, and Do that which is right, let him read
that, he will see what Spirit's Child I am: perhaps we shall come nearer
together, and he may of a Saul become a Paul; which I do heartily wish in his
behalf, and had much rather have a hearty good and Christian Conference with
him, concerning our IMMANVEL, then this Controversy.

59. Truly I say, that my Book which he opposes in some places needs a better
Explanation, for the simple understanding; I am also very ready to do it, if
any desire it; for it stands in some places yet in a very Mystical Typical.
Magic understanding.

60. But there are also such Mysteries therein, that the learned Schoolman,
Prophetical or in Parables or Similitudes.
or Master Math. 7. 6.
Alexen, cannot number them, for it has pleased God to have it so I look upon
the writings of the Prophets, and see whether they be clear in all places;
besides CHRIST himself taught also in Parables or Similitudes. Men should not
cast Pearls before Swine.

61. But what concerns the Articles of Faith, which in this Book are still in a
Magic understanding; those in the other writings are set down clear enough:
more then the Libeller or Pasquill requires or understands: yet if any desire
more clearing, it shall be afforded him; and if he desire proof thereof, it
shall also be given him.

62. But he that desires it not, I have not written it for him, let him leave
it to me; I write for my self, and run after none; I have not put it out to any
Booksellers shop to sell; if some people fearing God, had not intimately
Earnestly and in true Christian intention asked and entreated for it, I had not
given it to any at all.

63. But since honest hearts fearing God are found, whose Christianity is
indeed sincere and in Earnest; should Christian Love be withdrawn from them?
Or has God Math. 5. 15.
given me it, that I should put it under a stool; or Math. 25. 25.
bury it in the Earth?

64. Christ faith; none Kindles a Light or Candle, and sets it under a
Stool, or under a Bushel: but sets it upon a Table, that all that are in the
House may see by it: The Divine Light will not be covered, those that God
gives it to, should let it shine, for God will require an account of his
Talent.

65. Moreover, what is it, that Men contend about in the Christian Religion?
and dispute much? The Christian Religion is no strise contention or Opinion, it
consists in the New Regeneration out of Christ, in Faith, from the Holy
Ghost, in Humility, Love and Righteousness.

66. A Christian must be borne of Christ, he must have a Christian Will and
desire, and lead a Christian Conversation. It is not only knowing will do it,
and comforting ones self with Christ's sufferings, and be a Dissembling
Hypocrite in the presence of God; to speak one thing, and Will, Desire, and Do
another; and let the evil poisonous Worm of the Corrupt Natures Fire, burn
still, and be but a Lip or Mouth-Christian.

67. It lies not in knowing much, that a man should tickle himself with
Christ's sufferings, and set them alost on the Pinnacle, and yet retain the
Evil Envious kindled poisonous worm Continually in the Heart, and continually
carry Fuel to its Fire: I say, that very Mantle, will become hellish fire to
Many: that he has known Gods will, and will not enter thereinto, and give up
himself to him.

68. A Christian must break his own Natural Will, and give himself up into
Gods Will; he must always quench his Fire-will, and Continually, bring all the
Thoughts of his Mind into the Obedience of God, into the Love and Mercy of God
in CHRIST, into his becoming Man or Incarnation, Suffering, Dying, Death, and
Resurrection; he must will nothing, but Gods Will in Christ.

69. But this is his Desire, that God may be his Will and Deed, that God in him
may be his knowledge; he should continually slay the will of his Flesh, and
desire only GODS Will in himself: that it may rule, Drive, and be the Deed, in
him.

70. Note wherein Man's ability of doing Good consists.
For man of himself does no good thing; but the Law of God, which God writes
in his Nature, that Does the Good: that very Law is the Eternal Word of the
Deity: and puts on to it self, Divine and heavenly substantiality, viz. the
New Body; for it is become man, and must also become Man in us.

71. And in that Body stands the right, willing, and doing, and the
performance and the ability of a Christian Man; without that there is no
Christian, but the Rev. 17. 1, 2.
Antichrist, and a spiritual Whoredom, as the Revelation of St. John
Testisyeth.

72. Therefore it lies not in Disputing, flying high and being accute,
des^^ing and giving his brother to the Devil: for God Tim. 2. 4. (...)
(...) as the V. Psalm speaks: and Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Ezekiel the 33. As true as I live, says the Lord, I will not the Death of a
Sinner, etc. And Christ says, Luke 5. 32.
I am come to call sinners to Repentance, and not the Righteous; Also Isaiah
faith; Isa. 42. 1.
Who is so simple as my Servant. Also, 1 Cor. 4. 20.
the Kingdom of God consists in Power: What needs then such high flying and
Contention?

73. Psalm. 51. 17.
God respects a shiveered Broken Contrite and sighing heart, that is afraid
of his wrath, that would always fain Do well, that always Desires God and
goodness, that Co-worketh with God: for what the Mind is desirous of, that it
receives, be it necessity or Death, or else the Kingdom of God; for the
Kingdom of God is not far off, but within us, we must become born of God, if
we will see God, or receive Gods Will.

74. In Adam we lost Gods, will, and in the Promise of the Woman's Seed we found
it again: for it presented it self with or by the Promise to all Men in the
Light of Life; and Espoused it self to the soul for a Bride: Whatsoever soul is
Entered thereinto, out of that is the Noble The New Regenerate Man.
Lilly Twig or Branch Sprouted up again, and that is become Elected or Chosen
to be the Child of God.

75. But he that has not willed, but let the fierce wrath of the Eternal
Nature, deteing him; has the fierce wrath and Anger swallowed up into it self,
and kept him in the Abyss of the Original in the first Principle, out of
which the Worm of the soul arises Originally.

76. In that very regenerate will of God, Israel is become born in God, and in
that very will, is, the Word of Eternal Life, which makes Divine Essence,
wherein the Divine Will becomes generated.

77. And that is entered into Mary's Essence, and Opened the, in Death,
enclosed, Will, in MARY; and brought sorth the Lilly of God: and therein is
become a true Man; and has received or assumed a soul out of the, in Death,
enclosed, and now through Gods Motion, Sprouting forth, humane Essence, into it
self; in which now, Divine ability stands, for it is in the Word of the Light
of Life: and to that very will we must unite and give up our selves; that it
also may become MAN, in US.

78. In Adam, the Ability was shut up in Death, for the Divine Light
Extinguished in Alams soul; and in the Promise, it stood before the soul for an
Eye-Mark; and in the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, it was brought
again into the soul, and shone again in the Darkness.

79. Though indeed in it self, it was not Extinguished, but Adams soul was
entered into the spirit of this World; and gone forth out of the Divine
Principle; it had received the spirit of this World for a Lodging: thus stood
the Light in it self in the Shining, and was covered as to the soul.

80. For the soul is another Principle then the Light, as the Fire has another
source or quality, then the Light; so the soul is a Magickfire, introduced into
Adam out of the first Principle: and with the Moving of the Deity in the Divine
Fiat, became generated a Creature.

81, For its Essence it has been always from Eternity, but in the Creature,
in the time of the Bodies Creation, became formed to the Image of God: and yet
it is not solely or entirely the right Image; but the Essential fire to the
Image; if it attain the Divine Ligh, viz; the Second Principle, then the Divine
similitude grows out of it, in which God Dwells, and in which Gods Will
stands, which has Divine Power Might or Strength.

82. But if not, and that it stands barely in his Magick-fire, and will not
introduce Gods will into it self; then it brings the Will of the Original,
viz: of the first Principle, or of the Kingdom of this World, which stands
in the Ground of the first Principle, into it self, the Image whereof, also the
Magic fire of the soul receives whence Note, Why Christ called the Pharisees
Generation of Vipers, and Herod a Fox.
CHRIST called the Pharisees, a Generation of Adders and brood of Serpents, and
Hered a Fox: understand according to the Image of the inward Man, which through
the Imagination becomes generated and born.

83. Therefore it lveth in the Imagination, which when it receives the Divine
Lightening in the aspect or Countenance of (...) Light of God, becomes
impregnate of the Word of God; and then is FAITH generated, which then Eats
of Christ's flesh, and Drinks of his Blood, and takes the Divine
substantiality into it self, wherein the true similitude and the Image of God
stands, which then Eats ex Verbo Domini, of the Word of the Lord, and of
the bread of God, of which Christ says; Joh. 6. 56.
Whosoever eats my flesh and Drinks my blood, he continues in me, and I in
him,

84. Read the Book of the Threefold Life, there it is explained with all
Circumstances, and cleared; there a Man may understand, what a Principle is,
and much more in the Three Books of the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ;
and of or concerning his Mother MARY; and also of the Eternal Mother, where
all is become brought forth out of the Center of Nature. Also, read the Three
Principles, there thou have the Ground, which is here too long to write,
neither does the Libeller deserve it.

85. Therefore I say still, the true Christain Faith, stands in no Conceit or
Opinion, much less in strife, but in the New Birth, out of the Word of
Eternal Life, which became Man, and that must become Man in us, or else we
cannot see God: as CHRIST says to Nicodemus; therein shines the Light of God.

86. We must give Divine sewell to our souls-fire, if it be to burn in a Divine
source or quality, and if a Divine Light be to shine from it, earthly fuel
gives an earthly source or quality, and a Light according to that source or
quality; whatsoever a man kindles in himself, THAT burns in him.

87. But Gods kingdom stands in Power, in Love, and Joy; it searches after
nothing, for it has all things beforehand: only the soul searches, it would
enter into the kingdom of Rest; and in the Earthly Body it sticks in
unquietness; and therefore it searches after its Native Country, out of which
it went forth in Adam from Jerusalem to Jericho, viz: into it self, into the
original of the first Principle, and out of it self, though the first
Principle, into the spirit of the outward World, into the Multiplicity, viz:
into the Stars and Elements, into the source or torment-house, where if finds
and learneth ARTS; It will needs be as God, and will know, Evil and Good;yes
indeed; it experienceth that: It were better to be in Paradise.

88. Therefore is all contention and strife, concerning the kingdom of God,
only a fighting with a shadow, a Babylonish work in the kingdom of Antichrist.

89. A True Believing Christian, ought not to strive or Contend with any about
Religion; let him strive only against himself, against Flesh and Blood, and
Endeavor for this, how he may work the works of God in the Love of his
Neighbor; let him seek only Gods will, and give himself up to that, and Lead
his Life in Obedience to the Will of God: let him draw himself away from this
World; for he is not at home in this world; and let him seek his brother as a
Member of his own Soul, and take him along with him.

90. As one Member wishes and does all Good to the other; so will also a
Believing Soul, Continually have his fellow Member with it, and endeavors
for this, how it may show his Brother any Good; it always shows him its
Light, and with or by its Imagination sets it before the Eyes of the soul, For
an Object.
to be looked upon, and says, Come I pray hither; for which things sake, this
Pen has written so very much, which the Pasquill or Libeller, does not
understand, for the Sting is in him.

91. O how miserably and horribly has he written, of the Propagation of Man,
and Of the will of God: whereas a Man, whom the Devil assaulteth enough
besides, might Despair upon it; therein sticks Heresy, that a man dares
pervert the will of God, who only wills Good; and make of Gods will, a will
of Evil or Malice.

92. How very blind is he, as to the knowledge of God, how altogether Nothing
does he know of the Eternal Nature; and of the Original of the Will, what the
will to Good and to Evil is: He rejects my The AVRORA.
A. B. C. little Book, and sets the Babylonish Grammar, in the (...) of it: Art
(...) do the thing.

(...) Mine is bestowed upon me of Grace in the Love of God; I shall well stand
with mine against your; it is as the Sun and the Moon, to one another. An
honest Man, fearing God, who seeks but Gods will, may very well distinguish
my writings, and thine, asunder.

94. Do thou suppose that men are satisfied by them? Can they satisfy the
heart and poor captive soul, which sticks in the Prison of Darkness? (Thou
Teach, that God has not Elected them all:) That God Hardens one part of
them, and draws them not, in Christ, to the Father, and give the Similitude
of a Potter: As if the SOUL were made or Created; and though indeed thou do
not so state it in terms, yet it affords such an Understanding.

95. Why do you not set down the Original of the will to Evil and to Good,
what is in GOD, that Draws Men to Good, and, to Evil? Will thou boast thy
self of an Enlightened Mind, then thou must know that, and set it down; for the
Comfort of the poor soul; that it may not be wavering and unsettled, and to
think that God has not created it for a vessel of Honor; that it is not born
or generated in the Line of CHRIST; as thou bring it in concerning Cain and
Abel; and usest the bowed perverted Scriptures and leavest out the Best, viz.
the Love of God, which wills not the Evil; and so thou Castest a snare about
the Neck of the Soul.

96. Well: thou art come to my warehouse, to which I have invited the Children
of God: But I tell thee, I have no such ware as thou seek after; I have only
Comfort for the Children of God; and Not Desperation for the Devils: I will set
forth to thee, the Ware I promised, if thou will not buy, let it alone.

97. I have not invited the Devil's Advocates to it, but Christ's Children, who
would feign be saved: although thou boastest Much, that the Election of Grace
is not to be searched for out of Christ, but tellest not how it is to be
searched for, in CHRIST: but layest it aside, as if God would not have all Men,
as if he hardened some out of a Predestinate purpose.

98. In that respect I will show you some of my Wares; if you will buy, well
and good, and so you may be a brother in Christ: but if not, thou thy self wilt
not, God would indeed, but if thou thy self wilt not, then thou hardenest thy
self.

99. The CENTER out of which Evil and Good, flows, is IN thee; that which
thou awakest in thee, be it Fire, or Light; that will be taken in again by its
Like; either by Gods Anger-fire, or by Gods Light-fire: Each of them Electeth
or chooses to it self, that which is like its property.

100. Will any be a Devil, then Gods Anger will have him; for he is of its
property: the Election or choosing is suddenly there; but will he be an Angel,
then is the Election or Choosing also suddenly there.

101. But has be been an Evil wicked Man, and likely that the Anger of God
has already chosen or Elected him to Damnation, and yet lets in the sparkle
of Gods Love, again, into the Light of Life, which not withstanding, all the
while the outward Man lives, stands presented to him, and calls him; then
is also as suddenly, the Elector or chooser to the Kingdom of Heven in THAT
sparkle, and besides, Luke 15. 7.
with very great Joy and honor, more then for Ninety and Nine Elected which
need no repentance.

102. The soul of Man, is from or out of that Center, which is called God the
Father, understand out of the Eternal Beginning less Nature: it has the
Center to the fire, and Light, in it self; to evil and Good; what IT Electeth
or chooses for it self, of THAT it is re-Elected or chosen again and taken
up; which is to be seen by the Devils.

103. They were Angels in Gods Light; and their Center Moved it self yet
higher then the right of the Angelical Nature was, and awakened in them the
Mother of the Original in the fierce wrath; and that also suddenly caught
their will-spirit, and Elected or chose them to be Creatures of the Dark world.

104. Do you suppose now, that it was Gods Predestinate purposed will to have
it so? then must God have a Devils will in himself, and also an Angelical:
which is quite contrary to the Holy Scripture, also against Gods Love, and
against the Light of the Eternal Nature.

105. But the Pasquill or Libeller, understands NOT at all what Gods Love and
Anger are; or what is called God. He will speak of Gods will, and it is but a
fighting with a Shadoe and a Juggling.

106. But since he understands it not, and that, through the Grace of God, I
see his miserable blindness, how he burns in the poison of the Original,
and thus affords a right Advocate to the Anger of God, as also to the Devil to
bolt up and keep the poor foul in the Anger of God; therefore I will Discover
somewhat to him. Now if he will buy, well and Good, then let IMMANUEL be for
US, and the Dark world for the Devil.

107. But if he will NOT, then I have written for the Reader of his Pasquill or
Libel; if the Reader be a Christian, and Entendeth to be saved, he will be well
able in his Understanding and Mind, to distinguish between US.

This shall be my Answer for this one Time.

Here follows further Information, and Refutation of the Pasquil or Libel,
It is noted with the The Number and Page of the Libel.
Number, where it is to be found in the Libel.
108. First the Pasquil sets down for an Entrance, a great Register of the
Prophesies of CHRIST concerning the last Times; How Seducers and HERETICS,
would come, and say, Here is Christ, and that we should not then believe them:
And that the Libeller does to the End, that he may make to himself a stately
Entrance and Door of reproach to the Pasquill or Libel; That he may proclaim
the Author for a HERETIC: and a man may soon see what he has in his Mind and
Thoughts, and what Spirit's Child he is; his Christian vein, suddenly appears,
so that he may lay it upon the Author.

109. Indeed Christ and his Apostles have rightly prophesied, and it is, or
stands so, in the substance, and it proteedeth at present with great
prevalency, when every one Cries, Math. 24. 23. 26.
Here is Christ, or There is Christ; Run after Me, you is a Heretic and Babel
at present is quite kindled with Clamor: it burns also in the fire of Gods
Anger, in its senseless Turbulency.
Sectarianisme, so that indeed, Math. 24. 24.
if it were possible the Elect might be doveived.

110. But why does the Pasquill or Libeller, wrest the words of the Prophecy,
and not say what an HERETIC is? He thinks he has catched a Mouse, and sees
not that he himself sticks fast in the Trap.

111. Certainly, HERETICS are such people as are generated or born out of or
from Reason, out of or from ART which is from the Stars, which make an
unstedfast Matter or Substance, whereas to day one Constellation or
Configuration, is made, and to Morrow that is broken by another; where a man
must have many things to build with; where, a man does but Exchange words, and
Expounds words with words; where, the Mind never Experienceth what the Power
and understanding of the words are, where a Man runs about with Reason and Art,
and seeks only favor and honor thereby; that the Man might have respect and
repute.

112. And when a Man cannot retain that, then they Cry in the Ears of the
Worldly power and Authority, and raise, Calumnies, Persecution, Wars and
Shedding of Blood; then the uproar-Master, danceth in his heart; now thou have
gotten the day; and fall on to make Laws about Christian Liberty; and to
Establish them with worldly authority, and put penalties upon Men, that they
must believe and do what those uproar-Masters have carved out.

113. And then when it comes into a Custom, then they call him a Saint or Holy
Person, and Men devise and saine Continually more and more to add to it, how
they may flatter and serve the uproar-Masters; in the mean time not forgetting
the Belly-Idoll, they draw all with suttlety and Tricks, and draw the SCRIPTURE
of the Saints and Holy Men by the Hair of the Head to it, and that with great
mixture of their own with it.

114. And there then is the right ANTICHRIST, for he does what himself will,
and not what God will; he is from or out of himself, born or generated out of
or from the Starry-Reason, and not out of or from God.

115. Such, Men set up, for Teachers, to the World; and these now are mere
Contenders, strivers, boasters, and HERETICS, and stir up nothing but Wars,
Plagues, and Vexation; they Teach only reproachful words, they strive about
words, they dispute about the Shell, and let the Kernel lie, also they know
nothing thereof, for the kernel is a Mystery to them; Exodus 32. 19.
they Dance about the Calf as in Moses time; and leave Moses alone with God in
the Mount, and likely slight whatsoever he shall say, when he comes from the
Mount.

116. They take not themselves concerned, though Israel be destroyed nay rather
they will help toward it, and put the Sword into the Hands of violence; thus
the Anger of God will have it, that he may but devour THOSE, who are NOT Gods
children, and seek not God, but their own honor.

117. But he is a ture Christian, who is Obedient to CHRIST, And, when those
uproar-or Alarum-Masters, Math. 24. 23. 26.
Cry out, here is the Church of Christ, or there is the Church of Christ,
Behold, he is in the Wilderness, He is in the Chamber; Also in the Supper, And
the other says no, he is not there, go not then forth; for CHRIST says;
Math. 28. 20.
Behold I am all the days with you, even to the End of the World; Math. 24.
27, 28.
as the Lightining Springs up in the East, and shines to the West; so will
also continually and even in Eternity, be the Coming of the Son of Man: Luke
17. 23. 24.
for where a Carcass is, thither the Eagles gather together.

118. CHRIST is always the true Christians, Carcass, his Lightning is
continually IN them, they continually Eat his Flesh and Drink his Blood, and
forsake boasting and playing the Herotick; they contend with none, they have no
contention; Christ is with them, they are generated or born out of Christ, and
Live in him, they seek only how they may do his Will.

119. Note.
Has Romans 8. 2.
Christ made us free from the Law of Sin, what need we then long hunt after
any other? why should we despise and persecute others, since we are all
extracted or begotten out of ONE Soul and Body?

120. In Adam we fell with thst ONE only soul, into Death and Eternal
Darkness; In Christ we become again Newborn in that same ONE only soul: And
nothing More is wanting, but that we all should Enter again into THAT ONE only
soul of Christ; and become ONE in CHRIST again and not Two.

121. As the Libeller, shamefully, falsifies it, as to Adam, and hides and
obscures the true Ground, and in the sted thereof sets up a plea as Advocate
for the Devil: whereas he knows very well, that the Author, in his Book
has rejected that thing, yet he will set it up again, and the Pasquill or
Libeller is ready for that End and purpose, if any understand the Matter;
Syrach. or Ecclesiastions.
Syrach says, He that throws among the Dogs, and hits one, it will be
discerned well enough which he hits.

122. Observe, I pray, his holiness, when he makes such an Introduction, that
he can give the Author up to the Devil, then he holds it forth for a great
piece of Holiness, that he will not Judge the Author, but leave the judgment
of him to them to whom it belongs, where likely he means the Devil, or the
Hangman; as he all along pronounces the Author to be a Devil.

123. O, Great Babylonish holiness! Mind repentance or else thou will not eat
of Christ's Carcass: The Author is no Devil, but seeks his Math. 24. 28.
Carcass CHRIST, and Destreth nothing Else.

124. Christ says, Math. 12. 34.
How will you that are evil or wicked, speak that which is Good; also Math. 7.
16.
Can a Man gather Grapes of Thorns, or sigs of Thistles; If a Toad, did sit
under a sweet smelling Medicinal Herb, or in an Apothecaries Shop of Precious
Ointments, or did Eat nothing but Sugar, and dainty Spice, yet it would suck
only poison out of all, and continue an evil Toad still.

125. And so it is also with an Envious Man, that sucks only poison, out of all
that is very Good; He turns all to the worst, he cries down that thing for
Evil, which is better then himself; for every property desires only its like,
the other is contrary to it.

Number I. Page 5.
126. THere the Libeller begins to reprehend, that which stands written in my
Preface, In the Preface to the Avrora. Verse. 27.
viz: Till the Prince of Light came, out of the Heart of God, and became a Man
in Nature, and wrestled in his humane Body, in the power of the Divine Light,
in the wild Nature: that Kingly or Royal Branch or Twig, grew up in Nature,
and became a Tree.

127. What fine knowledge he has concerning the Soul of Man, and of the right
Man, is here easy to be Perceived or Discovered.
traced; he rejects this description, and understands nothing thereof, how
the Author's mind and thoughts are; for it is written in a Magic
understanding: for the Author himself, who knew not of this Libeller, or of any
other reader; He supposed, he had made a Labor for himself only, but God has
turned it otherwise.

128. But that, the Libeller, perverts the Author's meaning and Mind and
Thoughts, very soolishly, and gives it a strange understanding, a simple Man
may very well understand it; though indeed, the Libeller with Consutation, is
so blind, that he knows not what he babbles: He speaks just nothing of the
meaning of the Author, but brings another sense in to it, that he may have but
somewhat to reprehend.

129. For, the Authors Text is very right, but the Pasquill or Libeller,
understands nothing therein, which by the foregoing Words of that Text is
Demonstrated very well to him, what the Author saw if he had rightly taken in,
the Magic understanding, else he should have let it quite alone.

130. The Author, had under his Pen, the poor fallen Man, and the poor captive
perished Soul, and showed, how it becomes helped or saved again.

131. He looked in this Description, not only into the outward Kingdom, into
the 4 Elements and Stars, but into the inward Kingdom, into the first
Principle, whence the soul originally arises; He understands somewhat else by
the Wild Nature, then the Pasquill or Libeellr understands. He meant not
Stars and four Elements, also not the beastiall flesh which is of this World,
as the Pasquil or Libeller reproacheth: but he meant the Center, the
fire-source of the soul, which had Extinguished the Light of God, and
introduced the earthly Imagination from the kingdom of this world.

132. He understood, how the poor soul after its fall became a Creaturely
Magick-Fire in Gods Eternal Anger-fire: and THAT he called the wild Nature;
for the soul stands in the Eternal beginningless Nature, in the first
Principle of God the Father, and is the Cause of the Image of God.

133. It has all forms of the Eternal Nature in it, It has in the Essence,
ever been, from Eternity; but, in the Creation, passed into a Creature: It is
from or out of the fire, wherein God the Father ever generateth forth his
Light; And is in its Original without besides or beyond, the Light of God, an
anxious horrible Substance, like a horrible brimstone worm: for it is a
Magick-fire, from or out of Gods fire, which is the Eternal Natures, Original.

134. Which when the Eternal fire of God moved it self, became desirous to
have its re-awakening, and Comprised in its desire, an awakened similitude,
according to and out of it self; understand, out of the Desire of the Eternal
Fire, which is only a Spirit; and originateth in the will, which is the
One-Element-fire, which stands in the inward re-awakening, and Consumes that
again continually in the Comprised Substance of the Desire; and continually
thereby only awakeneth it self, as is to be seen in the kindling in the outward
Kingdom.

135. Out of that Eternal Nature, out of its properties, understand out of the
Eternal, which is the Center, and a Principle in it self; a Magick-fire of
God, which it self, is God the Father according to the Eternal Nature; the
Eternal Light becomes Generated, and shines in that Nature in its
properties, that the properties of the fierce wrath and Anger become not
manifest, but are only a cause of the shining of the Or Light.
Life.

136. For the Light makes also a Center in it self; with other properties;
That which in the fires property is a fierce wrath, that in the Lights property
is a desire of the substance of the Light, and is called, Love, and Meekness:
That draws the fierce wrathful fire into it self, and Extinguisheth the
fierce wrath of the fire therewith, so that out of the fire, Joy comes to be.

137. For the Anxious fires desire is after Meekness, and the Meeknesses
desire, is after the fiery Essence, that it may be a Life; Thus each desire
makes a Will-Spirit, one out of the Fire, and one out of the Light, and yet is
but ONE only, but with TWO properties.

138. And God calls himself a God, according to the Lights property,
understand, Exodus 34. 6.
a God of Love, Meekness and Mercy; and according to the Fires property, he
calls himself, an Angry Zealous or Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
Jealous God, and a Consuming fire: and yet he is but ONE and not TWO: as in
the Book of the Threefold Life, and in the Three Principles, is mentioned and
expounded at Large with many Circumstances.

139. This, thus briefly mentioned, is now the Most Original Spirit, where, in
the fires property the Eternal Nature is understood, and much more in the
forms to Fire, which make the Eternal Center, as is mentioned in the Three
Principles.

140. And understand further, That the Desire in that Eternal Spirit,
according to both properties, has from Eternity Continually been a Delight
Longing or Lust, to seek and to find it self, and has continually found it
self in it self, each property its like, both according to the fierce Wrath and
the Love, according to fire and light, and according to all forms to the Fire,
and according to all forms in the Light, of the Love.

141. That which is found has been the Spirits LookingGlasse: in the Love in
the Light, the Looking Glass is called Gods wisdom; and in the fierce wrath
of the fire, it is called Gods AngerEye.

142. In this Looking-glass, has been seen from Eternity, the substance of
this world, viz. the Third Principle: for it has stood in the Magical Desire,
indeed not in Substance, but in the LookingGlasse, in the Desire of the
Eternal Nature, wherein the Spirit has discovered it self, and with the
beginning of this world, with the moving of the Eternal Nature, by the Spirit
of God in the harsh or astringent Fiat, created it into a Substance, into a
similitude, according to the property of the Eternal Nature, according to all
forms to Nature, and according to all Forms in Nature.

143. Whatsoever, became generated in Nature, viz. in the Principle, belonged
to the kingdom of God, and has the Name of God. But whatsoever became
generated in the Forms to Nature; that belongs to the dark angwish-world.

144. All properties became moved, and each property set it self in its
Looking-glass, for a Note.
FIGURE, according to its Essence; understand according to the Desires Essence.

145. The harsh or astringent Mairix to Nature, was the Fiat, which Formed or
fashioned.
comprised the similitude and Image, and brought it into a substantial Being,
through Gods moving.

146. Understand, according to the will-spirit, which goes forth out of the
Lights Center, and according to the Will-spirit which goes forth out of the
fives Center; and yet is but ONE, But in TWO properties, viz. Two Magic
desires.

147. As Men see in the Creature, how Love and Anger stick in One Mind, and
yet have Two Centers, all accordingly as the Outward Will-spirit discovers in
any One, so is the awakening in Love and Anger: and Men see in this world in
the Creatures, how there are Evil and Good, Wolves and Sheep, Serpents and
good Fish, Poisonous Toads and lovely handsome Beasts and living Creatures;
Every one out of its Mothers property, springing from the Eternal Original.

148. In this Eternal Looking-glass of the wisdom of God, has also the soul
of Man, from Eternity by the Spirit of God, been discovered in the Essence,
which with the beginning of the first Moving in the Fiat of God, became formed
into a NOTE.
Creature, according to the similitude of the Birth or Geniture of God.

149. The Spirit of God discovered in the Looking-glass of wisdom, an Image,
according to his similitude or likeness; understand out of both the Magic
fires in the Principle of the Light, a Total entire similitude according to
the Deity, as to all the Three Principles.

150. If we would conceive of the Eternal divine Birth or Geniture, in the
Light of the Majesty in its Tri-unity, and then of the soul of Man in its
Image, Substance, and Being, we cannot perceive or think upon it better, in a
similitude, then in Fire and Light; that is a direct or Exact similitude.

151. The Fire signifies the Eternal Nature, which arises originally in the
Desire in the Eternal Will, continually, from Eternity in Eternity, where the
Eternal Will-spirit, out of the Eternal Nothing, viz. out of the Liberty of
the Deity, manifests or reveals it self, by or with its going forth into
the Desire of Nature, and divides it self, into two worlds or Principles, viz.
Darkness and Light.

152. Where each World has its Center to the source or quality in it self, and
yet neither departed away from the other, but ONE world is in the OTHER, the
Light holds the darkness captive, but the darkness is a cause of the fire,
and the fire is a cause of the Light: For in the Harsh or astringent and stern
darkness, arise the Essences or the source or quality of fire and Nature.

153. Now we see plainly, in the fire and Light a twofold source or quality,
and desire; and we see also how the fire burns out of a Dark Substance, which
signifies the Dark world dwelling in it self.

154. The Fire signifies the Eternal Nature, in the Fathers Will in the
Desire to Manifestation or Revelation; the Light signifies the Eternal
Liberty, without, besides, or beyond, Nature, which manifests Nature in
Substance.

155. The Fire, has in it self, the dark worlds fierce wrathful Essence, and
the Light has in it self, the Eternal Liberty, viz. a meek, soft, quiet still
Habitation or delight.

156. But now the Liberty and Meekness without the fire, would not be
manifested or revealed; but would be a still Nothing, and the fire also would
have no Glance or Luster, without the Liberty; and so the fire and Light would
be Nothing without the Desire; that is the Center to the Genetrix, and holds
or contains in it self, the FIAT of the word.

157. And in the Desire becomes Generated, the Eternal Word, or the
understanding, also the wisdom, as also the Anger-Looking-Glasse, out of the
Root of the dark Center.

158. And we see further, how the Fire dwells in the Light, and the Light in
the Fire, and one comprehends not the other; the Light becomes generated in
the fire, viz. out of the dying or Consumptibility, it shines out of the
Death, and sincketh down to the Death in it self, and makes in it self
another source or quality then the fire is: another Principle, where another
Life goes forth, viz. Meekness and amiable delight, whereas in the fire, there
is only anguish and pain.

159. For, we see, that the Light is as it were a Nothing in respect of the
Fire, and its Root: for it is incomprehensible, and it signifies to us, the
Eternal Liberty, without, besides, or beyond Nature, viz. the Divine
Substance, and the Angelical world; and yet it is All: for it is all power of
all Essences out of the Fire, and out of Nature in the Light, and is a Life of
the understanding, also of Reason and Sensibility or Thoughts; whereas in fire
is nothing but an opposite or Coutrary will, to be understood.

160. For, the forms of the fire Nature, are themselves at Enmity one with
another, the Harshness Bitterness and Anguish, are one against another, which
are the fires Root, where, in the Desire stands the harshness, and in the
harshness the drawing, where the Nothing becomes brought into Somewhat, and the
will overshaddoweth it self, with that which is drawn in.

161. Whence, in the Desire, a darkness and Overshadowing exists, and then
also, out of the first desire, the other or second Will, to go out from the
Darkness, and yet there is no flying away from one another, but the other or
second Will enters into it self, into the Liberty without besides or beyond
the Desire in the Darkness, and so brings the property of Nature along with
it.

162. That fiery property, is, the Liberties; viz: the Nothings Revelation or
Manifestation, for thus existeth the Glance or Luster and shineing. For in the
Liberty, is, the property which is brought along with the other or second will,
put into the still meek delightful habitation, and out of that very property,
a Love-desire comes to be.

163. Thus, the Fire and the Light, in a sunilitude, signifies to us the
divine Substance, also the Soul and its Image: The MATTER out of which the Fire
burns, signifies the Forms to the Eternal Nature, and the Dark world, and
the FIRE signifies the property of the Father.

164. The GLANCE or Luster of the Fire, signifies the Liberty without besides
or beyond Nature; The shining or the LIGHT signifies the other or second
world, viz: another or second Principle, which becomes generated out of the
first, viz: out of the Fathers property, and the Son of God out of the Father.

165. The POWER or virtue of the shining of the Light, signifies the Heart of
God, viz: the Divine Center, as also the understanding, 'Ingenium or Wit, and
Wisdom: for in the power of the Light stands the Right Life.

166. The twofold Spirit which originateth in the Fire, with a twofold source
or quality, viz: Heat and Air, signifies to us in a similitude, the Spirit
of God: the HEAT signifies the Anger and fierce wrath of God, according to
the Eternal Nature of the dark world, according to the property of the fierce
wrath; And the Meek AIREY, signifies the property of Meek Light, in the
Lovedesire, out of the source or quality of the Light.

169. The MEEKNESS of the Light signifies to us in a similitude the Divine
Substantiality, or the water of the Eternal Life, wherein Paradise is
understood, and in the fiery property, Heaven.

168. Now we see, how all Fire draws the Air again to it self, and burns
in the power of the Air; for where Fire can have no Air, there it
extinguisheth; for the Air blows up the Fire, and brings the
Substantiality of the Light into the Fire again, viz: the Meekness of the
Light, understand the Watery Matter, whence the Glance in the Fire Originateth.

169. For, the Meekness originateth from the Liberty, without besides or
beyond the Fires Nature, viz: in the Nothing, and they ever pant the one after
the other: The Fires or the Natures fierce wrath: pants after the Meekness;
and the Liberty or the Nothing pants after the Manifestation or Revelation,
which in Nature becomes Manifested or Revealed.

170. Now we see, that the Light affords a very friendly richly Joyful
Spirit, out of the source or quality of the Fire; that friendly and richly
amiable aspect or Spirit, originateth out of the indrunk waters source or
quality, of Meekness, viz: out of the Liberty.

171. And, in that, the Fire draws the Lights meek Substantiality into it
self, thereby it gives forth that indrunk meek Spirit through the fierce wrath
of Death, through the Consumptibility, into the Light again, and brings the
Nature-property along with it: as we may apprehend by the Air, that it is a
power of Every Life, and it is yet in it self not Nature; but rules as a
mighty potent Spirit IN Nature.

172. Thus in this Type or Resemblance, is understood, the Divine Substance,
and also the Eternal Naturer out of which, Desire and Substance, is become
generated the Third Principle, viz: this outward visible World: and become
Created in the beginning, into a Substantial Being, together with all
Creatures.

173. For, from the Eternal Mother, is the beginning or inceptive Mother come
to be, for where there is nothing, there nothing comes to be: but where ever
somewhat has come to be, there it is come to be out of the Eternal, which
has been, without beginning, and it is the Eternalls Similitude, Image,
Substance, and Propriety, and yet we cannot say, that it is sundred from the
Eternal, but it is distinguished, the one world is in the other, and each
possesses it self.

174. God is in Every thing or Substance, but every thing does not comprehend
him; That only comprehends him, that is gone forth out of his Eternal
Substance; understand, that is of his Substance, that does stand in HIM: For,
God dwells not is the Out-birth of the outward Nature, but in the inward in
himself.

175. God indeed is himself, ALL, but all is not called and acknowledged to be
God, in respect of the difference of the source or quality: Nature is not God;
but God is manifested or revealed through Nature; God is understood alone in
the Eternal Light, according to the second Center, viz. in the Liberty: and
yet is not severed asunder from the Eternal Nature.

176. For if a shining is to be, then there must be fire, and yet also there is
shining of fire, without or besides the Liberty; which the divine world
signifies.

177. The Glance or Luster of the Fire, signifies God the Father, and the
Forms to Fire signify the Eternal Nature, and the power of the Light
signifies the Heart of God, viz: the true Deity, for it produces another or
second Center, of another source or quality, then the fire, viz: a Love-Desire,
and Meekness.

178. And the Out going Spirit, out of the Glance of the Fire into the power of
the Light, out of the Lights Substance, drunk in by the Fire, viz: out of the
Love and Meekness, signiffeth to us rightly the Holy Ghost, which continually
goes forth from the Father and the Son into the Divine power and
Substamiality: as the Air from the Fire and Light, and rules in the Lights
Substantiality.

179. The outward world is througly a similitude of the Inward, for the Inward
has manifested or revealed it self with or by the outward, whereby a Man may
understand, what the Invisible God, in the hidden Mystery, is.

180. Man ought not to think, that God is somewhat absent from any thing, or
space or place, for he fills ALL, but in his own Principle, viz: in the Light
world
Middlemost World, which he himself is.

181. And now when the Invisible God once moved himself, according to the
Eternal Magia, viz: in the Eternal Nature-Desire, he generated to himself in
his wisdom, his likeness out of the properties of all the Three worlds, and
out of Every Essence and property, created Creatures and figures.

182. For the Work-Master, viz: his Spirit, was in all things or substances,
viz. in the Divine Light world, Angels and pure spirits; understand out of the
Eternal Nature, viz: out of the Eternal Fires and Lights property, out of
Divine Substantiality.

183. For a Spirit has the Eternal Center of Nature in it self, if it be an
Eternal Spirit: it has all forms to Nature, viz: of the dark world, and also
of the Light world, in it self, for it is proceeded out of Gods Mouth, it is
Nature, else it were no manifested or revealed Spirit, with or among the
Spirits.

184. Out of the Eternal Nature, God has manifested or revealed his wisdom;
for in the Essence, viz: in the divine wisdom, has the Substance of the
Spirits and Creatures been from Eternity; but with the Moving of God the
Father, it passed into a formed Creation, according to the property of the
Essence, in Verbo Fiat, in the Word Fiat, in the word of Power, and therefore
were the Angels called Heb. 1. 7.
Flames of fire, but thoroughly Enlightened with the Light of God.

185. The Light of God dwells in their fire-flames, so that the firesource or
quality, is nor manifested or revealed in them, but if it become manifested,
then they have lost the divine Substantiality, out of which the fires Glance
Existeth, and that Spirit stands barely and nakedly in the Dark world, as is
done by the Devils.

186. A Spirit, [proceeding] out of Nature, is a Magic Fire- source or
quality, and is desirous of substance, or of the Substantiality of its form:
the desire makes substance, and brings that substance into its Imagination;
that is the Magic fires, viz: the Spirits, Corporeity, whence the Spirit is
called a NOTE.
Creature; Also that Substantiality is the Spirits Food whereof the fire lives
or burns.

187. Here now is understood, the Devils and also Man's fall, for according to
the Eternal Nature, they are both out of one Original; the Devil was an
Angel, and should have set his Imagination in the Light of God, viz: in Love
and Meekness, in the Divine Substantiality: and then he had conceived divine
Substantiality in his Imagination, and his light had continued shining; his
Magic fire-source or quality, had eaten of Gods Meekness, and then also, had
the fire-source or quality burned in such an Essence and property, and then he
had Continued an Angel.

188. But he turned himself back into the Center, after the Mother of the
Genetrix, and set his Imagination, [to goe] after the forms to Nature, and
would needs rule terribly in the might of the Fire; he contemned the Meekness,
viz: the Second Principle, and would domineere over God.

189. What he now desired, that he received also into his fiery Desire; viz:
the Substantiality of the fiarce wrath, out of the forms of the Dark world,
out of his own Center; Thus now is that Substantiality the food of his Spirits
Fire, and his Fire-source or quality stands in a dark fierce wrathful
Essence, and can conceive no desire more, in the Meekness, viz; in Gods
substance.

190. Thus he is a Devil, and dwells in the Center of the Darkness, viz: in
the forms to Nature; for his Light is extinguished, he can not kindle that
again, it shines no more out from his Essence, neither can his Imagination
any more reach or attain it. and he continues a sierce wrathful fire-source
or quality, in the Darkness, and eats of the dark Substantiality, and
stands in another Principle.

191. The Word Fiat, Verbum Fiat, which figureth his form or Image in him, is
the Mother of the Dark world; viz: the stern forms to Nature, according to
every Spirits property; as the source or quality in the Center is, so is also
the Will-Spirit.

192. Now then, the light being withdrawn, he can frame no other will, then
his mother is, in her forms: for as the Genetrix is, so is also the
will-spirit out of the Genetrix.

193. Thus understand also concerning Man's Soul; which is also a
Magick-fire-source or quality, out of the Eternal Center, out of the Eternal
Nature; for after God created the body out of the Substantiality, then he
introduced the Spirit out of all the Three Principles thereinto: He should be a
similitude and Image of God; understand, according to, and out of, all the
Three Worlds, viz; out of the Eternal Fires Nature, and out of the Lights
Nature, and then out of this outward worlds Nature, wherein the outward Man
lives.

194. For, God breathed into him the Living Breath, and then Man became a
living soul: Now what can God breath other out of himself, then himself; for
God is the substance of all substances; but all is not called or known to be
God: He calls himself a GOD only according to his Heart, according to the
property of the Light world, viz: according to the Love and Meekness,
according to the second Principle.

195. God breathed into the Created Image the Spirit out of all the Three
Worlds, viz: that is to say, Himself: viz: the Eternal beginninglesse Magic
fire-source or quality, out of all forms of the Eternal Nature, that is, the
first Principle, and it is the property of the Father, who according to Nature
calls himself an Angry Zealous or Jealous God, and a Consuming fire.

196. And then the Center of the Light, as a Sparkle out of his Heart, out of
which the Divine Will goes forth, which appropriateth or uniteth it self to
God again: and Imagines according to its Mother, viz: according to Gods Love
and Meekness; That is the Second Principle, wherein the Angelical world
consists.

197. And Thirdly, the Spirit-Aire, with the Spirit of this outward world, out
of the Stars and Elements, viz: the Third Principle; Thus Man became an
Entire Total Image according to God, out of all the Three Worlds; An Image of
God, wherein God dwells, wherein God beheld found and manifested or revealed
himself.

198. Now the Eternal Word was his Law, of his spiritual Nature, that this
introduced and in-breathed spirit of Man, should introduce its Imagination,
into no other source or quality, but only into Gods Love and Meekness; It
should eat only of the Divine Substantiality, and drink the water of the
Eternal Life, and then its Body had Continued Paradisicall.

199. The Body had paradisicall fruit to Eat, which grew for it IN all fruits:
The outward Body of this world, was in the source or quality of the Light
world, as it were swallowed up, and yet it was there: As the Light swalloweth
up the Darkness, and holds it captive in it self, and yet the Darkness
remains, but, in the Light, is not Manifested.

200. So also should the outward (...) of this world; as also the inward source
or quality of the Fire, out of the first Principle, stand hidden in the
Paradisicall Substantiality, and source or quality; and Man should bring his
life and will into the Paradisicall source or quality.

201. He should set or put his Spirits Imagination into the Heart of God, viz:
into the Lights Center, and then had the Soul continually eaten of the Lights
Substantiality; understand, the soulish Fire had conceived or received the
divine source or quality into it self, and had burned forth, in the divine
source or quality, viz: in Love and Meekness.

202. Through that burning or Life, would the divine Substance have been
introduced into the outward Body; viz: heavenly Fesh; and the Holy Body would
have stood in the Tincture of the second Principle; and the outward Dominion of
the Outward World would have stood hidden in the Inward World, and have been
manifested in the Outward.

203. Such a Body also was created in the Beginning, viz: out of the inward
Substantiality of the pure Element, which is manifested in Paradise, and an
outward Body of or from the Four Elements, which stood manifested in the
outward World; but the inward should lead the Dominion, and hold the outward
as it were swallowed up, as the Light does the Darkness.

204. Understand, each Principle should stand free and barely in it self, and
set or put its Imagination or Desire into God, and then would Gods light have
filled all in All, and the Earnest severe Firesource or quality, of the first
Principle, viz: the Eternal Nature of the Dark World; as also the outward
Nature and source or quality of the Stars and Elements, would not have been
manifested.

205. Man would have lived in the Divine Love source or quality, and would have
continued Immortal and incorruptible, no sickness, neither want necessity nor
Death would have touched him.

206. Therefore now if such a desire is to be in Man, out of which the
Will-Spirit should barely be inclined or directed into God, then must Divine
Substantiality needs be in the Souls Fire: out of which such a Will-Spirit
might exist.

207. For, out of no Earthly source or quality, nor out of the Dark Worlds
source or quality does any divine desire exist; Earthlinesse, knows nothing
of God; also the Dark World has no Divine Love or Desire in it self.

208. Whereby we know, that we, according to the second Principle. viz:
according to the Paradisicall Angelical World, have had flesh and blood, out
of the heavenly Essence and Substantiality, which was the right Body of the
Soul; and therein stood the Image of Heaven.

209. And the Spirit (...) the Magick-Fire of the Soul, which shined in the
power of the (...), was the true similitude of God; according to the Trinity of
GOD, the Image wherein God dwells; and wherewith God manifests himself:
For that very Spirit is like all Angels in Substance and Being; of which
Christ faith, Math. 22. 30. That Math. 22. 30.
in the Resurrection they are like the Angels of God.

210. When God had created Adam, he then stood in the Paradisicall World, viz:
in the Image of God; but God knowing, how he with his Noble Jewel between the
Inward Dark World, and then also the outward Elementary World, stood fast bound
to BOTH, therefore he gave to the Souls Nature, the Law and Cormandment, and
said; Genesis 2. 17.
Thou shall not eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, for on what
Day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the Death, that is, dye away from the
Divine World; and in THEE, will, the Dark World, and then also, the Outward
world, become manifested, and get the Dominion in THEE.

211. As also then it was so done, when Adam began and set or put his Desire
and Imagination into the Outward World: then the souls fire did Eat of the
forbidden Fruit, and brought the Earthly source or quality, and the
substantiality of this World into his Noble Image, into the Paradisicall
Angelical World.

212. He brought the earthly source or quality and substance, into the Pure
Elementary Flesh, which was created out of the Divine substantiality, so his
light extinguished; that is, he went with his will-spirit out of the Divine
substantiality into the Earthly, into the Stars and four Elements.

213. Thus the Image became Earthly, and Luke 10. 30.
fell among the Murtherours, who smote it, and wounded it, and left it lying
half dead: thus Adam went out of Jerusalem toward Jericho, as Christ said.

214. The Stars and Elements, put on to the Body the fierce wrathful earthly
Clothes or Garments of their Essence and substantiality; and the Dark-world
gave to the souls fire also its fierce wrathful severe or earnest and stern
source or quality, and now the Souls fire, burned in that fierce wrathful
property, and so God and the Kingdom of Heaven was Lost; for the Divine Image
disappeared or vanished, and the Earthly, began to appear; the Outward Fiat gat
the predominancy.

215. As soon as Adam was overcome by the Spirit of this World, then he fell
into sleep, viz. into the outward Magia, which signifies or resembles Death;
for the outward Kingdom has beginning and End, and must break off from the
Inward; THAT, is its Death; for the outward Life goes again into its Mother,
out of which it is proceeded, viz: into the Mystery of the Stars and Elements,
and the Inward Life of the Soul, continues in the Dark world, viz: in the
Eternal Nature, whence it is Originated.

216. Therefore, the Regeneration from or out of the Heart of God is necessary
for us, that the Dark Souls fire shut up in the fierce Wrath and Anger, might
conceive or receive Divine substantiality again, that its Light, might shine
again.

217. And THAT is it which I wrote in my Avrora.
BOOK.

That all was shut up in the Anger; Till the Prince of Light, out of the Heart
of God, came, and became a Man in Nature, and wrestled in the Power of the
Light in the Wild Nature.

218. By Nature, the Author, understood, the Eternal Soulish Nature, the
Center of Nature, which, in the Soul, after the Image became Earthly, became
Wild and Strange as to the Divine World.

219. And Adam and all his Children must needs have continued Eternally in the
wild Nature and in the Anger and fierce wrath of God; if the Prince of Light
out of Gods Heart had not come, and put upon the Souls Fire, Divine
Substantiality, that is, the Garment or Body of Angels; again; if Gods Word or
Heart it self had not become Man.

Here follow the Pasquils or Libellers Suppositions.
220. Now the Libeller sets it down thus, and he (understand the Of the Avrora
J. Behme.
Author) will thereby, make CHRIST, as to his Innocent or Immaculate, Holy,
Pure Humanity; Natural; and thereby prepare an Entrance and way for his
Seduction from God, to Nature and Creature: especially, and because, as a
Beaten and Expert Spirit, he knows, that this Tree of Life, will hence
forward discover his Root out of which he is grown, but has hitherto been
covered with Earth: and will put an End to that, his Secret Mystery: whereby he
may bring to the people, a Root, which bears Gall and Wormwood: and still
seduce many from Christ, and catch them in his Net.

221. The Scripture says of our wild humane Nature, thus, That Ephesians. 2. 3. 1
Cor. 2. 14.
we are all by Nature the children of wrath. And the Natural Man perceives
not that which is of the Spirit. Is Christ become a Man in the wild Nature?
then he was by Nature vain or corruptible, as all other Men. And how then has
he revealed the Mystery of God, of which the Natural Man knows and
understands Nothing? could he pay our Debts, and offer an acceptible
sacrifice for us, and reconcile us to the Father?

222. With these sayings, this Spirit, obscureth the distinction between the
heavenly pure, and the Earthly perished Corrupt impure Birth and Nature. Also
between the Woman's Seed and the Serpents, Abraham's and Adam's Seed, and will
frame for us, A Natural Christ, in whom is Good and Evil, Light and
Darkness, Yea and Nay.
Yes and No; and set our Salvation on a Gog. But the Scripture discovers his
falsehood and Groundlesnesse, and faith: Romans 9. 7. 2.
That not all Abraham's Seed are also therefore Children, but in Isaac shall
thy Seed be called, and not in Adam, Cain, Ishmael, and Esau. The Children of
the Promise are accounted for the Seed.

223. Gal. 3. 16.
He says not, through the Seeds, as through many, but as through One, through
thy Seed, which is Christ; out of which, viz: out of the Eternal incorruptible
Seed, the Living Word of God: all Children of the Promise are born, as the Dew
out of the Morning.

224. For, as his Children are Joh. 1. 13.
not born of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but
of God: So also, according to his Humane Flesh, he cannot be born of Adam's
Natural, but of Abraham's promised Seed, which he himself is; nor be of less
Descent and Honor; then his children are, seeing Heb. 2. 11.
they all come from ONE, both that which sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified.

225. Which Seed is not a Natural Adamicall, but a Supernatural Heavenly
Seed, wherein God and Man is united; God in Man and Man in God, out of which,
Mary, as a Gal. 3. 28, 29.
Daughter of the Promise, even according to her Flesh must aforehand be born,
e're Christ had assumed his body in her; as the Holy Apostle says clearly,
that Romans 9. 4. 5.
Christ proceeded from the Father according to the Flesh, to whom belonged the
Filiation, the Glory of the Covewant, the Law, the Oracles, Ordinances or
Worship of God, and the Promise, which Promise belongs Not to Abraham's
Natural, but to Abraham's Seed of Faith.

Hitherto the Libeller.
226. J. B. Answer.
Are not these high inducing Vaunting Speeches: How should a simple Man be
otherwise then lead blindfold by them; who would say he does the Author wrong?
But hearken Libeller! you will not with this Description yet by a great deal
lay bare the Root of the Covered Tree, as you suppose: you yet understand
Nothing thereof, much less, the Author's Mind and Thoughts, only you
falsify, and pervert it with a strange understanding.

227. Are you not a false Expositor; then tell me; where stands it written in
my Book? that Christ became a man in this Worlds wild Nature, and that he was
begotten of and proceeded from Sinful Seed, as thou explainest the meaning of
the Author to be so; and set down a heap of contradictory senseless
meanings, and shamefully and reproachfully cryest out upon him for a Devil,
very blindly contrary to his meaning and understanding.

228. Art thou he that must Judge me: then learn first the Author's Mind and
Sense: My Text says. Till the Prince of Light came out of the Heart of God,
and became a man in Nature, it is not, in the Wild Nature, but it is, And
wrestled in his humane Body, in the Power of the Divine Light in the Wild
Nature.

229. The Question is. What is the Wild Nature, wherein the Prince of Light
out of the Heart of God, wrestled in the Humanity; Is it earthly Flesh? Or the
source or quality of the Stars and Four Elements? No: For the Sake of that,
the Prince out of the heart of God, came not. But it was the Soul, out of the
eternal Fathers Nature, which had through its Imagination, and Lust,
introduced Death and Earthlinesse into it self; and awakened the Dark worlds
fierce wrathfulnesse in the Anger of God, and there was no Remedy, neither in
Heaven, nor in this world, unless the Prince of the Love of God, came, and
wrestled with the fierce wrathful Anger of God, and quenched the same in the
Humane Soul.

230. And therefore the Prince of the Love of God, viz: Gods own Heart, became
A MAN, in the humane Nature, in humane Essence, not in a strange One, as the
Libeller wonderfully brings it in here: also not in the Wild, of the Stars
and Elements, not in Beastiall Flesh of the Corrupt or perished out-birth of
the Four Elements, it is not in that Essence, that the Deity is united; it is
not the Wild Adamicall Flesh which Christ assumed to himself, as the Libeller
explaineth it, who yet has no understanding at all of the Essence, wherein God
is become MAN.

231. Adam's Soul had not an outward four Elementary Body on it; for it stood
in Gods Love, in Paradise: Paradise is not Four-Elementary, it stands not in
FOUR Elements but in ONE: It is the Divine delight or Habitation.

232. God dwells not in the Out birth of the Four Elements, but in Heaven in
the pure Element, that is his Spirits Corporeal Substantiality, and that
Substantiality Adam had also for a Body, and stood in the outward Body, as the
Gold, hidden in the Course or drossie Stone.

233. The Inward Body keeps the outward body hidden, as the Light does the
Darkness; and the Spirit of God dwells in the Inward body, for it contains
in it self the Second Principle, viz: the Kingdom of Heaven; an Image of the
Divine Substantiality; the Soul has its Meekness therein, it did Eat of that
very Body wherein God dwelt: Its Fire became allayed or Meekened therefrom; for
it received therein Gods Love and Meekness.

234. But as soon as the Souls Fire, began, and Imagined according to the
Earthlinesse: and would Eat of the four Elements and Stars, then the outward
Kingdom viz: the Third Principle, drew-in the first Principle, into the Souls
Fire, and also into the heavenly Body; and obscured the Noble Image, so that it
fell, into inability, into Sleep; Then it was in inability, as it were
captivated in Death, for the Earthly Source or Quality, dwelt now therein,
whence the Souls Fire became fierce wrathful, stinging, and Murtherous, for it
must now eat Evil and Good, and the Noble Image of the Similitude of God
Disappeared.

235. Now when God saw, that the Noble Image was disappeared or vanished, and
that the outward kingdom became Lord in it; His Mercy Pitied it, and promised
it the Woman's Seed and crusher of the Serpent, and said; * The seed of the
Woman shall Crush or Bruise the Head of the Servent, which has brought thee to
Fall; He said the Seed of the Woman, should do this.

236. Understand, in the right humane and heavenly Substantiality which in Adam
was shut up in Death, would God become Man; Not in the Earthly, introduced into
the Noble Image and Soul; into the right humane Nature of the second Principle,
in which God dwelt before Adams fall, into that very Essence shut up in Death,
is Gods Word Entered: THAT, is the Seed of the Woman; and the Word, is Gods
Seed.

237. God was the Man or husband of it, who sowed his Word or Heart into the
Woman's humane Essence; understand, in the Essence of the Soul and of the Flesh,
is God become Man, Christ was One of the Persons of the Holy Trinity, and is
become Adam; understand, 1 Cor. 15. 46. to the 49.
the second Adam, out of and in the First, and yet remains to be what he was.

238. He is not Strange to us, but is our Brother; as he said after his
Resurrection; Joh. 20. 17.
Go, tell my Brethren, I ascend to my God, and to your God.

239. If Christ had assumed on himself a strange Seed, such as I am not, and
which in Adam I was not, what would that help me? where would my poor Soul
remain? How could he then be the Woman's seed, or my Brother?

240. He promised to Abraham, not a strange Seed of the Woman, but said; Genesis
22. 10.
In thy seed shall all People become blessed: that is, in Thine, understand,
Acts 3. 25.
in the heavenly Substantiality, in Adam, shut up in Death; shall the Messiah
destroy Death: And thy seed, that is, in which thou in Adam were put to Death,
shall in Christ, in Gods Blessing, Live again: Christ shall live in THEE, in
thy Image, and thou in HIM, thou and Christ shall become one; he the Body, thou
his Member.

241. It concerned God not only as to a Sacrifice, whereby his Anger should be
appeased, that he let his Heart become Man, and let his Son be Crucisied;
that so his will might be reconciled; No, But it concerned him as to his
substance, that in Adam, was become shut up in Death, that was it, his Son
should make living again.

242. For we belive a NOTE. what Body shall rise again; see verse. 3. II. Romans
8. II.
Resurrection of our Bodies, which we had here; it is Not, the Earthly Body,
that is the Image, which shall live eternally, but the Heavenly, which the
Earthly Body HERE holds captive in Deaath.

243. But if Christ become born therein, then it is no more in Death, but
lives in Christ, and is only covered with the Earthly Body; and therefore must
Christ, when he dyed on the Cross enter into Death, into the Anger of God.

244. The Love of God in Christ, went in the humane Soul into the first
Principle, viz: into the source or quality of the Anger in the Fathers Nature,
and kindled the fierce wrathful Anger-source or Quality in the Soul with Gods
Love and Meekness; whence the Divine Light burnt forth again: That was Heb. 2.
14. See verse. 513.
Poison to Death, and a Pestilence to Hell, for Love and Anger are Contraries.

245. Now if Christ had not assumed Adams and Abraham's Natural seed, as the
Libeller says, how then is he Math. 8. 20. and in Mark.
the Son of Man? Is he only a Seed come from Heaven? and has assumed
nothing from Man, but a humane covering to himself, so that he only dwelt in
Man, without any property of the humane Essence; Luke.
what would that avail my perished Soul? John, in many places.


246. Has he not assumed the humane Nature to himself? then he it Not the
Son of Man, or My Brother, Acts 7. 56.
as he calls himself every where the Son of Man.

247. The Libeller says, I will make Christ Natural, Is he not become
Natural? then can he not be the Son of Man, also not the Seed of Woman,
much less Abraham's Seed.

248. But that the subtle Libeller, will make the Virgin MARY supernatural,
and says, she was begotten or Extracted out of the Seed of God, e're Christ
became conceived in her, and will thereby bring a strange seed thereinto,
which is not humane, that is very Heretical and Antichristian, and he should
do well to smell into his own Bosom, before he condemns others, and passes
his judgment upon them.

249. Is not Mary extracted or begotten of Joachim and Anna, also Naturally
conceived and borne, as all the children of Adam; then let him demonstrate it,
else his conceit will till then remain untrue.

250. But if he say, if Mary were begotten of Joachim and Anna, then were
Christ begotten of sinful seed; as his high flowne Spirit, runs on and
supposes; Then I say to him once for all, that he is altogether blind in the
Divine Mystery; and understands nothing thereof.

251. He speaks indeed of the High Blessing of Mary, but he draws it to a
strange Seed, out of which Mary was begotten or extracted: but he says not
with any ground what kind of seed that was, whether it was barely the Spirit
of God, or whether it was heavenly Substantiality, or the Seed in the Word, or
was also somewhat of humane Essence.

252. For, the Humane Essence, is to Him throughout sinful, he will not at all
be born of Man, but of God, in like manner as if God in Christ had introduced a
strange humanity: and he throughout explaines it so; He will only be born in
Christ as the Dew of the Morning.

253. But Sir Libeller hearken! we will not be so evil as you are, we will
readily of Good Will show you the true Ground in the Mystery, if you will not
go in that way, then go aside; we have other Eyes then you have; Have you
Art? then have we Light.

254. You are not our Judge, though you condemn me, I am a child of God in
Christ, and my seeing is proceeded from Gods seeing; Therefore I will from a
Good heart show you my open Face; though you are not able to apprehend, how
Christ is become conceived aad. born of Humane Essence, Heb 4. 15.
without sin; and you conclude throughout, that I speak of Christ, as if he
were proceeded from sinful seed, though all indeed is very groundlesly Judged,
and your meaning stands in Babell.

Therefore observe my Confession of Faith, and acknowledgement, as it follows
Exactly.
255. God said to Adam: when he stood in Paradise; and lived in the Divine
source or quality and substantiality: What day thou eatest of the Tree of
knowledge of Good and Evil, thou will dye the Death; by Dying, he means not
only, the Outward Body, which with the Beginning of Sin, first became Living.

256. For the Outward Body, fell not down instantly, when Adam transgressed the
Commandment and Dyed; but he gat now the Great Life, and became Lord: before,
he was weak or impotent, and the right Man potent or Mighty: he formerly came
behind and waited on the Image of God, and was a servant, but when the Soul
introduced Earthly source or quality, then he was Lord; and the Image was shut
up in Death.

257. The Spirit is the Life, the Flesh is not the Life, The heavenly Fleshes
Life was Gods Spirit, and the Earthly Fleshes Life was this Worlds Spirit.

258. When the Earthly drew into the Heavenly, and took the Dominion, then the
heavenly vanished or disappeared; for the Spirit of the heavenly, departed away
out of the Earthlynesse, into its Principle; then stood the Image which was out
of the Divine Substantiality, in Death, not in the fierce wrath of the Death of
the Anger; so that the heavenly Substantiality were become kindled in Gods
Anger; but as a vanished disappeared Substance without source or quality, and
Life.

259. For, that which is generated out of the Love, that receives no fierce
wrath into it self: for the Lights Substantiality is water of Eternal Life;
the water makes no fierce wrath, but quenches the Fires fierce wrath.

260. If now the heavenly Image or Substantiality, in Adam were taken out of
the Heavenly Limbus, then surely its Original Mother was the Water of the
Eternal Life; which originateth from the Meekness or Desire of the Light of
God: as the Water in the Deep of this world, from the Meekness of the Sun's
Light, Through Venus's Desire.

261. What fierce wrath or Anger then, would or could come into the heavenly
Substantiality of the Holy Body in Adam? Also that Substantiality was not at
all the Life it self: but the Spirit of God was the right Life in the holy Body.

262. But when the Spirit of God departed: then stood that Image, as dead,
without Life; and the Soul lived, of the Earthly Fire-fewell, though indeed it
is not quite Earthly Essence, yet that Earthly Essence is generated from the
first Principle, wherein also the Soul stands.

263. Therefore also the Soul lusted after that source or quality, there was
given to the Soul a heavenly Body, of which it should Eat, and Not of BOTH
Body's: It should set or put its Lust or longing and Imagination, only into the
Heavenly, then would the Soul-Fire have had the Earthly Body in the Dark World,
only hanging to it.

264. But when it would eat of Both, then came the Dark Body to have power or
strength, and The outward Light of this world.
Light, and ruled over the right humane Body: Thus sin began in the
Soul-Fire; for it became kindled with the fierce wrathful Essence; and so now
the Soul Fire burnt, in that very source or quality, and the Divine Light of
the Soul, which shone in the meek heavenly Substantiality, extinguished.

265. For in the Beginning, the right humane Essence of the Soul, was the
fuel to its Life's burning, but afterward the Earthly Essence was it: and
that is now the Sin and the Opposite Will, and the Soul has no Image or
Body, which remains Eternally, unless it be through Christ Regenerated out
of its first Substantiality, through the Death of Christ.

266. Therefore it is, that many kinds of Figures appear in the Souls Image
in the inward; all according to what its desire is to a Substance, as, the
Image of wild Beasts, also Serpents and Toads; In whatsover Essence and Will,
the Souls-Fire lives and burns, according to that Essence is also, the FIAT
in the Will-Spirit, and it Imageth or frames such an Image: so now, when the
outward Body deceaseth, then stands that Image, thus, in such a form and
source or quality.

267. In the Time of the Earthly Life, it may alter its will, and then also its
Fiat alters the Figure, but after the Dying of the Body, it has nothing
more, wherein it can alter its Will; as is to be seen by the Devils.

268. Therefore said Christ, Joh. 3. 5.
To must become borne anew, through Water and the Holy Spirit, or ye cannot see
the kingdom of God; understand out of Gods Water, out of the water of the
first right Image, wherein the Holy Spirit dwells, in which christ is become
conceived and born.

269. That Water, has not taken sin into its Essence, for, that cannot be:
for that which is out of or from Gods meekness, becomes not kindled in the
fierce wrath of God, but is as an impotency or weakness shut up in Death, viz:
in the stillnesse, in the still nothing.

270. Adam lost the Life, understand, the right Divine Life of his Noble Image,
and that has Christ brought again, he has generated that Image out of Death
again, the living Word, out of Gods Heart, is entered into the Image shut up
in Death, and has assumed or taken, THAT Essence, to himself, and become a
true Man, such a Man, to whom the outward Body only hung: which stood swallowed
up in the right Image, but in the outward World, manifest.

271. He has also therewith put on again to the Soul, the holy Body, viz: the
Innocent or Immaculate; and into that holy Body, has taken a humane Soul, out
of Mary's Souls Essence-seede; therefore must Math. 4. 1, 2.
Christ afterward be Tempted, Mark 1. 12.
and want the outward food for Forty Days.

272. Luke 4. 1, 2.
For the Soul must be tempted, to try, whether now in that holy Body it would
Eat of Gods Substance, and satiate it self, and therefore it was permitted to
the Devil, to Tempt the Soul.

273. Seeing he The Devil.
Excused himself, that he could not stand, because the Matrix of the fierce
wrathful Nature had drawn him too hard, therefore now he should tempt, and
try it, with THIS Man, as he had also tempted and tried it, with Adam, and
overcame him.

274. Therefore God sent another or second Adam, and set him upon the Kingly
Throne which he had, there he should tempt or try with him, whether he could
also give him a Fall: Math. 4. 8.
He now set before him, the Glory of this outward World, Luke 4. 5, 6.
viz: the outward Eating or food.

275. And though indeed that was not at hand, therefore, that he should with
his Noble Image and Divine strength, go into the outward, and Math. 4. 3.
command Stones to become bread, to try whether he could bring it to that, Luke
4. 31.
that the Noble Image might yet become captivated and shut up in Death.

276. And then he set before him, the Great power and authority he had, he
should with the Divine Omnipotency in the outward kingdom, Math. 4. 6.
fly from the Temple, to try whether he might introduce him into the outward
Lust, Luke 4. 9.
so that Gods Love Spirit might depart from this Image, whereas the Deity was
only humble and Lowly he would introduce him into Pride.

277. Thirdly, he set before him, the Dominion of the Outward world; he should
be a Lord in the Third Principle, that he would let him only be a Lord in the
Inward, should fall down and pray unto him or worship him.

273. For the Devil had to do about the Kingly Seat, that this Man was to
possess: Therefore it was permitted to him, viz: to the Devil, to Tempt HIM,
so that if he stood, the Devil should remain a Liar, and his Judgment be
upon his own Lying Mouth or Tongue.

The Conception and Becoming Man or Incarnation of Jesus Christ, is with its
Circumstances as follows.
279. WHen the Divine Image in Adam was vanished or disappeared, Then God
pitied it, and would that this Image might be helped again, and Promised to
Adam and Eve, the Crusher of the Serpent, viz: the Word and Power of the Deity,
that should take the Woman's seed, understand, the disappeared Image Essence,
into it self, and therewith destroy, the sting of the Devil and the Anger of
God, in the Soul.

280. That very Promised Word, stood nevertheless presented to the Noble
Image, now shut up in Death, and desired its former dwelling house of its
similitude for a Delightful habitation.

281. But by or with the Promise, it has set it self before the Soul again,
in the Light of the Life of the Soul; and set a Limit or Mark thereto, whereby
it would again enter into the in Death enclosed right humane Essence; and
awaken the Life from Death.

282. That Limit or Mark, was set in Mary the Virgin: and became blessed in the
Word of Promise in Paradise; and stood as a Center or Or Mark to the humanity
Limit of the Humanity.

283. Gods Heart had promised and espoused or united it self: in that Limit or
Mark, That Limit or Mark became adorned, with the highly precious Virgin of the
wisdom of God, viz: with the Looking Glass or Eye of the Holy Spirit; indeed
not with any strange thing, but with the first Life, understand, the Divine, of
the Noble Image in Adam, from which Adams Soul went forth into the Spirit of
this outward world, viz: into the source or quality of the Stars and
Elements, whose Center, is the Abyss of the first Principle.

284. This blessed Limit or Mark, was promised to the Fathers, viz: to Adam,
Abraham, David, and others, O, how have the Prophets delighted and rejoiced at
this Limit or Mark! the sacrifices of the Jews were a Type of this Limit or
Mark.

285. For, when Adam had lost the pure and fair Image, understand, the power
of the Heart of God, which stood in his body of the Heavenly Substantiality, as
a Center of the Deity; then stood the Soul barely in the Fathers Property,
understand, the Eternal Nature, which without the Light of God is a fierce
wrathful, and Consuming fire.

286. For the Soul is out of that Center; viz: out of the Eternal Nature of
the Father; and therefore was that Soul in Israel lead so long a while, even
unto the Limit or Mark in the Father Nature.

287. The Exodus 19. 16.
Law on Mount Sinai, was given in Fire and Thunder in the Fathers Nature, and
Moses was also called in the Exodus 3. 2.
Bush by the Fire-flame in the Fathers Nature. Acts 7. 30.


288. And Christ also said thus when he came in the Flesh, Father, the Men were
thine, and thou have given them to ME, and I give them Eternal Life.

289. That highly blessed Limit or Mark, stood in the Grace Covenant of the
Sacrifices with or in Israel; The Sacrifices were a Sign or Type of the Limit,
which God set before them; and Israel became in the Sacrifices through the
Limit or Mark ransomed from sin.

290. Israel offered Sacrifice with the blood of Beasts, that, Gods Imagination
looked upon, through the Limit or Mark of his Covenant; since Man was become
Earthly, therefore God set the Limit or Mark before himself, for a Covenant of
Grace, that his Imagination might not enter into the Earthly source or quality,
and that his anger Fire might not be awakened, with Man's Earthlinesse and
Sin, and so he devour them, as was done by Eliah.

291. The Circumcision of the Jews was also this, that Israel must shed its
Blood, and, that, Gods Imagination looked on, through the Limit or Mark of his
Covenant: For Christ should destroy Death with the shedding of his blood: It
should fall into the Anger of God, viz: into the Souls Fire, and quench the
kindled Fire of God.

292. Therefore now God Imaged or represented to himself in the Covenant, the
bloud-shedding of Christ, and quenched with this Imagination, the fierce wrath
in the Soul: and through THAT, became Israel saved, such as with earnest
sincerity have set or put their Will and Imagination into the Covenant, they
have received or conceived the power of the Limit or Mark in the Covenant, viz:
in Gods representing.

293. For in God, that which is done and past, and that which is to come is all
one; And therefore was the New Regeneration out of Christ reckoned or imputed
to the Children of the Covenant, as iif they stood already in the New Body of
Christ, as if Christ had already drowned the Anger with his bloud-shedding, and
that the Life were already become Generated out of Death again.

294. For that very Life out of the Limit or Mark, stood in Gods Imagination:
and with the Promise in Paradise it set it self therein, that very Life was
Promised to Abraham, that it should be awakened again in his seed: Not in a
strange seed, as the Libeller conceiteth, but in the seed of the Noble Image,
which out of the Heavenly Substantiality, out of the Second Principle, was
together given to Adam, for a Body.

295. And yet, with the Entrance of the Soul into the Earthlynesse, was become
shut up in the still Death, as in the Nothing; and that should again sprout
out of Death, and therein rise again and be borne, A New Man, Ephesians. 4. 24.
in holiness, innocence, and Righteousness: it should again be put on to the
Soul.

296. Understand it highly and aright: The Life of God in the Covenant of the
Limit or Mark, which in Mary assumed the humanity, that very Life must from
Christ enter into us, understand into our disappeared Image shut up in Death;
That is the Grain, that is sown, into the Dead disappeared Substantiality,
that, draws that humane Essence again to it, and becomes again the Life of
that Image.

297. Thus the Noble Note the New Regeneration.
Lilly Twig or Branch, grows up; which first is small as a Grain of
Mustard Seed, as Christ says, and afterward becomes as large as a Lorber.
Baum.
Bay Tree; That is the True New Regeneration out of Christ.

298. My Libeller; put you other Eyes into your Wisdom.
Bride; and look upon the Old Testament and the Covenant of Promise, with or as
to Adam and Abraham, rightly, do not imbitter the Scripture; and drag it not
about by the Hair of the head, in a strange understanding: Your Meaning or
Opinion, Obscureth, the Noble Lilly or Branch, which now should sprout or Grow
out of the Mother, or Root; much more, then it does serve, to the promoting of
its growth.

299. If you would Judge in this Mystery, then must you be born again in
Christ, you must see out of Christ's Eyes, if you would apprehend the Great
Mystery Mysterium Magnum, but if you were born of Christ, then you would not be
a Math. 7. 3.
Mote Judger, but a loving Brother. Luke 6. 41.


300. Christ bids you Luke 6. 37.
not condemn, but meekly to converse and friendly Instruct, not to wrangle, or
scoff, or pronounce Men to be in the Jaws of the Devil: My friend, you are
yet very blind concerning the kingdom of Christ: I will rightly show you the
Door of the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ; as it is given to me from
the Grace of God in the Love of Christ.

301. Not through my understanding, but in my resignation in Christ, from
Christ's Spirit From Christ's Spirit have I conceived or received the knowledge,
the Great, Mystery; Mysterium Magnum, I have not studied in your School, I
have known nothing of that, neither have I sought it in that way, I sought
only Gods Heart, and more is come to me then I sought or understood.

302. Therefore if you would be brother in Christ, put your Buckshornes off,
and then we may see one another with right Eyes, and a modest Mind, and
instruct one another in the Fear of God.

303. Such Surlynesse and Scorn; is Babel, the Mother of Tyranny, and Great
spiritual whoredom, whence Wars and Strise is arisen at all times: your
Libell is, only a Bloody provocation, and a scoffing, an unseemly puffed up
Pride, a Cainish property; go out from it, if you would see the richly Amiable
countenance of Christ in the Holy Ternary, in Ternario Sancto: if you would
see, the Wonder-Branch of the hidden LILLY, which at present Sprouteth out of
the Root of the Tree.

304 If you would grow and sprout, with the Noble Lilly Branch, out of the Old
Tree, you must bring an humble Heart: and so you must stand in the Becoming Man
or Incarnation of Christ; if you would grow spring or sprout and speak out of
or from God.

305. For None know any thing of God, ^ J^h. 1. 18.
but only the Spirit of Christ which is in God, the Some in the Bosom of the
Father, searches out in our spirit even the Depths of the Deity; Our spirit
must stand in the Spirit of Christ, if we we would understand the Divine
Mystery.

306. It is not enough, for Men to put together or collect a heap of Scripture
Texts, and Make an Opinion and Meaning out of them, no, my Friend, Opinion does
it not; but the Living Word, where the Heart experienceth the certainty,
therein Consists Faith in the Holy Spirit.

307. In Opinions there is mere Doubting, whether it be right or not, Out of
Opinions is the Antichrist Generated: If we would speak of God, then we must
speak from or out of the Spirit of Christ, which alone knows what God is, or
else we are very Liars.

308. Christ's Spirit must speak out of us, of the Divine Mystery, else we
speak out of the Babel of Confusion: Christ is in our right humane Essence,
understand, in Adams Essence, become Man; not in the Essence of the Stars and
Elements, but in the Essence of the The one Eternal Element.
One Element, through which before the fall, Paradise grew or sprouted in Adam.

309. Luke 1. 25. to the 31.
When the Angel Gabriel came to Mary, he Saluted her, and said; Hail,
Graciously Amiable, the Lord is with Thee, Thou blessed of all Women, thou
shall be impregnate in thy Body, and bear a son, whose name thou shall call
JESUS.

310. Here it has not that understanding, as the Libeller Explaines it, that
Mary was borne out of God beforehand, Ere Christ in her became Man, No, Acts
26. 23.
Christ is the first from the Dead, he first kindled the Life in Death, only
the Limit or Mark, stood in Mary; that was the Blessing; For, in the Limit or
Mark, was the Living Word, and the Spirit of God; Surrounded and Clothed, with
the Noble Virgin of the Wisdom of God, in the Divine Substantiality.

311. When the Angel said, thou shall be impregnate in thy Body, And she, the
Virgin Mary, thereupon said: Luke 1. 38.
Behold, I am the Maidservant of the Lord; be it done unto me as thou have
said; then the Life in the Limit or Mark of the Covenant, viz; the Heart of
God, moved in NOTE. what was Quickened that shall arise again; as verse. 2. 2.
Maryes in Death included Essence: That word was clothed or surrounded with
divine Substantiality, out of the Water of Eternal Life, generated out of the
Meekness of the Light of the Majesty of God.

312. And in that Substantiality, was the Tincture out of the Fire and Light of
God, which is the Glance or Luster and Ornament of the Substantiality.

313. And in the Tincture, was the Chaste Modest Eye of the wisdom of God, and
the Wisdom is the Holy Spirits Corporeity, wherein he dwells: It is his
Eternal Looking-glass; wherein he has discovered or discerned the Great.
Wonders, from Eternity.

314. And the Holy Spirit is gone forth or proceeded from the Word, viz; out of
the Center or Heart of God, forth from the Father, viz: out of the Fire through
the Light into the Majesty, into the Essence of the Paradisicall and Angelical
World; understand, into that Essence, or into the Pure Element, viz: into the
Substantiality of the Heavenly Corporeity.

315. This very Substantiality or Corporeity, as is now mentioned, was Christ's
heavenly Flesh and Blood: For the Noble Tincture makes the Water out of the
Majesty, [turne] into Spiritual Blood.

316. That very Substantiality, which was in the Covenant, wherein the Promised
Word of God, stood, is Entered into Maryes Substantiality, viz: into the in
Death enclosed Substantiality, and is become a Body, and has made that which
was shut up, living again: The divine and heavenly Paradisicall Substantiality
in the Covenant, and Mary's Substantiality, is become ONE thing; the Life
sprouted or grew in Death.

317. Therefore is Christ become our Life and Spirit, also our Flesh and Blood,
and therefore he gives us, understand, our Souls-Fire, his heavenly Body and
Blood, to eat and to drink: Our Soul, has with the Divine Substantialities
Entrance, again gotten heavenly flesh for its Fire-Life: it burns again in
the divine source or quality, out of the Love-Substantiality.

318. The Holy Tincture according to the divine Fires Property, belongs to
the Soul, and the Waters property, viz: the Lights Meekness, belongs to the
Body, the Body is always under or beneath the Soul.

319. For, the Soul it out of the Eternal Nature-Fire, it is the Principle
between the Dark and Light World: it has the Center of the Fire-World in it
self.

320. And the Substantiality is out of the Center of the Light-world, in the
Divine desire it comes to a Substance, for it is the substance of the Desire,
the Desire is NOTE.
Spirit, and that which is comprehended in the Desire, is the Substance of the
Desire.

321. And what can the desire comprehend, other, then it self, that is, the
Meekness of the Light, that is, a sinking down of the Love and Meekness
toward the Fire-Spirit that rises up; That, the FireSpirit continually
comprehends in its desire, and consumes it, that is, it brings it through
the sharpness of the Father, and there it goes through death again forth
into the Liberty, and makes the source or quality of the divine World, for the
Spirit of God, is understood therein.

322. Not that there is a dying or Death therein, but the Fire source or
quality, is accounted for a Death, for the Root of the Fire, is the Dark World
with its stern forms to the Fire-Nature: As in the Book of the Six Points of
the Great Mystery, is expressly mentioned at Large.

323. Now understand the sense, aright: Gods Substantiality, has been from
Eternity, it is unmeasurable, and unsathomable, it is every where all over,
wheresoever a Man can say here is God, there is also the Divine Substantiality,
yet not in the Outward World in the Third Principle; but in the Heavenly in the
Second Principle.

324. Therefore said Christ, John 3. 13. Joh. 3. 13.
None goes to Heaven but the son of Man which is come from Heaven, and which
it in Heaven; his divine Substantiality was in Heaven, and yet it was come into
the Humanity, and the Humanity, is without him, dead, in Adam.

325. Now, would any go into Heaven, they must then have his substance on
them; He is Genesis 28. 12.
the Ladder that Jacob saw, which with one End reached to Heaven, and with the
other End in the Humanity.

326. A Man is to understand it thus, that the Body of Christ, understand, the
Genesis 28. 12.
Corporeity of the divine Substantiality, which has revealed or manifested it
self in the Corporized Substantiality of the Humanity in Mary, Joh. 10. 29, 30.
is Greater then ALL.

327. The divine Substantiality is not totally gone into the Creaturely Image,
that cannot be; for it is unmeasurable, Only it has revealed or manifested it
self, in the humane Substantiality in the Created Image, in the Becoming Man or
Incarnation of Christ; and kindled the humane, and given its Life, understand,
into Adam's Image, which also was in Mary, and in all Men.

Question.
328. Now it may be asked: What kind of Person was Mary: being the Limit of
Gods Covenant stood in her? Or, how did CHRIST get Body and Soul in Her, and
yet remained what he was from Eternity?

Answer.
329. Many was, First, a Bodily Issue and Daughter of Eve the Mother of us all,
and of her right Mother Anna, and of her right Father Joachim: no immaculate
pure virgin, understand, according to the outward World, for the Anger of God
stuck also in her, and she is redeemed or reconciled through the Blood of
Christ.

330. And according to the Second Principle, her Image stood also shut up in
Death; But the Limit or Mark stood in her, understand, in her Image, but
undiscernably and unperceivably; in that way and manner, as God is in all, and
the Thing knows nothing of him: for God dwells not in the Thing, he
possesses Nothing, but only himself: Thus was the Limit or Mark in Mary; and
Gods Promise in the Word of Life, was in the Limit or Mark, yet not dwelling in
Mary, but in it self.

331. God had never according to his Heart, moved himself, from Eternity, and
when once he moved himself in Mary in the Limit or Mark, then Mary became
highly blessed; and in the Blessing impregnate with the Savior: For the Life
came into Death, into the, in Death enclosed, Essence.

332. Now yet the Seed of Man qualified or operated with the Body, and now when
the divine Life came into the Essence of the Seed of Mary, then her whole Body,
viz: the Images Body, according to the Second Principle, became Highly Blessed,
And in this new Wondrous Entrance and Moving of God, was brought to Life, so
that her Essence became living, and the Tincture of her Blood became kindled
with the Divine Tincture, understand, the Seeds Tincture, which qualifieth or
mixeth with the whole Body.

333. But the outward Kingdom of this World, was not at this time broken off
from Mary, that held her still captive, SHE must through Dying, through her
Sons Death, enter into the Eternal Life.

334. Her Body indeed, did not vanish or fall away, for it was in the Midst, in
the Blessing, only the Earthly source or quality must break or corrupt in her,
and all Adam's Children must enter through One and the same Entrance into Life,
viz: through the Dying of Christ: when Christ quenched the Soul-Fire on the
Cross in Death, then also Maryes Soul-Fire became quenched, that is, rightly
kindled in the Light of the Majesty.

335. The outward Body remained to be a Covering before it, so long as it stood
in the source or quality of the Stars and Elements; Through Dying, the outward
Substance of the source or quality, becomes broken off, and then the Image of
God appears or shines.

336. Understand it right, Christ had in Mary assumed all the Three Principles
on to himself, but in Divine Order or Ordinance, not mixed, as Adam did, who
introduced the outward Kingdom through the Imagination into the Inward: into
the Soul Fire, whence the Light extinguished.

337. He had on himself, that is on to the Limit or Mark of the Living
Covenant, assumed, on to the Living Substantiality, the Souls Essence, viz: the
first Principle, and then the Essence of the Image, of the Second Principle;
and then the outward Kingdom, the Third Principle; for he should be Lord of
All.

338. He became after the End of Four Months, a living Soul, which now stood in
the Image; but the Deity was in the Image the Center, which neither receives
Addition or Diminution: the Divine Substantiality also, receives neither
Addition nor Diminution, it becomes neither less nor bigger, only it has
manifested or revealed it self in the Humane Image, and generated it to Life.

339. Thus in Maryes Conception in her Seed a Living Essence arose, no more
shut up in Death, not a sinful One; for where Gods Light shines forth, there
is no sin within: Sin originateth in that place, where Gods Light shines Not;
but where it shines, there is mere Love and Mecknesse.

340. The Heart of God was the Ce^^^ in the Person of Christ; the Essences were
with the Moving of the ^^ity, sanctified and Enlightened; understand according
to the Second Principle: for the Divine and humane Essence became Flesh and
Blood, and became a Man, One only Person.

341. The outward Kingdom hung to the inward, but the inward had now in this
Person the Dominion, the outward was Servant; therefore says the Scripture,
Phil. 2. 7.
he took upon him the Form of a Servant, that he might release us from
Servitude, or Bondage.

342. Thus, I say, What Christ is according to our humane Image, and according
to the Soul; therein he is a Creature, like us, assumed from us; but what he is
according to the Deity, and according to the Divine Substantiality, with that
he is above Nature, and higher then the Heaven, and is as to that, no Creature,
but GOD himself.

343. But his Divine Substance is IN his Creature, viz: in the Humanity,
manifest: he is according to the Humanity, such a person as Adam was before his
Imagination and Fall; he is the second Adam.

344. The First Adam should possess the Kingly Seat, but seeing he stood not;
therefore God generated to himself another or second Adam out of the First: Now
if he had not been Natural, then he had been unlike the first Image, also he
had not been the Son of Man; as the Libeller supposes.

345. Had he not had a Natural Soul, then he had not in the Person, had all
the Three Principles: What should he then have committed into the Hands of his
Father at that present when he dyed on the Cross, or what had suffered on the
Tree of the Cross, if he had not been Natural.

346. When he was risen from the Dead, he showed himself to his Disciples, and
said, Luke 24. 39.
Behold me; a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as yo see me have: Why then does
the Libeller say that it is I that would make Christ according to his holy
immaculate humanity, Natural: I am not the first that make him Natural: He is
my Brother, and the son of Man, therefore he must needs be Natural, yes the
very Angels are Natural.

347. But That he says: I have written: that he became a Man in the Wild;
viz: in the Outward Birth; that is NOT true: The Text in my writing says thus:
and he wrestled in his humane Body in the Power of the Light, in the wild
Nature, Has he not, in Hell and on the Tree of the Cross, wrestled with Gods
Anger? Has he not Dyed and taken away from our Wild Nature, Joh. 15. 55.
the sting of Death?

348. The Libeller says; Christ is not from Adam's Natural Seed, if that were
true; then he is not the son of Man; then has not God assumed the humanity
Naturally: the Word is indeed become Flesh; and is it not become Flesh in the
Humanity? Then let the Libeller Tell me how Christ came to be the son of Man;
or where remains our Salvation or Redemption, the Resurrection of our Flesh?

349. Is Christ not in our Flesh; then he will not awaken or raiseus up: What
does his Wounds help me if they are in strong Flesh? Has not the blind
Libeller seen; that in my whole Book I have distinguished the Earthly and the
Heavenly Man? What need he mix himself in the Magic understanding, and find
fault with that of which he has no knowledge understanding or Ground: let him
read my Book of the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, he would find more
then he can fathom.

350. But that he will say; that Christ is become Man in the promised Seed, and
Not in Adam's and Abraham's; What is that Seed? You see that very Promised Seed
has breathed it self into the Humanity, and God and Man is become ONE Person.

351. He says, Christ, viz: the Eternal Word, has assumed the Seed of the
pure holy Virgin, Elected to it from Eternity, which dyed away from Nature, and
was totally blessed in God: viz: the forementioned Seed of Abraham: Tell me
Libeller; Who is that Virgin that has dyed away from Nature: then she must be
a Monster without a Soul, without Flesh and Blood, and No Mankind.

352. What need God assume to himself heavenly Seed into his Substance? was not
his Substance for certain on him from Eternity: What does that help us? But
that he is Entered into our humanity and awakened or raised up, our in Death
enclosed Seed, and make it Living again; that I rejoice at, that I may truly
say; that my Flesh Luke 22. 69.
suteth at the Right hand, in the Power of God.

353. If Christ has assumed to himself, any other Seed then my Inward Man is,
how then can my inward Man Eat his Flesh and Drink his Blood?

354. Sir Libeller, Err not, God will not suffer himself nor his children to
be mocked: we suppose easily, that you are altogether blind still in the
Mystery of God; you know nothing of the inward Man; much less of the New
Regeneration: learn first rightly to understand the Principles; and the Center
of Nature, before you Judge; you will needs be one taught of God or Learned in
God, and yet know not one Letter in THAT School.

355. By, Nature, you understand, only, the outward Kingdom: what kind of
Nature then has the Soul? I suppose here your Art will know nothing of it: you
know Nothing of the inward Man, which is the similitude of God: and yet will
Judge: you understand not what God is: and yet you will Judge Gods Children:
you are justly to be condemned in this.

356. You bring places of Scripture, and understand them not; and besides you
expound my sense and Mind altogether falsely: Who has called you, that you
should explain my obscure deep hidden Writing? I had written as a young child
in the Mystery of God; when I was first come into that School, and hung still
to the A. B. C: come you or any other to this Dance, and you will well see,
whether you can be instantly a Doctor or no.

357. Such a foolish understanding as you impute to me, I would scarce look for
in a Cow: have a care and consider, how you will be able to answer it in the
presence of God: If your Fiction, should prevail, then instantly would another
Antichrist be generated or born.

358. You come marching on with a twofold Seed in Adam, one must be Christ's
Seed and the other Adams Natural Seed, and found the Election of God upon it;
but you look upon this Mystery, as a Cow looks upon a New Barn Door; you
understand nothing of it; you can not explain, and set it down with any
ground, what the Seed of the Noble Image is, and yet you will Judge.

359. Indeed, thou layest a snare before Men's Souls, especially the dejected
sad sorrowful Tempted Souls, so that many a one thinks thus, with himself,
saying who knows whether I be begotten or extracted out of a right Seed, out
of Christ; especially when he feels the Assaults of Temptation: then he
should seek comfort, in this Libell.

360. You say, the Gracious Election is a great Comfort to the children of
Christ, when they feel Gods Grace in them; viz: the Woman's Seed; but where
shall he rest that is Assaulted and Tempted by the Devil? he may well in your
writings despair; he would think continually, he were out of or from Adam's
Seed, and that God will none of him.

361. If you will speak so of the Grace-Election, then you must not leave out
the Love of God, which wills not the Evil; you should join with it that
which Christ says, Joh. 17. 5, 6.
Father, the Men were thine, and thou have given them to Me, Joh. 10. 28.
and I give them the Eternal Life: Also Joh. 17. 24.
Father, I will that those whom thou have given Me, be where I am: Also; Luke 5.
32.
I am come to call the sinners to repentance, and not the Righteous; Luke 15. 7.
there is in Heaven among the Angels of God, more Joy at one sinner that
Repents, then at Ninety-nine righteous, that need Repentance: And Ezekiel. 33.
11.
As true as I live, says the Lord, I will not the Death of a sinner, but that
he turn and live.

362. If you will prove any thing with Cain and Abel, with Issac and Ishmael,
also with Esau and Jacob; then learn first to understand the Three Principles,
what the drawing to Good and to Evil is, reject not Nature, learn first to
distinguish the Eternal Nature, from the beginning inceptive Nature; else you
will but lay a snare upon the Bodies and Souls of your Disciples or Scholars,
and will but tumble or Grope in the Dark in mere doubting.

363. You will build high, and yet a Man can find no sufficient ground in all
your writing: It is as to the Mystery but a fighting with a shadow: Tell me,
if you be a Master, and have an enlightened Mind and Thoughts, as you suppose;
What are the Two Seeds in Adam, out of one of which Cain, out of the other Abel
is generated or borne: Is that the Predestinate Purpose of God, as you conceit
it? then demonstrate it.

364. You must understand the Birth or Geniture, of the Holy Trinity, if you
will Judge thereof; also, the understanding of the Dark World; also of the
fierce Wrath, and of the Love of God, what God is in Love and Anger; what a
Devil or an Angel is, and how he came to be a Devil.

365. Also, you must understand the Mystery of the Divine wisdom; Especially
you must understand, how the Dear Name of God Originateth from Eternity; How
the Nothing becomes introduced into Nature, so that out of the Nothing, a
source or quality comes to be; If you understand not THESE things, then stay
with your conceits at home; read my Book of the Threefold Life of Man: and you
will see with other Eyes.

366. Christ says, You must be borne anew; through Water and the Holy Spirit,
else you cannot see the Kingdom of God: He says, YOU, not a stranger, YOUR
SELF!

367. There does not come another strange Creature into us when we become born
out of Christ; but, when we put our whole desire, into God, into the becoming
Man or Incarnation of Christ, into his suffering and Dying: and become sorry
for our sins and desire Gods Mercy in Christ; then our Souls Will-Spirit
goes forth from sin and Evil or Malice, and enters into the becoming Man
or Incarnation of Christ; viz: into the Heavenly Substantiality, which is NOTE.
greater then all: and there the Will-Spirit comes before the Center, viz:
before the Heart of God.

368. That Heart of God is desirous of the Humanity, and that graspeth with its
desire into the Will-Spirit, after the Humanity, and thus the Will-Spirit
receives the Power of the Center, viz: a Sparkle of the Divine Power.

369. And that Sparkle, has on it self the Divine Substantiality, viz: the
Water of the Eternal Life, out of the Majesty of God, and therein, the Wisdom
with the Heavenly Tincture: this the Will-Spirit which is become generated out
of the Soul, brings again with great Joy, into the Souls-Fire.

370. And when the Soul-Fire, tastes the sweet Love and Meekness in it self,
in its own Essence, then the Essence is so very vehemently terrified, that it
appears overcome, as it were dead, and loses its Fiery right, and the Fiery
Essence falls into the Meekness of the Love, viz: into the Liberty of God,
without besides or beyond Nature, and yields it self captive to the
Meekness, viz: to the Lights property; and is as if it were of the Fiery
property, and yet were not of it: this is a terror of Great Joy, and the
Aspect of God, in the Divine Power, whence Body and Soul do tremble for Joy.

371. For thus the Soulish Fire becomes put out of, the Earnest severe pain
of the fierce wrath of God, of the Eternal Fires Essence and property, into
another source or quality: viz: into a Love-Desire; for the Light of God
kindles it self in the Souls-Fire; for when the Meekness and Love Desire
comes into the Magic Souls-Fire, then the Love and Meekness feels the
Great Life, out of the Fathers Nature.

372. For, the Meekness is a Sinking down, it is the Water-Spirit, and
without the Great Life, is as it were dead, in comparison of the Fire, but when
it comes into the Fire, it becomes, as vehemently terrified, as the Fire in
it, and the terror is the kindling of its Life and of the Light.

373. Seeing then the Soul in the beginning of its Creation, was clothed and
adorned with this Heavenly Substantiality; and it was the Souls right inward
Body, and that the Soul, in Adam is gone forth, with its Imagination, away from
this Substantiality; whence that Substantiality is again become shut up in
Death, viz: in the still Nothing.

374. And it, the Soul, is entered with its Imagination into the Earthly
Kingdom, viz: into the Substantiality of its Root: and nevertheless, that
very first Image, which became shut up in Death, viz: in the inability without
the Life, yet hangs to the Soul: but without its apprehension or
understanding.

375. Therefore now, when the Light of the Soul becomes kindled again, and
the heavenly Substantiality out of Gods Majesty receives the Life: viz; the
Light in the Soul; then the dead Substantiality becomes Living again in the
Lights power; and becomes, together with the now new introduced
Substantiality, one Substantiality, one spiritual Body, for it is of one only
Essence, and here Death rises up in Christ, here God and the Inward Man become
one Person.

376. Understand it aright: This new Light-Life, is Christ: He first introduced
it again into the Soul, and our right humanity, so that God and Man is ONE:
Now we must follow after God, we must put our Imagination into him: for he has
put his into Us, and then we become impregnate with the Savior; we become
newborn in his Limit or Mark, that God set in Paradise; wherein, he is become
Man; Death rises up again in that very Limit or Mark: we must be true Members
of Christ, if we would see God.

377. When the Water, or the Water-source or quality out of the Meekness of
God, comes into the Souls-Fire, so that the Light kindles it self, then is
the Noble Tincture already generated out of the Water in the Fire, which is the
Glance or Luster and Ornament of Heaven, as a Paradisicall Delight or
Pleasantness, in which the Substantiality of God shines or appears; and
therein the Holy Spirit, and in the Spirit, the Divine Center, viz: the Power
of Heart of God, and in the Heart of God the Mystery, viz: the Principle or
the Father; viz: the Fire-World; and in the Fire-World, the Dark World; and in
the Dark World this outward World, together with the Stars and Elements.

378. Thus ALL goes out of ONE fountain-Spring, but the Heart of God is the
Center of All Substances, or of Every thing: it is all Magical, and in the
Magick-Desire stands the Substance according to each Worlds property, and
according to the desire of each of them; for the Desire makes Substance,
according to the Desires property, therefore, is the Fire the strongest, and
the Light the Mightiest in the Power; the Fire gives Life, and the Light
gives power, and understanding.

379. Understand it aright; The Dark World is the Center of this outward World;
The Dark World has the forms to Nature, viz: the Great Magic Desire; wherein
the source or Torment and Anguish generateth it self; It is the wheel to the
Fire-Life, with its Forms, and has in it self, the strong Magia of the
Desire: It labors in its own form till to the Fire; and there its Principle
Schleusset sich.
shuts up it self.

380. For, in the Fire, existeth the great Life, and another source or quality,
and also another Principle, viz: the Light, with the quality or source of
Meekness: whereas in the Dark World, there is only Anguish and a mere hunger
Desire; The Light holds the Dark World captive: In these TWO now stands the
Drawing to Good and to Evil: my Sir Libeller.

381. The Light or the Power of the Light is a desire; and wills to have the
Noble Image according to Gods similitude; for it is created to the Light World:
so also the Dark World, viz: the Desiring of the fierce Wrath, wills to have
it: for Man has all the Three Worlds in himself, and there is a great Strife
in Man: to which of these now he uniteth or gives up himself with his Desire
and Willing, that gets the Dominion in him; as the Apostle says, Romans 6. 16.
To which you give your self in Obedience, you are servant of that; either of
sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness.

382. Each world stands hidden in the other; for Each dwells only and
barely in it self, neither possesses the other in the fource or quality
thereof; as you see it in Light and Darkness, how the Darkness dwells in
the Light, and is not manifest in the shining of the Light: but if the Light
departs or Extinguisheth, then the Darkness becomes manifest.

383. Thus you see also, the difference of the source or quality, how one
source or quality mixeth not with the other; by the Fire and Light; The Light
dwells in the Fire, and yet has not the Fires source or quality, but a meek
amiable one: and Herein sticks the Great Mystery, Mysterium Magnum: My Sir
Libeller, seek it, and then you will find it.

384. In this Mystery seek the TWO sort of Seeds and Wills, and leave
free will to Man: else you are the Dark Worlds Advocate; which World soever in
Man, gets the upper Dominion, that extracts or begets Seed out of its own
Essence; that bears fruit and works, the other stands hidden, be it the
Heavenly or the Hellish.

385. When Adam's Soul went sorth away from the Divine World out of Paradise
into the Outward World, then the Soul wrought or boar fruit to Death in the
Dark World: But when it apprehended the Cursher of the Serpent, in the Limit or
Mark of the Covenant, then it wrought or boar fruit to Life again.

386. But being his Noble Image, without the becoming Man or Incarnation of
Christ, could not rise up our of the still Death, therefore both Dominions
remained qualifying or operating in him; viz; the Hellish and the Heavenly, and
are standing the whole Time, in strife one with another, about the Image; Each
has its Fiat in it self, and many a Branch is become rent off from this Tree.

387. And here seek Cain and Abel, also Jacob and Esou, Isaac and Ishmael; here
you will find them, and not in the Light World in Gods Predestinate purpose:
Here you will find my deep hidden Magical Avrora written, 1612.
Book, which the Author at that time might not make more clear, but now
through Gods grace may do it.

388. Read the Forty Questions of the Soul, I Will assure you, you will become
seeing, unless the Anger of God and the Devils malice has wholly blinded
you, and that you are a total Cain: then you will see nothing but a Shell: And
though you were such a one, yet then the Door of Grace stands Open toward
you, and desires to have you, and you may IN Christ become generated anew.

389. The Possibility is in ALL Men, but Romans 9. 16.
in Gods Mercy, not that he would not have any that came to him, HE will
always readily, only it lies not in humane conceits, running and own doing,
none can make himself the Child of God; he must wholly cast himself into the
Obedience of God, and then God makes him a Child: he must be Dead, understand
with the outward Reason, and then God in Christ lives in Him.

390. He should not feign to himself ways to the Kingdom of Heaven, and make
Opinions, as the Autichristian Church does; for, in the Opinion he runs of
himself, yet Romans 9. 16.
It lies not in any Man's going or running, but in a lowly humble Penitent
Heart, which goes forth from sin, those God has Mercy on, for it lies in
Gods Mercy.

391. When Man converteth, and goes forth from sin, then he becomes IN Gods
Mercy, Elected to be a Child of God: then the Spirit of Christ, draws him to
the Father, Christ says John 6. 44.
None comes unto Me except my Heavenly Father draw him.

392. Now he draws not the wicked Will, THAT, the Devil and the Dark world
draws; only Man has Free will, if he cast his Will into Righteousness into
God, then the Spirit of God comprehends his Will, and brings it in
Ternarium Sanctum into the Holy Ternary: and there the Noble Grain becomes
sown in the Will, and then begins the Drawing of the Father to the
Regeneration.

393. God hardens no Man, but the Dark world in the Devils Imagination and
Enchantment, they harden Man, viz; the Souls-Fire, they are a Door shut against
the Light.

394. Though indeed the Scripture says, Romans 9. 18.
God has Mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will: yet it has not
that understanding, as if God would not hear the Poor Sinner: For Christ says:
Math. 11. 28.
come all to me, that are weary and heavy laden, I will refresh you: Also: Luke
5. 32.
I am come to call sinners to Repentance. Also, John 12. 47.
The Son of Man is come not to Judge the World, but that he might save the
World: He that runs in his own conceit hardens himself, for he will needs
be Christ.

395. Gods hardening is, when he lets one run on whither he will; God
knows his, very well, why should a Man pour Oil into those wounds to which
it is poison, the Soar will be but the Larger.

396. Who will help him, who himself will NOT: Or shall Men Math. 7. 6.
cast Pearls before Swing; If a man lets the free will go whither it will,
then it comes into its Fathers Native Country, out of which it is gone forth;
why does Man lend the Devil his heart, that he may introduce an Evil Will or
Desire thereinto: Math. 7. 17, 18,
A good Tree brings forth good fruit.

397. Why did Adam bring his Imagination into the Serpents Poison, into Pride
of Multiplicity, into the wonder of the fierce wrathful Nature: He had the
Command not to do it, why was he disobedient? who compelled him? Even the Lust
or Longing which came from the Devil: and therefore is HE Guilty of Man's Fall.

398. He must indeed stand in the Temptation, to try into which World he would
give up himself; all the Three Worlds drew him, each had him on a Band, there
he should show his valor as a Prince: he was free.

399. But that he was overcome by the Outward World, that the Devil caused by
his Infection, as still at this very day he teareth many a little Sprout from
the Tree: Therefore Man should not be secure, also not rely on, or be of
himself; but continually give up himself into Gods Mercy.

400. He can not better wrestle with the Devil then when he casts himself into
Gods Mercy, then he relyes not on, or is not of, himself, but he is Gods; the
Devil may dance in his Smoke Hole how he will, a Man can not hinder him of
that, only let him not give his Will to the Devil, as Adam did.

Number II. Page 18.
401. THe Pasquil or Libeller begins here again to Reprehend, but he perverteth
the Author's Mind and Sense quite and clean; and casts Gall into it, where it
stands written thus.

402. Avrora Preface, verse. 77.
But they that became generated or born in the Light of Nature-spirit.
Nature and of the Spirit, and upon Earth never rightly knew the Tree of Life,
but were grown in ITS Power, which has overshadowed ALL Men upon Earth, as
indeed many Heathen and People and Infants; they were also taken up, in that
very power, wherein they were Grown, and their Spirit became clothed
therewith, and they sung the Song of their Power.

Now thus says the Libeller.
403. And as this The Author J. B.
Spirit, determines of a Natural Christ, so will he also have the knowledge of
him to be Natural, and from that, though they knew not the Tree of Life in
Spirit and in Truth; might attain Eternal Life Externally; as if there were
more ways then One to it.

Thus far the Libeller.
Answer.
404. Is not the Libeller sent. that he should Judge the People Tongues and
Languages? and shall he not Judge the Child in the Mothers body or Womb? also
the deaf and blind, which are born Deaf, especially, the Heathen and Turks? he
lets none of these into Heaven, for he has the Keys of Peter; O thou
miserable Blindness, how many will enter into the Kingdom of God before thee.

405. Is not the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father and the Holy
Spirit in them both? Now if the Heathen People, are, without understanding,
Zealous for the Living God, and yet have not the knowledge of Christ among
them, and know nothing thereof, but with a total earnest sincerity Desire the
Love and Mercy of God: will God then cast them all away, because they have not
Christ's Name.

406. He that apprehends the ONE only living God; he has apprehended the
Holy Trinity: The Publican in the Temple, knew not how to say any thing else
but only this: O God be Gracious to me poor Sinner! If now a Turk or Heathen
should come in such a Manner, with sincere earnest Supplication and Repentance,
and yet knew nothing of the Kingdom of Christ: Sir Libeller, would not thou
admit him to the Mercy of God?

407. How do you know what God would do for you? or what have you given to
him? that he has of Grace bestowed his Son upon you; may he not then also
receive Turks and Heathens to Grace, especially little Children: Hearken thou
blind Libeller: thou understandest not the Author's saying.

408. My Text says: Those who were become Born or generated in the Light of
Nature and of the Spirit: The Light of the Eternal Nature is the Heart of God,
the Light of the Majesty of God, and the Spirit from or out of the Light is the
Holy Spirit: with this Description, the Jacob Behme.
New Birth.

409. Now if a man be generated or born out of THAT, then it is well and good;
for he is born of God: there will be many people thus born in God, which knew
nothing of the Name of Christ, viz; How God is become Man or Incarnate.

410. Does now the blind Libeller understand Nothing, then I suppose the Devil
has blinded him: See further: But those that were grown in ITS Power,
understand in the Power of the Tree of Christ, they were received: Do thou
here understand, the Natural Growth with or as to Flesh and Blood? then thou
art blind indeed.

411. Do you not see my Text says, Those who were born in the Light of Nature
and of the Spirit; that is no fleshly Birth, that which is born in the Spirit
of the Light, is born of God. Sir Libeller you have the Property of a Toad,
which sucketh Evil out of Good, what shall I say, or write much thereof.

Number III. Page 26.
It stands thus.
412. Avrora Chapter 1. verse. 2. disliked by Bolthator Tylcken.
But if a Man will speak of God, what GOD is, he must diligently consider the
Powers in Nature; as also the whole Creation of Heaven and Earth, as the
Stars and Elements, and the Creatures which are proceeded from them, then
also, the Holy Angels Devils and Man, also Heaven and Hell.

413. Justified by Jacob Behme.
Hearken Libeller; when thou rightly know, what an Angel is, then thou
know thy self in thy Noble Image, and know God in his Love according to
the Second Principle.

414. And when thou rightly know what a Devil is, then thou know Gods
Angor and the Dark World.

415. And when thou rightly know, the Stars and Elements, then thou have in
the Outward Nature, the Similitude of the Inward Eternal Nature.

416. And when thou rightly conceivest of the Creatures, thou then see by the
Creation, Gods wonderful Wisdom, and when thou rightly conceivest of the
Heaven, then thou know the difference or distinction of the Principles.

417. But Hearken Libeller, why should I talk long with thee about it; thou art
indeed wholly blind as to my Writings, thou brigest every where other meanings
thereinto, then I intended by it: Thou say; Avrora Chapter 1. Verse 1.
Flesh and Blood cannot Conceive of God, thou ought not to oppose me in
that, I say so too: and that 1 Cor. 2. 10. 14.
the Outward Man knows, or understands Nothing of God, but the Inward Man,
especially the Spirit, searches even the Depths of the Deity.

418. I say not; That a Beast should Consider the Angels, Devils, Heaven,
Hell, Stars, Elements and Creatures: But an understanding Man, who is the
Child of God, who shall have his refreshing therewith, that Gods Love Grows
in Him.

419. But that which is said concerning the LAW of Nature, that those who live
or have lived therein, and are grown in that Light's that, the blind Libeller
expounds all concerning the outward Nature: he understands nothing in it.

420. The Law of Nature, is Gods Commadment, when God said to Adams Nature,
Thou shall not eat of the Tree; that Law is also written in our Mind: so that
we know we should do right; the very beathens, and little Children understand
THAT.

421. Now if a Man live in that Law; and does that which he well knows, that
it is RIGHT; and is generated or born out of the Light of the Eternal Nature,
out of the Spirit, viz: out of Gods Heart: who will Judge him? Thou
Moate-Judger, stay thou at home.

422. When I in that Place speak of the Tree of Or Tree of Life.
vegetation, viz: of the sweet Tree; then I understand or mean not the will of
the Flesh, but the Dominion of the Spirit of God, I also speak not of the
Corporal and inceptive or beginning Birth, but of the Spiritual.

423. The sweet Tree is Gods Spirit, as is formerly mentioned at Large,
understand, it is the heavenly Substantiality, which the Word or Heart of God
brought along with it; into the Essence of Mary, which became Man in Mary, that
sweet Tree of the Divine Substantiality is greater then all; and moves in the
second Principle, over US ALL.

424. My whole meaning Aims at this, and though thou understandest it not, yet
I know it, and say with assured Truth, that many a Heathen, Turk, and Infant,
has eaten of this Tree in Gods Mercy, and though he has not known it plainly
by Name, that which the outward Man knows not, that the inward Man knows,
yea the Outlandish People have even Adames Body and Soul as well as we.

425. Hearken Libeller: what says Paul, Romans 2. II.
Romans 2. 11. to the 16? There is no respect of Persons with God: Verse 12.
they who have sinned without Law, shall perish without the Law; and they who
have sinned against the Law, they shall be judged by the Law; Verse 13.
for in the sight of God not the hearers of the Law are justified, but those
that do the Law shall be justified; Verse 14.
for if the Heathen that have not the Law, and yet by Nature do the work of
the Law, those having not the Law are a Law unto themselves, Verse 15.
whereby they show, that the Law is written in their Hearts, seeing their
Conscience witnesses, as also their Thoughts, which accuse or exeuse one
another, Verse 16.
till the Day wherein God will Judge, the secrets of Manking, through JESUS
CHRIST, according to my Gospel.

426. Why then does the Libeller reject this which I have written, that the Law
of Nature is written in Man's heart, and Every one by Nature Knows well, and
his Conscience witnesses to him, that he should do Right: now if there were a
Stranger, who knew Nothing of Christ, and did from his whole Soul, christian
works, in hope of the Divine Wages; Will thou condemn him?

427. Do thou not understand, that they shall be judged by the Gospel, which
hear the Gospel and do it not; and they which hear it not and do Evil, shall
be so too: and they which heard not Christ Preached, nor knew of him, and yet
were zealous in the Love, in the fear of God; shall in their zeal, enter into
the kingdom of God, before the stiff necked Christians, which only bear the
Name of Christ.

428. If thou can, then blame Saint Paul to his face, as thou do me; Thou
unintelligent fierce wrathful envious Libeller; Thou Judge me and Condemnest
me, Contrary to the Commandment of Christ, who says; Luke 6. 37.
Judge not and you shall not be Judged, condemn'not, so you shall not be
condemned; Math. 7. 2.
With what Measure you Meet to others, will others Meet unto you again. Mark 4.
24.


429. What need you spread abroad such a reproachful Libel among the People,
and Judge my written unprinted Writings, which I wrote only for a Memorial to
my self, which are come to Light without my will; and to condemn me in such a
vain frivolous and altogether Diabolical manner.

430. Thou Moate-Judger; was this commanded thee it was not done in respect of
the Author of the Book; but that thou might make show of thy fine high
understanding Thoughts, what a Master of Scripture, and Man of understanding
thou art: but I find thee in or Confusion
Babel with an unchristain Mind, go on so, and thou will be found, a very
faithful Labourer to our Lord God in his Vineyard, will you not think you?

431. Thou have in thy disgraceful Libel set it down thy self, that men should
condemn none, but it is free for THEE only, what thou forbiddest to another,
THOU only may Judge that which is secret.

432. Had I known that my Book should have been read, likely it had been
written clearlier, with plain words, though it is clear enough, but thou art
blind: The Moat or Splinter of the Thorn of Pride, to show himself to his
brother Abel, like Cain, sticks in thy Eyes.

433. But I tell thee, that thy Book the Libel, affords a good Root for a New
Antichrist; I understand therein very new Things, which I suppose, to run quite
contrary to the Holy Scripture: Especially concerning the Becoming Man or
Incarnation of Christ, and concerning his Mother Mary.

434. I believe, if men did not Read the Libel, it would be more conducing to
their happiness, then for any to grope far after your new conceits, which are
contrary to the Ground of the Scripture; it has such an aspect, that it
fills the Eyes of the People, but not of those that understand aright, they
do not all account thee a Master for it, it is even called Babel, and an
untirnely or abortive unprofitable Libel.

435. Is this thy Christian Heart, that thou judge and condemnest a zealous
Man, who is zealous after Salvation: and if I did indeed err in my zeal, and
yet in a right heart and sincere meaning, and that, really led with Ignorance
and simplicity: should thou condemn Me? Do thou not Observe what Saint
Paul says of the zealous Heathens, as abovementioned, Romans 2.

436. Art thou a Master and a Christian, why do thou not first Instruct me,
and teach me what is better; Do thou not know me, I think it is not hidden
to thee who I am, viz: a simple Man, and unlearned: Art thou highly learned,
expert, and skillful, should thou then deal so Tyrannically with me, as to
cast me to the Devil?

437. Where is thy Christian Heart? show it me in thy Libel? should thou
condemn a Simple Man? I would have friendly conserred with thee, and given thee
a good account of my doings, if thou had done as befits a Christian, with
friendly Information.

438. But thy high pust up Mind would not; now I have answered to it; it
deserves no better; since thou proclaimest me a Devil, I proclaim thee a
Liar, for I am a Child of God, and am zealous day and night after my God, with
Sapplication to his Mercy for Christ's sake, and steadfastly believe, that I am a
Child of God, and Member of Christ's Body: I am also very certain in the power
of the Holy Spirit, that he will preserve my Deposited Treasure, viz: the Noble
Pearly Jewel in Christ, till that Day.

439. Thou proud Pharisee, thou shall not take away the Noble Garland of
Victory from me, which my Savior Christ has set upon me; but if thou desire
to take it away from me, have a care what thou do, and where thou abidest,
that the Anger of God do not devour thee.

440. I would as a Christian have thee warned, to abstain from such
reproaching, and shameful condemning: for the kingdom of God, consists not
is knowing much, but in an Earnest sincere obedient humble Mind and Will, in
the presence of God, that we be Christains in the Deed, and not with the Mouth
only.

441. A Christian has no strife but only against HIMSELF, against his EVIL
Nature: God says, Romans 12. 19.
Vengoance is mine, I will repay it, we live and are in God, Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
why will we then strive about HIM? Let every one but judge himself, and turn
to God. The Strife is always about the Shell; and the Kernel which belongs
to the Soul, men let that lie.

442. Has any Learned somewhat, let him use it to the Honor of God, and the
profit of his Brother; he should not despise any: God has regenerated us in
his Love, without all our knowledge or desert, through his Heart, viz; his
great Mercy; when as formerly we were all of us blind, and knew nothing of his
bringing us back again; we were Romans 3. 9.
all under sin: and he has bestowed on us the childship out of Grace: Gal.
3. 22.
shall we then out selves judge one another.

443. Or, can we all speak with one and the same Tongue? There are, you know,
many Gifts, and but One only Spirit, which gives them, as Saint Paul says;
Shall we then call that very Spirit a Devil, which opens Gods Wonders to us,
do thou not know what the Scripture says, Luke 12. 16.
Whosoever blasphemeth or reproacheth the Spirit of God, has no forgiveness
Eternally.

444. Thou drawest the Judgment of God wilfully upon thy self, and make the
people the worse, that look upon thy Reproaching, so that they also become
slanderers from your Mouth, whereas otherwise they would be quiet, that Sin
might be brought forth with Sin, and so be reserved to the severe Romans 2. 5,
6.
Judgment of God, who will give to every one according to his Deeds.

Number IV.
445. THe Libeller sets it down thus: All men are created by God, according to
the Flesh; and in that very Same Measure.
Mass or Lump, they are all shut up under Sin, disobedience, and Darkness,
and none better then the other: but they are distinguished according to the
Spirit: and the Children of the Light generated from or out of HIM: whom he
delivers out of the Natural Darkness; and makes their Darkness Light; But
the Children of the World he lets sit in Darkness, and lets their Light
go out in the Midst of the Darkness; for he loved Jacob, and hated Esau.

446. Hearken Libeller; why do thou boil the Broth in thy Mouth, and
tellest not all freely forth, as it sits in thy heart; you have it within
you, I would have you fully give it forth: What mean you by the Two sorts of
Spirits from the Mothers Body or Womb; are there two sorts of Souls generated
or born? one out of God; the other out of the Flesh, as thou supposest: O thou
blind Reason, what do thou Teach? Will thou judge? when thou thy self
understandest it not.

447. Of the Flesh, no Soul becomes Generated, but Soul of Soul, and Flesh of
Flesh; we are from Adam all extracted or begotten of one Soul and Spirit: and
no other; Adam is the Tree, we are the Branches; we stand all in that Tree as
to the Root, and he has destroyed us all.

448. Else, if it were so, that one Man did receive in the Mothers Body or
Womb, an Earthly Spirit, and the other, one out of or from God, then were he
which is Generated or born out of or from God, not guilty of Adams fall; also
he were no Sinner from the Mothers womb, and the other from the Flesh, were
from the Mothers womb, Damned: as he finely Court-like applies it to Jacob and
Esau: this is his meaning, and the understanding sounds just so; only he
boyles the broth in the Mouth.

449. For what should God suffer, so long a while, that there is teaching and
Preaching to the Damned; or what would it be profitable to the totally perfect?
Is the Spirit, from the Mothers womb, of God, and has it Gods Light PERFECT;
then it is without Sin, and needs no Teaching: But the Scripture says, Romans
3. 23.
They are all Sinners, and come short of the boasting which they should have in
God. The Holy Apostles say; Rev. 5. 9.
O Lord, thou have redeemed US with thy Blood.

450. ANd the Libeller says further; Who then dare say that this is done
without the command of the Lord; and that neither Good nor Evil comes out of
the Mouth of the Most High; Has not a Romans 9. 21.
Potter power, to make of One Lump what he will, one vessel to Honor, and the
other to Dishonor? And cannot GOD do so with US Men.

451. Yes indeed; that were a fine thing from one of understanding, who will
produce Texts of Scripture, especially such sayings which give offense to the
sad sorrowful tempted Mind, and that he also expounds it so, that he casts
a Snare about his Neck, and goes away laughing at it, this is false wicked
fraud.

452. Thou still supposest; that God makes One happy out of his Predestinate
purpose, and Damneth the other out of his Predestinate purpose; whereas God
says in Exekiel 33. Ezekiel: 33. II.
As true as I live, I desire not the Death of a sinner, but that he turn and
live.

453. If thou understandest not the Principle, between Light and Fire; which
belongs to the Soul, then be silent about the Election still; thou
understandest nothing thereof.

454. Thou supposest God hardens the Soul, and it is not true; the hardening
sticks in the Principle, so that many become apprehended by the dark Center
of Nature, from the fierce wrathful Forms to Nature.

455. For the Principles stand in a Continual Wrestiling, as the Fire in the
source or Or Operation.
quality; As it has so happened to Lucifer, that he has framed the Will of
Pride in the Fires- Matrioc in respect of the Dark world: also it is to be seen
by Cain and Abel.

456. The Light World, which is God himself, has no desire to Evil or
destruction: there is not the least sparkle in God, that desires the Evil;
God calls himself God, according to the Light, according to the Love, and not
according to the Fire-source or quality, much less according to the Dark World.

457. The Fire-source or quality, is fierce wrathfulnesse, and devouceth all
whatsoever comes into it, and the Dark World is a mere fierce wrathful
hunger: and the Light World is a mere Love, Man has all the Three in the
Center.

458. When the Life becomes kindled, then is in the Center the Strife in the
Forms to Nature; there many a Soul becomes apprehended in the Essence; THAT
is not Gods predestinate purpose.

459. God willed not, that Adam should fall, else he had given him no
Commandment; also he willed not the Devils Fall: But, that his fierce wrath,
has apprehended Lucifer, as also Adam, that is the Creatures fault.

460. The Souls Spirit knew indeed very well, where its home was; It was free,
as God also is free; he has the Center of Nature according to the substance of
all Substances; why did he put his Imagination into the fierce Wrath? Pride and
State brings (...)
dejectedness of Mind; so it went with the Devil and also Adam.

461. The Devil would be a Fire-Lord, and Adam, Lord in this world, God did
suffer it to be done, seeing they both had free will.

462. The Soul is not made as a Potter makes a pot, it becomes Generated, the
Child's Soul is generated out of the Essence of the Parents; That would the
Libeller feign obseure; only that he might out of Gods predestinate purpose,
Elect an Evil and Good Spirit, and thrust Gods Anger-will into the sad
sorrowful heart, for Despair.

463. No, hearken Libeller: Let me have them proceed. ALL out of ONE Soul; and
then we have ALL equally together; ONE Door of Grace open; this I will have
from thee, else I say, thou art a Heretic, and a perverter of the Scripture,
and would bereave us of the Mercy of God.

464. I say in the Power of my high knowledge given me of God; that the Door
of Grace is not yet barred up to the poor Soul, and though the Devil had it on
his chains, and would go away with it, if it be yet in Flesh and Blood, in this
world, there is remedy for it, if it bewail the Evil, and Convert, God
forsakes it NOT.

465. He has Created but ONE only Soul; not to perdition but to Life, to his
Honor and Glory; this he requires also from all Men, and Man shall give an
account, how has used it; for it is his Noblest Jewel.

466. And according to the Soul and its Image, he is Gods Child; and according
to the Spirit and Body of this World, he is become a Beast, according to the
source and quality of the Stars and Elements; As in the Book of The Threefold
Life is expressed largely enough: The Reader himself may seek there, he will
find the GraceElection a little otherwise, and the Mark nearer, then in this
Libel.

467. I may not here repeat the Deep Mystery with so large a Discourse: The
frivolous scornful discourse in this Libel, also, is not worthy of it; a Man
should not cast Pearls before swine; the Libeller has made a heap of scornful
expressions, to trim his conceit; but all that which is not very necessary, I
count not worth an answer.

Number. V.
468. THe Libeller produces also the Text, Math. 24. where Christ says; Math.
24. 24.
If it were possible even the Elect would be deceived, this he does also upon
pretense of the Election: but No, friend, that belongs not to it; If any
vematus steadfast in Christ; then it is not possible for the Devil or any
Heretic, to be able to seduce him, and pluck him out of Christ's hands.

469. But if an enlightened Christian, though he be indeed in Gods Love, will be
secure or careless, and Dance to the Devil after his Pipe, and receive him in
for a Guest; there it is very possible; but though it were possible, that the
first Man, as also the Devil, did fall; yet cannot the Libeller be convinced
with THAT.

Number VI.
470. Then says the Libeller; Gods WILL, whereby he Electeth one and rejects
another, a man should not search for out of Christ; there thou have it, make no
more ado, search no further then so; but consider, when thou look upon any
body, who knows? whether he be Elected? whether he be a child of God or of
the Devil?

471. O thou Miserable Reason, will thou COMMAND 1 Cor. 2. 10.
the Spirit which searches even the Depths of the Deity, as Saint Paul says?
The Spirit searches it self; and when it comes to the very Center, it knows
its Father; for the Soul Originateth out of God the Father; out of the Eternal
Nature.

472. O, Blindness and own-self Reason, who has forbidden us to search? The
Devil forbids us it, that we might not search out his Kingdom, else we
might fly away from him; what if thou forbiddest me, that I should not dare so
much as to cough? how has the Mist of obscurity blinded thee? should not the
son dare to see what the Father does in the House where he must needs manage
all his works?

473. Why should I not enquire afteer my fathrs or my Native Country? out of
which my Soul in Adam is gone forth, but IN Christ is introduced into it
again? I say, it will of necessity be forbidden you, WITHOUT the Spirit, to
search what God is: Gods Spirit searches it self, else none can search God. If
God be not in the Spirit; the Libeller needs not forbid it to search.

Number VII.
574. THe Libeller says further: But why do not all seek Grace in Christ, but
endeavor to set up their own righteousness? THAT, a Man must leave to the
Secret Council of God, which is possible for No Man to reach.

475. Hearken Libeller: Make thy breath longer: Put away Pride and State,
Covetousness, Envy, and Malice, and the brave little son Falsehood out of the
way, and then the wicked would seek The Grace in Christ.
it, the Lust and pleasure of this world Lies in the way; Take a Besom, and
sweep Fear and dread of searching into Opinions and Tenants in Spiritual
matters how right they are.
Fear out of the World; and then all Men would seek the Grace.

476. Yet thou seek also with all thy diligence, how thou may Condemn me:
also thou will set up only thy own righteousness, against thy brother, whom
thou should Love as thy self; Thou searchest into many Scriptures, that thou
may judge him; Smell but into thy Bosom.

Number VIII.
477. THere the Libeller, supposes he has catched a Mouse: which must crouch
under him, upon that where the Author sets it down; That Avrora, Ch 14. from
verse 41. to the 51.
God knew not of Lucifers Fall beforehand: there he has certainly got him in
his clutches, O now he will tumble and touse him.

478. Hearken Libeller: That place is not expressed out of the Magic
understanding: I will stand to it with you, in what I have written: but
hearken; do thou suppose, it is not true? do thou understand the
Principles? do thou know what is done in the Dark World? The Will of the
Dark world is not manifest in Heaven: God does not cumber himself with the will
of the firce wrath.

479. His fierce wrath and Anger has known it very well, the fierce wrath is a
cause of the Fall, but no such Imagination Enters into his Love, there is not
the least sparkle of the Devil or Darkness manifest in his Love: but a Mere
Love desire: so also God calls himself a God, according to the Love and
Meekness; and according to THAT, now, the Question is Answered

480. Else if a Man says: Acts 15. 18.
To God are all his works Manifest from Eternity, then a Man must say; God has
been in all things from Eternity: He is in every thing in the Essence, as the
source or quality in every thing is: Psalm. 18. 26, 27. as it is there written,
Pial. 18. 26.
With the perverse thou art perverse.

481. The very Abyss and also Hell, is Gods: in Hell there is hellish Skill
and knowledge; and in Heaven heavenly, and in this World Starry or 4 Elementary.
Historical: according to the First Principle, all Malice is from Eternity
known to God: but Men call not that, God, but Gods Anger: according to such a
meaning was the Authors Mind, thought, or sense, so written only for himself.

482. He understood the sense well, but he knew not of the Libeller, else he
had set it down more simply and plainly: When a Man speaks of the Total God
according to Love and Anger, according to ALL Worlds, then he says rightly:
Acts 15. 18.
To God has all his works been known from The Eternal Beginning.
Eternity.

483. But hearken Libeller: have thou not seen, how the Center of Nature was
described in my Book; could thou not search after it, assuredly thou had
come to the Ground or foundation? It is not my meaning here now at this time to
metion any thing further of the Mystery, of Omniscience: read The Three
Principles, and thou will find it: it would here require too long a Discourse,
and besides it is not necessary.

484. But a Man cannot say, that God is the Essence; Note whence Nature and the
Essences Exist.
but in the Eternal Nature, the Essences Exist: and in Gods Magia, Nature does
exist: He is IN All; but nothing apprehends him, as is beforementioned; He
possesses himself; as the Light possesses it self, How God possesses the
Evil as the Light possesses the Fire.
it dwells in the Fire without Source or Torment.

Number IX.
485. THe Libeller has many Conceits, and a total strange understanding,
especially, upon that where it stands written by the J. B.
Author thus: Avrora Chapter 14. verse 36.
That Lucifer was a Part, of, or out of God: there he will be simply blind and
understand nothing as it is moant; he will know nothing of Gods Eternal
Nature, he understands, by Nature, only the Outward World; he will by no
means understand; that an Eternal Spirit, as Angels and Souls of Men, is
proceeded out of Gods Eternal Nature and Substance.

486. My Libeller; Open thou thy Eyes, and observe, that I. by the Eternal
Nature, out of which the Angels are Created, understand, not the Divine
Principle: can you not see a similitude of it, in Fire and Light? Thou see,
thy self, very well, that the Fire is Nature, and not the Light: out of the
Light can nothing be created; only out of the Substantiality, viz: out of the
Meekness, can a thing be created, that, is Substance.

487. Yet now a living Spirit cannot be made out of Substance, the Life is not
Substance, but a desire of Substance.

488. A Spirit, as Angels and Souls are, is out of the Magia or Desire, of the
Fire-source or quality, proceeded out of the Forms to Nature, viz: out of the
Center: for Nothing is Eternal, unless it be proceeded out of the Center of
the Eternal property.

489. The Center is a Desire to the Manifestation of the Abyss in a Ground, of
the Nothing, in somewhat, to manifest or reveal the hidden Mystery of the
Eternal Divine Substance.

490. The Light has another Center: God is understood or meant, by the Light:
the Heart of God, is the Center of the Light, and the Magic Desire is the
Center of the Fire; and in the Fire, is the Liberty, viz: the Nothing,
manifest; spoken after a Creaturely Manner.

491. God is in respect of the Creature, as a Nothing: and yet he is indeed
ALL: in the Fire, his Majesty becomes manifest: in the Fire is the finding of
the Nothing: God himself finds himself from Eternity in himself: He is not
Nature, as to what concerns the Name God; The Nature becomes born or
Generated in the Will of the Eternal Nothing.

492. There is but ONE only Will, which is the ABYSS, which is desirous of the
foundation or Ground; viz: of the Manifestation or Revelation of it self: and
in that desire becomes the Nature manifested: and the desire makes the
Nature, that drives it self from one desiere to another, one form of the
Desire makes the other, even to the Fire: there is the Principle and Life
generated.

493. The Fiat is the Mother; viz: the desiring or the hunger, as a Man may
call it; It makes the Desire to be Substance, according to the form of the
Property, it figureth the Willing into a form or shape, wherein we understand
the Center of the Spirit.

494. Now then GOD himself, is the Abyss and also the Bysse, or Ground, in the
Fire all becomes Manifest, both the Nature and also the Light of the Majesty:
In the Fire is the Separation between The Name God.
Gods Name, and The Name Nature.
Natures Name, also between the Love-source or quality, and the Natural fierce
wraths source or quality.

495. In the Fire, exist Two Principles, viz: Two Magia's, Two desirous Wills
viz: the Lights and the Fires.

496. The Light is a desire of Love, Meekness, and Substantiality, and that is
in the Eternity called God: The Light is the Majesty, the Lights desire is the
Other or second Center, or the Heart of God: the Substantiality is Gods
Substance; it is the Water source or quality, or the Spirit of the Eternal
Joys Life.

497. And the Fire makes in the Water-source or quality, the Tincture, or
Life, so that Gods Substantiality is a Life: That very Lights Substantiality,
is the Words or Hearts Cerporeity, wherein the Great Mystery of the Will of the
Abyss, viz: the Wisdom, becomes Manifest.

498. And the Fire is another Principle then the Light, it has a fierce
wrathful, stinging, consuming, Desire, climing up in Might and Pomp; it
wills to consume and swallow up all into it self, it is a cause of the
Covetousness, its Bitterness is a Cause of the Envy, for it is the sting of
Death and Anger.

499. And here go back into the Forms to Fire, and then thou will find the
Dark World, and the hellish fierce Wrath, and in the Fire, GODS Anger, which
the Light, viz: his Heart holds captive in the Love-Source or Quality, and
allayeth or meekeneth the Fires fierce-Wrath.

500. For, the Water of the Eternal Life, generated or born out of the
Meekness, viz: Gods Substantiality, makes out of the Divine Firesource or
quality, another source or quality, viz: the climibing up of the Divine Joys
Kingdom: The Fire-source or quality, must only be a cause of the Life and of
the Light, as also of the Spirit and of the Joys Kingdom.

501. And hear the Name God severeth it self in the Trinity; viz: In the First
Center to Nature, viz: the Eternal Will of the Fiat, which in the Fire is a
stern severe zealous Substance, and in the Light, the cause of the Joys
Kingdom, and of the Spirit of Life; That is the Father of all Substances, also
of his Sons, viz: of the second Centers, of the Love-desires.

502. And The Other or second Center, of the power of the Light, is his Son
or Heart, and makes in himself and in the Father the Second Principle, viz:
the Angelical World, that, is our right Fathers or Native Country, which
Christ brought into US again.

503. And The Spirit going forth from the Fire in the Light, is the Third
Person: in the Light, in the Love, and the Joy-source or quality, He is called
God, the Holy Spirit, understand according to the Sons Center: and according
to the Fires Center, he is called, The Anger-Spirit of the Father.

504. In the Dark World HE is the Life of the Hellish source or quality, out of
all Forms to Nature, In the Fire HE is the Flame of the fierce wrathful Anger
of God the Father; and in the Light HE is the flame of the Great Love of God;
He is the right Life of God, and is also the Life of all the Three Principles,
of all the Three Worlds, in each World according to its property; and is only
known or acknowledged and rightly called God the Holy Spirit, according to the
Love, viz: according to property of the Son of God: Else he is called the
Spirit of the Nature of all things or Substances.

505. Seeing we here go so deep, we will therefore show you somewhat more, out
of true Love, and not out of a Desire so totally to reproach you, because of
your unskilfulnesse or ignorance: for we know you better then you do your
self: and though we are zealous over you, yet it should be understood
heartily, as a reproof of your high climbed stately proud Will, over, the
Spirit of God, from which I have my knowledge.

506. Consider of the Principle of Fire, and see how the Dead arises and how
he dies: Behold! the Fire is a great hungry desire after Substance, and if it
cannot have that, then it extinguisheth.

507. Here consider the Great desire of the Father after the Son, viz. of the
first Principle after the second: how the Father thus in great desire, loves
the Son: for he is his life, else were the Fathers Life a dry fainting
hunger, like the Devils and the Dark World; for the Fire burns not without
the Substance of the Water-Spirit.

508. Here consider what befell the Devil when he lost Gods Love and
Meekness; then he remained to be a dry hunger in the fierce Wrath of the
Eternal Nature: thus it goes also with the Soul of Man, for they originate
all alike out of the Eternal Nature.

509. Now see further, what in the Center of the Fire, is the Possibility and
Substance; you understand now, that the fierce wrathful Firesource must have
Substance, and that the Fire-source or quality it self longs after Substance,
and if the Fire get the Substance, or the Substantiality of the Water-source or
quality, into it self, then the Fire consumes that Substantiality, and then is
the dying of the Substantiality, for the Substantiality goes again into the
Still Eternity, without, besides, or beyond Nature, viz: into the Nothing.

510. And you see rightly, that yet there is no Dying, but the Light goes
forth out of that very Death, out of the Consumtibility forth, and the Light is
then first the power of the understanding and of the Thoughts or Senses: Thus
Death arises, out of the Fire-Life, viz: into another World, viz: into the
Eternal Nothing, into the Liberty, without, besides, or beyond Nature.

511. And you see now, that the Light dwells in the Fire without Source,
Quality, or Torment, and knows nothing of the fierce wrath of the Fire, for
it is in its Essence a Love Desire: Thus have I written that the Deity, viz.
Gods Center, knew nothing of the fall of the fierce wrathful Devils; but the
first Principle know it, viz: the Father according to the Fires Nature, and
according to the Desire, and according to the hunger in the Dark world.

512. Here consider, beloved, Men and brethren in Christ, what the suffering
and dying of CHRIST, as also OUR Dying, is: How our Soul, must in Christ's
Death, be introduced into the Center of the Hell of Gods Anger, into the
Principle of Gods Fire, and go quite through the source or quality of the
consumptibility; into the other World, viz: into the Liberty, into the Center
of the Love of God.

513. For, Adam's Soul had turned it self out, and was Dead to the Light in the
Substantiality: and therefore the second Adam, brought the Soul again into the
Fire, viz: into Gods Anger-source or quality, and kindled the Light again in
Death, and there the Light shone again in the Darkness; Heb. 2. 14. See verse.
244.
That was Death to Death, and a Pestilence to the Anger, viz: to Hell.

514. The Soul was gone forth out of the Liberty of God into the Nature of this
World, viz: into the Substantiality of this World, and there the Divine Light
shines not.

515. And then it had nothing in this Worlds Substance, wherewith it could
kindle the Eternal Fire source or quality, but only the Earthly Substance,
wherewith the Soul kindled its Fire-source, so now also there shone a Sun-and
Starre-Light, according to the Principle of this World, in the Soul; and
Extinguished the Light of God; it gat a SunLight instead of the Eternal Light,
wherein it had been an Angel.

516. But as to what belonged to its Center or Original, it was in the Dark
World, that was its Ground, and according to the outward Light, it was in this
world: and so now when the Body decaseth, then the Sun-Light is destroyed, and
the Soul stands Naked in the Dark World.

517. Therefore God brought Divine Substantiality, into the faded disappeared
Image of Man, and brought it into the Anger, viz: into the Fire of the Fathers
Nature, and kindled again the faded disappeared Substantiality of the Image,
so that the Soul could again eat of the Divine substantiality; and allay or
meeken its Fire, whence the Noble Image rises again out of Death, into
another World, viz: into the Liberty, without, besides, or beyond Nature, into
the Light of the Majesty.

518. As the Power, viz: the Second Center, arises up out of the Death of the
Fire of the Father into another World, viz: into it self: so also does the
Noble Image of Man; It is all but one and the same Entrance into the Divine
Life.

519. And this lets the Great Mystery Mysterum Magum befound by you,
through Gods Grace, this lets the Root of the Tree stand open to you, if you
be seeing and Not blind, not through conceits of Stories, but through a
kindled Spirit, out of Gods Grace: through seeing, and not by conjecture
whether it be true or no.

520. I need no wrested forced strange cited Scriptures, to demonstrate it; I
can demonstrate it in all things, I have all the THREE Worlds, together with
all Creatures, for a witness, and yet I am Dumb or Mute to the unenlightened:
I see and am NOT seen my self.

521. My Sir Libeller: Whence will you then take the Original of the Devil?
you will not allow, the Devil to be a Great part of the Deity according to the
Fathers Nature, whereas yet Lucisor, is by Christ himself called a Great
Prince: Now if you will not allow that, then show me another Nature out of
which the Devil was Created, than, out of the Divine?

522. You must necessarily allow, that the Devils were Angels, now then
Angels are children of God, out of Gods Substance; they are Creatures, and a
Creature must needs be out of or from Nature; now if they be Eternal
Creatures, then they are also proceeded out of the Eternal Nature, and that is
God the Fathers in the First Principle.

523. For you indeed know, that the Devils have the properties of Gods Anger
and of the Dark World, and so also have all wicked Souls of Men: From whence
else will they have their properties, than from their Mother which has
generated them, if here you will not understand, then God help you.

524. The wicked Soul goes certainly out of this World into the Dark World,
into the Eternal Nature, into its Mother out of which it is gone forth and
proceeded, and wherein it stands Naturally: why should God else be willing to
cast the Soul into Hellfire, into that source or quality, if it were not
proceeded out of that source?

525. The Soul of the wicked goes together with the Devils, again into that
place, out of which it went forth in the beginning of its Creation, viz: into
the Center to Nature: and the Righteous go through the Death of the Fire,
through Christ's Love-Fire into the Eternal Life, into the Liberty, without,
besides, or beyond, Nature, in the Light.

526. When God Created the Angels, then the Father moved himself according to
the Eternal Nature, his desire comprised the Essence out of his Substance,
wherein stood the Wisdom of all Wonders: Thus out of Nature are Creatures come
to be, according to the Property of every Essence.

527. In the Essence, have the Angels and Devils, and also Souls, been from
Eternity, and have been seen in the Wisdom, but they went into Creatures in
the beginning of the Moving of God the Father.

528. What have I now done to the Libeller, in that I have written, it was God,
against God? Do you not understand that? The Devil was a Great Prince of the
Place of this World, Created in the Moving of the Fathers Nature; he Imagined
according to his Mother: He should have Or put his Imagination into the Light
into the Love.
set his Imagination in the Light in the Love and Meekness of God; And then he
would have continued Gods child and an Angel.

529. But he let the fierce Wrath draw him, and looked back into his Mother,
and Imagined into the Fires property, and would be a Lord of the Light World,
he would be above God; thus with his Elevation he kindled; the Substantiality
of his Throne, of the place or space of this World; out of which Earth and
Stones are come to be, which God with the Moving in the Fiat afterward Created.

530. Will thou know this in very plain terms in brief; then observe it. When
the Substance of all Substances had once moved it self, then all Forms would
be Creaturely; for out of the One only Will which has been from Eternity, has
in the Substance of all Substances, gone forth the Wills Form, according to
Every Property, in the Wrestling Wheel of Nature.

531. But Luciser had the Light, if he had not now gazed Back into the Center
of Nature, he had been one of the Brightest Princes, for where there is Great
Fire, there is also great Light.

532. Enough concerning Him: we shall be enough understood by those that are
OURS: but for the proud self-conceited Spirits, we have set a fast Lock and
Seal before it, that they cannot apprehend our sense or thoughts: also we
shall herein mention no more to the Wanton, in pleasure and voluptuousness,
but let it remain for the Time of the Lilly in the New Birth.
Lilly.

533. The Libeller Blames me very much; He says, I have written that the
Devil is like God; if he did set that down with Truth; it is, when he was an
Angel; for then he was indeed like God, for God had through and in him, made
himself Creaturely, but when he became a Devil, then he lost the Divine
Principle, and became, like Gods Wrath.

534. Now therefore the Strife was effected only in Gods Anger: For, with the
first Imagination, he lost the Love, and could no more reach the Heart of God:
What should God now do to the false or wicked apostate or revolted Will? He
gave him Hellish-Fire which he desired, to devour, instead of the Love, since
he would not have the one, he must have the other; they were indeed both his;
what he chose, that he had.

535. But that it is said; God could not withstand the Malicious Devil: that,
the Libeller perverts, as one that understands nothing of my Writings, or
else of mere Malice: Did he not see? how I have described with all
Circumstances, that Gods Heart or Love, went not into the Devil, for he, the
Devil would not himself have it; now where the Will it self wills not,
there, is, an Eternal Death.

536. The Will-Spirit was indeed in the Original out of Gods Nature, but when
it demersed it self into the Center, to hide it self from the Light of God;
then remained fierce wrathfulnesse IN fierce wrathfulnesse. With what now
should resistance be made, it was now in its most Original MOTHER.

537. Should Gods Love go into the Hellish Fire, that is not to be; should God
in his Wrath strive against it: it sat already in the Hellish Fire: Had not
fierce Wrath striven with fierce Wrath, then had not Gods Anger yet moved, in
the place of this World.

538. Consider but the Earth, thou will well find it, thou blind World, with
all thy Texts of Scripture which thou have produced, thou will not put one word
in my Book back from its place, only that thou set a strange vizard upon
me, that the people might not know me, which I esteem not, for I am to YOU a
very strange Man.

539. Thou can not in thy Hood look me in the Face, thou must put off thy
skin, if thou will see the Spirit of the Mystery; Thou understandest Not,
what thou writest against me, thou discoursest not concerning my apprehension,
and that makes that thou, see somewhat that is strange; thou will not see,
that it is the Root of the Tree; Thou will sooner leap into Hell, as Lucifer
did, e're thou touchest one little twig thereof.

540. Thou runnest again into thy Center, toward Babel, and set upon an
Or University.
Academy, out of which, Opinons and the Greatest Babel is grown; out of which,
all Strife has followed, where Men have contended about Words, about the
Shell, and let the Kernel lie, but hearken friend; tell but See the Apology
to Gregory Rickter verse 127.
TEN, and thou will find it by Experience.

541. God has Elected ALL of us in ONE Soul and in ONE Spiritual Body to be
his Children; God has not breathed into Adam TWO Spirits, but One only, which
is the Spirit of all the Three Principles; of all Three Worlds, viz: a
Fire-Light-and-Aire-Spirit.

542. Adam should have managed his Dominion with the Light-Spirit; then would
the Fire-source or quality, have been hidden in its Principle, and have stood
in great joy, it had burned only in it self.

543. Thus also the NOTE.
Spirit of this World, that should also have stood only in it self, and have
been manifest in this World, and the Fire, and also, the Outward World, should
have stood as if were swollowed up into the Light, and have been manifest only
in it self, all desires should have been set in the Light, and then the Light
had shined in all Essences and desires, and had filled all, as in ONE Will.

544. But when the Will of the Center, viz: the Fiery Will, which is called the
Soul, went into the Earthly kingdom, and Imagined after Evil and Good, then
it received also the Evil and Good.
same, then its Light Extinguished, and it remained in its Mother, a dark dry
hunger, and must help it self with the Spirit of this World, as with a
Sun-Light.

545. Therefore it comes to pass, that many times when a Man goes in the
dark, he is astonished and terrified, and always afraid somewhat should lay
hold on him, that is the fear of the Soul, when it perceives it self to be
without the Light of the Sun in a dark Dungeon, it is afraid of Gods fierce
Wrath in the Center, and of the Devils that dwell in the Darkness.

546. Since then the Divine Light is Extinguished in the Soul, therefore Man's
Life and Spirit, at present without the New Birth, stands in two Regiments or
Dominions, viz: in the Souls Fire, it is the Dominion of Gods Anger, and of the
fierce Wrath, as the Fires property is.

547. And according to the Spirit of this World, it is Evil and Good,
according to the Sun, and according to the Constellation of the Outward Starry
and Elementary Spirit, it is always according to its Constellation which stood
in its Birth, as also has stood in its Conception; As that it is at all times
aspected with the Conjunction of the Constellatison, with the Imagination of
the Constellation; so is also the outward Will-Spirit: unless it be, that the
Soul do attain the Divine Light again in the New Birth, and then the Soul
constrains the outward Spirit with the power of the Light, and leads it
captive.

548. My Libeller; your conceit deceives you; I know of no more but ONE only
Spirit, according to the Property of ALL THREE Worlds, which is in Man, and
when the Light Extinguisheth, then it is in TWO Properties: that which
receives the Light of God, that is Elected to be a child of God.

549. Now it lies indeed in Man, that he should seek and desire it; for Christ
says; Math. 7. 7. Luke 11. 9. 12.
Knock and it will be opened unto you, seek, and you will find, Ask and you
will receive; Luke 11. 13.
Your Father will give the Holy Spirit, to him that asks for it; Also, 1 Timothy
2. 4.
There is no son, that asks for an Egg, and the Father gives him a
Scorpion: 1 Timothy 2. 4.
God wills that all Men be saved.

550. Where now remains in these words and Promises, the predestinate purpose
of God to the Hardening; or where are the Two Spirits, whereof God loves the
one, and hardens the other? We have indeed All, but One only Soul, and that
is free, it may frame its Will in Gods Love or Anger, into which soever it
casts it self with its desire, there it is.

551. It comes to pass many times, that a Soul has demersed it self with its
Will-Spirit into Gods Anger into the Dark World, in its fierce Wrath to all
Devils, with its sins, and yet many in the time of this world, go out
again and convert, and God receives them to Grace; He hardens them not.

552. Have you not an Example in the Prodigali lost son, who had consumed all
his righteousness of his Fathers Inheritance, with the Devils Swine: and was
become a Swinheard: What the Father did with him when he came again, how he
fell about hu neck, and kissed him, and said, Luke 15. 24.
This is my beloved son, whom I had lost, he was dead, and is become living:
it is likely thou will say; God drew him, else he had not come.

553. The Soul is Free, God draws every one; who incline toward him, when it
enters into him, then it is Elected to the Light World: so long as the Will
remains in the fierce Wrath in the Dark World covered with the Outward; so
long God wills it not, and it is not drawn, but when it inclines it self
toward Gods Face, and does but a little Imagine into Gods Love, then the
Divine Life becomes stirring.

554. Understand, the Word is become Man or Incarnate, and stands in the
Soul, viz: in the Fathers Principle, in the sound; for it has by its entrance
into the Anger, set the Looking Glass of his Covenant, viz: the Virgin of the
Divine Wisdom, before the Soul, that it should behold it self therein.

555. The Wisdom says continually, Come; then says the Devil behind it
also; Come: now to which so Ever it goes, thereby it becomes Elected for a
Child.

556. God lets no Soul, (which has Light) to Extinguish its Light out of
his predestinate purpose: The Free Will Extinguisheth it: The Devil set
himself in the form of an Angel before the Soul, that it might Imagine in
Evil and Good, thus then its Imagination eats of Evil and Good, and so the
Soul becomes blind, and captivated in its Imagination.

557. Else if God did harden any out of his predestinate purpose, and did let
his Light Extinguish out of his predestinate purpose, then would not that be
true which David says in the 5. Psalm, Thou art not a God that willest Evil:
indeed he permits it to come to pass, that an honest virtuous Man becomes
Evil, when the Will inclines into Evil, then he lets his Light Extinguish.

558. But not out of his predestinate purpose; so that he would not saine have
that very Man: surely he receives him if he comes again: so long as a Man
lives in this Tabernacle, he has power to become the Child of God: for the
Apostle says also thus; Joh. 1. 12.
He has given us power to become the Children of God.

559. Understand, not out of or from the Will of the Flesh, viz: of the outward
World; that belongs not to Gods Kingdom, but out of or from the Will of the
Souls Spirit, which becomes Generated or born in God: For, Gods predesfinate
purpose is, that the right Divine Will, should always become Generated out of
the Soul, which is done, when the Soul enters into the becoming Man or
Incarnation of Christ, in that it becomes Generated or born again to be Gods
child.

560. For the Souls-Fire becomes introduced into Christ's Death, and Sprouteth
again with a New fair blossom, out of the Death of Christ forth into the
Divine Liberty, into the Angelical World.

561. That very Blossom or Spiritual Will, is Gods Will, and in that very
Will-Spirit the Soul is an Angel, for it possesses the Second Principle, viz:
Gods Majesty; it continually introduces Divine Substantiality, viz: Christ's
Flesh, which fills the Heaven, so that the Soul Joh: 6. 54.
eareth of Christ's Flesh, and drinks his Blood, John 6. out of the Water of
the Meekness of the Eternal Life.

562. Therefore, I say with good Ground: It is not Gods predestinate purposed
Will, that any one Man becomes Lost; but it is from the Will of his fierce
Wrath and Anger, and of the Dark World and of the Devil.

563. Therefore he is a false or wicked Judger, and an Advocate of Gods Anger;
who will Judge, and blame God, and knows not, the difference, of what God is
in Love and Anger, and knows not whence an Evil, and Good, Will,
Originateth: and yet will be a Judger: he cries continually, God, God, it is,
that does a thing.

564. The Prophets and Apostles, have often, called the Total God according to
Love and Anger, as also according to all the Three Principles, by ONE WORD; but
yet a Man should use a right understanding, and make a distinction between Gods
Love-Will and his Anger-Will.

565. We see very plainly in Man, that he wills Evil and Good: he would
always saine be an Angel, and would also feign have the Pride, in
Covetousness and the Power of this World; Men should search, whence every Will
takes its Original; and not always say, God, God, God, wills it.

566. He wills only that which is like himself; his Love, viz: the Right Name
of God, wills only, that we should Love God, and our Neighbor, and Continue
in his desire and will; HE wills nothing else, but that all Men should turn
to him, and go out from fierce Wrath into the Love; For, Math. 7. 12. Ch: 22.
37. to the 40.
the Love of God and of our Neighbor is the whole Law and the Prophets.

567. On the Contrary, his fierce Wrath and Anger, which is the Root of the
outward World, wills its like, to have sewell or wood for its Fire.

568. Now being Gods Love, has set before Man, the LookingGlasse, of his
Wisdom, in the becoming Man, or Incarnation of himself; why then does he go
into the Anger Looking-glass, and lets the Devil sway him? God indeed
sends Prophets and Teachers, out of his predestinate purpose; who reveal and
signify, to the World, his Anger: why does Man follow Sin?

569. That must needs be a wonderful thing: that God should cause any to be
called to come to HIM, and yet would harden him out of his predestinate
purpose, that he Could not: then God would be unrighteous; Indeed the Lust of
the Flesh and of the Devil hardens the Soul, and holds it Captive.

570. If God had willed the Evil or the Fall of Man, then he would not have
forbidden Adam the Tree of Good and of Evil, viz: the Lust or Pleasure of this
World: But if he has forbidden him, and has also hardened him, that he could
not do Gods Will; who would now be righteous, God, or Man?

571. As the Libeller supposes, that it is out of Gods predestinate purpose,
that two unlike sons were generated out of Adam, an Evil and a Good, and
will make thereof two sorts of Seed: hearken, make two sorts of Souls, and then
it may be.

572. When Adam became Earthly, then he became drawn of the Spirit of this
World, and Gods Anger became Stirring in him, then did the Soul give way, that
the Devil through the Spirit of the Outward World, thrust in Evil Seed into
the Soulish Essence, for propagation, which the Constellation of the
Configuration has increased, so that a fratricide or brother Murtherour,
became generated: but was that Gods predestinate purpose?

573. Had not Adam made himself Earthly, then would not Gods fierce wrath have
become Manifest or revealed in him, also then would the Constellation have had
no power over the Soulish Seed.

474. For, the outward Kingdom, should not have possessed and governed Man in
the inward Image, it should have been as an impotency or weakness in Man: He
was Paradisicall.

575. But that it stands written, the 1 Cor. 15. 45. to the 47.
Outward Man was Created to a Natural Life, thereby it is understood, that
Nature is a Ruler or Manifester of the Wisdom of God: and then in the Mortal
fall, Eve is understood to be a Woman, (and not a Virgin) of this World.

576. Whereas it could not be otherwise; and that Adam stood not in the Proba
or Trial; he let him fall into the Genesis 2. 21.
sleep of the Eternal Life, and made a Natural fleshly Woman, out of him, out
of his Matrix and Rib.

577. For the spirit of the outward World had captivated Adam, and introduced
its substantiality into his Imagination; whence he is such a Naked, sfinking,
hard, palpable, cold, bitter, and hot, Man, like a Beast, and is not the Noble
Image, which is saded and disappeared in Death, which is created out of
heavenly substantiality.

578. But, that thou will not allow me this, that in Man, understand in the
Third Principle, a humane Image according to the Angelical World, out of the
Heavenly substantiality, has stood, in the Inward: yet I say, that Gods
Spirit, that in the Second Principle goes forth out of the First, viz: out of
the Souls Fire of the Father, into the Second, out of the Love and Light Fire
into the Son, was never at all without substance; for it is the Driver forth
of the Divine power and substantiality.

579. Has now the Light and Spirit of God, been in Man? viz: in Adam? then
also has Gods substantiality been therein: For, no Fire burns in Gods Love,
unless it have DIVINE substantiality.

580. Therefore says Christ: Joh: 6. 53.
Whosoever eats NOT the Flesh of the Son of Man: he has no part in HIM: He
understands, the Corporeity of his unmeasurable Eternal Divine
Substantiality in the Water of the Eternal Life; and in the Tincture of the
Power out of the Fire and Light, in the Glance or Luster of the Divine Wisdom
out of the Words Body.

581. Now if Adam has been a total sumilitude according to God, then he must
not only have had Earthly Substance for his Body, if the Soul had had only
Earthly source or quality to Eat, then it had not had the prohibition, but it
had also the Corporeity of the Second Principle, out of the Heavenly
Substantiality, that was the right Angelical Image, which became created in
the Fiat of the Word.

582. But the Outward Fiat, according to the Outward Principle, Created the
Outward Man, and God the Holy Spirit, breathed himself thereinto, according to
the source or quality and property of all the Three Principles, into the
outward Image, according to its outward Property, viz: the Spirit of the Great
World, Majoris Mundi, of the outward World; and the Angelical Divine World,
according to the Love of Gods Heart, and according to the Eternal Nature, viz:
according to the Fire-World; viz: according to the Fathers Property, the right
Soulish; viz: the Center of the whole Man.

583. In Brief, what is it, that Men should make many words? Man was a Total
similitude according to God, according to all the Three Worlds, and their
Properties, and that he must be again, or must be a hunger-Spirit in the Dark
World.

584. What he makes Out of himself, or himself to be.
of himself, that he is. He stands here in the Field or Soil, either there
grows out of him an Herb on Gods Table, or an Herb in Gods fierce Wrath; what
kind of Essence so ever he will bring in the growing according to the relish of
that, it will also get a Mouth, for it will eat, either of the Love or of the
Anger.

585. The matter is not about the high knowledge only, but about the taste or
relish, that any becomes the Bread of God which God Eats; It lies little in
the knowing, but all in the DOING, it must be DOING, the Evil Branches must be
Cut off, that good Wine may grow.

586. We should not judge and condemn one another for the knowledge sake: The
Plowman knows less then the Doctor, but he goes many times before the
Doctor, into the kingdom of Heaven: let us fall upon DOING, that we may get
Divine Essence into our Sprout: let us reach after the LOVE, and then we have
ALL.

587. MY high Knowledge makes me not happy or saved; for I know not my self;
it is not Mine, but Gods Spirit knows it self in ME, he allures Me therewith
to himself; when he departs or withdraws, then I know Nothing.

588. I have not my knowledge at all from Man, why should I then long contend
with Man about it, no Man can either give it me or take it away from me.

589. I deal foolishly, in that I Strive with thee, for thou can take nothing
from me; but it is done, for the sake of other people, which through thy Mouth
abuse my knowledge, else I would, for thy Cursings and Judgings; not lift up a
Finger.

590. Thou shoudst Converse in Love as a Christian if thou would be Gods
child; but if thou Judge thy brother into Hellfire, for the sake of his
Gift, what will become of thee; how do thou know what is befallen him, that
he runs on thus: How do thou know, upon what Branch or Root God has
ingrasted him? Thou were not at all by, when he did sow the Spirit of his
Wisdom.

591. You say it is from the Devil: and there was Joy in Heaven in Ternario
Sancto in the Holy Ternary, especially in the Fathers Nature, when this Seed
was sown; I would NOT give the little Grain that was sown into me, for all
this worlds good; It is more dear to me, than Heaven and Earth, and thou
treadest it underfoote, do but see what manner of Angel thou art.

592. Thou writest much, and if thou should go with thy writings to the
Center, there would be no body at home; thou gatherest many Texts of Scripture
together, which in themselves are GOOD, that thou might settle a framed
Opinion, concerning that thou know no Ground for.

593. Thou can not bring the Opinion into the Center, and then bring it out
again, there is no Spirit of Depth in thee, but collected Matter, from others
Mouths, and thy own Mouth understands it not.

594. But I write, what I my self understand, and what I can bring into the
Ground of the Center.

595. Art thou a Master? then show thy self one: give me a writing concerning
the Center of the Eternal and also of the outward Nature, let it be seen what
thou can do: prove it in the Light of Nature, and not from a strange Mouth;
Speak from your own knowledge, and then I will Answer thee.

566. Let thy contemining alone, and do thou direct it to the honor of God,
and make if serve the profit and salvation of Man, that it may be a Sprour upon
Gods Table: and I will Answer thee that thou will Wonder, and if thou meanest
piously, wilt highly rejoice: thou would neither seek nor find any Devil in
Me.

597. There is a great earnestness, in me to seek my Eternal kingdom in God;
God has not promised me a Scorpion instead of an Egg: he would not give me to
the Devil when I prayed so earnestly to him for his Holy Spirit.

598. The Devil sets not upon a Man, a spiritual high Triumphant Crown or
Garland of Victory in Ternario Sancto in the Holy Ternary, when a Man Fights
against him: He has none, of THAT which has been done to this Spirit, which
thou call a Devil; and whence its knowledge proceeded.

599. I write not for my own Fame, which is in God, but to Teach Men, what they
may expect from God, if they will but come to the Ring or Lists of this Earnest
Fight: unless the outward voluptuousness in soft pleasure of the Flesh, be
preferred.

Number X.
600. THe Libeller has very fleshly or carnal Eyes: upon that which I have
written, which is; that The Man Adam, before his first Imagination, before the
Woman was made, had a Powerful Body, and that he had no such Members for
Propagation; he will merely have it to be an Earthly Man.

601. The Libeller understands not, that 1 Cor. 4. 20.
the kingdom of God Consists in Power, and that the Image of God was Created
out of heavenly Substantiality, and that the bright Angellicall Image was Lord
over the Outward Life, that Man had not such gross Beastiall Flesh, till the
Image became shut up in Death, as God said: Genesis 2. 17.
The Day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye.

602. He understood, or meant, not the Outward, he dyed not, to the Outward
Life, but to the Noble Image of Gods power: the Spirit of God departed from
him; thus the Image out of Gods Substance, came to be in the Nothing, viz: in
the Eternal Death, without source, quality, or operation.

603. If ADAM had not Imagined according to the Earthlinesse, then had not EVE
been made out of him; but he himself would have been able to have generated
after a Magical Manner; He had the Matrix, and also the Limbus, he was Man and
Wise before his Eve was, a pure chaste Masculine Virgin of God.

604. Therefore must the Second Adam again, be borne or generated of a Virgin
without the concurrence of any Man, and be like the first Image, in which the
Divine Light exercised the Dominion.

605. Though likely it was not manifested to Men's Eyes in Christ's Time, we had
not heavenly Eyes: yet Joh: 8. 12.
then he was the Light of the World; as himself says: Such a one also was Adam
before his sleep, before the Imagination into the Earthly kingdom; I
understand in my Book, not a power-body according to the outward World, but
according to the Image; although the The outward was then such as shall arise
at the Resurrection.
outward was totally much otherwise then it is.

606. My Libeller: you suppose, that at the Last Judgment day, another Man
will arise, other than Adam was before the Fall: Gods purpose must stand; the
first Image must come again, and even in such a form as God Created it, to
Eternal Life.

607. Or, can you not in the Light of Nature, understand somewhat thereof? how
the Soul is ashamed of the Members of the Beastiall Birth, and the Beastiall
Impregnation: do you not feel it in you.

608. Tell me; if we were Created Beastiall in Adam, whence the shame proceeds?
that the poor Soul is ashamed of the Bodies desormity, and of its propagation.

609. Do you not say, that those Members became manifested on Adam and Eve
after Sin; and that Genesis 3. 7.
they were ashamed, that according to the Outward Man they were become Beasts;
they saw not what the Outward Fiat had made in the Sleep, till the Earthly
source or quality awaked, then the Soul became ashamed that out of an Angel a
Beast was come to be.

610. While the Earthly Kingdom stood hidden, so long the Soul knew it not,
but when it drew into the Soul, then began sorrow and horror before the
Abyss: for the Soul saw its Root, which the Outward Body and Spirit
understood not.

611. Or do you suppose: that Adam was created to Mortality? O no! But to the
Eternal Life in Paradise; with Paradisicall source or quality: and with a
Body, which was sit for Paradise; which was like to Paradise. But of this no
more here. In the Book of the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, and in the
Book of the Threesold Life, also in the Three Principles, it is expressed at
Large, read it there.

Number XI.
612. COncerning the Last Words in the Book, where it stands written thus;
Avroroe, Chap: 26. verse 152.
Though Peter or Paul had written otherwise; and that I had set it down thus;
Chap: 18. verse 1. Chap: 26. verse: 122.
That Moses was not by at the Creation, Chap: 19. verse 100
but wrote the Creation from his predecessors Mouths; the Libeller takes on at
it, and braggeth stoutly with a storm against Abel, he will suddenly kill him,
and have in Hell.

613. Hearken Libeller! that which is said of Peter and Paul, though Poter or
Paul had written otherwise: is spoken in way of a Proverb: it is not; that
Peter and Paul have written otherwise; but the Cryers at Babel, the
Predestinatours.
Grace Electioners, the Cripple Electioners, at Babel, Cry out, thus has Paul
written, thus Peter; thus another; and draw it to their Conceits: against THOSE
I set THAT, Avrora, Chap: 26. verse 152.
though Peter or Paul had written otherwise, Men should look to the HEART upon
Gods Grace, and his Promise, and not hang or depend upon their Conceits that
urge the Apostles words for them.

614. It is not my entention to blame the high Apostles, but the Cripple
Electioners, such as thou art; who draw the Scripture about by the hair of the
head, and leave out the Love of God, which wills not the Evil; thou
pervertest my Mind and Thoughts, therefore thou art a false wicked Evil
Electioner.

615. As to Moses, Aurora. Chap: 18. verse 1.
where I say: there * Chap: 21. verse 1. and 11.
sticks yet much in the Mystery in Moses Writings: I have NOT said that he
has written wrong, it is Chap: 20. verse 2.
briefly and summarily written, and needs an enlightened explanation.

616. For a Philosopher, rests not, unless he have the Cemer of a thing,
after such a meaning, have I written of Moses, that a richly spiritual
explanation were necessary: what have I done to the Libeller thereby; he
seeks cause where he can, he must be a right Contender, seeing he fouldeth up
all and wheeleth it about; it is no otherwise with him, than in an Academy,
where he gets cause of contention; likely some other might come who would wipe
his Nose, for him, who also had For offense and defense
Horns.

617. He need not contend with me, I have written for my self, and not for the
Or Predessinators.
Grace-Electioners: much less for the New Babel, which Sprouteth up in the
Libeller: it thrusts out the Horns already, it will soon be borne, only it
sticks yet in the Margin: it is now high time to prepare for the The Gift
which Gossips give at Christenings.
Gossips Gift.

618. If the Libeller had not a Mind to read my Book, he might have thrown
it away at the first Leaf, what need he seek in it for so much Evil: Sure he
has an Evil Mind, full of fierce Wrath, that thus venteth it self, whereas
it is not his Calling or Employment: He might only have that while thought upon
his Mammon, or have taken care of his Soul, before he had Judged and Condemned
other people; But Pride has set him on Horseback, to ride over-a Weak Man.

619. But it comes to pass many times, that a Little one beats a Great one;
let him not rely too much upon Art, for it exposes many a Man to derision.

were Got vertraut,
bat, woll gevaut,
ob with use welt thut bassen:
Ich trass ausf Goft
Et wird mith nit berlassen.
Who in God trusts
Builds sure, not Lusts,
Though the vain World do hate me.
I trust in God;
He, never will forsake me.
Math. 10. 25.
If they have called the Father of the House Beelzebub, what will they do to
those of his Household? faith Christ. Math. 5. 11, 12.
When they persecute you, and hate you for my Names sake, then do you rejoice,
for great is your Reward in the Kingdom of Heaven.

620. Men say, an Enemies Mouth, never speaks Good; there is nothing so Evil
but some men make it worse. My Book is not Evil, it meddles with none; only
thou make it Evil, thou expoundest it in an Evil sense, and my sense was
right and Good when I made it.

621. Thou fayest there is an evil spirit in me, if there were a good spirit
in thee, then thou would make the Evil to be Good, and would not pervert
all.

622. Gods Spirit seeks only Good, he contends with none: he Loves Man; and
where he is in a Man, there he drives on to Love and Humility toward his
Neighbor, he Teaches and instructs Gently and Meekly, he lifts not up the
Horns; also he comes not with Thunder and Ligntning; as the Anger in the
Fathers Nature, upon Mount Sinai, and with Elias, did: but with a still meek
Voice, as at the day of Pentecost.

623. God has in Christ regenerated us in the Love, not in his fires property;
that we should meet together one with another, with a Modest and amiable
condiscention and behavior in a friendly Will and intention: and heartily
admonish one another, as brethren.

624. We should help up the weak and erroneous, and friendly instruct them in
the way, and not from the narrow path, plunge them into the Water, or else cast
them into Gods Anger in Hellfire, as the Libeller does, where he says: Hell
Fire is thine.

625. Christ says; Math. 5. 22.
Whosoever says unto his Brother thou Fool, he is guilty of Hell Fire, or
Raiha, he is guilty of a Council; what is he worthy or guilty of, who calls
his Brother a Devil, and judges or condemns him to Hell fire? O Man!
Consider thy self, convert from such uncouth Paths.

626. We have indeed here is this valley of Misery; before hand in the way of
our Pilgrimage, a very small narrow Or Ladder.
Bridge into Gods Kingdom, why should we our selves first throw one another
down; does one go astray, then let the other show him the way; let us deal one
by another as Brethren.

627. We all are born blind, now then if sight be afforded us of Grace, why
then does not one Brother afford Eyes to the Other? Every one sees, as God
has favorably afforded him, according as sight is given to him, why will one
brother hate the other, for the sake of that, because he knows not what the
Lord has given to him.

628. O how Miserable is this Time of Ours, how the Devil hunteth for us with
Snares and Nets, so that one Brother reproacheth dispiseth contemns and
slays, the Other, that he may captivate us in Gods Anger: How does he not
afford us the high honor, which he had, but lost it with Pride.

629. Dear Brethren, beware of Pride, especially those that are generated out
of much Learning and Knowledge; it is the Pride of Reason, and it is Man's worst
Enemy, it has set up nothing but Wars and contemning of others.

630. Syrach says, Ecclus. 3. 18.
The higher thou art, the humblyer behave thy self, Verse 28.
Pride goes before a Fall; Prove. 16. 18.
Our Reason-knowledge is A foolish Virgin.
folly, if Gods Spirit in us kindle not the knowledge: if I knew all Scriptures
outwardly, and had not the Spirit of understanding, what were my knowledge
other, then a Conceit.

631. That, is not Divine knowledge, that any confirm an Opinion with many
Texts of Scripture collected and put together; for every Text has its proper
understanding, in the place it stands, according to the Matter treated of;
oftentimes it signifies much otherwise, then the purpose it is drawn by one
for to HIS Opinion.

632. The Right knowledge, stands in this, where any will Judge, there his
knowledge in him should be confirmed from the Spirit of God; it must go forth
from the Center, and not from a strange Mouth.

633. Or do thou suppose, that Gods Spirit has ceased to speak? or that it
is Dead? so that the Spirit, which moves in Gods seeing, dare not say any
more; Thus says the Lord.

634. The Spirit shows it what it should speak; only it bewares and defends
it self from the intermixture of the Spirit of this World, and from the
Imagination of the Devil, that the right humane will spirit, which goes forth
out of the souls fire into the Light, be not infected with its Malignity or
Curse.

635. There is no better Medicine or Antidote, then the Desire of Love, and the
Humility: so long as it goes on and judges, in Love and Humility in the
seeing of the Divine Power, so long is his Word, GODS WORD, for it is approved
by the Spirit of God: it goes upon the wings of the Wind, in the pure humane
will-spirit: as David says, Psalm. 18. 10.
The Lord Rides upon the Wings of the Wind.

636. You find by no Prophet or Apostle, that any has spoken from another
Mouth, but from his own Gift: sometime, the Spirit has brought in a Text, and
thereby cleared other Scriptures, but the Maine Matter has been set down out
of his own Spirit and Mouth.

637. Who has prohibited us, that we should not dare to speak out of the Gifts
of our Spirit, but that we should only speak with a strange Mouth from our
Spirit: as the Libeller would have it.

638. Who has made a Law, that a man should take away the Speech from the
Spirit; and change it into another Form, but even, the Antichrist, who has
set himself to be Lord over Gods Spirit, and has changed the Mouth of the holy
Children into his Color and Will.

639. Indeed the High Apostles have not commanded it: but they said: NOTE.
Keep in Remembrance JESUS CHRIST, who dyed for us and rose again, and did bid
us Teach and Preach that: they have barred up the Spirit of no Man, or
commanded his Tongue to be altogether changed into THEIR Words: They have all
of them indeed spoken together every one out of his own Tongue, and yet out of
ONE Spirit, which was CHRIST'S.

640. We have still at this very Day, the very SAME Spirit, if so be, we are
born or generated out of HIM; dare it not then now speak, what is Necessary at
this Time: what is the Cause, that the Center of the Holy Trinity Manifests
or Reveals it self? even Men's Seeking, their Desiring.

641. Men strive now about the Person of Christ, about Gods Election, and Men
raise Wars and reproaches about it, and that, Gods Love will have no more, to
be, and he will rather manifest or reveal himself, that Men should yet see
what he does, and so go out from strise about Gods Will, into a right
Apostolic life, and no more contend about the knowledge, as is done hitherto
for a long time in Babel.

642. But, that now thus, a simple Mouth, must speak such great Things; and NOT
one highly Learned: Ask that of God, why he does it? If now a Shepherd as
David was, should be a King, from the Command of God; the World would not
believe it, at all, till he did sit in Kingly Honor and Glory.

643. CHRIST indeed came in a meek-lowly Form or Condition, also his Apostles
were mean People: God can do so still; that he may bring to nothing the own
self-Reason of this World.

I say we speak what we Know and Witness what we see.

644. There grows a Lilly in the Humane Essence, which will in its own
Tongues or Languages speak the Great Deeds and Wonders of God, which shall
Sound over the Circuit of the Earth Halelu-jah.

This Translation finished in English out of the High Dutch and Low Dutch
Copies, September 4. 1659.
FINIS.

