A DISCOURSE Concerning the ORIGIN AND PROPERTIES Of VVIND.

With An Historical Account of Hurricanes, and other Tempestuous Winds.

By R. Bohun Fellow of New Coll: in OXON.

OXFORD, Printed by W. Hall for Tho. Bowman Anno Dom. 1671.

THE PREFACE.
COnsidering the unsuccesfull Attempts of several Authors who have adventured
upon this difficult part of Meteorology, I was sufficiently discouraged from
exposing to public view those Collections, which I had sometime made
concerning the Causes and Properties of Winds. But afterward, by reason of my
residence in a place principally concerned in Naval Affairs (where I had
frequent opportunities of conversing with the most experienced of our
Sea-Captains) I began to compare the observations of their Voyages, with the
writings of the most celebrated of the Ancient, and Modern Philosophers; which
I judged the only expedient to arrive at a more perfect History of Winds. I
have omitted nothing remarkable which was taken notice of by Aristotle, whose
Sagacity in these enquiries was the greatest that the Grecian World could boast
of: But the succeeding Ages, which with their nice Speculations endeavored
rather to amuse, then satisfy the minds of men, made little Progress in the
History of Nature; till our Voyages to the East and West Indies, and the great
increase of Navigation for these Hundred years last past, furnished us with so
many new discoveries, and improvements in all Natural knowledge (especially, in
what relates to the Motions of the Winds and Seas) that we are every day forced
to regret the insufficiency of those Theories which we received from the
Schools of the Ancients; since the Course of the General or Trade-Wind, the
Indian Monzoons, the several sorts of Brises in the African, and American
Climates (which are certainly the most considerable Phenomenon that belong to
an exact Treatise of Winds) were as remote from the knowledge of their most
inquisitive Naturallists, as the places where they happen, from Athens or Rome.

I must confess the incomparable Ld Verulam has given us much light, in his
Discourse on this Argument, though he seems to have been little Curious in the
Collections of Foreign Parts; without which, we must still have remained
ignorant of the largest Portion of the Universe: But I can boast of little
assistance from others, more then some Historical observations of the
Trade-Winds and Hurricanes taken from the learned De Motu Moris and Ventorum.
Isaac Vossius, which I made use of, as finding them most agreeable to the
Relations of our Sea-Voyages, and beleiving them Generally true. I must
likewise acknowledge my obligations to the Honorable Mr. Boil, for his advice
upon several occasions, particularly, in the experiment mentioned page 134,
concerning the Qualities of Winds.

I have indifferently made use of either the Peripatetique or Epicurean
Principles, as they served best for the Explication of the present Phenomenon:
For though at this day, some with the greatest applause embrace the Cartesian
and Atomicall Hypotheses, yet what are the Atomicall, or Corpuscularian
Placits, but Democritus or Epicurus in another Dress, which we call the New
Philosophy; not that it was Invented, but only Revived, and Vindicated by the
Moderns, from the Injuries and oppression of Time.

I have in the following Discourse offered at a fuller Account both of the
Regular, and Tempestuous Winds, the Land and Sea-Brizes, and several other
particulars which most writers had past by in silence: And though, as to the
Historical part or Matters of Fact, I may have committed some errors; this
must not altogether be imputed to my credulitye, but the great Diversity of
Relations, and innumerable Accidents, which alter the mostconstant motions of
the Currents and Winds. I have known some Masters of Ships, who missed of the
Monsoons at the usual seasons of the year in their return from the Indies: and
I have sometimes met with different Accounts of the Harmetan Winds, and the
Tornados on the Coasts of Guiny: nor shall I undertake that every ship which
has Crossed the Line, met with the Trade-Wind in the same Degree of Latitude: I
have therefore described them as they generally happen, and though there may be
some Variation, yet, for the most part, they very Regularly depend on the
course of the Sun. I may thus far assure the Reader, that I have managed this
Affair with all imaginable Caution, and seldom made use of any Account, but
when several Relations did agree in the same particulars, or when I found the
persons of the most unsuspected integrity, and which had no interest to
deceive. Then it was my ultimate Design to make the most advantageous use of
these enquiries, as they might conduce to any improvement in Philosophy:
Albeit I may possibly be obnoxious to Censure, for diverse Philosophical
reflections, which I have occasionally made in the following Discourses: Though
I have for the most part rather Alluded to Several, then Adherd to any One
Hypothesis. Yet since all Disquisitions of this kind are but Conjectural, and
no exact Demonstration to be expected in Physiologicall Sciences, I might
challenge the freedom of my own thoughts, reserving for others the same
Liberty, to abound in their own sense, and to interpret Nature as they please.

The Contents.
THe Placits of the Ancients and their several Definitions of Wind. page 6.
The Opinion of De Carts, and other Modern Naturallists. 7. 8. Wind no more
then a Motion, or Protrutrusion of the Air. 7. That there are Several Origines
of Wind: First, they are generated in the Lower Region, by the Dilatation of
Vapors or Air: p. 12. By the Repletion, or Superoneration of the Atmosphere.
p. 16. From Pressure of Clouds, or the Elasticall Virtue of the Air, etc. 20.
The 2d Local Origin of Winds in General from the Earth or Seas, as from
Submarine or Subterraneall Eruptions. 23. By the Rarefaction of Liquids, proved
from the Experiment of the Aeolipile. 24. Historical instances of Winds
breaking from under the Earth or Sea. 27. 33. Of the Mascarets in the River of
Dordogn, and the sudden tumors in the Lake of Geneva. 34. The 3d General
Cause of Wind, by Descension from the Middle Region; both from Vapors before,
and after their Coalition into Clouds. 27. 39. Their Ingenit Gravity the cause
of their descent. 40. Not their Repulse from the Antiperistasis of Contraries.
39. The Reason why some Winds blow with greater violence, and impetuosity then
others. 45. The Formal Cause of Winds. 46. The Opinions of Aristotle,
Theophrastus, etc. with the Latin Interpreters. 47. 48. Some other conjectures
concerning the Causes of their Oblique Motion. 40. 50. etc. The Undulating and
Reflex Motions of Wind. 50. 51. The Matter of Winds: an Explication of
Aristotle's Opinion. 58. Their Limits and Extent. 63. The most Flatulent
Seasons: why they blow more in Spring and Autumn, then at other times. 65. The
Several Species of Winds. 67. An Historical Account of the General, or Trade
Wind. 68. 69. etc. The Causes why it blows Constantly from the Easterly points,
and imitates the Course of the Sun. 71. Where to be expected on this side the
Tropique. 78. The Variation thereof in several Longitudes. 79. Why the
Westerly Winds blow most commonly without the Tropiques. 86. The Provincial
Winds. 90. A discourse concerning the Terrheinos and Viracoins; or the Land and
Sea-Brises. 92. Their History and Cause. 93. etc. When they come in, or cease,
in the Straights, on the Coasts of Guiny, and the East and West Indies; and
what Accidents hasten or retard their approach. from p. 99. to 110. Of the
Etesian, or Anniversary Winds: their several species. 111. 112. etc. Of the
Anniversary Winds in the way to the East Indies, which they call the Monsoons.
119. How many months they continue the same Course on the Coasts of Africa, and
India. 121. The Changing or Breaking up of the Monsoons. 122. A Discourse
concerning the Qualities of Wind p. 131. derived from their Constituent Parts,
or the Medium through which they pass. 131. Some Trials for the Explication
of this Phenomenon. 133. 134. etc. The Great incertainty of these
observations, and the diversities of their Qualities in several Climates. 138.
The Properties of Easterly Winds: Unwholesome in most parts of Europe, and yet
in America very agreeable and pleasant. 141. Of the South Winds. 142. Why they
magnify Visible objects, and cause a stammering in the speech. 147. Of the
Westerly Winds; their exceeding violence in the Isle of Jersy, and Coast of
Cornwall. 150. Of the North Winds, their wonderful impetuosity in Norwey and
Island. 161. The great Caution to be used, and what Circumstances are to be
considered in judging the Qualities of Winds. 172. 173. The causes of Hot
Winds. 174. 175. The Extremity of their Heat toward the Persian Gulf, and
several instances of other Scorching Winds in Afric, and Arabia, where they
blow off from the Sands. 178. 179. The causes of Cold Winds. 181. 182. The
Sea-Winds in the Temperate Zones hotter then those which blow over the Land.
187. Instances of this Nature, in Great Britain, the Isle of Jersy, Virginia,
Florida, and several other places. 188. 189. etc. Yet in the Torrid Zone, the
Sea-Brises cooling, and pleasant; examples thereof in America. 191. Some
Unusual Qualities of Wind. 194. Of the Harmetans in Guiny. 195. 196. The
Virulent and Destructive Qualities of certain Winds in the West Indies. 201.
Some Proposals, for a more Accurate Discovery of the Nature, and Qualities of
Winds: in relation to Architecture,Navigation, and several Trades, and
Mechanical Arts from 209. to 222. Diverse Prognostiques of Wind. 223. Of
Whirlwinds in General. 229. Their several species. 231. Concerning the
Tornados: a Description of their Nature. 236. 237. How many degrees they are to
be expected on this side the Aequinoctiall, and at what time of the year. 246.
Most toward the Coasts of Guiny. 247. The Tempests near the Cape Bon
Esperance. 245. The Cause of the Tornados. 249. The Presters or Fiery
Whirlwinds: Examples thereof. 251. 254. Hurricanes: Some conjectures concerning
their cause. 257. The Places where they happen. 265. 266. Their Prognostiques,
and Description in diverse Historical Relations. from 269. to 292. etc.
THe Origines of Winds are no less Various then their Motions, and we ought
not to determine positively concerning those Appearances in nature, which may
be rationally explicated several ways.

Though we consult the Placits of the learned Ancients, and consider also what
we owe to the improvements of latter times, yet I question whether any Theory
was ever yet started on this Argument, which will adequately resolve the whole
Phenomenon of Winds; and we must never expect to confine their Original to
any one determinate Cause.

Most of the Grecian Philosophers agreed in the same Definition of Wind; till
the Prince of the Peripatetiques was not only ambitious to establish a New
Hypothesis of his own, but likewise undertook the confutation of his Master
Plato, and the rest of his Predecessors: The Philosophical Monarch thought he
could never reign securely in the minds of men, unless, like the Family of the
Ottomans, he destroyed all his Brethren first.

I have no intention to disparage the Authority of the Ancients; but I cannot
be so injurious to the many noble productions of our present Age, to think that
all Science is only to be sought for in the Urns of the Dead: we have a more
intimate converse with Nature then heretofore, which displays her beautiful
Bosom, and every day affords new Discoveries of useful knowledge, and further
conducing to the Benefit of Human life.

If we consider the success that Philosophy has met with in the World, we
shall find that those Opinions, which obtained most in one Age, had their
Fatal Periods, and were as much exploded and decry'd in the next; and it is as
impossible that any one Hypothesis should be calculated to the Gusto of all
persons when the sentiments of men are different as their complexions: I have
therefore taken a larger compass then the Generallity of writers, and derived
the Origines of Winds from several Causes; which I rather endeavor to prove
from Accounts of our Sea-Voyages, and relations of Matters of Fact, then to
refine on them by any nice speculations of my own. For this Philosophy is not
to be had in Colleges or Books, but must be fetched from both Indies; we must
traverse the wide Seas, and be tossed to as many points of the Compass, as
Columbus or Drake; we must climb into the Regions of the Air, and descend into
the Caverns of the Earth, to detect the innumerable Causes and Qualities of
Winds: They are diffused like the Universal mind, and it requires a kind of
ubiquity to understand them. How small a portion is it of the vast system of
the World, that we inhabit, and how much less of it that we comprehend? How
Extravagant are the Phenomenon of the large American tracts; their Tides,
Winds, and other Aeriall impressions, how different and irreconcilable to
Ours? How many noble discoverys have been made in these Countries, which the
Athenian Sages could never think of in their narrow Porches and Gardens: They
might spin fine webs out of their own bowels; but for want of a closer
inspection into Nature, their Texture and Materials are slight. And we must
acknowledge that even the Stagirite himself has left us no very perfect Theory
of Winds, though this Province of late years, has been more succesfully
undertaken by the Lord Verulam, Galileo, De Carts, and other illustrious
Moderns.

Aristotle constitutes two species of Exhalations; the one vapid or moist; the
other [(...)] Fumid or Terrene: and as the first is employed in Rain, Hail, or
Snow, etc. So the other furnishes materials for Winds, etc.

The Ancients understand no more by wind, then a Motion of the Air: Anaximander
in Plutarch styles it, (...): and some others, (...): to which that of Seneca
may allude; Ventus est Aer Fluens. But neither the Prince of the Peripatetics
Not. Quest. lib. 5. cap. 1.
ever supposed them to consist of Earth (though it was always to be most
predominant) nor the Ancients, of Air alone, without some allay of other
Heterogeneous Elements.

In the 23. Section of his Problems, Aristotle himself denominates Wind, (...),
Aeris impulsum: yet in the 2d book of Meteors, he seems rather to reflect this
opinion on his predecessors, declaring; (...), etc. cap. 4. So that Aristotle
allows not the simple agitation of Air to be reputed VVind; wherein he dissents
from the Stoics, who held it only Motum aut Fluxionem Aeris: And there have not
been wanting the most eminent moderns who embraced their sentiments, as
Gassendus, Beregard, Dorisi, etc. Mr. Hobs defines it, Air moved in a direct,
or undulating motion: and to this purpose the learned Isaac Vossius Le Vent est
un Movement and Agitation de l' Air, cause par des Exhalaisons and Vapeurs.
Hydr. L. 15. C. 23.
Fournier, Varenius, and many others.

The modern Peripatetics generally agree in an Hot and Dry exhalation, repuls't
by the Antiperistasis of the middle Region; though I find no footsteps of any
such opinion in the Text of Aristotle.

VVind, in the most General Acceptance, is, any Sensible Motion of the Air:
By Air, the Vulgar understand almost any invisible Matter, whether Rarified
vapors or Water; though it consists of much grosser parts then that which is
employed in respiration.

De Carts computes, that Rarified Air requires only thrice, but Dilated
vapors no less then 3000 times as much space, as before their expansion:
wherefore in the Generation of Winds, he preferrs them before Fumid
Exhalations or Air; as in his Definition: page 153. Venti nihil sunt, nisi Moti
and Dilatati Vapores.

It seems to me less probable (whether we reflect on the opinion of Aristotle,
or Cartesius) that Winds should be always made up of Heterogeneous Exhalations
distinct from the Body of the Air; For certainly, they are sometimes no more
then Streams or Currents of Air it self, shifting from one part of the
Atmosphere to another. So that the Air, while it continued placid and calm,
may be compared to a Pond or Lake; and when it is violently agitated and moved,
it resembles a Torrent or River.

I have already declared, that no one Hypothesis, how comprehensive soever,
has yet been able to resolve all the Incident Phenomenon: so various are their
Efficients, and the Matter of which they consist. I shall therefore comprise
the Local Origines of VVind under 3 General Heads.

1. They are generated in the Intermediate space between the Earth and Clouds;
and that either by Rarefaction, or Repletion; and sometimes happily by the
Pressure of Clouds, Elasticall Virtue of the Air, etc.

2ly From the Earth, or Seas; as by Submarine or Subterraneall Eruptions.

3ly By Descension or Resilition, from the Middle Region; But I shall explain
my self, how I desire to be understood of all these in the Following
Discourses; and then descend to the Matter of which they are Formed, their
Limits, and Qualities, etc.

My Lord Bacon complains, that the first species has been too much neglected by
most writers; while some seek for them in the Clouds, and others in the Caverns
of the Earth, when as they are more frequently generated in the Intermediate
Space, which they call the Lower Region of the Atmosphere.

The Universal Efficient of this sort is the aliquando Sol ipse causa est
Venti, fundens rigentem Aerem, and ex denso, Coactoque explicans. Sen. Not. Q.
lib. 5. cap. 5.
Sun; the matter, Air, or whatever: Vapourous Effluxions from the Earth.

Now imagine those Vapors, or Fumes, that are continually hovering in this
Lower Region, (which being dilated, will possess so many hundred times more
space then they did before the expansion) to be attacq't by the quick and
Penetrating beams of the Sun, what a tumult, and mutiny must this necessarily
cause in the Atmosphere? When all places were full before, at least the Voids
no way Proportionable to the dilatation; whither must the ejected particles
retire? the spaces they should possess, are overstock't already, they must be
forced to send out Colonies to other parts; where equivalent compressions and
condensations are made; where the spaces lie wast, and in a manner destitute of
Inhabitants: But what Seditions, Eddies, and Undulations must this cause in the
whole body of the Air? How will the Atmosphere fluctuate, and be harrast to and
fro, and (as it were) curled with waves? the Rarified vapors still flying to
seek new habitations, and so do impell, and bear along with them all they
encounter in the way; some condensed bodies deserting their Seats, and others as
far Expanded, hasting to take possession; that there can be no tranquillity,
or rest, 'till the influences of the Sun cease, or the vapors be exhausted:
And what is all this Struggling and Commotion of the Air, but Wind?

For either the Dilatation of the former, or too great an Accession of New
matter, will inchoate the collateral agitation of Winds; as the Lord Verulam
experimented from a cross of Plumes, in a Turret closely shut up; when means
were used by the evaporation of water, to overstock the space; and afterward
by Fire, to thin and rarify the vapors; the Plumes began to tremble by
degrees, and at last the motion grew rapid, Instar turbinis: the Water
affording multitudes of vaporous steams, and the Fire resolving them into VVind.

It likewise appeared from another of the In turri undique clausa foculum cum
prunis ignitis, in medio locavimus: post parvam moram aucto calore, and
Dilatato Aere, agitabatur crux plumea hinc inde, motu vario, etc.
Verulamian Experiments, that Air of it self, when other vapors are wanting,
will be sufficiently Agitated by Rarefaction: For though without some other
Auxiliary Exhalations, Air alone might seem able to create but a very feoble
and languid VVind; yet when it is dilated into at least 60 times the extent it
possessed before the Expansion, it must needs by this means crow'd and
superonerate the former Spaces, and so cause a considerable emotion of the
Atmosphere; So that, if there be much Superfluous Matter, and the Protrusion
violent, it causes storms and Tempestuous Winds; if it be less, then are only
Engendered those mild and refreshing Airs, such as use to come off from the
Banks of Rivers and Ponds at Daybreak.

De Carts will scarce admit, that Dilated Air exceeds above a quadruple
proportion; yet Mr. Boyl's Experiments concerning the Rarefaction of the Air.
a person not less sagacious in the contemplation of Nature, has proved in a
late discourse, that Air, without Heat, will be dilated to 13000 times the
former extent, though with it Mersennus never arrived to an 100: And
questionless in the Atmosphere, without the assistence of Art, we may suppose
it Rarefiable by the Heat of the Sun, to incomparably larger Dimensions then De
Carts allows it; at least sufficient to create very impetuous Winds, which
may be occasioned from any extraordinary expansion of the Air: as we usually
observe, that in great conflagrations it blows manifestly fresher thereabout,
then it did before, and the people of Gascoigny (at that time subjects to the
Crown of England) are said to have petitioned the King against the burning of
Heath in Sussex, and Hampshire, which afterward raised a VVind, very
pernicious to their Vines.

Another cause which generates Wind, is the Superoneration of the Atmosphere.
Democritus and other Ancient Atomists, supposing, if there were too many
particles of matter crowded in little Space, they must necessarily justle, and
arietate each other, thought Winds to be nothing else, but the Struggling or
Agitation of Atoms: On the contrary, if there chance to be few Atoms in much
space, so that there be no Pressure, or Coarctation in a free and spacious
heaven, this (they say) begets tranquillity and a serene Temperature of the
Heavens.

Lastly, beside this Superoneration, these Flatulent Emotions may proceed from
any other Cause which alters the Aequilibrium of the Atmosphere; So that it
will be sufficient to generate Winds, if the Air be only denser in one part
then another, by the unequal distribution of vapors; Therefore we have
commonly a gentle Brise breathing off from Ponds or Lakes, where the Cold more
especially condenses the Air, at least the Vapors arise in greater plenty from
Humid Bodies. Thus we sometimes see a larger collection of clouds in one
Quarter, which being afterward discharged in showrs, there oftentimes follows
a wind from the immediate conflux of the vapors to that place.

For the Currents of Air imitate the Motions of water, and by the just laws of
Hydrostatiques, according to their respective gravity, mount higher or descend:
so that there is a perpetual inquietude, till it come to an exact
Aequilibrium; and what cause soever it be, which varys the Counterpoise of the
Atmosphere, must needs occasion Winds.

The 2d cause which produces these Intermediate Winds, is Compression: when
two, or more Clouds impetuously pressing or falling upon each other, drive out
a VVind from between them.

The Purest and most Aetheriall matter is not without some degree of
Gravitation; though we want Instruments to make such nice discoverys in Nature:
However, the Gosser Vapors, and Air which inhabit the Middle Region, gravitate
more sensibly; of which we can be able to give some Account by our Barometers:
when the Quick silver rises higher, or subsides in the Tube.

Winds may be thus generated from Pressure alone.

Suppose D. H. in the following Figure, to be the Incumbent Vapors, or Clouds.

F the superficies of the Earth, Sea, or another subjacent Cloud.

G the Motion, or stream of Air, expeld from between them. If the Pressure be
not directly downwards, but sloping, as from K to L; and there be resisted by
some cross winds, or denser Part of the Atmosphere: it often reverts to M, or
O, and so generates Whirlwinds and Tornados. Sometimes you shall have a sudden
Puff of wind, driven from between two Clouds, with a violent Displosion of the
Air; that descends almost Perpendicularly to the Earth.

We have a lively resemblance of this in Common Bellows; when the Sides
closing compresse the included Air; and force it to issue out impetuously at
the Nose, or Pipe.

I have oftentimes observed, that Stiff Gusts of Wind happen immediately
before Rain; because the Clouds being overcharged and teeming with showers,
press more then at other times; and when the Atmosphere begins to thicken, and
grow Ponderous, over our heads; we seldom fail of a VVind, some small distance
from thence; which likewise ceases when the shower is fallen.

Moreover the Elasticity of the Air; which the Peripateticks make little regard
of: And those Ingenious Moderns who have demonstrated it is Elasticall force,
from many noble experiments; yet never applied it Particularly to this
Phenomenon of Winds, though it prove oftentimes the most Immediate cause of
their production. For the Air, whether from the gravity of Incumbent Vapors and
Clouds, superfluity of matter, or however straightened, and oppres'd, does as
soon expand it self, (like a fleece of Wool after the compression) till it
arrive at the former Dimensions again; And being Dilated, Explicated, and as it
were Unbent, must needs agitate, and propell the contiguous bodies, that reduced
it to such straits before: as we see the Elasticall power of it in VVindguns;
how impatient it is of restraint, and willing to regain it is liberty, when the
first opportunity is offered; How easily susceptible of the least impressions;
as appears from the Propagation of Sounds; when the noise of Bells, or Canon is
heard; that is to say, they shake the Air, for many miles in almost an
imperceptible time: And the Elastical reciprocations of the Atmosphere (by
whatever species of coarctation the Aerial spring is bent) though they are not
obvious to our senses, yet are both consonant to reason, and agreeable to the
actings of Nature in such cases: And if this struggling or Emotion of the Air
necessarily results from it is Elasticity, or Repletion; This moved or agitated
Air, is Wind; Ventus enim est, ubi fit agitando percitus Aer, Lucret.

A 2d Local origin of winds in general, is from the Earth or Seas: either by
resolution of their Superficial parts; or from Submarine, or Subterraneall
eruptions. The Terrheinos, or Land Brises between the Tropics, which last from
the first approaches of Night, till Morning, consist for the most part of
terrestrial Fumes, perspiring from no greater depth, then the Solar rays did
before penetrate: And those which alternately blow in the day time, are the
Ofsprings of the Sea, when the Celestial warmth attenuates the liquid Surface
into Winds. For Humid bodies are soon agitated, and Volatilis'd by heat; as
might appear from that Vulgar, but very considerable Experiment, of the
Aeolipile; by which the strange Sagacity of Art does so clearly interpret to us
the operations of Nature; that we may without difficulty conceive, the most
forcible emotions of Wind to be generated from the Rarefaction of water.

Suppose A, B, G, the Figure of the Vessel, which you may fill with water to
H: then, setting it on the Fire, the water, when thoroughly heated, will be
Rarified into Wind: and Issue out through the Neck K, with great violence.

Some have used them instead of Bellows, and contrived Pneumatiek Inventions of
this Nature to blow the Fire: Others have made them large enough, to turn the
Wheels of spits; For the force of the Wind will be greater, or less,
Proportionably to the bigness of the Vessel.

Thus we may Imagine the Atmosphere to be as one Immense Aeolipile, continually
dilating the Vapors, and Air; and the Sun likewise to exhale many flatulent
steams, out of the Marshes, and Lakes, especially from the Sea, (which is the
most Universal Parent, not only of Fountains and Rivers, but Winds) And though
the subtlety of Nature will still exceed the most Accurate Researches of Human
wit, yet we have little more to enquire concerning the Natural; then may be
advantageously Explicated from the Artificial Winds.

Nor do they only exhale from the Superficies; but emerge sometimes from the
Gulfs of the Ocean, and Profoundest Caverns of the Earth. The Earth is the
first Mother of Meteors; and contains the Principles of them all in her
Fruitful Womb: In these Subterraneall Kingdoms are the Spirits, Minerals, and
juyces, that afterward raise Storms by Sea; Winds, and Thunders, in the Air;
and Earthquakes under Ground: Those that have been conversant in Colepits, and
Mines, will frequently predict Tempests, from their Damps; the burning blew of
their candles; and other infallible signs. From hence these Subterraneall
Storms break prison, to disturb the peace of the Atmosphere, and raise
mutinyes, and commotions in the whole body of the Air. My Lord Bacon mentions a
rocky, and Mountainous place in Wales, called Aber Barry, which had many
Caverns, and recesses under ground; where is heard a continual noise of Winds,
that resound, and tumultuate within: And in another place of Denbigh shire,
there are so vehement eruptions of Wind, out of some cavityes, and spiracles of
the Earth, that repel, cloths and other injected bodies, and for a great way
together dally, and play with them in the Air. But among innumerable Examples,
I could produce of this Nature, one out of the Philosophical Transactions
quadrates exactly to our purpose. Numb. 26. page 481. anno 1667. It was then
given in to the Royal Society; as the result of twenty years experience, from
a Person well versed in Mineral affairs. He affirmed: If in digging under
ground, the workmen meet with Water, they never want Air, or Wind: But if they
miss it: they are destitute of convenient Air, either to breath in, or make
their Candles burn: Sometimes there bappens to be a great quantity of Winters
standing Water in their Mines; but as soon as the level is made, and any part
of the Water begins to run away, the men must secure themselves as well as they
can: For the included Air, or Wind breaks forth with violence, to carry all
before it.

They have Burning Mountains in China that are said to raise Tempests: The same
Accounts we have of the Grottos in Calabria, Sicily, and many places about the
Alps. And I think it not less considerable, what the learned Meteor. p. 67.
Peter Gassendus assures us of a Mountain in Provence, which had a Visto
thorough it (like Pausilyponeer Naples) from whence a Northerly Wind on one
side, and a Southerly on the other, have been observed to break forth at the
same time. I have heard that in Cornwall, they have so sure Prognostics of
Storms at Sea, from their Mines, that the Fishermen never Presume to tarry out,
when the signal is given, by the Eruption of certain Meteors, which immediately
Presage a Tempest. There are almost as many instanof this kind, as we find
Cranies or receptacles of Air under ground: Questionless these Cavernous
retreats are very often the Local origin's of Wind (where the Poets faign the
Kingdom of Aeolus) not Unphilosophically alluding to the mode of their
Production. Winds that are generated in the Cloisters of the Earth are for the
generality, made up of Waters dilated by the Subterraneall Fires: Kircher,
among many other Romantic Suggestions on this Argument, adds, that colliquated
Snows, and Rain sinking into the ground, do sometimes expel, and force out
the Winds and Air.

Yet not only Water, but most bodies will be moved, and Volatilis'd by Heat:
Especially the Nitrosulphureous, and other Mineral or Metallic Concretes, that
are easily resolvible into Fumes; either by Rarefaction from some Intestine
Vulcano; or by that glowing and Potentiall Heat, which is no where wanting in
the bowels of the Earth.

If you mingle together Nitre, Sal Ammoniac, crude Antimony; etc. and
macerating them all in salt Water, set the vessel over the Fire: the Fumes will
issue out much after the manner of our Aeolipiles: which shows what may be
likewise effected, when the same causes concur in the Subterraneall World.

Some also have conjectured that Winds oftentimes break from under the Ocean:
because the waves are observed to rise, and gently to curle, and furrow the
Seas on that side, whence it is next to blow.

Or if the included spirit be in greater plenty; it sometimes dashes the waves
against the rocks, with so great violence, that the noise may be heard in some
places, no less then 8 or 10 leagues.

I am credibly informed, that in St. Owens Bay, belonging to the Isle of
Jersey, the Sea is often strangly disturbed before the Western storms, even
when the Air is very calm: and though no Wind be stirring, yet the roaring of
the waves may be heard, not only over the whole Isle, but into France, about 30
miles distance; which is the certain Prognostique of an ensuing tempest. And
those sudden tumors, which happen in the rivers of Garonne or Dourdongn, near
Bourdeaux, seem to be the effects of intestine winds, swelling them into
ridges, and mountains of water, which they call Mascarets; and are so terrible
to them that sail in the river, that when they perceive them coming the people
cry out; Guard le Mascaret, Guard le Mascaret: and then the watermen immediately
make to the shore to save their lives; for it inevitably threatens the
overturning their boats. It happens only in Summer and in the greatest
tranquillity of the Air; but is often followed by wind. Something like these
Mascarets, though from a different cause, are the sudden turgences of the
river Severn, which they called Higram. Scaliger in his Exercit. speaks of a
Sea toward the Gulf of Lions, which is frequently so raging, when there is no
sensible Wind to irritate it; that the Adjacent Countries might justly fear a
deluge: the waves seeming to rise above the shoars. In like manner the Italian
Benacus, or Lago de Garda, and more especially that near Geneva, is oftentimes
troubled in the calmest days: which is questionless nothing but an Included
Spirit or Wind: though the inhabitants ignorantly impute it to witchcraft.

This Sub-marine Tempest, is by some called Procella Caeca; and by the
Portugals, La Manca; when they see it break out in a Cloud or Mist, from under
the Water.

I supersede many remarks from our Sea voyages; and some others out of
Beregard, and Kircher, and shall instance only in two: The one recited by
Fromundus, from the testimony of the Learned Fienus, who in a calm and serene
day, diverting himself on the Belgique shore, perceived a dense mist suddenly
to rise from the Ocean, which though very inconsiderable in the beginning, he
saw it increase, and diffuse it self by degrees, till it covered the face of
the Heaven, and ended in a most Dreadful tempest at last: and what can be more
Admirable in the whole history of Nature, then that so small a Vapo'r should
fill the spacious Atmosphere, swell the Seas into Mountains, and mingle all
things with horro'r and night?

The other is set down by Mr. Boil, (to whom the learned world is so much
obliged for his curiosity in all Natural inquiries) and I shall insert it from
the pen of the Honorable Author. Some years since, near the strong fortress of
Duncannon, where diverse of the ships Royal of England lying at Anchor, in a
place where they apprehended no danger from the Wind: there seemed suddenly to
ascend out of the water, not far from them, a black Cloud, in shape and
bigness not much unlike a barrel: which was, not long after, followed (as the
most experienced Pilot foretold) by so hideous a storm, as forced those ships
to go to Sea again; and had like to have cast them away: and this account was
written by the principal Officers to their Superiors in England, etc. We can
by no means distrust the matter of fact, which had almost as many witnesses to
confirm it, as there were men in the Navall Army: and we are sufficiently
informed from this memorable event, how far the Sub marine eruptions may be
concerned in the production of stormy winds.

I proceed to the 3d General Cause which is their Descension or Repercussion
from the middle Region of the Air.

This opinion seems most a justed to the vulgar hypothesis, though the Prince
of the Schools rather ascribes the oblique progression of Winds, to the
Rapidity and Circumgyration of the Heavenly Motions: which he expressly
asserts in the second book of his Meteors. (...) (...), etc. That their motion
is impres'd from above, etc.

Yet Alexander Aphrod. urges against the sense of Aristotle, that upon this
supposition, the whole current of Air would always be carried from East to
West, by the diurnall revolution of the Primum mobile; and so the Winds could
never chang to any other point of the Compass; with many insupportable
difficulties, which put the Moderns upon new methods of resolving the
Phenomenon.

The Peripatetiques, though by no encouragement from the Text of Aristotle,
hold that the Repulse or Antiperistasis, which the hot and dry exhalations meet
with by rancountring the cold Clouds, causes their resilition downwards, and
impresses that oblique motion on the Winds.

But the most learned of our present age have so little regard, for the
doctrine of Antiperistasis, as it is usually maintained in the Schools; that
they endeavor to explicate this, and all other appearances in Nature without
it; and the Lord Verulam himself being averse to this Caprice of the Scholastic
Doctors, declares the Repercussion of Winds, from the cold of the Middle
Region, to be of all other the vainest and most Irrational Hypothesis.

However I deny not but Winds are frequently generated in the 2d Region of the
Air, sometimes from vapor's before, and otherwhile after their coalition into
Clouds: The Prognostics of these, is a trembling, and murmur of the woods; the
shooting of Stars; Halos about the Moon: All which indicate a repletion of the
Atmosphere with exhalations, that afterward descend and are converted into
Wind: yet the cause of their relapse to the Earth, is, no repercussion from
that Imaginary Antiperistasis, but the Ingenit gravity of the vapors themselves;
at least the pressure and detrusion of the superincumbent Air; which I suppose
to ly in several fleeces, or storys one above another, and press down the
inferior; that when the Winds chance to gravitate comparatively more then the
vapors near the surface of the Earth, they, to preserve the just Counterpoise
of the Atmosphere, must necessarily descend of their own accord.

The gravity of Air (especially Wind which is a body far more Heterogeneous
and impure) can be no paradox to the learned of our times; since the many noble
disquisitions about the pressure and weight of the Atmosphere, made by Mr.
Boil, and other curious Persons.

Our Seamen commonly observe it to blow from that quarter, where they see one
or more Clouds gather above the Horizon: Either that they press more then at
other times, or because the matter of which they consist is afterward
dissolvible into Winds.

Those Clouds, from the rupture and dissolution of which we are to expect
sudden gusts, hang more loose and floating, being commonly of a brighter
color, and neither so dense or opacous as the other which are pregnant with
showers.

It appears from the precedent discourses, that Winds do not only emerge from
the Aeolian Caves; but have a much sublimer origin in the Kingdom of Meteors,
being generated both in the Lower and Middle Regions; at least consist of the
gross Air, and vapors, that are driven from thence: and though after their
relapse to the earth, they are indifferently disposed to what ever species of
Agitation, yet generally they begin their march toward that quarter, whither
the most Violent Impulse is made; at least where they find the medium more
yiedling, and fittest to propagate their motions. As sometimes the Atmosphere
is thinnest toward the South, which begets a North Wind: other while in the
West, and then the protrusion is likewise made Westward: Or if the whole
current bend with too great violence toward one point; it oftentimes recoyls
back again, and begets a quite contrary Wind to the former. Thus we often
observe, that when one Wind ceases, the Opposite begins; and the Atmosphere,
which in many things bears a great resemblance to liquids, has these kind of
fluxes and refluxes like the Rivers and Seas: For Air is a body so fluid, and
tractable, so easily susceptible of them, and long retentive of the least
impressions; that if it once be set a going, it as a kind of perpetual
Automat, continues the motion, is drawn into consort with the vapors, and it
self converted into VVind. If we make a further enquiry into the cause of
their motions, we shall find they proceed likewise according to the disposition
of the Aliment; and those which have no durable Fonds, dwindle away and are
soon exhausted in their course: sometimes they condense into Clouds; and
otherwhile, being too much attenuated and refind, they vanish and dissipate in
the Air.

Those Winds which are nearest their Local Origines, blow hardest: especially
such as are reinforc't by other auxiliary Vapors as they pass. Acosta observed
they were always most turbulent near the shoars and promontories of the Indies:
because the flatulent steams were then more impetuous near their rise; which
afterward became languishing, and broken by a long passage in the Ocean. So
that there are several accidents which may occasion the greater rage and
impetuosity of Winds; As first, the Plenty of Matter which constitutes them:
secondly, the Rarity of the Medium that affords no considerable obstacles to
stop their career. Orlastly, because the Protrusion of the Air is more forcible
and stronger then at other times.

Thus far we have employed our thoughts concerning their first Fountains, or
Local Origin's in General.

The Formal Cause, or essential Attribute of Winds is their Transverse
Motion: For Air is no longer Wind, then it is Agitated and Moved: and therefore
Homer was not so good a Philosopher as some of his Scholiasts would make us
believe, who shut them up in Ulysses his bottle.

(...), Hom.

(...). Odys. 10.

And the swift course of the Tempestuous Wind,
Close in a leather bottle he confind.
The Causes of their oblique Progression has so far engaged the most
Philosophical Genius'es of former times; that Bodinus at length, not knowing
what to determine among such Variety of opinions, ascribes it to the Energy of
Angels: And the College of Conimbra to the Immediate influx of the Divine
Power. Kepler will needs have the Earth Animated, and to breath out Winds from
the Subterraneall Caverns, as from it is Nostrils or Mouth.

Theophrastus [in his book which he Entitles: (...):] Phancy'd the Winds to be
partly of an Igneous Nature still aspiring upwards: and partly made up of
Terrestrial Exhalations which endeavor to Descend; that by this means they
were forced to direct their Course Obliquely, between two Contrary Motions:
Which seems to me less Plausible then the Doctrine of Aristotle; though I
think it would be equally difficult to explain how the rapid gyration of the
Celestial bodies, could create those violent impressions on the Air, and
Winds, at that immense distance from the Earth.

It would be tedious to recite the dissents of the Greek interpreters with the
Latins; how many nauseating, and frivolous contests arose upon this Argument
between Theophrastus, Aphrodisaeus, and the School of Alexandria: and in the
more flourishing reign of Peripatetisme, how strangely did Albertus Magnus,
Thomas Aquinas, Cajetan, and Contarenus, with many others of the Seraphic and
Angelical Doctors, torture their wits, either to find out some new Salvo for
the Hypothesis of Aristotle, or invent a worse of their own. Bonaventure writ a
whole book, wherein he treats of little else beside the several opinions
concerning the Transverse motion of Wind. And we must needs esteem it a great
effect of their leisure, who have employed so much time in such empty and jejune
speculations.

Yet not only the Peripatetiques have failed in their attempts: but we have as
little satisfaction from Epicurus, or the severe Porch: and may as justly
question whether the Theories which shall be started hereafter, must hope for
any better success. Yet I think we may thus far rationally conclude, that as
the causes of Winds are various, so the reason of their Transverse Motions is
not always one and the same.

I have frequently observed that not only the North, but most other Winds, seem
many times rather somewhat to descend, then blow in an exact Perpendicular line
to the Horizon: yet we must acknowledge, that even those which relapse from
the Middle Region, or are generated by the Rarefaction of Vapors in the
Intermediate space between the Earth and Clouds, have for the most part an
oblique or Semicircular Motion; for though their Ingenit weight would rather
Praecipitate them to the Earth: yet they are either born up and repel'd by the
continual Effluxions of ascending Steams; or at least can descend no lower
then where they come to the just counterpoise of the Air. So that if the
Flatulent Vapors have gravity enough (especially after they are Condensed in
the Colder Region) to invite them Downward, and yet the resistance of the
Atmosphere sufficient in a great measure to check and retard their descent;
this must necessarily divert them from their Precipice, inclining them rather
to a mixed and Collateral Motion. For though Winds are generally heavyer then
the Air below, yet they are supported in it, during their Career; till by
degrees falling downwards to the Earth, they at length cease, or languish in
their Course.

We must note likewise, that the whole body of the Air, settles about the
Earth in a sphericall Figure; so that the protrusion is made from all parts to
the Center; that the Winds, being resisted by the Pressure of the Atmosphere
above, and the Earth or Sea below, move, as in a Channel, between both,
wherefore they soar highest in a Serene Sky, when the depression of the Air,
and Winds is much less then in Cloudy weather. And the reason why they blow
Obliquely (or which is all one) perpendicularly to the Horizon, is not to be
supposed, because the Vapors are naturally determined to any such particular
species of Agitation; but that, being dilated by the Sun, they require a larger
space, and find the Medium most disposed to admit of their Motions in that
manner.

Lastly those Winds which emerge from the Caverns under Ground, may sometimes
have that Tranverse Motion impres'd on them from their Fountains, at the time
of their Eruption. For those Volatile spirits or Salts, being once moved in the
Hollows of the Earth, by the Subterraneall warmth, are still roving up and
down, and restless, till they get vent; and after their release protrude the
Contiguous Air, and propagate the same kind of Agitation in whatever bodies
occur in the way: and then all Auxiliary Vapors will be sure to have
Immediate recourse whither the strongest current bends.

But beside these Primitive and Original, there are other Secundary causes and
Affections of Winds: as, their Undulation; Repercussion from Promontorys;
Opposition, etc.

We have thus far inquired into the Progressive; but the Undulating Motions
are no less considerable in Winds: for they blow not in one constant fluor,
or stream, but in gusts, that have their starts and intervals, intermitting
like our pulse; which is called the Undulation of VVind or Air, from the
resemblance it bears to the wavings and fluctuation of Waters.

Some of them are Indigenae, or Natives, and others Adventitious to the places
where they blow: yet the question still recurrs; for those which are Externs,
and either come from beyond Sea, or rove from far countries, have the same
Local Origin with the rest, though remoter from our observation.

The motions of Winds, as indeed all other bodies whatever, are propagated in
right lines; if nothing intervene to check and retard their course: but usually
so many impediments occur, that are able to make resistance in the way, that
they seldom proceed in one uninterrupted Perpendicular from their fountains:
Especially in moutanous places, Forests, and other Eminencys, and inequalitys
of Ground, but they are repulsed and recoyl back again, and being sometimes
imprisoned in the straits or Creeks of promontorys, they are tossed and banded to
and fro like Tennis balls, till they find their passage out: so that after
several diversions it may happen at last, that a VVind may be distracted to a
quite different point of the compass: and otherwhile so far befreinded by the
advantageous situations of the places where they blow, that they run streaming
between two Mountains, as in a Channel or trough; and are guarded on all sides
from the inroads of other Exotique Winds and Air. Upon this account its no
very unusual thing to have one VVind blow on the Top of a Mountain, and a
quite contrary in the Valley below. In the main Sea they keep the same quarter a
long time, when nothing occurrs that can control them: but near mountainous
Islands, or shoares, they whiffle up and down, and shift from one point of the
Compass to another, by several repercussions from the promontorys or hills;
and these our Seamen call Eddy Winds: For as Water once dismis'd from the
Fountains head, is not only tinctured with the qualities it received from
thence, but must afterward conform to the course of the Channel or banks
through which it glides: so the Winds (which are Torrents, or Rivulets of Air)
have their Maeanders and deflections in their Journey, and are in a great
measure obnoxious to the situation of the Country's in which they blow: They
also meet with frequent opposition, from the repletion of the Atmosphere with
multitudes of fresh Exhalations, that check, and cross them in their way; but
especially by their Rancounters with Contrary Winds; which must necessarily
Engage, and strive for mastery, till one overcomes: So that from two contrary
Winds, there sometimes results a Third compounded of both Extremes; and
otherwhile if they meet in the Eye of each other from Diametrically opposite
points of the Compass, they balance one another; and there ensues a calm.

The Matter of Winds according to Aristotle, is, (...): [A Dry and Fumid
Exhalation] we have his Sentiments more particularly in the second book of
Meteors: (...). On which Text the succeeding Peripatetics seem to ground their
Doctrine, that nevertheless may admit of a far greater Latitude then the
Modern Schools allow: For he never altogether excluded moist Bodies (...), etc.
as is expressy declared in the same Chapter: though the Degrees of Siccity
were always to be most Prevalent [(...)] etc.

I acknowledge that Winds may sometimes consist of Hot and dry Exhalations; but
the Humid and Aqueous are much better adjusted to the design. For this reason,
rain is the usual Prognostic of Winds, because the plenty of moisture, then
floating upon the superficies of the Earth, is afterward dilated and put in
motion by the heat of the Sun: as Lucretius instances in wet clothes, and
Aristotle in moist wood, that emit greater quantityes of steams, and wreke more
then Dry: for although the Fumid and Terrene concretions, especially those
Earths and Salts in the Caverns and spiracles under Ground, being Agitated by
the Subterraneall fires, require a far intenser heat to resolve them into
Winds being of much more tenacious figures then Water, and other liquids, which
hang loosely together, and are sooner expanded into larger dimensions.
Wherefore the definition of Metrodorus in Plutarch seems to excel; That VVind
is: (...). Aquosi anhelitus aestus. And though Aristotle declares, they confist
of Hot and dry exhalations, at least, the Earthy parts to be always most
predominant; yet, by traveling over lakes or snowy Mountains, he allows they
may become moist or cold; and we find that almost any stirring, or Ventilation
of the Air does refrigerate.

Neither did the Stagirite himself so strictly confine his Hypothesis to the
Hot and terrestrial Exhalations; For in the 2d book of his Meteors he
acknowledges the Etesians to be generated from the colliquation of ice, and
snow in the Polar regions. (...), etc. Quibus a sole colliquatis flare soliti
sunt. But why should I longer dispute their materials and propertys? Winds are
hot, dry, cold, have the greatest diversitys of qualitys, and accidents: They
may consist of almost infinite variety of salts, spirits, juyces, and minerals,
Subterraneous damps, agitated Air, dissolved Snows, broken and dissipated
Clouds, rarified vapors, and what not? For most bodies being sufficiently
dilated, and put in motion are convertible into Wind.

Next, as to their Limits and Seasons: Some spread many thousand leagues, and
others not above 2 or 3 miles from their Fountains; I call That the Country, or
Fountain of VVind, where are those Caverns, or other Local Origin's which gave
them birth.

We cannot easily determine of their Altitude: My Lord Bacon delivers his
sense, that they not only aspire to the Confines of the Middle Region, but soar
above the generallity of Clouds; as we oftentimes observe the Clouds move, and
a gentle breath fanning the top branches of trees, and yet not the least Brise
of Wind stirring near the surface of the Earth: which shows, they sometimes
prevayle most in the Lower, and otherwhile in the remoter stations of the Air,
and so accordingly mount higher or descend, as they happen to be more or less
depres'd by the Gravity of the Atmosphere.

Varenius perceived the smoke issuing from the top of mount Aetna, to be
Agitated and tossed up and down, as from the tunnells of chimnys; which, though
it lifts up its snowy head into the Second Region, yet it is not altogether
exempt from the incursions of Winds. However, Acosta traveling over the
Peruvian hills, discovered no violent motion of the Air; but rather an Ether so
subtilis'd, and ignite, that it caused heavings and convulsions in animals, so
that they were forced to thicken it with spunges, to prevent immediate
suffocation. In like manner the highest eminency or peak of Tenariffe, is
always at peace, nor exposed to those storms which sometimes infest the lower
parts or neck of the Mountain.

The Alps, and Pyreneans, or whatever hills beside that are covered with
perennial snows, are also liable to Winds from their resolution in the Summer;
but the Peruvian, and some others which may be reckoned as the Extravagancys of
Nature, that threaten the sky, and overlook the Clouds with their prodigious
height, are, I suppose, never disturbed by tempests; though I question whether
any of our European world can pretend to this privilege, yet the Grecian
historians, who took all opportunitys to advance the miracles of their country,
relate of the Macedonian Athos; That it was Customary when they sacrificed on
the top of of the mountain, to inscribe their names in the ashes, and the
characters are said to have remained all the year round, without being in the
least defaced by the Winds.

The Spring and Autumn, especially about the time of either Aequinox, are the
most Flatulent seasons of the year.

It Is observable, the complexion of the Air is generally more silent at Midday,
and in Soultry Weather; when the Exhalations are too much attenuated to
constitute Winds, which require a very considerable density and refrigeration:
For this reason the South Winds usually blow in the Night, the Air being over
much refined in that quarter by the heat of the Day, till it condense again by
the moderate cold of the night. The Spring is generally more Windy then the
Violent heats of Summer; both from the liquefaction of snows; and because the
pores of the Earth are then loosened, and the Vaporous effluxions releast from
their former imprisonment, during the Frost: and therefore those VVinters which
have least frost, and the Vapors suffered freely to transpire, are exposed to
the most boystrous Winds: as for example the last in the year 1670.

Likewise in Autumn we have commonly very blustering weather; most about the
other Aequinox, when the Sun principally dilating the Air between the
Tropiques, causes a more violent protrusion toward the Poles of the World.
Shall we say that the luxuriant Rains which fall at that time of the year,
affor'd more plentiful materials for VVind? Or is it by reason the reservs of
the Summer Vapors are condensed by the Autumnall cold, when the heat of the
Summer too much refines, and dissipates the exhalations, and the inclemency of
the Winter rather thickens them into Snow or Clouds. So that a just and
moderate condensation is necessary to the constitution of Winds: if it be too
much, they degenerate into rain, etc. if too little, they become Stagnant Air.

But, from their Limits and Seasons, I descend to the more remarkable Species:
As the General or Tropicall VVind; the Provincial; the Land and Sea Brises;
the several sorts of Etesians and Monsoons in the Indian Seas, etc. and shall
from thence proceed to their Qualitys, and Prognostiques.

The General or Trade VVind, continues all the year round with little
variation. It is likewise called the Tropicall, Levantine, and Universal
Brise: because it blows constantly from the Eastern Points: and makes no far
excursions beyond the Tropiques; commonly meeting our ships about the 30, 34,
and in Summer oftentimes beyond the 36, degree of N. Latitude: always
proportionably to the declination of the Sun.

On this side the line they sit most at N. East; and on the other, at South
East, or the points between the South and East. Now what Universal cause can
afford such immense magasins of vapors? where can be the Local origines of
these perenniall Winds which imitate the circulation of the Heavens? Or
happily the disciples of Copernicus will conclude that they depend on the
diurnall motion of the Earth; which passing from East to West, in the space of
24 hours, may by that violent rotation seduce with it the adjacent Air in one
constant fluor or stream; For we observe that the Winds in some Seas change
with the currents or tides; and if so small a force can vary the motions of the
Air; how much more may we expect from the rapid circumgyration of the whole
Terraqueous globe? De Carts, speaking of these Levant Winds in his discourse
of Meteors, says, Commode ratio deduci nequeat, nisi Universi fabrica simul
explicetur. This opinion, I confess, is wholly built on the Copernican
Hypothesis; yet if the Heavens move, and the Earth stand still, according to
the Vulgar and more received system of the world, we may render a no less
rational account of the Phenomenon from other solid grounds.

For, supposing the heat to be far more intense to exhale and solicit
vapors, between the Tropiques, when the Sun is Vertical, and the rays fall at
right angles to the Earth: This must needs set vast multitudes of vapors
a-float, both from Sea and Land, which may be sufficient to furnish materials
for the General Wind: but then an objection may as easily be started, why
these Vapors, or Winds, still keep in the road of the Sun? why should they not
sometimes slant aside, and make their deflexions toward the Poles? I answer;
the resistance of the Atmosphere is greater; being remoter from the middle of
the world, and the immediate jurisdiction of the Sun beams, that the winds are
as it were walled in on both sides, by the grosser vapors beyond the Tropiques;
and so forced to attend on the solar motions, where the channel is open, and
the Air more yielding and refined by the continual heat.

Nay, even in our Seas, when no other Winds are stirring, you may often
perceive a small Air still accompanying the course of the Sun; and it is
remarquable in dead calms that both the Fanes of ships, and weathercocks by
land generally hang Westward. This may receive some Elucidation from a very
obvious experiment of an iron bullet, heated, and drawn over the surface of
water, that presently invites the the ambient Air to follow the same course, as
we may discover by a feather, or other versatil body suspended above the
Water; that will have an immediate tendency the same way, where the medium
being attenuated by the heated iron becomes more pervions and rare: which
methinks may be of some validity to explicate why these Universal Winds have
that constant compliance and uniformity with the course of the Sun. They are
likewise accompanied with a perpetual motion of the Seas, from East to West:
for the Currents of Air and water are inseparable companions, both in the South
seas, the Pacifique, and Indian Ocean. And as the tides are driven from the
shoars, and return in a thousand Eddys, and tortuous Meanders from the land;
In like manner the Winds, though they chance to be frequently repuls't by the
promontorys, and higher Islands, that like shoars impede the Atmosphericall
currents, yet generally between the Tropiques the motions of the Seas and
Winds make their perennial progress the same way. Some are pleased to think,
that the Sun in their Zenith does so far excavate and absorbe the parts of
the subjacent Ocean that the waters immediately follow, as in a channel, from
East to West: But Vossiius [De Motu Maris and Vent.] on the contrary, does as
eagerly contend, that the Celestial beams do, by dilating the waters, rather
cause a greater turgency and protuberance on their superficies; which therefore
subside toward the Occident, where the passage is more declive, till it be
likewise elated by the approach of the Sun: From the same principles he
endeavors the solution of the Universal Winds, that the Air rises highest
where the Solar rays fall at more direct angles; and then, like the Seas, begin
their course Westward: of which he assigns no other cause then as before: Quia
lege naturae, ab altioribus ad decliviora fit motus: quod enim Aequor, id ipsum
patitur Aer huic incumbens. So perfectly Analogous are the motions of Air to
those of Water: that the Winds are almost Universally governed by the
Hydrostatique Laws.

However, I shall no longer propose my conjecturall thoughts concerning the
cause of this abstruse Phenomenon: but choose rather to entertain the Curious,
with some nicer observations, which have been made both by the English and
Dutch, that by this means, though I dare not boast the invention of New
Hypotheses, yet I may be able to cast in my mite toward the perfecting an
history of nature.

I was lately enquiring of a very skillful navigator, what variations he
observed of the Trade Winds in his voyages to the West Indies. Who readily
complying with my desires sent me this following account.

The Trade Winds have their Variations as well as others, though not so much:
For betwixt the Tropiques, where we are at the greatest certainty, they differ
two or three points.

Their most certain points are the N E. by N. and N E. by E. I have observed
both outward, and homeward bound, that as we came Northerly, so we had the
more Easterly Winds in the same Latitude: As for example, outward bound, in the
Latitudes of 20, 21, 22, and 23, near the Tropique of Cancer, and in the
Longitudes of 52. 53. and 54. beginning the said Longitude at the Meridian of
London; I say, there we found the Winds at E. N. E. and E. by N. and E. and
sometimes E. and by S. and E. S. E. so likewise homeward bound, sailing along
the North side of Cuba, in the same Latitudes above mentioned, near the
Tropique, we found the Winds upon the same points, as a foresaid, though there
were 35 degrees of Longitude difference: but after we have passed these
Latitudes, and sailing near the line, we shall then find the Trade Winds to
incline more toward the N. E. as is above declared.

But what I could not so particularly collect from many reviews of our Seamens
Journals, I find an Inquisitive Person has observed in two several Voyages to
the East Indies. That from 34 degrees of N. Lat. toward the coast of Afric, or
about the Meridian of the Canaries; the Winds seldom vary above two points
from the North East; and so last to the 7 or 8: though sometimes the Tornado
Winds have been met with from the 12th of N. Lat. and generally continue till
within 4 degrees of the line. Moreover P. Trans. Vol. 2.
from the African shore, 100 or 200 leagues West; the forementioned North-East
Wind commonly inclines to the East; and 20 degrees off from the meridian of the
Azores, will be most at East North-East: and as the Winds near the Continent
of Europe are commonly between East and North, so at the meridian of the
hithermost Azores, they hang between South-West, and North-West.

The S. East Winds begin to take place between the Equator, and the Tropique
of Capricorn: and the nearer you are to the Coast of Afric, they are the more
Southerly: and as you approach to the Coast of Brasile, it inclines more and
more to the East. And there is not only variation in respect of the Longitude,
but likewise of the Latitude: So that near the Equator the VVind is more
toward the South, then it is in the same Meridian near the Tropique of
Capricorn, where it it is constantly between S. E. by E. and S. E. by S.

From hence we may understand what variations happen to the General Winds in
respect to the degrees of Longitude: and for their Latitude, or distance from
the Equator, it is for the most part governed by the course of the Sun: which
being Excentrical from the Earth, as it approaches, or deviates more or less
from one Tropique to another; so it alternately causes the same declinations in
the Universal Winds: when it deflects toward the Northern signs, they
likewise bend the same way: If the Sun be just about the Aequinoctiall, they
have the same Winds and tides in the Pacifique, and so from Peru to the
Moluccas: when it is in the Summer Solstice, the Trade Wind reaches to at least
the 36th degree of Boreal Latitude; and being in Capricorn, it not only
declines to almost the 40 degree of S. Lat. but obliges them that navigate in
the Northern Hemisphere, to fetch their VVind much nearer the line. The same
detrusion of the Seas and Winds happens, not only in the Ocean between Africa
and the West Indies; but in the South seas toward the Philippine Islands. For
from March to October, they hang toward the North; and from October to March,
they revert with the Sun toward the Southern parts of the world. Yet there may
some accidents intervene, that frequently impede the course of the tides, and
Universal Winds: as the Situations of promontorys, or shoars, especially about
the Coast of Guiny, and oother parts of Africa: but in the Indian seas
subjacent to the Torrid Zone, from the 10, or 11 degrees of S. Lat. to the 28,
there are constantly the same motions of the Tides and Winds, till the Sun
retiring toward the Tropique of Cancer, draws the Winds 10, or 11 degrees more
North, nay sometimes almost to the Aequinoctial line: but as it describes a
contrary Arch toward the South, they in like manner make their excursions to
about the 30 degree of South Latitude.

The Adjacent Mountains that guard them from the East, likewise divert the
Levants from the Coasts of Guiny: which occasions such tedious Calms toward
the Aequinoctiall, that some ships have waytted several months, for a VVind
before they could set sail from their Port. So Angola, Congo, and many other
Countries along the Aethiopique Ocean, from the line to near the Tropique of
Capricorn; as Cape Negro, Carinba, etc. are shelterd from the General Brise:
As likewise Peru, and some other Western parts of America, which have vast
ridges of Hills that run for many thousand leagues from North to South,
dividing Guiana and Brasile from Peru and the Kingdom of Chili.

I shall only add, that the Levants blow much stronger by day then night, (as
is well known to all Mariners who have sailed between the Tropiques) which
shows that they rather depend on the Sun then the motion of the Earth, or
Primum Mobile.

These are the most General observations: but, as I before suggested, the
Trade Winds loose much of their sovereignty near the shoars, and are
frequently impeded by the intervention of Islands, and Cross Winds: and
sometimes the Promontorys and Land Brises repel them from their Coasts: yet
these, or whatever extraneous accidents, can never alter the perennial motion,
but it still recovers again: and blowing from Africa to the American continent,
and so through the South seas toward the East Indies, and from thence makes as
it were a complete Tour round the world.

The Ocean between Jemiac and Carthagene is oftentimes very tempestuous: but
nearer inclining to either shoars the fury of the Trade Winds is much abated,
and for 20 leagues in length, at a place called the Keys of Cuba, it is
interrupted by a Westerly Wind that blows all the year round. So that it
prevayles most in the Pacifique and other Spacious seas; where it runs
streaming without impediment along the liquid Plains; that from New Spain to
the Philippine Islands, they steer the same course, for 60 days together, and
from the Cape of good Hope to St. Helens, it likewise constantly swells their
sails with one secure and equal gale.

We might likewise venture at a better account, then has hitherto been given,
why the Western Wind blows most commonly on this side the Tropiques; for the
whole current of Air being carried from East to West, it recoyls back again;
and by reason of this repercussion, from about 30 degrees Latitude where the
Trade VVind ceases, the Western begins. Here in England, the Eastern usually
govern the spring, and we have sometimes variable Winds, but generally the
Western ingrosse the greatest part of the year, which indeed are no more then
the Tropicall VVind at rebound: for not being able to return back against the
stream (the Trade Winds still reigning in the Torrid Zone) it must needs be
diverted toward the Poles, and sometimes produces the West, and otherwhile the
Laterals, North and South West, as the Angles are more direct or acute in their
reflection.

Thus, from the same Latitude where the Trade Wind ends, there usually begins a
motion contrary to the course of the Sun, by which we sail from West to East,
and so much the more or less, as it deflects toward either of the Poles.
wherefore those who navigate from the Moluccas to the Western parts of America,
being never able to hold on their course in the middle, and bear up against
the General VVind, fetch a compass beyond the Tropiques, sometimes to 36, and
otherwhile to 40; as the course of the Sun, and consequently the Winds and
Tides, incline more or less toward the North or South. And so those that sail
from Barhados St. Domingo, or Jamaica, are forced to steer their course toward
the Gulf of Florida, to the 36, and in Summer sometimes beyond the 40 degree of
N. Latitude; where they meet with the Reverse, or Western Winds to conduct them
into Europe. The same likewise happens in the voyage from Brasile to Angola: if
the Sun illustrates the Southern world, it extrudes the General VVind to at
least the 36 degree of S. Latitude; where afterward they meet with perpetual
Currents and Winds from the West: but in the other part of the year, when the
Trade VVind makes a lesser Arch toward their Hemisphere, it will be sufficient
if you take a compass to the 25, or 26 degrees of Latitude.

So not only the Tropicall Brise, but the VVestern (which are kind of perennial
or Stationary Winds without the Tropiques) observe their just distance from
the Aequinoctiall, always proportionable to the course of the Sun: and if this
were better understood by some of our less curious navigators, they would find
the motions of the Trade Winds, though it meets them in several Latitudes,
sometimes nearer, and otherwhile remoter from the line, not so Fortuitous as
they commonly imagine: and some more accurate observations of this nature,
would not only instruct them, where to expect the Trade VVind in their voyages
to the New World, but how far they should make a circuit without the
Tropicks, to fetch their Western Winds, when they are Homeward bound.

The General or Trade Winds are diffused though the Universe, and have vast
Territorys, and dominions, but others are confined to as narrow a compass;
which they call the Regionary and Provincial, because they wander not far
from their Native Fountains, and termiminate in those Regions which gave them
birth. Gassendus mentions one in Provence that blows constantly from the Gass.
Meteor. cap. 1.
same point, and seldom makes any excursions above two miles.

* Seneca says, these are observed Nulla regio quae non habet aliquem ventum
intra se cadentem, and circa se nascentam. Lib. 5. N. Q. cap. 17.
in all Countries and climes. And whence can they proceed but from the Salts,
juices, and Earths there about that afford them materials? or from the Adjacent
mountains, and Caverns, which are (as it were) the Country and Royalty of those
Winds; so that they neither sally far abroad themselves, nor suffer
Foreigners to invade their Destricts. For though by reason of the situation of
the places, or the Paucity of the exhalation, they make no long Journys from
home; yet having Indefectible and Perenniall Fountains, they never cease
blowing within their own jurisdiction.

I might reckon among the Provincial Winds, those on the shoars of Peru and
Chile, which blow perpetually from the South: that in their voyage from Lima to
Panama they quickly run it up before the Wind, but in their return back again,
they are forced to steer a different course, which requires many days.

We have in the next place, a fit opportunity to make a more accurate research
into all sorts of Brises. The Brises are those Winds which blow alternately
both from Sea and Land, in the space of 24 hours.

The Viracoins or Sea Brises rule by day, and those that come off from shore
which the Portugals call Terreinhos, or Vento di Terra, are, as it were, the
Sentinels of the night; so that dividing their Empire between Sea and Land;
they are constant as the seasons of the year, or course of the Sun; on which
they seem wholly to depend. Yet I deny not, but they come sooner or later, in
some places then others, and vary the Alternative, according to the several
latitudes, and other external events in the regions where they happen.

De Carts and Du Hamel agree in the same opinion; where, offering at the cause
why some Winds blow off from Sea in the day time, and from Land by night; the
former gives this account. Solemn De Carts p. 159.
dum splendet plures, vapores e mari, quam terra attollere: at contra, cum sol
recessit, calorem relictum plures e terra, quam e mari, elevare. And Du Hamel
comments thus on the same opinion in his treatise of Meteors. Haec enim calorem
pertinacius retinet quam aqua; unde terra etiam noctu vapores ventis
procreandis suppeditat: as if the day Brises were generated from the Sea vapors
during the presence of the Sun; and the Night Winds from the heat which he
leaves behind him in the Earth. For though liquids reake more in the Day time,
and emit greater numbers of vaporous steams; yet Solid bodies, such as the
Earth, being once thoroughly heated, retain the warmth longer, by reason the
density and close contexture of their parts, for some time, hinders the
exilition of the fiery particles. So that after Sunsetting, the Terrestrial
fumes may still afford matter for the Night Brises.

Yet the learned De Motu Maris and Vent.
Is. Vossius regretting the ill success of all former Hypotheses, and
particularly that of Cartesius, followed by Du Hamel, endeavors to prove the
origin of most, and even those that are commonly reputed Land Winds, to
proceed from the Sea, which he admits not only to be sooner susceptible of any
Calorifique impressions, but longer retentive of them, then the Earth. For the
Diverse find by experience, that the profoundest Seas are in hot Days warm to
the bottom, though not equally with their surface; when the Land is scarce
ever heated above 2 or 3 foot by the Sun. We may suppose with this Inquisitive
Gentleman, that the motion of the Air is generally consectaneous to the Seas;
and both of them Elated by Rarefaction: So that the heat raising them higher,
the Winds and tides accompany each other to the shoars; yet in the night time,
being deprived of the Celestial beams, they subside; and observing the equal
libration of the Air, revert back again to their former stations; whence may be
generated those which we call Terrestrial Winds: Sole occaso subsidere
utrumque humorem, and Aerem denuo ad locum suum refluere. Cap. 24.

In some Countries the Sea-brises are no more then Efforts of the General or
Trade VVind; as at Madagascar, St. Helens, Barbados, and others of the
Caribbe-Islands, together with many places between Tropiques, when the
Universal VVind reaches their Coasts: which, if it be not impeded by tains,
or Islands, blows fresh in the day time, but after Sunsetting, the
Terrestrial exhalations, that happily were too much attenuated by the heat of
the Day, condense again by the nocturnall cold, And settling about the
Promontorys and hills, they are at length precipitated by their innate gravity,
and beget a Wind toward all quarters at once; which is not only able to make
head against the Trade Wind, but to repulse it from their coasts. As the
Jamaica Brises come from all parts of the Issland at the same time, that no
ship can enter the Harbor by Night, nor depart after the Sea Brise begins.

Lastly may not all sorts of Brises, be chiefly caused by the mutual
Rarefaction and condensation of the Air; and those which in the Day time make
to land (where the medium is most yielding and thinnest, because fewer vapors
ascend from thence) in the night, are repercus'd back again to Sea; and so, as
it were, Ebb and flow by turns, that these Atmosphericall tides are no less
constant, then the fluxes and refluxes of the Ocean. I have often suspected,
that all these species of Winds arise from the difference between the density
of the Land and Sea Air: For Air, if it chance to be much compres'd in one
place, more then another, the natural Elasticity thereof endeavors a
restitution, and oftentimes repells it back again with extreme violence: so
that almost any unequal density of the Atmosphere may occasion Winds. But
whatever be the particular mode of their generation, they seem to be
universally governed by the motion of the sun. When first he salutes our
Horizon, they begin insensibly to fan, and agitate the Air, blowing fresher
by degrees, as the Celestial heat prevayles, and are highest at 12 of the
clock; and so continue till 2 or 3, and then slacken, and (as it were) decline
with the Sun. The Brises in the Levant cease all the winter, when the Sun is
banished into the Southern Tropique; and return again in the spring when he
likewise reverts toward the Northern signs: beside, they often intermit in
the Summer, when the Levant Winds blow through the Mediterranean; and it would
questionless prove very obliging to the learned world, to make a complete
collection of such observations, as might any way contribute to a more perfect
history of Brises. For example, first how they differ according to the several
Latitudes and meridians, 2ly whether they are perenniall, as between the
Tropiques, or last only the Summer Months, as most in the temperate Zones: 3ly
what obstructions they meet with from the Universal Brise, or other cross
Winds. And Lastly the nature of the shoars, Currents, and hills where they
happen. In the forementioned Isle of Jamaica the Land Winds depend so much on
the situation of the mountain, that they reach to all parts at an equal
distance from thence: and therefore an ingenious person has observed in his
voyage to the Caribbes Islaid Philos. Transact.
, that at Port-morant on the Easterly side of the Country there is little land
Brise, because the mountain is more remote from thence, so that the exhalation
spends it self in the way.

In these parts of the West Indies, the Sea Winds are coolest, and most
refreshing, which the people receive with their windows open, the fronts of
their houses being generally built on purpose for their reception; and they
find themselves no less quickend by the pleasurable gale, which is as great a
Luxury to those Regions, as bathing with us; and so cherishing to the
inhabitants, that sick persons, if they can possibly creep out of their
Hammocks or beds, neglect not this opportunity of reviving their spirits. In so
much that we may judge concerning the salubrity of many African and American
climats, from the nature of the Brises; for those which want the gentle salutes
of the Sea Wind, are scarce inhabitable by the excess of heat. In the mean
time, though I despair of reconciling the various Hypotheses to which the
Phenomenon may refer; I shall set down certain Historical remarques taken
from our Journals, and voyages into the Levant, Guiny, the East, and West
Indies; and may hereafter promise a fuller account of all other parts, wherever
the English ships have spread their Triumphant streamers in the Old or New
world.

In the first place we must note, that the Terreinhos, and Brises of all sorts
succeed a calm; wherein happily the matter of which they consist, forms it
self.

They come in the day time from the Seaward; yet not always from one poinr of
the compass, but several, as the land lies. On the coast of Carthagene from
the East; on the Island of Trinidad, and so likewise at Guiana in America, from
the North; At Jamaica South upon one side of the Island, and North upon the
other.

In Guiny (and from 6. degrees of N. Latitude to the Aequinoctiall,) the Sea
Brises arrive at S. S. W. to the S. W. Their beginning is at 9, or 10 of the
clock in the morning, and they continue till 10, 11, or 12, at night, blowing a
fresh gale, which extremely cherishes the Natives and white men.

At 10, 11, or 12, at night they cease; giving place to the Land Winds, which
continue till morning, from the North to the N. W. points. This I was informed
by a skillfull Master of a ship, who had made several voyages to Guiny; whom I
shall have occasion to mention more particularly hereafter.

On the coasts of Malabar (if we may rely upon Linschoten, and Varenius (who
pretends in such cases to have diligently consulted the Sea men's journalls)
from September to April, which is the time of their Summer, the Easterly Winds
blow off the land, about 12 at night, and continue till 12 at noone, reaching
10 miles into the Ocean; Then the VVestern make to shore, as it were the former
reflected back again; the Vapors and clouds being alternately resolved into
Winds, by the rising, and setting Sun.

In Brasile, Madagascar, and many of the Caribbe-Islands, they have no Land
Brise, especially if the shoars lie low, as at Barbados, where the General or
Levant. Wind blows from one end of the Isle to the other; and servs instead of
the Viracoins or Sea-brise. Here (as I was informed by one of the chief
Planters, who lived several years upon the place) it begins to rise about 7,
or 8 in the morning, rising higher with the Sun till 12, when it blows with a
very strong Gale; and so lasts at the same height till toward 3 in the
afternoon, and then slackens at Sun setting. As the Trade VVind generally blows
fresher by day then night.

On the Coasts of Madagascar and Brasile, they have the aforesaid General or
Trade Winds, all the year round, from 9 in the morning till 3 in the
afternoon. It would be further inquired into, whether there be any Terreinhos,
but from high lands: for at Barbados they have rarely any Land Brise, the
Levants being sole Monarchs of the Island: but at Jamaica, which lies not above
4 or 5 degrees from thence, and within the Tropiques, they have also the Land
Winds constantly every Night, which drive a way the Levants from their shoars.

In other Places they want the Sea-Brise: and for the most part, where the
Ocean lies VVesterly between the Tropiques: as the Western Kingdoms of Afric;
Gualata, Hoden, about Cape Verde, and the river Niger, Malaguta, Congo: so in
America on the Coasts of New Spain, Chiapa, Hondura, etc. where the Trade VVind
raigns perpetually, and suffers not the Sea-Brise to approach their Coasts. But
where ever long ridges of Mountains guard them from the East, as in part of
Guiny, Angola, and so on the Western Countries of Peru; they have the refreshing
Brises from the Ocean, which renders them fruitful and pleasant.

I made no further enquiry of our Sea men concerning the Brises of the East
Indies, finding them already set down by Hughen Van Linschoten in his
Instuction, for Cap. 18. lib. 3.
the Navigation of the Indies.

The Land Winds blowing into the Sea, last from Midnight; and the Viracoius
(which arrive at the West and sometimes N. W. throughout all India) from noon
till 12 at night: and coming out of the Sea toward the Land, are therefore
called Viracoins, or Sea Winds: They often stay late, and blow but slowly.

Nearer the Coasts of China, you have the Terreinhos out of the West, and N. W.
S. E. and E. N. E. Being in the North they change to the South, and then ensues
Cap. 24. lib. 3.
a calm, till the Terreinhos come in.

The Brises in the Straights begin about 9, or 10 in the Morning, blowing
freshest at noon, and so gradually declining till 4 or 5, at last cease in a
Calm: which lasts till 10, 11, or 12, at night: When begins the Land Brise
till 5 or 6; and then Calm, till the Sea Brise comes in. This account I
received from a Sea Captain well versed in all parts of the Levant: having
served under the Venetians several years in those Seas.

At the river of Constantinople the Winds commonly blow thorough; but in
exceeding fair VVeather you shall have both the Land and Sea Brises, as in the
Straights.

If either the Easterly, or VVesterly Winds, blow fresh, they hinder both the
Land and Sea Brises in the Mediterranean; of which we must note: They are
always the more languid, and weaker, the later they come in.

In very hot days, and when no other Winds are stirring, you may sometimes
observe this alternation between the Land and Sea Brises on the Coasts of
England: but scarce with any certainty beyond the Latitude of Portugal.

Brises of all sorts are more constant in Summer, then Winter; and between the
Tropiques, then in the Temperate Zones.

The Etesians or Anniversary Winds are those which blow constantly at certain
seasons of the year. The most remarkable species begin in Summer about the
rise of the Dog star; and last 40 days, being preceded by their Prodromi, or
Forerunners 8, or 10 days.

The account of Pliny is not much different from Aristotle; as he computes
their Etesians, in the 2d book of his Natural History.

Not only the Stagirite and Theophrastus, but of late De Carts and many other
Moderns derive their Origin from the colliquated snows and ice, in the
Northerly regions. For the long continuance of the Sun, near 6 months together
above their Horizon, at last overcomes the obstinacy of the cold, and dissolves
the snows; which being attenuated into Winds, make long marches toward the
South, where they find the Air more yielding and pure, then the Foggs, and
gross vapors of the North.

They were called the Sleepy Winds: Venti Delicati, and Somniculares; by
reason they intermit in the night time, and rise again with the Sun: happily
because the vapors were then only sufficiently dilated by the celestial beams,
though in the night time they subside, and hover near the Earth; being too
refrigerate and dense to constitute Winds, till they are again quickened, and
put in motion by the approaches of the Sun.

I am willing to acquiesce in the aforesaid cause; and I believe we in England
or France, might owe our Etesians to Groenland, and other parts of the Frozen
Zones, because we have no constant visible Fountains of any such Winds in our
own dominions: but if the Etesians of Greece, according to the sentiments of
Aristotle, do allways depend on the resolution of snows in the North, they
would certainly take Russia, Poland, or Germany, in the way, which lie nearer
the Artick Pole, before they arrive at Greece: and yet on the other side of the
Taurican hills, they are said to have Southerly Winds about the time of the
Grecian Etesians. We may better make judgment of these Winds, that, being
most Peculiar to this Country, they were no Foreigners in their Original, but
sprung from particular Fountains within it self; such as the hills of Macedon
and Thrace, that have perennial Snows of their own, and these being mastered by
the scorching heats of Summer, may give birth to their Etesian Winds: which has
this advantage over the other opinion, that it clears the difficulty, why they
are silent in the night, and blow with fresher Gusts at Midday, when the Sun
mounts highest in the Northern Hemisphere. I shall only add, not to mention
several others of the modern Naturallists, that even * Cabeus himself, who
was a person sufficiently Zealous in asserting Meteor. page 202.
the Peripatetique Hypothesis, dissents from the opinion of Aristotle, and will
scarce allow the Etesians of Greece, a remoter Origin then the neighboring
Alps.

I shall not insist upon the mistake, for which some of his own interpreters
have severely enough reflected upon Aristotle: That he should first deduce the
Origin of these Winds from the Frozen Zones, and afterward assign the reason
why they blow stronger in the Day time; because the liquefaction of the Snows
is interrupted by the Nocturnall Cold; when it is Notorious, that in those
Countries, the Sun for many Months together, is never depres'd below their
Horizon.

Toward the Adriatique, and many parts of Asia, they have Set Winds which
arrive from the N. and N. E. Yet all these, which were reputed the Venti Stati,
blow not from the Northerly Points; for in Gascony, about the same time with
the Etesians of Greece, they have rather Southerly Winds; which Scaliger (who
was best able to judge of his own Country) observes to be unwholesome and
Pestilentiall.

At Madrid for the most part of the Summer they have a Brise from the
Pyreneans, or the Adjacent Guadarama, which extremely allays the excess of
heat.

You shall have different sorts of Winds from the same Snowy mountain, blowing
to several quarters, according to the situation of the Countries: As was
observed in those Countries by the forementioned Cabeus: Saepe nobis Boreas, and
Borealibus Auster Spirat: It being not unusual for them in Lombardy to feel a
Northerly, and at Tirol, which is situate on the contrary side of the Alps, a
Southerly Wind, at the same time.

In Italy they can never fail of Etesians from their own Appennines; and so
happily on the shore of Guzarat, and the Indian Ocean, from mount Caucasus:
And where ever great Chains or ridges of Hills run along, as the Caucasean or
Appennine, this very often renders an account of most Etesians there about: Yet
I question whether many Authors may not ascribe too much to this one cause: for
in some places they have Anniversary Winds, that can never possibly have their
rise from the Resolution of Snows. And, I believe, it would prove extremely
difficult, to lay down any tolerable Hypothesis, of the Monsoons on the Coasts
of Afric, and India, from the best discoverys we have yet been able to make of
those Parts.

There are other Stated or Anniversary Winds, which they called (...) and
(...), Avicular and White-South Winds: either because they were so friendly to
the procreation of birds; or rather, that they returned with Nightingales or
Swallows in the spring: beginning to blow after the Summer Solstice, by the
computation of Aristotle, 70 days, about the beginning of March.

But no longer to dispute the certainty of those observations, which were made
by the Greeks, and afterward transmitted from them to the Romans; who were by
far less sagacious in the Studies of Nature: I have here in England for some
years past, kept by me an exact table, or Ephemeris both of the Vernall, and
Summer Etesians; but found the Winds no less Variable in those Months, then
at other Seasons.

The Monsons are Anniversary Winds in the Indian and African Seas, called by
the Dutch Moussons [i. e. Motions] and by our English Sea-Captains vulgarly
Monsons. They blow Easterly one half of the year; and the other part, from the
contrary points. They were unknown to the Ancient world who wanting the use of
the Compass, made no long voyages by Sea; but the industrious moderns have
taught us new Theorys of Nature: they have taken as larg a circuit as the Sun,
and their ambition has known no other bounds but those of the Ocean. Heretofore
we had no commerce with the East Indies, but by way of the Levant, the
merchandise being brought from the Red Sea to Aleppo, and other parts of Syria,
and so transported through the Mediterranean; till about the year 1500 the
Portugues found out the Passage by the Cape of Good Hope. Yet in their first
attempts they either happend to be there at the breaking up of the Monsons, or
other cross seasons, that scarce one ship in twenty arrived safe at Goa: but
of late years very few of our East India Fleets miscarry; since the Currents
and Monsons have been better understood by our Pilots and Masters of ships.

I have diligently compared the accounts we have from Kircher, Ricciol, and
Furnier, of the Anniversary Winds in the Indian seas, with the English
Journals; and find those authors generally false: Nay even Varenius himself,
who was more conversant with Seafaring men, is no less erroneous then the
rest. But to omit nothing which may satisfy the curious in these enquirys; I
shall insert a relation of the Monsons communicated to me from Captain George
Swanly, an experienced Captain, after diverse voyages he had made to the
Oriental Indies; which I have set down in his own words.

The Munsons or Monsoons are Winds which reign 5 Months of the year on one
side of the Compass, and 5 others on the Opposite. There are two months in
which they change, that have variable Winds; (viz.) most part of March and
September.

From September, on the North side of the Equator, to the Tropique of Cancer
and there about, in the Indian Seas, they blow from the N. E. and according to
course of the Months, they veere more Northerly.

At Surat, Malabar, Pegu, and that Coast of India, is the fair season till
March: All which time it is the fowl season with the same Winds on the other
side, at Coromandel, Patane, toward China, and Japan: and all the said time,
from September till March, on the South of the Aequinoctiall, the Winds are on
the N. W. quarter of the Compass with rain; which there is the
Fowl-weather-Monsoon.

From March to September, the Winds are, to Northwards of the Equator,
Westerly, or at the S. W. points, with rains, at Surat, Malabar and Pegu; at
which time it is fair on the Coasts of Coromandel, Patane, toward China, and
in the way to Japan; and then in the Tropique of Capricorn the Winds are at S.
E. and that quarter; which are in those Parts the dry Monsoons.

Yet near all Lands between the Tropiques on the Eastward of Cape Bon
Esperance in the fowl seasons there do happen some fair intervalls; yet in the
dry Months, seldom any rains interrupt the constant serenity of the Air.

The Fair Monsoons are the Winds blowing partly off the shoars, and
contrariwise the Monsoons blowing on the shoars, are the fowl and rainy
seasons.

Yet still happily I shall leave the reader in suspense, whether Ricciolus, and
other learned men, or the reports of our Seamen, are most to be credited; But I
shall not scruple to decide it for the latter; who beside their yearly
Traffic into those parts, are obliged to a very perfect understanding of the
Monsons; since the mistaking of very few days may sometimes hazard the loss of
their voyage for that whole year. When as the Jesuits, for the most part,
transcribe one from another, without strictly enquiring into the truth of what
they write; and Kircher (who of all others is the greatest Rhapsodist of
Falsitys, though he contain some rich Oar among much dross) pretends to have
had no other information of these particulars, then what he collected from the
English, and Dutch Journalls; which I doubt, he never had opportunitys
sufficiently Mund. Subterr. Lib. 4.
to examine, or compare.

When one Motion ceases, the other does not immediately begin; but there are
sometimes longer, and otherwhile shorter Intervalls between them: In which, are
variable Winds, and Calms that presage dangerous Tempests: for the Opposite
Winds, before one resigns to another, must needs, by their struggling, cause
strange disorders in the Atmosphere. Wherefore of all seasons in the year, our
Masters of ships ever avoid the Seas at the changing or breaking up of the
Monsons. It Is observable, the Easterly Winds change, sometimes first into
Northerly, and other times toward the Southerly points; which may happen, from
the impressions that the changing of the Currents make on the Air, and that on
the Exhalations and Winds.

These in the Indian Seas are far more certain then other Anniversary Winds;
yet by reason of various Accidents, they come later in, and otherwhile continue
longer, some years then others.

They are chiefly regulated by the Heavenly Motions; changing for the most part
under such a Phasis of the moon; and are so far dedependant on the Sun, that
Sir Thomas Herbert in his Travells gives this account of them.

The Monsoons are Anniversary Winds, which blow constantly one way for so many
months; beginning exactly, from the Suns entrance into a sign of the Zodiac;
and the other half year, the contrary way, or till the Sun enter into the
Opposite degree: which if Seamen neglect, they go near to loose their Passage
into India.

Their Principal Efficient is the Sun: and though it will be difficult to
explain the particular Mode, yet both the Currents and Winds are most
certainly influenced by that Sovereign Planet: which alternately resolves the
Snows, and bringing Summer with it to either Tropique, attenuates the Clouds
and Stagnant Air, which condensed in the VVinter. By this means, passing from
one Hemisphere to another, and Surveying the Elementary World, allways finds or
Provides materials for the Anniversary finds; which occasions the Monsoons to
blow with little variation, at the same seasons of the year; especially in the
Indian Ocean, where the Currents are more constant, and fewer inequalitys, then
in narrower Seas, where they never keep the same quarter long, but are
repercus'd from the Promontorys, and come down in Changeable Puffs, and Eddys
of VVind; as both Drake and Candish found in the straights of Magellan; which
renders the Passage so very difficult into the South Seas. But were the whole
Sublunary Globe of the same equal and uniforme superficies, we should have
Winds in most places no less constant then the Monsoons, and as regularly
governed by the course of the Sun. It will be no hard matter to explicate the
cause of the Easterly Monsoons; this being the perpetual course of the
Trade-wind all the year round between the Tropiques: But that they afterward
revert to the West, may possibly be occasioned from the great Magazine of
vapors lodgd about the Island of Madagascar, and the Coasts thereabout; which
are reflected from thence by the Advent of the Sun into the Tropique of
Capricorn: for Winds are both the result of rarefaction and condensation
also; and the rarified vapors not only cause a more vehement Protrusion of the
Air after their dilatation; but being over much compressed in one quarter, as
often by the Elasticall power thereof, beget a Reverse VVind in retiring to
their former places: So that there can scarce be a moments rest in the
Universe, the Atmosphere being as one continued scene of Action and Passion,
that I believe the Air even in the calmest days is almost every where Agitated,
at least by some insensible Wind. But thus far of their distinct Species, and
particularly of the Monsoons.

In relation to their Qualities: I before rejected the Hot and Dry Exhalations,
as too narrow, and insufficient to resolve the innumerable Phenomenon of
Winds; for they consist no less of Omnigenous Vapors, Salts and Mineralls,
with other different species of matter; and we must expect their Qualities to
be Various, as they have greater or less Allays of such Bodies.

Some of them are Corrosive, others Suffocating and Pestilentiall; they are
sometimes Hot, and then Cold from the same Quarter, and so successively capable
of all Qualities and Extremes, according to the Diversity of their Constituent
parts, or Mediums in which they blow. This might appear from many obvious
Experiments: Let them pass thorough a Tunnell or Pipe of a convenient length,
but much wider at one end then the other, that it may give free admission to
the Air: in the cavity of which strew several sorts of Aromatics and odorous
herbs, such as Thyme, Roses, Violets, etc. then let it be stuck in the wall of
some house exposed to the open fields, with the larger end obverted to the
Winds, and the lesser so placed to conveigh them into the house, (somewhat
after the manner of the Italian Ventiducts) and you shall have the whole room
perfumed with a pleasant, and agreeable smell: but instead of these, if you put
in herbs or mineralls, with Virulent, and Deleterious Qualities; you shall have
some complaining of their heads; others seas'd with Lipothymies, and inclined
to sleep, when the stupefactive fumes enter together with the Winds, and
surprise the Spirits. The same we may conclude of all such whose component
particles are either noxious in themselves, or make their entry through
unwholesome places, which are stord with Antimony, Mercury, or other Putrid and
Arsenicall vapors.

I made diverse trials of this nature, instead of common Water: I filled the
Aeolipile with water distilled from roses, which generated Winds with a very
grateful Perfume; afterward, I experimented the same with several sorts of
liquids; I likewise cast in Camphire, and then small shavings of Juniper Wood,
into the Aeolipile, that sent out flatulent steams according to the nature of
the bodies injected: which makes it evident that the Qualitys of Winds are
oftentimes derived from their Constituent particles. But as to the Medium
through which they pass; I judged the use of the Aeolipile by no means
suitable to my design in discovering their degrees of heat or cold; the Winds
generated therein being actually hot before: so I caused to be made a Tin
pipe about 4 foot long, which I fitted to the nose of a pair of bellows, and
covering it with a mixture of snow and ice; perceived the. VVind which passed
through the pipe to be very excessively cold: but because our Organs are not
all ways equally disposed, nor indeed are they sufficient Criteria, to be
relied on in such nice cases, I therefore made use of an Hermetically-Seal'd
VVeather-glasse; and blowing thereon, found a very visible alteration in the
liquor of the Weather-glasse, which being ventilated from the same bellows
wrought no such effect, before the Frigorific mixture was applied. I afterward
heated the Pipe in the Fire, through which the Winds should pass, and there
came forth an exceeding Hot blast. So far upon all accounts may the
Disposition of the Medium influence the Transient Winds.

If we further enquire upon what account Winds thus far sympathize with
their Mediums: we must acknowledge it to be no dream of the Epicureans, that
continual effluviums do issue from all material concretes; And the Winds not
only bear off with them those particles which are already disengaged from their
textures, but help to loosen others; that there is scarce any Body so solid,
which pays them not some tribute as they pass. Those which have made no far
excursions from their Fountains, cannot be much adulterated in the way, and so
preserve their first Qualitys entire: But the Traveling Winds, that arrive
from remote Countries, and drive before them different species of Air, and
mingle with other Heterogeneous exhalations in their passage, they are at last
quite overcome by them; and so far influenced by their long intercourse with
the medium, that they almost Universally borrow their Temperament and Propertys
from thence. The Winds in Italy which blow over the groves of Myrtle do often
perfume the Air for many miles; and in those Countries where the Rosemary grows
wild in the fields, the smell thereof has been carried a considerable distance
from their Coasts. The Levants are accounted Soultry and troublesome in Spain;
yet on the shoars of Murcia, where they come off the Mediterranean, they are
agreeable and pleasant. The Tramontanas at Rome are often more piercing then the
sharpest North Winds, either in England or France; because they blow from the
Snowy mountains. And I might instance in a remarque out of Captain James. The
Southerly Wind was then coldest: the reason I conceive to be, for that it did
blow off the Main Land, which was all covered with Snow, and the N. Winds came
out of the Bay which was hitherto open. I conclude, that Winds have more
frequently their Qualitys, from the Places or Mediums through which they pass,
(or at least from the Fountains that gave them birth) then from the Quarters
which are reputed Hot or Cold, or otherwise qualified for producing such Winds.

As in Holland, and the lower parts of Germany, they have very often colder
weather with the Midland Winds, though from the South, then with the N. or N.
E. which pass over the Sea, and mingle with the tepid vapors of the Ocean. The
Southern Blasts to us here in England are accounted noxious and Pestilentiall;
but to certain African Provinces, healthful and Pleasant. The Northerly are
coldest in our European World, and the Southerly on the other side of the
Aequinoctiall. For the Arctick and Antarctick Winds must needs be of the same
nature, blowing from either of the Poles, where the cold is equally
predominant. So that the Qualitys of many Winds seem not so much to respect
the Points of the compass, as the Course of the Sun.

The Eastern Winds according to Aristotle are hot and dry: nor is their Siccity
only remarkable in Greece, Palestine, Asia the Less, and most parts of Africa,
where they make long marches over the parcht and barren sands; but likewise in
the more temperate climes of Holland and France; by reason they pass through
Poland, Germany, and other vast tracts of Land; and lastly arriving at our
Isle, they can suffer no considerable alteration in their qualitys, by so small
a passage over the Narrow Seas.

They are no very welcome guests to us in England, being ominous to our Gardens
and Fields, by blasting the corn and fruits. I have known strange destruction
done in one Night, when they come late in the spring. Sometimes they not only
blite the leaves and blossoms, but kill the Trees with their poisonous breath.
They bring after them swarms of Caterpillars, and other devouring insects; or
those dry and tabid mists, which corrupt the lungs, and cause Epilepsys,
Consumptions, etc. whether by driving before them the putrid Air from Holland,
or however they contract that malignity in their natures. Nevertheless we can
make no General conclusions of their propertys from hence, which are changed
by innumerable acidents. For though in these Countries of Great Britain, they
are inauspicious both to animals and plants: yet in the West Indies, the
Eastern Brise is refreshing, and healthful above all other Winds. In Arabia
and those Asiatique regions they are exceedingly dry, by traveling for many
thousand leagues over the sandy deserts; yet Blondus observes them to be rather
humid in Italy, and to occasion a relenting in the Air, where they blow
immediately from the Adriatique Seas.

In relation to their degrees of heat, though Aristotle declares they are much
hotter then the Westerly, we find by experience that with us in England, the
Easterly are at certain Seasons of the year exceeding cold, and very often the
most freesing winds, especially if they hang somewhat toward the North.

I need assign no other cause, for the frigidity of the Easterly Winds, then
that they have their first rise from the Continent, where the Midland Air is
much colder then the Maritime.

The South Winds are generally reputed Hot and Moist, on this side the Line,
being heated in their entry through the Torrid Zone; or because they consist
not of melted Snows, as the Northern, but of the Tepid and Sulphury steams from
Africa, and other Sunburn'd climes.

They pass over no Seas of any large extent, just crossing the Mediterranean,
and British, yet they moisten and relax the Air, and cause wet weather by
dissolving the Clouds into rain, which are rather dissipated and blown over by
the impetuous Norths.

Yet I think it very irrational to conclude that all the Southerly, should
have their rise from the Torrid; or the Northerly Winds, from the Frigid
Zones. Since it is not unknown to the Curious that in part of Italy and
Provence, they have very often Northerly Winds (rising as is supposed from
some places about the Alps) whereof they are not at all sensible in other
Countries of France, through which they must of necessity pass, if they came so
far North. In like manner at Marseilles, and in the Mediterranean, they have
oftentimes Southerly Winds; when they blow from contrary points on the African
Continent, which lies more to the South.

I believe very few of the South Winds here in England ever took a longer
flight then from the Mediterranean Sea, or the lower parts of France; and it
can scarce be supposed that the same Numericall Exhalations could ever travel
from between the Tropiques, and not be spent in the way, long er'e they arrive
at the British Coasts; yet happily by protruding the Ambient Air, and that
successively the Contiguous to it; the motion may at length be Propagated many
hundreds of Miles beyond the reach of those vapors which caused the first
Agitation. So that it is not impossible, but that a VVind which began near the
Aequinoctiall, may by this means, be continued, even to the Poles of the
World. However I shall make no longer digressions concerning their Extent, but
proceed to the Qualitys which are vulgarly ascribed to the Southerly Winds.

They are laxative, stupefactive, and pestilentiall; They cause Epilepsies and
pains in the head, and were therefore styld (...), by the Grecians: They render
men Shaagrin and melancholy, and in some of the Azores Islands, the children
are said to sit dejected and leave their playing when they blow. For first they
open the pores of our bodies by their heat, and then insinuate the malignant
influences; and the parts being pointed and volatile have not only an easy
ingression into our blood, but thaw and unloose the textures of ice and snow:
Nay it is most certain, that iron it self takes the file much better, when the
South Wind blows, then at other times.

They many times cause a far rougher Sea then the most Tempestuous Winds from
the North, Happily because they blow more obliquely, and rake the Surface of
the Water; when as the Northerly oftentimes descend, as from a precipice
downwards, which immediately deads and weakens their force.

They magnify visible objects: As our Seamen observe their ships to appear
bigger at a distance, either in misty weather, or when the South Wind blows.
For the humid and nebulous vapors of which they consist, distort the visual
beams, and by refracting them to the Perpendicular, cause more rays of light to
enter into the eye (which makes the object seem larger) then otherwise would
arrive at it in strait lines.

Many who are naturally inclined to Stammering in their speech, do find their
infirmity evidently worse, when the Wind is toward the South: Probably because
the moisture of the Air, causes a greater relaxation of the Nervs, and thereby
a tremulous and unstable motion of the muscles, at that time. Which perhaps
has more power upon the Vocal muscles, then others, because they lie in the
Road, and are more exposed to the invasions of whatever is breathed in at the
mouth or nostrills, then others are. Whence also we find the tongue more apt
to falter (though somewhat in a different manner) whenever it is overmuch
bedewed with strong and vaporous liquors.

Smells are said to be most Fragrant in these Winds, when the Air is humid and
lax to convey the odoriferous particles. They anticipate the Spring; and cause
the trees to blossom, and bud forth before their time; and by this means
exhaust their spirits and nutritive juice. They damp linen and paper, though
never so carefully guarded from the Air, cause flesh to rot, and upon all
accounts hasten putrefaction in bodies.

The Western have been Counted the mildest, and most Auspicious of all others;
and were so highly in favor with the Poets, that they thought them worthy of
the Golden Age, and to refresh the Elysian groves. They are indeed cherishing
to Animals, they cause fertility in the Earth, and paint the flowery meades with
all the verdant beautys of the spring. But though the Breathing Zephyrs are so
much celebrated in Poems and Romances, and happily were kinder to the delicious
Countries of Italy, and Greece, yet we find no less malignity in their natures
from particular accidents and climats, then what we have observed of other
Winds.

In the Isle of Jersy (as I was lately informed by an ingenious Gentleman of
that place) they Taint and Blast all the plants and trees, except the white
poplar (which flourishes best in those Winds) and suffer nothing to grow a good
distance from the Western shore: when the Midland of the Country, and all
other parts, even to the Brink of the Ocean, is very fruitful and universally
planted. They have an observation there; when it rises on a sudden instorms,
it continu's for 9 days or thereabout.

They blow in this Isle the greatest part of the year, but chiefly about the
Aequinoxes; and particularly in Autumn, when they are very boystrous, having
nothing to checque their rage between that and America: and these they call the
Michaelmas storms. Beside what is said of this Island, the same effects are
known in Normandy, and many parts of our British Coasts, especially toward
Cornwall and the Lands End; but they render the Norman shore inhabitable by
reason of the sand they blow over it: where are few or no Trees to be seen near
the Sea, and those very shrubs. When they take a point of the North, they are
worst, but not long lasting.

The greatest Winds which have been known of late years, were either Westerly
or from the Collateral points between the West and North. One about the Death
of Oliver Cromwell: And another famous for demolishing so many houses and
buildings which in diverse places it levelled to the ground. It did
considerable Damage to most of the Colleges in Oxon: blew down two and twenty
Elms in the Grove of Trin. Coll. and several of the strongest Fabrics in
England Escaped not without some marks of it is violence. For many of those
houses, which either by their strength or situation, were able to resist it is
furious assaults, lost their roofs, or had their chimnys and barns blown down.
But that which makes it still memorable in most parts of the Kingdom, was the
great numbers of Trees, and sturdy Oaks that fell in this Tempest. You might
see the Spoils of the Villages and woods all the Country round. An event,
scarce to be paralleld in the former Age; and which would require a large
History to transmit all the particulars thereof to posterity.

The Westerly Winds are oftentimes thus Tempestuous in England and Flanders;
which receive their first efforts from the wide Seas, where they bring terrible
storms; sometimes Snow, and then in large Flakes; but usually in the spring
time rain: especially the S. W. which are the most Humid and Pluvious, because
they travel by Sea many thousand miles, and must needs wet their wings in so
long a flight over the Western Ocean. By some writers they are esteemed Gelid
and Moist; but with us they are warmer then the East or North: either because
they consist of the tepid vapors and Air, which are heated by the declining
Sun; or that being Sea-Winds they are therefore generally hotter in the
Temperate Zones, then those which blow off the Land.

Lastly: the Northerly Winds, in these parts of Europe, are accounted Cold and
Dry: by reason they arrive from the Frigid climats of the North, and consist
for the most part of resolved snows and ice.

They cause a sude and serene sky dispersing the Clouds; wherefore Boreas in
Homer is styled (...) Serenator Boreas: yet in Africa they cause rain, and are
moyster then the South; which according to the complexion of those Countries,
has a greater degree of siccity and heat.

In some places of Holland and Flanders, where they gather the vapors from the
German or Scottish Seas, the N. Winds often bring with them Cloudy and wet
weather. And we have known as great falls of rain here in England; the VVind
being at N. and N. E. but then it usually continued at S. or S. W. for some
days before. So I have supected, that those vapors and Clouds, which were
gathered, and blown over by the Southerly, were afterward reduced back again by
the Northerly Winds.

They render the Northern men vegete and healthful, to extreme old age, by
hindering the exilition of the spirits; when as the Africans are old at 40,
where the continual heat opens the pores, and suffers the vital flame to
transpire.

That which makes the Fortunate Islands truly so, is the kind salute from the
Northern Winds, after they have been somewhat heated in their progress
toward the South.

The gates of Citys, in the opinion of the wisest Architects, ought always to
be directed toward the North; and the situation of Tornay in Flanders is
celebrated by Fromundus upon that account. Hippocrates prescribed the N. Wind
as the greatest Antidote against the plague in Greece: and Varro is said to
have preserved his whole family during the raging plague at Corcyra, by stoping
up the windows toward the South, and giving free admission to the Northern
Air. Yet one of the Ancient Phycitians gives a worse Character of the Northerly
Winds: That they cause acute pains, and defluxions from the head to the
Stomach: Breed the Stone, and stop the passages of the Ureters. hinder the
Transpiration of those peccant juyces which nature endeavors to throw off from
the Blood; and produce many more distempers which are reckoned the effects of
Siccity or cold. They are searching and Astringent; scarce to be endured by
those who have infirm habits of body, and yet agreeable to healthful and
robust constitutions. Sir Walter Raleigh in his voyage to Guiana takes notice
that near the Coast of Brasil, they had one half of the year Northerly, and in
the other part Southerly Winds; And further toward the South in the Kingdoms
of Magellana and Chili, they have them the whole year round Southerly; which
reign most in the Tropique of Capricorn, as the North Winds at Island, and
those Countries which lie near the North Pole; especially in the VVinter, so
that the Hollanders which wintered in Nova Zembla, during the whole time, had
Northerly Winds. Thus the Sun, as he approaches either of the Tropiques,
subtiliseth the Air, driving away the grosser Exhalations into the Frigid
Zones, where they are laid up in vast Magazines till winter; but then the
spaces being able to contain no more, they Circulate again to the middle of the
World. For the Solar motions, being excentricall to the Earth, cause so
unequal a distribution of heat and cold, that the Air must of necessity be
denser in some parts then others; and consequently liable to the frequent
disturbance of Winds: and the vapors, according to the distinct seasons of the
year, being continually either retiring from the Poles, or on their voyage
thither, the Sun, as Prince of the Atmosphere, obliges them to a motion no
less constant then his own: Insomuch that neither These, or indeed any other
Winds, are so fortuitous as many suppose, but proceed from regular causes, and
are guided by the certain conduct of nature, though happily the manner of it
may not be fully understood by us.

The Norths are often exceedingly impetuous on the shoars of Florida and
Virginia, taring up Forests of vast Trees by the roots, and wasting the whole
Country like Hurracanes. They blow very hard toward the Orcades and on that
side the British Coasts. But they must needs be very sensible of their effects
in Finmark and Russia which lie more exposed to their fury. The Bishop of Upsal
in two Chapters [De Vehementia Venti Circii. Lih. 1. De Gent. Sept.
and De Vent. Sept. Violentia] informs us of many disasters, which happen by
them in Norway and Island: particularly, that at the Port called Vestrabord,
the N. E. VVind blows with such vehemence that it dismounts the Horsemen, and
Soldiers, driving them away before it. On the Western shoars of Norwey, it
suffers not so much as a tree or the least shrub to grow, that the Inhabitants
are forced (if you believe our Author) to roast their meat with fire made of
great fishes Bones. And in Bothnia, and that part of Norwey which they call
Vichia, the Northern Whirlewinds are so terrible, that they carry away the
roofs of their houses, and of the Churches which are covered with lead, blowing
away great beams and rafters, removing Windmills, stones, and even Castles, and
Villages from one place to another. If this be an Author suspected, the Annals
of our own Country will furnish us with relations of the same nature, which
would require as large a share of credulity to believe them, if the rage of
these Tempestuous Winds was not sufficiently understood in most parts of
Europe, though happily in remoter Climates, which are less acquainted with the
great Disturbers of the Northern World, they might seem fabulous. Some of which
are solemny recorded in our Historys, that even exceed the Hurracanes of the
West Indies. Yet I have heard, that those Winds, which we count very great
storms here in England, would be thought no wonder in Scotland, where they are
accustomed to these violent Blasts; and for this reason build their houses
universally with stone, exceeding thick, low, and with narrow windows. But not
to be prolix in their History; we might offer at the cause whence this strange
vehemence and impetuosity of the N. Winds does proceed. Shall we say from the
great quantity of exhalations laid up in the Treasuries of the North? or
because they find the resistance less toward the South, where the Atmosphere
is rarefied by the heat of the Sun, so that they glide without opposition
through the yiedling Air, especially in the day time, wherefore the aforesaid
Northerly Winds are observed to blow harder by day then night.

They are more Sonorous then other Winds, because they rage with greater
violence, and so make a stronger collision of the Air.

I have thus far considerd their nature in the remoter parts of Europe, where
they are nearest their Source: But after they have made a long Progress
Southwards, and are heated in their approaches toward the Sun, we find them in
Africa to be far different from what they were in Norwey or Island; and their
qualityes no less various then the Temperature of the Heavens. So likewise in
America, (and as Acosta observes more particularly of some Countries in Peru,)
the Northerly Wind is counted unwholesome, and the Southerly extremely
cherishing to men and beasts: The first is not penetrating nor disperses
clouds, as among us, but causes rain: and the South Wind is just qualified in
those climes as the North is in our country's that lie nearer the Arctic Pole:
Nay, not only comparatively to different situations, and places, but the
judgment to be made concerning the Qualitys of Winds, from the Quarters whence
they blow, is very various and fallible, in relation to one and the same
Latitude. Many of the hardest frosts, which have happend in England, began with
a Southerly wind, (and then commonly are the more lasting and violent) which
nevertheless is generally much hotter then any other, which arrives at the
British coasts.

I took notice, no longer since then the 11 of January last: that in the
morning we had much rain (the wind being N. and N. E.) which ceasing about
noon, there followed, first a shower of hail, and then a considerable fall of
snow (the wind still continuing at N. and N. E.) which was the most part of it
dissolved by 3 or 4 in the afternoon: then the VVind vering to full South, it
froze exceedingly hard for the time. So little certainty is there in
observations of this nature, that we had Rain with a Northerly, and Frost with
a Southerly VVind in the same day. And not only thus, but it appeared by the
Weatherglasse, to which I had recourse upon this occasion, that there was a
very sudden mutation in the Air from heat to cold, when the Wind came about to
the South, more then in the morning while it continued at N. and N. E.

We must expect these so different Qualifications of Winds, to happen even
in the same Climate: since not only the Variety of their Component Particles,
and the Fountains which gave them birth; but either the Cutting down Forests;
Draining of Fenns: Changing the Currents of great rivers: Their Vicinity or
Distance from the Course of the Sun: whether they blow off from Land or Sea, or
Snowy Mountains; and a thousand extraneous accidents are sufficient to alter
the Properties of Winds.

Neither are the laws of their Motions reducible to such certain rules, as
(...). Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Aristotle pretends; That two Opposites always blow at Contrary Seasons of the
year: As the N. W. about the Vernall, and the S. W. at the Autumnall Aequinox:
and it would likewise be examined whether the same Contrariety happen
constantly between the Solstitiall Winds. Others have observed, that we
commonly feel a a S. Wind at midnight, an Easterly at the Rising, and a
Westerly after the Setting of the Sun; and last of all, a Northerly about Noon,
when the Solar rays are most powerful to resolve the grosser mists and clouds
in the North. For Winds, being for the generality, Nothing but Dilated Vapors
or Air, they almost wholly depend on the Presence of the Sun, at least are
generated from the heat left behind him in the Earth and Waters. VVhereupon
De-Cartes ingeniously remarks, that we should have no such Variety in the
Qualities and Production of Winds; if the whole Terraqueous Globe were of one
uniforme superficies: as we may perceive that in wide Seas, their motions are
far less irregular then by Land; since the great diversity of Climates,
Mountains, and Lakes, varies them exceedingly.

I have thus far discoursed of the 4 Principal: the Collateral or
Intermediate Winds (if any right judgment could be made of their natures from
the Quarters whence they blow) might be supposed Hot, Dry, Moist etc. as they
are farther removed, or hang nearer toward the Cardinal Point. But we are like
to expect little satisfaction from the generality of writers concerning the
temperature of Winds: For who can with patience hear the impertinence of those
Notionall men, that enquire no further, but declare? That the South Wind is
allways Hot and Moist: the North, Cold and Dry: the West etc. which obliges us
in the following discourses, to offer at some more accurate account of their
Qualitys, and the most Universal causes from whence they proceed.

First: Winds are Moist; either because their Constituent parts are made up of
Vapid and Aqueous corpuscles, such as rain, dews, watery Clouds: or by reason
they make long Voyages by Sea, or over great Lakes, Morish Countries and Fenns;
and so are tainted with the Qualitys of the Medium through which they pass.
Those which proceed from Melted Snows, have some small allay of the Terrene,
but approach nearer the Moist.

The Siccity of Winds is from their Saline, and Terrestrial parts: or that
arriving from those Parc'ht and Torrid regions near the Line, they are
exsiccated as they travel by the Ways of the Sun.

I shall not dispute whether this has been cautiously enough minded by most
writers, How many nice circumstances are to be considered in judging the
Qualitys of Winds; and how difficult it is, to make a just Estimate of their
several degrees of Heat and Cold. For there must not only be especial regard
had to the Temperament of our Senses, but to the Climes in which they blow; and
seasons of the year; Since those which would seem hot at Christmas
comparatively to the winter Cold, should the same happen in July, when we had
been long accustomed to a different temperature of our Organs and the Ambient
Air, would undoubtedly appear exceedingly Cold. Then we denominate Winds
either Gelid or Hot, in respect of those that usually blow in such Climats: as
the Southern Blasts with us here in England (though they are Colder then the
Ambient Air) may be reputed Hot, comparatively to the N. or N. E. which are
much more refrigerative in these parts of the World. Thus we ought not rashly
to make judgment of their Qualitys: but first consider what Symptoms of Heat,
they betray in relation to Weather-glasses, or the Winds that commonly blow in
such Countries: as likewise, what mutations happen by them in the Temperature of
the Air: And afterward compare all these Circumstances with the present
disposition of our Organs, least we determine concerning the positive Qualitys
of Winds, from only the Prejudices, and Hallucinations of Sense.

There are several Causes Productive of Heat: As their passage through Hot
Regions; Or because they consist of the ignite and suffocating Air, which
infests the Burning Zone; where the whole Mass is corrupted with such
intolerable heats, that the Winds which are either generated therein, or only
pervade the Torrid regions, must needs, for some time, retain their temperament
and Qualitys: till at length they loose them in long voyages, and the
calorifique particles languish and dwindle away by degrees, being oppres'd with
multitudes of Heterogeneous exhalations in their course. Then, I think it not
improbable, but that the Solar rays, or whatever parcells beside of the Subtle
and Aetheriall matter, may by mingling with them, actually advance the heat of
Winds. And Lastly: The ignite Damps such as we sometimes discover in Colepits
and Mines, and all other of the Mineral and Metalline Kingdoms, that finding
no Vent, cause Earthquakes in the Bowels thereof, if they escape through the
Pores of the Earth, occasion Presters and Hot Winds: And those fiery
eruptions, which in many places of Calabria and Sicily, are continually
breathing out from the Subterraneall Regions, must needs diffuse the seminals
of heat through the whole body of the Air and Winds; especially, such as come
reaking from under Burning Mountains; or at least are the results of those
Calorifique mixtures by which some Mineralls and salts, fermenting together in
the Cavitys of the Earth, emit Hot fumes: Like several Chymicall preparations,
such as Oil of Tartar and spirit of Vitriol, which cause a strange Ebullition
and Heat by their commistion only. And if we suppose any thing Analogous to
these under ground (where Nature in her own Elaboratory often exceeds the
greatest Sagacity of Art) why may not the Tepid Steams and Vapors that ascend
from thence, be able to produce so considerable a degree of Heat in the Air,
that might occasion Scorching Winds? And happily the Rancounters of Certain
Mineralls with each other, in those Passages where the Waters flow, may
likewise by their mutual ferments, be the most probable cause of many Hot
Baths and Springs. Nevertheless Fromundus, and some other Naturalists of late,
in the Number of which we may reckon our Countryman Mr. Hobs, affirm that all
Winds whatever do actually refrigerate, and oftentimes so intensly, that they
prove the fittest instruments for the Congelation of Liquids: And I must
confess, it seldom falls under our observation, that in any parts of Europe,
the Winds are comparatively hotter then our Sensories, or the Ambient Air; yet
in many Provinces of Afric and Arabia, but most of all near the Persian Gulf,
where they come just off from the Burning Sands, they are intolerably hot and
suffocating: as appears from the Relations of the Portugalls first Voyages to
the East Indies, where they felt Gales of the E. and N. E. Wind so Hot, that
the Air seemed to be inflamed and scorching like fire. So likewise Gasparo
Balbi in his Travells speaks of four persons, that wearied in their Journey, sat
down near the Banks of Euphrates to refresh themselves a while, and were all
stifled by one of these Hot Winds. And we have a more surprising Narrative
from Marcus Polo: that, when the King of Chermain sent an Army of 16 Hundred
horse, and 5 thousand foot against the Lord of Ormus, for not paying his
Tribute, they all perished by these Suffocating Blasts. But if we distrust the
integrity of these writers, Olearius in his Voyage to Persia, describes the
intemperature of the Air in those Countries to be such; that with the North or
East Wind they felt a Cold which deprived them of their Limbs, and on the
Contrary the S. Winds were ready to choke them with the extremity of heat. But
Della Valle, a Nobleman of Rome (whose Curiosity led him through most of the
Eastern Kingdoms) reports, that toward Arabia there was a VVind so scorching
and Dry, that it left behind it like marks of Fire, wherever it came; and the
excessive Heat forced them to keep their legs naked, which became so red and
inflamed, that without the greatest Torment, they could not endure to set them
on the ground. In some places of the Country, these Soultry Gales last from 9
in the morning, till noon; which are ready to stifle the inhabitants, and
blowing immediately from the Scorching Sands, the people many times lie in the
water to rescue themselves from the intolerable Heats. Della Valle says, that
they are called in the Annalls of Persia, Bad Semum, i. e. Burning and Venomous
Winds.

I have heard the like relations from many of our Sea Captains, who trade on
the Arabian or African Coasts: so that I think Mr. Hobs or any other of the
Modern Naturallists had little reason to question the Heat of some Winds:
though in these parts of the world, where they travel not over such Sandy
Deserts, and are more removed from the ways of the Sun, they are more sensibly
Cold.

By Gelid Winds, I understand those which are colder then our Sensories, or the
Ambient Air. This Frigidity may happily proceed from the Nitrous particles of
which they consist, or whatever body else we reckon to be the Primum Frigidum;
Or because they have their Origin in those Caverns under the Earth, where the
Sun beams never penetrate, and no Subterraneall warmth is to be found. Monsieur
De Carts averrs that all Boistrous Winds, from whatever point of the Compass
they blow, Meteor. cap. 2.
are Universally Cold and Dry: and we find that any sort of Air violently
moved by a Fan or Bellows, does refrigerate; so that the Cold of Winds may
somewhat depend on their motion, or manner of affecting our Senses. And since
the Cartesians will allow Cold to be no positive Quality of it self, but a mere
Privation of Heat: then, either the absence of their Subtle matter may cause
the Frigidity of Winds; or else the occasion thereof must be this, that they
pass thorough the Gelid Regions which are never visited by the Sun Beams. For
as Those which come from Aethiopia and other parts of the Torrid Zone, do
imbibe the Heat, and Sympathise with the nature of the places from whence they
come; so questionless the other that consist of, or drive before them, the
gross and Frigorifique Air from Groenland and other Northern Climates, must
needs have considerable allays of the Mediums through which they pass. And
within the Polar Circles, the absence of the Solar rays for so many Months,
does sufficiently conduce to the Production of Cold; since the Sun which used
to correct the rigor and inclemency of the weather, is now banished from their
Horizon, and the Air become Chill and Torpid by the long Predominance of the
Cold. So that the Winds must of necessity admit of very considerable
alterations in their passage: and whether or no they consist of Frigorifique
particles; yet by their commerce and enterfering with the Gelid Regions, they
may draw, I know not what, Contagion from thence: As appeared in the
forementioned Experiment, how much the mixture of Snow and Ice, only by
applying it to the outside of the bellows, did soon infrigidate the Transient
Winds. For I am not sufficiently convinced, that Cold Winds, proceed always
from Nitre, Sal Armaniac, or other Frigorifique Corpuscles; But sometimes only
appear so to us, by their particular Motions on our Sensories: As we see any
Air Ventilated from Fanns or Bellows, or our own breath darted with a very
vehement impulse from the Mouth, appears Frigid; which if we exhale gaping,
and in another position of the lips, is rather sensibly Hot.

Thus if Winds may be styled Cold from a simple Privation of Heat, and if only
the want of some Subtle Matter, the absence of the Sun, or other Calorifique
Corpuscles, will resolve the several Phenomenon we commonly ascribe to cold;
this will be sufficient to constitute the Refrigerative Winds; which may better
be explained in this manner, then by the Positive Quality of the
Peripatetiques, or the Nitrous, and other Frigorifique particles of the
Atomists, and Corpuscularian Philosophers. I shall only add one circumstance
out of the Honorable Mr. Boil, concerning the causes of cold Winds. I have
supected some Winds may be Cold only by consisting of, or driving before them,
those higher parts of the Air, that by reason of the longuid reflection of the
Sun beams in the Upper Region, is for the most part Cold.

Yet, as I before declared, we often commensurate the Qualities of Winds, not
only from their Constituent Particles, or their just degrees of Frigidity or
Heat, but sometimes because they are warmer then the Ambient Air, or the Winds
that usually blow in such Climats; or at leastwise then those membranes or
Sensorys, by which we judge them. The Winds which blow off from Sea, are
far Hotter then those which come from Land. May not the Collucent Salts,
which create such a sparkling and Coruscation in Tempests, or other vehement
Collision of the waves, be able to produce some heat in the Air and Winds,
being either actual Flames or at least making those impressions on our
Sensory's as if they were? Nevertheless, since we find by experience that
these kind of Salts, with which the Sea water is impregnated, do neither rise
up in vapors, nor being mingled with liquids, any way advance their Heat; May
there not be other Calorifick Effluviums (like the hot Steams in Colepits and
Mines) that ascend from the bottom of the Sea, yet cannot so easily perspire
through the solider Superficies of the Earth; which renders the Maritime
Regions and Winds hotter then the Midland? But whatever be the cause, it is
most evident that all over Europe, the winters are generally milder in Islands
then many places in the Continent which lie nearer the Sun. As in England then
France; nay Scotland, though it be situate so far North, has seldom more
keen and piercing Frosts then Paris, or some Citys of Italy, which are infested
with Terrestrial Winds. So likewise part of Asia, as in China where it runs to
the Southwards of Spain, the winters are most excessively cold: and in the 42
degree of Latitude, they have ice which lasts 3 or 4 Months together, by reason
of the Land Winds. For this cause New England, though it lies not so far
distant from the Equator, is incomparably colder then any parts of Great
Britain. And at Virginia, as I have been informed, the Land Winds oftentimes
surprise them with such an Exceeding sharp Air, that one would think it
impossible there should be those extremes of Heat and Cold in the same day. So
on the Coasts of Carolina and Florida, where they have for the most part
Midland Winds, the Colds are intolerable considering their no great distance
from the Sun. When as the Sea-Brise in most parts of Europe, is temperate and
mild: I have heard, that in the Isle of Jersy, the Myrtles, will live abroad
all winter, being cherisht on every side, with the tepid vapors from the Sea;
and that little ice they have is soon gone. It Is also observable near the Sea
side here in England, as in the County of Cornwall, that the Snow is generaly
melted in less then a weeks space, and the Frosts not so lasting as elsewhere:
Shall we say the acrimony of the Sea vapors soon dissolves the textures of the
ice and Snow, or that they choke up and repel those Frigorifique Corpuscles,
which are as the Coagulum to cement, and knit together the parts of liquids? So
likewise on the Coasts of Ireland, the Complexion of the Air is much Hotter
then in many other places of the same Latitude: and were it not environed with
the Ocean, who would think Island inhabitable, that lies directly under the
Polar Circle?

Yet this holds good only in the Temperate Zones: for in the Torrid, the
Sea-Brise is refrigerative, and abating the excess of heat; And contrariwise
on the African Continent the Land-Winds, which travel over the Burning Sands,
almost suffocate the miserable inhabitants, which are roasted into Skeletons,
and sometimes loose their Hearing and Sight by the immoderate Heat: Yet in part
of Guiny, where the Neighboring mountains defend them from the Easterly Winds,
and suffer the cool Sea-Brise, to blow upon their Coasts, how wonderfully are
their Spirits revived with the delightful gale? But though the Levants are so
pernicious, when they come reaking off from the Sandy Wilderness, yet being
Refrigerated in a long passage over the Pacifique Ocean, at the Caribbes, and
the American Continent, they become the coolest of all Winds, and the greatest
blessing which Providence could ever bestow on the New World, to allay the
otherwise insufferable heats of the Torrid Zone: Only part of Peru, though the
Soil be of it self fertile, and enrich't with all the bountys of Nature, yet
on this side the Mountains, the Land-Winds render it sterill and unfruitful;
when as Brasile enjoys a more Temperate Heaven, being bedewed with the
reflreshing Brise from the Adjacent Ocean.

From these several instances it appears, that the Land-Winds must needs be
more intensely Heated, between the Tropiques, then in these parts of the
World, that lie so far distant from the course of the Sun; And the Earth,
being a dense body, retains the Calorifique impressions; when as the
volutation of the waves so often changes the Superficies of the water, that the
same parts of the Ocean are not always exposed to the Celestial Beams: And
though it must be acknowledged that near the Aequinoctiall, the Surface of the
Earth, and consequently the Winds that blow over it, are much warmer then in
the Neighborhood of the Poles; yet without dispute the Ocean also is
proportionably as much Hotter then our Seas; And though the Sea-Winds seem
Refrigerative with them, which rather betray very great Symptoms of Heat in
these Countries; yet I question whether this, in some measure, may not be
understood Comparatively to the disposition of our Sensories, and that of the
Ambient Air. For, their Blood and Spirits being far more agitated then ours,
and also accustomed to a Climate excessively Hot; they must of necessity have
different Perceptions from us, who live in the Colder Regions of the World.

But beside these Vulgar or Elementary Qualities of Winds, they have almost
infinite Variety in their Natures, according to the several Subjects they can
operate upon; and their Propertys are various, as the different impressions
which they make upon other Bodies. For those which are Corrosive, in reference
to iron, or stone, may prove Pestilentiall to men; and one and the same Quality
have one denomination, as it relates to Beasts, a second to Birds, and a third
to Insects, according to the different Capacities of the Recipient. Some Winds
are observed to raise strange disturbances, and (as it were) Convulsions in
Swine. And those who keep Silkworms, are said to shut their Windows, and
protect them from the South Wind, which causes their sickness and death; but
readily expose them to the North, which conduces as much to their vigor and
health. So that we can never pretend to a perfect knowledge of their Qualities,
unless we understood their relations to all other bodies in the World.

But among the wonders of Winds, we must not pass by the Harmatans of Guiny;
which, for the time they blow, cause Wainscoats and Planks to open and gape,
making wide chasms in the most solid and imporous wood. I could insert many
testimonies of this nature from credible persons; several who lived in those
Countries, and not a few of our Seamen, have been witnesses of their strange
effects: I shall instance in one relation which was communicated to me by
Captain Peachy, who was long employed in the African Trade by the Royal Company.

The Harmetan Winds, so called by the Natives, come but once a year,
constantly in December about Christmas; and bring a very unwholesome Vapor.

Their arrival is for the most part at the East, and they go no farther then
the E. N. E. their continuance is 4 or 5 days, not blowing hard, but with an
easy gale: the Natives are full of Aches and Pains in these times, and care not
for stirring out of doors.

The Trees that are standing, during their continuance, will open, that you may
put in your knife and sheath: so will the boards of the floors, when as before
there was nothing seen, and after they are gone, they close up again to their
wonted place.

This may proceed from their extreme Siccity, when they blow off the Sands, in
that exceeding Hot Climate; as we see boards chop and gape, that are kept over
dry; and more in Chambers or Cock-lofts, then lower rooms; and so likewise most
sorts of wood, by lying long in the Sun, which exhausts their moisture: The
known remedy in such cases, is, to soak them thoroughly in water, by which
means, they oftentimes swell again into their former dimensions: so possibly
may the trees, and planks in Guiny, when the Harmetans are gone, and some
Moyster VVind succeeds, which brings with it a more Humid and relenting Air.
We have observed effects of this nature in some of our very Drying
March-VVinds; and therefore the workers of Musical Instruments commonly choose
to dry their materials at that time of the year; which, as they think, renders
them more resounding and harmonious.

I have not as yet had sufficient opportunity to satisfy my self in one
Curious enquiry which belongs to the History of Winds: only, thus much I have
heard, that, when a certain VVind blows at Florence, the weavers of the finest
silks leave off their work; finding by experience that it quite spoils the
Oriency and Brightness of their Colors; so that they can by no diligence or
invention seclude it out of their workhouses, to hinder the ill effects
thereof. It is a cold Wind, perhaps blowing off from the Snowy Hills, where it
gathers those corroding Salts, which alter the texture of the superficial
parts; and by causing new modifications of light, change the colors of silks.
As the richest and most florid dies of Scarlet are not only soon faded in a
shower of rain, but it has been observed, that they suffer prejudice, and loose
somewhat of their luster, if they be worn much in misty weather: and so
possibly certain species of Air or Winds, may be able to make the like kind of
impressions on those Florentine silks.

We find by experience that some Winds produce very odd effects in many
sorts of Animals and Plants; and others convey into the Air spirits so subtle
and penetrating, which dissolve the hardest of Metals. That inquisitive Jesuit,
in his Natural History of the West Indies, gives us an account of the iron
grates, which in those parts were so much rusted and consumed with the Winds,
that by only pressing them between your fingers they dissolved into Powder.
Which has likewise been observed of the Air about London (whether from those
Corrosive salts, or the great quantity of Sulphur contained in the Seacoale)
that it does not only spoil Tapistrys, and beds, tarnish the most polisht
silver plate, fowl linen and paper, and sully all sorts of Household-stuffe,
with it is Fuliginous steams, but has a very sensible operation on the Iron or
Brass in their Chimnies and Windows; which it corrupts, and causes to rust
much sooner then in the Country. I shall not undertake to Philosophise
concerning the cause of the former Phenomenon, unless we were better
acquainted with the situations of those places in the West Indies: Only we are
sufficiently informed, that in some of the American Kingdoms, the Earth
exhales very noxious vapors, that occasion a strange contagion in the Air;
though impartial Nature has recompensed this inconvenience with many blessings
which the Old World did never enjoy: In the plains of Peru they have a VVind
which kills men (if we may give credit to the Spanish writers) without the
least sense of pain and afterward by it is extreme Subtlety and cold, preserves
them from Putrefaction. Since the first discovery of Almagro, great numbers of
persons have been found dead in those Deserts; some lost their feet and hands,
that were rotted by these Virulent Blasts, which happend to the General
Costilla, and many others of the Christians who traveled into those parts:
Insomuch that the Spaniards, who formerly used to pass over the Plains between
Peru and Chile, rather undertake a laborious voyage by the Seaside, then
hazard the disasters which they might otherwise expect from these Winds. But,
I insist not upon instances, for which we have no further evidence of truth,
then the credit of the relators: yet we must suppose that there is quite
another Face of Nature in those remote Climates; therefore we ought not to
explode all things as false, that are only different from such observations, to
which we have been accustomed in these parts of the world.

The Winds near Serra di Lyone, where the Neighboring Mountains abound with
many putrid and Sulphurous exhalations, breath out in such venomous Blasts,
that they breed Pestilentiall Fevers, and other diseases in the inhabitants.
So very considerable are their influences, not only in other regards, but to
the benefit, or prejudice of Human life; For a kind Temperature of the Heavens,
Serene Air, and wholesome Winds, which is the Atmosphericall diet, are full as
necessary to the Health and welfare of Mankind, as good meat or Drink.

Those likewise which have their Origines from such Subterraneall Caverns, that
exhale noxious Fumes, like the Killing Damps in deep pits or Mines, must needs
by this means, mingle a great allay, and adulterate the purity of the Air, when
the virulent particles are carried and dispersed by the Winds: what can we
expect but a Mortal and unwholesome vapor from such places, as the Den of
Charon near Naples, where the deadly venom transpires insensibly through the
pores of the Earth, and suffocates all Animals that enter at the mouth of the
Cave. Empedocles, by stopping up one of these Poisonous Caverns, and hindering
the Eruption of the Winds from thence, is said to have cured an Epidemick
sickness which they had occasioned in all the Citys thereabout, whereupon in
Plutarch he was afterward styled (...): And in all other recesses under *(...).
ground, where the Pregnant womb of the Earth is stored with so many several
sorts of Minerals, and Salts, if they ascend from thence, they must needs fill
the Atmosphere with as great diversity of vapors: And therefore those Winds,
which are generated in the Sulphurous soil of Puteoli, smell of brimstone a
great distance from thence; and those which come from infected places,
propagate the contagion, and bring death along with the infectious Air.

Thus we see Winds are not all vested with the same Qualities, nor alike
friendly, or injurious to Human life; but they sometimes are replete with those
Arsenicall and Deleterious Corpuscles, that convey into our blood the seeds of
diseases; and otherwhile with such agreeable juices, that recreate and cherish
our spirits, and contribute to longevity and Health.

But the wonderful effects of Winds are more obvious to reason, then
perceptible by the justest criteriums of sense; since the invisible Agents are
diffused every where; and the Air is as the common Vehicle, or (...) of all
things, where so many different sorts of Saline and Mineral spirits are
continually Floating, and driven to and fro in the Atmosphere: So that, I
believe much of that Natural Magic, by which distant Bodies act upon each other
(though we usually ascribe it to Occult Qualities, or certain Sympathies and
Antipathies in matter) to proceed from no other cause then the secret
operations of Winds: For they are the Carriers of the Universe, and transport
from one place to another, odors, diseases, fertilising Salts, the seeds of
Animals and Plants, and most other things, of which we can give no account how
they came there; as vegetables, that spring on the tops of houses, or those
which are observed to grow on the walls of Castles, and Ancient Theaters; nay
sometimes whole Groves and vast Forests have at first had no other Planters
then the Winds.

But to attempt a full collection of all their Properties and Effects, must be
the work of Posterity; which possibly may require many ages e're it be brought
to Perfection: And to complete the many Desiderata of this Phenomenon in an
Universal History of Winds (For we have only the Out-lines of this vast
Design in Sir Francis Bacon) it would be advisable to make an exact Table or
Ephemeris, for many years together, and so daily compare the observations of
their Prognostiques, the Quarters whence they blow, their Duration and
Properties; how far they agree or differ from what has been already delivered
in Books. Many of this nature are set down by the Lord Verulam, but for the
most part collected out of Aristotle and Pliny, though with less improvement
then might have been expected from that illustrious person. However, since the
Learned World has been so long imposed on by Tradition; we ought, in the first
place, to be thoroughly informed concerning all matters of Fact, and afterward
consider to what Hypothesis they may best relate: and because That must be the
result of long experience, and observation, I can only commend this Province to
those curious Persons, who have leisure, either to make such new Discoveries of
their own, or detect the Vulgar Errors of former Times.

It should first be examined what influences they have upon Human Bodies; in
relation to their Sickness or Health: and those who are inclined to Gowts,
Catarrhes, infirmities in the Sight, distempers of the Lungs, Epilepsies,
Deafness, etc. might be able to collect observations of this nature; what
inconvenience they are sensible of from any sort of Winds.

Those celebrated Aphorisms of Hippocrates concerning their Medicinal
Qualities, ought to be considered; how far they are found Experimentally true
and consonant to the observations of the Moderns: For if we rightly understood
the different Temperatures of the Air, and Winds, and how to apply this remedy
to many distempers, it might possibly prove the most succesfull part of Physic.

Next, as to the Diversities which arise from the Quarters whence they blow:
whether the East and North betray not in these Countries continual Symptoms of
Siccity and Cold; and the South and West, of Heat and Moisture. Likewise, as to
their effects upon Animals; Since the South has a thousand Malignant
influences; and, according to our English Proverb, The Wind at East, is neither
good for man nor beast. Then, which of them are most agreeable, or inauspicious,
to the Vegetable life; what observations of this nature can be drawn from
Agriculture, and Gardening? which are those Winds that are most favorable to
the Sowing and ripening of Corn, or most pernicious for breeding worms in
plants, or for blasting and destroying their fruits.

What directions this Doctrine might afford to Architects, in choosing the
Situations of Dwellings: whether the Air of many houses might not be meliorated
by giving a freer admission to the Winds; since it has been observed, that
several Dwellings here in England, which were environed with huge woods, or
sometimes had only a clump of trees standing toward such a Quarter, have been
always obnoxious to sickness, till they happened to be cut down, and the places
rendered pervious to the Winds: Sometimes only the changing of a window, or
door, from the South, and exposing it to the North, has done as great a cure.
It is well observed in the Relation of my Lord Howards voyage to
Constantinople, that, at Vienna they have frequent Winds, which if they cease
long in the Summer, the plague often ensues; so that it is now grown into a
Proverb: that, if Austria be not Windy, it is subject to Contagion.

In the next place, what advancement might be expected from hence to the Art of
Navigation. Since, I am confident that more ships perish, by our ignorance of
the Winds and Currents, then by any other Disaster which happens on the Seas:
If the Masters of ships were obliged to give in Journals of their voyages to
all parts of the world; and these for many years compared with each other, we
should not only be able to collect a Complete History of the Trade Winds, and
Monsoons, and their variations in the several Latitudes and Meridians, (which
would be of very great importance) but should find, that there are many
Anniversary Tempests which might be very certainly foretold by the Seasons of
the year, and Provision made accordingly; Beside other useful Circumstances
of the Annual Motions, and Reversions of the Seas, according to the
Declination of the Sun (which hitherto most of our Seamen have thought to
proceed purely from chance) might be reducible to so regular observations,
that, beside the great improvements which would redound from hence to
Philosophy, and all Natural Knowledge; it would be of no small advantage to
the interest of Trade and Navigation. This noble Art is worthy of Philosophers
and Mathematicians, and the Mechanical part ought to be esteemed the least,
that should accomplish a skillful Seaman. So that, men of letters ought not to
despise this, as a rude and illiberall profession; to which we must be
beholding for the most considerable Discoveries of Nature.

Then, as to their Continuance or Succession: It has been noted that if the
Winds change conformably to the Motion of the Sun; as from the East to the
South, from the South to the West, etc. they seldom return thither again, at
least for no long time: But, if their changes happen in a contrary manner to
the course of the Sun, as from West to South, from South to East, etc. they
usually revert back again to the former points, before they complete the whole
Circuit of the Compass: We have this remarque in my Lord Bacon; and he
disdained not to borrow several observations of this kind, from Husbandmen and
Sheapheards; who are less within doors, and more concerned in all the
vicissitudes of the year, whether or no they are like to expect kind seasons
for their Corn, and flocks. It might likewise be inquired into, what
Prognostiques the Seamen have of the weather, in all parts of the world, where
they have different sorts of Tempests: I am informed, that they also commonly
observe, when the VVind has been long in one Quarter, if it pass into a
Quarter of the like Quality, it is seldom constant, but reverts to the former:
as suppose the East, if it change to the North, it frequently returns, but if
it pass by the South, and follow the Sun, the weather probably changes for
some continuance, and not per Saltum, as if it should skip from the East, to
the West, or from the North to the South, for then it is seldom holding. It is
not my design to multiply instances of this nature, I only offer at some few,
to compare the Mutations of the Weather, with those of the wind; and
questionless in a long tract of time, they might be reduced to some more
certain rules, then those in Aristotle or Pliny; at least better calculated for
an Island; which being invaded on all sides by the Sea-vapors and Winds,
seldom enjoys the same serene Face of the Heavens, for any long time together;
but is generally far more obnoxious to all changes of weather, then the
Continent.

Next, what certainty there is in any Astrologicall Predictions, as by the Age,
or Phasis of the Moon, Appearance, or Conjunction of the Stars, etc. The Rise
of the Orion is more particularized in Authors; but seems to be rather a
Concomitant of other causes, then of it self, the Efficient of Winds.

So likewise, what information we might receive from all sorts of Trades: of
what concernment it might be for Vintners to have their Cellar-VVindows exposed
to this, or that VVind; since Michael Angelus Blondus in his book of
Navigation, affirms, that the Easterly, and Paduanus in his Treatise of Winds,
that the Southerly, have a very sensible operation on the VVines in the Cask. I
have heard that some of the Vertuosi who pretend to great skill in ordering of
Cidar, find by experience, that certain Winds set it a fermenting more then
others, and render it turbid and thick; so that when they perceive them coming
to such a Point of the compass, they critically observe the just time for
botling it, to prevent these inconveniences. Rules have been prescribed to
Drudgsters, and Apothecarys upon this account, for the preserving their
Medicines: and happily some remarks might be taken from Cabinet-makers,
joyners, and other Mechanical Artists, in the drying and seasoning their
Materials, that might conduce a fuller History of Winds.

Lastly, it would be no less beneficial to the Advancement of Natural
knowledge, to detect the Falsity of those Assertions, which have been long
received in the world, from the great reputation of their Authors. As for
example, those which are set down by Aristotle, in the second of his Meteors,
and in the book of Problems, where he endeavors to explicate several
Phenomenon of the Air and Winds; as in the first Section. Probl. 8. 9. 10. 11.
12. 19. 23. and in the Twenty sixth Section. Prob. 3. 9. 13. 14. 15. 16. 18.
21. 22. 25. 37. 38. 40. 42. 48. 49. 56. 58. which I mention more particularly,
because I find My Lord Bacon in his Chapter concerning the Qualities of Winds,
follows exactly the traces of Aristotle; and the generallity of Peripatetique
writers have made it their Non Ultra, daring to adventure no further in these
enquiries, then was prescribed to them by that Great Genius of Nature. So
likewise the sentiments of Theophrastus delivered in his Book of Winds, and
the rest of the Ancient Placits, ought to be more thoroughly examined; before
we receive them for infallible: many things in Pliny that relate to this
Argument, might be considerable, were they not suspected to be generally false:
But since the too great Veneration of Antiquity, has imposed so many Vulgar
Errors on the credulous world; it will be the most generous design, first to
free our minds from those prejudices we have taken up from Tradition, and upon
this foundation to superstruct a more Real and Experimental Philosophy.

I have only mentioned some few observations of that infinite Variety, with
which this fruitful Argument will entertain the Curious: And so from their
Causes and Qualities, proceed to the Prognostiques of Winds.

First we might enquire what the radiant, sanguine, pallid, nubilous, or other
Appearances of the Sun, signify to the predictions of Winds.

What the Age or Eclipse of the Moon, the picked, or obtuse figure; the greater
resplendency of the Lunar Horns, or the Conjunction of it with other Planets:
likewise Halos about the Sun, or Moon, the shooting, or twinkling of Stars,
etc. whether these may be accounted Prognostiques of Winds? In like manner, if
the Sun seem bigger then ordinary, or dart more refulgent Beams; or if it rise
in a Cloud of the same Color, etc. All these different Appearances of the
Heavenly Bodies proceed chiefly from refraction, the visual rays being distorted
by the Density of the Medium: and the collection of those rorid and nebulous
vapors in the Air, that cause these unusual perceptions in our sense, may
first generate Halos, and afterward descend in Tempests, or Winds.

Some prognosticate from Comets and Eclipses: and it would be farther worth our
remarque; what connection there is between certain species of Thunder or
Lightnings, and Wind; what predictions may be taken from the colors, motion,
and as it were Several storys, and ranges of Clouds, or the sudden appearance
of any Single one above the Horizon, in an extraordinary serene and peaceful
sky, as we observe in Tornados.

Others have been no less superstitious from the sudden palenes of Fires,
from the roaring of the Sea, from the resounding of Echos, or a noise heard
from the shoars, which happens many times before the Levants blow in the
Mediterranean; or if there be a Murmur in the Mountains, or Clouds without
Thunder; or if the Sea seem to rise, or swell, in those places where there is
no sensible VVind to irritate it. Some have employed their curiosity, in making
praedictions from Birds, and Water-Fowle, from Ravens, and Crows, the playing
of Porpuses and Dolphins, the spinning of Spiders, the leaping of Fishes above
the water, etc. Innumerable of this nature may be had from Aristotle,
Paduanius, Petrus de Medina, Ricciolus, Fournier; though for the most part
fallible and uncertain, we might offer at the Philosophical reasons of some
Prognostiques; but those, which have any evident connection between the causes
and effects, may be solu'd from the former Discourses.

But (as I before noted) the great Inequalities in the superficies of the
Earth, the several obstacles and repercussions from mountains, the different
Situations of the places, and Medium's in which they blow, the distance of
those Countries from the Poles of the World: Their respects to the course of
the Sun: whether they comply with, or resist the Natural Motion of the Air
from East to West etc have so many intricate, and nice speculations, that it
will be hard to lay down any perfect Theory of Winds. Yet certain it is, that
most mutations which happen in the Air, either as to heat, cold, or such like
qualities, are chiefly occasioned by the diversities of Winds; which, for the
time they blow, are the Sovereign Lords of the Atmosphere, and influence, and
dispose of it as they please: Beside this, they help to sustain, or dissolve
the clouds; they ventilate and purify the Stagnant Air, preserving it from
Putrefaction, and by this means are the greatest Benefactors to Mankind.

Their Number and Distribution, has been very different in the time of Homer,
only 4, of Strabo 6, of Andronicus Chyrrestes, 8, though in strictness, we may
suppose as many several sorts of Winds, as points in the whole Horizontall
Arch. The Romans came to 12: others have very aptly multiplied their number to
16; 4 answering to the Cardinal points of the Heaven, and 3 Collateral,
between every Cardinal Wind: But the Moderns, since the increase of
Navigation, have divided their Compass into 32 points, known in these Parts, by
the Dutch or German names; and by the Italian, in the Mediterranean Seas.

A Prosecution of the former discourses, concerning Whirlewinds in general:
with an Historical Account of the Tornados, Hurracanes, and other Tempestuous
Winds.
THe Peripatetique Philosophy constitutes no considerable difference between
Lightning and Whirlewinds; only, that the matter of the first is more tenuous
and rare; and the other, made up of grosser and Heterogeneous parts. We might
explicate this Phenomenon more advantagiously, if we suppose a Spirit, like
that of Nitre, to be discharged with a very violent Collision or Displosion,
from one Cloud; which meeting with another, suffers a repulse, and so causes
that Rotation which Aristotle styles (...); and in the Third of his
Meteorologics, assigns this cause for it; (...): so that, the spirit or VVind,
being pent up and straightned Meteor. l. 3. c. 1.
in a narrow space, and finding no passage out, recoyles, and whirls about in a
Circle: for though the progress thereof would be naturally direct (in which
all motion once begun, is continued, if there be no impediment, as De Carts
often observes) yet the density and resistance of the Cloud, gives it an
oblique or Vortiginous Motion: Aristotle supposes, that the Heat retiring
upwards, condenses the Cloud above, and therefore the eruption is made toward
the Earth; possibly, we may rather impute it to the Cold, and Pressure of the
Incumbent Air; or, that the Cloud, by reason of it is Gravity, more easily gives
way downward, and so descending in this kind of Circular motion, absorbs
whatever shall happen within the Vortex.

VVhirlwinds are divided into several species; and have acquired different
Appellations, according to the Diversity of the Matter, Motion or Distraction
of the Cloud. They are very particularly set down by Pliny; who makes the Genus
to all of them, Ecnephias, or Procella; which, if it Circulate, and cause a
gyration in the Air, is called Typhon, and sometimes, if it breaks out with
great violence and noise, Turbo; But, if by the struggling or rotation of the
included spirit, in the descent, it chanced to be inflamed: it was styled by
the Grecians, Prester; and if the Flame be exceedingly rarified and innocent,
they called it (...); which we may suppose to consist of a substance not unlike
the most Rectified Spirit of Wine. So that, Prester comprises not only the
Ecnephias, but has the Vortiginous Motion of the Typhon; beside, it is
inflamed, and is therefore, Typhon accensus; as the other, Vibratus Ecnephias.
Plin. Hist. Libro 2.


All which descriptions are well adjusted to the sense of Aristotle. The Stoics
held, that the Typhon was somewhat ignite, and that the Prester was made up of
Hotter, but the Typhon of more Rarified matter.

Seneca describes Lightning to be a very vehement, and the Prester a more
rarifyd Flame.

Epicurus allows of no Fiery eruption out of the Clouds, but Lightning.

Now we may imagine, that the Nitro-Sulphureous, or other Mineral Spirits,
being pent in, and besieged by an obstinate Cloud, and finding no way out, at
last, both from the Continual rotation of the Subtle Matter within, and
compression by the Air or Winds from without, may by long struggling set
themselves at liberty, and violently rend off some part of the Cloud, which,
falling into the Sea, causes Tempests and the Sinking of ships, and there-upon
is likewise denominated (...), because after the Fall it commonly causes a
Whirlpool in the water.

This Ecnephias oftentimes subverts houses, and tares up trees by the roots;
and it is usual to see Cocks of Hay, elevated by it, and as it were, dancing in
the Air. For bodies no more solid then Clouds, being charged with such Spirits
or Salts, not less active and impetuous then Gunpowder, may by their violent
Agitation, from some contrary Currents of VVind, cause these kind of Eddys in
the Atmosphere; which is subject to so many inequalities and vicissitudes,
sometimes from the condensation of vapors by Cold, and otherwhile by the
rarefaction of them, from extraordinary Heat; So that there must needs follow
strange disorders and Whirlwinds, by what means soever, the Tension or
Compression of the Air, becomes greater, then the Dimensions thereof will
naturally permit.

The Tornados are variable Winds, called in the Portugal lanlanguage Travados,
but most significantly by the Greeks, Ecnephias from (...) Nubes; for their
surest Prognostique is a Thick Cloud, suddenly rising above the Horison, which
is easily visible in those Countries, where the Air is generally defecate and
serene.

The Cloud for its smalnes at first was called Olho de Boy, the Bulls-Eye; yet
this, from so insensible a beginning, diffuses it self by degrees, and at
last, covering the whole Face of the Heavens with a Canopy of darkness, causes
horrible storms, Thunder and Lightning, swells the raging Seas up to the Clouds,
which power them down in Deluges of Rain, falling rather in huge Cascades, and
by Bucket-fuls, then drops; sometimes together with Hailstones of prodigious
bulk: so variable and unsteady are the Tornado-Winds, so little obliged to any
certain law, that they commonly shift all the Points of the Compass in the
space of an hour, blowing in such sudden and impetuous gusts, that a ship
which was ready to overset on one side, is no less dangerously assaulted on
the other; sometimes they shift without intermission, and otherwhile they blow
in starts, so that you shall have a perfect calm between every puff: Let a
fleet of ships sail as near as they can without falling fowl on each other,
and they shall have several and contrary Winds: You shall be alarmed with
many of them in the same day, most toward the coasts of Africa, for half an
hour or three quarters at a time: and were they equally lasting, as impetuous,
few would be invited thither by the Guiny gold, or venture to cross the Line
for the richest Merchandise of the East.

Our Seamen commonly meet with the Tornados from the 10th, sometimes the 11th,
and 12th degr. of N. Lat. likewise in the Tropic of Capricorn near the
Promontory of Cape Bon Esperance; where the fatal cloud rises as only a small
spot in the Air, and then displaies it self, spreading like a Carpet over the
top of the Mountain; which the Seamen espying, though in the calmest weather,
immediately furle their sails, and provide for the ensuing storm, that not long
after descends in lightning and Winds, being the more terrible because it
begins with the utmost fury at first, and the changes of the points sudden, as
the twinkling of an eye. You shall have a treacherous Calm, a dreadful
tempest, and in an hours space, the sky clear again, and the Sea smooth as
glass: The Portugues in their discoveries of the Oriental Indies, lost 9 ships
out of 12, which were overset by the Prodigious impetuosity of these sudden
Gusts. But we seldom hear of such disasters now adays, our Seamen being more
expert to govern themselves, in these dangerous attacques; and always jealous
of surprise in the African Seas: For the nearer you are to the Coasts of Africa
(as was observed by an Phil. Trans. page 1004.
inquisitive Traveller of late, in the Philosophical Transactions) so much
more dreadful is the Thunder and Rain, but the further Westward you go, the
Thunder, and Rain will be less, and the Winds not so uncertain; so that, if
you go as far West as the Meridian of the East side of Brasile, there is
little Thunder, neither does the VVind come down in such sudden Puffs and
Flaws; but between the 4 and 8 Degree, it is most inclined to Calms and thick
Foggs, and the Rains come not in such dangerous showrs.

I have not only consulted the most experienced of our Seamen; from whom I had
information in these particulars; but I find that many others, both English and
Foreigners, have in their Travells given us descriptions of the Tornados,
which would be superfluous to recite; I shall only add a relation out of Sir
Thomas Roe (in his East India Voyage) to confirm the precedent Discourses.

These Tornado-Blasts were so variable, that sometimes within the space of an
hour, all the several Winds of the Compass will blow; So that, if there be
many ships in company, you shall have them sail so many several ways, and
every one of them seem to go directly before the VVind. These strange Gusts
came with much Thunder and Lightning, and extreme Rain, so noisome, that it
made their Cloths, who stirred much in it, to stink upon their backs; and the
water of these hot, and unwholesome showers would presently bring forth worms,
and other offensive Animals.

The Tornados met with us, when we were about 12 degrees of N. Latitude, and
kept us company, till two Degrees Southward of the Aequinoctiall.

This Ecnephias not only visits the Coasts of Malaguta and Guiny, producing
vehement Gusts of of VVind with Rain, but reaches as far as Terra de Natal,
lying to the East-North-East toward St. Lawrence; and at Cape Gardafui near
the entrance of the Arabian Gulf, it infests those parts in May, as was
collected by Varenius from the Dutch Journals: In the Sea toward the Kingdom
of Loango, and that part of the Aethiopique Ocean, the Tornados are most
frequent in January, February, and March.

On the shoares of Guiny, when no other Winds blow in those Climats, and
within 5, 6, or 7 Degrees of the Aequinoctiall, they reign in April, May, and
June, which is the time of their Rains; and in other parts of Africa, they
observe other Months; For they have not only Etesian Winds, but Anniversary
Tempests in some Seas. Yet, to be fuller satisfied in the History of this
Ecnephias, I addres'd my self to Mr. George Cock of Greenwich (a Gentleman of
a generous and communicative Nature) who being interested in the Royal Company,
is well versed in all occurrences of the African Trade, and at my request
procured me this following account of the Tornados on the Coast of Guiny, from
a person long employed in their service.

The place of the Tornados rising is, E. N. E. to the N. N. E. they frequently
give 2 or 3 hours notice of their coming, by a thick black Cloud gatherd in
the Horison, with much Thunder and Lightning. Sometimes the Wind comes first,
very forceable, and then a great quantity of Rain; otherwhile, the Rain begins,
and is followed by a Tempestuous VVind. At this season the Blacks count it good
planting Corn, or Roots.

They make the Air very clear; so that a man may see 5 times further then
before: I my self lying at Anchor in the River, have seen the Isle of Princes,
at least 6 leagues up; when before, I could not see the Isle of Fernando do
Poo. During the Tornados, it is exceeding Cold, insomuch that the Natives and
other Inhabitants are very sensible of it for the time.

Their continuance is about an hour, or two hours at most.

I endeavored to understand from some of our Seamen, whether the Cape
Bon-Esperance was so very ominous for these kinds of Tempests; according to the
dreadful descriptions of Maffeus; and what notice had been taken by our
Mariners of the Bulls-Eye, appearing most about that Promontory? which gave
such discouragements to the Portugals, in their first attempts upon the Indies?
In answer to this, an Ancient East-India-Captain informed me; he had sometimes
seen that which the Portugals called Olho-de-Boy, rising on the Peak of the
Promontory, and described it to be, A Bright-red Appearance in a Black Cloud;
which afterward descending causes violent storms. So that they commonly expect
fowl weather, and encounter great difficulties about the turning of that Point;
where, as the Lands lie higher, so they are more obnoxious to Tempests; for not
only the Cape Bon Esperance, but several other Hills and High landsare
observed to generate storms; and in many Countries they have Mountains, from the
top of which, most of the Tempests thereabout are noted to take their first
rise.

I lately made enquiries of several ships that, during the Winter months,
never met with any Tornados, all the way from Brasile; They being most violent,
when the Sun is near their Zenith, and in the time of their Rains, when the Air
is moist, and affords greater quantities of Flatulent vapors.

May we not collect from hence that this Phenomenon also does principally
relate to the Sun? which passing from one Tropique to another, not only draws
the General or Trade Winds along with it, but causes the Monsoons, and
Tornados, and though the latter differ much on the shoars of Africa, from what
they are in the Pacifique and Brasilean Seas: yet this may be allowed, to
particular Accidents, the diversity of Latitudes and Meridians; Inequalities
between the Seas, and Mountains etc.

In the English Channel, especially about the end of Summer, many have been
surprised with these vehement blasts of Wind, with Lightning, and Rain, after
the manner of Tornados, and so in our American Dominions, by the
Caribbe-Islands; But no Seas have been so infamous for them, as those near
Guiny, where the Levants, or General Brise, being interrupted, occasions this
variablenes of the Winds; or for other reasons, not as yet nicely considered by
our Seamen, who though we must be forced to rely on their credit for matters of
Fact, yet they are able to assist us but very little in determining the Causes
of things, that must depend on a thousand minute observations in the places
where they happen.

The Coasts of Monomotapa, and generally the more Southerly and Maritime
Regions of Africa, are said to abound with diverse sorts of Minerals, and the
Nitro-sulphureous Spirits, if they escape from under the Earth or Sea, must
necessarily by their mutual conflicts, and accension in the Air, cause the
most terrible Lightning and Whirlwinds: Moreover, the Sun, then in their
Zenith, is more powerful; and the Spacious Aethiopique ocean must needs
furnish multitudes of Exhalations, that, gathering insensibly, at length make
up the Tornado-Cloud; which afterward may create Tempests two several ways.

1. By it is resolution into Rain and stormy Gusts.

Or, 2ly, by it is pressure; when the Cloud distills not by degrees in pluvious
drops, but rushes down impetuously all at once, driving before it a swift
Torrent of Air, which falls as from a precipice, and threatens the oversetting
of ships; If it chance to be strongly resisted, either by the extraordinary
density of the Atmosphere, or some other cross Winds that stop the career,
then it runs round in changeable Puffs to all points of the compass: and
though the Bulls-Eye which occasions the Ecnephias, may seem exceedingly at
first, chiefly by reason of the vast distance from the Earth: yet Ponderous
bodies, the higher they ascend, relapse back again with the more vehement
impulse: and therefore some have Tempestatem eo Majorem esse, quo minor uubes
apparuit; nam quo ex altiori loco descendit, etc. De Carts. Meteor. c. 7.
observed, the lesser the cloud appears at first, the Tempest will last the
longer.

The Ecnephias is sometimes inflamed, and then is called Prester, from (...)
uro, though the cause of it is Accension (or indeed of any Fiery Meteor
whatever) is not so easily explicated. Shall we conjecture that it consists of
some such inflammable Matter which easily kindles from contact and commistion?
or by the violent agitation, or displosion of certain Mineral Spirits and
Salts? or may not the Presters and Fiery Winds break out in Actual Flames from
the Vulcanos and Burning Mountains under ground? May they not proceed from a
sufficient collection of inflammable Exhalations in the Regions of the Air?
Presters being a kind of Continued Lightning.

Sometimes there appears first, like a Flaming Cloud in the Horizon, from
whence proceeds the Fiery Tempest, in a most astonishing manner; and some of
these Hurracanes and Whirlwinds have seemed so very terrible, as if there had
happend one entire conflagration of the Air and Seas. I was informed by Captain
Proud of Stepny, a person of great experience and integrity, that in one of his
Voyages to the East Indies, about the 17 degree of South Latitude he met with a
Tempest of this nature, toward the Coast of India; of which I had some
particulars extracted from his Journal: First, contrary to the course of the
Winds, which they expected to be at S. E. or between the South and East, they
found them between the East and North; the Sea extremely troubled; and, which
was most remarkable and Dreadful, in the N. N. W. North and N. N. E. parts of
the Horizon the sky became wonderfully red, and inflamed, the Sun being then
upon the Meridian; These were thought Omens of stormy weather; which afterward
happened according to their suspicions: and as the Darkness of the night
increased, so did the Violence of the VVind, till it ended in an extreme
Hurricane; which an hour after Midnight, came to such an height, that no Canvas
or sails would hold; and 7 men could scarce govern the Helm. But that which I
mention as most considerable to our purpose, was, that the whole Hemisphere,
both the Heavens and raging Seas, appeared but as one entire Flame of Fire; and
those who are acquainted with the reputation of this Grave Person, will find no
just reason to distrust the truth of the Relation.

Although these Fiery Whirlwinds are to be reckoned as the most wonderful
events in Nature, yet we have frequent examples of them in Historians and
Philosophers: One the most memorable which ever I read of, was known, some
years since, here in England; and described at large in the Public Gazet: it
run a long in a tract, as a dreadful Torrent of Fire, destroying all places
wherever it came; and, if I mistake not, did much damage in Lincolne-Shire; but
I cannot now recollect the particulars, though, as I remember, it happend since
the last Dutch war.

They have a strange kind of Ecnephias toward the Arabian Gulf, which rises
from the North; where also they have oftentimes Sandy Tempests; and that not
only in Afric, near the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, (as seems to have been noted
by Herodotus) but especially in Arabia; where the Floating Sands are driven by
the Winds, and sometimes have overwhelmed no less then six thousand persons at
once, traveling in Caravans from Aleppo on their way to Babylon.

I shall conclude with a Description of Hurricanes, which have the greatest
affinity in their Nature to the Tornados, but far more lasting and violent:
by some, they are called Huracanos, and by others, Orancan: Yet I rather think
the word was first borrowed of the Natives, and deduced from a Barbarous
Origin.

We seldom hear of any Hurricanes but between the Tropiques, and within the
jurisdiction of the General, or Trade-VVind; which blowing perpetually from
the Eastern points, if it chance to be repelled by a Land-Brise, or any
contrary Motion from the West; This must needs occasion strange Conflicts and
Seditions in the Air: and, were our senses fine enough to discern the
invisible commotions of the Atmosphere, we should see it oftentimes disturbed
and Fluctuating, no less then the most Tempestuous Seas.

They are not alike terrible in all places between the Tropiques, but reign
more especially near High shoars and Islands that lie Eastward from the
Continent; so that they infest the Philippine and Caribbe-Isles, more then any
other parts of the Habitable World.

Nearer the Line it is most inclined to Calms; and though in the Torrid Zone,
there is but one Set VVind all the year round, yet they are also extremely
subject to Tempests, whenever the Levants encounter any opposition from the
West. For although (as I before noted) the progress of Wind is Naturally
direct, yet meeting with any impediment, it whirles about in a Circular and
Vortiginous Motion. This cause was assigned by Dorisi of the dangerous storms
that happen near the Aequinoctiall: and (not to instance in several others,
who have declared for the same Hypothesis) Ricciolus, and more expressly
Varenius, in his Geography, gives the like account of these Typhons, or
Hurricanes:

Causa Typhonis procul dubio est, quod Ventus ex aliqua plaga erumpens, versus
aliam, in hac reperit impedimentum, etc. Potest etiam esse ab oppositis Ventis
simul spirantibus, etc.

We see these kind of Eddys in Rivers, when the Course of the Channel is stopped
by a damme or Bank; at least when two contrary Currents meet; And I believe the
Phenomenon of Hurricanes might be sufficiently illustrated from Hydrostatique
experiments, were it not my intention rather to prosecute their Natural
History, then to determine their cause. Though I shall endeavor to collect
such observations, as may not obscurely hint to us the fittest Materials, on
which to superstruct an Hypothesis. But we cannot safely adventure upon this
Arduous attempt, without more exact discoveries of many particular
Circumstances, and Accidents, which are of greatest importance to these nice
Speculations.

I should enquire what Anniversary Winds blow either in Guiana, or the
Neighboring continent; especially from the West, in those Months which are
most suspected for Hurricanes.

Then, what judgment can be made of their Causes, from their Prognostiques:
since I am assured from very good hands, that they have oftentimes been
foretold by the Indians. Moreover, the Influences of the Sun, the nature of the
Currents and Shoars; the Phasis of the Moon, etc. ought not to be neglected by
the Inquisitive Naturallist.

Lastly, whether they are not frequently accompanied by Earthquakes, as I have
been informed by some who were Planters in the West Indies, which was likewise
taken notice of in that excellent History of the Caribbes, of an Hurricane
which happened in the year 1563 together with an Earthquake. For the Included
Spirit, which caused that Palpitation in the Bosom of the Earth, being
afterward releast from it is imprisonment, might occasion these dreadful
Tempests and Winds. Fournier (who is generally reputed an Author of good
credit, and skillful in what relates to Hydrography) mentions an Inundation on
the Coasts of America, an Eruption of a Burning Mountain, and an Earthquake
near the same time; which for the memorableness of the event, I shall set down
in a few lines.

Thirty five leagues on the South of Lima, is situate a Famous Port called
Hisco; and a Town in which most of Noblesse and persons of Quality do reside;
who perceiving one day, that the Sea retired all at once, from their shoars,
and left the River dry, great Numbers of people flock't together on the shore,
to behold so extraordinary a sight; little suspecting the ill destiny which was
to attend them: For, presently after, they saw a great and sudden tumor of
the Sea, and perceived the Water to boil, and the waves to swell, and roll one
upon another; not like Waves, but Mountains of water, so high, that there
remained no hope of saving their life's by flight; expecting every moment when
they should be Swallowed up by the Sea: so that, the Ocean quitting it is
ordinary Bounds, made an excursion for three Hundred leagues; overturned the
houses and trees, and left the Country desolate: the ships sailed over the
highest walls, during this wonderful Inundation. Canama, a noted Village
distant 230 leagues from Lima, was destroyed with it is Port, and many other
places; more especially the Town of Arica, which lost in the Harbor many ships
richly laden, to the value of a Million in Gold. The Mountain Onerate, which,
some years since, had vomited out a great quantity of Ashes, began a very
terrible Conflagration, and was followed by a sudden Trembling of the Earth,
which in less then a quarter of an hour, swallowed up several Villages; that
there was scarce ever a more Dreadful Earthquake.

It is not unusual to have Inundations of the Seas, Eruptions of Burning
Mountains, Earthquakes, and then Violent Tempests, like Hurricanes, to happen
about the same time, and probably from the same Cause: For the
Nitro-Sulphureous spirit which causes the Trembling of the Earth, and that
stupendous commotion of the Seas, may afterward break loose into the most
Horrid conflagrations, and Winds: especially, in such places that abound with
these Thundering Minerals; which, if we consider their Active nature, are the
fittest Materials for Hurricanes. I know not how far it may be thought a
confirmation of this, that Bray-Brook in Northamptonshire, where (as was at
large described in the last of the Philosophical Transactions) there happened
that dangerous Whirlwind the last year, has been a place much subject to
Earthquakes. But I return from this digression, to the Hurricanes of the
West Indies, where it seems to me very odd, that they should be so dreadful in
some places of the Caribbe-Islands, insomuch that Mevis and St. Christophers,
have several times been almost depopulated by them, when they never reach to
Jamaica, on the one side (happily as lying without the Vortex of the Whirlwind)
nor on the other, beyond Barbados, where they have seldom more then the Tail
of an Hurricane, though it is not far situate from St. Christophers, Porto
Rico, Gardaloupe, and other Islands, where they rage with the greatest violence.

They are no strangers to the Moluccas, and Philippines, and we have most
incredible relations of the storms in the way to Japan, which have carried
ships a considerable distance from the Sea, up the Dry-Land: Some have been
miserably wrackt, and buried in the waves, others split in a thousand pieces
against the Rocks, that scarce one ship in five escapes these diasters in the
Tempestuous Months about Autumn, or at the change of the Monsoons. From hence
we may collect this considerable remarque, That they never happen but on the
Eastern Shoars, where they are Fatal to the Chinese and Caribbe-Seas, and so
as far as the River of Plate; likewise to that part of Afric from the Cape to
St. Lawrence, and the Adjacent Isles: when they are altogether unknown to the
African Ocean, from the Canaries to Cape Bon Esperance, are never heard of at
New Spain, or the Coasts of Peru, nor toward any other western parts of
America; because there the Winds, which blow off from Land, make no opposition
against the General Brise, but comply with the Constant motion of the Air
between the Tropiques, from East to West: For the shifting of the Trade-Wind
from the Easterly Points, is usually the first Onset of an approaching
Hurricane.

Yet, however these suspicious of mine be received, I think it cannot be
rationally disputed, but that those direful Tempests have their first rise
from the Western Continent: for we seldom encounter them very remote from
Land, and the experienced Masters-of-ships are never jealous of Hurricanes in
the Spacious Ocean; or, if they perceive them coming, immediately make out to
Sea, where their fury is much less, then near the Shoars.

They are most to be dreaded about the end of Summer, in the Months of July,
and August: For both the Winds and Seas, imitate the Motions of the Sun, and
being dilated by the Celestial heat, annually revert from North, to South; and
from South, to North again; so that the Sun hasting from one Tropique to
another, causes the like sudden Conversions in the Currents and Winds; and
being the most Universal Efficient, must needs be principally concerned in all
vicissitudes of the Sublunary World.

Hurricanes are usually preceded by an extraordinary Tranquillity of the
Heavens and Seas: possibly, some Counter-Winds may for a short space balance
another, and bring the Air to an Equal poise. So that, those who happen to be
in the Center of the Whirlwind are at first sensible of no disturbance; as we
see in Eddys or Whirl-pools of water, that, while the Circumference is
violently agitated, in the middle it continues for some time, quiet and calm.

I have already too long digres'd from my first design, which was to
contribute, what I could, to their History; and for this end, I have collected
several relations which may be of greatest importance to make a fuller
discovery of their nature, and the Miraculous Effects of Hurricanes: The first
is out of Battista Ramusio; and though I am assured, that the best accounts are
to be had from Oviedo, and other Spaniards, and the descriptions they have made
of the New-World, yet their books are so rarely to be met with, that very few
of the Spanish Journalls come to our hands, but what were first translated into
other Modern languages, as this, of two several Hurricanes at the Island of
Hispaniola: I made diligent enquiry after Gonzalo D' Oviedo, which is a book
fit to be consulted upon this occasion; which I at last found in the University
Library done into Italian by Gio: Battista Ramusio, with several other
Portugal and Spanish Journals, where I met with the following descriptions of
these Hurricanes in one of the Caribbe-Islands.

Hurricane in the Language of this Island signifies properly a most excessive
Tempestuous storm: and in effect is nothing else, but an extraordinary great
Wind, and Rain together.

It happened on Wednesday the third of August in the year 1508 (Don Francisco
Nicola D' Ovando the great Commendator, being Governor of this Island) very
near midday, that there rose upon a sudden a very great Wind, accompanied with
Rain; which, in one and the same instant, was taken notice of in many remote
parts of the Island; and hence, by reason of it, great losses immediately
followed in the fields; and the Country farms remained utterly wasted and
destroyed: in this City of St. Domenico it bore to the Ground all the houses of
straw which were in it; and some too which were built with stone were extremely
battered and endangered: Nay in that Country which they called the Happy
Adventure, all the houses were levelled to the Earth; from which accident the
name of the Misadventure was afterward given to it, by reason of the great
numbers which there underwent a Total Ruin: and that which was worst, and
most sensibly afflictive, that in the Haven of this City were destroyed more
then twenty ships, pinnaces, and other vessels: The VVind was North, and so
strong that the Mariners perceiving the sudden increase, threw themselves into
their Boats, and went to cast more Anchors into the Sea, and to fasten and
secure their vessels with stronger Cables; But to such a height grew the
Tempest, that all provision which was made to resist it, proved useless, and
ineffectuall, because every thing broke, and the Wind with an incredible force
drove all the vessels, both small and great, down the River, out of the Port,
and Carried them into the Sea, some it stranded across the shoars of that
River; others were sunk and never appeared more: but afterward, the VVind
changing upon a sudden to the contrary point, the South Wind, with no less
violence and fury, rose to an equal height, with the former North Wind;
whence, beyond all apprehension, some vessels were furiously driven back again
into the Port, and as the North Wind had forced them to Sea, so this Opposite
drove them back again into the Harbor against the stream of the River. These
very vessels we afterward obsered to move down the stream, without perceiving
any more of them then the Cages or Tops of their Masts, for their Hulks sunck
totally under water. Many men were drowned in this calamity, and the extremity
of the Tempest lasted Twenty four hours, even till the next day Noon; but
ceased not so, in an instant, as it began: Such an one it was, that many who
saw it, and are yet living in this City, do affirm, that it was the most
Affrightfull and Horrid spectacle, that could possibly be looked upon with
human eyes: and they report the Appearance to be such, that it seemed as if
Hell had stood open, and the Infernal spirits carried those vessels from one
place to an other; The Wind hurried away in a Body together many men, diverse
Bowshoots through the streets, and fields, without any possibility to stop or
help themselves; many of whose heads were miserably shattered and broken: It
drew by force some stones out of the midst of the walls, it threw down and
broke in pieces many thick Woods turning them upside down; hurling the trees of
others at a very great distance. In short, the loss occasioned by this
Tempest, was exceeding great and General to the whole Island. The Indians say,
that at other times here have used to be Hurricanes, but not any like This had
ever yet happened; neither in theirs, nor their predecessors times; so that by
this Horrible Tempest many were slain, and their Estates and Goods ruined; both
in this City, and in the greater part of this Island, but chiefly their Farms
in the Country.

The Admiral Don Diego Colombo came the year following being (1509) into this
City, the tenth of July, and on the twenty ninth of the same Month, there arose
another Hurricane, greater then that already mentioned, but yet it made not so
much spoil among the Houses, though in the Fields a much greater. There have
been others since, but never Such, nor so Stupendous as these. It Is believed
and asserted by the Catholics, that since the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar
has been placed in the Churches of this City, and in the other Regions of this
Island, these Hurricanes have ceased. Certainly, whosoever has passes by some
Woods of great and thick standing trees, where the Hurricanes have arrived, has
seen things of much wonder and amazement. For one might then behold trees,
innumerable, and those extreme bigg, drawn up with their roots, which were as
long as was the Tree even to his highest top-branch, others cleft asunder in
many pieces; and in such a manner placed one upon an other, that it appeared
exactly a Diabolical operation. I my self have seen in some places the whole
territory covered with eradicated, and cleft trees; and placed one upon
another with wonderful Entanglings. And because we were to go from thence,
and pass through those very Countries and woods, thus rent asunder and
intricated, having no other way so safe to our design (the great Rivers
interposing us, together with the sharp Craggs of Mountains, the deep Valleys,
and the thorny, and close Woods, and many other difficulties; beside the
suspicion of the enemy, and the Ignorance of the country) so that it was very
observable to see how our men went clambring, eight or ten yards one higher
then the other, from tree to tree, and from bough to bough, toyling themselves
in the prosecution of their way; whence going on through all their
Molestations, they felt the most extreme Torture and Anguish, with hope to
attain the safest way, though by a passage so infinitely obstructed; and
continually some of our companions came out from the trees thus plagued,
crushed, and their clothes wholly torn off, and the skin flead off from their
hands; The trees were excessively bigg; and stupendous it was to see them in
this manner, and at so great a distance from the place, where they first grew,
so heaped, entangled, and interwoven one within another, that, as we have said
already, it appears no other then the work of the Devil. I have many pregnant
Testimonys in the City of the two Hurricanes, that I now describe, which in our
Times happened in this Island, and there are yet some remains of the Damage it
did in my own house; several other persons throughout the Island then lost
most of their riches, as there are yet many more in Spain, who felt the fury of
the first Hurricane, to their utter ruin, and loss of their ships. In a word,
such were these two Tempests, that their memory will last, as long as those now
living on the place, and therefore it is fit that some notice of them remain
ever to Posterity.

I have made choice of another account out of the History of the
Caribbe-Islands, written by an Ingenious Frenchman: and I have lately met with
several other relations both of the French and English, who lived upon St.
Christophers, miserably deploring the Subversion of their houses, and the ruin
of their Families and Estates by Hurricanes: but I forbear to insert them
among the rest of my papers, because they contain no delightful variety, being
only the same Tragedy acted over again; and, for the most, of the like Nature
with this which follows.

Hurricanes are terrible and violent Tempests, which may be termed the true
images of the last Conflagration of the World: formerly they happened but once
in 5 or 7 years; but they are now become more frequent, since the Antilles were
inhabited, for there was one in 51, another in 52, two in 53, and two in 56:
[Nay, in the Island of Gardaloupe, lying about the 16 degree of N. Latitude,
there happened no less then 3 Hurricanes in one year] The manner of them is
Thus.

Ordinarily the Sea becomes Calm on a sudden, and Smooth as glass: then
presently after, the Air is darkened, and filled with Dense and Gloomy Clouds;
after which, it is all (as it were) on Fire, and opens on every side with
Dreadful Lightnings, that last a considerable time: after which follow
wonderful Claps of Thunder, that seem as if the Heaven was rent asunder. The
Earth Trembles in many places, and the VVind blows with so great Impetuosity,
that it roots up the tallest and greatest Trees, which grow in the VVoods;
Beats down almost all the Houses, and tears up the Vegetables; destroying every
thing that grows upon the Earth; and very often compels men, whilst this
Dreadful Tempest lasts, to catch hold of the trunks of trees, to secure
themselves from being carried away by the Winds; some lie in the Caves of the
Rocks, or retire into the Huts of the Negroes and Caribbians, which are built
exceeding low on purpose to elude the shocks of these Tempests. But that which
is most dangerous of all, and which causes the greatest Mischief, is, that in
four and twenty Hours, and sometimes in less space, it makes the whole Circle
of the Compass; Leaving neither Road nor Haven secure from it is raging forces;
so that all the ships that are at that time on the Coast, do perish most
miserably.

At the Island of St. Christophers, several ships in the Harbor, being laden
with Tobacco, were all cast away by an Hurricane; and afterward the Tobacco
poisoned most of their Fish on their Coasts.

When these storms are over, a man may behold the saddest Spectacles that can
be imagined. There may be seen Pieces of Mountains shaken by the Earthquakes,
and Forests overturned; Houses beaten down by the violence of the Winds;
abundance of Poor Families undone by the loss of their Goods, and the
Merchandise in their Cottages; of which they can save but very little. There
one may see the poor Seamen drowned, and rolling in the waves, with many brave
ships broken in pieces, and battered against the Rocks. It Is a thing so woeful
and deplorable, that should this Disorder happen often, I know not who could
have the Heart or confidence to go to the Indies.

There came to my hands, the last winter, a more accurate account of an
Hurricane, which lately encountered one of his Majesty's Frigates in the way to
the West Indies; and after frequent Converse with the Ingenious Captain at his
return, he was pleased, understanding my design, to send me a very Handsome
account of the particulars in a letter: The Contents were these.

The Contents.
SIR,
IN answer to your request, concerning the Hurricane, I can say little of it is
effects more, then what concerns our particular Damage, and Terror. It
happened upon the 18th of August last, 16 Hours after the New Moon, in the 14th
Degree of North Latitude, about 90 leagues from Barbados; It succeeded a storm
of 48 hours continuance at North-East; an unusual way of it is appearing, for
it commonly follows a Calm: It Is presage being a shifting of the Wind about
the compass, with the Appearance of a troubled sky, the only advantage we
have to prepare for it is reception. The Fury of it began about 10 at Night, and
continued till 12 the next Day. It Is observed that the Hurricanes of the New
Moon begin at Night, and those at the Full in the Day; as was noted two years
since, when the Lord Willoughby perished with 8 ships, and near a 1000 persons.

During it is 14 hours Fury with us, it shifted 14 Points, from the N. E. to the
S. S. West, keeping a method of changing one point an hour; and then shifted
Backward, and in it is retreat still abated, until it returned to the Original
Point, where it wholly ceased.

In the height of it, we had some Hail, the Stones whereof were very great,
which seemed to be thrown upon us for the space of the twentieth part of a
Minute, and then an intermission of 5 or 6 Minute, before any more came. The
Sea in the night seemed as a real Fire, and I believe we might have distinctly
perceived any object at a great Distance: In the day time we seemed rather to
sail in the Air then Water, the Wind forcing the Sea so high that we could
scarce make a distinction of either Elements.

The Terror of it was such, that I thought it the Emblem of Hell, and the last
dissolution of all things; especially the first two hours, which were attended
with so much Thunder and Lightning, so astonishing, as if we had been wrapped up
into the Clouds, or the whole Air set on Fire.

The strength of the Wind was so great, that it blew a Boat of 18 foot long
(fastened to 4 Ring-bolts, and each Bolt through a Ring of the ship) Clear off
the Deck: It blew away a Piece of Timber of great substance and weight, called
the Crosse-Piece of the Bits, to which we fasten our Cabels: it tore off the
Sails from the Yards, though fast furled; the Yards from the Masts, and the
upper Masts from the lower: It blew a way four men of five, who were upon the
Fore-Yard, three of which, by a strange Providence, were thrown in again upon
the Deck by the Sea, and saved. The last remain of its Fury was a Weighty
Grinding-Stone, which it left fastened between two Timber Heads, but it blew
away the Trough from under it. I had several Accounts from Particular Friends
how terrible it was in other places, but to me it seemed beyond all expression.

These Hurricanes are most frequent between the Aequinoctiall, and the Tropique
of Cancer: They more rarely happen between the Line and the Tropique of
Capricorn. But that which is the greatest Wonder to me, is, that they should be
so terrible among the Caribbe-Islands, that, in some of them, they have neither
left House, Tree, nor Plant in the ground, beginning at St. John De Porto Rico,
and so running Eastward: but the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, and Jamaica are
never troubled with them, though within few leagues of the rest.

There are some Old Indians that have given notice of them 3 or 4 Days before
their Coming: by what rules, I was never Curious to understand; it being enough
for us to study how to defend our selves and ships from them, rather then by
any nice enquiries to search into their Cause. Only thus much I observed, that
they have an influence upon the Sea, as well as the Moon, both upon them and
it; for I found by observation of the Sun and Stars, that there was a Current
tending so violently Northwards, that in 24 hours it would force us as many
leagues from our Easterly Course; which did so confound us, having neither Card
nor Compass left to Steer by (which, with several other Goods, were swept a
way in a Breach which the Sea made into our ship) that I think it was as great
a difficulty for me to find out Barbados (this place being nearest for our
relief) as Columbus, who first discovered those Countries. Sir, I have been as
modest as I could in giving you this Relation, because I know many who are
unacquainted with the violence of these Tempests, will be incredulous; But I
should be sorry, that all who will not believe this Account, should have the
same confirmation which I had. If there be any thing in it worth your notice,
it may engage me hereafter to recollect some more particulars; In all things I
shall endeavor to assure you that I am, etc.


Were it not sufficient, that a Relation much of this Nature was presented to
his Majesty; and that the ship, after it returned, lay at Anchor a long time in
the River of Thames; not without signal marks of the Hurricane, I might have
been scrupulous enough, to have desired the Subscriptions of several others,
who could attest the truth of this Narrative. I should only wish that some of
those reflections, which the Ingenious Captain is pleased to make upon this
occasion, were inquired into, by those who live upon any of the
Caribbe-Islands: whether the Hurricanes of the New Moon begin constantly by
Night, and those at the Full in the Day? which would be remarkable, though I
never remember to have met with the like observation in any other Description.
However, we can by no means exclude the Operations of this Influentiall Planet;
which has a very great Dominion over both the Winds and Tides; whether from
it is Pressure, or by what means soever it produces these effects: Some have
thought that the Moon has an Atmosphere of its own, and sends out effluviums to
the neighboring World; and therefore acts more Powerfully in the Perigaeum,
when it approaches nearest the Earth.

That wonderful light which appeared during this Hurricane, might be from the
Collision of the Lucid Salts, with which the Seawater is so deeply
impregnated: Light happily being nothing else but the Motion of some subtle
matter.

We have seldom heard of any Hurricanes but in the Months of July, August, and
September, and the Seamen hitherto have never been apprehensive of them at
other times; yet the last year there happened one in October which was very
unusual.

They are now become the subjects of our Gazets; and scarce a year passes but
we have Accounts from the American Plantations, of the Damages they have
sustained by Hurricanes. Not to mention the Tragedy of my Lord Willoughby and
his followers, we had several of a fresher Date: no less then five or six have
happened within these three years.

The last advice was from Antego, the second of September; the most part of the
New Town of St. John's was quite thrown down to the ground. Where diverse of our
Merchants Ships richly laden, some from New England, and one Irish Ship that
came thither for shelter, perished in the Harbor; together with many more
Vessels that were cast away at Meavis, and other parts of the West Indies.

I also take notice of another passage, where he says Hispaniola has been
exempt from Hurricanes, when it is certain that at the first Descent of the
Spaniards upon this Island, it was most obnoxious to them of all others,
whereupon they afterward took occasion to boast, that, since the Holy
Sacrament, was exposed in their Churches, they wholly ceased.

We may likewise observe, that the Seamen took the first Presage of the
Hurricane, from the whifling of the VVind about the Compass, which is Ominous
in those Climates, where it hangs generally between the Easterly Points. They
varied, no more then 14 Points in this Formidable Hurricane, though it has been
a vulgar error that they shift through all Quarters of the Compass. Not only
the Winds, but the Currents are observed to change, and run round in Eddys
before the beginning of the Tempest.

This Hurricane was preceeded by a storm at North-East, though it is
Universally agreed on, in the Relations both of the English, French, and
Spaniards, that they commonly succeed a Calm: So that you shall have the Sea,
for some time Placid, and Even, and not so much as the least wrinkle to appear
on the Surface of the Water. It Is likewise esteemed a sure Prognostique, that
the Birds (led by an instinct of Nature) come down before hand in Flocks from
the Mountains to secure themselves in the Valleys against the injury of the
Weather.

I believe, there might be excellent use made of the Barometer for predicting
of Hurricanes, and other Tempests, especially at Sea; since I am credibly
informed, that a person of Quality, who lives by the Seaside, (though happily
there may not be so considerable alterations in the gravity of the Atmosphere
far off at Land) can by the Barometer almost infallibly foretell any great
Tempest for several hours before it begins.

I find no mention of Salt Rains in any of the English Narratives; but the most
Inquisitive of the French and Dutch have reckoned it as a very Infallible
Presage, that the Rain, which falls a little before, is bitter, and salt as the
Seawater: which happily may argue a Collection of some Saline and Sulphurous
spirits, in the Regions of the Air, that encountering each other, may by their
violent Displosion be principally concerned in the Production of Hurricanes. My
Lord Bacon just hints in his Chapter [De Imitamentis Ventorum] that there are
certain Flatulent, and expansive spirits cuntained in some Minerals (and then
instances particularly in Niter) that not only imitate, but exceed the force
of most VVhirlwinds. But certainly Nitre alone can effect no such Wonders,
though by the addition of Sulphur it is soon inflamed, and capable of the most
vehement Agitation. For the Sulphurous particles, being extremely subtle,
loose the Textures of the Salts, and render them of the most expansive Nature;
wherefore in the composition of Gunpowder, the Ignition is quicker, and the
Displosion more impetuous, accordingly, as the Nitrous corpuscles have greater
or less allays of Sulphur or coal, which they use in a different Proportion
for Fowling-peices and Canon-powder.

Thus from the expansion of these Raging Minerals, (which after their
Rarefaction require an immense space, and are exploded with the greatest
violence) we can only expect such wonderful Effects as those of Hurricanes.
For beside the Subverting of Forests, and Towns, They have in some of the
French Plantations, removed Detache les rochers du haut des montagnes, and les
precipite dans les vallees, etc. Histoire des Isles Antiles p. 244.
the Rocks from the Tops of Mountains, and cast them into the Valleys, as if
they had been blown up with Gunpowder; so that, since we have no better way to
interpret Nature, then from the Sensible discoveries of Art, we may with the
greatest probability derive these Tempests from some such Nitro-Sulphureous
Exhalations, then which, nothing in the Mineral World, can be of greater force
to occasion Lightning and VVhirl-Winds. I shall not undertake to determine
positively the Mode, only I thought good to insinuate thus much, that these
Miraculous Emotions of the Atmosphere can hardly be supposed from the Agitation
of common vapors or Air; For so General a Conspiracy of the Winds, and as it
were a kind of Paroxysme which so much disorders the Frame of Nature, must
necessarily proceed from some very extraordinary cause.

FINIS.

