Rev. 1. 4. 4. John to the Seven Churches in Asia, Grace be unto you, and Peace
from him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven
Spirits which are before his Throne.

Rev. 4. part of the 3. verse. and 5, to the 11. Rainbow, round about the
Throne, in sight like unto an Emerald.

out of the Throne proceeded Lightenings and Thundrings, and Voices: and there
were seven Lamps of Fire Burning before the Throne, which are the Seven Spirits
of God.

four Beasts full of Eyes before and behind.

First Beast was like a Lion, and the Second Beast like a Calf, and the Third
Beast had a Face as a Man, and the Fourth Beast was like a flying Eagle.

six wings about him, and they were full of Eyes within, and they rest not Day
and Night* saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is,
(...) is to come.



Four and twenty Elders fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and
worship him that lives for Ever and Ever, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne, saying,

Pleasure they are and were Created.

Rev. 5. 6, 8, to the 10. Lamb as it had been slain, having seven Horns, and
seven Eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the Earth.

Harps and Golden Vialls full of (...) which are the Prayers of Saints.

the Book, and 10 Open the Seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of Every Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
and Nation.

Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth.

Isaiah 9. 2. Darkness, have seen a great Light: they that dwell in the Land
of the shadow of Death, upon them has the Light shined.

Matthew. 4. 16. Darkness saw great Light: and to them which sat in the Region
and shadow of Death, Light is sprung up.

(...).

(...)

Revelatio Omnium Revelationum.


This AVRORA, or Redness of the Morning Is the WONDER of the World.
Rev. 1.4. Rev. 4. 3. 5. 10. ^^ Rev. 8. ^^ 16.

Isai: 9.2. Math 4.16.

apocalypse W. Muller fecit.


Note.
It is necessary for the Reader, to peruse the Book of the three Principles,
and the Book of the threefold Life of Man, also with this; and then he will be
able to conceive aright of the Ground in this Book Aurora.

For since the time of the writing of this Book Aurora, Dayspring or Morning
Redness; the lovely Bright Day has appeared unto the Author. And all that
which is too obscure here, is held forth most clearly in them; which is truly a
great WONDER, as the Reader who loves God, will find.

Although the Author indeed had written this Book only for himself, according
to the gift of Gods Spirit, but knew not then the Counsel or will of God
concerning it.

Begun the 27 of January, in the year 1612. on the Friday after the Conversion
of Paul.
The Preface to the Reader.
Reader,
THe Books of this Author, that are already published, declare sufficiently the
high worth of his deep writings: But of all the benefits that do accrue
thereby, it is one inestimable Excellency of them, that they help the Minds
of all sorts of people, that will take pains to read and to consider them; in
the understanding of the Holy Scriptures: and that satisfactorily and
convincingly, without need of having any reference to the vast Commentaries of
Authors, either in the Learned or Modern Tongues: and they will help Men to
be able to discern the truth in the various Expositions and Opinions of all
Parties, also to still the differences debates controversies disputes and
contests; that all may be satisfied in a Loving friendly way, and so agree in
one and the same Truth together.

And among many differences in Opinion that Spring up, there is one weighty and
remarkable, arisen, since the Light within, and Christ within, has been
pressed more then Ordinary; one sort being judged to deny, a Christ without,
and the other, a Christ within; whereas it might be considered, that 1 Cor. 1.
13.
Christ is not divided, though he be every where in all places, and in all
things, and yet but once manifested in Romans 8. 3.
the likeness of sinful Flesh: Suffering, Dying, Rising from the dead,
Ascending into Glory; yet he that is not partaker of the same Christ within, or
is not made conformable in his soul and spirit to him in his suffering Death
and Resurrection, in this Life, in some measure, shall never be partaker with
him in his glory in the Life to come; But if we Romans 8. 17.
Suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him, at his appearing: Paul's
desire to know nothing but 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Christ and him crucified among the Corinthians; was not to know them to
crucify Christ, but the virtue and Power of Christ crucified in them: and if
the same Christ that suffered at Jerusalem were not in every one, the wickedest
Man in the World could not Heb. 6. 6.
crucify to himself the Lord of glory: And what Christ did in the Flesh once,
always had and has its powerful effect in the Spirit of every Soul that is
united to him within it self, and not otherwise: Therefore we should learn to
understand, how, it is Christ, that was Rev. 13. 8.
the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World, and then also in Abel when he
was slain by Cain: also in his own Body when Jesus himself was nailed on the
Cross and gave up the Ghost: and still suffers and is slain Ephesians. 5. 30.
in his Members; and as he will say at the Judgment, when all shall appear,
from Adam to the last Man that is borne of a Woman, Math. 25. 40. 45:
whatsoever is done to the Least of those that believe in him, it is done to
Christ himself, in them; and not that he will, only, take it as done to him,
as his words are commonly expounded; but it is really done to him: Joh. 6. 55.
His Flesh is meat indeed, and his Blood is drink indeed, and they that did not
eat and drink it, though it were within them (otherwise they could not doefo)
had ^o part in him: and this be said when himself was conversant with his
Disciples before his Suffering and Death; Therefore there cannot be a Christ,
within, in Christ without, but one and the same Christ within and without, now
and then, and always, from Eternity to Eternity.

There is another great difference, concerning Perfection and the attaining to
it in this Life: one sort condemning the otherf, or speaking that which they
understand to be spoken in the Scripture; but they do not endeavor to
reconcile the meaning of those Texts, which seem so extremely to differ. For
perfection; Math. 5. 48. Luke 6. 32.
Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, Job. 1. 1. and 2. 3.
Job was a perfect and upright Man. James. 3. 2.
If any Man sin not in word he is a perfect Man. And there is mention made of
the James 1. 25
perfect Law of Liberty: also, 1 John 3. 9.
he that is borne of God sins not, neither can he, because the seed of God
remains in him. Phil. 3. 15.
As many as be perfect, let them be thus minded, viz: Phil. 3. 14.
to press for the Prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. On the
other side: Romans 3. 10.
There is none righteous, no not one, 1 King 8. 46. 2 Chronicles. 6. 36. Prove. 20.
9. Eccles. 7. 22.
there is not a Man that sins not, James 3. 2.
in many things WE sin all. And the Apostle John, who no doubt was then borne
of God, says: 1 John 1. 8.
If WE say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us; if [wee] say, not if he or they say, or whosoever says: And while he was
in the instant of high Revelations, Rev. 19. 10.
he fell down before the Angel to worship him, thinking it had been God, but
the Angel said to him, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant.

And these great differences cannot be reconciled by the distinction of a time
or condition of Men unconverted, before they have attained Perfection, before
they are righteous or before they are sanctified: but they may be decided by
the understanding, what it is that sins in Man; and what it is in Man that
is perfect and cannot sin: For as the Soul in this Life enters into the one
or the other through obedience to it; that Soul is either righteous and
perfect, or wicked and imperfect, as the Scriptures testify: And Col. 1. 28.
ever one that shall be presented perfect, is to be presented perfect in Christ
Jesus, so that our perfection consists in him not in Self: and so the Gifts
of God are perfect, or else we could not be Ephesians. 2. 8.
saved by Faith, for that is not of our selves, but is the gift of God* and
therefore it may well be said by the Apostle Paul, after his high Revelation:
Romans 7. 18.
I know that in me, that is in my Flesh dwells no good thing; dwells, not
did or has dwelt, before his conversion or at the beginning of the writing
that Epistle: but at that instant dwells in him no good thing in his Flesh:
also, says he, Romans 7. 23.
I do find a Law in my Members rebelling against the Law of my mind, and
leading me into captivity to the Law of sin: So that Romans 7. 19.
the good which he would do, that he did not, but the evil which he would not
do, that he did. Romans 7. 18
To will was present with him, but how to perform it, that he did not know:
and then says, So in my mind I serve the Law of God, which is perfect, but in
my Flesh I serve the Law of sin, Also the Apostle John says, 1 John 3. 7.
Let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness, is righteous: and the
Apostle Paul again says, Romans 8. 14
as many as are led by the spirit of God they are the Sons of God: and Romans 6.
16,
his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of obedience unto righteousness
or of sin unto Death. Also it is said, Ezekiel. 18. 20.
The Soul that sins it shall die. Ezekiel. 18. 24. 26.
If a righteous Man (which is indeed a perfect Man so long as he is a servant
to righteousness) departs from his righteousness, and does that which is
wicked; in the wickedness which he does he shall die: and yet that which is
perfect cannot die. And on the other side; Ezekiel: 18. 21 22. 27. 28.
If a wicked Man turn from his wickedness and does the thing which is good
and righteous, in the righteousness which he does, he shall live, says the
Lord: Thus, a righteous Man can sin, and a wicked Man can do that which is
righteous: yet it is the Soul in the wicked Man that turns and does
righteousness in the mind, and the will, and the Spirit, and the heart, and
the Life, through Christ in the Soul: And it is the Soul in the Righteous Man
that does that which is wicked, in the mind and will, and spirit and heart and
life, through the Power of Sin, corruption, and imperfection, also of the Flesh
or the Romans 7. 24.
body of Death, which is this mortal flesh and blood: therefore we should Romans
6. 12.
not let sin Reign in our Mortal Bodies, that we should obey it in the Lusts
thereof. But we should Col. 1. 29.
strive after perfection; that Gal. 4. 19.
Christ may be formed in us: we should Prove. 23. 26.
give God our Hearts, and he will cleanse them for us, and make us 1 Samuel 13. 14.
after his own heart, and will make our Hearts desires and minds pure, and then
they are 1 Cron. 28. 9.
perfect; for nothing that is Rev. 21. 27
Impure, and so, imperfect, can enter into the Kingdom of God. Thus, in our
Minds, Joh. 7. 17.
if we do the will of our Father which is in Heaven, we shall know of the words
of Christ, whether they be of God or no: which they that heard them from his
own mouth and did not so, could not know. But we are not to condemn those
that have not attained to our mesure of Light, Grace, Knowledge, or Perfection:
but to let our Math. 5. 16
Light so shine before Men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our
Father which is in Heaven: and then they will say, 1 Cor. 14. 25
God is in us of a Truth: they will be able to understand it. If we be Romans 15.
1,
strong, we should help those that are weak in Light or understanding, and
should declare the Luke 1. 79.
Gospel to those that sit most in Darkness and in the shadow of Death, and
guide one another feet into the way of Peace, and then we shall be like him
who is in our hearts, Math. 11. 29.
meek and lowly, and so we shall find rest unto our Souls; and then, when He
who is now our Col. 3. 4,
Life, shall appear, we shall also appear with him in Glory. And when we have
received 1 John 2. 27.
the unction of the Holy one, in our Souls, we are then Heb. 12. 23
come to the spirits of Just men made perfect, and to the Church of the
Firstborn which are written in Heaven: and yet some that were so, did not
know by what Death they should glorify God: and in Death the Body is 1 Cor.
15. 42. 43.
sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption, sown in Dishonor, raised in
Glory, sown in weakness, raised in power: sown in imperfection raised in
perfection; for 1 Cor. 5. 53, 54.
this Mortal must put on immortality. Thus though we are risen with Christ in
our Souls, Spirits, and Minds, serving the Law of God in this Life with a
perfect Hear^, ^ay though sin dwell in our flesh, yet if we let it not reign
in our Mortal or imperfect Bodies, so that we obey it not in the Lusts
thereof; then the Holy Spirit dwells in our minds, and in our bodies, which
are the Temples of the Holy Ghost: but if we let sin reign, then our Souls and
Bodies are Denns of Thieves and Murderers, and the habitations of all Devils.

This for the present is my understanding, which I pray may be enlightened and
helped by the Father of Lights, from whom is every perfect Gift to my self and
all mankind my brethren: who have several measures of the same Light, and
diverse Gifts by the same Spirit: of which I desire to be made partaker from
themselves, and shall highly rejoice my self therein, with them.

But the Ground to the understanding the things here mentioned, and of all
things contained in the Scriptures, is exactly described in this Authors
writings.

For, they discover both where the Things themselves are to be found, in which
are hidden all Divine and Natural Mysteries, and likewise show, as with the
finger, how those secret things have proceeded to their Being and
manifestation, from the infinite Incomprehensibility, wherein Nothing can be
perceived, and yet All things have proceeded from thence; and how they have
come to be as they Are; to the discerning what the Effable Manifested Revealed
God is, and all Creatures whatsoever: and amongst the rest, what we our selves
are, and how we may attain the true only and eternal happiness and blessedness
of Life everlasting, with and in God.

And can there be anything more useful beneficial necessary and worthy then
this?

Also further by his writings we may come to understand, how Christ is the
Savior of All Men: and yet all will not attain salvation. Though it be
confessed, and must be granted, that Eternal Salvation is attained by some
Infants, also by some innocent ignorant Persons of years, that have been born
of Hethenish, Jewish, and Christian Parents; being such as have served God
according to the Law of their forefathers with an upright Conscience: as Paul
who was a Jew: and so the Eunuch, Servant to Candace Queen of Aethiopia, a
stranger; and Cornelius the Centurion, and all others fearing God, and working
Righteousness, in every Nation, are accepted of him, though they know nothing
of the Great, and Common Salvation that has appeared to all Men; as the
Apostles knew it.

For, if any be cleansed from his Sins, it is done by the blood of JESUS
CHRIST which cleanses us from all Sin, and this is effected in us and for us,
when we knew not, and though we know not of it, nor how it is done, in the
least, to satisfy a Soul that it may undoubtedly be convinced thereof.

And indeed, had not the Holy Scripture mentioned this thing concerning the
Blood of Christ; it had not been possible for any Man but such as the Prophets
and Apostles were, to have procured any that are now called Christians to
Believe and Confess it.

Neither can any understand this though he read of it in the Scriptures; but
by the Holy Spirit within himself, which proceeds from the Father and the
Son in the Soul of every one, and by the word in the Heart, the word of
Faith, which is God and Christ, even that true [Divine] Light which lights
every one that comes into the world.

The same also may be said concerning all those that have been, are, or shall
be saved, though they attain not the understanding of the mysteryes of
Salvation, in this Life, as those (...) who wrote the Holy Scriptures, neither
can any understand them as they did, but by the Same Gifts of the Holy Spirit
in the Soul.

Therefore let none boast that he is not born among those, that are called
Heathens, but among those, that were outwardly called Jews of old, or
Christians now, or of the Church of Rome, or Protestants or of the Reformed
Religion^^ Presbyterians Independents Separatists Seekers or Perfectists:
though every one of these have outwardly a high Prerogative and Excellency
above the Heathen, yet the lives and fruits of these not exceeding their's,
they will ^^se up in Judgment against these: but let every Soul, in Love,
rejoice, with all other Souls, in this, that God is our Father, in whom we
live and move and have our Beings, ruling in our Soules' and manifesting his
infinite Grace and Mercy, and bringing all things to pass, according to his
unconceivable Wisdom and Goodness, and according to the purpose of his good
will toward Men, which (...) his Eternal Gospel: To those that hearken and
yield, to his will and Word of Life, always calling, in the Soul of every one,
or else none could be condemned for neglecting and contemning it, as they shall
be: also provoking the Soul to forsake that which it perceives to be evil,
and embrace and Co-work with that which it perceives, to be good Holy and
divine within it self: therefore also let every Soul, Act. 17. 27.
groape after God in its Heart, that it may feel and know him whom to know is
Life Eternal, and feel the Hope of enjoying the inestimable good things that
are laid up for them that Love God, though few here know anything thereof: and
yet he will certainly give them unto us at that Day, which himself has
appointed, which will also assuredly come, though no man knows when nor what
that day will be or bring forth, but he to whom God does reveal it.

And indeed such Person's Writings, whose unsterstandings have been filled with
Spiritual Divine Wisdom, are to be prized above all others.

And though it be an exceeding happiness and joy to us that God has bestowed
so large understanding to those that have written the Scriptures, and therefore
we ought diligently and frequently to read and deeply consider them, yet in
most of the Mysteries thereof it remains very dark to us, we having so little
knowledge of the things it speaks of: therefore how highly, in exceeding Love
to the that the Deep and Glorious mysteries therein couched may the more
clearly be understood by us. eet his Aurora, Chap. 9 v. 14.
Scriptures, should we value and esteem the writings of this Author Jacob
Behme, which disclose the very things which are but briefly hinted therein, and
so fundamentally as to satisfy all the objections, of Reason that can be made,
and which do also direct us plainly in the way to find the infallible Conductor
the Holy Spirit, which will open our understandings, to discern those hidden
Mysteries mentioned in the Scriptures so long ago; that Romans 15. 4.
we through patience and This true comfort of the Scriptures in the Soul, comes
by understanding the spiritual sense of the Mysteries of the Scripture, not
the bare litterall sense or History.
comfort of them might have Hope; And yet but darkly, of purpose that some
things should be kept secret from the beginning of the world, and not revealed
till the due time and season in every Age, and some not till this last age
which is appointed for the manifesting of all mysteries.

And because this Author could not so deeply and fundamentally disclose these
mysteries, but in such significant though hard Terms of expression as he See
the preface to Jacob Behmes clavis, verse. 10. 11.
uses; he wrote therefore for the satisfaction of his loving friends, some
explanatory Tables, and a Clavis, which are already printed in English: yet
still for all that, they are accounted very difficult to be understood.

And I also, who have much and studiously traced his writings over, have found
them difficult, but far exceeding in recompense, the utmost pains that I could
possibly bestow upon them; I find also that the understanding of them comes by
Degrees, and frequent Loving conversation in all the parts and pieces he has
written; and yet also I must say that this book Aurora has conduced more to
open my mind to the understanding of all his writings, and of all Mysteries,
both Natural and Divine, and so consequently of the Holy Scriptures, then any
other helps and books which I could ever meet withal besides.

Which the Reader will also perceive, by the diligent perus^ll of this book, in
a continued order, from the Beginning and so on: and find See this Aurora, Chapter
3. verse. 96.
Whatsoever his heart desires or ever longed for, and that it is, as this
Author says near the end of the Preface to this Book, The Wonder of the World.

And though it was not quite finished at the time when he wrote it, nor ever
after, being it was taken away and kept from him till he had written several
complete Treatises, and so in them that defect of the Aurora was supplied in
abundant measure: for, instead of 30. Sheets which that book wanted to the end;
there are written of the same Mysteries, when he had more full knowledge, and
leave to declare it and set it down in writing, more then 300. Sheets of
Paper, which contain all Mysteries in succinct Terms very deeply expressed:
but in this, the Ground of those Terms are largely and plainly described after
the manner of the Infancy of his high Manifestation in a Childish way, so that
it is a large and most clear A B C, being the fitter and plainer for
Beginners, with which his other books may the easier be understood, and is a
summary contents of all his Mysteries, and may serve instead of a Manuduction,
introduction, and key to unlock all the difficult expressions, in his other
Books.

And that because it explaines the first Ground concerning the Seven
Properties of the Eternal Nature, which here he calls the Seven Qualifying,
or fountain Spirits or Qualities, which are the Seven Spirits of God, in and
from and to All Eternity, with Notes of Reference to the Book of the three
Principles, and threefold Life of Man; which are the supply to the want of
finishing this Book, and which he wrote down with his own hand, in their
several proper places by way of exposition in a manuscript of Michael von
Enderns, his own written Copy being kept from him, by Gregory Rickter the
superintendent at Gerlitz, and Published in Print with many whole verses Lines
and words left out, printed in high Dutch, 1634. But these Notes were added by
the Author, in the year 1620. and are here inserted, with Alphabetical marks,
in this translation into English, which is made from a Copy taken from that of
his own hand writing, which was kept laid up for 27 years together, till the
26 of November, in the year 1641, when it was brought to Light by D. P. S. A
Burgomaster, at Gerlitz: and presented, to the Prince Elector of Saxonies
Marshall of his House, George Pflugen, in Dresden: But is now in the Hands of a
worthy Person in Holland, and lately printed in High Dutch: and so the rest of
this Authors Manuscrips in his Hands, will be printed by degrees in Nine parts,
in the same Order the Author has written them in: This Aurora being the first.

But the Author was resolved to leave it unfinished to remain as an Eternal
remembrance of the endeavor to suppress and quash this Revelation in its
first downing: which will also be manifested at the Last Day, when all things
shall appear, to be judged whether they be Good or Evil; and everything
receive its just recompense of reward.

Therefore,

Dear Reader,

In true sincere Love to thee as to my self I commend this Book the Aurora to
thy reading whosoever thou art; desiring thy Prayers, that is, thy good
desires, that I with thee may be received into the Grace and Mercy of the
All-mighty Omni-present God, whose whole fulness is allwaies with and in
himself every where, and so be protected through this miserable Pilgrimage,
under corruption, in the vale of sinful Flesh, and that most hurting us, in
the greatest Pleasure, Honor, Pomp, Riches and fulness of Worldly content,
in this transitory Life: till we awak and meet together, in the everlasting
joy of our ever blessed God, who fills us throughout and al things else with
himself, within and without, which we should perceive, if we would learn to
distinguish, Him from the Creature in every thing.

I willingly yield my self to be thine, though with the acknowledgment that I
am one of the unworthiest of the Children of Men,

John Sparrow.

The Brief Contents of the 26. Chapters of the First Book of the Author,
called, the Aurora.
A Preface to the Reader, JAcob Behme's Preface, being a brief Information,
Concerning the Two Qualities, the Evil and the Good, in Nature from the
Beginning to the End. Page 1 Also the Contents of this Book Aurora. Page 23
Chapter I. Concerning the searching out, of the Divine Being in Nature: Also
concerning the Two Qualities, the Good and the Evil. Page 33 Chapter II. An
Instruction, showing how men may come to apprehend the Divine and Natural
Being: and further of the Qualities. Page 43 Chapter III. Of the most highly
Blessed Trinity ONE God. Page 54 Chapter IV. Of the Creation of the Holy
Angels. Page 74 Of the Divine Quality. Page 75 Of the Divine SALITTER. Page 77
Chapter V. Of the Corporeal Substance, Being, and Propriety of an Angel.
Page 86 Chapter VI. How an Angel, and a Man, is the similitude and Image of
God. Page 100 Of the blessed Love of the Angels toward God. Page 106
Chapter VII. Of the Court Place and dwelling; Also of the Government of
Angels, how it stood at the Beginning, after the Creation, and how it is become
as it is. Page 108 Of the Nativity of an Angelical King, and how they came to
be. Page 117 Of the Deepest Ground and Mystery. Page 118
Chapter VIII. Of the whole Body or Corporation of an Angelical Kingdom. The
Great Mystery. In his other Writings, called, Mysterium Magnum. Page 123 Of the
first Species Circumstance Quality or Spirit of God in the Divine Power or
SALITTER. Page 127 Of the Second. Page 129. Of the Third. Page 131 Of the
Fourth. 134 The Great Mystery of the Spirit. Page 135 Of the End of Nature in
this world. Page 138 Of the Language of Nature. Page 146 Of the Fifth
Circumstance or Spirit in the Divine power of the Father. viz. The Love. Page
153
Chapter IX. Of the Gracious amiable blessed friendly and Merciful Love of
God. The Divine Mystery. Page 159 What remains hidden, since the Beginning of
the world. Page 161 The Wrath the Original of Hellfire. Page 164
Chapter X. Of the Sixth Qualifying or fountain Spirit in the Divine Power: The
Sound. Page 176 What in Men, shall arise; in Heavenly Joy, or in Hellish
Torment: The Salitter. Page 184 How a Man may Quench the kindled Wrath of God
in this Life, in himself. Page 190 How near, God and the whole Trinity is, to
us. Page 195, 196
Chapter XI. Of the Seventh Qualifying or Fountain Spirit in the Divine Power.
The Divine SALITTER. Page 200 The Holy Gate. What the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, is. Whom We Christians worship. Page 206, 207 What the Law of
Nature is. Page 208 Why He only that sins shall be punished. Page 209 The
Prerogative of Christians. Page 210 Of the Word SALITTER. Page 218 How the
Imaging in Nature, is. Page 220 How our Life is a perpetual warfare with the
Devil. Page 224.
Chapter XII. Of the Birth or descent of the Holy Angels, as also of their
Government, Order, and heavenly joyous Life. Page 230 What the Angels do when
they sing not. What do they Talk of. Who they are like. Page 238, 239 What
Heaven it self is. Page 244 What the Angels walk upon. Page 254 Of MICHAEL.
Page 256. Of LUCIFER. Page 259 Of Lucifer's Creation. Page 260. Of URIEL. Page
261 The Beauty of Heavenly Forms Likened to Precious Stones. Page 263 Why
Baptism Instituted in the water. Page 265 How the Wisdom of God is
Incomprehensible. Page 266
Chapter XIII. Of the Horrible Fall of the Kingdom of Lucifer. Page 268 What
the fountain of the First Sin of the Angels is. Page 269 Where the fault lies,
that Lucifer is become a Devil. Page 280 The Eternal Geniture of the Deity.
Page 290 The Beginning of Sin. Page 293
Chapter XIV. How Lucifer, who was the Beautifullest Angel in Heaven, is
become the most horrible Devil. Page 302 The cause that God Created Angels.
Page 305 Of the Eternal Enmity. Page 316 Seven sources of Sin, and the Eighth
the house of Death. Page 318 Of the first source. Page 320 What the Eternal
Sport of God was, before the Time of the Creation of the Angels. Page 322 Of
the second source of Sinne's beginning. Page 327 How God possesses all, and
yet no Creature is He. Page 334
Chapter XV. Of the Third Species or spirit of Sin's beginning in Lucifer. Page
336 What Lucifer knew before his Fall. Page 339 When the End of this Time will
be. Also of the Fourth Species of Sins beginning. Page 342 Of the Sting of
Death. Page 345 What the Comprehensibility is. Page 346 Of the Fifth manner of
Sin's beginning. Page 348 Of the Sixth Form of Sin's beginning. Page 352 Of the
Old Serpent. Page 354
Chapter XVI. Of the Seventh Kind of Sin's beginning in Lucifer and his Angels.
Page 357 Of Sorcerers and Witches. Page 358 Wherein Naturality consists. Page
359 Of the mourning house of Death. Page 364 That God wills not Evil, nor can
do. Page 365 Of Pride Covetousness Envy and Wrath. Page 378, to 380. The final
Condemnation. Also of the last Fight and Expulsion of Lucifer and all his
Angels. Page 381 What will be called the Burning Hell. Page 385
Chapter XVII. Of the miserable state and Condition of the Corrupt perished
Nature, and Original of the four Elements instead of the holy Dominion of God.
Page 386 What is called the Wrath of God. Page 387 How a Comprehensible is come
out of an Incomprehensible. Page 389 How the Devil still presents the
Swine-Apples of Paradise before the Soul. Page 393
Chapter XVIII. Of the Creation of Heaven and Earth. And of the first Day. Page
394 Why Man in this World so loves Gold Silver and Precious Stones. Page 398
How shall I understand My self according to the Threefold Geniture in Nature.
Page 399 An Exposition of the first Verse of the first Cha. of Genesis,
according to the Language of Nature. Page 405 Into what the Soul Goes when we
Dye. Page 411 Of the Creation of the Light in this world. Page 413 Whence
fightings among all Creatures have their Original. Page 418 What Light was
before the Sun and Stars. Page 423
Chapter XIX. Concerning the Created Heaven. And of the Form of the Earth and
of the Water; is also concerning Light and Darkness. Page 424 From what Light
this Author has his Knowledge. Page 428 How it was, that Jesus Christ could
take the Devil Death and Hell captive. Also in what Heaven he sits at the
Right hand of God. Page 433 Where shall the wrath of God become at the End.
Page 435 Concerning the Form of the Earth. Page 438 Why the Earth is so Hilly
Rocky Stony and Uneaven. Page 441 Of Day and Night. Page 443 Of Morning and
Evening. Page 446
Chapter XX. Of the Second Day: How God separated the Waters beneath the
Firmament, from the Waters above the Firmament. Page 456 We should strive
against the Malice and Wickedness that is in our Hearts. Page 460 What the
Moon, or Luna is. Page 465 How the Heavens are not pure in Gods sight. Page 466
In what Heaven the Man that fears God dwells. Page 470 How Christ could go
through, the Doors being shut, Joh. 20. 19. Page 474
Chapter XXI. Of the Third Day. Page 479 The Diurnal Motion of the Earth. Page
479 Man is made out of the Seed of the Earth. Page 485 How Man's hope stands
in God. Page 488 How Sins are the Cause that the Deity is hidden from us. Page
494 Of the Seven Spirits of God, and of their Operation in the Earth. Page 496
Why the Astral Birth of the Earth did begin a Day sooner then the Astral Birth
in the Deep above the Earth. Page 506 Whence Mercy Existed. Page 509
Chapter XXII. Of the Birth or Geniture of the Stars, and Creation of the
Fourth Day: Also the Reason of the Title, Dawning, or Morning-Rednesse. Page
510, 511 Why the Spirit of Nature it self will open the Door. Page 515 What the
Stars are. Page 517 Sixteen Questions asked the Doctors. Page 519 How this work
is the Holy Ghost's Dear Revelation. Page 523 Of the Earth. Page 529 Of the
Vegetations of the Earth. Page 530 Of the Metals in the Earth. Page 531
Chapter XXIII. Of the Deep above the Earth. Page 538 Of the Astral Birth or
Geniture: and of the Birth or Geniture of God. Page 541 The Severe Geniture of
the Wrath of God cannot be accensible nor Elevable in God. Page 542 What is
called the Animated or Soulish Birth. Page 548 Of the Being of the Deity, and
of the Three Persons. Also whence the Living and Rational Spirit existeth.
Page 551 What is the Water of Life. Page 553 The Gate of the Holy Trinity. Page
555 Of the Kindled Nature. Page 565
Chapter XXIV. Of the Incorporating or Compacting the Stars. Page 565 Out of
what the Stars are come to be. Page 568 Why God did not Bar the Devil up
instantly. Page 570 Why the Stars should not be worshipped. Page 572 In whom
the Light of Life kindles from the water of Life. Page 574 Why Christ rested
40 hours and no longer, in Death. Page 575 God an angry God to those that hate
him. Page 577 What is the Water of Life. Page 579 Where the Word of this
Author, is Generated. Page 581
Chapter XXV. Of the Whole Body of the Stars Birth, or Geniture, that is, the
whole Astrology. Page 583 Though Body and Soul should fail, God is his Refuge.
Page 586 What is called the Corrupted Nature. Page 590 The Kindling of the Life
of this world: of Sol. Page 591 Of Mars. 592. The Highest Ground of the Sun and
all the Planets. Page 593 How the Eye of the Lord beholds all. Page 595 How
the Desire of the Flesh is the Lake of Hellish wrath. Page 596 The Annual
Motion of the Earth round about the Sun. Page 598 Of the Planet Mars. 601. Of
Jupiter. Page 602 Chapter XXVI. Of the Planet Saturnus. Page 609 Of the Planet
Venus. Page 612 The Gate of Love. Page 613 How Christ is the Light of the
World. Page 615 What is the Divine Being. Page 616 Of the Planet Mercurius.
Page 617 The Great Depth concerning the Center or Circle of the Birth of Life.
Page 618 Why is called Eternity. Also what the House of Flesh is. Page 622 What
has the Casting shovell in its hand: also, Of Man and the Stars. Page 624 How
Man became a living Soul. Page 627 The Deep hidden secret Mystery of the
Humanity. Page 630
RA. RA. RP. See the Margin. Page 635 4. Questions concerning that Mass which
is Man. Notes concerning the Not finishing this Book Aurora. Page 642, 643.
These Errata are so many, because, after the Book was Printed in English,
there came over from beyond Sea a New Copy of the Aurora in High Dutch
printed, and compared with that of the Authors own handwriting: And so also it
was compared here with this printed Copy in English, wherein most of these
differences were found.

And therefore the Reader is desired to mend his Book before he reads it, for
it will render many of the Obscure places clear to be understood.

J. B. Preface, Page 4. line 6. for to, read in. p. 5 l. 28. (...) 25. 23. p.
6. l. 14 l. 19 l. 33 f. Nature. r. kind. l. 24. r. Mahal^leel, p. 16 l. 9 r.
Evil Quality. p. 18 l. 14 r. Tree, and spoiled many Tweggs in the Holy Tree, p.
10 l. 12 f. dwell. r. flow. p. 26 l. 31 f. yet beheld. r. behold. p. 28 l. 5 f.
first. r. for. p. 3^. l. 10 r. see 10. the p. 36 l. 2^ r. eth in winter. p. 47
l. 3 r. as if God were p. 57 l. 13 f. the very. r. every. p. 62 l. 2 r. World,
and is the King and the Heart of all things of this world: and. p. 63 l. 5 put
out, is. l. 6 r. but is. l. 19 f. onne. r. Son. p. 64 l. 13 f. eut of, r. And
is. p. 65 l 31 r. there, and is the Spirit and Life of all powers of the whole
Father. p. 68 l. 17 f. must. r. will. p. 82 l. 30 f. to. r. into p. 85 l. 23 r.
out of the Seed of the Mother. p. 97 l. 24 r. Eternity to Eternity. p. 98 l. 18
r. As by. l. 28 f. ^r. r. by. p. 107 l. 6 f. Radius, r. Rednes. p. 109 l. 10 f.
Liberty. r. Ternary. p. 111 l. 30 r. that in the divine power they should. p.
114 margin. f. Part. r. Port. p. 11^. l. 13 r. up, in the moving of the Holy.
p. 117 l. 20 r. Nativities or Genetu^es of the l. 30 r. Head and General or
Leader, the beautifullest and most powerful Cherubin or, p. 119 f. bad r. had.
p. 141 l. 13 f. cannot. r. come to. p: 156 l. 24 r. valley. O Potency o^
Dominion, th^^ art a R^ging and te^ring of the Hellish fi^e. p. 15^ l. 61.
Pity. r. complain on. p. 161. l. 20. r. delightful habitation. l. 25 r.
creatures in this world. p. 166 l. 23 f. Life. r. Light. p. 174 l. 6 r. thick
and stinking; and. l. 16 f. brittle. r. spoiled or corrupt. p. 176 l. 22 r. as
well the first as the. p. 177 l. 1 r. the Second, third. fourth. p. 180 l. 30
f. Light. r. Sight. p. 188 l. 12 f. world r. wood. p 191 l. 2 f. thou love,
r. pleases thee. p. 197 l. 8 r. Smelling, All-Tasting, All. p. 200 l. 17 r and
all. f Deity, r. God. p. 203 l. 27 f a. r. one. p. 205 l. 13 r. Center. as a
Heart. p. 208 l. 4 f. half, r. clear. p. 216 l. 10 f. the six. r the Seven. p.
231 l. 16 r. one for from. p. 245 l. 12 r. and Habitation of all. p: 253 l. 1
r. God, has; for, the Ternary of God rises up in the Seven Spirits of God;
and is. l. 16 r. the One Body. l. 30 f. Spirit. r God. p: 272 l. 16 f. Wars,
r. Wares. l. 26 for, a dull Humor, r. drunkenness or fullness p: 282 l. 4 f.
fiery, r. fierce. p. 288 l. 15 r. Spirits one in another, where always one
generateth the other. p. 289 l. 23 r. the other, and in the sound one hears
the other. p: 292 l: 19. r: as the whole Deity. l. 24 f. Deity, r. God. p: 317
l. 25 Mark: to which it is the whole desire longing and delight of my heart, to
^each fully. p. 321 l. 23 f. er. r. and. p: 322 l. 15 f. cause, r. caused. p:
338 l. 15 r. stinging Murdering. l. (...) r. Divine meekness. p. 339 l. 19 f.
Imagined Speculated or roved thereinto. r. made havoc or spoiled all therein.
p 356. l 7. r. Love, or the. l 17. f. these, r. the. p 363. l 20. r. of many
wicked. p 367. l 4. r. Angels were. p 373. l 5. f. studied. r. learned. p 390.
l 18. r. house, as the place of this world is come to be. p 393. l 27 and 28.
f. stomach ready to choke it, r. Head. p 402* l 20. f. stinging, r. stinking. p
435. l 31. f. given, r. left. p 438. l 23. f. corrupt, r. corrupted. p 439. l
13. f. Death, r. the wrath. p 460. l 23. r. If thy Heart. p 466. l 10 and 11.
r. what kind of Firmament of Heaven then is that, which. p 469. l 15. r. and
generateth the. p 476. l 19. r. and with its Spirit, made. p 483. l 20. r. for
the one only incorporated. p 487. l 13. f. see. r. be. p 488. l 6. f. prevent,
r. boast of. p 490. l 21. f. or altered at all, r. but only altered. p 491. l
5. f. with, r. in. p 505. l 32. f. Life, r. the Light. p 509. l 23. r. existed
the Mobility. [put out the rest.] p 510. l 9. r. Deity in all the Births. l 17.
r. 140. Therefore on the Third Day the Earth began to Spring, just as the
Qualifying or fountain Spirits stood in the Crack of the Word or fire-flash. p
519. l 2. f. of. r. above. p 521. l 3. r. of the Light, why then do you contend
or dispute about the way of the Light, as if none can see it rightly. p 527. l
4. r. are, though he was capable of understanding the right or Law of God, and
has took. p. 528. l 18. r. God, the Lifer p. 530. l. 11. r. Earth, and made
them moveable. p. 532. l. 27. r. as to its own. p. 533. l. 28 r. flesh in
Death. p. 534. l. 5. r. water in the. p. 546. l. 27. f. Devils, r* Hellish. p.
548. l. 14. r. the Souls Birth p. 549. r. water, and in the Fire, the meek Love
rises up for. p. 551 l. 12. f. of, r. in. p. 552. l. 21. r. Body of Nature. p.
553. l. 14. r. Love-Joy. l. 25. r. inceptive. p. 565. l. 10. f. must rule. r.
rules. p. 570 l. 19 f. true, r. new. p 573. l 12. r. soul; for the soul is
generated out of the power of the Body, and. p 574. l. 23. r. benumbed not
quite dead. p 576. l 30. f. Earth, r. first. p 582. l 29. f. God, r. the Deity.
p 587. l 13. r. thereof, whereby I gat new Life and power again, p 598. l 26.
f. roueth, r. rouleth. p 606, l 17. r. Body of this world, in all powers of the
Body. p 607. l 27. r. Heart, through the Light, p 614. l 11. r. to be Lord. p
615. l 5. r. he had assumed. p 627: l 14. f. body, r. Love. l 17. f. of, r. in.
p. 642. l. 4. r. intended to make a Bon-fire of it, (...) put.

J. B. Preface for the Aurora. To the Courteous Reader.
1. COurteous Reader, I compare the whole Philosophy Astrology and Theology,
together with their Mother; to a goodly Tree, which grows in a fair Garden of
pleasure.

2. Now the Earth, in which the Tree stands affords sap continually to the
tree, whereby the tree has its living Quality: but the tree in it self grows
from the Sap of the earth, becomes Large, and spreads it self abroad with its
branches: And then as the Earth works with its power upon the tree, to make
it grow and increase; so the Tree also works continually with its branches
with all its strength, that it might still bear good fruit abundantly.

3. But when the Tree bears few fruit, and those but small ones neither,
shrivelled rotten and wormeaten, the fault does not lie in the will of the
tree, as if it desired purposely to bear evil fruit, because it is a goodly
Tree of good Quality; but here lies the fault, because there is often great
cold, great heat, mildew, caterpillars and other worms happen to it: for the
Quality in the Deep, from the influence of the Stars, spoileth it, and that
makes it bear but few good fruit.

4. Now the Tree is of this condition, that the bigger and older it is, the
sweeter fruit it bears: in its younger years it bears few fruit, which the
crude and wild nature of the ground or earth causes, and the superfluous
moisture in the tree: and though it bears many and fair blossoms, yet the
most of its Apples fall off whilst they are growing, which is not so, when it
stands in a very good soil or mould. Now this tree also has a good sweet
quality, but there are three other which are contrary unto it, namely, the
bitter, sour, and astringent.

5. And as the Tree is, so will its fruit be, till the Sun works on them and
makes them sweet, so that they become of a sweet taste, and its fruit must
also hold out in rain, wind and tempest.

6. But when the tree grows old, that its branches wither, and the sapp
ascends no more, then below the stemm or stock there grow many suckers, at
last from the root also twiggs grow, and make the old tree flourish, showing
that it also was once a green twigg and young tree, and is now become old. For
Nature, or the sapp, struggleth so long till the Stock grows quite dry, and
then is to be cut down and burnt in the fire.

7. Now observe, what I have signified by this similitude: the Garden of this
tree signifies the World; the soil or mould signifies Nature, the Stock of
the tree sig^ifies the Stars, by the Branches are meant the Elements, the
fruit which grow on this tree signify Men, the sapp in the tree resembles the
pure Deity. Now Men were made out of Nature the Stars and Elements, but God
the Creator reigns in all: even as the sapp does in the whole tree.

8. But there are two Qualities in Nature, even until the Judgment of God: the
One is pleasant, heavenly and holy, the other is fierce, wrathful, hellish and
thirsty.

9. Now the good one qualifieth and works continually with all industry, to
bring forth good fruit, and the Holy Ghost reigns therein, and affords
thereunto sapp and life: the bad one Springs and drives with all its
endeavor to bring forth bad fruit continually, to which the devil affords
sap and hellish flame. Now both are in the tree of Nature, and Men are made out
of that tree, and live in this world, in this garden, betwixt both, in great
danger; suddenly the Sun shines on them; by and by, winds, rain and snow, fall
on them

10. That is, if man elevateth his Spirit into the Deity, then the Holy Ghost
moves springs and qualifieth in him: but if he permit his spirit to sink
into the world, in lust toward evil, then the Devil and hellish sapp stirs
and reigns in him.

11. Even as the Apple on the tree becomes corrupt rotten and worm-eaten, when
frost, heat, and mill-dew fall on it, and easily falls off and perishes: so
does Man also when he suffers the Devil to rule in him with his poison.

12. Now as in Nature there is, springs, and reigns, good and bad; even so
in Man: but Man, is the Child of God, whom he has made out of the best Kernel
of Nature, to reign in the good, and to overcome the bad: though evil sticks
unto him, even as in Nature the evil hangs on the good, yet he can overcome
the evil, if he elevateth his spirit in God; for then the Holy Ghost stirs and
moves in him, and helps him to overcome.

13. As the good quality in Nature is potent, to overcome the evil, for it is
and comes from God, and the Holy Ghost is the Ruler therein: even so is the
fierce wrathful Quality, powerful to overcome in a malicious wicked soul: for
the Devil is a potent Ruler in the wrath or fierceness, and is an eternal
Prince of the same.

14. But Man has cast himself into fierce wrathfulnesse through the fall of
Adam and Eve, so that the evil hangs on him; otherwise, his moving and
driving would be only to the good. But now it is in both, and it is as St. Paul
says, know ye not, that to whom you yield your selves servants in obedience,
his servants ye are, to whom ye obey, either to sin unto death, or to the
obedience of God unto righteousness, Romans 6. 16.

15. But because man has an impulse or inclination to both, he may lay hold on
which he pleases; for he lives in this World betwixt both, and both
Qualities, the good and the bad are in him, in which soever man moves, with
that he is endued, either with a Holy or a Hellish Power. For Christ says, My
Father will give the Holy Ghost to those that ask him, Luke 11. 13.

16. Besides, God commanded man to do good, and did forbid him to do evil; and
now does daily call and preach, and exhort man unto good; Whereby we see, well
enough, that God wills not evil, but his Will is, That His Kingdom should
come, and his Will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Now since man is
poisoned through sin, that the fierce wrathful quality, as well as the good,
reigns in him, and is now half dead, and in his gross ignorance can no more
know God his Creator, nor Nature and its operation; yet has Nature done its
best endeavor from the beginning till now, to which God has given his Holy
Ghost, so that it has at all times generated wise, sholy and understanding
men, which did learn to know Nature and their Creator, who always in their
Writings and Teachings have been a Light to the World, whereby God has raised
his Church on Earth, to his eternal praise. Against which the Devil has raged,
and spoiled many a noble Twigg, through the wrathful fierceness in Nature,
whose Prince and God he is.

17. For Nature has many times prepared and fitted a learned judicious man
with good gifts, and then the Devil has done his utmost to seduce that man,
and bring him into carnal pleasures, to pride, to a desire to be rich, and to
be in authority and power. Thereby the Devil has ruled in him, and the fierce
wrathful Quality has overcome the good; his Understanding, his Knowledge and
Wisdom has been turned into Heresy and Error, who has made a mock of the
Truth, and been the Author of great Errors on earth, and a good Leader of the
Devils Host.

18. For the bad quality in Nature has wrestled, and does still wrestle with
the good, ever since the beginning, and has elevated it self, and spoiled many
a noble fruit even in the mothers Womb, as it plainly appears, first by Cain
and Abel, which came from one womb. Cain was from his mothers womb a despiser
of God, and proud; but Abel, on the contrary, was an humble man, and one that
feared God.

19. The same is seen also in the three sons of Noah; as also by Abraham's sons
Isaac and Ismael, especially by Isaac's in Esau and Jacob, which struggled and
wrestled even in the mothers womb: therefore said God, Jacob have I loved, and
Esau have I hated, Genesis 25. which is nothing else, but that both qualities in
Nature have vehemently wrestled one with another.

20. For when God at that time moved in Nature, and would reveal himself unto
the world through righteous Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and would raise a Church
to himself on earth for his glory, then in Nature Malice also moved, and its
Prince Lucifer. Seei^g there was good and bad in man, therefore both Qualities
could reign in him, and therefore there was born at once in one womb an evil
and a good Man.

21. Also it is clearly seen by the first world, as also by the second, even
unto the end of our time, how the Heavenly and Hellish Kingdom in Nature has
always wrestled one with another, and stood in great travel, even as a woman
in the birth. This does most clearly appear by Adam and Eve. For there grew up
a tree in Paradise of both Qualities of good and bad, wherewith Adam and Eve
were to be tempted, to try whether they would hold out in the good Quality in
the Angelical nature and form. For the Creator did forbid Adam and Eve to eat
of the fruit: but the evil quality in Nature did wrestle with the good, and
brought Adam and Eve into a lust and longing to eat of both. Thereupon they
presently became of a beastial form and nature, and did eat of good and bad,
and must increase and live in a beastial manner, and so many a noble twigg
begotten or born of them perished.

22. Afterward it is seen, how God did work in Nature, when the Holy Fathers in
the first world were born: as Abel, Seth, Enos, Kenan, Mahaleel, Jared, Henoch,
Methusalah, Lamech, and Holy Noah. These made the Name of the Lord known to the
world, and preached Repentance: for the Holy Ghost wrought in them

23. On the contrary, the Hellish God also wrought against it, in Nature, and
begot Mockers and Despisers, first Cain and his Posterity: and it was with the
first world as with a young tree, which grows, is green, blossometh fairly,
but brings little good fruit, by reason of its wild Nature. So Nature in the
first world brought forth but little good fruit, though it blossomed fair in
wordly knowledge and luxury or wantonness, which could not apprehend the Holy
Spirit, who wrought in Nature then, as well as now.

24. Therefore said God, It repents me, that I have made man, Genesis 6. 6. and he
stirred up Nature so, that all flesh dyed, which lived on dry Land, excepting
the root and stock, that remained in virtue: and so he has hereby Dung'd the
wild Tree, and manured it, that it should bear better fruit. But when the same
sprung up again, it brought forth also good and bad fruit again; Among the sons
of Noah, there were found again Mockers and Despisers of God, and there hardly
grew any good branch on the tree, which brought forth any holy and good fruit:
the other branches were bearing also, and brought forth wild Heathens.

25. But when God saw, that man was thus dead in his Knowledge, He moved Nature
again, and showed unto man, how there was good and bad therein, that they
should avoid evil, and live unto the good; and he caused fire to fall down out
of Nature, and fired Sodom and Gomorah, for a terrible example to the world.
But when the blindness of men grew predominant, and refused to be taught by
the Spirit of God, he gave Laws and Precepts unto them, showing how they should
behave themselves, and confirmed them with wonders and Signs, lest the
knowledge of the true God should be quite extinct. But for all this, the light
did not manifest it self, for the darkness and wrathful fierceness in Nature
struggled against it, and the Prince thereof ruled powerfully.

26. But when the Tree of Nature came to its middle age, then it began to bear
some mild and sweet fruit, to show, that it would henceforth bear pleasant
fruit. Then were born, the Holy Prophets, out of the sweet branch of the tree,
which taught and preached of the light, which hereafter should overcome the
wrathful fierceness in Nature. And then there arose a light in Nature among the
Heathens, so that they knew Nature, and her operation, although this was only a
light in the wild Nature, and was not yet the holy light.

27. For the wild Nature was not yet overcome, and light and darkness wrestled
so long one with another, till the Sun arose, and forced this tree with its
heat, so that it did bear pleasant sweet fruit: that is, till there came the
Prince of Light out of the heart of God, and became Man in Nature, and wrestled
in his humane body in the power of the Divine light in the wild Nature. That
same Prince and Royal twigg grew up in Nature, and became a tree in Nature, and
spread its branches abroad from the East to the West, and encompassed the whole
Nature, and wrestled and fought with the fierce wrath which was in Nature, and
with the Prince thereof, till he overcame and triumphed as a King in Nature,
and took the Prince of wrath or fierceness, Captive in his own house, Psalm. 68.

28. This being done, there grew out of the Royal Tree, which was grown in
Nature many thousand Legions of precious sweet twigs, all which had the scent
and taste of that precious Tree. Though there fell upon them, rain, snow, hayl
and tempestuous storms, so that many a twigg was torn and beaten off from the
tree, yet still others grew in their places. For the Wrath or fierceness in
Nature, and the Prince thereof, raised great tempests, with hayl, thundering,
lightning and rain, so that many glorious twiggs were torn from the sweet and
good Tree.

29. But these twiggs were of such a pleasant sweet and curious taste, that no
humane nor Angelical tongue is able to express it: for there was great power
and virtue in them, they were good to heal the wild Heathens. Whatever Heathen
did eat of the twigg of this tree, he was delivered from his wild nature, in
which he was born, and became a sweet tree in this precious Tree, and sprung up
in that tree, and did bear precious fruit, like the Royal tree. Therefore many
Heathens resorted to the precious tree, where the precious twiggs lay, which
the Prince of darkness by his storms and tempestuous winds had torn off; and
whatever Heathen did smell to the twigg so torn off, he was healed of his wild
wrath or fierceness, which he had brought from his Mother into the world.

30. But when the Prince of darkness did see, that the Heathens strove and
contended about these twiggs, and not about the Tree, therein he found great
loss and damage, and then he ceased with his storms toward the East and
South, and placed a Merchant under the tree, who gathered up the twiggs, which
were fallen from the precious tree: and then when the Heathens came, and
enquired after the good and virtuous twigs, then the Merchant presented and
offered them, for money, to make gain of the precious Tree. For, this, the
Prince of wrath or fierceness required at the hands of his Merchant, because
the tree was grown upon his ground and land, and spoiled his soil.

31. And so when the Heathens did see, that the fruit of the precious tree was
put to sale, they flocked to the Merchant, and bought of the fruit of the tree,
and they came also from foreign Islands to buy, even from the Ends of the
world. Now when the Merchant saw, that his Wares were in request and esteem, he
plotted, how he might gather a great treasure to his Master, and so sent
Factors abroad, every where, to offer his Wares to sell, praising them highly:
but he sophisticated the wares, and sold other fruit instead of the good, which
were not grown on the good Tree; this he did to increase his Masters treasure.

32. But the Heathens and all the Islands and Nations, which dwelt on the
earth, were all grown on the wild tree, which was good and bad: and therefore
were half blind, and did not discern the good tree, (which however did spread
its branches from the East to the West,) else they would not have bought of the
false wares.

33. But because they knew not the precious Tree, which spread its branches
over them all; all of them ran after, and to, the Factors, and bought of them
mixed false wares instead of good; and supposed they served for health: but
because all of them did long after the good tree, which however moved over them
all, many of them were healed, because of their great desire they had to the
Tree. For the fragrancy of the tree, which moved over them, healed them of
their wrath or fierceness and wild nature, and not, the false wares, of the
Factors: this continued a long time.

34. Now when the Prince in the darkness, who is the Source of wrath or
fierceness, malice and perdition, perceived, that men were healed of their
poison and wild nature by the fragrancy of the precious Tree, he was enraged,
and planted a wild tree toward the North, which sprung up and grew in the
fierceness or wrath of Nature, and made proclamation, saying: This is the Tree
of Life, he that eats of it, shall be healed and live eternally.

35. For in that place, where the wild tree grew, was a wild place, and the
people there had the true light of God from the beginning even unto that time,
and to this day, though unknown: and the tree grew on the Mount Hagar in the
house of Ismael the mocker. But when Proclamation was made of the tree, Behold
this is the tree of life! then the wild people ^^ocked unto the tree, which
were not born of God, but of the wild Nature, and loved the wild tree, and did
eat of its fruit.

36. And the tree grew to a mighty bigness, by the sap of wrath or fierceness
in Nature, and spread abroad its branches, from the North to the East and West:
but the tree had its source and Root from the wild Nature, which was good and
bad, and as the tree was, so were its fruits. But though the men of this place
were grown out of the wild Nature, yet the tree grew over them all, and grew so
huge, that it reached with its branches even unto the Esteemed precious Land or
Country under the Holy Tree.

37. But the cause, that the wild tree grew to such a huge bigness, was,
because the Nations under the good Tree ran all after the Factors, which sold
the false Wares, and did eat of the false fruits, which were good and bad, and
supposed they were healed thereby, and meddled not with the holy good effectual
Tree.

38. In the mean while they grew more blind, weak and faint, and were disabled
to suppress the growing of the wild tree toward the North: for they were too
weak and faint, and they saw well enough, that the tree was wild and naught,
but they wanted strength, and could not suppress the growing of the tree.

39. Yet if they had not run after the false Wares those Factors sold, and had
not eaten of the false fruits, but rather eaten of the precious tree, then they
might have gotten strength to oppose the wild tree. But because they ran a
whoring after the wild Nature in Humane conceits and opinions, in the lusts of
their hearts, in a hypocritical way, therefore the wild Nature did predominate
over them, and the wild tree grew high and large over them, and spoiled them
with its wild rankness.

40. For, the Prince of Wrath or fierceness, in Nature, gave his power to the
tree, to spoil men, which did eat of the wild fruits of the Factors: Because
they forsook the Tree of life, and sought after their own fancy, as Mother Eve
did in Paradise, therefore their own innate quality predominated in them, and
brought them into strong delusions, as St. Paul says, 2 These. 2. 11. And the
Prince of Wrath or fierceness, did raise Wars and tempests from the wild tree
toward the North against the people and Nations, which were not born of the
wild tree, and the tempest which came from the wild tree overthrew them in
their weakness and faintness.

41. And the Merchant under the good Tree dissembled with the Nations of the
South and West, and toward the North, and commended his Wares hugely, and
deceived cunningly the simple ones; and those that were witty, he made them his
Factors, that they also might have their livelihood or livings out of it, and
he brought it so far, that no body did see or know the holy tree any more, and
so he got all the Land to himself, and then made Proclamation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. I am
the stock of the good tree, and stand on the root of the good tree, and am
ingrafted into the Tree of Life, buy my Wares which I sell: and then you shall
be healed of your wild birth, and live for ever.

42. I am grown out of the root of the good Tree, and the fruit of the holy
tree is in my power, and I sit on the Throne of the divine power, I have power
in heaven and on earth, Come unto me, and buy for money, the fruit of life.

43. Whereupon all Nations flocked unto him, and did buy and eat, even till
they fainted: all the Kings of the South, West, and toward the North did eat
the fruits of the Factor, and lived under a great faintness; for the wild tree
of the North grew more and more over them, and made waste of them a long time.
And there was a miserable time upon earth, such as never was, since the world
stood, but men thought that time to be good; so terribly the Merchant under the
good tree, had blinded them.

44. But in the Evening God in his mercy took pity on man's misery and
blindness, and stirred up the good tree again, even that glorious Divine Tree,
which did bear the fruit of life; then there grew a twigg nigh unto the root,
out of that precious tree, and was green, and to it was given the sap and
spirit of the tree, and it spoke with the tongue of Man, and showed to every
one the precious tree, and its voice was heard in many Countries.

45. And then men resorted thither to see and to hear what the matter was, and
there was showed unto them the precious and vigorous Tree of Life, of which men
had eaten at the beginning, and were delivered of their wild nature, and they
were mightily rejoiced, and did eat of the Tree of life with great joy, and
refreshing, and so got new strength from the Tree of life, and sung a new song
concerning the true real Tree of Life, and so were delivered from their wild
birth, and then hated the Merchant and his Factors, as also their false Wares.

46. But all those came, which did hunger and thirst after the Tree of life,
and those that sat in the Dust, and they did eat of the holy Tree, and were
healed of their impure birth and wrath or fierceness of Nature, in which they
lived, and so were ingrafted into the Tree of life. But only the Factors of
the Merchant, and his and their Dissemblers, and those that made their gains
with false wares, and had gathered Treasure together, came not, for they were
drowned and quite dead in the gain of the Merchants whoredom, and lived in the
wild nature, and so their anguish and shame, which was discovered, kept them
back, because they went a whoring so long with the Merchant, and seduced the
souls of men, notwithstanding they gloried, that they were ingrafted into the
tree of life, and lived in sanctity by a divine power, and set to sale the
fruit of life.

47. Now because their shame, deceit, covetousness, knavery and wickedness was
discovered, they waxed dumb, and stayed behind, they were ashamed, and repented
of their abominations and Idolatry, and so went with the hungry and thirsty to
the Fountain of Eternal life; and therefore they grew faint also in their
thirst, and their plague rises up from eternity to eternity, and they are
gnawed in their conscience.

48. Now the Merchant seeing that the deceit of his false Wares was discovered,
he grew very worth, and despaired; and bent his Bow against the holy people,
which would buy no more of his Wares, and ^o destroyed many of the holy people,
and blasphemed the Green-twigg, which was grown up out of the Tree of life. But
the Great Prince MICHAEL which stands before God, came and fought for the
Holy people, and overcame.

49. But the prince of darkness perceiving, that his Merchant had a Fall, and
that his deceit was discovered, he raised a tempest from the North out of the
wild Tree against the holy people, and the Merchant of the South made an
assault upon them: then the Holy people grew hugely in their Blossom, even as
it was in the beginning, when the holy and precious tree grew, and that
overcame the wrath or fierceness in Nature and its Prince; thus it was at that
time.

50. Now, when the noble and holy Tree was revealed to all Nations, so that
they saw how it moved over them, and spread its fragrancy over all people, and
that any one that pleased, might eat of it; then the people grew weary of
eating its fruit, which grew on the tree, and longed to eat of the Root of the
Tree; and the cunning and wise people sought after the Root, and contended
about the same: so the strife was great about the root of the tree, insomuch,
that they forgot to eat of the fruit of the sweet tree, by reason of the
controversy about the root of the tree.

51. And now they minded neither the Root nor the Tree, but the prince of
darkness had another design, intending something else: when he saw, that they
would eat no more of the good Tree, but contended about the Root, he perceived,
that they were grown very weak and faint, and that the wild Nature predominated
in them again;

52. And therefore he stirred them up to pride, so that every one supposed, he
had the Root at hand, every one must look after and hear him, and reverence
him: Whereby they built their Palaces and great Houses, and served in secrecy
their Idol Mammon, whereby the Lay people were troubled and caused to offend,
and so lived in carnal pleasures, in the desire of the wild Nature, and served
their belly in wantonness, confiding in the fruit of the tree, which moved
over them all, though they fell into misery, that thereby they might be healed.

53. And in the mean while they served the prince of darkness according to the
impulse of the wild nature, and the precious tree stood there only for a
Maygame or mocking stock, and many lived like wild beasts, and did lead a
wicked life, in Pride, Pomp, Stateliness and Lasciviousness, the rich
consuming the labor and sweat of the poor, forcing them thereunto.

54. All evil actions were approved of for Bribery: the Laws issued forth out
of the evil in Nature, and every one strove after riches and goods, after
pride, pomp and stateliness, there was no deliverer for the poor; scolding,
railing, cursing, and swearing were not disapproved nor held vicious, and so
they defiled themselves in the wrathful or fierce Quality, even as a swine
tumbleth in the dirt and Mire.

55. This did the Shepherds with the sheep, they retained no more but the bare
name of the noble tree, its fruit, virtue and life was only a cover to their
Sins. Thus the world lived at that time, saving a small remnant or number,
which were generated in the midst among the Thorns in great tribulation and
contempt, out of all Nations upon the Earth, from the East to the West.

56. There was no difference, they all lived upon the impulse of the wild
nature in faintness, even unto a little number, which were delivered out of
all Nations, as it was before the Deluge, and before the growing of the noble
tree in Nature; and thus it was also at that time.

57. But why men in the end, did long so eagerly after the Root of the tree, is
a Mystery, and hitherto it was concealed from the wise and prudent; neither
will it rise up to the height, but in the Deep, in great simplicity.

58. As indeed the noble tree with its kernel and heart, has always been
concealed from the worldly wise: though they supposed they stood some at the
root, and some at the very Top of the tree, yet this was no more then a shining
Mist before their eyes.

59. But the noble tree from the beginning till now strove in Nature to its
utmost, that it might be revealed to all people Tongues and Languages, against
which the Devil in the wild nature raged, and fought like a fierce Lion.

60. But the noble tree bore the more and the sweeter fruit, and revealed it
self more and more against all the fury and madness of the Devil, even unto
the end; and then it was light. For there grew a green twigg at the Root of the
noble Tree, which gat the sap and life of the root, to which was given the
Spirit of the Tree; so it increased and multiplied the noble tree in its
glorious virtue and power, and nature also, in which it grew.

61. Now when this was done, then both the Gates of Nature were opened, the
knowledge of the two Qualities of good and bad, and so the Heavenly Jerusalem
was manifested, and the Kingdom of Hell also, to all men upon Earth. And the
Light and voice was heard in the four Winds, and the false Merchant in the
South was quite revealed, and his own hated him, and rooted him out from the
whole earth.

62. This being done, the wild tree toward the North withered, and all people
beheld the holy tree, even in foreign Islands, with admiration. And the Prince
in the darkness was revealed, and his Mysteries were discovered, and his
shame, ignominy and perdition, the men upon earth did see and know, for it was
Light.

63. And this lasted but a little time, for men forsook that light, and lived
in carnal pleasures to their own perdition: for as the gate of light had opened
it self, so did also the gate of darkness, and from them both went forth all
manner of powers and Arts, that were therein.

64. For as men had lived from the beginning in the growth of the wild nature,
and hunted only after earthly things; so in the end, things were not mended but
rather worse.

65. In the middle of this time were raised many great stormy winds from the
West toward the East and North: but from the North there went forth a great
stream of water toward the holy tree, and in the midst of the stream it was
light, and so the wild tree toward the North withered.

66. And then the Prince in the darkness was enraged in the great motion of
Nature. For the Holy Tree moved in Nature, as one that would by and by be
elevated, and kindled, in the glorification of the holy Divine Majesty, and
cast the wrath or fierceness from it, which had so long stood against it, and
had wrestled with it.

67. In like manner, the tree of darkness wrath fierceness and perdition,
moved furiously, as one that would be kindled by and by, and therein the Prince
with his Legions went forth to spoil the noble fruit of the good tree.

68. And it stood horribly in Nature in the fierce quality, in that quality,
wherein the prince of darkness dwelt, to speak after the manner of men; even
as when men see terrible weather coming on, which makes a horrible appearance
with lightening and tempestuous winds, at which men stand amazed.

69. On the other side in the good quality, in which the holy tree of life
stood, all was pleasant sweet and delightful; like an heavenly joyfulness.
These two moved furiously one against another, till the whole nature was
kindled of both qualities in one moment.

70. And the tree of life was kindled in its own quality, by the fire of the
Holy Ghost, and its quality burnt in the fire of heavenly joyfulness, in an
unsearchable light and glory.

71. All voices, of the heavenly joyfulnesse qualified mixed or harmonized in
this fire, which have been from eternity in the good quality; and the Light
of the holy Trinity shined into the tree of life, and replenished or filled the
whole quality, in which it stood.

72. And the tree of the fierce quality which is the other part in Nature, was
kindled also and burnt in the fire of Gods wrath in a hellish flame, and the
fierce source rose up into eternity, and the Prince of darkness with his
Legions did abide in the fierce wrathful quality, as in his own Kingdom.

73. In this fire were consumed, the Earth, Stars and Elements, for all were
on fire at once, each in the fire of its own quality, and all was separable.
For the Ancient of Days moved himself in it, wherein every power and all the
Creatures, and whatsoever can be named, even the powers of Heaven, of the Stars
and of the Elements, became thin again, and fashioned according to that form,
which they were in from the beginning of the Creation.

74. Only the two qualities, good and bad, which have been in Nature one in
another, were separated, and the bad one, was given to the prince of malice and
wrath or fierceness for an eternal habitation; and that is called Hell, or a
Rejection, which in eternity, no more apprehends or touches the good quality;
but is an oblivion of all good, and that unto its eternity.

75. In the other quality stood the Tree of eternal Life, and its source and
offspring descended from the holy Trinity, and the Holy Ghost did shine into
the same. And all men came forth which descended from the loins of Adam, who
was the first man, Each in its virtue, and in that quality, in which each did
grow on earth.

76. Those that on earth had eaten of the good Tree, which is called JESUS
CHRIST, in them did dwell the Mercy of God unto eternal joy; they had in them
the power of the good quality, they were received into the good and holy
quality, and they sung the Song of their Bridegroom, each in his voice
according to his own Holiness.

77. But those that were born in the Light of Nature, and of the Holy Ghost,
and on earth never fully knew the Tree of Life, but were grown in its power,
which overshadowed all men upon earth, as very many Nations, Heathens and
Babes, which were also received into the same power wherein they were grown,
and wherewith their spirit was clothed, and they sung the song according to
their power and measure in the noble tree of eternal life, for every one was
glorified according to his power virtue measure and proportion.

78. And the Holy Nature Generated joyful heavenly fruit, even as on earth it
had generated fruit in both the Qualities, which were both good and bad, so now
it did generate heavenly fullness of Joy.

79. And those men, that were now like Angels did each eat the fruit of his
Quality, and they sung the song of God, and the song of the Tree of eternal
life.

80. And that was in the Father as a holy Scene, a triumphing joy; for to that
end all things at the beginning were made out of the Father, and now they abide
so to all eternity.

81. But those that were grown on earth in the power of the tree of wrath, that
is, which the fierce quality had overcome, and were withered in the wickedness
of their spirit, in their Sins, all those came forth also each in his power or
faculty, and were received into the Kingdom of Darkness, and each was endued
in that power, in which he was grown up, and their King is called Lucifer, viz.
one expelled or driven forth from the Light.

82. And the hellish quality brought forth fruit also, as it had done upon
earth, only the good was severed or parted from it, and therefore it brought
forth fruit now in its own quality. And these Men also, which were now like the
spirits, did each eat the fruit of his quality, and so did the Devils also.

83. For as there is a difference in men upon earth in their qualities, and all
are not of one Quality Condition or Disposition, even so among the rejected
reprobate spirits, and so in the heavenly pomp in Angels and Men, and that
lasts unto its eternity. AMEN.

84. Courteous Reader, This is a short information concerning the two Qualities
in Nature from the beginning to the end, how there arose from thence two
Kingdoms, a heavenly and a hellish, and how they stir in this time and strive
one against another, and what the issue of it will be in the time to come.

The Contents of this Book, by way of Introduction. To this Book I have given
this Name, viz. The Root or Mother of Philosophy, Astrology, and Theology.
And that you may know what this Book does treat of, Observe,
I.
1. In the Philosophy, is treated concerning the Divine power, I. What God is;
II. How in the Being of God, is created, Nature the Stars and the Elements.
III. From whence every thing has its Original. IIII. How Heaven and Earth were
created. V. How Angels, Men, and Devils, were created. VI. How Heaven and Hell,
and whatever is creaturely, were created, and what the Two Qualities are in
Nature.


All out of a true ground in the knowledge of the Spirit, by the impulse and
motion of God.

II.
2. In the Astrology, is treated, I. Of the powers of Nature, of the Stars,
and of the Elements. II. How all Creatures proceeded from thence. III. How the
same do impell and rule all. IIII. And work in all, and how good and bad is
wrought by them in Men and Beasts. V. Whence it comes, that Good and Bad is,
and reigns in this world. VI. Also how the Kingdom of Heaven and of Hell
consists therein.


3. My purpose is not to describe the course, place and Name of all Stars, and
what their Annual Conjunction, Opposition, Quadrat, is, or the like; what they
yearly and hourly operate, which by a long process of time has been observed,
by the wise, skilful and Expert Men, who were rich and large in spirit, by
their diligent contemplation, observation, deep sense, Calculation and
Computation.

4. Neither have I studied or learned the same, and I leave that to the Learned
to discourse of: but my intention is to write according to the Spirit and
sense; and not according to Speculation.

III.
5. In the Theology is handled. I. Of the Kingdom of Christ, of what condition
the same is. II. How it is set in opposition to the Kingdom of Hell. III. How
in Nature it fights and striveth against the Kingdom of Hell. IIII. How men
through Faith and Spirit are able to overcome the Kingdom of Hell, and triumph
in Divine power, and obtain eternal salvation, and all this as a victory in the
Battle. V. Also how Man through the operation or working in the hellish
quality, casts himself into perdition. VI. And what the issue of both will be
at last.


6. The Supreme Title is,

AVRORA. That is, The Dawning of the Day in the East: or Morning-Rednesse in
the Rising of the SUN.

And is a secret Mystery concealed from the wise and prudent of this world,
which themselves shall shortly be sensible of: but to those, which read this
book in singleness of heart, with a desire after the holy Spirit, who place
their hope only in God, it will not be a hidden secret, but a manifest
knowledge.

7. I will not explain this Title, but commit it to the judgment of the
impartial Reader, who wrestleth in the good quality of this world.

8. Now if Mr. Critic, which qualifieth or works with his wit in the fierce
quality, gets this book into his hand, he will oppose it, as there is always
stirring and Opposition between the Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdom of Hell.

I. First he will say, that I ascend too high into the Deity, which is not a
meet thing for me to do. II. Then Secondly, he will say, that I boast of the
Holy Spirit: I had more need to live accordingly, and make demonstration of it
by wondrous Works or Miracles. III. Thirdly he will say; that I am not learned
enough. IIII. Fourthly he will say; that I do it in a vainglorious way. V.
Fifthly he will be much offended at the simplicity of the Author: as it is
usual in the world, to gaze only upon high things, and simpleness is a
scandal and offense unto it.
9. To these partial worldly Critics, I set in opposition the Patriarchs of
the first world, which were mean despised Men, against whom the world and the
Devil raged as in the time of Henoch, when the holy Fathers preached powerfully
of the name of the Lord, they did not ascend with their Bodies into Heaven, and
yet beheld all with their Eyes, Only the Holy Ghost revealed himself in their
Spirits.

10. Afterward it is seen in the next world among the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets, all which were mean simple Men, and some of them were Herds-men.

11. Also when the MESSIAH CHRIST the Champion in the Battle in Nature, assumed
the humanity, though he was the King and Prince of Men, yet he kept himself
in this world in a low estate and condition: and was a Stranger to the world.
And all his Apostles were poor despised Fishermen.

12. Nay Christ himself returns thanks to his heavenly Father, that he has
concealed it from the worldly wise men, and revealed the same to Babes. Math.
11.

13. Besides it is seen, how they also were poor Sinners, having both the
impulses of good and of bad, in Nature. And yet they reproved and preached
against the Sins of the world, yea against their own Sins, which they did by
the impulse of the holy Spirit, and not in vain glory.

14. Neither had they any Ability from their own strength and power, to teach
of Gods Mysteries in that kind, but all was by the impulse of God.

15. So I can say nothing of my self neither, nor boast or write of any thing,
save this, that I am a simple man, and besides a poor sinner, and have need to
pray daily; Lord, forgive us our sins, and say with the Apostle: O Lord, thou
have redeemed us with thy Blood.

16. Neither did I ascend into heaven, and behold all the works and creatures
of God; but the same heaven is revealed in my spirit, so that I know in the
spirit the works and creatures of God.

17. And besides, the will to that, is not my natural will, but it is the
impulse of the Spirit: and I have endured many an assault of the Devil for it.

18. But the spirit of man is descended not only from the Stars and Elements,
but there is hid therein, a spark of the light and power of God.

19. It is not an empty Word, which is set down in Genesis, the 1. chapter v. 27.
God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him. First it
has this sense and meaning viz. that he is created out of the whole Being of
the Deity.

20. The Body is from the Elements, therefore it must have Elemental food.

21. The Soul has its Original, not only from the Body, though it be in the
Body, and has irs first beginning in the Body; yet it has its source also
from without in it, by and from the Air, and so the Holy Ghost rules in it, in
that manner, as he replenisheth and fills all things, and as all things are in
God, and so God himself is all.

22. Seeing then the Holy Spirit in the Soul is creaturely, viz. the
propriety or Portion of the Soul, therefore it searches even into the Deity,
and also into Nature, for it has its Source and descent from the Being of the
whole Deity.

23. When it is kindled or enlightened by the Holy Ghost: then it beholds
what God its Father does, as a son beholds what his Father does at home in
his house.

24. It is a Member or child in the house of the heavenly Father.

25. And as the Eye of man sees even unto the Stars, from whence it has a
finite original and beginning: So the soul also sees even into the Divine
Being, wherein it lives.

26. But the Soul having its source also out of Nature, and that in Nature
there is good and bad; also, in that man has cast himself, through Sin, into
the fierceness or wrath of Nature, so that the soul is daily and hourly
defiled with Sins, therefore it knows but in part.

27. For the wrath or fierceness in Nature reigns now also in the soul. But
the Holy Ghost does not go into the wrath or fierceness, but reigns in the
source of the soul which is in the light of God, and fights against the wrath
or fierceness in the Soul.

28. And therefore the soul cannot attain unto any perfect knowledge in this
life, till at the end, when light and darkness are separated, and wrath or
fierceness, is, with the Body, consumed in the Earth, and then the soul sees
clearly and perfectly in God its Father.

29. But when the soul is kindled or enlightened by the Holy Ghost, then it
triumphs in the Body, like a huge fire, which makes the heart and reins
tremble for Joy.

30. But there is not presently a great and deep knowledge in God its Father,
but its love toward God its Father, triumphs thus in the fire of the Holy
Spirit.

31. But the knowledge of God is sown in the fire of the Holy Ghost, and at
first is as small as a Grain of Mustard seed, as Christ makes the comparison,
Matthew. 13. afterward it grows large, like a tree, and spreads it self
abroad in God its Creator.

32. Just as a Drop of water in the Ocean cannot avail much; but if a great
River runs into it, that makes a greater commotion.

33. But the time past, present, and to come, as also depth and height, near
and afar off, is all one in God, one comprehensibility.

34. And the holy Soul of man sees the same also; But in this world in part
only: it happens some times, that it sees nothing at all: for the Devil does
assault it furiously in the fierce wrathful source which is in the soul, and
oftentimes covers the noble Mustard seed, and therefore Man must always be
in fight and war.

35. In this manner, and in this knowledge of the Spirit, I will write in this
book, concerning God our Father, in whom are all things, and who himself is
all: And will handle, how all is become distinct and creaturely, and how all
drives and moves in the whole tree of life.

36. Here you shall see the 1o true ground of the Deity; 2o how all was One
Being before the Time of the world; 3o how the holy Angels were created also;
and out of what: 4o Also how the terrible Fall of Lucifer together with his
Legions happened: 5o How Heaven, Earth, Stars, and the Elements, were made: 6o
how metals, stones and other creatures in the earth are generated; 7o How the
birth of life is, and the corporeity of all things; 8o Also what the true
heaven is, in which God and his Saints do dwell: 9o And what the wrath of God
is, and the Hellish fire. 10o And how all is become kindled and enflamed.

In brief, How, and what, the Being of all Beings is.

37. The First Seven Chapters treat very plainly and comprehensibly of the
Being of God and of Angels, by similitudes, that the Reader may from one step
to the other at last come to the deep sense and true ground.

38. In the Eighth Chapter, begins the depth in the Divine Being, and so on,
the further, the deeper.

39. One thing is often repeated, and still more deeply described, for the
Readers sake, and by reason of my slow and dull apprehension.

40. That which you do not find sufficiently explained in this book, Of the
Three Principles.
you will find more clearly in the second and Of the Threefold Life of Man.
third.

41. For, corruption is the cause, why we know but in part, and have not
perfect knowledge at once.

42. Yet this Book is the WONDER of the World, which the holy Soul will
understand well enough. Thus I commit the Reader into the meek and holy Love of
God.

The First Chapter.
Of Searching out the Divine Being in Nature, of both the Qualities; the Good
and the Evil.

1. THough Flesh and Blood cannot conceive or apprehend the Being of God, but
the Spirit only when enlightened and kindled from God:

2. Yet if a man will speak of God, and say: What GOD is, Then, I. A man must
diligently consider the Powers in Nature. II. Also the whole Creation, Heaven
and Earth. III. The Stars, the Elements, and the Creatures, which are proceeded
from them. As also the holy Angels, Devils, and Men; moreover, Heaven and Hell.


Of the Two Qualities in One.
3. In this Consideration are found, Two Qualities, a Good one and an Evil one,
which are in one another as One thing, in this world, in all Powers, in the
Stars and the Elements, as also in all the Creatures: and no Creature in the
Flesh, in the Natural Life, can subsist, unless it has the Two Qualities.

What a The understanding of the Thing here called QVALITY, is the foundation
of that whole Revelation of Jacob Bebme's: and of all Mysteries; of which his
Writings are only a description. For all along, the seven Qualities are called
sometime Seven Sources, Seven Species, Kinds, Manners, Circumstances,
Conditions, Powers, Operations, or Faculties, of a Thing: Also, the Qualifying
or Fountain Spirits, which give, model, Image, or frame, the Power, Virtue,
Color, Taste, figure, shape, Constitution, Substance, Essence, and distinct
Being, of All Things; which ever were, are, shall be, or can be; in, from* and
to, ALL Eternity; in God, and all Creatures; in Heaven, in Hell, or in this
World: Also, the Forms or Properties, of Nature which is the Salitter or Power,
of God; And so, they are the seven Spirits of God: as in the Revelations of
John, Chap. 1. 4. Chapter 3. 1. Chapter 4. 5. Chapter 5. 6. ^ Sound, Smell,
QVALITY is.
4. Now here a man must consider, What the word QVALITY means, or is.

A Quality is the Mobility boiling springing and driving of a thing.

Of Heat.
5. As, for Example, Heat, which burns, consumes and drives forth all,
whatsoever comes into it which is not of the same property: and again it
enlightneth and warmeth all cold, wet, and dark things, it compacteth and
hardneth soft things.

Of Light and Fierceness.
6. It contains likewise two other kinds in it, namely, 1o Light, and 2o
Fierceness: of which take notice in this manner. The light or the heart of the
heat is in it self a pleasant joyful Glance or Luster, a power of life, an
inlightening and glance of a thing which is afar off, and is a piece or source
of the heavenly Kingdom of Joy.

7. For it makes all things in this world living and moving; all flesh, trees,
leaves, and grass, grow in this world in the power of the light and have their
life therein, viz. in the Good.

8. Again it contains, also a fierceness or wrath which burns, consumes,
and spoileth: this wrath or fierceness springs, drives, and elevateth it
self in the Light, and makes the light moveable.

9. It wrestleth and fights together in its twofold source, as one thing: It
is also one thing, but it has a double source: The light subsisteth in God
without heat, but it does not subsist so in Nature.

10. For all Qualities in nature are one in another as one Quality, in that
manner, as God is all: and as all things descend and come forth from him: For
God is the Heart or fountain of Nature, from him comes all.

11. Now the Heat reigns and predominateth in all powers in Nature, and
warmeth all, and is one source or spring in all; for if it were not so, the
water would be too cold: and the Earth would be congealed, and there would be
no Air.

12. The Heat is predominant in all, in trees, herbs and grass, and makes the
water moveable, so that, through the waters Springing out of the earth, there
grows herbs and grass, and it is therefore called a Quality, because it
operateth moves and boyleth in all, and elevateth all.

13. But the Light in the Heat gives power to all qualities, so that all
grows pleasant and joyful. Heat without Light avails not the other
qualities, but is a perdition to the Good, an evil source or Spring: for all is
spoiled in the fierceness or wrath of the Heat. Thus the light in the heat is
a quick Spring or living fountain; into which the Holy Ghost enters, but not
into the fierceness or wrath.

14. Yet the heat makes the light moveable, so that it springs and drives
forth, as is seen in winter; when the Light of the Sun is likewise upon the
earth, but the hot Rays of the Sun cannot reach into the earth, and that is
the reason why no fruit grows.

Of the qualification of the Cold Quality.
15. Cold is a Quality also, as well as Heat, it qualifieth or operateth in all
creatures, whatsoever come forth, in Nature, and in all whatsoever does move
therein, in Men, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Worms, Leaves, and Grass.

16. And Heat is set in opposition unto it, and qualifieth therein as if it
were one and the same thing, but it opposes the fierceness or rage of the
Heat, and allayeth the Heat.

17. It contains also two sorts or Species in it, which is to be Observed,
viz. It mitigateth the heat, and makes all things pleasant, and is in all
creatures, a quality of life; for no creature can subsist without cold, for it
is a springing driving Mobility in every thing.

18. The other kind or Species is Fierceness: for where it gets power, it
suppresseth all, and spoileth all, even as the Heat does; no life can subsist
in it, if the Heat did not hinder that. The fierceness of Cold is a
destruction to every life, and the house of Death, even as the Hot fierceness
also is.

Of the qualification of the Air and the Water.
19. Air has its original from Heat and Cold; ^or Heat and Cold work
powerfully, and replenish all, whereby is caused a lively and stirring motion;
but when cold allayeth or mitigateth the Heat, then both their qualities are
rarefied and made thin; and the Bitter quality draws them together, so that
they become Dewey.

20. But the Air has its original and greatest motion from Heat, and the water
has it from cold.

21. Now these Two Qualities wrestle continually one with another, the Heat
consumes the water, and the Cold condenseth or crowdeth the Air. Now air is a
cause and the spirit of every life and motion in the world, be it in flesh, or
in any of the vegetables; all whatever is, has its life from the Air, and
nothing can subsist without air, whatsoever moves and is in this world.

22. Water also Springs in every living and moving creature in this World; in
the water consists the Body of every thing, as the Spirit consists in the
Air: be it or in Flesh*
in animals, or vegetables.

23. And these two are caused by heat and cold, and qualify or mix and operate
together as one thing.

24. Now in these two qualitis two other Species or kinds are to be observed,
viz. a living and a dead operation. The Air is a living quality, if it be
temperate or moderate in a thing, and the Holy Ghost reigns in the Calmnesse
or Meekness of the Air, and all the creatures rejoice therein.

25. But there is a fierceness or wrath also in it, so that it kills and
destroys by its terrible disturbance. But the qualification takes its
original from the fierce disturbauce or elevation, so that it moves and
drives in every creature, from whenee life has its originals and does exist:
and therefore both of them must be in this life.

26. The Water also has a fierce deadly Spring, for it kills and consumes:
and so, all things that have a life and Being, must Rot and perish in the water.

27. Thus is the Heat and the Cold a cause and original of the Water and of the
Air, in which every thing acts and stands, every life and mobility stands
therein. Of which I shall write plainly, Concerning the Creation of the Stars.

Of the Influences of the other Qualities in the Three Elements, Fire, Air, and
Water.
Of the Bitter Quality.
28. The Bitter quality is the heart in every life: for, as it draws together
the Water in the Air, and also dissipateth the same, so that it becomes
separable; so also in other Creatures, as in vegetables of the Earth. For
Leaves and Grass have their green color from the Bitter quality.

29. Now if the Bitter quality dwells meekly and Gently in any Creature, then
it is the Heart or joy therein: for it dissipateth all other Evil Influences,
and is the beginning or cause of joy or of Laughing.

30. For, being moved, it causes the Creature to tremble and be joyful, and
raises it up in its whole Body: for it is as it were a glimpse or Ray of the
heavenly joyfulnesse, an elevation of the spirit, a spirit and power or virtue
in all vegetables of the Earth, and a mother of the life.

31. The Holy Ghost springs moves and drives vehemently in this quality,
for it is a part of the heavenly joyfulnesse, as I shall demonstrate afterward.

32. But it has also in it another Species or kind, namely, the fierceness or
wrath, which is the very House of Death, a Corruption of all Good, a perdition
and destruction of the Life in the Flesh.

33. For if it be elevated too much in any creature and be inflamed in the
Heat, then Flesh and Spirit separateth, and the Creature loses its Life and
must Die: for it move to and kindles the Element of Fire, for in the great
Heat and Bitterness no Flesh can subsist.

Of the Sweet Quality.
34. The Sweet Quality is set opposite to the Bitter, and is a gracious amiable
blessed and pleasant quality, a refreshing of the Life, an allaying of the
Fierceness, it makes all pleasant and friendly in every Creature, it makes
the Vegetables of the Earth fragrant and of good taste, affording fair, yellow,
white and ruddy Colors.

35. It is a glimpse and source of meekness, a pleasant Habitation of heavenly
joyfulnesse, a House or Mansion of the Holy Ghost, a qualification of Love and
Mercy, a joy of the Life.

36. But on the other side, it has also a fierce or wrathful source, a source
of Death and Corruption: For if it be kindled in the Bitter Quality in the
Element of Water, then it breeds diseases, and the botchey Plague or
Pestilence, and corruption of the Flesh.

37. But if it be kindled in the Heat and Bitterness, then it infecteth the
Element of Air, whereby is engendered a sudden spreading Plague, and sudden
Death.

Of the Sour Quality.
38. The Sour Quality is set opposite to the Bitter and Sweet, and is a good
temper to all, a refreshing and cooling when the bitter and sweet qualities are
elevated too much; it is a longing delight in the Taste, a pleasure of life, a
stirring Boiling flowing joy in every thing; a desire longing and lust of
joyfulness, a still Joy or habitation of the Spirit: thus it is a temperature
to all living and moving creatures.

39. It contains also a source of evil and corruption: For if it be too much
elevated, or stirs too much in any thing, so that it be inflamed, then it
engenders sadness, and Melancholy.

40. In the water it causes a stinck, putridnesse, and rankness, a
forgetfulness of all good things, a melancholy or sadness of life, a House of
Death, a Beginning of Sorrow, and an End of joy.

Of the Astringent or Saltish Quality.
41. The Saltish quality is a good or Temper.
Temperature in the bitter, sweet, and sour, making every thing pleasant; it
opposes the rising of the bitter Quality, as also of the sweet, and sour;
lest they should be inflamed: it is a sharp quality, a delight in the taste, a
source of life and joy.

42. It contains also fierceness and corruption: Being inflamed in the fire,
it engenders a hard, tearing and stony nature, a fierce wrathful source, a
destruction of life, whereby the Stone or Gravel is engendered in the flesh,
causing great pain and torment to the flesh.

43. But if it be inflamed in the water, then it engenders in the flesh,
scabs, sores, pox, leprosy, and is a mourning house of Death, a misery, and
forgetting of all good things.

The Second Chapter.
An Introduction, showing how men may come to apprehend The Divine, and
Natural, Being. And further, of the two Qualities.

1. ALl whatsoever has been above mentioned is therefore called Quality,
because it qualifieth operateth or frames all in the Deep above the earth,
also upon the earth, and in the earth, in one another, as ONE thing, and yet
has several distinct virtues and operations, and but one mother, from whence
descend and Spring all things.

2. And all the creatures are made and descended from these qualities, and live
therein as in their mother: and the earth and Stones descend or proceed from
thence also; and all that grows out of the earth, lives and Springs forth
out of the virtue of these qualities; no rational man can deny it.

3. Now This twofold Source, Good and Evil in every thing, is caused by the
Stars: for as the Creatures in the Earth are in their Qualities, so also are
the Stars.

4. For from the twofold Fource, every thing has its great Mobility, running,
Springing, driving and growing. For meekness in nature is a Still Rest, but
the fierceness in every power, makes all things moveable, running, and
Generative.

5. For the driving qualities cause a lust in all creatures unto evil and good,
so that every thing is desirous one of the other, to copulate and increase,
decrease, grow fair, perish, love, and hate.

6. In every Creature in this World is a Good and Evil will and source; in Men,
Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Worms, and in all that which is upon the earth; in
Gold, Silver, Copper, Tinn, Iron, Steel, Wood, Herbs, Leaves, and Grass; As
also in the earth, in stones, in the water, and all whatsoever can be thought
upon.

7. There is nothing in Nature, wherein there is not Good and Evil: every thing
moves and lives in this double impulse working or operation; be it what it
will.

8. But the holy Angels and the fierce Wrathful Devils are here to be excepted,
for these are severed apart: Each of these lives, qualifieth and rules in his
own peculiar quality.

9. The holy Angels live and qualify in the light in the good quality wherein
the Holy Ghost reigns. But the Devils live and reign in the fierce wrathful
quality, in the Quality of fierceness and wrath, destruction or perdition.

10. Yet both of these the good and the evil Angels were made out of the
qualities of Nature, from whence all things existed, only they differ in their
qualifying or Condition.

11. The Holy Angels live in the power of meekness, of the Light and
joyfulnesse, and the Devils live in the power of the rising or elevating
quality of fierceness, terror and Darkness, and cannot comprehend the light;
into which condition, they precipitated and cast themselves through their pride
and elevating of themselves, as I shall show afterward, when I shall write of
the Creation.

12. But if thou will not believe, that in this world all descends or comes
from the Stars, I will demonstrate it to thee: if thou art not a Sot or Stock,
but have some little Reason and understanding left, therefore take notice of
that which follows.

13. First behold the Sun; It is the Heart or King of all Stars, and gives
light to all stars from the East to the West, it enlightneth and warmeth all,
all lives and grows by its power; besides, the joy of all creatures stands
in its power.

14. If that should be taken away or Extinct, then all would be dark and cold,
neither would there grow any fruit, and neither man nor beast could propagate
and increase, because their heat would be extinguished, and their Seed would be
cold and chilled.

Of the Quality of the Sun.
15. If thou will be a Philosopher, and Naturalist, and search into Gods Being
in Nature, and discern how all is come to pass, then pray to God for the holy
Spirit, to enlighten thee with the same.

16. For in thy Flesh and Blood thou art not able to apprehend it, and though
thou do read it, yet it is but as a Fume or Mist before thine Eyes.

17. In the Holy Ghost alone, who is in God and also in the whole Nature out of
which all things were made; in him alone thou can search into the whole Body
or Corporeity of God, which is Nature, as also into the holy Trinity it self.

18. For the Holy Ghost goes forth from the holy Trinity, and reigns and
rules in the whole Body or Corpus of God; that is, in the whole Nature.

19. Even as the spirit of Man rules and reigns in the whole body in all the
Veins, and replenisheth the whole Man: even so the Holy Ghost replenisheth the
whole Nature, and is the Heart of Nature, and reigns in the good Qualities of
every thing.

20. Now if thou have that spirit in thee, so that it enlightneth, fills and
replenisheth thy spirit, then thou will understand what follows in this
writing.

21. But if not, then it will be with thee, as it was with the wise Heathens,
who gazed and stared on the Creation, and would search and sift it out by their
own Reason, and though with their fictions and conceits they came before Gods
countenance or Face yet they were not able to see it; but were stark blind in
the knowledge of God.

22. And as the children of Israel in the Desert could not behold Moses his
countenance, and therefore he must put a Vail before his face, when he drew
near to the people.

23. The cause of it was, they neither understood nor knew the true God and his
Will, who notwithstanding walked among them, and therefore that Vail was a sign
and type of their blindness and misunderstanding.

24. As little as a piece of work can apprehend him that made it, so little
also can Man apprehend and know God his creator, unless the Holy Ghost
enlighten him; which happens only to those, that rely not upon themselves, but
set their hope will and desires, only upon God, and move in the Holy Ghost, and
these are one Spirit with God.

25. Now if we consider rightly of the Sun and Stars, with their Corpus or
Body, operations and Qualities, then the very divine Being may be found
therein, and that the virtues of the stars are Nature it self.

26. If the whole Wheel Circumference or Sphere of the stars be well
considered, then it is soon found, that the same is the mother of all things:
or the Nature out of which all things are come, and wherein all things stand
and live, and whereby every thing moves, all things are made of these powers,
and therein they abide eternally.

27. And though, indeed they shall be changed at the end of this Time, when
good and evil shall be separated; And so in like manner Angels and men, in the
power of Nature out of which they had gotten their first beginning, shall
subsist in God, eternally.

28. But here thou must elevate thy mind in the Spirit, and consider, how the
whole Nature with all the powers, which are in Nature, also the wideness,
depth and height, also heaven, and earth, and all whatsoever is therein, and
all that is above the heavens, is together, the Body or Corporeity of God; and
the powers of the Stars are the fountain Veins, in the natural body of God,
in this world.

29. Thou must not conceive, that in the Body of the Stars, is the tryumphing
Holy Trinity, God the Father Son and Holy Ghost, in which there is no evil,
but is the Light-holy eternal fountain of joy, which is undividable, and
unchangeable, which no creature can sufficiently apprehend or express: which
dweleth and is above the Body of the Stars in it self, whose depth no creature
is able to measure or fathom.

30. But we must not so conceive, as if God were not at all in the Corpus or
Body of the Stars, and in this world: for when we say; ALL, or from Eternity
to Eternity, or All in All then we understand, the Entire GOD.

31. Take Man for a Similitude or Example, who is made after the Image or
Similitude of God, as it is written in Moses, Genesis 1. 27.

32. The Inward or hollownesse in the Body of Man, is and signifies the Deep
betwixt the Stars and the Earth.

33. The whole Body with all its parts, signifies Heaven and Earth.

34. The Flesh signifies the Earth, and is also from Earth.

35. The Blood signifies the Water, and is from the Water.

36. The Breath signifies the Air, and is also Air.

37. The Windpipe and Arteries, wherein the Air qualifieth or operateth,
signifies the Deep betwixt the Stars and the Earth, wherein fire, air and
water qualify in an elementary manner, and so the warmth the Air, and water,
qualify also in the Windpipe and Arteries, as they do in the Deep above the
Earth.

38. The Veins signify the powerful flowings out from the Stars: and are also
the powerful outgoings of the Stars: for the Start with their powers reign in
the Veins, and drive forth the Form shape and condition in Men.

39. The Entrails or Guts signify the operation of the Stars, or their
consuming of all that which is proceeded from their power, for whatsoever
themselves have made, that they consume again, and remain Still in their virtue
and power, and so the Gutts also are the consuming of all that, which man
Thrusts and stuffeth into his Gutts, even all whatsoever grows from the
power of the Stars.

40. The Heart in man Signifies the Heat, or the Element of Fire, and it is
also the Heat: for the Heat in the whole Body, has its Original in the Heart.

41. The Windpipe and Arteries, signify the Element of Air, and the Air
rules also therein.

42. The Liver signifies the Element of water, and it is also the water: for
from the Liver comes the Blood in the whole Body into all the Members. The
Liver is the Mother of the Blood.

43. The Lungs Signify the Earth, and are also of the same Quality.

44. The Feet Signify near and afar off, for near and afar off, are all one in
God: and so man by means of his Feet can come and go near and far off: let him
be where he will, he is in Nature, neither near, nor afar off; for in God these
are one thing.

45. The Hands signify Gods Omnipotence: for as God in Nature can change all
things, and make of them what he pleases: so man also can with his Hands
change all that which is grown in Nature, and can make with his Hands out of
them what he pleases: he rules with his Hands the Work and Being of the whole
Nature, and so they very well signify the Omnipotence of God.

Now observe here further;

46. The whole Body, to the Neck; signifies, and is, the round circle or
Sphere of the Stars, as also the Deep within or between the Stars, wherein
the Planets and Elements reign.

47. The Flesh signifies the Earth, which is congealed, and has no motion:
and so the flesh in it self has no Reason, Comprehensibility, or Mobility, but
is moved only by the power of the Stars, which reign in the flesh and veins.

48. No more could the earth bring forth any fruit, neither could there grow
any Metals, as Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, or stones, if the Stars did not
work in them; neither could there grow any Grass, without the operation of the
Starts.

49. The Head signifies Heaven; the same is grown on the Body, by the veins,
passages and going forth of powers; and so all the powers come again from the
Head and Brain into the Body, into the fountain-veins or Arteries of the flesh.

50. Now Heaven is a pleasant Palace of joy, wherein all the powers are, as in
the whole nature in the Stars and Elements, but not so hard working and
Springing. For every power of Heaven, has but one Species kind or form of
power, Springing very bright and meek, not promiscuously Evil and Good one in
another, as in the Stars and Elements, but very pure.

51. It is made out of the Midst of the waters, but not qualifying in such a
manner, as the water in the elements, for fierceness or wrath is not therein.
However Heaven belongs to Nature, because the Stars and Elements have their
original and power from the Heaven. 52. For Heaven is the Heart of the water,
as in all creatures, and in all that, which is in this world, the water is the
Heart thereof and nothing can Subsist without water, be it in the flesh or out
of the flesh, in the Vegetables of the earth, or in Metals and Stones, in every
thing the water is the kernel or the Heart of it.

53. And so Heaven is the Heart in Nature, wherein all the powers are, as in
the Stars and Elements, and it is a soft supple and meek matter of all powers,
as the Brain, in man's Head, is.

54. Now Heaven kindles with its power, the Stars and Elements, so that they
move and work: And so the Head of man is also like Heaven.

55. For as in Heaven all powers are meek and full of joy; And as Heaven has a
Closure or Firmament above the Stars; and yet all powers go forth from Heaven
into the Stars: so the Brain also has a Closure or Firmament between it and
the body, and yet all the powers go forth from the Brain into the Body, and
into the whole man.

56. The Head Contains the five Senses, viz. Seeing, Hearing, Smelling,
Tasting, and Feeling, wherein the Stars and Elements qualify, and therein
existeth the Sydereal or Heavenly Starry or Astral and Natural spirit in Men
and Beasts, in this flows forth Good and Evil, for it is the House of the
Stars.

57. Such power the Stars borrow from Heaven, that they can make in the flesh a
Living and moving Spirit in Man and Beast. The moving of the Heaven makes the
Stars moveable, and so the Head also makes the Body moveable.

58. Now open here the eyes of thy Spirit, and behold God thy Creator.

Question.

Here Now the Question is, From whence has Heaven, or whence Borrows it this
power, that it causes such Mobility in Nature?

Answer.

59. Here you must Lift up your Eyes Beyond Nature, into the Light-holy
Tryumphing divine power, into the unchangeable holy Trinity, which is a
triumphing Springing moveable Being, and all powers are therein, as in Nature.

60. For this is the Eternal Mother of Nature, of which Heaven, Earth, Stars,
Elements, Angels, Devils, Men, Beasts, and all have their being, and therein
ALL stands.

61. When we nominate Heaven and Earth, Stars and Elements, and all that is
therein, and all whatsoever is above the Heaven, then thereby is nominated the
Total God, which has made himself Creaturely in these above mentioned Beings,
in his power which goes forth from him.

62. But GOD in his TRINITY is unchangeable, and whatever there is in Heaven
and upon Earth, and above the Earth, has its Spring Source and Original, from
the Power which proceeds from God.

63. Yet you must not therefore conceive, that in God, there is Good and Evil,
for God Himself is the Good, and has the Name from good, which is the
triumphing Eternal Joy: only all the powers proceed from him, which you can
search out in Nature, and which are in all things.

Question.

64. Now perhaps you may say: Is there not good and Evil in Nature: and so
seeing every thing comes from God, needs must then the Evil also come from God?

Answer.

65. Behold there is a Gall in man's Body, which is poison, and he cannot live
without this Gall; for the Gall makes the Astral spirits moveable, joyous,
triumphing or laughing: for it is the source of joy.

66. But if it be inflamed or kindled in one of the Elements, then it spoileth
the whole Man, for the wrath in the Astral spirits comes from the Gall.

67. That is, when the Gall overfloweth, and runs to the Heart, then it
kindles the Element of fire, and the fire kindles the Astral spirits, which
reign in the Blood in the veins and in the Element of Water; and then the whole
Body trembles by reason of the wrath and the poison of the Gall.

68. And such a source has Joy, and from the same substance as also the wrath.
That is, when the Gall in the Loving or Sweet quality is inflamed, in that,
which man is in love withal, then the whole body trembles for joy, in which
many times the Astrall spirits are affected also, when the Gall is overflown,
and is kindled in the Sweet quality.

69. But it has no such Substance in God, for he has not flesh and blood, but
he is a Spirit, in whom all powers are; as we pray in the Lords Prayer, Thine
is the power. (John 4. 24. Matthew. 6.)

70. And as it is written of him in Isaiah 9. He is Wonderful, Counsel, Power,
Champion, Eternal Father, Prince of Peace.

71. The Bitter quality is in God also, but not in that manner as the Gall is
in Man, but it is an everlasting power, in an elevating triumphing spring or
source of Joy.

72. And though it be written in Moses, I am an angry zealous God, Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 4. 24. yet the meaning of it is not, that God is angry in himself, and
that there arises a fire of anger in the Holy Trinity.

73. No; that cannot be, for it is written, against those that hate me, in that
same Creature, the fire of anger rises up.

74. But if God should be angry in Himself, then the whole Nature would be on
fire, which will come once to pass On the Last Day in Nature, and Not in God,
but in God, the triumphing Joy will burn; it was never otherwise from eternity,
nor will it Ever be otherwise.

75. But now the elevating springing triumphing joy in God makes Heaven
triumphing and moveable, and Heaven makes the Stars and Elements moveable, and
the Stars and the Elements make the Creatures moveable,

76. Out of the Powers of God, are the Heavens proceeded: out of the Heaven are
the Stars; out of the Stars are the Elements; out of the Elements are the Earth
and the Creatures come to be.

77. Thus all had its beginning even to the Angels and Devils; which, before
the Creation of Heaven, Stars, and the Earth, were proceeded out of the same
power out of which the Heaven, the Stars, and the Earth were proceeded.

78. This is a short Entrance or Introduction, showing how the Divine and
Natural Being is to be considered. Henceforth I will describe the true Ground
and Depth concerning What God is, and how all things are framed in Gods Being.

79. Which indeed has been partly concealed from the beginning of the World to
this time, and Man with his Reason could not comprehend it.

80. But seeing God is pleased to reveal Himself in Simplicity in this last
Time; I shall give way to his Impulse and Will; I am but a very little Spark of
Light. AMEN.

The Third Chapter.
Of the most blessed Triumphing, Holy Holy Holy Trinity, GOD the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, ONE only God.

1. COurt^ous Reader, here I would have you faithfully admonished, to let go
your Opinion and Conceit, and not to Gaze after the Heathenish wisdom, nor be
offended at the simplicity of the Author: for this work comes not from his
Reason, but from the impulse of the Spirit.

2. Only be thou careful to get into thy spirit the Holy Ghost, which issues
forth from God, and He will lead thee into all truth, and reveal Himself unto
thee.

3. And then thou will see well enough in his Light and Power; even into the
holy Trinity, and understand those things which are written hereafter following.

Of GOD the FATHER.
4. When Our Savior JESUS CHRIST taught his Disciples to pray, he said; When
ye pray, say thus: Our Father, which art in Heaven, Matthew. 6.

5. The meaning is not, as if Heaven could comprehend encompasse or contain God
the Father: for itself is made by the Divine power: for Christ says, My Father
is greater then all, Joh. 10. 29.

6. And God says in the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is The
Dirt under my Feet.
my footstool, Esa. 66. What house would you build for me? I compass the
Heaven with a Span, and the Earth with three Fingers, Esa. 40. 12. Also, I will
dwell in Jacob, and Israel shall be my Tabernacle, Psalm. 135. 4. Syrac. 25. 13.

7. But in that Christ calls his Father a Heavenly Father, his meaning is, that
his Fathers luster and power appears and shines very bright and pure in
Heaven; and that, above the circle or incloure, which we behold with our Eyes,
and which we call Heaven, does appear the totally Triumphing Holy Trinity, The
Father Son and Holy Ghost.

8. Christ also thereby distinguishes his Heavenly Father from the Father of
Nature, which is indeed the Stars and the Elements, these are our Natural
Father, out of which we are made, and by whose impulse we live here in this
world, and from whence we have our food and nourishment.

9. But God is therefore Our Heavenly Father, in that our Soul continually
longs after him, and is desirous of him, yea it thirsts and hungreth
continually after him.

10. The Body hungreth and thirsts after the Father of Nature, which is viz.
the Stars and the Elements, and that Father also feeds and nourishes the
Body.

11. But the Soul thirsts after the heavenly Holy Father, and he also gives
meat and drink to it, feeding it with his holy Spirit, and the spring source or
fountain of joy.

12. Yet we have not two Fathers, but only One: for Heaven is made by his
Power, and the Stars out of his Wisdom, which is in him, and proceeds forth
from him.

Of the Substance and Property of the Father.
13. When we consider the whole Nature and its property, then we see the Father.

14. When we behold Heaven and the Stars, then we behold his eternal Power and
Wisdom: so many Stars as stand in the whole Heaven, which are innumerable and
incomprehensible to Reason, and some of them are not visible; so manifold and
various is the Power and Wisdom of God the Father.

15. But Every Star in Heaven Differs in its power and Quality, which also
makes so many Distinctions in and among the Creatures upon the Earth, and in
the whole Creation.

16. But all the Powers, which are in Nature, proceed from God the Father; All
Light, Heat Cold, Air, Water, and all the powers of the Earth; Bitter, Sour,
Sweet, Astringent, Hard, and Soft, and more then can be Reckoned; all have
their beginning from the Father.

17. Therefore if a Man would liken the Father to any thing, he should liken
him to the Round Globe of Heaven.

18. Thou must not conceive here, that the very power, which is in the Father,
stands in a Peculiar severed or divided part and place in the Father, as the
Stars do, in Heaven.

19. No! but the Spirit shows that all the powers in the Father are one in
another, as one power.

20. A Resemblance Image or Figure whereof, we have in the Prophet Ezekiel the
1. Chap. Who sees the Lord in the Spirit and resemblance, like a wheel,
having Four other wheels one in another, the Four being like one another, and
when they moved, they went Strait forward, which way soever the Wind did sit,
or Blow, and that way they went all forward, having no cause of returning.

21. And thus it is with God the Father; for all the powers are in the Father,
one in another, as one power; and all powers Consist in the Father, in an
unsearcheable Light and Clarity, or Brightness and Glory.

22. Yet thou must not think, that God who is in Heaven and above the Heaven,
does there stand and hover, like a power and quality which has in it neither
Reason, nor knowledge in it.

23. As the Sun which turns round in its circle, and shoots forth from it
self Heat and Light, whether it be for benefit or hurt to the Earth and
Creatures, which indeed would be for hurt, if the other Planets and Stars did
not hinder.

24. No! the Father is not so, but he is an All-mighty, All-wise, All-knowing,
All-seeing, All-hearing, All-smelling, All-feeling, All-tasting God, who in
himself is meek, friendly, gracious, merciful, and full of Joy, yea Joy it self.

25. And he is thus from Eternity to eternity unchangeably: He never changed
himself in his Being, neither will he change himself in all Eternity.

26. He is proceeded or born of nothing, but Himself is all in Eternity; and
all whatsoever is, is come from his power, which from Eternity goes forth from
him.

27. His Immensenesse Height and Depth, no Creature, no not any Angel in
Heaven, can search into it, but the Angels live in the power of the Father very
meekly, and full of Joy, and they always Sing in the power of the Father.

Of GOD the SON.
28. If a Man will see God the Son, he must once more look upon natural
things, otherwise I cannot write of him: the Spirit indeed beholds him, but
that can neither be spoken nor written; for the Divine Being consists in
power, which can neither be written nor spoken.

29. Therefore we must use Similitudes, if we intend to speak of God: for we
live in this world, as men who know but in part, and are made of that which is
but in part. Therefore I cite the Reader into the life to come, where and when
I shall speak more properly and more clearly of this high Article.

30. In the mean while, the loving Reader is to attend to the sense and meaning
of the Spirit, and then he will not fail to get a little refreshing, if he has
but any hunger in him.

Now Observe.

31. The Turks and Heathens say, God has no Son: Set Open your Eyes wide,
here; and do not make your selves stark blind, and you will see the Son.

32. The Father is all, and all power Subsisteth in the Father: He is the
Beginning and the End of all things; and besides and beyond him is nothing; and
whatever is, is from the Father.

33. For before the beginning of the Creation of the Creatures, there was
nothing but only GOD; and where there is nothing, out of that nothing will be.
All things must have a Cause or Root, or else Nothing will be.

34. Yet you are not to think that the Son is another God, then the Father.
Neither should you think, that the Son is without or besides the Father, and
that he is a severed part or divided piece; as when two men stand one by
another, where one comprehends not the other.

35. No! the Father and the Son is not of such a substance, or such a kind of
thing: for the Father is not an Image, to be likened to any thing; but the
Father is the fountain of all powers, and all the powers are one in another as
one power, and therefore he is said to be ONE only GOD.

36. Otherwise if his powers were divided, then he were not Al-mighty, but now
he is the Self-subsisting, All-mighty, and All-powerful God.

37. And the Son is the Heart in the Father, all the powers, which are in the
Father, are the propriety of the Father; and the Son is the Heart or the
Kernel or Pith, in all the powers, in the whole Father, and he is the cause of
the springing Joy in all powers in the whole Father.

38. From the Son, who is the Fathers Heart in all his powers, the Eternal
Joy arises and springs in all the powers of the Father, such a joy, as no
eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither has ever entered into the Heart of any
Man, as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

39. But if a man here on Earth be enlightened with the Holy Ghost from the
fountain of JESUS CHRIST, so that the spirits of Nature, which signify the
Father, be kindled in him, then there arises such a Joy in his Heart, and it
goes forth into all his veins, so that the whole body trembles, and the
Soulish animal spirit triumphs, as if it were siting in the holy Trinity,
which is understood only by those, that have been Guests in that place.

40. And this is but a Type or Glimpse of the Son of God in Man, whereby
Faith is strengthened and preserved: for the joy cannot be so great in an
earthen vessel, as in a heavenly, wherein the perfect power of God is fully.

Now here I must write a Similitude.

41. I will show thee a Similitude in Nature, signifying how the holy Being in
the holy Trinity, is.

42. Consider Heaven, which is a round Globe, having neither beginning nor end,
but its beginning and end is every where, which way soever you look upon it:
and so is God, who is in and above the Heaven, he has neither beginning nor
end.

43. Now consider further; the Circle or Sphere of the Stars, they denote the
various Powers and Wisdom of the Father, and they are made also by the Power
and Wisdom of the Father.

44. Now the Heaven, the Stars, and the whole Deep between the Stars, together
with the Earth; signify, the Father.

45. And the Seven Planets, signify, the seven Spirits of God, or the Princes
of the Angels, among which also Lord LUCIFER was one, before his Fall; which
all were made out of the Father in the beginning of the creation of Angels,
before the Time of this World.

46. Now Observe: The Sun stirs in the midst in the Deep between the Stars
in a round circle, and is the heart of the Stars, and gives Light and power to
all the stars, so tempering the power of the stars, that all becomes
pleasant and joyful.

47. It enlighteneth also the Heaven, the Stars, and the Deep above the Earth,
working in all things that are in this world, and so rightly signifies, the
Son of God.

48. For, as the Sun stands in the midst betwixt the Stars and the Earth,
enlightening all powers, and is the Light and Heart of all the powers, and is
all the Joy in this world; besides, all beauty and pleasantness stands in
the light and power of the Sun.

49. Even so, the Son of God in the Father, is the Heart in the Father, and
shines in all the powers of the Father; his power is the moving springing joy
in all the powers of the Father, and shines in the whole Father, as the Sun
does in the whole world.

50. If the Earth should be taken away, which signifies, the House of Misery
Trouble or of Hell; then the whole Deep would be Light in one place, as well as
in another: as indeed the whole Deep in the Father is as light in one place as
in another, from the Luster of the Son of God.

51. And as the Sun is a Self-subsisting creature, power, and Light; which
shines not forth from or out of all creatures, but in and into all creatures,
and all creatures rejoice in its power:

52. So the Son in the Father, is a self-^ubsisting person, and enligheneth
all the powers in the Father, and is the Fathers joy or Heart in his Center, or
the Midst of him.

Observe here the Great Mystery of God.

53. The Sun is made or Generated from all the Stars, and is a Light, taken
from the whole Nature, and shines again, into the whole Nature of this World,
it is united with the other Stars, as if it self together with all the stars,
were but one starr.

54. And so the Son of God is Continually Generated from all the powers of
his Father, ^ from Eternity, (...) is not made, but the Heart and Luster
shining forth from the powers of his Heavenly Father; a self-subsisting Person,
the Center, or Body of the Luster in the deep.

55. For the Fathers power Generateth the Son continually from Eternity, to
Eternity: but if the Father should cease to Generate, then the Son would be
no more: also if the Son should shine no more in the Father, then the Father
would be a dark valley: also then the Fathers power would not rise from
Eternity, to Eternity, and so the Divine Being would not Subsist.

56. Thus the Father is the selfe-subsisting Being of all powers, and the son
is the heart in the Father, which is Generated continually out of all the
powers of the Father, and who again enlightneth the powers of the Father.

57. Do not conceive, that the Son in the Father is so mixed, that his Person
can neither be seen nor known: No; for if it were so, then it were but one
Person.

58. For as the Sun shines not from or out of the other stars, though it had
its original from the other stars; so also the Son shines not from or out of
the powers of the Father, as to his Body or Corporeity.

59. And though he be generated continually out of the powers of the Father;
And yet he shines back again into the powers of the Fahter, for he is another
Person than the Father, but not another God.

60. He is eternally in the Father, and the Father generateth him continually
from eternity to eternity, and the Father and the Son is ONE God, of an
Equal Being in Power and Omnipotence.

61. The Son sees, tastes, hears, feels, smells and comprehends
All, as the Father does; in His power, all lives and is, whatsoever is Good,
as in the Father; But that which is Bad or Evil is not in Him.

Of GOD the Holy GHOST.
62. God the Holy Ghost, is the Third Person in the triumphing holy Deity, and
proceeds from the Father and the Son, (...) the holy moving spring or
fountain of Joy in the whole Father.

63. He is a pleasant, meek quiet Wind or whispering Breathor Still voice, out
of all the powers of the Father and of the Son; as, on Mount Horeb with the
Prophet Eliah, 1 Kings 19. 12. And on Whitsunday or the Day of Pentecost, with
the Apostles, Act. 2. may be perceived.

64. Therefore if we will describe his Person, substance and property from the
true Ground; it must be represented in a Similitude. For the Spirit cannot be
written down, being no Creature, but the moving flowing boiling power of God.

65. Consider, the Sun and Stars again; the Stars being many and several,
inexpressible and innumerable, they signify the Father: out of the stars the
Sun is come to be; for God has made it out of them, and it signifies the
Son of God.

66. And from the Sun and stars proceed the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water,
and Earth: as hereafter I shall demonstrate plainly, when I shall write of the
Creation.

Now Observe:

67. The three Elements, Fire, Air and Water; have a threefold moving or
qualification, but proceed from one Body: and consider, the fire or heat swells
and flies aloft from the Sun and stars; and from the Heat the Air or Expandeth
it self.
swells and flies aloft; and from the Air comes the Water.

68. And in this motion or qualification consists the life and spirit of all
creatures, and whatever can be named in this world; and that signifies the
Holy Ghost.

69. And as the three Elements, fire air and water, proceed from the Sun and
stars, and are one Body in one another, and cause the living motion, and the
spirit of all the Creatures of this world:

70. So the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and causes
the living motion in all the powers of the Father.

71. And as the three Elements move in the Deep, as a self-subsisting spirit,
and cause heat, cold, and clouds, and do flow forth from the power of all the
stars; and as all the powers of the Sun and stars are in the three Elements, as
if they themselves were the Sun and Stars, from whence is the life and spirit
of all Creatures, and does consist therein:

72. Just so the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and
moves in the whole Father.

Observe here, the deep Mystery.

72. All the Stars which men see, and those which they do not see, they all
signify the Power of God the Father: and out of these stars is Generated the
Sun, which is the Heart of all the stars.

73. Also there goes forth from all the stars, the Power which is in every
star, into the Deep: And the Power, Heat and shining of the Sun goes likewise
into the Deep.

74. And in the Deep, the power of all Stars, together with the Heat and luster
of the Sun, are all but one thing: a moving boiling hovering, like a Spirit or
Matter. Only it has not Reason, for it is not the Holy Spirit; and thus also
the fourth Element must adhere or belong to a natural spirit; or it is not
capable of Reason.

And thus God the Father goes forth in his Deep out of all his powers, and
Generateth the Splendour the Heart or the Son of God in his Center.]

76. Which may be likened to the round Globe of the Sun, which shines upwards,
downwards, and on every side; And so the splendour together with all the powers,
goes forth from the Son of God in the whole Father.

77. Now, in the whole Deep of the Father, Externally without the Son, there
is nothing but the manifold and unmeasurable or unsearchable Power of the
Father.

78. And the unsearchable Power and Light of the Son, is in the Deep of the
Father, a living, all-powerful, all-knowing, all-hearing, all-seeing,
all-smelling, all-tasting, all-feeling Spirit, wherein is all power splendour
and wisdom, as in the Father and the Son.

79. And as in the four Elements, there is the power and splendour of the Sun
and all the stars: so it is in the whole Deep of the Father: and that is, and
is rightly called, the Holy Ghost, which is the third self-subsisting Person in
the Deity.

Of the Holy TRINITY.
80. Now when we speak or write of the Three Persons in the Deity, you must not
conceive that therefore there are three Gods, each Reigning and Ruling by
himself, like temporal Kings on the Earth.

81. No: or the Trinity has no such substance and Being in God.
Such a Substance and Being, is not in God: for the Divine Being consiseth in
power and not in Body or flesh.

82. The Father is the whole Divine power, whence all creatures have proceeded;
and has been always from Eternity: He has neither beginning nor end.

83. The Son is in the Father, being the Fathers Heart or Light, and the
Father generateth the Son continually from Eternity, to Eternity; and the
Sons Power and Splendour shines back again in the whole Father, as the Sun
does in the whole World.

84. Also the Son is another person then the Father, but not Externally
without or severed from the Father, nor is he any other God then the Father is;
his power, Splendour, and Omnipotence is no less then the whole Father.

85. The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is the Third
self-subsisting person in the Deity: As, the Elements in this World go forth
from the Sun and the Stars, and are the moving Spirit, which is in every thing
in this world.

86. So the Holy Ghost is the moving Spirit in the whole Father, and proceeds
or goes forth from Eternity to Eternity continually from the Father and Son,
and replenisheth the whole Father; he is nothing Less, or Greater then the
Father and Son; His moving power is in the whole Father.

87. All things in this World are according to the similitude of this Ternary.
Ye blind Jews, Turks, and Heathens, open wide the Eyes of your Mind: I must
show you, in your Body, and in every Natural thing, in Men, Beasts, Fowls, and
worms; also in wood, stone, leaves and grass, the Likeness of the Holy Ternary
in God.

Objection.

88. Ye say, there is but One Being in God, and that, God has no Son.

Answer.

89. Open your Eyes, and consider your Selves: Man is made according to the
similitude, and out of the power of God in his Ternary. Behold thy inward man,
and then thou will see it most plainly, and clearly, if thou art not a fool,
and an irrational Beast; therefore observe.

60. In thy Heart, in thy Veins, and in thy Brain, thou have thy spirit; and
all the powers which move in thy heart, in thy Veins, and in thy Brain, wherein
thy Life consists, signifies God the Father.

91. From that power Springs up thy Light, so that thou see, understandest
and know in the same power, what thou art to do; for that Light glimmereth
in thy whole Body: and the whole Body moves in the power and knowledge of the
Light, for the Body helps all the Members in the knowledge of the Light:
which signifies, God the Son.

92. For as the Father generateth the Son out of his power, and as the Son
shines back in the whole Father: so in like manner the Power of thy Heart, of
thy Veins, and of thy Brain, generateth a Light which shines in all thy powers
in thy whole Body. Open the Eyes of thy Mind, consider it, and you shall find
it so.

93. And Observe: As from the Father and the Son there goes forth the Holy
Ghost, and is a self-subsisting Person in the Deity, and moves in the whole
Father; so also out of the powers of thy heart, veins and thy brain, goes
forth the Power which moves in thy whole Body; and out of thy light goes
forth in the same Power, Reason, Understanding, skill, and Wisdom, to govern
the whole body, and to distinguish all whatsoever is Externally without the
Body. Extra Corpus.


94. And both these are but one in the government of thy Mind, viz. thy spirit,
which signifies God the Holy Ghost* also the Holy Ghost from God rules in
this spirit in thee* if thou art a child of Light and not of darkness.

95. For in respect of this light understanding and government, is man
distinguished from Beasts, and is an Angel of God, as I shall clearly show,
when I shall write of the Creation of Man.

96. Therefore observe exactly, and take notice of the order of this Book, and
thou will find,

Whatsoeve thy Heart desires, or ever longed for.

97. Thus you find in Man three fountains. First the Power in thy whole Mind,
which signifies, God the Father; Then secondly, the Light in thy whole mind,
enlightening the whole Mind, which signifies, God the Son: Then thirdly,
there goes forth out of all thy powers, and out of thy light also, a spirit,
which has understanding.

98. For, all the Veins together with the Light in thee, as also thy Heart and
thy Brain, and all whatsoever is in thee, make or Constitute that spirit, and
that is thy Soul; and it well signifies, the Holy Ghost, which goes forth
from the Father and the Son, and reigns in the whole Father: for the Soul
of Man reigns in the whole Body.

99. But the Body or the beastial flesh in man, signifies, the dead corrupted
Earth, which Man through his Fall has so framed it to himself, as more shall
be spoken of in its due place.

100. The Soul contains the first Principle, and the Soul's spirit the second
principle, in Ternario sancto, in the Holy Ternary; and the outward spirit,
viz. the Astral, contains the third principle of this world.

101. Thus you find also the Ternarie of the Deity, in Beasts: for as the
Spirit of a man, is, and Existeth, so it is also in a Beast, and therein is no
difference.

102. But the difference, lies in this, that Man is made by God himself out
of the best Kernel or Pith of Nature, to be his Angel and Similitude, and God
Rules in man with his holy Spirit; so that Man can Speak discourse distinguish
and understand all things.

103. But a Beast is made of the wild Nature of this World; the Stars and
Elements have generated Beasts through their motion, according to the will of
God.

104. And so the spirit in Birds, Fowls and Worms, Existeth also: and all
has its threefold source in similitude to the Ternary in the Deity.

105. And you see also the Ternarie of the Deity in Wood and Stones, as also
Herbs, Leaves, and in Grass: only these are all Earthly.

106. However Nature Generateth nothing, be it what it will in this World, and
though perhaps it should stand or continue, but scarce a Minute, yet it is all
generated in the Ternarie, or according to the similitude of God,

107. Now Observe: In either wood, stone or herbs, there are three things
contained, neither can any thing be generated or grow, if but one of the three
should be left out.

108. I. First there is the Power, from which a Body comes to be, whether wood,
stone, or herbs. II. After that in the same, there is a Sap in that thing,
which is the Heart of the thing: III. And thirdly, there is in it a springing
flowing Power, Smell or Taste, which is the spirit of the thing, whereby it
grows and increases. Now if any of these three fail, the thing cannot
subsist.


109. Thus you find in Every thing a Similitude of the Ternarie in the Divine
Being; look upon what you will; let no man make himself so stark blind, as to
think otherwise, or to think that God has no Son and Holy Ghost.

110. I shall make this more plain and clear, when I come to write of the
Creation: for I do not borrow of other men in my Writings: And though indeed I
quote many Examples and Testimonies of Gods Saints; Yet all is written by God
in my Mind, so that I absolutely and infallibly believe, know, and see it, yet
not in the flesh, but in the spirit, in the impulse and motion of God.

III. It is not so to be understood, that my Reason is greater or higher than
all other men's living, but I am the Lords Twigg or Branch, and am a very mean
and little Spark of his; he may set me where he pleases, I cannot hinder him
in that.

112. Neither is this my Natural will, that I can do it by my own small
ability, for if the Spirit were withdrawn from me, then I could neither know
nor understand my own Writings, and I must on every side fight and struggle
with the Devil, and lie open to temptation and affliction as well as other men.

113. But in the following Chapters you will soon see the Devil and his Kingdom
laid naked, his Pride and Reproach shall suddenly be discovered.

The Fourth Chapter.
Of the Creation of the Holy Angels.

An Instruction, or open Gate of Heaven.
1. THe Learned, and almost all Writers, have very much Cumbred, and troubled
their Heads mightily, to search contrive and conceive in Nature, (and have
brought forth many and sundry Opinions) concerning How, and Of what, the Holy
Angels were framed: And on the other side, what that horrible Fall of the Great
Prince Lucifer was: or* How he became so base a wicked and fierce wrathful
Devil; From whence that Evil Quality should Spring, or, What drove him to it?

2. And although this ground and great Mystery has remained hidden from the
beginning of the world, and that humane flesh and blood is not able to conceive
or apprehend it:

3. Yet God, who created the world, will reveal himself, now at the End, and
all great Mysteries will be manifested or revealed: to intimate, that the great
Day of Revelation and the Final Judgment, is ne^^, and daily to be expected.

4. On which, will be restored again all that which has been lost through
Adam; and in which the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of the Devil shall
be severed asunder, in this world.

5. But How all this will be done, God will reveal, in the highest plainness,
and simplicity, so that no man will be able to Oppose Him.

6. Therefore every one should lift up his Eyes, for his Redemption draws
near; And not seek after base covetousness, pride and wanton luxurious
stateliness, supposing it the best life to be Here; whereas in their luxury,
they sit in the midst of Hell, to wait upon Lucifer as his Guard.

7. Which themselves shall suddenly be sure to see with great terror, anguish
and eternal despair, as also to their shame and scorn: whereof the Devils are a
terrible Example, who were once the fairest and brightest Angels in Heaven, as
I shall reveal write and manifest here following; I will suffer Gods impulse, I
am not able to withstand it.

Of the Divine Quality.
8. Since thou have perceived, in the Third Chapter, the Ground of the Ternarie
in the Divine Being, I shall here show plainly, the power and operation, as
also the Qualities or qualification in the Divine Being; or, from what the
Angels were properly and peculiarly created, or what their Body and Power is.

9. And as I said before: All the powers or virtues are in God the Father, and
no man with his sense and thoughts can reach to apprehend it. But in the Stars
and the Elements, as also by all the creatures in the whole creation of this
World, a Man may clearly know it.

10. All power and virtue is in God the Father, and proceeds also forth from
him, as Light, Heat, Cold, Soft, Gentle, Sweet, Bitter, Sour, astringent or
harsh, sound or noise, and much more that is not possible to be spoken or
apprehended. All these are in God the Father, one in another as one power, and
yet all these powers move in his Exit or going forth.

11. But the powers in God do not operate or qualify in that manner, as in
Nature, in the stars, and Elements, or in the creatures.

12. No; you must not conceive it so: For Lord Lucifer in his Elevation made
the powers of impure Nature thus burning, bitter, cold, astringent, sour, dark
and unclean.

13. But in the Father, all powers are mild, soft, like Heaven, very full of
joy, for all the powers triumph in one another, and their voice or sound rises
up from Eternity, to Eternity.

14. There is nothing in them but Love, meekness, mercy, friendlinesse, or
courtesy; even such a tryumphing, rising source or fountain of joy wherein all
the voices of Heavenly joyfulnesse sound forth, so as no man is able to
express it, nor can it be likened to any thing.

15. But if a man will Liken it to any thing, it may nearest be Likened to the
Soul of Man, when kindled or enlightened by the Holy Ghost.

16. For then it is thus joyful and tryumphing, and all powers rise up in it,
and triumph, and so raise the Bestial Body, that it trembles: this is a true
glimpse of the divine Quality, as the quality is in God; But in God all is
Spirit.

17. The quality of water, is not of such a running and Qualifying condition or
manner in God, as it is in this World; but is a Spirit, very bright clear and
thin, wherein the Holy Ghost rises up; a mere power.

18. The bitter Quality Qualifieth in the sweet, astringent or harsh and sour
Quality, and the Love rises up therein from Eternity, to Eternity.

19. For the Love in the Light and clarity or Glorious Brightness goes forth
from the Heart or Son of God, in all the powers of the Father, and the Holy
Ghost moves in them all.

20. And this, in the Deep of the Father, is Like a Divine or SALNITRUM.
SALITTER, which I must needs liken to the Earth, which before its corruption
was even such a Salitter.

21. But not so Hard, Cold, Bitter, Sour, and Dark, but like the Deep or like
Heaven, very clear and pure, wherein all powers were Good fair and Heavenly:
But that Prince Lucifer thus Spoiled them; as you shall perceive here following.

22. This Heavenly Salitter, or powers one in another, generate Heavenly joyful
fruits and colors; all manner of Trees and Plants, on which do grow the fair
pleasant and lovely fruits of life.

23. There Spring up also in these powers and virtues, all manner of Blossoms
and Flowers, with fair Heavenly colors and smells.

24. They are of Several Tastes, each according to its Quality and kind, very
Holy, Divine, and full of joy.

25. For every Quality bears its own fruit, as it is in the corrupted
murtherous Den or dark Valley and Dungeon of the Earth; there spring up all
manner of Earthly Trees, Plants, Flowers, and Fruits.

26. Also within the Earth, Grow curious precious Stones, Silver, and Gold, and
these are a Type of the Heavenly Generating or Production.

27. Nature Labors to its utmost diligence upon this corrupted Dead Earth,
that it might generate Heavenly forms and Species or Kinds; but it generateth
only Dead, Dark, and Hard fruit, which are no more then a mere shadow or Type
of the Heavenly.

28. Moreover its fruit is altogether fierce, or biting, Bitter, Sour,
astringent or harsh and Hot, also Cold, hard and naught; they have Scarce any
spark or spice of Goodness in them.

29. Their Sap and spirit is mixed with hellish quality, their scent or smell
is a very stink; thus has Lord Lucifer caused them to be, as I shall clearly
show hereafter.

30. Now when I write of Trees, Plants and Fruits, you must not understand them
to be Earthly, like those that are in this world: for it is not my meaning,
that there should grow in heaven, such Dead hard Trees of wood; or such stones,
as consist of an earthly Quality.

31. No; but my meaning is heavenly and spiritual, yet truly and properly such:
I mean no other thing, Then what I set down in the Letter.

32. In the Divine Pomp and State are especially two things to be considered:
first the Salitter or the Divine powers, which are moving springing powers.

33. In that same power grows up and is generated fruit according to every
quality and species or kind, viz. heavenly Trees and Plants, which without
ceasing bear fruit, fairly blossom, and grow in divine power: so Joyfully, that
I can neither speak nor write it down:

34. But stammer it like a child, that is learning to speak, and can by no
means rightly call it, as the Spirit gives it forth, to be known.

35. The second form or property of Heaven in the divine pomp or state is
Mercurius, or the Sound, as, in the Salitter of the Earth, there is the Sound,
whence there grows Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, and the like; of which men
make all manner of Musical Instruments for founding; or for mirth, as Bells,
Organ Pipes, and other things that make a sound: Also there is likewise a Sound
in all the creatures upon earth, else all would be in stillnesse and silence.

36. By that sound in Heaven all powers are moved, so that all things grow
Joyfully, and generate very beautifully: And as the Divine power is manifold
and various, so also the sound or Mercurius is also manifold and various.

37. For, when the powers spring up in God, they touch and stir one another
and move one in another, and so there is a constant harmony, mixing or Consort,
from whence go forth all manner of colors.

38. And in those Colors grow all manner of Fruits; which rise or spring up in
the Salitter, and the Mercurius or found mingleth it self therewith, and rises
up in all the powers of the Father, and then sounding, and Tunes, rise up in
the heavenly joyfulnesse.

39. If you should in this world bring many thousand kinds of musical
Instruments together, and all should be tuned in the best manner most
artificially, and the most skilful Masters of Music should play on them in
consort together, all would be no more then the Howlings and barkings of Dogs
in comparison of the Divine Music, which rises up through the Divine Sound
and Tunes from Eternity to Eternity.

40. Further, if thou will consider the heavenly Divine Pomp State and Glory,
and conceive how it is, and what manner of Sprouting Branching delight and joy
there is in it;

41. View this world diligently, and consider what manner of fruit sprouts
branches and increases, grows out of the Salitter of the Earth, from Trees,
Plants, Herbs, Roots, Flowers, Oils, Wine, Corn and whatever else there is
that thy heart can find out: all is a Type of the heavenly Pomp.

42. For, the earthly and corrupt nature has continually labored from the
beginning of its Creation to this day to bring forth heavenly forms or shapes
in the Earth, as also in Man and Beasts: as men very well see that every year
New Arts* are invented and brought to Light, which has been constantly so from
the beginning to this time.

43. But yet Nature has not been able to bring forth heavenly power virtue and
qualities, therefore its fruit is half dead, corrupt, and impure.

44. You must not think, that in the divine pomp, there comes forth, Beasts,
Worms and other creatures in flesh, as in this World they do: No; but I mean
only the wonderful proportion, power, virtue, and comeliness of feature in
them.

45. And Nature labors with highest diligence, to produce in its Power
heavenly figures shapes or forms, as we see in Men, Beasts, Fowls and Worms,
as also in the increase or growth of the Earth, that all things are done, show,
and appear most curiously, Artificially, and delicately.

46. For Nature would fain be delivered from this Vanity, that it might
procreate heavenly forms in the holy Power.

47. For, in the Divine Pomp likewise go forth all manner of Sprouting and
Vegetation of Trees, Plants, and all manner of fruit, and every one bears its
own fruit, yet not in an earthly quality and kind, but in a Divine quality form
and kind.

48. Those fruits are not of so dead, hard, bitter, sour and astringent a
relish for food; nor do they rot and grow stinking, as those in this world do;
but all consist in holy Divine power.

49. Their Constitution or composition is from Divine power, from the Salitter
and Mercurius of the divine pomp, and are the food of the holy Angels.

50. If man's abominable Fall had not spoiled it, he would have been feasted, in
such a manner, in this world, and have eaten such fruit as indeed they were
presented to him in Paradise, in a twofold manner.

51. But the infectious Lust, longing and Malady of the Devil, who had infected
and spoiled the Salitter, of which Adam was made, that brought Man into an Evil
Longing or Lust to eat of both the Qualities the Evil and the Good, whereof I
shall write clearly here following, and demonstrate it.

Of the Creation of Angels.
52. The Spirit shows plainly and clearly, that before the Creation of the
Angels, the Divine Being with its rising and qualifying was from eternity, and
remained so in the Creation of Angels, as it is also at this day, and will so
continue in and to Eternity.

53. And the Space Room or place of this world, together with the creaturely
heaven, which we behold with our eyes, as also the Space or Place of the Earth
and Stars together with the Deep, was in such a form as now at this day it is
in, aloft, above the Heavens, in the Divine Pomp.

But was the Kingdom of the Great Prince Lucifer, in the Creation of the
Angels: [ Understand according to the second Principle, out of which he was
thrust forth into the outermost, which also is the very innermost of all.

55. Who by his proud elevation in his Kingdom, ^indled the qualities, or the
divine S^litter, out of Understand the Center of his Nature or the first
Principle:] and set it on fire.

56. Supposing thereby he should grow hugely and highly light and qualifying,
above the Son of God: but he became a Fool, therefore this place or space in
its burning quality could not subsist in God, whereupon the Creation of this
world ensued.

57. But this world at the End, in Gods appointed Time, will be set again to
its first place, as it was before the Creation of Angels, and Lord Lucifer will
have a hole or dungeon for his eternal habitation therein, and he will remain
eternally in his kindled quality, which will be an eternal base filthy
reproachful Habitation, an empty void dark valley or dungeon, a hole of
fierceness or wrath.

Now Observe;

58. God in his moving, created the holy Angels at once, not out of a strange
matter, but out of himself, out of his own power, and eternal wisdom.

59. But the Philosophers had this opinion, as if God had made the Angels only
out of the light: but they erred therein, for they were made not only out of
the light, but out of all the Powers of God.

60. And as I have showed before, there are two things especially to be
observed in the Deep of God the Father: first the power, or all Powers of God
the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, are very lovely, pleasant and
various, and yet are all One in another as one power.

61. And as the powers of all the stars rule in the Air, so also in God: but
every power in God Shows it self with its operation, severally and distinctly.

62. Then afterward the Sound is in every power, and the Tone or tune of the
Sound is according to the quality of every power; and therein consists the
total Heavenly Kingdom of Joy, and so from this divine Salitter and Mercurius
all Angels are made, viz. out of the Body of Nature.

Question.

63. But thou may here ask: How are they made or generated; or in what way
and manner?

Answer.

64. If I had the tongue of an Angel, and thou had an Angelical
understanding, we might very finely discourse of it. But the Spirit only does
see it, and the tongue cannot advance toward it. For I can use no other words,
then the words of this world: but now the Holy Ghost being in thee, thy Soul
will well apprehend it.

65. For behold the total holy Trinity has with its moving Composed compacted
or figured a Body, or Image out of it self, like a little God, but not so fully
or strongly going forth, as the whole Trinity, yet in some measure according to
the extent and Capacity of the Creatures.

66. For in God there is neither beginning nor end, but the Angels have a
beginning and end, but not circumscriptive apprehensive palpable or conclusive:
for an Angel can sometime be great, and suddenly little again, their alteration
is as swift as man's thoughts are. All qualities and powers are in an Angel, as
they are in the whole Deity.

67. But thou must rightly understand this. They are made and compacted
together, or figured out of the Salitter and Mercurius, that is, out of the
exit or excrescence,

68. Consider this Similitude: Out of the Sun and Stars, go forth the Elements,
and they make in the Salitter of the Earth a living spirit, and the stars
remain in their Circle or Sphere, and that Spirit likewise gets the quality
of the stars.

69. But now the Spirit after its compaction, is a severed distinct thing, and
has a substance of its own as all the Stars have, and the stars also are and
remain severed and distinct things, each of them is free to it self.

70. Nevertheless the quality of the Stars reigns in the Spirit; yet the
Spirit can and may raise or demerse it self in its own qualities, or may live
in the influences of the stars, as it pleases: for it is free, for it has
gotten the qualities which it has in it self, for its own.

71. And though it had them at the beginning from the stars, yet they are now
its proper own: Just as a mother when she has the seed in her self, as long as
she has it in her, and that it is a feed, it is hers: but when the seed is
become a child, then it is no more the mothers, but is the child's proper own.

72. And though the child be in the mothers house, and the mother nourishes
the child with her food, and that the child could not live without the mother,
yet both the Body and the Spirit, which are generated out of the mother, are
the Child's proper own, and it retains its corporeal right to it self.

73. And in this manner it is with the Angels, they are also all composed
framed or figured out of the Divine Seed, but every one has his own Body to it
self, though they are in Gods house, and feed on the fruit of their mother, out
of which they were made, yet their Bodies are their proper own.

74. But the quality Externally without them, or externally without their
Bodies, viz. their mother; is not their propriety, as also their mother is not
the child's propriety; also the mothers food is not the (...) and then we shall
get the Angelical Clarity or Glory and Purity again.

Question.

11. Now thou will ask; How are the Angels then Created according to the Image
of God?

Answer.

12. First, the compacted figured Body is indivisible and incorruptible, and
not to be felt by Man's Hands; for it is constituted or composed out of the
Divine power, and that power is so knit and bound together, that it can never
be destroyed again.

13. (...) as none, no not any thing, can destroy the whole Deity, (...) also
there is not any thing can destroy an Angel; (...) every Angel is formed
figured set together or compo^^^ out of all the powers of God, not with flesh
and blood, but out of the Divine power.

14. And first the Body is out of (...) the powers of the Father, and in those
powers is the light of God the Son; and now the powers of the Father and of
the Son, which are in an Angel creaturely, generate an understanding spirit,
which rises up in that Angel.

15. First of all the powers of the Father, generate a light, whereby an Angel
sees into the whole Father, whereby he can see the outward power and operation
of God, which is Externally without its own Body, and thereby can see its
fellow-brethren, and can see and enjoy the glorious fruit of God, and therein
con^isteth its Joy.

16. And that light at first came out of the Son of God in the powers of the
Father, into the Angelical Body creaturely, and is the Bodies proper own, which
cannot be withdrawn from it by any thing, unless it self extinguisheth it, as
Lucifer did.

17. Now all the powers, which are in the whole Angel, generateth that light;
and as God the Father generateth his Son to be his Heart, so the power of the
Angel generateth also its Son and Heart in it self, and that again
enlightneth all powers, in the whole Angel.

18. After that there goes forth out of all the powers of the Angel, and also
out of the Light of the Angel; a fountain, which springs or boyleth in the
whole Angel: and that is its spirit, which rises up into all eternity: for in
that spirit is all knowledge and skill of all the powers, which are in the
total God.

19. For, that spirit springs up out of all the powers of the Angel, and
goes up into the Mind, where it has five open Doors, there it can look round
about and see whatsoever is in God, and also whatsoever is in it self.

20. And so goes forth from all the powers, of the Angel, as also from the
light of the Angel: as the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the
Son, and fills the whole Corpus or Body.

Now Observe the Great Mystery.

21. As there are Two things to be observed in God: the first is the Salitter,
or the Divine powers, out of which the Body or Corporeity, is: and the second
is the Mercurius, Tone, Tune or Sound. Thus also it is in like manner and form,
in an Angel.

22. First there is the power, and in the power is the Tone or Tune, which
rises up in the spirit, into the Head, into the Mind, as in man in the Brain,
and in the Mind it has its open Doors or Gates; but in the Heart it has its
Seat Residence and Original, where it existeth out of all powers.

23. For the fountain of all powers flows or to.
in the Heart, as it does also in man, and in the Head it has its Princely
seat, where it sees all, smells all, and feels all.

24. And now when it sees and hears the divine Tone Tune and Sound rise up,
which is externally without it, then is its spirit affected, and kindled with
joy, and elevateth it self in its Princely seat, and Sings and ringeth forth
very joyful words concerning Gods Holiness, and concerning the fruit and
vegetation of the Eternal Life.

25. Also concerning the ornament colors and Beauty of the eternal Joy, and
concerning the amiable blessed glance or gracious aspect and Countenance of God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; also concerning the excellent fraternity
fellowship and communion of Angels, concerning the continual everlasting
joyfulnesse, concerning the holiness of God, and concerning the Angels own
Princely Government.

26. In brief, concerning all powers, and that which proceeds from all Gods
powers, which in regard of the untowardnesse of my corruption in the flesh I
cannot write; I would much rather be there present my self.

27. But what I cannot write here, I will commit to thy Soul to consider
further of it: and at the day of the Resurrection you shall see it most plainly
and clearly.

28. You should not here scorn my spirit, for it is not sprung forth from the
wild Beast, but is generated from my power and virtue, and enlightened by the
Holy Ghost.

29. I write not here without knowledge; but if thou, like an Epicure and
Fatted Swine of the Devil, from the Devils instigation should mock at these
things, and say:

30. The Fool surely has not gone up to heaven, and seen or heard them: these
are mere Fables: therefore in the power of my knowledge, I would have you
warned and Cited before the severe Judgment of God.

31. And though in my body I am too weak, to bring thee thither; yet That from
which I have my knowledge, is mighty and potent enough to cast thee even into
the Abyss of Hell.

32. Therefore take warning, and consider, that thou also belongest to the
Angelical Quire, and read the following Hymn with longing delight, and then
the Holy Ghost will be awakened and stirred up in thee, and thou also wilt get
a desire and Longing after the heavenly Chorus and Quire of Dancing. Amen.

33. The Musician has wound up his Pegs and tuned his Strings; the Bridegroom
comes, take heed thou do not get the hellish Podagra.
Gout in thy feet, when the Round begins, lest thou be found incapable or
unfit for the Angelical Dance, and so be thrust out from the Wedding, seeing
thou have no Angelical Garment on.

34. Surely the Gate will be locked upon thee, and so thou will not enter in
any more, but wilt Dance with the Hellish Wolves in the hellish fire: truly
thou will forget then to mock, and sorrow will gnaw thee.

Of the Qualification of an Angel.
Question.

35. The Question now is, What manner of qualification has an Angel?

Answer.

36. The Holy Soul of a man, and the spirit of an Angel, is and has one and
the same Substance and Being, and there is no difference therein, but only in
the quality it self, or their corporeal government, that which qualifieth
outwardly or from without in man, by the Air, has a corrupt earthly quality;
yet on the other side it has also a Divine and heavenly quality hidden from
the Creatures.

37. But the holy Soul understands it well, as the Kingly Prophet David
says, The Lord rides on the wings of the wind, Psalm. 104. 3.

Question.

38. But a simple man may ask: What do you mean by the word qualifying, or,
what is that?

Answer.

39. I mean thereby the power, which in the Body of the Angel enters in from
without, and comes forth again: As in a Similitude; When a a man fetches
breath and breaths it forth again: for therein stands the life both of the
Body and of the Spirit.

40. The quality from without, kindles the spirit in the heart, in the first
fountain; whereby all the powers in the whole Body become stirring, and then
that quality in the corporeal spirit, which is the natural Spirit of an Angel
or Man, rises up into the Head where it has its Princely Seat or Throne and
Government, and there it has its Counselors, whose advice it takes.

41. The first Counselor is the Eyes, they are affected with every thing they
look upon, for they are the Light.

42. For, as the Light goes forth from the Son of God in the whole Father
into all the powers, and affects all the powers of the Father, and on the
other side all the powers of the Father affect the Light of the Son of God:

43. So do the Eyes work in the thing they look upon, and the thing works
again in the Eyes, and the Counselor, the Eyes brings it into the Head
before the Princely Seat or Throne; and there it is to be approved of.

44. Now if the spirit is pleased therewith, then it brings the same to the
heart, and the heart gives it to the passages or Issuings forth of the powers
or fountain-veins in the whole Body; and then the Mouth, and Hands, and Feet,
fall to work.

45. The second Counselor is the Ears, which have their rise also from all
the powers in the whole body through the spirit, their fountain is Mercurius or
the Sound, which arises from all the powers.

46. And as in all the powers of God the Mercurius rises and sounds, wherein
the heavenly Tone Tune or Joy consists, and the Tone or Tune goes forth out
of all the powers, and so in the attraction of the Spirit in God, is elevated
or raised up:

47. And when one power touches or stirs the other, and tuneth or sounds;
Then the Tune or Sound goes forth, and rises up again in all the powers of
the Father; and so all the powers of the Father are again affected therewith,
whereby they are always impregnated with the Tune, and continually generate it
again in every power.

48. Thus also the second Counselor in the Head, is the Ears, they stand
open, and the sound goes forth through them, in all that sounds.

49. Now where the Mercurius sounds, and is elevated, there the Mercurius of
the spirit goes also in, and is thereby affected, and brings it before the
Princely Throne in the Head, where it is to be approved by the other Four
Counselors.

50. And if the Spirit is pleased therewith, then it brings the same before
its Mother into the Heart, and the Heart or the fountain of the heart gives it
to all the powers in the whole Body; and then the Mouth and Hands lay hold on
it.

51. But if the whole Princely Counsel in the head Be not pleased, so that it
is approved, then it lets that go again, and brings it not to the Mother the
Heart.

52. The third Princely Counselor is the Nose, there the fountain rises up
from the Body in the Spirit into the Nose, and there it has two open Doors or
Gates.

53. And as the Excellent precious and amiable blessed savor or smell goes
forth from all the powers of the Father and of the Son, and tempereth it self
with all the powers of the Holy Ghost, whence the Holy Spirit and most precious
Savor rises up from the fountain of the Holy Ghost: And flows or boyleth in
all the powers of the Father, and kindles all the powers of the Father,
whereby they are impregnated again with the amiable blessed savor or Saving
Smell, and so generate it in the Son and Holy Ghost:

54. So also in Angels and Men, the power of the smell rises up out of all the
powers of the Body by and through the Spirit, and comes forth at the Nostrils
of the Nose, and is affected with all Smells or savours, and brings them
through the Nostrils of the Nose, which is the third counselor, into the
Head; before the Princely Seat, or Throne.

55. And there it is to be proved, whether it be a good smell or savor
pleasing to its Constitution and Complexion, or no: if it be good, then it
brings the same to its mother, that it may be brought to effect; if not, then
is it expelled and thrust away.

56. And this Counselor of the Smell, which is generated out of the Salitter,
is also mixed with Mercurius, and so belongs to the heavenly joyfulnesse, and
is a glorious, Excellent and fair fountain in God.

57. The fourth Princely Counselor is the Taste, on the Tongue, which also
arises from all the powers of the Body through the spirit into the Tongue: for
all fountain-veins of the whole Body go into the Tongue, and the tongue is the
sharpness or Taste of all the powers.

58. As the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son, and is the
sharpness or proof of all powers, and in his moving or rising up; brings all
that which is good, again into all the powers of the Father, whereby the powers
of the Father are impregnated again, and so continually generate the Taste.

59. But that which is not good, the Holy Ghost speweth that out, as a
loathsome abomination, as it is written in the Apocalypse the 3. Chap. v. 16.
and as he spewed out the Great Prince Lucifer in his pride, and perdition. For
he could no more endure to Taste the fiery proud stinking quality: and thus it
is also as to all Proud stinking Men.

60. O Man let this be told thee, for the Spirit is earnestly Jealous in this
thing especially: desist from Pride, or else it will be with you, as it befell
the Devils: there is no jesting or trifling herein; the Time is very short,
thou will suddenly Taste it, I mean the hellish fire.

61. Now as the Holy Ghost proves all; so the Tongue also proves all Tastes:
and if the same pleases the Spirit, then it brings the same into the head;
to the other four Counselors before the Princely Seat, and there it is
proved, whether it be profitable or wholesome for the qualities of the Body.

62. If so, then is it brought to the Mother, the Heart, which gives it to all
the veins or powers of the Body, and then the Mouth and Hands lay hold on it.

63. But if it be not good, then the tongue spits or speweth it out, before it
comes to the Princely Counsel.

64. But though it be pleasant to the Tongue, and is of a good Taste, and yet
is not serviceable and useful for the whole Body, then it is rejected
nevertheless, when it comes before the Council, and the Tongue must spit or
spew it out, and touch it no more.

65. The fifth Princely Counselor is the Feeling; which fifth Counselor
arises also from all the powers of the Body in the spirit, into the Head.

66. For as all powers go forth from God the Father and Son, in the Holy
Ghost, and so one touches the other, from whence existeth the Tune or
Mercurius, so that all the powers do sound and move themselves.

67. Else if one did not touch the other, nothing would stir at all, and so
this touching makes the Holy Ghost stir, so that he rises up in all the
powers, and touches all the powers of the Father, wherein then existeth the
heavenly joyfulnesse or triumphing; as also tuning, sounding, generating,
blossoming, and vegetation or Springing, all which, has its rising from this,
that one power touches the other.

68. For Christ says in the Gospel, John 5. v. 17. I work, and my Father
works also. And he meanet^ this very touching and working, in that every
power goes forth from him, and generateth the Holy Ghost, and in the Holy
Ghost all the powers are already clearly stirred, by the going forth of the
Father.

69. And therefore the Holy Ghost flows boyleth and rises up from eternity,
and kindles again, all the powers of the Father, and makes them Stirring, so
that they are always impregnated.

70. In such a manner it is also in Angels and Men: for all powers in the Body
arise, and touch one another, or else Angels and Men could Feel nothing.

71. But if one member be too much stirred, it cries to the whole Body for
Help, and the whole Body stirs, as if it were in a great commotion or Uproar,
as if the Enemy were at hand, and comes to help that Member, and to deliver
and release it from the Pain.

72. This you may see if a Finger be but hurt, crushed or wounded, or any other
member of the Body, be it which it will; presently the Spirit in that place
runs suddenly to the mother the Heart, and complains to the Mother; and if
the pain do but a little exceed, then the mother rouzeth up and awakeneth all
the members of the Body, and all must come to help that Member.

Now Observe:

73. Thus one power continually touches and stirs the other in the whole
Body, and all the powers rise up into the head before the Princely Council,
which proves the stirring of all the powers.

74. Now if one member stirs too much, and at any time hurts a princely
Counselor; viz. by Seeing, it would be in Love with that which it ought not
be in love withal.

75. As Lord Lucifer did, who saw the Son of God, and fell in love with that
high light, and moved and stirred himself so very much, intending to be equal
with him, or indeed to be higher and brighter then He; such stirring or
meddling, the Counselors reject.

76. Or if it would stir and move too vehemently br Hearing, and would fain
hear false and wicked Tongues in talking Lies and Fictions, and bring that to
the heart, this also is rejected by the Counselors.

77. Or if it would by the Smelling get a Longing or Lusting after that which
is none of its own, as Lord Lucifer did also, who longed after the holy Savor
or Sweet Smell of the Son of God, and intended in his elevation and kindling
to smell and savor yet more pleasantly.

78. In that manner as he deceived our Mother Eve also, saying; If she did but
eat of the forbidden Tree, then she should be wise or witty, and be like God,
Genesis 3. 5. But this smelling or stirring, the Council rejected also.

79. Or if by Tasting it should fall into a desire and longing, to eat that
which is not of the quality of the Body, or is none of its own; as Mother Eve
in Paradise, fell a longing to eat of the Devils Swine-Apples, and did eat
thereof; such stirring in lust the Council also rejects.

80. In brief: There are therefore Five in the princely Council, that one
should advise the other: and every one is of a peculiar sundry Quality, and
that compacted or concreted spirit which is generated out of all the powers, He
is their King or Prince, and he sits in the Head in the Brain of a Man, and
in an Angel in that Power which is instead of the Brain of a Man, and in the
Head also upon his Princely Throne, and executes every thing, which was
concluded and decreed by the whole Princely Council.

The Sixth Chapter.
How an Angel, and a Man, is the Similitude and Image of God.

1. BEhold! as the Being in God, is, so is the Being also in Man and Angels;
and as the Divine Body is, so is also the Angelical and humane Body or
Corporeity.

2. But with this difference only, that an Angel and a Man is a Creature, and
not the whole Being, but a Son of the whole Being, whom the whole being has
generated: and therefore it is fit that it should be in subjection to the whole
Being, seeing it is the Son of its Body.

3. Now if the Son resist and oppose the Father, it is but right, that the
Father should cast him away out of the House: seeing the Son sets himself
against him that has generated him, and from whose power he is become a
Creature.

4. For if any make somewhat out of that, which is his own, he may, if it does
not prove according to his will, do with it what he pleases, and make it
either a vessel of honor or dishonor; which was done even so to Lucifer.

Now Observe:

5. The whole Divine power of the Father speaks forth from all Qualities, the
WORD; that is, the Son of God.

6. Now that Voice or that WORD, which the Father speaks, goes forth from
the Fathers Salitter or powers, and from the Fathers Mercurius Sound or Tune;
And the Father speaks this forth in himself, and that WORD is the very
splendour or Glance proceeding from all his powers.

7. But when it is spoken forth, it stays or sticks no more in the powers
of the Father, but sounds or tuneth back again in the whole Father in all
powers.

8. Now that WORD, which the Father pronounces or speaks forth, has such a
sharpness, that the Tone of the WORD goes swiftly in a moment, through the
whole Deep of the Father, and that sharpness is the Holy Ghost.

9. For the WORD, which is spoken forth, or outspoken, abides as a splendour or
glorious or Proclamation.
Edict, before the King;

10. But the Tone or Sound, which goes forth through the Word, executes the
Edict of the Father, which he had outspoken through the Word, and that is the
Birth or Geniture of the holy Trinity.

11. Now behold! An Angel and a Man is thus also: the power in the whole Body
has all the Qualities, as it is in God the Father.

12. And as all the powers in God the Father, rise up from eternity to
eternity: so all the powers rise up also in an Angel and in a Man, into the
Head, for higher they cannot rise: for they are but Creatures, which have a
Beginning and End.

13. And in the Head is the divine Councel-Seat or Throne, and it signifies
God the Father, and the Five Senses or qualities are the Counselors, which
have their influences out of the whole Body out of all the powers.

14. Now the Five Senses always sit in Council in the Power of the whole Body,
and when the Councels Decree is concluded, then the compacted or concreted
Judge speaks it out into its Center or midst of the Body; as a WORD, into the
Heart: for that is the fountain of all powers, from which also it takes its
rise.

15. Now it stands there in the Heart, as a self-subsisting Person, composed
out of all powers, and is a Word; and signifies God the Son; and now it
goes out from the Heart into the Mouth on to the Tongue, which is the
sharpness, and that so sharpeneth it, that it sounds forth and is
distinguished according to the Five Senses.

16. From what Quality soever the word takes its original, in that quality it
is thrust forth upon the Tongue, and the power of the distinction or difference
goes forth from the Tongue; and that signifies the Holy Ghost.

17. For as the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son, and
distinguishes and sharpneth all, and effects or produces that, which the
Father speaks through the Word.

18. So also the Tongue sharpneth articulateth and distinguishes all that,
which the Five Senses in the head bring through the heart on to the Tongue, and
the Spirit goes forth from the Tongue through the Mercurius or Tone in that
place, as it was decreed or concluded by the Council of the five Senses, and
executes it all.

Of the Mouth.
19. The Mouth signifies, that thou art an un-allmighty Son of thy Father,
whether thou art an Angel or a Man. For through the Mouth thou must draw into
thee the power of thy Father, if thou will live.

20. An Angel must do so, as well as a man, though indeed he needs not to use
the Element of Air, in that manner as a man does; yet he must attract into
himself, through the Mouth, the Spirit, from which, the Air in this world
existeth.

21. For in Heaven there is no such Air, but the qualities are very meek and
joyful, like a pleasant cheering Breath of wind, and the Holy Ghost is among
all the qualities in the Salitter 2nd Mercurius.

22. And this the Angel also must make use of, or else he cannot be a moveable
creature, for he must also eat of the heavenly fruit, through the Mouth.

23. Thou must not understand this in an earthly manner, for an Angel has no
Guts, neither Flesh nor Bones, but is constituted or composed by the Divine
power, in the shape form and manner of a man, and has all members, like Man,
except the Members of Generation and the Fundament or going out of the Draffe,
neither has an Angel need of them.

24. For Man gat his members of Generation and Fundament first in his doleful
and lamentable fall. An Angel sends forth nothing, but the Divine power,
which he takes in at his Mouth, wherewith he kindles his heart, and the heart
kindles all the members, and that he sends forth from himself again at the
Mouth, when he speaks and praises God.

25. But the heavenly fruits which he eats, are not earthly; and though they
are in such a form and shape as the earthly are, yet they are mere Divine
power, and have such a pleasant Lovely Taste and Smell, that I cannot liken it
to any thing in this world: for they Taste and Smell of the Holy Trinity.

26. Thou must not think, that they are there only as it were a Type or shadow
of things; no: for the Spirit shows plainly, that in the heavenly pomp in the
heavenly Salitter and Mercurius, do grow Divine Trees, Plants, Flowers, and all
sorts, of whatsoever is in this world but as a type and resemblance: And as the
Angels are, so are the vegetation and fruits, all from the Divine power.

27. These heavenly Sprouts and Springings thou must not wholly liken to this
world: For there are two Qualities in this world, a Good and an Evil: and many
things grow through the power of the Evil quality, which does not so in Heaven.

28. For Heaven has but one form or manner, nothing grows there, which is
not good: Only Lord Lucifer has deformed and dressed this world in that
manner: And therefore was Mother Eve ashamed, when she had eaten of that which
was dressed by the Evil quality, in like manner also she was ashamed of her
members of Generation, which she had caused by biting of this Apple.

29. The Angelical and Heavenly fruit has not such a substance: indeed it is
most certain and true, that there are all manner of fruits in heaven, and not
merely Types and Shadows: also the Angels pluck them with their Hands, and eat
them, as we do that are Men, but they need not any Teeth to do it withal,
neither have they any, for the fruit is of a divine power.

30. Now all this, whatsoever an Angel makes use of, which is Externally
without him, for the supporting of his life, is not his corporeal propriety, as
if he had it by a Natural right, but the Heavenly Father gives it them in love.

31. True it is, their Body is their own propriety, for God has given it to
them for a propriety: Now whatsoever is given to any for his own or for
propriety, that is his by right of Nature, and he does not deal righteously
which takes it from him again, unless upon condition and agreement: And thus
God does not neither, and therefore an Angel is an eternal incorruptible
Creature which stands or subsisteth in all Eternity.

32. But what would the Body profit him, if God did not feed it, for then it
would have no mobility, and would lie still like a dead Block. Now therefore,
the Angels are obedient to God, and humble themselves before the powerful God,
they honor laud and praise him in his Great Deeds and Works of Wonder, and
sing continually of Gods Holiness, Because He feeds them.

Of the Gracious Blessed and Joyful Love, of the Angels, toward God, from a
true Ground.
33. The right Love in the divine Nature comes from the fountain of the Son
of God. Behold thou child of man, let this be told thee; the Angels know
already what the right Love toward God is, but thou need it in thy cold
Heart.

34. Observe: when the gracious amiable blessed Joyful Glance and Light,
together with the sweet power out of the Son of God, shines into all powers
in the whole Father: then all the powers are kindled by the Gracious amiable
blessed lovely Light and sweet power, in a triumphing and joyful manner.

35. So also, when the Gracious amiable Blessed and joyful Light of the Son
of God shines on the loving Angels, and casts its Beams into their Heart,
then all the powers in their Body are kindled; and there rises up such a
Joyful Love-fire, that for great joy they sing and ring forth Praises, and that
which neither I nor any other Creature is able to express.

36. With this Song I would have the Reader cited into the other life, where he
will have experience thereof: I am not able to set it down in Writing.

37. But if thou will have experience of it in this world, give over thy
Hypocrisy, Bribery and Deceit and thy Scorning: and turn thy heart in all
seriousness to God: Repent thee of thy Sins, with a true intention and
resolution to live Holily, and pray to God for his holy Spirit.

38. Wrestle with him, as the Holy Patriarch Jacob did, Who wrestled with him
all night, till the dawning of the Day, or Morning Radius brake forth, and
would not give over till God had blessed him (Genesis 32.) Do thou so like wise
with him, and the Holy Ghost will get a form in thee.

39. If thou hold on in thy earnestness, and wilt not give over, then will
this fire come suddenly upon thee, like lightning and shine into thee, and
then thou will well experiment that, which I have here written, and wilt easily
believe that which is in my Book.

40. Thou will also become quite another man, and wilt think thereon all the
days of thy life; thy delight will be more in Heaven, then on Earth.

41. For the conversation of the Holy Soul is in Heaven, and though indeed it
converseth in the body on earth, yet it is always continually with its
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, and eats as a guest with him. Note this!

The Seventh Chapter.
Of the Court Place and Dwelling, also of the Government of Angels, how it
stood at the beginning, after the Creation, and how it is become as it is.

1. HEre the Devil will oppose like a Snarling Dog, for his shame will be
discovered: and he will give the Reader many a sore stroke, and always put
him in doubt that these things are not so.

2. For nothing does torment him more, then when his Glory is upbraided to him,
by signifying what a Glorious King and Prince he has been: when this is
objected to him, then he is in a rage, and madness, as if he would storm and
overthrow all the world.

3. If this Chapter, should be lighted upon by a Reader in whom the fire of the
Holy Spirit should be somewhat weak, I fear the Devil would be very busy to
set upon him, tempting him to doubting whether the things, set down here, be so
or no, that his kingdom might not stand so very naked, nor his shame be so
quite discovered.

4. Now if he can but suppose he shall bring it to pass to be doubted of in any
heart, he will not fail to use his utmost skill pains and labor therein. I see
very well already, that he has it in his purpose.

5. Therefore I would have the Reader warned, that he be diligent in the
reading hereof, and patient, so long, till he comes to the reading of the
Creation and of the Government of this world, and then he will find it plainly
and clearly demonstrated from Nature.

Now Observe:

6. When God Almighty had Decreed in his Counsel, that he would make Angels or
Creatures out of himself, then he made them out of his eternal power and
wisdom, according to the form and manner of the Liberty in his Deity, and
according to the Qualities in his Divine Being.

7. At first he made three Kingly Governments or Dominions, answerable to the
number of the Holy Trinity, and each Kingdom had the Order or Ordnance, power
and quality of the divine Being.

8. Now elevate thy Sense Thoughts and Spirit into the Deep of the Deity, for
here a Gate is opened. The Place or Space of this world the Deep of the Earth,
and above the Earth even to Heaven, as also the created Heaven, which was made
out of the or Center.
midst of the Waters, which moves above the Stars, and which we behold with
our Eyes, whose depth we cannot sound or reach with our sense: all this place
or room together was one Kingdom, and Lucifer was King therein before his being
thrust out.

9. The other two Kingdoms, that of Michael and that of Uriel, those are above
the created Heaven, and are like that other Kingdom.

10. These three Kingdoms together contain such a Deep, as is not of any humane
Number, nor can be measured by any thing.

11. Yet you must know, that these three Kingdoms have a Beginning and End: But
that God, who has made these three Kingdoms out of himself, is infinite, and
has no End.

12. Yet, without and beyond and besides these three Kingdoms there is likewise
the power of the Holy Trinity, for God the Father has no End.

13. But thou art to know this Mystery, that in the Center or Midst of these
three Kingdoms is generated the splendour or Son of God.

[14. This needs explanation: Read the The Three Principles.
Second and The Threefold Life.
Third part of these writings, where it is described ]

15. And the three Kingdoms are circular round about the Son of God, neither
of them is further or nearer to the Son of God, for the one is equally as
near about the Son of God as the other.

16. From this or Tree.
fountain and from all the powers of the Fether goes forth the Holy Ghost,
together with the Light and power of the Son of God in and through all
Angelical Kingdoms or Dominions: and without beyond and besides all the
Angelical Kingdoms, which no Angel or man is able to dive or search into.

17. Neither have I any purpose to consider of it further, much less to write,
but my Revelation reaches even into the three Kingdoms, like an Angelical
Knowledge.

18. But not in my Reason or apprehension or in perfection like an Angel, but
in part, and so-long only, as the Spirit tarrieth in me, further I know it not.

19. When he parts from me, I know nothing, but the Elementary and earthly
things of this world: but the Spirit sees even into the depth of Deity.

Question.

20. Now one may ask, what manner of Substance or thing it is? that the Son
of God is Generated in the Center or midst of these Three Kingdoms? Surely one
Angelical Host must needs be nearer unto him then the other, seeing their
Kingdom has so great a Deep?

21. Also then the Glory Clarity or brightness and power of the Son of God
would not be so great without beyond or besides those Kingdoms, as in with and
among those that are near him, and as in the Angelical Circuit or Court?

Answer.

22. Answ. The holy Angels were made to be creatures from God: that they should
praise sing ring forth and Jnbilate before the Heart of God, which is the Son
of God, and tncrease the heavenly joy.

23. Where then should the Father else place them, but before the Gate of his
Heart? Does not all joy of Man, which is in the whole man, arise from the
fountain of the Heart: so in God also then there arises the gyeat joy out of
the fountain of his Heart.

24. And therefore has he created the Holy Angels out of himself, which are as
it were little Gods, answerable to the Being and qualities of the whole God,
that in the power should Act forth the praise, and sing and ring forth in the
power, and increase the arising joy from the heart of God.

25. But the Splendour and the power of the Son of God, or heart of God, which
is the Light, or source and fountain of joy, takes up his fairest and most
joyful original; in the center or midst of these kingdoms, and shines into,
and through all the Angelical Gates.

26. Thou must understand this properly, what the meaning of it is: for when I
speak by way of similitude, and liken the Son of God to the Sun or to a round
Globe; it has not that meaning as if he were a circumscriptive fountain, which
can be measured, or whose depth, beginning, or end, could be fathomed. I write
so only by way of similitude, till the Reader may come to the true
understanding.

27. For the meaning is not here, that the Son of God should be generated
only in the Center or midst of these Angelical Gates, and no where else without
beyond or besides these Angelical Gates.

28. For the powers of the Father are every where, from and out of which the
Son is generated and from which the Holy Ghost goes forth; how should he
then be generated only in the Center of these Angelical Gates?

29. This therefore is the only gronnd and meaning, that the Holy Father, who is
ALL would have in these Angelical * Gates, his most joyful and most richly
loving Qualities, out of which the most joyful and most richly loving Light,
Word, heart, or fountain of powers; is Generated: and therefore has created
his Holy Angels in this place for his joy honor and Glory.

[30. In the Abyssal or bottomless Eternity indeed, it is in one place as well
as in another: but where there are no Creatures, it cannot be known but by the
Spirit in its wonders.]

31. And this is the Select place of the glory of God, which God the Father, in
himself, has made choice of, wherein his Holy WORD, or heart is generated in
highest glory Clarity or brightness, power and tryumphing joy.

32. For, Observe this Mystery; The Light, which is generated out of the powers
of the Father, which is the true fountain of the Son of God, is generated
also in an Angel, and a Holy Man, so that in the same light and knowledge he
tryumpheth in great joy;

33. How then is it that he should not be generated every where, in the whole
Father? For his power is ALL, and every where, even there, where our heart and
senses or Thonghts cannot reach.

34. And so Now, where the Father is, there is also the Son and the Holy
Ghost: for the Father every where generateth the Son, his holy WORD, power
light, and sound, and the Holy Ghost, goes every where forth, from the Father
and the Son, even within all the Angelical gates, and without besides or
beyond the angelical gates also.

35. Now if a Man likeneth the Son of God to the Globe of the Sun, as I have
often done in the foregoing Chapters; that is spoken in the way and manner of
Natural similitudes, and I was constrained to write so, because of the
misunderstanding of the Reader, that so he might raise his Sense or Thoughts
in these natural things, and climb from step to step, from one degree to
another, till he might come into the high mysteries.

36. But it has not this meaning, that the Son of God is a circumscribed
compacted figured Image, like the Sun.

37. For if it were so, then must the Son of God have a beginning, and the
Father must have generated him at once, and then he could not be the Eternal
Almighty Son of the Father, but were like a King, who had yet a greater King
above him, who had generated him in Time, and in whose power it were to alter
and to change him.

38. This were such a Son, as had a beginning, and his power and splendour
were like the power of the Sun which goes forth from the Sun; the Body or
Globe of the Sun standing still in its place: And if this were so, then indeed
one Angelical or Part.
Gate would be nearer to the Son of God, then another.

39. But here I will show to thee the highest Gate of the divine Mystery, and
thou needst seek no higher, for there is no higher.

Observe.

40. The Fathers power is all, in and above all Heavens, and the same power
every where generateth the Light. Now this ALL-POWER, is, and is called, the
all-power of the Father; and the Light which is generated out of that
all-power, is, and is called the Son.

41. But it is therefore called the Son, in that it is generated out of the
Father, so that it is the Heart of the Father in his powers.

42. And being generated, so it is another Person, then the Father is: for, the
Father is the power and Kingdom, and the Son is the Light and Splendour in the
Father, and the Holy Ghost is the moving or exit out of the powers of the
Father and of the Son, and forms figureth frames and Imageth all.

43. As the Air goes forth from the power of the Sun and Stars, and moves in
this world, and causes that all creatures are generated, and that the Grass
Herbs and Trees spring and grow; and causes all whatsoever is in this world to
be:

44. So the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son, and moves or
acts, forms or frames and Imageth all that is in the whole God.

45. All growing or vegetation and forms in the Father arise and spring up
moving in the Holy Ghost; therefore there is but ONE only GOD, and three
distinct Persons in one divine Being, Essence or substance.

46. Now if a Man should say, the Son of God were an Image, circumscriptive
or measureable like the sun, then the Three Persons would only be in that
place where the Son is, and his splendour or shining would be without or
beyond him, and as gone forth from the Son, and the Father would be One,
only Externally without or besides the Son, and then the power of the
Father, which would be afar off, and wide distant from the Son, would not
generate the Son and Holy Ghost, externally without and beyond the Angelical
Gates; and so there would be an un-almighty Being, Externally without or
besides this place of the Son; and moreover the Father would be a
Circumscribed or measurable Being.

47. Which is not so: but the Father every where generateth the Son out of
all his powers, and the Holy Ghost goes every where forth from the Father and
the Son, and so there is but ONE only God in one Being with three distinct
Persons.

48. Of which you have a similitude in the precious Gold-Oar or a Gold-Stone,
unseparated. First there is the matter, that is, the Salitter and Mercurius,
which is the Mother or the whole stone, which generateth the Gold every where
in the whole Stone, and in the Gold is the glorious power or virtue of the
Stone.

49. Now the Salitter and Mercurius signify the Father, the Gold signifies
the Son, and the power or virtue signifies the Holy Ghost: in such a manner
also is the Ternarie in the holy Trinity only, that all moves and goes forth
therein universally.

50. Men find also in a Gold stone a little bit of it in some place wherein
there is more and purer Gold, then in another not discerned, though there is
Gold in the whole stone or Oar.

51. Thus also is the Place or Space in the Center or midst of the Angelical
Gates a more pleasant, more gracious amiable and blessed Place, to the Father,
wherein his Son and Heart is generated in the most richly and fully loving
manner, and wherein the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son,
in the most richly and fully loving manner.

52. Thus you have the right ground of this mystery, and you ought not to
think, that the Son of God was generated of the Father, at once at a certain
time, as one that has a beginning, and that he stands now as a King, and
will be worshipped.

53. No; this were not an Eternal Son, but one that had a beginning, and were
under beneath or inferior to the Father, that had generated him.

54. Neither would he be all-knowing, for he could not know how it was before
his Father had generated him.

55. But the Son is always generated continually from eternity unto
eternity, and reshineth always continually from eternity, into the powers of
the Father again, whereby the powers of the Father are always from Eternity to
Eternity continually impregnated with the Son, and generateth him continually.

56. Out of which, the Holy Ghost continually Existeth from eternity to
eternity, and so continually from eternity to eternity goes forth from the
Father and the Son, and has neither Beginning nor End.

57. And this Being, is not only so, in one place of the Father, but every
where, in the whole Father, who has neither beginning nor end; into which, no
creature can reach with its Senses or thoughts.

Of the Nativity or Geniture of an Angelical Kings, and how they came to be.
58. [This also is more fundamentally described in the Three Principles.
Second and Threefold Life.
Third Book.] 59. The Person or Body of a King of Angels is generated out of
all the qualities and out of all the powers of his whole Kingdom, through the
moving boiling spirit of God, and therefore such a one is their King, in that
his power reaches into all the Angels of his whole Kingdom, and he is the Head
or Throne-Angel. And such a one was Lord Lucifer also, before his fall.

second and third book; viz. in The three Principles of the Divine Being; And
in the Threefold Life of Man. Of the Ground or Foundation and Mystery.
61. If a man will find out the mystery, and deepest Ground; he must diligently
and exactly view and consider the Creation of this world, the Government or
Dominion and order or Ordinance, as also the Qualities, of the stars, and the
elements.

62. And although these are of a corrupted and twofold Being, which is not
living nor has understanding: for it is but the corrupt Salitter and
Mercurius, in which King Lucifer kept House, wherein is both Evil and Good,
though it be indeed the real power of God, which before its corruption was
bright and pure, as now it is, in Heaven.

63. This power of the Stars and Elements, did the Creator, after the horrible
fall of Lucifers Kingdom, frame and put into such order again, as the Kingdom
of the Angels stood in, in the Divine pomp, before his fall.

64. Only thou must not think, that the Angelical Kingdom with its creatures,
were so rolled wheeled and tur^'d round about, as now the Stars are, which are
only powers, and in regard of the birth or geniture of this world are thus
wheeled or turned about, whose birth or geniture stands in the moving boiling
anguish in Evil and Good, in Corruption and Redemption, till the End of this
enumeration, or the Last Day.

Now Observe.

65. The Sun stands in the Center or Midst of the Deep, and is the light or
heart which proceeded out of all stars: For when the Salitter and Mercurius,
before the Creation of the world, in the Kingdom of Lucifer became thin or dim
and bad qualified one with the other: then God extracted the Heart out of all
the powers, and made the Sun thereof.

66. And therefore the Sun is the most shining and brightest of all, and
re-enlighteneth all the stars again, all the stars work in its Power, and it
self has the power of all the stars, it kindles all the powers of the stars
with its splendor and heat, and so every Star receives from the Sun,
according to its power and condition, or Kind.

67. Thus also is the Frame and Constitution of the Angelical Kingdom: The Sun
signifies the Supreamest Throne-Angel, the Cherubin or King, in an Angelical
Kingdom: such a one as Lord Lucifer also was, before his fall: He had his seat
in the Center or Midst of his Kingdom, and reigned by his power in all his
Angels.

68. As the Sun rules in all the powers of this world in the Salitter and
Mercurius, that is in softness and hardness, in sweetness and ^owrnesse, in
bitterness and astringency, in heat and cold, in Air and Water.

69. As is apparent in Winter, when there is so hard Cold or Frost, that the
water becomes Ice; though the Sun shines somewhat warm through all the cold
frost, yet for all its beams by which it shines on them, it freezeth into Snow
and Ice.

70. But here I will show thee the right Mystery. Behold; the Sun is the Heart
of all powers in this world, and is compacted framed or composed out of all the
powers of the stars, it re-enlightneth all the stars, and all the powers in
this world again, and all powers grow active operative or qualifying in its
Power.

71. [ Understand it Magically: for it is a Mirror Looking-glass or
Similitude of the Eternal world:]

72. As the Father generateth his Son, that is, his Heart or light, out of
all his powers, and that light which is the Son, generateth the life in all
the powers of the Father, so that in the same light, in the Fathers powers
goes forth all manner of growing vegetation springing, Ornaments and Joy: of
such a condition is the Kingdom of Angels, all, according to the Similitude and
Being of God,

73. A Cherubim or Leader of a Kingdom of Angels, is the Fountain or Heart of
his whole Kingdom, and is made out of all the powers, out of which his Angels
are made, and is the most powerful and brightest of them all.

The Angelical King is the Center or fountain: as Adams Soul is the Beginning
and Center of all souls, and, As; from the Place of the Sun was created and
generated the Planetick wheel or Sphere, wherein each Star is desirous of the
Splendour and Power of the Sun; so the Angels are desirous of their Cherubim or
Prince: all according to God and to his Similitude.

75. For the Creator has extracted the heart out of the Salitter and
Mercurius of the Divine powers.

Understand he has composed it by the Fiat, viz. the Center of Nature.]

76. And has formed out of that the Cherubim or King, that he might press or
penetrate again with his power into all the Angels, and affect them all, with
his power.

77. As the Sun with its power presses into all the Stars, and affects them
all; or as the power of God the Son, presses into all the powers of God the
Father, whereby they are all affected, wherein the Birth or Geniture of the
heavenly Joyfulnesse springs up.

78. In this form condition and manner it is also with the Angels. All the
Angels of one Kingdom, signify, the many and various powers of God the
Father; the Angelical King, signifies, the Son of the Father, or the Heart
out of the powers of the Father; out of which the Angels are made; The Exit out
of the King of Angels, or his going forth into his Angels, or his affecting of
his Angels, signifies God the Holy Ghost.

79. And as the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son, and
affects all the powers of the Father, as also all heavenly fruits and forms,
from whence all has its rising, and wherein the heavenly joyfulnesse does
consist:

80. Just in such a manner is the operation or power of a Cherubim or
Throne-Angel, which works or operateth in all his Angels, as the Son and
Holy Ghost operateth in all the powers of the Father; or as the Sun operateth
in all the powers of the Stars.

81. Whereby all Angels obtain the will of the Throne-Angel, and are all
obedient to him; for they all work in his power which is in them all.

82. For they are the Members of his body: as all the powers of the Father, are
Members of the Son, and he is their Heart: and as all heavenly forms and
fruits are Members of the Holy Ghost, and he their heart, in whom they rise up.

83. Or as the Sun is the heart of all the stars, and all stars are Members of
the Sun, and work one among another as one Star, and yet the Sun is the Heart
therein, though indeed there are many and various powers yet all works in the
power of the Sun; and all has its Life from the Power of the Sun. Look on what
you please; be it in * Animals, Metals, or Vegetables, of the Earth.

The Eighth Chapter.
Of the whole Corpus or Body of an Angelical Kingdom.

The Great Mystery.
1. THe Angelical Kingdoms are throughout formed according to the Divine Being,
and they have no other form or Condition, then the Divine Being has in its
Trinity.

2. Only this is the difference; that their Bodies are creatures, which have a
Beginning and End, and that the Kingdom, where their Locality habitation or
Court is, is not their corporeal propriety or proper own, having it for their
Natural right, as they have their bodies for a Natural right.

3. But the Kingdom belongs to God the Father, who has made it out of his
powers, and he may set it and dispose it which way he pleases; otherwise their
Body is made according to all, and out of all, the powers of the Father.

4. And their power generateth the light and knowledge in them: and as God
generateth his Son out of all his powers; also as the Holy Ghost goes forth
out of all the powers of the Father and the Son: so also in an Angel the
Spirit goes forth from their Heart, from their light, and from all their
powers.

Now Observe:

5. As the condition and constitution of an Angel is in his Corporeal Body,
with all the Members thereof; such is the condition of a whole Kingdom, which
together is as it were one Angel.

6. If a man rightly considers all circumstances, he will find, that the
whole government in its locality circumference or Region in a Kingdom, is of
the same Condition or Constitution as the body of an Angel is, or as the Holy
Trinity.

Observe here the Depth.

7. All power is in God the Father, and he is the fountain of all powers in his
Deep; in Him is Light and Darkness, Air and Water, Heat and Cold, Hard and
Soft, Thick and Thin, Sound and Tone, Sweet and Sour, Bitter and Astringent,
and that, which I cannot number or rehearse.

8. Only I conceive of it in my Body, for That is originally from Adam to this
time made out of all powers, and according to the Image of God.

9. But here thou must not think, that the powers in God the Father are in such
wise, or qualify in such a corrupt manner and kind, as in man, which Lord
Lucifer has so brough^ to pass; but it is all very lovely pleasant delicious
and joyful, very Gentle and Meek or Mild.

10. First there is the Light: (as I may naturally compare or resemble it) like
the light of the Sun, but not so intolerable; as the light of the Sun is
intolerable to our corrupted perished Eyes, but very lovely pleasant and
delightful an Aspect or Glance of Love.

11. But the darkness is hidden in the Center of the light, that is, when a
creature is made out of the power of the light, and would move and boil higher
and faster in that light then God Himself does; then that light would go out
and be extinguished in that Creature.

12. [ Understand, the Creature kindles the fire, if Humility that is from
Love: Read the Second and Third Book, viz. the Three Principles, and the
Threefold Life of Man.]

13. And instead of Light it has darkness, and therein the Creature is
sensible by experience, that there is a darkness, hidden in the Center.

14. As when a man kindles a Wax Candle, it gives Light, but when it is put
out, then is the Snuff or Candle, darkness: Thus also the light shines from
all the powers of the Father: but when the powers are perished or corrupted,
then the light is extinguished, and the powers would remain in darkness, as is
apparent by Lucifer.

15. The Air also is not of such a kind in God, but is a lovely pleasant still
breath or voice blowing or moving; that is; The exit going forth, or moving, of
the powers, is the original of the Air, in which the Holy Ghost rises up.

16. Neither is the water of such a kind in God, but it is the source or
fountain in the powers, not of an elementary kind, as in this world; if I
should liken it to any thing, I must liken it to the Sap or Juice in an Apple,
but very bright and lightsome like Heaven, which is the Spirit of all powers.

17. It is Lord Lucifer which has thus spoiled it, that it rages and raveth
so in this world, which so runs and flows and is so thick and dark, and
moreover if it runs not it becomes stinking; of which I shall treat more
largely, when I shall write of the Creation.

18. The Heat is in God a most lovely pleasant soft gentle mild meek warmth, an
exit or going forth of light, which expandeth it self rising up from the light,
wherein the source or fountain of Love Springs up.

19. The Cold also in God is not of such a kind, but is a cooling or refreshing
of the Heat, a mollifying or allaying of the Spirit, a rising up boiling or
moving of the Spirit.

Note here the Depth.

20. God says in Moses, when he gave the Law to the children of Israel; I am
an angry jealous God to those, that hate me: afterward he calls himself also, a
merciful God to them that fear him, Exodus 20. 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 5. 9, 10.

Question.

21. Now the Question is: What is the wrath of God, in Heaven? And whether God
be angry in himself? or how is God moved to Anger?

Answer.

Here there are chiefly Seven sorts of Qualities or Circumstances to be
observed.

I. Of the First Species or Circumstance.
22. First there is in the Divine power hidden in Secret, the astringent
Quality, which is a Quality of the Kernel Pith or hidden Being, a sharp
compaction or penetration in the Salitter very sharp and harsh or astringent,
which generates hardness and also coldness; and when that heat is kindled, it
generateth a sharpness like to Salt.

23. This is one Species or source of wrath in the Divine Salitter, and when
this source is kindled, which may be done by great motion or elevation,
touching or stirring, then the astringent causes, or qualifieth in, great
coldness, which is very sharp, like to Salt, very hard binding knitting and
attracting together like a Stone.

24. But in the heavenly Pomp or State it is not so elevating; for it does not
elevate it self, neither does it kindle it self; Only, King Lucifer has
kindled this quality in his Kingdom, through his Elevation and Pride, whence
this quality is burning even till the Last Day.

25. And by this now, in the Creation of this world, the Stars and the
Elements, as also the Creatures tremble and burn, out of which existeth also
the House of Death and of Hell, also an Eternal Base loathsome Habitation for
the Kingdom of Lucifer and for all wicked Men.

26. This Quality generateth in the heavenly Pomp, the sharpness of the
spirit, out of which, and whereby, the creaturely Being is so formed or
constituted, that a heavenly Body may be framed, as also all manner of colors,
forms and sprouts or vegetation.

27. For it is the contraction compacting or Imaging of a thing, and therefore
it is the first Quality, and a beginning of the Angelical Creatures, and of all
Images or figurations which are in Heaven, and which are in this world, and all
whatsoever can be named or expressed.

28. But if it be kindled through elevation, which those creatures only can do
in their own Kingdom, which are created out of the Divine Salitter, then it is
a burning source-vein of the wrath of God.

29. For it is one of the seven Spirits of God, in whose power stands the
Divine Being in the whole or total Divine Power and heavenly Pomp.

30. And so if it be kindled, then it is a fierce source of wrath, and a
beginning of hell, and a torment and woe of the hellish fire, also a quality of
darkness; for the Divine Love, and also the Divine Light are extinguished
therein.

31. [ It is a Key, which locketh in to the Chamber of Death, and generateth
Death, from whence proceeds Earth, stones, and all hard things.]

II. Of the Second Species or Circumstance.
32. The Second Quality or Second Spirit of God in the Divine Salitter, or in
the Divine power, is the sweet quality, which works in the astringent, and
mitigateth the astringent, so that it is altogether lovely pleasant and mild or
meek.

33. For it is the overcoming of the astringent quality, and is the very source
or fountain of the Mercy of God, which overcomes the wrath, whereby the
astringent harsh source is mollified, and Gods Mercy rises up.

34. Of this you have a Similitude in an Apple, which at first is astringent
harsh or choaky, but when the sweet quality forces and overcomes it, then it
is very soft lovely and pleasant to eat: and thus it is also in the Divine
power.

35. For when Men speak of the mercy of God the Father, they speak of his
power, of his fountain spirits of the qualities, which are in the Salitter out
of which his most richly loving Heart or Son is generated.

Observe here.

36. The astringent or harsh Quality is the Heart Pith or Kernel in the Divine
power, the contraction compaction or imaging forming or impression; for it is
the sharpness and cold, as is seen, that the harsh astringent cold dries the
water, and makes it sharp Ice.

37. And the sweet Quality is the allaying or warming, whereby the harsh or
astringent and cold quality becomes thin and soft, whence the water takes its
original.

38. Thus the astringent quality is, Germanice Barm-Hertzigkeit,
Warm-Heartednesse. Mercy.
and is called the Heart; and the sweet, is called Barm, or Warm, or softening
or mitiga^ing: and they are the two Qualities, out of which the Heart or the
Son of God is generated.

39. For the astringent or harsh quality, in its stock or kernel when it
qualifieth or operateth in its own Power, is a Darkness: And the sweet
Quality, in its own power is a moving boiling warming and rising Light, a
source or fountain of meekness and well-doing.

40. But while both of them qualify or operate one in another, in the Divine
power; as if they were but one power, they are a meek mild lovely pleasant
merciful qualifying.

41. And these two Qualities are two of the spirits of God among the Seven
qualifying or fountain-Spirits in the Divine power.

42. Whereof you have an Image in the Revelation of John: Apocalypse, Chap. 1.
where he sees seven Golden Candlesticks or Lights before the Son of God,
which signify the seven spirits of God, which shine in great clarity
brightness or luster before the Son of God, out of which the Son of God is
continually generated from eternity to eternity, and is the Heart of the seven
Spirits of God, which I will here describe in order one after another.

43. You must here elevate your sense or mind in the Spirit, if you intend to
understand and apprehend it: Or else in your own sense or mind you will be an
astringent hard blind Stock.

III. Of the Third Circumstance or Species.
44. The Third Quality or the Third Spirit of God, in the Fathers power, is the
bitter quality; which is a penetrating or forcing of the sweet and astringent
or harsh Quality, which is trembling, penetrating, and rising up.

Observe here:

45. The astringent or harsh quality is the kernel or stock, or sour or
attractive, and the sweet is the light mollifying and softning, and the bitter
is penetrating or triumphing; which rises up and triumphs in the astringent
or harsh and sweet quality.

46. This is the source of joy, or the cause of the laughing elevating Joy,
whereby a thing trembles and Jubilateth for Joy; whence the heavenly joy
existeth.

47. Moreover, it is the Imaging or forming of all sorts of Red colors in its
own quality: in the sweet it Imageth or forms all sorts of White and Blew: in
the astringent or harsh and sour, it forms all sorts of Green Dusky and
mixed colors, with all manner of forms or Figures and Smells.

48. The bitter quality is the first spirit, whence the life becomes stirring,
from whence mobility takes its original, and is well called Cor or the Heart,
for it is the trembling shivering elevating penetrating spirit, a triumphing,
or Joy, an elevating source of laughing, in the sweet quality the bitter is
mollified, so that it becomes very richly loving and Joyful.

49. But if it be moved, elevated and kindled too much, then it kindles the
sweet and astringent or harsh quality, and is like a tearing, stinging and
Burning Poison, as when a man is tormented with a raging plague sore, which
makes him cry out for woe and misery.

50. This quality in the Divine power, when it is kindled, is the spirit of the
Zealous or Jealous and bitter wrath of God, which is unquenchable, as may be
seen by the Legions of Lucifer.

51. Yet further, this quality, when it is kindled, is the bitter hellish fire,
which puts out the Light, turning the sweet quality into a Stinck, causing a
sharpness and tearing, a hardness and coldness, in the astringent or harsh
quality.

52. In the sour quality it causes a rankness and brittlenesse, a stinck,
misery, a house of mourning, a house of darkness, of Death and of Hell, an End
of Joy, which therein can no more be thought upon: for it cannot be quieted, or
stilled by any thing, nor can be enlightened again by any thing, but the dark,
astringent or harsh, stinking, sour, torn, bitter fierce quality rises up to
all Eternity.

Now Observe:

53. In these three Species or Qualities stands the Corporeal Being, or the
Creatural Being of all Creatures in heaven and in this world, whether it be
Angel, or Man, Beast, or Fowl, or Vegetable, of a heavenly or earthly form,
quality, and kind, as also all colors and forms.

54. Briefly, whatsoever Imageth it self, stands in the power and authority
of these three head Qualities, and is formed by them, and also is formed out of
its own power.

55. First the astringent and sour quality is a Body or source, which
attracteth the sweet power, and the cold in the astringent or harsh quality
makes it Dry.

56. For the sweet quality is the heart of the water, for it is thin and light
or bright, and is like Heaven: and the bitter quality makes it separable or
distinct, so that the powers form themselves into Members, and causes mobility
in the Body.

57. And when the sweet quality is dried, then it is a Corpus or Body, which is
perfect, but wanting Reason.

58. And the Bitter quality penetrateth into the Body, into the astringent
sour and sweet quality, and frames all sorts of Colors according to that
quality which the Body is most eagerly inclined to, or to that quality which is
strongest in the Body: according to that the bitter quality frames the Body
with its colors, and according to that quality the creature has her greatest
impulse and inclination, motion, boiling and will.

IIII. Of the Fourth Circumstance or Species.
59. The fourth Quality, or the fourth fountain-Spirit in the Divine power of
God the Father is the Heat, which is the true Beginning of life, and also the
true Spirit of Life.

60. The astringent or harsh, sour, and sweet, quality is the Salitter, which
belongs to the Body, out of which the Body is framed.

61. For coldness and hardness stands in the astringent quality, and is a
contraction and Drying; and in the sweet quality stands the water, and the
light or shiningnesse, and the whole matter of the Body.

62. And the bitter quality is the separation and forming, and the Heat is the
Spirit or the kindling of the life, whereby the Spirit existeth in the Body,
which springs or moves in the whole Body, and shines out from the Body;
also makes the living motion in all the qualities of the Body.

63. Two things are chiefly to be eyed in all the qualities: if you look upon a
Body, you see first the Stock Pith or the Kernel of all the qualities, which is
framed or Composed out of all the qualities: for to the Body belong the
astringent or harsh, sour, sweet, bitter and hot qualities; These qualities
being dried together, make the Body or Stock.

The Great Mystery of the Spirit.
64. Now these Qualities are mixed in the Body, as if they were all but one
quality; and yet each quality moves or boyleth in its own power, and so goes
forth.

65. Each quality goes forth from it self into the other, and touches or
stirs the other, that is, it affects the other, whereby the other
qualities get the will of this; that is, they prove the sharpness and spirit
of this quality, as to what is in it, and always mix with it continually.

66. Now the astringent or harsh quality together with the sour, always
contract or attract the other qualities together, and so apprehend and retain
the Body, and Dry it.

67. For it dries all the other powers, and retains them all through its
infection or influence, and the sweet softneth and moistneth all the other, and
so blendeth and tempereth it self with all the other, whereby they become
daintily pleasant and mild or soft.

68. And the bitter makes all the other stirring and moveable, and parts or
distinguishes them into members; so that every member in this tempering
obtains the fountain of all the powers, whence mobility existeth.

69. And the Heat kindles all the qualities, out of which the light rises up
and expandeth it self aloft in all the qualities, so that the one sees the
other: for when the Heat works in the sweet Moisture, then it generateth the
Light in all the Qualities, so that the one sees the other.

70. From whence the Senses and Thoughts exist, so that the one quality sees
the other, which is also in it and tempered with it self, and proves it with
its sharpness, so that it becomes to be a will, which in the Body rises up
in the first fountain source or wellspring in the astringent or harsh quality.

71. And there the bitter quality penetrateth in the heat through the
astringent, and the sweet in the water lets it easily or Gently through; and
there the bitter in the heat goes through the sweet water forth from the Body,
and makes two open Gates, which are the Eyes, the first Sense, or Sensibility.

72. You have an example and type or resemblance of this; If you behold and
consider this world, especially the Earth, which is of the kind and Condition
of all qualities, and all manner of figures or shapes are formed and Imaged
therein.

73. First the astringent quality is therein, which attracteth the Salitter
together, and fixes or makes the Earth firm and compact, so that it comes to
be a solid Body, which holds together and does not break asunder, and Imageth
or frames or forms therein all manner of Bodies, according to the kind of
each quality, viz. all manner of Stones and Oars of Minerals, and all manner
of Roots, according to the condition or kind of each quality.

74. Now when that is Imaged or formed, there it lies as a corporeal springing
boiling mobility, for it moves or boyleth thorough, and in the bitter quality,
in it self, as in its own Imaged formed or framed Body: But has as yet no life
to growing vegetation springing or spreading abroad without the Heat, which is
the or Nature-Spirit.
Spirit of Nature.

75. But when the heat of the Sun shines upon the Earth, then there spring and
grow in the Earth all manner of Images or Figures of Oars or Minerals, Herbs,
Roots and Worms, and all whatsoever is therein.

Understand this aright:

76. The heat of the Sun kindles, in the earth, the sweet quality of water, in
all Imaged or framed figures: and then through the heat the light comes to be
in the sweet water, and that enlightneth the astringent, sour, and bitter,
qualities, so that they see in or by the light: and in that seeing the one
rises up into the other, and proves the other; that is, in that seeing, the
one tastes of the others sharpness, from whence comes the Taste.

77. And when the sweet quality tastes the Taste of the bitter quality, it
Checks or stops it. Flend flemmet undweich.
caggs at it, and gives back even as a man when he tastes astringent harsh or
bitter Gall, he opens both the Throat or Jaws.
Gummes of his Palate in his Mouth in his or checking.
Cagging, and wideneth his Palate more then it is of it self; and just so does
the sweet Quality against the Bitter.

78. And when the sweet quality thus stretches or wideneth it self, and
retireth from the bitter, then the astringent always presses after it, and
would also fain taste of the sweet; and always makes the Body that is behind
it, and in it, to be Dry: for the sweet quality is the Mother of the water, and
is very meek mild soft and Gentle.

79. Now when the astringent or harsh and bitter quality get their light from
the Heat, then they see the sweet quality, and taste of its sweet water, and
then they continually make haste after the sweet water, and drink it up, for
they are very Hard, rough, and thirsty, and the Heat dries them quite up.

80. And the sweet quality always flies from the Bitter and Astringent, and
stretches its Throat or Jaws.
Palate always wider, and the Bitter and astringent continually hasten after
the sweet, and refresh themselves from the sweet, and dry up the Body.

81. Thus is the true Springing or vegetation in Nature, be it in Man, Beasts,
Wood, Herbs* or Stones.

Now observe the End of Nature in this World.
82. When the sweet quality thus flies from the bitter, sour and astringent,
then the astringent and bitter make all the haste they can after it, as their
best treasure; and the sweet presses vehemently from them, and striveth so
much, that it drives and Penetrateth through the astringent or harsh quality,
and rends the Body, and goes forth from the Body, out above the earth, and
hasteneth so fast, till a long stalk grows up.

83. And then the heat above the earth presses upon the stalk, and so the
bitter quality is then kindled by the Heat, and the Stalk.
it receives a repulse from the Heat, so that it is terrified, and the
astringent quality dries it.

84. And therein the astringent, the sweet, the bitter, and the Heat, struggle
together, and the astringent quality in its coldness continually makes its
dryness, and so the sweet withdraws on the sides, and the other hasten after
it.

85. But when it sees that it is like to be taken or captivated, the bitter
quality from within pressing so hard upon it, and the heat from without
pressing upon it also, it makes the bitter, fervent, or burning, and inflameth
it, and there it leapeth, springing up through the astringent quality, and
rises up again aloft, so there comes to be a hard knot behind it in that
place, where the struggling was, and the knot gets a Hole or Orifice.

86. But when the sweet quality leapeth or springs up through the knot, then
the bitter quality had so much affected or wrought upon it, that it was all in
a trembling; and as soon as it comes above the knot, it suddenly stretches it
self forth on all sides, striving to fly from the bitter quality: and in that
stretching forth, its Body keeps hallow in the middle, and in the trembling
leaping or springing up through the knot, it still gets more Stalk or leaves,
and now is frolic or cheerly that it has escaped the Battle.

87. And so when the heat from without, thus presses upon the stalk, then the
qualities become kindled in the stalk, and press through the stalk, and so
become affected or wrought upon in the external light of the Sun, and generate
colors in the stalk, according to the kind of its quality.

88. But so long as the Sweet water is in the stalk, the stalk retains its
greenish color according to the kind of the sweet quality.

89. And such matters the qualities always bring to pass with the heat in the
stalk, and the stalk always grows further, and always one Storm or assault
is held after another, whereby the stalk always gets more knots, and still
spreads forth its branches further and further.

90. In the mean while, the heat from without always dries the sweet water in
the stalk, and the stalk always is smaller at the Top; the higher it grows,
the smaller it is, growing on so long, till it can escape or run no further.

91. And then the sweet quality yields to be taken captive, and so the
bitter, sour, sweet, and astringent, do reign jointly together, and the sweet
stretches it self a little forth, but it can escape no more, for it is
captivated or caught.

92. And then from all the qualities, which are in the Body, there grows a
Bud or Head, and there is a new Body in the Bud or head, and is formed or
figured answerable or like to the first Root in the Earth, only now it gets
another more subtle form.

93. And then the sweet quality extends it self Gently or mildly, and there
grow little subtle leaves in the Head which are of the kind of all the
qualities, and then the sweet water is as it were a pregnant woman new with
child, having conceived the Seed, and it always presses onward, till it
opens the Head.

94. And then also it presses forth in little leaves, like a woman which is in
travel and bringing forth, but the little Leaves or Blossoms have no more its
color and form, but the form of all the Qualities: for now the sweet quality
must bring forth the children of the other Qualities.

95. And when this sweet Mother has brought forth the Fair, Green, Blew,
White, Red, and Yellow, Flowers Blossoms or Children, then she grows quite
weary, and cannot long nourish or Nurse these children, neither can she have
them long, seeing they are but her step-children, which are very tender.

96. And so when the outward heat presses upon these tender children, all the
qualities in the children cannot be kindled, for the Spirit of Life qualifieth
or flows in them.

97. And seeing they are too weak for this strong Spirit, and cannot elevate
themselves, they yield or surrender their Noble power, and that smells so
lovely and with so pleasant a savor, that it rejoices the very Heart, and
makes it Laugh: but they must wither and fall off, because they are too tender
for this Spirit.

98. For the Spirit draws from the Head or Bud into the Blossoms, and the
Head or Bud is formed according to the kind of all the Qualities; the
astringent quality attracteth or collecteth the Body of the Bud or Head, and
the sweet quality softneth it and spreads it abroad, and the Bitter quality
parts or distinguishes the matter into Members, and the Heat is the living
spirit therein.

99. Now all the qualities labor or work therein, and bring forth their fruit
or children, and every child is qualified or conditioned according to the kind
and property of all the Qualities.

100. This they drive and act so long till all the matter be quite dried, till
the sweet quality or sweet water be dried up, and then the fruit falls off, and
the stalk dries also and falls down.

And this is the end of Nature in this World.
101. Concerning this, much higher things are to be written, which you will
find concerning the Creation of this world: this is only brought in for a
Similitude, and described in the briefest manner.

102. Now the other form or kind of Qualities or of the Divine Powers, or of
the Seven Spirits of God, are especially to be observed or known by the
Instance or Example of Heat.

103. First there is the ground, or the corporeal Being, although in the Deity
or in the Creatures either, it has no peculiar or several Body, but all the
Qualities are in one another as One, however the operation of every quality is
perceived in particular and severally.

104. Now in the Body or fountain is the Heat, which generateth the fire, which
is a form or kind of thing which a man can search into, and out of the heat
goes the light through all the Spirits and Qualities; and the light is the
living Spirit, which a man cannot search into.

105. Bnt a man can search into its will, and know what it wills, or how it
is: for it proceeds in the sweet quality, and the Light rises up in the
sweet Quality in the sweet water, and not in the other qualities.

106. For Example; thou can kindle all things in this world, and so make them
give light and burn, if the sweet Quality have the predominancy in it; and
where the other qualities are predominant in it, thou can not kindle that:
And though thou may bring Heat into it, yet thou can not bring the Spirit
into it, to make it give light: therefore all qualities, are the children of
the sweet quality, or of the sweet water, because the spirit rises up only in
the water.

108. Art thou a rational Man, in whom is the Spirit and understanding, then
look all about in the world, for there thou will find it thus.

109. Thou can kindle wood, that it give light, for the water is chief upper
Regent or predominant therein; so likewise in all sorts of Herbs on Earth,
wherein the sweet water is predominant.

110. Thou can not kindle light in a stone, because the astringent or harsh
Quality is chief or predominant therein: neither can thou kindle light in
Earth, unless the other qualities be first vanquished and boiled out of it,
which is seen in the Gunpowder, which yet is but a flash or a spirit of
terror, wherein the Devil in the Anger of God represents himself, which I
will describe and demonstrate, more largely in another place.

Objection.

111. But thou will say; That a man cannot kindle the water to make it give
light.

Answer.

Yes, Dear Man. Here lies or sticks the mystery. The wood which thou
kindlest, is not very Fire, but a Dark or Opake stock, only the fire and light
takes their original from thence.

112. But thou must understand this, concerning the sweet quality of the water,
and not concerning the stick or block; but it is to be understood concering the
or Oylinesse.
Unctuositie or fatness which is the spirit therein.

113. Now, in the Elementary water on earth, the sweetness is not the Chief,
or Upper Regent, but the astringent, bitter, and sour quality; else the water
were not mortale, but were as that water is, out of which Heaven is created.

114. And that I will demonstrate to thee thus, viz. that the astringent, sour
and bitter Quality is predominant in the Elementary water on Earth.

115. Take Rye, Wheat, Barley, Oats, or what you will, wherein the sweet
quality is predominant, soak or steep it in the Elementary water, afterward
Distill it, then the sweet quality will take away the predominancy from the
other, and afterward kindle that water, and then you will see the spirit, which
is remaining in the water of the or Oylinesse.
unctuousnesse or fatness of the Corn, which did overcome the water.

116. This thou see also in Flesh: the flesh neither burns nor shines, or
gives Light, but its or Oil, or Tallow.
Fat burns and shines or gives Light.

Question.

117. Thou may perhaps ask: How comes that to pass; or, In what manner is it
so?

Answer.

118. Behold; in Flesh, the astringent, sour and bitter quality is
predominant; and in the fat, the sweetness is chief and predominant; Therefore
fat creatures are always Merrier and frolicker then the lean, because the
sweet Spirit flows more abundantly in them then in the Lean.

119. For the light of Nature, which is the Spirit of life, shines more in
them, then in the lean: For in that Light in the sweet quality, stands the
tryumphing or the Joy, for the astringent or harsh and bitter quality triumph
therein, for they rejoice that they are refreshed, fed, given to drink, and
enlightened from the sweet and light quality.

120. For in the astringent or harsh quality there is no life, but an
astringent cold hard Death; and in the bitter quality there is no Light, but a
dark, bitter, and raging Pain, a house of Trembling Horror and fierce wrathful
fearful Misery.

121. Therefore when they are Guests feasting at the sweet and Light quality,
then are they affected, and pleasant, very joyful and triumphing in the
Creature.

122. And therefore no Lean creature is merry, unless it be so that Heat be
predominant therein: that is, though it be Lean, and has little of the fat, or
oil in it; yet perhaps sweetness is very abundant there.

123. On the other side, many Creatures have much fatness and yet are very
Melancholy or sad; which is, because their fatness is inclined to the
condition of the Elementary water, wherein the astringent or harsh and bitter
quality is somewhat strong.

Of the Language of Nature.
124. Art thou a rational man, then Observe this; the Spirit, which moves on
high aloft, from the heat, takes its Exit, rising, and shining, in the sweet
quality; therefore the sweet qualities, is its friendly or kind will, and
reigns in meekness; and meekness and humility are its proper House or
Habitation.

125. And this is the Pith or Kernel of the Deity, and therefore IT is called
GOT, God, because it is sweet, meek, friendly and Bounteous or Good, GUTIG;
and therefore is IT called Barm-hertz-ig Warm-Heart-ed
or Merciful, because its sweet quality rises up in the astringent, sour, and
bitter qualities, and refreshes moistneth and enlightneth them, that they
might not remain a dark valley.

126. For understand but thy The Mother Tongue expounded according to the
Language of Nature.
Mother Tongue aright; thou have as deep a Ground therein, as there is, in the
Hebrew, or Latin: Though the Learned elevate themselves therein, like a proud
arrogant Braut. Turba.
Bride; it is no great matter, their Art is now on the Lees, or bowed down to
the Dust.

127. The Spirit shows and declares, that yet before the End, many a Layman,
will know and understand more, then now the Wittiest or Cunningest Doctors
know: for the Gates of Heaven set open themselves, those that do not blind
themselves, shall and will see it very well, the Bridegroom Crowns his Bride.
AMEN.

BARM-HERTZ-IG.
128. Observe! Barm-Hertz-zig. Warm-hearted. or Mer-ci-full.
the word BARM- is chiefly formed upon thy Lips; and when thou pronouncest
BARM- then thou shuttest thy Mouth, and snarlest in the hinder part of the
Mouth: and this is the Astringent quality, which environeth or incloseth the
word; that is, it figureth compacteth or contracteth the word together, that it
becomes hard, or sounds, and the Bitter quality separateth or cutteth or
distinguishes it.

129. That is, when thou pronouncest BAR, the last letter R snarleth, and
murmureth like a trembling Breath, and thus does the bitter quality which is a
trembling.

130. Now the word BARM- is a dead word, void of understanding, so that no man
understands what it means: which signifies, that the Two Qualities,
Astringent, and Bitter, are a hard dark cold and Bitter Being, which have no
Light in them: And therefore a man cannot understand their power without the
Light.

131. But when a man says BARM-HERTZ-, he fetches or presses the second
syllable out from the Deep of the Body, out from the Heart, for the right
Spirit speaks forth the word HEARTZ, which rises up aloft from the heat of
the Heart, in which the Light goes forth and flows.

132. Now Observe, when thou pronouncest BARM, then the two qualities, the
astringent, and bitter, form frame or compact together the word BARM, very
leisurely or slowly: for it is a long impotent feeble syllable, because of the
weakness of the qualities.

133. But when thou pronouncest -HERTZ- then the spirit in the word -HERTZ-
(Heart) goes forth suddenly, like a flash of lightning, and gives the or the
distinct sense or meaning of the word.
distinction and understanding of the word.

134. But when thou prnouncest -IG, then thou catchest or captivatest the
spirit in the midst of the other two qualities, so that it must stay there and
form the word.

135. And thus is the Divine power also; the Astringent and Bitter quality, are
the Salitter of the Divine Omnipotence, the sweet quality is the Pith or Kernel
of the Barm-hertz-ig-keit, Warm-heart-ednesse or Merci-ful-nesse, according to
which the whole Being with all the Powers, is called GOT. GOD.


136. The heat is the Kernel of the Spirit, out of which the light goes, and
kindles it self in the midst or Center of the sweet quality, and becomes
captivated by the astringent and bitter quality, as in the midst or center
wherein the Son of God is generated, and that is the very Hertz, Heart,
of God.

137. And the Lights Flame or Flash; which in the twinkling of an Eye or
Moment, shines into all the powers, even as the Sun does in the whole world;
is the Holy Ghost, which goes forth from the clarity or brightness of the
Son of God, and is the flash of Lightning and sharpness: for the Son is
generated in the midst or Center of the other qualities, and is catched by the
other qualities.

Understand this high thing, rightly.
138. When the Father speaks or pronounces the WORD, that is, generateth his
Son, which is always done for ever and Eternally: then that Word first
takes its Original in the astringent quality, therein it fixes conceives or
compacteth it self, and in the sweet quality, it takes its fountain spring or
source, and in the bitter quality it sharpeneth, and moves it self, and in the
heat it rises up, and Kindles the middle sweet fountain or source.

139. And now it burns jointly or equally alike in all the qualities of the
kindled fire, and the fire burns forth from the qualities: for all qualities
burn, and that fire is one fire and not many several Fires.

149. And that fire is the very Son of God, which is thus generated always
from eternity to eternity: this I can demonstrate by the Heaven and the Earth,
the Stars and the Elements, and by all the Creatures, Stones, Leaves and
Grass, yea in the Devil himself; and that not with Dead slight unsignificant
Arguments void of understanding, but with clear quick living and invincible
firm Arguments, even above, beyond, and to the Refutation of, all men's Reason
convincingly and undeniably, and lastly in opposition against all the devils
and the Gates of Hell; and would do it here, if it would not take up too much
room.

141. Yet it shall be treated of all along in this whole book in all the
Articles and parts thereof; but you shall find it more particularly in that
part concerning the Creation of the Creatures, as also, conconcerning the
Creation of Heaven and Earth and of all things, which will be fitter to be done
then, and easier apprehended by the Reader.

Now Observe:

142, Out of that fire goes the flash or the light, forth, and moves or
boyleth in all the powers, and has or contains the fountain and sharpness,
of all the powers in it self: because it is generated, through the Son, out
of all the powers of the Father, and so then it reciprocally makes all the
powers in the Father living and moving, and through that Spirit are all the
Angels formed and Imaged out of the Fathers Powers.

143. And that Spirit preserves and supporteth all, forms all, all
vegetation, colors and Creatures both in heaven and in this world, and above
all the Heaven of Heavens. For the Birth or Geniture of the Holy Trinity above
all is thus, and no otherwise, neither will it be otherwise in all Eternity.

144. But when the fire is Kindled in a Creature; that is, when a Creature
elevateth it self too high or too much, as Lucifer and his Legions did, then
the light extinguisheth or goes out, and the fierce wrathful and hot source,
the source of the hellish fire rises up, that is, the Spirit of the fire
rises up in the fierce Quality.

145. Observe here the Circumstances, how this is done, or how it can come to
be done. Therefore consider an Angel, is formed figured composed or compacted
together out of all powers, as I have described it at large.

146. Now when he elevateth himself, he elevateth himself first in the
astringent quality, which he gripeth close together, as a woman, which is in
travel; and presses himself, whereby the hard quality becomes so hard and
sharp, that the sweet water can force or prevail with it no more, and so can
rise up no more meekly or mildly in the Creature; but is captivated and dried
up by the astringent quality, and changed into a hard, sharp fierce Coldness.

147. For it becomes too Derb.
empty and dry by the astringent contraction, and loses its bright luster, and
its unctuosity, fatness or Oylinesse (wherein the light Spirit rises up,
which is the Spirit of the Holy angelical and divine life) becomes so hard
compacted and pressed together by the astringent quality, whereby it is dried
up like sweet dry Wood.

148. And so when the bitter quality rises up in the exsiccated or dried sweet
quality, then cannot the sweetness mollify it, and imbibe it with its sweet
light-water, because it is dried up.

149. And there the bitter quality raveth and rages, and seeks for rest and
food, and finds it not, and moves or boyleth in the Body as a faint Poison.

150. And now, when the heat kindles the sweet quality, and would mitigate its
heat in the sweet water, whence it rises up, and shines in the whole Body,
there it finds nothing but a hard dry sweet source or quality, there is no sap,
or moisture, it being quite exsiccated or dried up, by the astringencie.

151. Then it kindles the sweet source or quality with an intent to be
refreshed, but there is no sapp left, only the sweet source or quality is now
burning and glowing, even as a hard dried or burnt stone, and can no more
kindle its light, and so the whole Body remains now a Dark valley, in which
there is nothing, but a fierce hard coldness in the astringent quality, and in
the sweet, a hard glowing fire only, wherein the fierce Wrathful heat rises up
in all Eternity, and in the bitter quality there is a raving raging, stinging
and burning.

152. And thus you have here the true description of an Expulsed Angel or
Devil, as also the Cause thereof, and that not written in a similitude only,
but in the Spirit, through that power, out of which all things are come to be.

153. O man! behold thy self herein, look before thee, and behind thee, it is
not in vain.

154. This great History or Action, how it came to pass, and how it went, you
will find it at large, concerning the Fall of the Devil.

V. Of the Fifth Circumstance or Species.
155. The Fifth Quality, or the fifth Spirit of God among the the Seven Spirits
of God, in the Divine power of the Father; is, the gracious amiable blessed
friendly and joyful Love.

156. Now observe; what the fountain of the gracious amiable blessed and
friendly love of God is: Observe it exactly, for it is the very Pith Marrow or
Kernel.

157. When the heat in the sweet quality rises up, and kindles the sweet
source fountain or spring, then that fire burns in the sweet quality: now
seeing the sweet quality is a thin or transparent lovely pleasant sweet
fountain or spring water, it allayeth the heat, and quenches the fire, and so
there remains in the sweet fountain spring of the sweet water, only the
joyful light.

158. And the heat is only a gentle soft warming, even as it is in a man, which
is of a Sanguine Complexion, wherein also the heat is only a friendly cheerly
warming, if the party lives temperately, and keeps a due Measure.

159. That friendly Courteous Love-Light-fire, goes along in the sweet
quality, and rises up into the bitter and astringent quality, and so kindles
the bitter and astringent quality, feeding them with its sweet Love-sap,
refreshing quickening and enlightening them, and making them living or lively,
cheerful and friendly.

160. And when the Light-love-power comes at them, so that they taste thereof,
and get its life; O there is a friendly Meeting Saluting and Triumphing, a
friendly wellcoming and great love, a most friendly and gracious amiable and
blessed kissing and well relishing taste.

161. There the Bridegroom kisseth his Bride: O gracious amiable Blessedness
and great love! how sweet art thou? how friendly and Courteous art thou? how
pleasant and lovely is thy relish and taste? how ravishing sweetly do thou
smell? O noble light, and bright glory, who can apprehend thy exceeding Beauty!
how comely adorned is thy love? how curious and dainty are thy colors? and All
this Eternally! who can express it?

162. Or why, and what do I written whose Tongue does but stammer like a child,
which is learning to speak! with what shall I compare it? or to what shall I
liken it? Shall I compare it with the love of this world: No, that is but a
mere dark valley to it.

163. O Immense greatness! I cannot compare thee with any thing, but only with
the Resurrection from the Dead, there will the love-fire rise up again in US,
and embrace Man courteously and friendly, and re-kindle again, our astringent
bitter and cold dark and dead Quality, and embrace us most friendly.

164. O noble Guest! O, why did thou depart from us! O fierceness wrath and
astringency or severity, thou art the cause of it! O fierce wrathful Devil! O,
what have thou done, who have sunk down thy self and beautiful bright Angels,
into darkness? woe, woe for Ever!

165. O, was not the gracious amiable blessed and fair Love in thee, also? O
thou High and Lofty minded Devil! why would thou not be contented! were thou
not a Cherubin? and was there any thing so beautiful and bright in heaven as
thou? what did thou seek for? would thou be the whole or Total God? did
thou not know, that thou were a Creature, and had not the Fan and Casting
shovel in thy own hand, or Power?

166. O, why do I pity thee, thou stinking Goat? O, thou cursed stinking Devil!
how have thou spoiled us? how will thou excuse thy self! What will thou Object
to me?

Objection.

167. Thou Say, If thy Fall had not been; Man would never have been thought
of.

Answer.

O, thou Lying Devil! Though that should be true; yet the Salitter, out of
which Man is made, which is also from eternity, as well as that, out of which
thou art made, had stood in eternal Joy and Bright Glory, and had likewise
risen up in God, and had tasted of the gracious amiable blessed love in the
seven Spirits of God, and enjoyed the heavenly Joy!

168. O thou lying Devil, stay but a little, the spirit will discover thy shame
to thee, tarry but a little while longer, and thy pomp pride and Pageantry will
be at an End. Stay, the Bow is bent, the Arrow will hit thee, and then whither
will thou fall? the place is ready provided and prepared, it wants only to be
kindled, will thou bring fuel lustily to it, that thou be not frozen with
cold? thou will sweat very hard: do thou suppose thou shall obtain the light
again? No, but Hell fire. Smell to thy sweet Love, Guess at it, what is that
called? Gehenna; yes, that will be in love with thee, Eternally.

169. Woe, woe, poor miserable blinded Man, why suffer thou the Devil to
make thy Body and Soul so dark and blind! O temporal Good, and the pleasure and
voluptuousness of this life, thou Blind Whore, why do thou go a wooing and
whoring to the Devil.

170. O, Security! the Devil watches for thee! O, High-mindednesse, thou art a
hellish Fire. O, Beauty Pomp or Bravery! thou art a dark valley. O
self-vindication or Vengeance! thou art the fierce wrath of God!

171. O Man, why will the world be too narrow, for thee! thou will needs have
it all for thy self; and if thou had it, thou would not have Room enough! O
this is the Devils high-mindednesse, who fell out of Heaven into Hell.

172. O, Man! Alas, O man! why do thou Dance with the Devil, who is thine
enemy? Art thou not afraid, that he will thrust thee into Hell? why do thou
go on so securely! Is it not a very narrow stick, on which thou Dancest: under
that small narrow Bridge is Hell! do thou not see how high thou art, and how
dangerously and desperately thou go? thou Dancest betwixt Heaven and Hell.

173. O thou blind Man! how does the Devil Mock at thee! O, wherefore do thou
trouble heaven! do thou think thou shall not have enough, in this world? O,
blind man! is not Heaven and Earth thine? nay God himself too! What do thou
bring into this world, or what do thou take along with thee at thy going out
of it? thou bring an Angelical Garment into this world, and with thy wicked
life thou turnest it into a Devils Mask or vizard.

174. O thou miserable Man! Turn Convert, the heavenly Father has stretched
forth both his Arms, and calls thee, do but Come, he will take thee into his
Love: art thou not his child? He does Love thee: if he did hate thee, he must
be at odds with himself: O no, it is not so: there is nothing in God, but a
merciful amiable love and Bright glory!

175. O ye Watchmen of Israel! why do ye sleep? Awake from the sleep of
whoredom, and dress or trim your Lamps: the Bridegroom comes, Sound your
Trumpets.

176. O ye covetous stiffnecked and drunken Roysters! how do you woo and go a
whoring after the covetous Devil! Thus says the LORD: Will ye not feed my
people, which I have committed to your charge?

177. Behold I have set you upon Moses his chair, and entrusted you with my
flock; but you mind nothing but the wool, and mind not my sheep, and
therewith, you build your great Palaces. But I will set you on the Stool of
Pestilence, and my own Shepherd, shall feed my sheep, Eternally.

178. O thou fair world, how does Heaven pity thee? How do thou trouble the
Elements! O, wickedness and malice! When will thou leave, and give over?
Awaken! awaken! and, bring forth, thou sorrowful Woman, behold thy Bridegroom
comes, and requires fruit at thy Hands: Why do thou sleep? behold he
knocks!

179. O gracious amiable blessed Love and clear bright Light, tarry with us I
pray thee, for the evening is at hand! O, Truth! O, Justice, and righteous
Judgment! what is become of thee? does not the Spirit wonder, as if he had
never seen the world before now! O, why do I write of the wickedness of this
world? I must do it, and the world or gives me the Devils thanks for it.
curses me for it. Amen.

The Ninth Chapter.
Of the Gracious amiable blessed friendly and Merciful Love of God.

The Great Heavenly and Divine Mystery.
1. BEcause I write here of heavenly and Divine things, which are altogether
strange to the corrupted perished Nature of Man; the Reader doubtless will
wonder at the simplicity of the Author, and be offended at it.

2. Because the condition and inclination of the corrupted Nature is, to gaze
only on high things, like a proud, wild, wanton and whorish woman, which
always gazeth in her heat or burning Lust after Handsome men, to act
wantonness with them.

3. Thus also is the Proud corrupted perished Nature of Man, it stareth only
upon that, which is glittering and in Fashion in this world, and supposes,
that God has forgotten the afflicted, and therefore plagueth them so, because
he minds them not.

4. Corrupt Nature imagines, that the Holy Ghost regards only high things,
the high Arts and Sciences of this world, the profound studies and Great
Learning.

5. But whether it be so, or no; look but back and then you will find the true
Ground: What was Abel? A shepherd. What was Enoch and Noah? plain simple men.
What were Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? Herdsmen.

6. What was Moses, that dear man of God? A Herdsman. What was David, when the
Mouth of the Lord called him? A shepherd.

7. What were the Great, and Small Prophets? Vulgar plain and mean People: some
of them but Country people, and Herdsmen, counted the underlings or
footstooles of the world: men counted them but mere fools.

8. And though they did Miracles Wonders and showed great signs, yet the world
gazed only on high things, and the Holy Ghost must be as the Dust under their
feet: for the proud Devil always endeavored to be King in this world.

9. And how came Our King JESUS CHRIST into this world? Poor and in great
trouble and misery, and had not whereon to lay his head, Matthew. 8. 20.

10. What were his Apostles? Poor, despised, illiterate Fishermen, and what
were they that believed their preaching? The poorer and meaner sort of the
people. The High Priests and Scribes were the Executioners of Christ, who cried
out, Crucify him, crucify him, Luke 23. 21.

11. What were they that in all Ages in the Church of Christ stood to it most
stoutly and constantly? The poor contemptible despised people, who shed their
Blood for the sake of Christ.

12. But who were they that falsified and adulterated the right pure Christian
Doctrine, and always fought against and opposed it? Even the Learned Doctors
and Scribes, Popes, Cardinals, Bishops and great Dons, or Masters and Teachers;
And why did the world follow after them, and depend on them? But because they
had great respect, were in great authority, and power; lived stately and
carried a Port in the world; Even such a Proud Whore, is the corrupt perished
humane nature!

13. Who was it that purged the Popes Greediness of Money, his Idolatry,
Bribery, deceit and Cheating; out of the Churches in Germany? A poor despised
Luther.
Monk or Friar. By what power and might? by the power of God the Father, and by
the power and Might of God the Holy Ghost.

Question.

14. Then what is yet concealed or remains hidden? The true doctrine of Christ?

Answer.

No; but the That is the real knowledge, of the manner how the Mysteries,
spoken of in the Doctrine of Christ, as they are in Nature, Physically or
Metaphysically in Supernatural things, are to be understood convincingly
according to its true Ground; and the Capacity of the Humane Mind.
Philosophy; and the deep Ground of God; the heavenly Delight and Pleasure;
the revelation of the Creation of Angels; the revelation of the horrible Fall
of the Devil; From whence Evil proceeds: The Creation of this world; The deep
ground and mystery of Man and of all Creatures; The Last Judgment, And Change
of this world; The Mystery of the Resurrection of the Dead; And of Eternal Life.

15. This shall arise in the Depth, in great plainness and simplicity: But why
not in the height in Art? That no man should dare to boast, that he himself
has done it, and that hereby the Devils pride should be discovered and brought
to Nothing.

116. But why does God so? Of his great love and Barm-hertzig keit.
Mercy toward all People and Nations, and to show hereby, that now, is near at
hand, The Time of the Restitution of all whatsoever is lost, wherein men shall
behold and enjoy the perfection, and move in the pure Light and Deep Knowledge
of God.

17. Therefore before hand will arise the Dawning of the Day, or Morning
Redness, whereby the Day may be known or taken notice of.

18. He that will now sleep, let him sleep still; and he that will awake and
trim his Lamp, let him awake still: Behold the Bridegroom comes, and he that
is awake and is ready, accompanies into the eternal heavenly Wedding: But he
that sleeps at his coming, he sleeps for ever Eternally in the dark prison
of fierceness or wrath.

19. Therefore I would have the Reader warned, that he read this Book with
diligence, and not be offended at the meannesse or simplicity of the Author,
for God looks not at high things, for He alone is High: but he cares for the
Lowly, how to help them.

20. If you come so far, as to apprehend the spirit and sense of the Author,
then you will need no admonition, but will rejoice and be Glad in this light,
and thy Soul will Laugh and Triumph therein.

21. Now Observe: the Gracious amiable blessed Love, which is the fifth
fountain-spirit, in the divine power, is the hidden source fountain or Quality,
which, the corporeal being cannot comprehend or apprehend, but only, when it
rises up in the body, and then the Body triumphs therein, and behaveth it
self friendly lovely and Courteously, for that Quality or spirit belongs not
to the Imaging or framing of a Body, but rises up in the Body, as a flower
springs up out of the Earth.

22. Now this fountain-spirit takes its original at first out of the sweet
Quality of the water.

Understand this, how it is, and observe it exactly.

23. First there is the astringent quality, then the sweet, next, the bitter:
the Sweet is in the midst between the Astringent and Bitter. Now the Astringent
causes things to be hard, cold, and dark, and the bitter teareth, drives,
rages, and divides or distinguishes. These two Qualities rub and drive one
another so hard, and move so eagerly, that they generate the Heat, which now in
these two Qualities is dark, even as Heat in a Stone is.

24. As when a man takes a stone, or any hard thing, and rubbeth it against
wood, these two things are heated: now this heat is but a darkness, having no
light therein: and so it is also, in the Divine power.

25. Now the astringent and bitter quality without the sweet water, rub and
drive themselves so hard one against another, that they generate the dark heat,
and so are kindled in themselves.

26. And this Together is the Wrath or Anger of God, the source and original
of the hellish Fire.

As we see by Lucifer, who elevated and compressed himself so hard together,
with his Legions, that the sweet fountain water in him was dried up, wherein
the light kindles, and wherein the Love rises up.

27. Therefore now he is Eternally, an Astringent, Hard, Cold, Bitter, Hot and
Sour stinking fountain- source: For when the sweet quality in him, was dried
up, it became a sour stinck, a valley of misery, and a House of perdition and
woe.

Now further into the Depth.

28. When the astringent and bitter quality rub themselves so hard one upon
another, that they generate Heat, and so now the sweet quality, the sweet
fountain water, is therein in the midst or center between the astringent and
bitter quality, and the heat becomes generated between the astringent and
bitter quality, in the sweet fountain water, through the astringent and bitter
Quality.

29. And there the Light kindles in the heat in the sweet fountain water, and
this is the beginning of Life: for the astringent and bitter Qualities, are the
beginning and cause of the heat and of the Light, and thus the sweet fountain
water becomes a shining light, like the Blew or Azure Light of heaven.

30. And that bright-Light fountain water kindles the astringent and bitter
quality, and the heat, which is generated by the astringent and bitter quality
in the sweet water, rises up out of the sweet fountainwater through the
astringent and bitter quality, and in the astringent and bitter quality the
light first then becomes dry and shining, as also moveable and triumphing.

31. And when the light rises up out of the sweet fountain water in the heat
in the astringent and bitter quality, then the bitter and astringent quality
tastes the light and sweet water, and the bitter quality catches the taste of
the sweet water, and in the sweet water is the light, but only of a skie-colour
or Azure which is Blew.

32. And then the bitter quality trembles, and dissolveth the hardness in the
astringent Quality, the Light becomes dry in the Astringent, and shines
clear, much brighter then the Light of the Sun.

33. In this rising up, the astringent quality becomes meek, light, thin or
transparent, and pleasant or lovely, and obtains its life, whose original
rises up out of the heat in the sweet water, and this now is the true fountain
or wellspring of Love.

Observe this, in the deep Sense.

34. How should Love and Joy not be there? where life is generated in the very
Center or midst of Death, and Light, in the midst of darkness?

Question.

Thou ask, How comes that to pass?

Answer.

35. Indeed, if my spirit did sit in thy heart, and spring up in thy heart,
then thy Body would find, feel, and apprehend it.

36. But otherwise I cannot bring it into thy sense, neither can thou
apprehend or understand it, unless the Holy Ghost kindle thy soul, so that
this light it self shine in thy Heart.

37. And then will this light it self be generated in thee, as in God; and rise
up in thy astringent and bitter quality, in thy sweet water; and triumph, as in
God: Now when this is done: then you will first understand my Book, and not
before.

Observe:

38. When the light is generated in the Bitter quality, that is, when the
bitter and dry fountainsources catch the sweet fountain water of Life, and
drink it, then the bitter spirit becomes Living, in the astringent spirit, and
the astringent spirit which is as a spirit impregnated with child, is
impregnated with life, and must continually generate the Life.

39. For, the sweet water, and the life in the sweet water rise up continually
in the astringent quality, and the bitter quality triumphs continually
therein, and so there is nothing else but mere laughing, and Joy, a mere being
in Love.

40. For the astringent quality- loves the sweet water.

41. And First, because, in the sweet water, the Spirit of Light is generated,
and imbibeth or gives Drink to the astringent hard and cold Qualities; also it
enlightneth them, and warmeth them: for in Water, Light, and Heat, The Life
consists.

42. And secondly, the astringent Quality loves the bitter; because, the
bitter Quality in the sweet water, that is, in water heat and light, triumphs
in the astringent Quality, and makes the astringent, moveable or stirring,
wherein the astringent also can triumph.

43. And thirdly, the astringent quality loves the Heat, because in the heat
the light is Generated, whereby the astringent quality is enlightened and warmed.

44. And the sweet quality also loves the astringent.

45. And first, because it dries up the astringent that it become not thin
or dim like the elementary water, and that its quality consists in Power,
and because, that in the Astringent Quality the light, which is generated
therein, becomes shining and dry.

46. Besides, the astringent quality is a cause of the heat, which is generated
in the sweet water, wherein the light rises up, and wherein the sweet water
stands in great clarity brightness or glory.

47. And secondly, the sweet quality also loves the bitter, because it is a
cause of the heat, and also therefore, because the bitter spirit triumphs and
trembles in the sweet water, heat, and light, and so makes the sweet water
moveable or stirring, and living.

48. And thirdly, the sweet quality loves heat exceedingly, and so very much,
that I cannot compare it with any thing: but you may take this for a
Similitude, though it comes very short thereof: Suppose two young People of a
noble Complexion, these being kindled in the Heat and fervor of burning Love
one to another, there is such a fire as this; so that if they could creep into
the Bodies and Hearts one of another, or transmute themselves into one Body,
they would do it.

49. But this Earthly love is only cold Water, and is not true Fire: A man
cannot find any full similitude of it in this half-dead World; Only the
Resurrection of the Dead at the last Day, is a perfect Similitude in all divine
things, which receive the true Love-fire.

50. But the sweet quality does thus love the Heat because it generateth
therein the light-spirit, which is the Spirit of Life. For life existeth in the
heat; for if the Heat were not, all would be a dark valley: Now so dear as the
Life is, so dear is also the Heat, to the sweet spirit, and the light, in the
Heat.

51. And the bitter quality also loves all the other fountain-spirits. And
first the sweet. For in the sweet water, the bitter spirit is refreshed, and
therein it quenches its great thirst; and its bitterness is therein
mitigated, also it obtains its light-Life therein: in the astringent it has
its Body, wherein it triumphs cools and mitigateth it self; and in the Heat
it has its power and strength, wherein its Joy stands.

52. And the hot quality also loves all the other qualities, and the love is
so great therein toward, and in the other, that it cannot be likened to any
thing, for it is generated from and out of the other.

53. The astringent and bitter qualities are the Father of the heat, and the
sweet fountain water, is its Mother, which conceives, retains, and
generateth it: for the heat existeth through the astringent and bitter hard
driving, which rises up in the sweet quality, as in wood, or fuel.

54. Will thou not believe this? then open thy Eyes, and go to a Tree, look
upon it, and bethink thy self; there you see first the whole Tree, take a knife
and cut a Gash in it, and taste how it is; then you first taste the astringent
harsh choaky quality, which draws thy Tongue together, and that also draws
and holds together all the powers of the Tree.

55. Then you taste the bitter quality, which makes the Tree moveable or
stirring, so that it springs and grows green and flourishes, and so
gets its Branches Leaves and Fruit.

56. After that you taste the sweet, which is very Gentle and sharp: for it
gets the sharpness from the astringent and bitter Quality.

57. Now these three Qualities would be Dark and Dead, if the Heat were not
therein: but as soon as the Spring time comes, that the Sun with its Beams
suppleth and warmeth the Earth, the spirit becomes living by the Heat in the
Tree, and the spirits of the Tree begin to grow green, flourish and Blossom.

58. For the spirit rises up in the heat, and all the spirits rejoice therein,
and so there is a hearty love between them.

59. But the heat is generated through the power and Impulse of the astringent
and bitter qualities in the sweet water.

60. But they must use the Heat of the Sun to their kindling, because the
qualities in this world are half dead, and are too weak, of which King Lucifer
was the cause, which you will find, here following, concerning his Fall, and
concerning the Creation of this world.

Of the friendly Love, gracious amiable blessedness, and Unity, of the Five
qualifying or fountain-spirits of God.
61. Though it be impossible for the hands of men to describe this
sufficiently, yet the enlightened spirit of Man sees it: for it rises up just
in such a form and Birth, as the light in the Divine power, and also in the
qualities, which are in God.

62. Only this is to be Lamented concerning Man, that his qualities are
corrupted, perished and half Dead, and therefore it is that man's spirit or his
qualities, rising, or kindling in this world, can come or attain to no
perfection.

63. On the Other side, again it is highly to be rejoiced at, that man's spirit,
in his necessity becomes enlightened and kindled by the Holy Ghost: As the Sun
kindles the cold heat, in a Tree or Herb, whereby the cold chilled Heat
becomes living.

Now Observe:

64. As the members of Man's Body love one another, so do the spirits also in
the Divine power; there is nothing else but a mere longing desiring and well
liking acceptance, as also a triumphing and rejoicing the one in the other:
for through these spirits comes the understanding and distinction in God, in
Angels, Men, Beasts, and Fowls, and in every thing that lives.

65. For in these Five Qualities rises up the seeing, smelling, tasting and
feeling, and so a Rational spirit comes to be.

66. As when the light rises up, then one spirit sees the other.

67. And when the sweet spring or fountain water rises up in the light,
through all the spirits, then the one tastes the other, and then the spirits
become living, and the power of life penetrateth through all.

68. And in that power the one smells the other; And through this qualifying
influence and penetrating, the one feels the other.

69. And so there is nothing else, but a Hearty loving, and friendly aspect or
seeing, curious smelling, a good relishing or tasting and lovely feeling, a
gracious amiable blessed kissing, a feeding upon and drinking of one another,
and lovely walking and conversing together.

70. This is the gracious amiable blessed BRIDE, which rejoices in her
BRIDEGROOM, herein is love, joy and delight, here is light and brightness or
clarity, here is a pleasant and lovely smell, here is a friendly and sweet
taste.

71. And this for ever without End! How can a Creature sufficiently rejoice
therein? O Dear love and gracious amiable blessedness! Surely thou have no
End, No man can see any End in thee, thy profound Deep is unsearchable, thou
art every where all over thus, only in the fierce Devil thou art not thus,
they have spoiled, and perished, thee in themselves.

Question.

72. Now thou will say; Where then are these gracious amiable and blessed
spirits to be met with? Do they dwell only in themselves in Heaven?

Answer.

73. This is the other open Gate of the Deity, here thou must set thy eyes wide
open, and rouse up or awaken the spirit in thy half dead heart: for this is not
an Obscure Fiction Contrivance or Fantasy.

Observe:

74. The Seven Spirits of God contain or comprehend in their circumference, and
space, Heaven and this world, also the wide breadth and depth without and
beyond the heavens, even above and beneath the world, and in the world, yea the
whole Father, which has neither Beginning nor End.

75. They contain also all the Creatures both in heaven and in this world, and
all the Creatures in heaven and in this world are imaged fashioned or framed
out of these spirits, and live in them as in their own propriety.

76. And their Life and Reason is generated in them, in such a manner, as the
Divine being is generated, and also in the same power.

77. And out of and from the same Body of the seven Spirits of God, are all
things made and produced, all Angels, all Devils, the Heaven, the Earth, the
Stars, the Elements, Men, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes all Worms, Wood, Trees, also
Stones, Herbs and Grass, and all whatsoever is.

Now thou will ask.

Question.

78. Seeing God is every where, and is himself All, How comes it then that
there is in this world, such Cold and Heat, such biting and striking among all
Creatures, and that there is nothing else almost but mere fierceness or wrath
in this world?

Answer.

79. [The cause is, that the first four Forms of Nature, are one at Enmity
against the other without the light; and yet they are the causes of Life.] 80.
Behold, here the wickedness and malice which is the Cause; viz. when King
Lucifer did sit in his Kingdom, like a high-minded proud Bride, then his
Circuit Circle or Orb, contained or comprehended the place or space, where now
the Created Heaven is, which is made out of the water;

81. And the place also of the created world, even unto heaven, as also the
Deep where now the Earth is, that was all a pure and holy Salitter, wherein the
Seven Spirits of God were Complete and Pleasant, as now in Heaven, although
they are still complete and full, in this world. But observe the Circumstances
rightly.

82. When King Lucifer elevated himself, then he elevated himself in the seven
qualifying fountain-spirits, and kindled them with his elevation, so that all
was wholly burning, and the astringent quality was so hard and Compact, that it
generated stones; and was so cold, that it made the sweet spring or
fountain water turn to Ice.

83. And the sweet spring water became very thick brittle, and as or stinking.
in many pieces; and the bitter quality became very raging, tearing and raving,
whence Poison arose aloft, and the fire or heat was violently and zealously or
fervently burning and consuming, and so there was a very great distemper and
confused Mixture.

84. Upon this, King Lucifer was thrust out of his Royal Place or Kingly Throne
which he had in that Place, where now the created Heaven is, and thereupon
instantly ensued the Creation of this world;

85. And the hard Brittle matter, which had wrought forth it self in the
kindled seven qualifying or fountain-spirits, was driven together, from whence
the Earth and Stones came to be, and after that, all the Creatures were created
out of the kindled Salitter of the seven Spirits of God.

86. Now the qualifying or fountain Spirits became so fierce and wrathful in
their kindling, that the one continually spoileth the other with its evil
naughty quality or source, and so also now do the creatures, which were made
out of the qualifying or fountain spirits, and live in the same impulse, the
one biting beating worrying and annoying the other, all according to the kind
or disposition of the Qualities.

87. Upon this now the Total or Universal God has Decreed the Last Judgment,
wherein he will separate the Evil from the Good, and set the good again in the
meek mild and Pleasant delight, as it was before the horrible kindling of the
Devil, and will give that which is fierce or wrathful to King Lucifer for an
Everlasting Habitation.

88. And then there will be two Parts or divisions of this Kingdom, the one,
Men will get, with their King JESUS CHRIST; the other, the Devils shall have
with all ungodly Men and wickedness.

89. This is a short Introduction, that the Reader might the better understand
the Divine Mystery: concerning the Fall of the Devil, and concerning the
Creation of this world, you will find all more at large particularly described.
Therefore I would have the Reader admonished, that he read all in order, and so
he will come to the true ground.

90. It is true, that from the beginning of the world it was not so fully
revealed to any Man; but seeing God will have it so, I submit to his Will, and
will see, what God will do with it.

91. For his way which is before him is for the most part hidden to me: but
after him the Spirit sees, even into the highest and profoundest Depth.

The Tenth Chapter.
Of the Sixth qualifying or fountain Spirit in the Divine Power.

1. THe Sixth qualifying or fountain Spirit in the Divine Power, is the Sound
Tone Tune or Noise, wherein all sounds and Tuneth, whence ensued Speech,
Language, and the distinction of Every thing, as also the ringing melody and
Singing of the holy Angels, and therein consists the forming or framing of
all Colors, Beauty, and Ornament, as also the heavenly Joyfulnesse.

Question.

2. But thou will ask: What is the Tone or Sound? or how takes this spirit its
source and Original?

Answer. Observe*

3. All the Seven Spirits are generated in one another, the one continually
generateth the other, neither of them is the first, neither is any of them the
last; for the last generateth as well as the first* viz. the first, second,
third and fourth, and so to the last.

4. But why one is called the first, another the second, and so on, that is in
respect to that which is the first in order to the imaging framing and forming
of a Creature.

5. For all the seven are Equally Eternal, and none of them has either
Beginning or End; and therefore, in that the seven Qualities are continually
generating one another, and that none is without the other; it follows, that
there is ONE Only Eternal Almighty GOD.

6. For, if any thing be generated out of or in the Divine Being, that thing is
not formed or framed by or through one spirit alone, but by all the seven.

7. And if a Creature, which is like or as the whole Being of God, spoileth,
elevateth and kindles it self in a Qualifying or fountain-spirit, yet it
kindles not one spirit alone, but all the seven spirits.

8. And therefore that Creature is a loathsome abomination before the Total
God, and all his creatures, and must stand in eternal Emnity and ignominy or
shame, before God, and all the Creatures.

9. The Tone or Mercurius, takes its original in the first, that is, in the
Astringent and Hard Quality.

Observe in the Depth.

10. Hardness is the Fountain or Wellspring of the Tone, but it cannot
generate the same alone, yet it is the Father thereof, and the whole Salitter
is the Mother; otherwise if the hardness were both Father and Mother of the
Tone, then a hard Stone also must have a Ringing sound. But it does only make a
Noise, like knocking, as a seed or beginning of a Tone, and that, it is,
certainly.

11. But the Tone or voice rises up in the middle center in the flash or
Lightening, where the Light is generated out of the Heat, where the flash or
Lightening of life rises up.

Observe, how this is done:

12. When the astringent quality rubbeth it self with the bitter, so that the
Heat rises up in the sweet spring or fountain water, then the heat kindles
the sweet spring or fountain water, like a flash of Lightning, and that flash
is the light; which in the Heat goes into the bitter quality, and there the
Flash is distinguished according to all the Powers.

13. For all powers are discerned or distinguished in the bitter, and the
bitter receives the flash of the light, as if it were horribly terrified; and
goes with its trembling and terror, into the astringent and hard quality, and
there it is bodily captivated.

14. And the bitter quality is now impregnated with the light, and so trembles
in the Astringent and Bitter quality, and stirs therein, and is captivated
in the astringent quality, as in a Body.

15. And now when the spirits do move, and would speak, the hard quality must
open it self; for the bitter spirit with its flash breaks it open, and then
there the Tone goes forth, and is impregnated with all the seven Spirits,
which distinguish the Word, as it was decreed in the Center, that is, in the
middle of the Circle; whilst it was yet in the Council of the seven Spirits.

16. And therefore the seven Spirits of God have created a Mouth for the
Creatures, that when they would utter their voice which is their speaking, or
make a noise, they need not first tear open themselves; and therefore it is
that all the veins and powers or conditionating.
qualifying or fountain spirits go into the Tongue, that the Tone or noise may
comeforth gently.

Here Observe exactly, the Mind or meaning.
Sense, and Mystery.

17. When the flash rises up in the heat, then first the sweet water catches
or captivateth it, for therein it becomes shining. Now when the water catches
the flash, that is, the birth of the light, then it is terrified, and being so
thin and pliant or feeble, it gives back very much trembling: for the heat
rises up in the light.

18. And now when the astringent quality, which is very cold, catches the heat
and flash, then it is terrified, as in a Tempest of lightning; for when the
heat comes with the Light into the hard cold, then it makes a fierce flash,
of a very fiery and light color.

19. And then that flash retireth back, and the sweet water catches it, and
rises up in that fierceness; and in that rising and terrifying, changes it
self into a Green or Azure, or Blew Color, and trembles, because of the
fierce flash.

20. And the flash in it self keeps its fierceness, from whence existeth the
Bitter Quality, or the Bitter Spirit, which now rises up in the astringent
quality, and inflameth or kindles the hardness with its fierce quality, and
the light or flash dries it self in the hardness and shines clear and
bright, far brighter then the Light of the Sun.

21. But it is caught in the hard quality, so that it subsists in a Bodily
manner, and must shine so Eternally, and the flash trembles in the Body, like
a fierce rising up, whereby all the qualities are stirred always and Eternally.

22. And the flash of fire in the light trembles and triumphs thus
continually, and the hardness is always the Body, which retains preserves
and dries it.

23. And this stirring in the hardness, is the Tone, so that it sounds, and
the light or flash makes the ringing, and the sweet water mitigateth the
ringing: so that a man can use it to the Distinction of Speech, or Articulation
of Syllables.

Here Observe the Nativity or Birth of the Bitter quality, yet more plainly.
24. The original of the bitter quality, is, when the flash of life in the heat
rises up in the astringent quality, and now when the flash of fire in the
mixture of the water comes into the astringent quality, then the spirit of the
fiery flash catches the astringent and hard spirit, and both these together
are an earnest severe fierce quality, which rages and teareth vehemently like
a fiery violent fierceness.

25. I can liken it to nothing else, but to a Thunderclap, when the fierce
fire first falls down, so that it dazzleth the light; that fierce fire is like
the manner of the conjunction of these two.

Now Observe:

26. Now when the fire-spirit and the astringent spirit struggle and wrestle
thus together, then the astringent makes a vehement hard Cold astriction, and
the fiery makes a terrible fierce Heat.

27. And now the rising up of the heat and of the astriction makes a trembling
fierce terrible spirit, which raveth and rages, as if it would tear the Deity
asunder.

But thou must understand this, exactly, and properly.

28. This is thus, in the Original of the Quality in it self, but in the midst
in the rising up of this fierce spirit, this spirit is caught and mitigated in
the sweet water, where its fierce source or fountain is changed into a
trembling, bitter, and greenish Color like a greenish duskinesse, and
retains in it self the condition and property of all three Qualities, viz. of
the fiery, astringent, and sweet, and so from these three existeth the fourth
Quality, viz. the Bitter.

29. For from the fiery quality the spirit becomes trembling and Hot, and
from the astringent it becomes severe astringent, hard and corporeal, so that
it is a spirit; which always subsisteth, and from the sweet it becomes meek
or mild, and the fierceness changes it into a gentle bitterness: which
stands now in the Fountain or Wellspring of the seven Spirits of God, and
helps continually to generate the other six spirits.

Understand this rightly.

30. It does as well generate its Father and Mother, as its Father and Mother
does generate it, for after that it is corporeally generated, it then, with the
astringent Quality always generateth the fire again, and the fire generateth
Light, and the light is the Flash, which always generateth the Life again in
all the qualifying, or fountain spirits; whence the spirits have life, and
always generate one another again.

31. But here thou must know, that one spirit alone cannot generate another,
neither can two of them do it, but the birth of a spirit stands in the
operation of all the seven spirits, six of them always generate the seventh,
and so if one of them were not, then the other would not be, neither.

32. But that I sometimes take only two or three to the Nativity or birth of a
spirit, I do that, because of my own weakness, for I cannot bea^ them all
seven at once in their perfection, in my the Humane Nature being corrupted and
perished in the Fall of Adam.
corrupted Brain.

33. I see them all seven, very well, but when I speculate into them, then the
spirit rises up in the middlemost fountain or wellspring, where the Spirit of
life generateth it self, which goes now upwards, now downwards, it cannot
apprehend all the seven spirits in one thought or at once, but only in Part.

34. Every Spirit has its own quality or source, though indeed it is generated
of the other; and so it is with the apprehension of Man, he has indeed the
fountain of all seven spirits in him, but in what quality or fountain soever
the spirit rises up, the qualifying or fountain spirit thereof, wherein that
same spirit is most strongly Imaged, that is it which he comprehends most
sharply in that rising up.

35. For even in the Divine power one spirit does not go through all the
spirits equally at once in its or Ascension.
rising up: for when it rises up, then indeed it touches or stirs them all
at once, but it is caught in its rising up, so that it must lay down its
stateliness and Pomp, and not triumph over all the seven.

36. [ It is the Being or Substance of the Senses and Free from the Band of
Nature:]

37. Thus it is also in Man, when one qualifying or fountain spirit rises up,
then it touches all the other, and sees all the other, for it rises up in
the middle or central Fountain or Wellspring of the Heart, where, in the Heat,
the flash of Light kindles it self, wherein the spirit in its rising up, in
the same flash, sees through all the spirits.

38. But, in our corrupted flesh, it is only like a Tempest of lightning: for
if I could, in my flesh, comprehend the flash, which I very well see and know
how it is, I could clarify or transfigure my Body therewith, so that it would
shine with a Bright Light and Glory.

[ For from the Flash comes the Light of the Majesty:]

And then it would no more resemble and be conform to the Bestial Body, but to
the Angels of God.

39. But hearken friend, tarry yet a little while, and then give the bestial
Body, for food, to the Worms: but when the Total God shall kindle the Seven
Spirits of God in the corrupted Earth, then if that same Salitter, which thou
sowest in the earth, will not be capable of the fire,
then thy qualifying or fountain-spirits, which thou did sow in thy
lifetime, and is sown in thy departure from hence, will rise again in the
same Salitter which thou have sown, and will triumph therein, and become a Body
again.

40. But he or whose Salitter. See Chapter 10. verse 110. the Salitter which they
have Corrupted. and Chapter 11. verse. 115. the Corrupted Salitter.
that will be capable of the kindled fire of the seven Spirits of God, he shall
abide therein, and his qualifying or fountain spirits shall rise in hellish
pain, which I shall demonstrate clearly in its due place.

41. I cannot describe unto thee the whole Deity by the Circumference or extent
of a Circle, for it is unmeasurable; but to that Spirit which is in Gods Love
it is not incomprehensible: it comprehends it well, yet but in Part; therefore
take one part after another, and then you will see the whole.

42. In this corruption we cannot get higher, then with such a Revelation,
neither does this world enclose it self any higher, both as to the Beginning
and the End.

43. I would very fain see somewhat higher in this my anxious generating or
Birth, whereby my sick Adam might be refreshed.

44. But I look round about me in all the world, and can find out nothing; all
is sick, lame and wounded; moreover Blind, Deaf, and Dumb.

45. I have read the Writings of very high Masters, hoping to find therein the
ground and true depth: but I have found nothing, but a half dead Spirit, which
in anxiety travelleth and labors for health, and yet because of its great
weakness cannot attain perfect power.

46. Thus I stand yet as an anxious woman in travel, and seek perfect
refreshing, but find only the scent or smell or savor in its rising up,
wherein, the Spirit examineth, what power sticks in the true cordial; and in
the mean while refreshes it self in its sickness with that perfect smell or
savor, till the true Samaritan does come, who will dress and bind up its
wounds and heal it, and bring it to the eternal Inn or Lodging, then it shall
enjoy the perfect Taste.

47. This Herb, which I mean here, from whose Fragancy my spirit takes its
refreshing, Every Country Plowman does not know it, nor Every Doctor; the one
is as Ignorant of it, as the other; it grows indeed in every Garden, but in
many it is quite spoiled and naught: for the quality of the Soil or Ground is
in fault. And therefore men do not know it, nay the Children of this Mystery do
hardly know it: for, this knowledge has been very rare dear and precious, from
the beginning of the world to this Time.

48. Though in Many, a source or fountain and quality has risen up, but then
suddenly Pride pressed after it, and spoiled all; whereupon it was loath to
write it down in its Mother Tongue; it supposed, that was too childish a thing,
it must show it in a deeper Language, that the world should see, that it is
Manly; and for its advantage it kept it in secret, and dawbed it with deep
strange names, that men might not know it: such a Beast is the Devil's Proud
disease.

49. But hear, thou simple Mother, which bring all the children into this
world, which afterward in their rising up are ashamed of thee, and despise
thee, and yet are thy children, which thou have brought forth.

50. Thus says the Spirit, which rises up in the seven spirits of God, which
is thy Father, Despair not, behold I am thy strength, and thy power, I will
fill to thee a mild draught in thy Age.

51. Seeing all thy children despise thee; whom thou did bear, and have given
them suck in their Childhood, and will not give thee any attendance, or
minister to thee in thy high or old Age.

52. Therefore I will comfort thee, and will give unto thee a Young SON in
thy high or old Age; he shall abide in thy House, as long as thou live, and
attend thee or minister to thee, and comfort thee, against all the raving and
raging of thy proud Children.

Now here Observe further, concerning the Mercurius Tone or Sound.
53. All Qualities take their finite or transitory original.
beginning-original in their middle or center: Therefore Observe, where the
Fire is generated; for, there rises up the flash of the life of all the
qualities, and is caught in the water, so that it remains shining, and is
dried in the astringency, so that it remains corporeal, and becomes shining
Bright and Clear.

Observe here:

54. For Instance: kindle some wood, and then you will see the mystery; the
Fire kindles it self in the hardness of the wood: and this is now the
astringent hard quality, The quality or source Saturnus, which makes the wood
hard and dry.

55. But now, the light, that is, the flash, does not consist in the hardness;
otherwise a stone also would burn and give Light, but the light subsisteth
only in the Sap of the wood, that is, in the or Oylinesse.
water.

56. Whilst there is Sap in the wood, the fire shines, as a shining Light:
but when the sap is consumed in the wood, the shining Light goes out, and the
wood becomes a glowing Coal.

57. Now behold, the fierceness, which rises up in the light; consists not in
the water of the wood, but when the heat rises up in the hardness, then is
the flash generated, which the sap in the wood first catches, whereby the
water becomes shining.

58. The Fierceness or Bitterness is generated in the midst or center of the
hardness, and the heat is generated in the flash, and therein also it
subsisteth: and so far as the flash, that is, the flame of the fire, reaches,
so far also reaches the fierceness of the bitterness, which is the son of
the hardness and heat.

59. But thou must know this mystery, that the bitterness is already in the
world, Else the fierce bitterness would not so suddenly generate it self like
lightning in the natural fire.

60. For, as the Body of the fire generateth it self, when wood is kindled, in
such a manner likewise is the Wood generated in and above the earth.

61. But if the fierceness should be generated in the shining light, then
surely it would reach as far also, as the splendor or shining of the Light,
but it does not so.

62. But thus it is; the flash is the mother of the light: for the flash
generateth the light, and is the Father of the fierceness, for the fierceness
abides in the flash as a seed in the Father, and that flash generateth also
the Tone or Sound.

63. When it goes from the hardness and heat, then the hardness makes a
thumping knocking sound in the flash, and the heat ringeth forth, and the light
in the flash makes the ringing shrill, and the water mitigateth it, and then
in the astringency and hardness it is caught and dried up, so that it is a
corporeal spirit in all the qualities.

64. For, every Spirit in the seven Spirits of God is impregnated with all the
seven spirits, and they all are one in another as one spirit, neither of them
is without the other.

65. Only the Birth there in is thus, and so the one generateth the other, in
and through it self, and the Birth lasts or continues thus from Eternity to
Eternity.

66. Here I will have the Reader warned, that he rightly consider the Divine
Birth. Thou must not think, that one spirit stands by another, as you see the
Stars of Heaven stand one by another.

67. But all the seven are one in another as one spirit: as this may be
conceived in Man, who has several Thoughts because of the operation of the
seven Spirits of God, which keep and reside in, the humane Body.

68. But you may say to me, Thou art foolish in this, for Any Member of the
whole body has the power of the Other.

69. Yet in what quality soever thou excitest or awakenest the spirit, and
make it operative or qualifying, according to that same quality, the Thoughts
rise up, and govern the Mind.

70. If thou stirrest or awakest the spirit in the fire, then there rises up
in thee the bitter and harsh Anger; for as soon as the fire is kindled, which
is done in the hardness and fierceness, then springs up the bitter
fierceness or wrath in the flash.

71. For when thou elevatest thy self in thy Body toward or against any thing,
be it in Love or in Anger, now that which thou liftest up thy self toward or
against, thou Kindlest the Quality of that, and that it is, which burns in
thy compacted incorporated Spirit, but that qualifying or conditionating spirit
is excited in the Flash.

72. For when thou look upon any thing, which does not please thee, but is
against or contrary to thee, then thou raisest up the fountain of thy heart; as
when thou take a stone, and therewith strikest fire on a Steel, and so when
the spark catches fire in the heart, then the fire kindles.

73. At first it gloweth, but when thou stirrest the source or fountain of the
heart more violently, then it is as when thou blowest the fire, so that the
flame is kindled; and then it is high time to quench it, else the fire will be
too great, and then burns and consumes, and does hurt to its Neighbor.

Question.

74. Thou ask: How can a man quench this kindled fire?

Answer.

75. Hearken, Thou have the sweet water in thee, pour that into the fire, and
then it goes out: if thou letst it burn, then it consumes in thee the Sap
that is in all the seven qualifying or fountain Spirits, so that thou will
become dry.

76. When that is done, then thou art a hellish Firebrand, and a Billet or
Faggot to lay upon the hellish fire, and then there is no remedy for thee
Eternally.

77. But when thou look upon a thing which thou love and awaknest the
spirit in thine heart, then thou kindlest the fire in thine heart, which
burns first in the sweet water, like a Glowing coal.

78. And whilst it is but glimmering, it is only a gentle soft longing delight
or pleasing Lust in thee, and does not consume thee; but if thy heart be in a
greater commotion, and thou kindlest the sweet quality or fountain, so that it
becomes a burning flame, then thou kindlest all the qualifying or fountain
spirits, and then the whole body burns, and so Mouth and Hands fall on to
work.

79. This fire is the most dangerous and hurtful, and has spoiled Most, since
the world began, and it is a very hard matter to quench it: for when it is
kindled, it burns in the sweet water in the flash of Life, and must be
quenched through Bitterness, which is scarce a water, but much rather is a
fire.

80. Therefore also there follows a heavy sad sorrowful Mind, when one is to
forsake that, which burns in his Love-fire in the sweet fountain water.

81. But thou must know, that thou, in the Government of thy Mind, art thine
own Lord and Master, there will rise up no fire to thee in the circle or whole
circumference of thy Body and Spirit, unless thou awaknest it thy self.

82. It is true, all thy spirits spring and move in thee, and rise up in thee,
and indeed always One spirit has more power in thee then another.

83. For if the Government of the spirits were in one man as in another, then
we should all have one will and form: but they are all seven in the power of
thy compacted incorporated spirit, which spirit is the SOUL.

It has in it the first principle; the spirit of the soul has the second; and
the Astral or starry spirit in the Elements, has the Third, viz. this World:]

85. Now if a fire rises up in one qualifying or fountain spirit, then that is
not concealed or hidden from the soul, It may instantly awaken the other
qualifying or fountain spirits, which are contrary to the kindled fire, and may
quench it.

86. But if the fire will be, or become, too big, then has the soul a Prison,
wherein it may shut up the kindled spirit, viz. in the hard astringent quality,
and the other spirits must be the Gaylors, till their wrath be allayed, and the
fire be extinguished.

Observe, what that is.

8. When One qualifying or fountain spirit drives thee too strongly, or
presses thee too hard to a thing, which is against the Law of Nature, then
thou must turn thine Eyes away from it: if that will not help, then take that
spirit, and cast it into prison:

88. That is, Turn thy heart away from temporal Pleasure and voluptuousness,
from fullness of eating and drinking, from the Riches of this world; and think:
that, To day is the last Day of the End of thy Body: turn away from the
wantonness of the world, and call earnestly to God, and yield or submit thy
self to Him.

89. When thou do so, then the world mocketh thee, and thou are a fool to
them. But bear this cross patiently, and let not the imprisoned spirit get out
of Prison again, but trust in God, and he will set upon thee, the Crown of the
divine Joy.

90. But if the spirit breaks out of Prison, then put it in again, make good
thy Part against it as long as thou live, and if thou gettest so much
advantage, that it do not wholly kindle the source or fountain of thy heart,
whereby thy soul would become a dry firebrand of wood, each fountain or source
having yet its Sap, when thou departest from hence:

91. Then will not that kindled fire at the Last Judgment Day, hurt thee; nor
will it cleave or stick in thy Sappy-spirits, but after this anxious
affl^ction, and trouble, thou will be in the Resurrection, A triumphing Angel
of God.

Question.

92. But now, thou may say; Is there in God also a contrary Will or
Opposition, amongst or between the spirits of God?

Answer.

93. No: though I show here their earnest Birth, how earnestly and severely the
spirits of God are generated, whereby every one may very well understand the
great earnest severity of God:

94. Yet it does not therefore follow, that there is a disunion or discord
amongst them: For the very innermost deepest Birth or Geniture in the heart or
kernel, is only and altogether so, which no creature can apprehend in the
Body, but in the flash, where the hidden spirit is generated, there it will be
apprehended: for that is also generated in such a manner and in such a power,
as is here mentioned.

95. But unto me is opened the Gate of my Mind, so that I can see and discern
it, else it would indeed remain concealed with and hidden to me, till the day
of the resurrection from the dead; yea it has been concealed from all men,
since the beginning of the world: but I submit my will to Gods Will, let him do
what he pleases.

96. In God all the spirits do triumph, as one spirit, and one spirit always
mitigateth and loves the other, and so there is nothing but mere Joy and
Delight: but their severe Birth or Geniture which is effected or done in
secret, must be so: for life, understanding, and or Allknowingnesse.
Omniscience is thus generated: and this is an eternal Birth or Geniture,
which is never otherwise.

97. Thou must not think, that perhaps in Heaven there is some manner of Body
which only is thus Generated, which above all other things, is called God.

98. No; but the whole Divine Power, which it self is heaven, and the Heaven of
all Heavens, is so generated, and that is called GOD the Father; of whom all
holy Angels are generated, and live also in the same power, also the spirit of
all Angels in their Body is always continually and eternally thus generated,
in like manner also is the Spirit of all Men.

99. For this world belongs as well to the Body or Substantiality or
Corporeity.
Corpus of God the Father, as the Heaven does; but the spirits which are in the
locality or space of this world, were kindled through King Lucifer, in his
elevation, so that all things in this world are as it were half Faint and Dead:
And therefore it is, that we poor men are so very much blinded, and live in so
great and desperate Danger.

100. Yet thou must not therefore think, that the heavenly light in this world,
in the qualifying or fountain spirits of God is quite extinct: no; there is
only a duskishnesse or dim Obscurity upon it, so that we cannot apprehend it
with our corrupted Eyes;

101. But if God did once put away that duskishnesse, which moves about the
light, and that thy eyes were opened, then, in that very place, where thou
stand, sit, or lie: thou should see; the glorious Countenance or
Face of God and the whole heavenly Gate.

102. Thou need not first to cast thine eyes up into Heaven, for it is
written: The word is near thee, viz: on thy Lips, and in thy Heart, Deuteronomy. 30.
14. Romans 10. 8.

103. Yea God is so near thee, that the Birth or Geniture of the Holy Trinity
is done or wrought, even in thy heart, yea all the Three Persons are Generated
in thy heart, even God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

104. Now, when I write here, concerning the midst or Center, that the fountain
of the Divine Birth or Geniture is in the midst or Center; the meaning is not,
that in Heaven there is a peculiar or several place, or a peculiar several
Body, wherein the fire of the divine life rises up, out of which the seven
spirits of God go forth into the whole Deep of the Father.

105. No; but I speak in a corporeal, or Angelical or Humane way, that the
Reader may the better understand it; in such a manner, as the Angelical
Creatures were Imaged or framed, and as it is in God every where, universally.

106. For thou can not nominate any place either in heaven or in this world,
wherein the divine Birth or Geniture is not thus, be it in an Angel, or Holy
man, or any where else.

107. Wheresoever one qualifying or fountain spirit in the divine power is
touched or stirred, let the place be where, or thing what, it will, except in
the Devils and all wicked damned Men; there is the fountain of the divine Birth
or Geniture, clearly at hand, and there already are all the seven qualifying or
fountain-Spirits of God.

108. As when thou would make a spacious creaturely circumscribed circle, and
had the whole Deity peculiarly apart therein, Then Just so as it is generated
in a Creature, so it is also in the whole Deep of the Father in all places and
parts thereof, and in all things.

Note.

109. And in such a manner, is God, an All-mighty, all-knowing, all-seeing,
all-hearing, all-smelling, all-feeling God, who is every where, and proves the
Hearts and Reins of the Creatures.

110. And in such a manner, Heaven and Earth is His; Also in such a manner all
the Devils, together with all wicked Men; must be his Eternal Prisoners; and in
the Salitter, which they have corrupted and kindled in their Place or Space;
must endure eternal Pain and Torment, and moreover Eternal shame and Reproach.

111. For the Total glorious face of God, together with all the holy Angels,
will shine bright and gloriously, above them and under them, and round about
them on Every side.

112. And all holy Angels together with all holy Men, will eternally triumph
above them, below them, and round about them, and for great Joy, delight, and
Pleasantness; sing of Gods Holiness, of their Royal Kingly Government or
Regiment, and of the gracious amiable blessed fruit of the heavenly Spring or
Vegetation; and that will go forth according to the qualities of the seven
Spirits of God, in many various Voices.

113. On the contrary, the Devils with all wicked Men will be forced into a
Hole, where a hellish stinck will burn boil and rise up, and the hellish fire,
and hellish coldness, and bitterness, will burn after the manner of the
kindled spirits of God, eternally, in their Body, as also in their Courts
Dominions Regions Space or Circumference.

114. Nay, if they could be locked in or barred up into a Hole, that the angry
face of God might not touch them, then they might be Quiet and contented; and
would not be necessitated to endure eternal Ignominy, shame, and reproach.

115. But here is no help, their Torment increases and becomes but the
greater; the more they bewail it, the more does the hellish fierceness or
wrath kindle it self, they must lie in Hell, as dead Bones, like sindged
scorched Sheep in the fire, their stink and abomination gnaweth them.

116. They dare not lift up their Eyes for shame, Note.
for they see in their Circumference Courts or Regions nothing else, but only
a severe Judge, and above them and on all sides of them they see the Eternal
Joy.

Center.] 118. Here is Lamentation and Woe, Yelling and crying, and no
deliverance; it is with them as if it did continually Thunder and Lighten
tempestuously.

119. For the kindled Spirits of God generate themselves thus.

I. First the hardness generateth a hard, raw, rough, cold and astringent
quality. II. Secondly, the sweetness is grown faint, like a glowing coal, when
there is no more sap in the wood, that Gaspeth, and there is no refreshment for
it. III. Thirdly, the Bitterness teareth like a Hot Plague, and is as Bitter
as Gall. IIII. Fourthly, the Fire burns as a fierce wrathful Sulphur. V.
Fifthly, Love is an Enmity here. VI. Sixthly, the sound is a mere Beating
Rumbling or Cracking, like the noise of a fire, breaking forth out of a hollow
place, as if it were great Claps of Thunder. VII. Seventhly, the Circuit Region
Court or Residence of the Body is a house of mourning.
120. Their food is abomination, and grows from the fierceness of all
qualities; Lamentation and woe; and that for Ever without End; there is no Time
there. Another King sits on their Throne, which keeps or holds a
Judgment for Ever, they are only his Footstool.

121. O, Beauty, Pleasure and Voluptuousness of this world! O Riches and proud
Stateliness! O Might and Power! Thy unrighteous Judgment and great Pomp with
all thy pleasure and voluptuousness lies all together on a Heap, and is
become a hellish Fire!

122. Now eat and drink, now trim and dress thy self therewith, and domineer
therein, thou fair Goddess, how art thou become a whore, and thy shame and
reproach continues for ever.

The Eleventh Chapter.
VII. Of the Seventh Qualifying or Fountain Spirit in the Divine Power.
1. THe Seventh Spirit of God in the Divine Power is the Corpus or Body which
is generated out of the other Six spirits, wherein All heavenly figures
subsist, and wherein all things Image and form themselves, and wherein all
Beauty and Joy rises up.

2. This is the very spirit of Nature, yea Nature it self, wherein
apprehensibility or comprehensibility consists, and wherein all Creatures are
formed in Heaven and on Earth. Yea heaven it self is therein formed; and
Naturality in the whole Deity, consists in this Spirit.

3. If it were not for this Spirit, there would be neither Angel nor man, and
God would be an unsearchable Being, subsisting only in an unsearchable Power.

Question.

4. Now the Question is: How is this form? Or in what manner is this so?

Answer.

If thou art a Rational Mercurial spirit, which presses through all the seven
Spirits of God, and beholds proves and examineth them, how they are, then
thou will by the explanation of this seventh Spirit, conceive and understand
the Operation, and the Being of the whole Deity, and apprehend it in thy Sense
or Mind.

5. But if thou understandest nothing by this Spirit, then let this book alone,
Gregorius Richter Primarius Zu Gorlitz. Gregory Rickter the Primate or
Superintendent of the Clergy at Gerlitz.
and (Richte) Judge, neither of the cold nor of the warmth therein: for thou
art too hard bound and captivated in Saturnus, and art not a Philosopher in
this world.

6. Let thy (Richten) Judging alone, or else thou will receive thy evil wages
for it; therefore I will have thee faithfully warned of it. Tarry till thou
come into the other life, for then the heavenly Gate will be opened to thee,
and then thou also wilt understand this.

Now observe the depth.

7. Here I must layhold on the whole divine Body in the Midst or center at the
Heart, and explain the whole Body, how Nature is or existeth, and there you
will see the highest ground, how all the seven Spirits of God continually
generate one another, and how the Deity has neither Beginning nor End.

8. Therefore behold and see the Longing desired pleasure of thy Spirit, the
eternal divine Joyfulnesse, and the heavenly delight and corporeal Joy, which
in all eternity has no End.

Now Observe.

9. When the flash rises up in the Center, then the divine birth stands in
its full operation: in God it is continually and Eternally thus: but not so in
us poor fleshly children.

10. In this Life, the triumphing divine birth lasts in us Men, only so long
as the flash lasts, therefore our knowledge is but in part, whereas in God,
the flash stands unchangeably always Eternally thus.

11. Behold, all the seven Spirits of God are generated alike together at once;
none of them is the first, and none of them is the last; but we must have an
Eye to the Kernel, and consider how the divine Birth or Geniture rises up,
otherwise man understands it not.

12. For the creatures cannot comprehend at once, all the seven Spirits, one in
another, but they look upon them; But when one Spirit is touched or stirred,
then that touches or stirs all the other, and then the Birth or Geniture
stands in full Power.

13. Therefore it has a beginning in Man, but none in God; and therefore I
must also write in a creaturely manner, or else thou can not understand it.

14. Behold all the seven Spirits without the flash, were a dark Valley, but
when the flash rises up between the Astringent and Bitter qualities, in the
Heat, then it becomes shining in the sweet water, and in the flames of the
Heat, it becomes Bitter and triumphing and Living, and in the astringent it
becomes Corporeal, Dry and Bright.

15. And now these four Spirits move themselves in the flash, for all the four
become living therein, and so now the power of these four rises up in the
flash, as if the Life did rise up, and the power which is risen up in the
flash, is the Love, which is the fifth Spirit.

16. And that power moves so very pleasantly and amiably in the flash, as if a
dead Spirit did become living, and were suddenly in a Moment set into great
clarity or brighnesse.

17. Now in this moving, one power touches or stirs the other: and first
the astringent beats or strikes, and the heat makes in that beating or
stroke, a clear ringing sound, and the bitter Power divides the ringing, and
the water makes it mild and soft and so mitigateth it; And this is the sixth
Spirit.

18. And now the Tone in all the five spirits rises up like a melodious
pleasant Music, and remains so standing; for the astringent quality
exsiccateth or dries it up.

19 So now, in the same sound that is gone forth, which now subsisteth being
dried, and is the power of all the six qualifying or fountain spirits, and is
as it were the Seed of the other six spirits, which they have there compacted
or incorporated together, and made a Spirit thereof, which has the quality of
all the Spirits: And that is the Seventh Spirit of God in the divine power.

20. Now this Spirit subsisteth in its color like Azure or Heaven- Blew, for
it is generated out of all the six Spirits; and when the flash which stands
in the midst or Center in the Heat, shines into the other Spirits, so that
they rise up in the flash, and generate the seventh Spirit; then the flash
rises up also in the birth of the six Spirits together in the seventh.

21. But because the Seventh has no peculiar quality in it, therefore cannot
the flash in the seventh be brighter, but it receives from the seventh, the
corporeal Being of all the seven Spirits, and the flash stands in the midst
or Center of these seven Spirits, and is generated from all the seven.

22. And the seven Spirits are the Father of the Light, and the Light is their
Son, which they always continually generate thus from Eternity to Eternity,
and the light enlightneth and always Eternally makes the seven Spirits
living, and joyful, for they all receive their rising and Life in the power of
Light.

23. Again, they all generate the light, and all are together alike the Father
of the Light, and the light generateth no one Spirit, but makes them all
living and Joyful, that they always continually stand in the Birth.

24. Behold I will show it thee once more, that so by any means thou may
apprehend it, that this high work may not pass away in vain without Profit to
thee.

25. The astringent quality is the first Spirit, and that attracteth or draws
together and makes all Dry: The sweet quality is the second Spirit, and that
softneth or mitigateth it: Now the third Spirit is the bitter Spirit, which
existeth from the fourth and first.

26. And so when the third Spirit in its rage rubs its self in the astringent,
then it kindles the fire, and then the fierceness in the fire rises up in
the astringent. In that fierceness now the bitter Spirit becomes
self-subsisting; and in the sweet it becomes meek or Mild, and in the hard it
becomes Corpor^al, and so now it subsisteth, and is also the fourth Spirit.

27. Now the flash in the power of these four goes forth in the heat, and
rises up in the sweet spring water or fountain; the bitter makes it
triumphing, the astringent makes it shining, dry, and corporeal, and the sweet
makes it meek or Mil^; and so it receives its first shining or Luster in the
sweet, and here now the flash, or the light subsisteth in the midst or Center,
viz. in the Heart.

28. Now when that Light, which stands in the midst or Center, shines into
the four Spirits, then the power of the four Spirits rises up in the light,
and they become living, and Love the light; that is, they take it into them,
and are impregnated with it, and that Spirit which is so taken in, is the Love
of the Life; which is the fifth Spirit.

29. Now when they have taken the love into them, then they qualify Act or
operate for great Joy: for the one sees the other in the Light, and so the one
touches or stirs the other.

30. And then the tone rises up; and the har^ Spirit beats strikes or
th^mpeth; but the sweet makes that beating or striking Mild; and the Bitter
divides it, according to the condition or kind of every quality, the fourth
causes the ringing, the fifth causes joyfulnesse, and the compacted
incorporated sounding is the Tone or Tune or the Sixth Spirit.

31. In this Tone rises up the power of all the six Spirits, and becomes a
palpable Body, to speak after an Angelical manner, and subsisteth in the power
of the other six Spirits, and in the light; and this is the Body of Nature,
wherein all heavenly Creatures Ideas Figures and Sprouts or Vegetations, are
Imaged or fashioned.

The Holy Gates.
32. But the Light, which subsisteth in the midst or Center in all the Seven
Spirits, and wherein stands the Life of all the seven Spirits; and whereby
all seven become triumphing and Joyful, and wherein the heavenly joyfulnesse
rises up;

33. That is it, which all the seven spirits do generate, and that is the Son
of all the seven spirits, and the seven Spirits are its Father, which generate
the Light; and the Light generateth in them, the Life; and the Light is the
Heart of the seven spirits.

34. And this Light is the true Son of God, whom we Christians worship and
honor, as the Second Person in the holy Trinity.

35. And all the seven Spirits of God together, are God the Father.

36. For no one spirit of them is alone or without the other; they all seven
generate one another; for if one were wanting, the other could not be.

37. But the Light is another Person, for it is continually generated out of,
or from the seven spirits, and the seven spirits rise up continually in the
light; and the powers of these seven spirits go forth continually in the glance
or splendour of the light in the seventh or spirit of Nature.
Nature-spirit, and do form and Image all in the seventh Spirit; And this
out-going or Exit in the Light is the Holy Ghost.

38. The flash, or stock or Pith, or the Heart, which is generated in the
powers, remains standing in the midst or Center, and that is the Son; and
the Splendour or Glance in all the powers, goes forth from the Father and the
Son, in all the powers of the Father, and forms and imageth in the seventh
Nature-spirit, all, according to the power and operation of the seven Spirits,
and according to their Distinction and impulse.

And this is the true Holy Ghost, whom we Christians honor and adore for the
Third Person in the Deity.

39. Thus, O blind Jew, Turk and Heathen, thou see that there are Three
Persons in the Deity, thou can not deny it, for thou live and art or have
thy being in the Three Persons, and thou have thy life from them, and in the
power of these three Persons, thou art to rise from the Dead at the Last Day,
and live Eternally.

Note

40. Now if thou have lived well and holily in the Law of Nature, in this
world; and have Note.
not extinguished the half Flash, which is the Son of God, which teaches
thee the Law of Nature in thy seven qualifying or fountain spirits; and have
not put it out through a fierce elevation, which runs on contrary to the or
Conscience.
Knowledge of Nature; Note.
Then will thou with all Christians, live in eternal Joy.

Note

The Law of Nature is the Divine Ordinance out of the Center of Nature, he that
can live therein, needs no other Law, for he fulfilleth the will of God:]

42. For it lies not in thy or Nescience Ignorance or not believing.
unbelief, to hinder it; thy unbelief does not take away or make void the truth
of God: but Faith blows up the Spirit of Hope, and testifies, that we are
Gods Children. The Faith is generated in the flash, and wrestleth so long with
God, till it overcomes and gets the victory.

43. Thou Judge us, and thereby thou judge thy self, in that thou blowest
up the zealous or Jealous Spirit in Anger and Wrath, which extinguisheth thy
Light. Note.
But if thou art grown on a sweet Tree, and suppresseth the evil influence or
suggestions, and live well and holily in the Law of Nature, which shows
thee very well, what is Right: If thou art not indeed grown out from a fierce
or wrathful Twig or Branch,

Here is meant or understood, out of or from a very wicked Seed, where out
there often grows a Thistle: though yet there were a remedy, if the will were
but once broken: but it is a Rare and Precious thing; However indeed on a Good
Tree it is often so that some branches do also wither.

Note

45. Moreover thou art blind. For who shall separate thee from the love of God,
in which thou art born or Generated, and wherein thou live; if thou
perseverest and continuest therein, till the End? who shall separate thee from
God, in whom thou have lived here?

46. That which thou have sown in the Ground, that will spring up, be it Rye,
Wheat, Barley, Tares or Thorns; that which is not combustible or capable of the
final or last Fire, that will not burn at all: but God will not corrupt or
spoil his good Seed himself, but will husband, Till, and manure it, that it may
bear fruit in the Eternal life.

47. Seeing then, all live and have their Being in God, why do the weeds Glory
and boast against the Wheat? Do thou think, that God is a Dissembler, and
that he regards or respects any man's person, or name?

48. What Man was the Father of us All! was it not Adam? And when his Son
Cain lived wickedly before God; why did not his Father Adam help him? But here
it may be said: He that sins, shall be punished, Ezekiel. 18. 4, 20.

49. If Cain had not quenched or extinguished his light, who could have
separated him from the love of God?

50. So thou also, thou boastest thou art a Christian, and know the light,
why do thou not walk therein? Do thou think the Name will make thee Holy?
Tarry friend, till thou come thither into the other world, then thou will
know it by experience. Behold! many a Jew, Turk, and Heathen will sooner enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, who had indeed their Lamps well Trimmed and
Furnished; then thou who Boastest.

Question.

What Prerogative or Advantage then have the Christians?

Answer.

51. Very much; For they know the way of life, and know how they should rise
from the Fall: but if any will lie still, then he must be thrown into the
Ditch, and there must perish with all the wicked Heathens.

52. Therefore take heed what thou do, and consider what thou art; thou
judge others, and art blind thy self.

53, But the Spirit says thou have no cause for it, viz. to Judge him who is
better then thou: Have we not all one flesh, and our life subsisteth in God, be
it in his Love, or in his Anger? for what thou sowest, that thou shall reap.

Note

54. God is not the Cause thereof that thou art lost: for the law, to do right
or righteousness, is written in Nature and thou have that very Book in thy
Heart.

55. Thou know very well, that thou should deal well and friendly with
thy Neighbor; also thou know well that thou should not vilify thy own
life; that is, thou should not bemire and defile thy own body and soul and
lay open their shame.

56. Surely herein consists the Pith and kernel, and the Love of God. God
does not regard any man's Name or Birth, but he that moves or acts in the
Love of God, moves in the Light, and the light is the Heart of God. Now he
that sits in the Heart of God, who can spew him out from thence? none, for
he is begotten or Generated in God.

57. O thou blind half dead world, cease from thy Judging, O thou blind Jew,
Turk and Heathen desist from thy calumniating, and submit thy self in obedience
to God, and walk in the Light, then thou will see, how thou should rise from
thy Fall, and how thou should Arm thy self in this world against the
hellish fierceness and wrath, and how thou may overcome, and live with God,
Eternally.

58. Most certainly, there is but One God, but when the vail is put away from
thy Eyes, so that thou see and know him, then thou will also see and know
all thy brethren whether they be Christians, Jews, Turks, or Heathens.

59. Or do thou think, that God is the God of you Christians only? Do not the
Heathens also live in God whosoever does right or righteousness, God loves
and accepts him, Act. 10. 35.

60. Or, what did thou know, that art a Christian, how God would Redeem and
deliver thee from Evil? what friendship and familiarity had thou with HIM?
or what covenant had thou made with HIM, when God caused his Son to
become Man or be incarnate, to redeem Mankind? Is He only thy King? Is it not
written, He is the comfort of all the Heathen, Haggai. 2. 8.

61. Hearken, By one man sin came into the world, and pressed through one upon
all, Romans 5. 18. and through one came the Redemption into the world, and
pressed through one upon all, what therefore lies in any man's knowledge? No!
indeed thou did not know, how God would deal with thee, when thou were Dead
in Sins.

62. Now as Sin without distinction reigns through one Man over all, so Mercy
and Redemption reigns through one over all.

63. But unto those Heathens, Jews and Turks, blindness did befall, yet for
all that, they stand in an anxious Birth, and seek for a rest, they desire
Grace, though they seek not for it at the right mark or in the right Place or
Limit: but God is every where, and looks upon the ground of the Heart.

64. But if in their anxious Birth the Light be generated in them; what art
thou, that judge them?

65. Behold! thou blind Man, I will demonstrate this to thee, thus; Go into a
Meadow, there thou see several sorts of Herbs, and flowers, thou see some
that are Bitter, some Tart, Sweet, Sour, White, Yellow, Red, Blew, Green, and
many various sorts.

66. Do they not all grow out of the Earth? Do they not stand one by another?
Does the one Grutch the beauteous form of the other?

67. But if one among them lifts up it self too high in its growth, and so
withers, because it has not Sap enough; How can the Earth help it? Does it
not afford its Sap to that as well as to the other.

68. But if Thorns grow among them, and the Mower comes to reap his crop, he
cutteth them down together, but he casts out the Thorns and they are to be
burnt in the fire: but the various flowers and good Crop, he gathers and
causes it to be brought into his Barn.

69. Thus it is also with Men, there are diversities of Gifts and
accomplishments Endowments or Aptitudes, one it may be is much Lighter or
brighter in God then an other, but all the while they do not wither in the
Spirit, they are not rejectible, but when the Spirit withers, then that is
good and useful for nothing, but for fuel, and is only as wood for the Fire.

70. But if the Turks be of an astringent Quality, and the Heathens of a
Bitter, what is that to thee? Is the light become shining in the astringent and
bitter qualities, then it gives Light also.

71. But thou art generated in the Heat, where the light rises up in the sweet
spring or fountain water, have a care, lest the Heat burn thee, it is time,
thou should do well to Quench that.

Question.

72. Thou say: Is it right then that the Heathens, Jews and Turks, should
persevere in their blindness?

Answer.

73. No; but this I say; How can he see, that has no Eyes? for what does the
poor Lay or vulgar man know, of the Tumults which the Priests have in their
drunkenness? He goes on in his simplicity, and generateth anxiously, in his
Spiritual Birth.

Question.

74. But then thou say: Has God blinded the Turks, Jews and Heathens?

Answer.

No; but when God kindled the light for them, then they lived after the
pleasures voluptuousness and Lusts of their own Hearts, and would not be led
or directed by the Spirit, and so the outward Light extinguished.

75. But it is not therefore so totally extinguished, that it could not be
generated in Man; for man is out of or from God, and lives in God, be it
either in Love or in Wrath.

76. Now if man be in a Longing, should he not be impregnated in his Longing:
and so if he be impregnated once, then he can generate also. But because the
outward Light does nor shine to him, therefore he does not know his Son, whom
he has generated.

77. But when the Light shall arise on the Last Jugment Day, then he will See
HIM.

78. Behold, I tell thee a mystery: the time is already, that the Bridegroom
crowns his Bride!

79. Guess Friend, where lies the Crown? Toward the North; For in the Center
of the astringent quality the light will be clear and bright.

80. But from whence comes the Bridegroom? From the midst or Center, where the
Heat Generateth the light, and goes toward the North into the astringent
quality, there the Light grows Bright.

81. What do these toward the South? They are in the Heat fallen asleep, but a
stormy Tempest will awaken them, among these many will be terrified to Death.

82. Then what do those in the West? their Bitter quality will rub it self with
the other, but when they taste the sweet water, then will their spirit be mild
and meek.

83. But what do those in the East? thou art a lofty Proud Bride, from the
beginning, the Crown was always offered to thee from the beginning, but thou
thoughtst thy self too Fair already; thou live as the rest do.

Of the Divine and Heavenly Natures operation and property.
84. Now if thou will know, what kind or manner of Nature there is in Heaven,
and what kind of Nature the Holy Angels have; also what kind of Nature Adam had
before his Fall, and what, properly, the holy heavenly and Divine Nature, is:
then observe the circumstances exactly concerning this seventh qualifying or
fountain-spirit of God, as follows.

85. The seventh qualifying or fountain spirit of God is the qualifying or
fountain-spirit of Nature: for the other six do generate the seventh; and the
seventh, when it is generated, is then as it were the Mother of the six, which
encompasseth the other six, and generateth them again: for the corporeal and
natural Being consists in the seventh.

Observe here the Sense:

86. The six rise up in a full or complete Birth according to the power and
condition of each of them, and when they are risen up, then is their power
mingled one in another, and the hardness dries it, and is as it were the
whole Being.

87. This corporeal exsiccation or drying, I call in this book, the Divine
SALITTER, for it is in the Seventh fountain spirit of Nature.
therein the Seed of the whole Deity, and the said se-^venth Spirit.
is as it were a Mother, which receives the Seed, and always generateth fruit
again, according to all the Qualities of the Seed.

88. Now in this rising up of the six spirits, there rises up also the
Mercurius, Tone, or Sound, of all the six Spirits, and in the Seventh
Nature-spirit it subsisteth.

96. As, Note.
etc. --

89. [By the word {nitre}
SALITTER, in this book, is understood, How out of the Eternal Center of
Nature, the Second Principle grows and springs up out of the first, Just as
the Light springs up out of the fire, wherein two Spirits are understood,
viz. I. First a Hot, II. Secondly, an Aerial one, whereas in the aerial life,
the true vegetation or growing consists, and in the fire-life, is, the cause
of the Quality.

90. So, when it is written, the Angels are created out of God, then it is
understood or meant, Out of Gods Eternal Nature, wherein is understood or meant
the seven forms, and yet the divine holy nature is not understood to be in the
Fire, but in the Light.

91. And yet the Fire gives or holds forth to us a Mystery of the Eternal
Nature, and of the Deity also, wherein a Man is to understand, two principles
of a twofold source, viz. I. a Hot, Fierce, Astringent, Bitter, Anxious,
Consuming One in the fire-source. And out of the fire comes the II. viz. the
light, which dwells in the Fire, but is not apprehended or laid hold on by
the fire; also it has another source then the fire has, which is, Meekness,
wherein there is a desire of Love, where then in the Love-desire another will,
is understood, then that which the Fire has.

92. For the fire will consume all, and causes a high rising in the source,
and the meekness of the light, causes Entity or Substantiality, viz. In the
eternal light it causes the water-spirit of Eternal life; And in the third
principle of this world, it causes water, together with the existency or
Original of the Air.

93. Thus the Reader is to understand this book as concerning Three Principles
or Births, viz one is the original of the Eternal Nature, in the eternal will
or desire of God; which desire drives it self on in great anguish till it come
to the fourth form, viz. to the Fire.

94. Wherein the second, which is the Light, existeth, and replenisheth the
Eternal Liberty besides or beyond Nature, wherein we understand the holy
Ternarie in the Light, without or beyond Nature, in the power of the Light, in
the Liberty, as another or second spring or source without Being; and yet
united with the fire's Nature, viz. as Fire and Light together in One.

95. And the third principle of this world is generated and created out of the
First, that is, Magically: as is clearly demonstrated in our Three Principles.
Second and Threefold Life.
Third Book, unto which this Book is only an Introduction, and is the first
Book, which was not sufficiently apprehended by the Author at the first time,
though it appeared clearly enough, yet all of it could not be conceived; also
it was as when a Torrent or stormy Shower of Rain passes over a place, from
whence vegetation and springing existeth: for, therein, is the Seed of the
whole Deity:]

-- 96.

As in the mother; and then the seventh generateth all manner of Fruits and
Colors according to the Operation of the Six.

97. But here thou must know, that the Deity does not stand still, but works
and rises up without intermission, as a pleasant wrestling, moving or
struggling;

98. Like two creatures, which in great Love play together, Embracing
struggling and wrestling one with the other; now the one is above, by and by
the other, and when one has overcome, it yields or gives over, and lets the
other rise up again.

99. Thou may also understand it thus in a similitude, as when Seven Persons
had begun a friendly Sport and Play, where one gets the upper hand above
another, and a third comes to help that one which is overcome; and so there is
a pleasant friendly sporting amongst them; whereas indeed they all have one and
the same agreement or Love-will together, and yet strive and fight or vie one
against the other in a way of Love in sporting and pasttime.

100. And thus also is the working of the six Spirits of God in the seventh;
suddenly one of them has a strong rising up, suddenly another; and thus they
wrestle in love one with another.

101. And when the Light rises up along in this striving, then the Holy Ghost
moves in the power of the Light in the Play of the other six spirits, and so
in the seventh there spring up all manner of fruits of life, and all manner of
Colors and vegetations or Ideas and forms.

102. Now as that quality is which is strongest, so the Body of the fruit is
Imaged, and the Colors also, in this striving, or wrestling the Deity forms
it self into infinite and insearchable variety of kinds and manners of Images
or Ideas.

103. For, the seven spirits are the seven-head-Sources or springs, and when
Mercurius rises up therein, that stirs all, and the bitter quality moves
it, and distinguishes it, and the astringent dries it up.

104. [ Nature and the Ternarie are not one and the same, they are distinct,
though the Ternarie dwells in Nature but unapprehended, and yet is an
eternal Band, as is plainly expounded in our Second and Third Book.

Now observe here, how the Imaging in Nature is in the seventh Spirit.
105. The sweet water is the beginning of Nature, and the astringent quality
draws or attracteth it together, that it becomes natural and creatural, to
speak in an Angelical way.

106. Now being drawn together, it looks like Azure or Skie-colour Blew, but
when the light or flash rises up therein, then it looks like the precious
Jaspis, or Jasper stone, or as I may call it in my language, a Glassie Sea, on
which the Sun shines, and that very clear and Bright.

107. But when the bitter quality rises up therein, then it divides and
forms it self, as if it were alive or lively, or as if the Life did rise up
there, in a greenish flourishing manner and form, like a Green Flash of
Lightening, to speak after the manner of men, even so that it dazleth a man's
Eyes, and blinds him.

108. But when the Heat rises up therein, then the Green form inclines to a
half Red or Ruddy form, as when a Carbuncle stone shines from the Green flash
or Beam of Light.

109. But when the Light, which is the Son of God, shines into this Sea of
Nature; then it gets its Yellowish and Whitish Color, which I cannot
compare with any thing; but you must be content to stay or tarry with this
aspect or vision, till you come into the other Life.

110. For this now is the true Heaven of Nature, which is out of or from God.
wherein the Holy Angels dwell, and out of which they were created in the
beginning.

111. Behold now, when the Mercurius or Tone in this Nature Heaven, rises up,
there the Divine and Angelical joyfulnesse rises up, for therein rise up
Forms, Imagings, Colors, and Angelical Fruits, which blossom curiously,
grow, spring, flourish, and stand in Perfection, as to all manner of Bearing or
fruit Trees, Plants and springing growths, of a Gracious comely lovely amiable
blessed prospect vision or sight to be looked upon, with a most delicious
lovely pleasant Smell and Taste.

112. But here I speak with an Angels Tongue, thou must not understand it
Earthly, like to this world.

113. It is with Mercurius in this manner or form, also; thou must not think,
that there is any hard beating, striking, toning or sounding, or whistling and
Piping, in the Deity, as when one takes a Huge Trumpet, and Blows in it, and
makes it to Sound.

114. O no, Dear Man; thou half dead Angel, that is not so, but all is done and
consists, in power: for the Divine Being stands in power: but the holy
Angels sing, ring and Trumpet forth, with clear and shrill sounding: for to
that End God has made them out of himself, that they should increase and
multiply the Heavenly Joy: [and therefore were the Angels made out of God.]

115. Also such an Image was Adam, as God created him, before his Eve was made
out of him; but the corrupted Salitter did wrestle with the Wellspring of Life
in Adam, till it overcame. And so Adam became faint, which made him fall into a
Sleep. Here he was undone: And if the Bamhertzigkeit, or the Mercy of God had
not come to help him, and made a woman out of him, he should have continued
still asleep.

Of this we will speak in its proper Place.

116. This, as in mentioned above, is that fair Bright and holy Heaven, which
is thus in the Total Deity, which has neither Beginning nor End, whither no
Creature with its sense can reach.

117. Yet thou shall know this, that always in a place suddenly one quality
shows its self more powerfully, then the other, suddenly the second
prevails, suddenly the third, then suddenly the fourth, suddenly again the
fifth, suddenly the sixth, then again suddenly the seventh.

118. Thus, there is an Eternal wrestling, working, and friendly amiable rising
up of Love; where then in this rising up, the Deity continually shows it self
more and more wonderful, more incomprehensible and more unsearchable.

119. So that the holy Angels cannot sufficiently enough rejoice themselves,
nor sufficiently enough converse walk and most lovingly sport therein, nor
sufficiently enough sing, that Te Deum Laudamus, We praise thee, O God, in
Halelujah's, as to each quality of the Great God, according to his wonderful
Revelation, and Wisdom, and Beauty, and Fruit, and Form.

120. For the qualities rise up Eternally, and so there is not with them or
among them, either Beginning, Middle or End.

121. And although I have written here: how all is come to be, and how all is
framed formed and Imaged, and how the Deity rises up, yet for all that thou
must not think, that it has any Rest ceasing or extinction, and that afterward
it rises up thus again.

122. O no: but I must write in part or by pieces, for the Readers better
understanding, that he might thereby apprehend somewhat, and so attain the
Sense and Meaning thereof.

123. Neither must thou think, that I have climbed up aloft into Heaven, and
beheld it with my carnal or fleshly Eyes. O, no; hear me, thou half-dead
Angel, I am as thou art, and have no greater light in my outward Being, then
thou have.

124. Moreover, I am a sinful and mortal man, as well as thou, and I must
every day and hour grapple struggle and fight with the Devil who afflicts me
in my corrupted lost Nature, in the fierce or wrathful quality, which is in my
flesh, as in all Men, continually.

125. Suddenly I get the better of him, suddenly he is too hard for me; yet for
all that he has not overcome or conquered me, though he often gets the
advantage over me: for our life is as a perpetual warfare with the Devil.

126. [ This Strife and Battle is about that most High Noble Victorious
Garland, till the corrupted perished Adamical Man is killed and dead, in which
the Devil has an access to Man.

127. Of which the Sophister will know nothing: for he is not generated of God,
but is born of Flesh and Blood: and though indeed the Birth stands open for
and toward him, yet he will not enter; for the Devil withholds him: God
blinds None.]

128. If he buffetteth me, then I must retire and give back, but the Divine
power helps me again, then he also gets a Blow, and often loses the day,
in the fight.

129. But when he is overcome, then the heavenly Gate opens in my spirit, and
then the spirit sees the Divine and heavenly Being, not externally without the
Body, but in the fountain or wellspring of the Heart there rises up the flash
in the sensibility or Thoughts of the Brain, and therein the spirit does
contemplate or meditate.

130. For Man is made out of all the powers of God, out of all the seven
Spirits of God, as the Angels are also. But now seeing Man is corrupted,
therefore, the Divine Birth does not always spring qualify or operate in him,
no, nor in all men neither: And though indeed it springs in him, yet the high
light does not presently shine in all men; and though indeed it does shine, yet
it is incomprehensible to the corrupted Nature.

131. For, the Holy Ghost will not be caught held or retained in the sinful
flesh; but rises up like a flash of lightning; even as fire flashes and
sparckles out of a Stone, when a man strikes fire upon it.

132. But when the flash is caught in the fountain of the Heart, then the Holy
Ghost rises up in the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, into the Brain
like the Daybreak, Dawning of the Day, or Morning Redness: and therein
sticks the mark Aim or scope, and knowledge.

133. For in that light, the one sees the other, feels the other, smells
the other, tastes the other, and hears the other, and is as if the whole
Deity did rise up therein.

134. And herein the spirit sees into the depth of the Deity; for in God, near
and afar off, is all one; And that same God, of whom I write in this Book, is
as well in his Ternarie in the Body of a Holy soul; As in Heaven.

135. From this God I take my knowledge, and from no other thing, neither will
I know any other thing, then that same God, and the same it is which makes
that assurance in my spirit, that I steadfastly believe, and trust in him.

136. And though an Angel from heaven should tell this to me, yet for all that
I could not believe it; much less lay hold on it, for I should always doubt,
whether it were certainly so or no: But the Sun it self arises in my spirit,
and therefore I am most sure of it, and I my self do see the proceeding and
Birth of the holy Angels and of all things, both in heaven and in this world.

137. For the Holy Soul is one spirit with God, though indeed it is a Creature,
yet it is like to the Angels: Also the Soul of Man sees much deeper then the
Angels; for the Angels see only to the heavenly Pomp, but the Soul sees both
the Heavenly and the Hellish, for it lives between both.

138. Therefore it must undergo many hard Bangs and pinches, and must every day
and hour wrestle and struggle with the devil, that is, with the or devilish
conditions inclinations and passions in us.
hellish qualities, and so it lives in great danger in this world: and
therefore this life is very well called, the Valley of misery, full of anguish,
a perpetual hurliburly pulling and haling, worrying warring fighting,
struggling and striving.

139. But the cold and half-dead Body does not always understand this fight of
the Soul: The Body does not know how it is with it, but is heavy and anxious,
it goes from one room or business to another, and from one Place to another;
it seeks for ease and rest.

140. And when it comes thither, where it would be, yet it finds no such
thing: then doubtings and unbelief fall in between and come upon it; sometimes
it seems to it as if God had quite cast it off: but it does not understand the
fight of the Spirit, how the same is sometimes down, and sometimes gets aloft.

141. And what vehement and furious war and fight there is betwixt the
hellish and heavenly Quality, which fire the Devils Blow up, and the Holy
Angels Quench it; I leave to every Holy Soul to consider of.

142. Thou must know, that I write not here as a Story or History, as if it
were related to me from another, but I must continually stand in that Combat or
Battle, and I find it to be full of heavy strivings, wherein I am often struck
down to the ground, as well as all other Men.

143. But for the sake of the violent fight, and for the sake of the
earnestness, which we have together, this Revelation has been given me, and
the vehement driving or impulse, to bring it so to pass as to set all this
down in Paper.

144. But what the Total sequel is, which may follow upon, and after this, I
do not fully know: only sometimes, future Mysteries in the depth, are showed
to me.

145. For when the flash rises up in the Center, one sees through and
through, but cannot well apprehend or lay hold on it; for it happens to such
a one as when there is a Tempest of Lightening, where the flash of fire opens
it self, and suddenly vanishes.

146. So it goes also in the Soul, when it presses or breaks quite through in
its fight or Combat, then it beholds the Deity, as a flash of Lightening; but
the source quality or fountain of Sins, covers it suddenly again; For the Old
Adam belongs or into.
to the Earth, and does not, with this flesh, belong or into.
to the Deity.

147. I do not write this for my own Praise, but to that end, that the Reader
may know, wherein my Knowledge stands, that he might not seek that from me,
which I have not, or think me to be what I am not.

148. But what I am, that, all men are, who wrestle in JESUS CHRIST our King,
for the Crown of the Eternal Joy; and live in the Hope of Perfection; the
beginning whereof is at the Day of the Resurrection, which is now shortly near
at Hand: which, in the circle of the rising or Horizon of the East in the
flash, is very well to be seen, in which Nature shows it self as if it would
be Daybreak.

149. Therefore take heed, that you be not found asleep in your Sins: surely
the prudent and the wise will take notice hereof, but the wicked will continue
in their Sins.

150. They say, What ails the Fool, when will he have done with his Dreaming?
This is, Because they are asleep in fleshly Lusts, Well well; you shall see
what kind of Dream this will Be:

151. I would fain take ease and rest in my meekness, if I were not put upon
this work; but that God who has made the world, is too strong for me, I am the
work of his Hands, he may set me and place me, where he will.

152. And though I must be a byword and Spectacle of scorn to the World and
Devils, yet my hope is in God, concerning the Life to come, in Him I will
venture to hazard my self, and not resist, or strive against the Spirit. Amen.

The Twelfth Chapter.
Of the Nativity and rise original Geniture or Springing forth.
proceeding forth or descent of the Holy Angels, as also of their Government,
Order, and Heavenly joyous Life.

1. VErbum Domini, The Word of the Lord, comprised the Qualifying or
fountain-spirits by the Fiat; that is, the saying, Let there be, Angels; into a
will, and that is the Creation of the Angels:] Question.

2. Now the Question is; What is properly an Angel?

Answer.

Behold, when God Schuff created
the Angels; then he created them out of the seventh qualifying or fountain
spirit, which is Nature; or the Holy Heaven.

3. The word Schuff Created
thou must understand thus, as when a man says, attracted.
drawn together, or Compacted.
driven together, as the Earth is driven or Compacted together: In like manner,
when the whole God did move himself, then the astringent quality drew or drove
together the Salitter of Nature, and dried it, and so the Angels came to be:
now such as the Quality was, in every place, such also was the Angel.

Observe the depth.

4. There are seven Spirits of God, all these seven have moved themselves, and
the Light therein has moved it self also, and the Spirit, which goes forth
out of the seven Spirits of God, has moved it self also.

5. Now the Creator intended, according to his Ternarie, to create three Armies
Bands or Companies.
Hoasts, not one from another, but one by another, as in a circle or sphere.

6. Now Observe: as the seven Spirits of God.
Spirits were therein in their moving boiling or rising up, so also were the
Creatures: In the midst or Center of each Host was the Heart of each Host
incorporated or compacted together, out of which an Angelical or Great or
Chief-Prince, proceeded, or came to be.

7. And as the Son of God is generated in the midst or center of the seven
Spirits of God, and is the life and heart of the seven Spirits of God; so there
was one Angelical King created in the midst or center of his circumference
sphere extent or or Province.
Region out of Nature, also out of Natures Heaven, out of the power of all the
seven qualifying or fountain spirits; and that now was the heart in one Host,
and had in him the quality might power and strength of his whole Host, and was
the fairest amongst them or of them all.

8. Just as the Son of God is the heart and Lif and strength of all the seven
Spirits of God, so is also that one King of Angels in his Host.

9. And as there are seven principal qualities in the divine power out of which
the heart of God is generated; so there are also some mighty Princely Angels
created in each Host, according to each Head or chief quality; The number of
which I do not exactly know, and they are with or near the King, Leaders of the
other Angels.

10. Here thou must know, that the Angels are not all of one quality, neither
are they equal or alike one to another in Power and Might: Indeed, every Angel
has the power of all the seven qualifying or fountain-spirits, but in every
one there is somewhat of one Quality more predominant and strong then another,
and according to that quality is he glorified also.

11. For such as the Salitter was, in every place, at the time of Creation,
such also was the Angel that came forth, and according to that quality, which
is strongest in an Angel, he is also named and glorified.

12. As the Flowers in the Meadows do every one receive its color from its
quality, and is named also according to its quality, so are the Holy Angels
also: some are strongest in the astringent quality, and those are of a Dusky or
Gray, or dim white like twilight.
Brownish Light, and are nearest of Quality to the Cold.

13. And so when the Light of the Son of God shines on them, then are they
like a brownish or Purple flash of Lightening very Bright and clear in their
quality:

14. Some are of the quality of the Water, and those are light, like the holy
Heaven; and when the light shines on them, then they look like to a
Crystalline Sea.

15. Some are strongest in the Bitter quality, and they are, like a or Emeraud.
green Precious stone, which sparkleth like a flash of Lightening; and when the
light shines on them, then they shine and appear as a Greenish Red, as if a
Carbuncle did shine forth from it, or as if the Life had its Original there.

16. Some are of the Quality of Heat, and they are the Lightest and brightest
of all, Yellowish and Reddish; and when the Light shines on them, they look
like the flash or Lightening of the Son of God.

17. Some are strongest in the quality of Love, and those are a Glance of the
heavenly Joyfulnesse, very light, and Bright, and when the light shines on
them, they look like Azure or Watchet.
Light-Blew, of a pleasant Gloss Glance or Luster.

18. Some are strongest in the quality of the Tone, or Sound, and those are
Light or bright also; and when the Light shines on them, they look like the
rising of the flash of Lightning, as if some thing would lift it self aloft
there.

19. Some are of the Quality of the total or whole Nature, as a General
mixture, and when the light shines on them, they look like the holy Heaven,
which is formed out of all the Spirits of God.

20. But the King is the heart of all the qualities, and has his circumference
or Province.
Court Quarters or Residence in the midst or Center, like a fountain: And as
the Sun stands in the midst among the Planets, and is a King of the Stars,
and the heart of Nature in this world: so great also is a Cherubin or King of
Angels.

21. And as the other six planets with the Sun are Leaders of Hoasts, and give
up or submit their will to the Sun, that it may reign and work in them: so all
the Angels give up or submit their will to the King, and the Princely Angels
are in Council with the King.

22. But thou must know here, that they all have a Love-will one to another,
none of them grutcheth the other his Form and Beauty: For as it goes among the
spirits of God, so it goes among these.

23. They all have jointly and equally the Divine Joy, and they equally enjoy
the heavenly Food, therein there is no difference.

24. Only in the Colors and strength of power there is a difference, but no
difference at all in the perfection: for every one has in them the power of
all the spirits of God; therefore when the light of the Son of God shines on
them, then each Angels quality shows it self by the Color.

25. I have reckoned up only some few of the forms and colors of them, but
there are a great many more that might be written down, which I will omit for
brevity sake.

26. For as the Deity presents it self infinitely in its rising up, so there
are insearchable many varieties of colors and forms among the Angels: I can
show thee no right similitude of it in this world but in the blossoming field
of flowers in May, which yet is but a dead and Earthly Type.

of the Angelical Joy.
Question.

27. Now it may be asked: What then is it, which the Angels do in heaven; or
why, or to what End and purpose has God created them?

Answer.

28. Ye greedy covetous griping persons may observe this, you who in this world
seek after Pride, State, dignity, Honor, Fame, Glory, Power, Money and Goods,
and squeeze out the sweat and blood of the poor oppressed and distressed, and
spend their Labors upon your Gallantry bravery and stateliness, and think
your selves Better then plain and simple Lay-vulgar people, and suppose it is
that God has created you for.

Question.

Why has God created Angel-Princes, and has not made them all Equal, or
alike.

Answer.

29. Behold God is the God of Order: and as it is, goes, and boyleth, in his
Government in himself, that is, in his Birth or Geniture, and in his rising up,
so also is the order of the Angels.

30. Now as there are in him, chiefly seven qualities, whereby the whole Divine
Being is driven on, and shows it self infinitely in these seven qualities,
and yet these seven qualities are the Chief or Prime in the infiniteness,
whereby the divine Birth or Geniture stands eternally in its Order unchangeably.

31. And as in the Midst or Center of the seven Spirits of God, the heart of
Life is generated whence the divine Joy rises up, thus also is the order of
Angels.

32. The Angel-Princes were created according to the spirits of God, and the
Cherubin according to the heart of God: And as the divine Being works, so
also do the Angels.

33. That quality which rises up in Gods Being, and chiefly shows it self in
its working, as in the rising up of the Tone or Tune, or of the divine working,
wrestling and fighting; that Angelical Prince, which is most strongly addicted
to that Quality, begins in his Rank or File and Round, with his Legions; with
singing, ringing forth, dancing, rejoicing and Jubilating.

34. This is heavenly Music, for here every one sings according to the voice
of his quality, and the Prince leads the Q^ire or Chorus; as a Chantour or
singing-Master with his Scholars, and the King rejoices and Jubilateth with
his Angels, to the honor of the great God, and to the increasing and
multiplying of the heavenly Joys: and that, is in the Heart of God, as a Holy
Sport or Scene; and to that end also are they created for the Joy and Honor of
God.

35. Now when the heavenly Music of the Angel rises up, then, in the heavenly
Pomp in the Divine Salitter; there rise up all manner of Vegetations Springings
or Sprouts, also all manner of figures shapes or Ideas, and all manner of
colors; for the Deity presents shows or discovers it self, in endless
and unsearchable varieties of kinds, colors, Ideas, forms, and Joys.

36. Now, that qualifying or fountain-Spirit in the Deity which does show it
self then in a singular manner with its rising up, and Love-wrestling; as
having become the Prince or Chief of them; that very Angel-Prince belonging to
it, begins instantly his heavenly Music with his own Legions, according to
his Quality, with singing, ringing forth, Piping melody, and in all the manners
of heavenly Skill and Art, which rises up in the Spirits of God.

37. But when the Center in the Midst rises up, that is, when the Birth or
Geniture of the Son of God, shows it self in a singular manner, as a
Triumph; then there rise up the Musicks melodies or Joys, of all the three
Kingly Governments or Royal Regiments of the whole Creation of all the Angels.

38. What manner of Joy this must be, let every Soul consider: I, in my
corrupted nature, cannot apprehend it, much less can I write it.

39. By this song I invite or Cite the Reader unto the other Life; there
himself will be also of that Quire or Chorus, and then first will he give
credit to this spirit; what he does not understand here, that he will have
there apparently in his view.

40. Thou must know, that this is not forged out of a Stone; but when the flash
rises up in the Center, then the Spirit sees and knows it.

41. Therefore look to it, and be not too scornful in this Place, else thou will be found a scorner and mocker before God, and then well may thou fare,
as King Lucifer did.

Now it may be asked.

Question.

What do the Angels then when they sing Not?

Answer.

42. Behold! What the Deity does, that they do also: When the Spirits of God
lovingly generate one in another, and rise up one in another, as in a loving
saluting, Embracing, kissing, and feeding one another: in which Taste and
Smell, the life rises up, and the eternal refreshing; of which thou may read
before at Large.

43. Then the holy Angels also walk and Converse one with another friendlily,
graciously amiably and blessedly in the heavenly Circumference or Region, and
do behold the wonderful and pleasant form or prospect of heaven, and eat of the
gracious amiable blessed and delicate fruits of Life.

Now thou will Ask:

Question.

What do they Talk of, one with another?

Answer.

44. Behold! thou Pompous stately lofty and Proud Man; the world is even too
narrow for thee here, and thou think there is none like thee, or Equal to
thee: bethink thy self in this, whether thou have in thee the manner quality or
condition of an Angel or of a Devil.

To whom now shall I liken the Angels?
45. I will liken them to little children, which walk in the fields in May,
among the flowers, and pluck them* and make currous Garlands, and Poseys,
carrying them in their hands rejoicing, and always talk together of the
several forms or shapes of curious flowers, leading one another by the hand,
when they go to gather flowers.

46. And when they come home, they show them to their Parents, and they also
rejoice in their children, and are merry and cheerly with them.

47. So do the Holy Angels likewise, they take one another by the Hand, and
walk together in the curious May of heaven, and parley or talk of the pleasant
and fair Spring or fruits in the heavenly Pomp, and feed on the delicate
blessed fruits of God, and make use of the beautiful heavenly Flowers for their
play or sport in their Scenes, and make curious Garlands, and rejoice in the
delicious pleasant May, of God.

48. Here is nothing but a Cordial or Hearty loving, a meek and gentle love, a
friendly courteous discourse, a gracious amiable and blessed Society, where the
one always delights to see the other, and to honor one another.

49. They know of no malice, cunning subtlety or deceit, but the divine fruits
and pleasant loveliness are common among them, one may make use of these
things, as well as the other, there is no disfavour or hatred, no Envy, no
contrary or opposite will, but their hearts are knit together in Love.

50. In this, the Deity has its highest Delight, as Parents have in their
children, that its dear and beloved children in heaven, behave themselves so
well, and so friendlily: for the Deity in it self plays or sporteth also
thus, one qualifying or fountain-spirit in the other.

51. And therefore the Angels can do no other, then their Father does, as also
our Angelical King JESUS CHRIST testified, when he was with us on earth, as it
is written in the Gospel, where he says; Verily the Son can do nothing of
himself; but what He sees his Father do, that the Son does also, John 5. 19.
Also if you do not convert, and become like children, you cannot come into the
Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 18. 3.

52. Whereby he means, that our hearts should be knit together in Love, as
the Holy Angels of God are, and that we should deal friendly courteously and
kindly one with another, and love one another, and prevent one another in
kindness and respects, as the Angels of God do.

53. Not that we should Deceive and belie one another, and tear the Bread out
of others Mouths for very greediness and great Covetousness, neither should
one outbrave another, in Stateliness, Fashions, and deportment, and so despise
another who cannot use his sly crafty subtle Devilish Policy and Tricks.

54. O, no: the Angels in heaven do not so, but they love one another, and
rejoice in the Beauty and loveliness of others, and none esteems or
accounts himself excellenter then the other, but every one has his Joy in
the other, and rejoices in the others fair Beauty comely form and Loveliness,
whence then their love one toward another rises up, so that they lead one
another by the Hand, and friendlily Kiss one another.

Observe the Depth.

55. As, when the flash of life rises up in the Center of the Divine power,
wherein all the spirits of God attain their Life, and highly rejoice; there, is
a loving and Holy Embracing, Kissing, Tasting, Touching or Feeling, Hearing,
Seeing and Smelling. So also there is among the Angels; when the one sees,
hears, feels or touches the other, then there rises up in his heart the
flash of Life, and one spirit embraces the other; as it is in the Deity.

Observe here, the Ground, and highest Mystery of Gods Angels.

56. If thou will now know, from whence their Love, Humility and friendlinesse
comes, which rises up in their heart, then Observe that which follows:

57. Every Angel is Constituted, as the whole Deity is, and is as a little God.
For when God constituted the Angels, he constituted or framed them out of
Himself.

58. Now God is the same in one place, as he is in another, God is every where
the Father and Son and Holy Ghost.

59. In these three Names and Powers, stands Heaven and this world, and all
whatsoever thy heart can think upon: and though thou should draw a little
Circle, which thou can hardly look into or which thou can hardly discern,
even less then the smallest Point thou can imagine: yet even in that is the
whole Divine power, and the Son of God is generated therein, and the Holy
Ghost therein goes forth from the Father and the Son; if not in Love, then
in wrath, as it is written, with the holy thou art Holy, and with the perverse
thou art perverse, Psalm. 18. 26.

60. They which stir up the wrath of God upon themselves, which wrath stands
also in all the spirits of God, in that place, where it is awakened, stirred
up, or provoked: On the other side, where the love of God is awakened or
stirred up, there it stands also in the full Birth or Geniture of the whole
Deity of or in the place or thing wherein it is awakened.

61. And herein there is no difference, the Angels are created one as well as
another, all out of the Divine Salitter of the heavenly Nature: only this is
the difference betwixt them; that when God constituted them, each Qcality in
the great Motion stood in the highest Geniture or rising up.

62. Hence it is come to pass, that the Angels are of various and Manifold
Qualities, and have several colors and Beauties, and yet all out of or from
God.

63. Yet every Angel has all the qualities of God in him, but one of them is
strongest in him, according to which he is Named, and glorified in that Quality.

64. Now, as the qualities in God always generate, raise up, and heartily
Love, the one the other, and the one always gets its life from the other;
And as the flash in the sweet water rises up in the heat, from whence the Life
and the Joy have their Original: so it is also in an Angel, his internal Birth
or Geniture is no otherwise then that which is distinct from him or without
him, in God.

65. And, as the Son of God, without or distinct from the Angels, is
generated in the middle or Centrall fountain Spring, in the heat, in the sweet
water, out of or from all the seven spirits of God, and re-enlighteneth back
again all the seven Spirits of God; whence they have their Life and Joy.

66. So also in like manner, the Son of God in an Angel, is generated in the
Angels middle or centrall fountain Spring of the heart in the heat in the sweet
water; and re-enlightneth back again all the seven qualifying spirits of that
Angel.

67. And as the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and the Son, and
forms, Imageth figureth or frames and loves All: even so the Holy Ghost
goes forth in the Angel, into his fellow Brethren, and Loves them, and
rejoices with them.

68. For there is no difference between the Spirits of God and the Angels, but
only this; that the Angels are Creatures, and their Corporeal Being has a
beginning; but their power, out of which they are created, is God himself, and
is from Eternity, and abides in Eternity.

69. Therefore their agility is as nimble and swift as the Thoughts of a Man,
where ever they would be there also they are Instantly; moreover they can be
Great or Small, as they please.

70. And this is the true Being of God in Heaven, yea Heaven it self; If thy
Eyes were opened, thou should see it plainly and clearly on Earth in that
place, where thou art at present.

71. For seeing God can let the spirit of Man see it, which is yet staying in
the Body, and can reveal or manifest himself to him in the flesh, surely he can
well do it also when he is, out of the flesh, if he pleases.

72. O thou sinful House of this world, how art thou encompassed with Hell and
Death, awake, the hour of thy Regeneration is at hand, the Day-breaketh, the
Dayspring Dawning or Morning-Rednesse shows it self.

73. O thou Dumb and Dead world, why do thou require or demand Signs and
Wonders? Is thy whole body chilled and benumbed? will thou not awake from sleep?

74. Behold a great sign is given Thee, but thou sleep and see it not:
Therefore the Lord will give Thee a sign in his zeal or Jealousy which thou
have awaked and provoked with thy Sins.

Of the whole Heavenly delightfulness of all the Three Kingdoms of Angels.
75. Here the Spirit shows, that where every Angel is constituted stated or
settled, there that Place in the heavenly Nature, wherein, and out of which he
is become a creature, is his own seat; which he possesses by Right of Nature,
as long as he abides in Gods Love.

76. For it is the Place, which he has had from Eternity, before he was become
a Creature, and that Salitter stood in the same place, out of which he existed,
and therefore that seat remains to him, and is his, by right of Nature, as
long as he moves in Gods Love.

77. But thou must not think, as if God were tied to it, and cannot or may not
expel him from thence, if he should move or stir otherwise, then God had
constituted settled or stated him at first.

78. For as long as he abides in obedience, and in love; the Place is his, by
right of Nature; but when he elevateth himself and kindles that place in the
wrathful fire; then he sets his Fathers House on fire, and becomes a contrary
will or opposite to the Place, out of which he is made, and makes TWO out of
that, which was ONE, before his Elevation.

79. Now when he does so, then he keeps his corporeal Right of Nature to
himself, and that Place also keeps its own to it self: but seeing the
Creature, which has a beginning, will oppose or set it self against the First
Being, which was before the Creature was, which had no beginning, and will
needs spoil the Place, which is none of its making, wherein it was created a
creature in the Love, and will turn that love into a wrath-fire, then it is
equal and just, that the Love should spew up the wrathfire forth together with
the Creature.

80. From hence also the Laws Customs Statutes Ordinances and Polities.
RIGHTS in this world exist or have their original. For when a son resists
his Father, and strikes his Father, then he loses his Fatherly or Paternal
inheritance, and his Father may thrust him out of his House: but so long as he
continues in obedience to his Father, the Father has no right authority or
Lawful Power to Dis-inherit him.

81. This worldly Jus.
Right takes its original from Heaven; as also many other worldly Rights,
which are written in the Books of Moses, take their beginning and original from
the Divine Nature in Heaven, which I shall demonstrate plainly in its due place
from the true ground in the Deity.

Now; one might Object and say;

Objection.

Then an Angel is fully bound and tied to that place, in which he is created,
and must not stir, nor can stir from thence.

Answer.

82. No: as little as the Spirits of God are or will be tied in their rifing
up; that they should not move one among another, so little are the Angels also
tied to their place at all.

83. For as the spirits of God rise up continually one in another, and have a
Sport or Game of Love in their Birth or Geniture, and yet every spirit keeps
his natural seat, or place, in the Birth or Geniture of God, wherein it never
comes to pass, that the Heat is changed into the Cold, or the Cold into the
Heat, but each keeps its natural place or Posture, and the one rises up in
the other, from whence the life has its Original.

84. So the Holy Angels move walk or converse in all the three Kingdoms, one
among another, whereby they conceive, or receive their conceptions, one from
the other; that is, from the others Beauty comely form, friendlinesse courtesy
and virtue, every one receives his highest joy, and yet each keeps his
natural seat or Place, in which he is become a creature, for his own propriety.

85. Like one in this world, that when he has a dear and near kinsman, which
returns home from foreign Parts of the world, whom he had a very hearty
desire, and earnest longing to see; there is joy and friendly saluting and
bidding welcome, also a friendly loving discourse or conference between them,
and so he treats this loving and welcome Guest in the best manner that he
can: yet this is but cold water, in respect of the Heavenly.

86. And thus the Holy Angels do one toward another; when the Army or Company
of one Kingdom comes to the other, or when the Army or Company of one
princely Quality comes to an Army or Company of another princely Quality,
there is nothing but mere loving Entertainment saluting and embracing
reception; a very gracious amiable and blessed discourse and friendly respect,
a very gracious amiable blessed and loving walking and playing together; a most
chaste and humble exercise; a friendly kissing and leading one another up and
down, here begins the lovely Quire and set Dancing,

87. Like little Children, when they go in May to gather flowers, where many
often meet together, there they talk and confer friendly, and pluck or gather
many sundry sorts of flowers.

88. Now when this is done, they carry those flowers in their Hands, and begin
a sportfull Dance, and sing from the joy of their Heart rejoicing. Thus also do
the Angels in Heaven, when the Foreign Armies or Companies meet together,

89. For the corrupted Nature in this world, labors in its utmost power and
diligence, that it might bring forth heavenly forms, and many times little
children might be their Parents Schoolmasters and Teachers, if Parents could
but understand, or would but take notice of them; But now adays the Corruption
is Lamentable both with Young, and Old, and the Proverb is verified,

Wie die Alten Sungen,
So Lerneten die Yungen.
As the Old ones Sing,
So th'Young Learn to Ring.
90. By this high humility of the Angels, the Spirit admonishes the children
of this world, that they should view and examine themselves, whether they bear
such a love one to another? whether there be such humility among them? what
kind of Angels do they think they are? and whether are they like to these or
no? Being they have in them in possession, the third Angelical Kingdom.

91. Behold the Spirit will here a little present before thy Eyes, what manner
of love, humility, and courteous friendlinesse there is in thee, thou fair
Angelical Bride; behold I pray thee thy Dress, Ornament, and Attire, what
excellent delight and pleasure may thy Bridegroom take in thee, thou beloved
Angel, that dancest daily with the Devil,

I.
92. First, If one be now adays a little preferred or advanced, and gets but
a little while into an Office, then, others are no more so good as he, or fit
for his company that are in no preferment, he counts the vulgar or Layman
his Footstool, he instantly endeavors by cunning and craft to get the vulgar
or Lay-mans Goods under his disposing, if he cannot compass it by Tricks, and
designs, then he does it by force, to satisfy his high mindedness.

93. If a simple man comes before him, that cannot place his words handsomely,
then he takes him up short, as if he were a Dog: and if he has any business
before him, then he regards only those that are of worldly Esteem, and lets
them carry the cause, Right or Wrong: Take heed friend; what manner of princely
Angel indeed thou art: Thou will find it well enough in the following Chapter,
concerning the fall of the Devil; that will be thy Looking-glass to see thy
self in.

II.
94. Secondly, If one now adays has learnt more in worldly Sciences, or
studied more then the vulgar or Layman, in an instant, no vulgar or Layman is
to be compared to him, because he cannot Express himself, or speak according
to Art, he has no skill in the others proud Gange and Garb.

95. In brief, the Simple plain man must be his Fool, whereas he himself is
indeed a Proud Angel, and is (...) Love but a dead Man. This sort of Party
(...) have its Looking-glass in the following Chapter.

III.
96. Thirdly, If one be Richer now adays, then the other, then the Poorer Man
is counted the Fool: and if he can wear but better and more fashionable Clothes
or Apparel then his Neighbor, then the poorer man is no more worthy or good
enough to be in his Company.

97. And so the Old Song is now adays in full force and Practice: which is
this;

Der Reich den Armen Zwinget,
Und Ihm sein sweisze aboringet,
Dasz nur sein Grosshe Klinget.
The Rich man does Constrain the Poor,
And Squeezes out his Sweat so sore,
Tha^'s own great Wealth abroad may roar.
These Angels also are invited as Guests to the next Chapter for their
Looking-glass to see themselves in.

IIII.
98. Fourthly, There is for the generality such a devilish pride and
stateliness, and such over-topping one another, such despising, belying,
entrapping circumventing overreaching cheating deceiving betraying, extorting
Usury, coveting, envying and hating one another: that the world burns now as
in the hellish fire: Woe, woe for Ever!

99. O World where is thy Humility? where is thy Angelical Love? where is thy
courteons friendlinesse? At that very instant when the Mouth says, God save
thee; then if the Heart were seen it might be said; Beware, look to thy self:
for it bids the Devil take thee.

100. O thou Excellent Angelical Kingdom, how comely dressed and Adorned were
thou once? how has the Devil turned thee into a murtherous Den? Do thou
suppose thou stand now in the flower of thy Beauty and Glory? No! thou
stand in the midst of Hell: if thine Eyes were but opened, thou would see
it.

101. Or do thou think, that the Spirit is drunken, and does not see thee? O,
it sees thee very well: thy shame stands quite naked before God, thou art an
unchaste wanton lascivious woman, and go a whoring day and night, and yet
thou say, I am a chaste Virgin.

102. O, how fair a Looking-glass art thou, in the presence of the Holy
Angels: do but smell to thy sweet Love and Humility, does it not smell or
savor just like Hell? All these parties are invited as Guests, to the
following Chapters.

Of the Kingly Primacy, or of the power and Authority of the Three Angelical
Kings.
103. As the Deity in its Being is Threefold, in that the Exit out of the seven
Spirits of God shows and generateth it self as Threefold, viz. Father Son
and Holy Ghost, One God; wherein the whole Divine Power consists, and all
whatsoever is therein; and they are the Three Persons in the Deity, and yet are
not a divided Being, but in one another as one.

104. So also when God moved himself and Created the Angels, there came to be
Three special Angels out of the best Kernel of Nature, out of the Being of the
Ternary in the Nature of God, and in such power authority and Might as the
Ternary in the seven Spirits of God, and is again the Life and Heart of all the
seven Spirits.

105. And so also, the Three Angelical Kings, each of them in the manner kind
and Nature of his Host or Army, is risen up, and is a Natural Lord of his
Place or Region, over the Regiment or Dominion of his Angels; but the Ternary
of the Deity retains that Place, which is unalterable or unchangeable to it
self: and the King retains the Dominion of the Angels.

106. Now as the Ternary of the Deity is one only Being or Substance in all
Parts in the whole Father, and is united together, as the Members in Man's Body,
and all places are as one Place, though one place may have a different
condition frame and Office or Function.
Constitution, distinct from the other, as also the members of men have; yet it
is the Body of God.

107. So also are the Three Angelical Kingdoms united one in another, and not
each severed asunder: No Angelical King ought to say: This is my Kingdom: or
that there ought no other King to come thereinto; though indeed it is his first
beginning original natural inheritance; and remains also to be his: yet all
other Kings and Angels are his true Natural Brothers, generated out of or from
one Father, and do inherit their Fathers Kingdom.

108. And as the qualifying or fountain Spirits of God, have each of them the
Natural seat or possession of its Birth or Geniture, and retains its Natural
Place to it self, and yet is, together with the other spirits, the one only
Spirit; so that if the other were not, that would not be neither, and thus also
they rise up One in the other.

109. So it is also with the Chief or Principal of the Holy Angels in his
Constitution; and is in no other manner then as it is in God; and therefore
they live all friendlily peaceably and blessedly one with another, in their
Fathers Kingdom, as loving dear brethren; there are no Bounds or Bars how far
any should go, and how far not.

Question.

Upon what do the Angels walk? or upon what do they stay or set their Feet?

Answer.

110. I will here show thee the right Ground, and it is no otherwise in Heaven,
then as thou here find in the letter, for the Spirit looks into this Deep,
very unremoveably or steadfastly, also it is very apprehensible.

111. The whole Nature of the Heaven, stands in the power of the seven
qualifying or fountain-spirits, and in the seventh consists Nature or the
apprehensibility of all the Qualities: this now is very lightsome and solid as
a Cloud, but very transparent, and shining, like a Crystalline Sea, so that a
man can see through and through it all: Yet the whole depth upward and downward
is wholly thus.

112. Now the Angels also, have such Bodies, but more dry and close compacted
or incorporated together, and their body also is the kernel, of or out of
Nature, even the best or fairest splendour and brightness of or out of Nature.

113. Now upon the seventh spirit of God their Foot does stay, which is solid
like a Cloud, and clear and bright as a Crystalline Sea, wherein they walk
upward and downward, which way soever they please. For their Agility or
Nimblenesse is as swift as the Divine-power it self is, yet one Angel is more
swift then another, and that answerably according to their Quality.

114. In that seventh spirit of Nature, rise up also the Heavenly fruits and
colors, and whatsoever is apprehensible or comprehensible, and is like to such
a Text Forma.
Form, or manner, as if the Angels did dwell betwixt Heaven and Earth in the
Deep, where they ascend and descend, and where ever they are, there their foot
rests, as if it stood upon the Earth.

115. Antiquity has represented the Angels in Picture, like Men with Wings but
they have no need of any Wings, yet they have Hands and Feet, as Men have, but
after a Heavenly manner and kind.

116. At the Day of the Resurrection from the Dead, there will be no difference
between the Angels and Men, they will be of one and the same kind of form;
which I shall show plainly in its due place, and our King JESUS CHRIST clearly
testifies the same, where he says, In the Resurrection they are like the
Angels of God, Matthew. 22. 30.

Of the Great Glory Brightness and Beauty of the Three Angelical Kings.
117. This is the very Billet or Staff, which is flung at the Dog, to make him
run away, because of this Song, Lord Lucifer could pull and tear off the Hair
of his Head and Beard for grief sorrow and Pain.

Observe here the depth.

Concerning the King or Great Prince MICHAEL.

118. MICHAEL signifies the Great strength or power of God; and bears the
name operatively actually and in Deed: For he is incorporated or consolidated
together, out of the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, as out of a Kernel
or seed of them, and stands here now, as in the stead of God the Father.

119. The meaning is not, that He is God the Father, who consists in the
seven spirits of the whole Deep, and is not creaturely; but, the meaning is,
that in Nature among the Creatures there is also such a kind of Creature, as is
like God the Father, as he is in the seven qualifying or fountain spirits,
which is to reign among the Creatures.

119. For when God made himself creaturely, then he made himself creaturely
according to his Ternarie; And as in God, the Ternarie is the greatest and
chiefest, and yet his wonderful proportion, form and variety cannot be
measured, in that he shows himself in his operation so variously and
manifoldly. So also he has created Three principal Angel-Princes, according to
the highest Primacy of his Ternarie.

120. After that, he created the Princely-Angels, according to the seven
qualifying or fountain spirits, answerable to their Quality, viz. GABRIEL, an
Angel or Prince of the Tone, sound, or of swift or speedy Messages; as also
RAPHAEL, and others beside in the Kingdom of MICHAEL.

121. Thou must not understand this, as if these Royal Angels were to Rule in
the Deity, that is, in the seven qualifying or fountain-spirits of God, which
are without or distinct from the creatures; no, but each over his Creatures, or
the creatures of his own Dominion.

122. For as the Ternarie of God reigns over the infinite or Endless, Being
and over the figures and several various forms or Ideas in the Deity, and
changes varieth and Imageth or frames the same.

123. So also are the three Angelical Kings, Lords over their Angels even to
the heart and deepest Ground, though they cannot corporeally or Bodily vary or
change themselves, as God himself can, who has created them; yet they rule
them (viz. the Angels) Corporeally, and are bound or united to them; as body
and soul are bound one to another.

124. For the King is their Head, and they are the Members of the King; and the
or facultating potentiating.
Qualifying or fountain Princely Angels are the Kings Counselors or
instruments in Employment.
Officers in his Affairs, like the five Senses in Man, or as the Hands and
Feet, or the Mouth, Nostrils, Eyes and Ears, whereby the King executes or
accomplisheth his Affairs.

125. Now as all Angels are bound to the King, so is the King also bound to God
his Creator, as Body and Soul: the Body, signifies God; and the Soul the
Angelical King, which is in the Body of God, and is become a Creature in the
Body of God, and abides eternally in the Body of God, as the soul does in its
Nest, and therefore also has God so highly glorified him, as his own
propriety, or as the Soul is glorified in the Body.

126. Thus the King or Great Prince Michael Looks like God the Father in his
glorification, clarity, or brightness, and is a King and prince of God upon
the Mount of God, and has his Office in the Deep, wherein he is created.

127. That circumference or space, Region or Province, wherein he and his
Angels are created, is his Kingdom, and he is a loving Son of God the Father
in Nature, a Creaturely Son, in whom the Father delights.

128. Thou must not compare him with the Heart or Light of God, which is in the
whole Father, which has neither Beginning nor End, as well as God the Father
himself.

129. For this Prince is a Creature, and has a Beginning, but he is in God the
Father, and is bound and united with him in his Love, as his dearly beloved
Son, whom he has created out of himself.

130. Therefore he has set upon him the Crown of Honor, of Might Power and
Authority, so that there is in heaven no higher nor Excellenter, nor mightier
then He is, except God himself in his Ternarie. And this is one King; rightly
described, with a true ground, in the knowledge of the Spirit.

Of the second King LUCIFER, so now called, because of his Fall.
131. King LVCIFER, shut thy Eyes here a little, and stop thy Ears a little,
that thou may neither bear nor see, or else thou will be horribly ashamed,
that another sits upon thy Seat, and so thy shame shall be fully discovered
yet before the End of the world, which thou have kept so closely concealed in
secret and suppressed, ever since the beginning of the world, wheresoever thou
could: I will now describe thy Kingly Primacie, not for thee, but for the
benefit of Man.

132. This High and Mighty, Glorious and Beauteous King, lost his right name in
his Fall: for he is now called LVCIFER, that is, One carried forth or expelled
out of the Light of God.

127. His name was not so at the beginning: for he was a creaturely Prince or
King of the Heart of God in the bright Light, even the Brightest among the
three Kings of Angels.

Of Lucifers.
his Creation.
134. As Michael is Created according to the quality manner and property of God
the Father; So was Lucifer Created according to the quality, condition, and
Beauty of God the Son, and was bound to and united with him in Love, as a
dear Son or Heart, and his heart also stood in the Center of Light, as if he
had been God himself; and his Beauty or Brightness transcended all.

135. For his circumference conception or chiefest mother, was, the Son of
God, and there he stood as a King or Prince of God.

136. His Court, Province, place, Region or Quarters, wherein he dwelt with his
whole Army or Company, and wherein he is become a Creature, and which was his
Kingdom; is the created Heaven and this world, wherein we dwell with our King
JESUS CHRIST.

137. For our King sits in Divine Omnipotence, where King Lucifer did sit,
and on the Kingly throne of expulsed Lucifer, and the Kingdom of King Lucifer
is now become HIS; O Prince Lucifer, how do thou relish that?

138. Now as God the Father is bound and united in great love with his Son;
so was King Lucifer also bound with King Michael in great love, as One heart or
One God, for the fountain or wellspring of the Son of God has reached even
into the heart of Lucifer.

139. Only that the Light, which he had in his Body, he had it for his own
propriety, which while it shone with or agreeable to the Light of the Son of
God, which was Externally without or distinct from him, they both qualified
incorporated and united together as one thing, though they were two, yet they
were bound or united together, as Body and Soul.

140. And as the light of God reigns in all the powers of the Father, so he
also did reign in all his Angels, as a mighty King of God, and did wear on his
Head the fairest Crown of Heaven.

141. Here at present I will leave him a little scope, because I shall have so
much to do concerning him, in the second Chapter. Let him prance a little yet,
here, in the Crown, it shall suddenly be plucked away from him.

Of the third Angelical King called URIEL.
142. This gracious amiable Blessed Prince and King, has his Name from the
Light, or from the flash, or going forth of the Light, which signifies
rightly, God the Holy Ghost.

143. For as the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Light, and forms figureth
and Imageth all, and reigns in all; such also is the power and gracious
amiable blessedness of a Cherubin; who is the King and heart of all his
Angels; that is, when his Angels do but behold him, they are all then affected
and touched with the will of their King.

144. For, As the will of the heart affects and stirs all the members of the
Body, so that the whole Body does as the Heart has Decreed or concluded; Or as
the Holy Ghost rises up in the Center of the Heart, and enlightneth all the
Members in the whole Body: so the Cherubin with his whole Glance or Luster and
will, affects all his Angels, so that they all are together, as one Body, and
the King is the heart therein.

145. Now this glorious and Beautiful Prince is Imaged and framed according to
the kind and quality of the Holy Ghost, and is indeed a glorious and fair
Prince of God, and is united with the other Princes in Love, as one heart.

146. These are now the Three Princes of God in the Heaven. And when the Flash
of life, that is, the Son of God, rises up in the middle or central circle
in the qualifying or fountain spirits of God, and shows it self triumphantly,
then the Holy Ghost also rises upward triumphantly: In this rising up, the
Holy Trinity also rises up in the heart of these three Kings, and each of them
triumphs also according to his kind and Quality.

147. In this rising up, the Armies or Companies of all the Angels of the whole
Heaven become triumphant and joyful, and that Melodious TE DEUM LAUDAMUS (WE
PRAISE THEE O GOD) rises up.

148. In this rising up of the heart, the Mercurius in the heart, is stirred up
or awakened, as also in the whole Salitter of Heaven there rises up in the
Deity, the miraculous wonderful and fair Beautiful Imaging of heaven in several
manifold various colors and manners, and each spirit presents it self in its
own peculiar form.

149. I can compare it with Nothing save only with the most Such as are
mentioned, Exodus 28. 17. and Chapter 39. 10. Rev. 21. 19.
Precious Stones or Jewels; as or Sardius'es.
Ierubin. Cherubins. c Delfin. Topazes. or Sardius'es.
Rubie's, or Chrysoprasus'es.
Emeraud's, c Topaze's, or Sardonix'es.
Onix'es, Saphir's, Diamonds, Jasper's, or Ligure's.
Jacinct's, Ametist's, or Tarkoise's.
Beril's, or Achate's or Calcedonie's.
Sardis'es, or Chrysolichus'es.
Carbuncles. and such as Opal's, Granat's, Vermilion-stones, Gold-Stones, etc.
Like.

150. In such manner and Colors, the or Gods Nature's Heaven
Heaven. of Gods Nature shows or presents it self in the rising up of the
spirits of God: and now when the Light of the Son of God shines therein,
then it is like a Bright clear Sea of the colors of the abovementioned
Precious Stones or Jewels.

Of the wonderful proportion, alteration or variation, and rising up of the
Qualities in the heavenly Nature.
151. Seeing then the Spirit gives the form and manner of Heaven to be known;
I cannot choose but write it thus down, and let his will be done, who will have
it so.

152. And although the Devil will raise scorners and mockers to vilify it, I
do not much regard that: I am satisfied with this gracious amiable and blessed
Revelation of God; they may mock so long, till they find it by experience with
Eternal Shame, then the fountain of woe Lamentation and sorrow will surely Gnaw
them.

153. Also I have not gone up to Heaven, and beheld it with my fleshly Eyes,
much less has any told it me; For though an Angel should come, and tell it
me, yet I could not apprehend or conceive it without enlightening from God,
much less believe it.

154. For I should always stand in Doubt, whether it were a good Angel, sent
of God or no, seeing the Devil can transform or cloth himself in the form of
an Angel of light, to seduce Men, 2 Corinthians. 11. 14.

155. But because it is generated in the Center or Circle of Life, as a bright
shining light, like unto the heavenly Birth, or rising up of the Holy Ghost,
with a fiery driving or impulse of the spirit, therefore I cannot resist or
withstand it, though the world always make a mock of me for it.

156. The Spirit testifies, that there is yet a very little time remaining,
and then the Flash in the whole circle of this world, will rise up, to which
end this spirit is a forerunner, Messenger, and Proclaimer of the Day.

157. And then whatsoever man, is not found in the Birth of the Holy Ghost at
that time; in him the Birth will never rise at all, but he abides in the
quality or source of darkness, as a dead hard Flint stone, in which the source
or quality of fierceness wrath and corruption rises up Eternally.

158. And there he will be a mocker eternally in the Birth of the hellish
Abomination: for whatsoever quality the Tree is of, such also is its fruit.

159. Thou live betwixt Heaven and Hell, into whichsoever thou sowest, in
that thou shall reap also, and thar will be thy food in Eternity: If thou
sowest scorn and contempt, thou will also reap scorn and contempt, and that
will be thy food.

160. Therefore, O child of Man! have a care, trust not too much upon worldly
wisdom, it is blind, and is born blind, but when the flash of life is
generated therein, then it is no more blind, but sees.

161. For, John 3. 7. Christ says; You must be born anew, or else you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

162. Truly it must be generated in such a manner, in the the printed Copy
Holiness of God.
Holy Ghost; which rises up in the sweet spring or fountain water of the
heart, in the Flash.

163. And therefore has Christ ordained or Instituted the Baptism or New Birth
or Regeneration of the Holy Ghost, in the Water, because the birth of the light
rises up in the sweet water in the printed Copy, Brain.
Heart.

164. Which is a very great mystery, and has been also kept secret from all
men since the beginning of the world, till now: which I will demonstrate and
describe plainly in its due place.

Now Observe the Form and Posture of Heaven.
165. When thou beholdest this world, thou have a Type of heaven;

I. The Stars signify or denote the Angels: for as the stars must continue
unaltered, till, to the End of this Time, so the Angels also in the Eternal
Time of heaven must remain unaltered for ever.

166. II. The Elements signify or denote the wonderful proportion variety
change and alteration of the form and posture of Heaven: For as the Deep
between the Stars and Earth always alter and change in their form, suddenly
it is fair bright and Light, suddenly it is lowry and dark; now wind, then
rain; now snow, suddenly the Deep is Blew or Azure, suddenly greenish, by and
by whitish, then suddenly again Dusky.

167. Thus also is the change and alteration of Heaven, into many several
colors and forms, but not in such a manner and kind as in this world, but all,
according to the rising up of the Spirits of God, and the Light of the Son of
God shines therein Eternally: But the rising up in the birth differs in the
Degrees more at one time then at another.

And therefore the wonderful wisdom of God is incomprehensible.

168. III. The Earth signifies or denotes, the Heavenly Nature, or the
seventh * spirit of Nature, in which the Idea's, or Images forms and Colors
rise up:

169. IIII. And the Birds or Fowls Fishes and Beasts signify or denote the
several forms or shapes of figures in Heaven.

170. Thou art to know this, for the spirit in the Flash testifies the same,
that in Heaven there arise all manner of figures or shapes like the Beasts
Fowls Birds and Fishes of this world, but in a heavenly form or manner,
clarity or brightnes^e and kind, as also all manner of Trees, Plants and
Flowers.

171. But as they rise, so they go away again, for they are not incorporated or
compacted together, as the Angels are: for these figures are so formed in the
Birth of the rising qualities in the spirit of Nature, or Nature-spirit.

172. If a figure be Imaged in a spirit, so that it it subsisteth; and if
another spirit wrestleth with this, and gets the better, then it comes to be
divided, and indeed changed or altered, all according to the kind of the
qualities;

And this is in God as a holy Sport Play or Scene.

173. Therefore also the Creatures, as Beasts, Fowls or Birds Fishes and Worms
in this world; are not created to an Eternal Being, but to a transitory one, as
the figures in Heaven also pass away.

174. This I set down here only for a manuduction or introduction: you will
find it described more at large, concerning the Creation of this world.

The Thirteenth Chapter.
Of the terrible, doleful and Lamentable miserable Fall of the Kingdom of
Lucifer.

1. I Would have all proud, covetous, envious, and wrathful men invited to
look into this Glass, and there they will see the original of their pride,
covetousness, envy and wrath, also the issue and final requital or wages
thereof.

12. The Learned have produced many and various Monsters concerning the
beginning of Sin, and Original of the Devil, and scuffled one with another
about it; every one of them, thought he had the Axe by the Handle, yet it
continued hidden from them all, till this very time.

3. But since it will henceforth be fully revealed, as in a clear
Looking-glass, therefore it may well be conceived, that the Great Day of the
Revelation of God is now near at hand, wherein the fierceness and the kindled
fire will be separated from the Light.

4. Therefore let none make himself stark blind, for The time of the
Restitution, of whatsoever man has lost, is now near at Hand: the Day Dawneth,
or, the Morning-Rednesse breaks forth; It is high Time to awake from sleep.

Question.

Now it may be Asked:

What is the source or fountain of the first Sin of Lucifers Kingdom?

Answer.

5. Here we must again take in Hand the highest depth of the Deity; and see,
Out of what, King Lucifer, became a Creature, or what was the first source or
fountain of Evil or Malice in him?

6. The Devil and his crew continually excuse themselves, and so do all wicked
men, which are begotten in corruption, saying; God does them wrong, in
thrusting them out or rejecting them.

7. Nay, this present world does dare to say, that God has Decreed or
concluded it so in his predestinate purpose and counsel; that some men should
be Saved, and some should be Damned, and say, to that end also God has
rejected Prince Lucifer, that he should be a spectacle of Gods wrath.

8. As if Hell or Malice and Evil, had been from Eternity, and that it was in
Gods predestinate purpose, that Creatures should and must be therein; and so
they pull and hale and bestir themselves to prove it by Scripture, though
indeed they neither have the knowledge of the true God, nor the understanding
of the Scriptures: though some erroneous things also are brewed from the
Scriptures.

9. Christ says, the Devil was a murderer and Liar from the beginning, and
did not stand in the Truth, John 8. 44. But being these Justifiers and
Disputers assist the Devil so steadfastly, and pervert Gods truth, and change it
into Lies, in that, they make of God a thirsty and fierce wrathful Devil, and
such a one, as has created and still wills Evil, and so all of them,
together with the Devil, are jointly murderers and Liars.

10. For, as the Devil is the Founder and Father of Hell and Damnation, and
has himself built and prepared for himself the Hellish quality to be his Royal
Seat; so also such Writers and Scriblers are the Master Builders of Lies and
Damnation, who help to confirm and Establish the Devils Lies, and to make of
the Merciful loving and friendly God, a murderer and furious Destroyer, and so
pervert and turn the truth of God into Lies.

11. For God says in the Prophet:

As true as I live, I have no delight or pleasure, in the death of a Sinner,
but that he turn and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11. And in the Psalms it is thus; thou art
not a God, that have pleasure in wickedness, Psalm. 5. 5.

12. Besides, God has given Laws to man, and has forbidden the Evil, and
commanded the Good. Now if God would have the Evil, and also the Good, then he
should be at Odds with himself, and it would follow, that there would be
destruction or destructivenesse in the Deity, one quality running counter
against the other, and the one spoiling and corrupting the other.

13. Now how all this is come to pass, or how Wickedness has taken its First
Source, original and beginning, I will declare in the highest simplicity in the
greatest depth.

14. To which End the spirit inviteth and cites, summoneth or warns all men
that are seduced into Errors by the Devil, that they come and present
themselves before the Looking-glass of this School wherein they shall see and
inspect the murtherous Devil into his very heart.

15. Then he that will not take heed and beware of his Lies, whilst he may
very well do it, there is ^o Remedy for him neither here nor hereafter: he that
sows and will sow, with the Devil, must Reap with the Devil also.

16. In the Center of the flash it is showed, that the Harvest is white
already: wherein every one will Reap, what he has Sown.

17. Here, my Entrusted Talent, which I have received, I will let out for rent
profit and increase as I am commanded to do, and he that will deal with me in
this way of gain or usury, it shall be free for him, he may freely do it;
whether he be a Christian, a Jew, a Turk, or a Heathen; they will be all alike
advantageous to me; my Warehouse shall stand open for every one, let none fear
Exacting tricks or deceit, for he that comes to deal with me in my Wares,
shall be justly rightly and fairly dealt with.

18. Every one should here, have a care, to deal so well that he bring in some
Gain of use-money for his Master: for I am afraid, that every Merchant will not
be fitted in my Wars for his turn; for to some they will be very strange and
uncouth, neither will every one understand my Language Phrase and Expression.

19. I would therefore have every one warned, that he deal circumspectly and
warily, and not be conceited, that he is rich, and cannot grow poor; truly I
have very admirable and wonderful wares to Sell, every one will not have
understanding and skill to know what to do with them.

20. Now if any one should in a dull humor fall upon them, and plunge himself
into perdition, let him bear his own blame; he has need of a light in his
Heart, that his Understanding and Mind may be well governed.

21. Else let him forbear to come into my Warehouse, or he will but deceive
his own expectation; for the Ware which I have to sell is very Precious and
Dear, and requires a very sharp and acute understanding: therefore have a
care, and do not climb aloft, where you see no Ladder is, else you will fall.

22. But to me is shown the Ladder of Jacob, upon which I am climbed up, even
into heaven, and have received my Ware, which I have to sell and vent:
Therefore if any one will climb up after me, let him take heed that he be not
drunken, but he must be girt with the sword of the Spirit.

23. For he must climb through a horrible deep, a giddiness will frequently
come into his head; and besides, he must climb through the midst or center of
the Kingdom of Hell, and there he will feel by experience what a deal of
scoffings and upbraidings he must Endure.

24. In this combat, I had many hard trials to my hearts grief: my Sun was
often eclipsed or extinguished, but did rise again; and the oftener it was
eclipsed or put out, the brighter and clearer was its rising again.

25. I do not write this for my own praise, but only for an Item or hint, that
if it go so with you, you should not despair about it, for there belongs and
is requisite a mighty endurance hard labor and stoutnesse, for him that
fights with the Devil, betwixt Heaven and Hell: for He is a potent Prince.

26. Therefore have a care, that thou put on the Coat of Mayl or Corslet or
Breast Plate.
Habergeon of the Spirit, else do not venture to come near my Warehouse, that
my wares be not ill handled by thee, and so be prejudicial to thee.

27. Thou must renounce the Devil and the world, if thou will enter into this
fight, else thou will not overcome: But if thou overcomest not, then let my
book alone, and meddle not with it, but stick to thy Old matters, else thou will receive but evil wages for thy pains: be not deceived, God will not be
mocked, Gal. 6. 7.

28. Truly it is a narrow and strait passage, or entrance, through the Gates of
Hell; for them that will press in to God: they must endure many pangs
crushings and squeezings from the Devil.

29. For the humane flesh is very young and tender, and the Devil is rough and
hard, also dark, hot, bitter, astringent and cold: and so these two are very
ill matched.

30. Therefore I seriously exhort the Reader, and would have him faithfully
warned, as it were with a Preface to this Great Mystery, that if he do not
understand it, and yet longs and would fain have the meaning or understanding
thereof, that he would pray to God for his Holy Spirit, and that he would
enlighten him with the same.

31. For, without the illumination thereof you will not understand this
Mystery; for there is a strong Lock and Bar before it in the spirit of Man,
that must be first unlockt or opened, and that No man can do, for the Holy
Ghost is the only Key to do it withal.

32. Therefore if thou will have an open Gate into the Deity, then thou must
move stir and walk in Gods Love, this I have set down here for thy
Consideration.

Now Observe:

33. Every Angel is created in the seventh or faculty.
Qualifying or fountain-spirit, which is NATURA.
NATURE, out of which his Body is compacted or incorporated together, and his
Body is given him for a propriety, and the same is free to it self, as the
whole Deity is free.

34. He has no impulse or driving without or distinct from himself, his
impulse and mobility stands in his Body, viz. the Body.
which is of such a kind and manner, as the whole God is; and his light and
knowledge, as also his life, is generated in that manner, as the whole Divine
Being is generated.

35. For the Body is the incorporated or compacted spirit of Nature, and
encompasseth or incloseth the other six Spirits; these generate themselves in
the Body, just as it is in the Deity.

36. Now Lucifer had the fairest Beautifullest and powerfullest Body, in
Heaven, of or among all the Princes of God, and his Light, which he has, and
is continually generated in his Body, that has incorporated with the heart or
Son of God, as if they were One thing.

37. But when he saw that he was so fair and beautiful, and found or felt his
inward birth and great power or authority, then his spirit, which he had
generated in his Body, which is his ANIMAL (or animated) or Life-spirit, --

[Note, The Author calls the soulish Birth the ANIMAL Birth; from Anima, which
signifies the Soul; but being the Scripture otherwise understands by the
word Animal, the perished or corrupted Soul, or Animalem hominem, the Animal
man or the corrupted Natural Man, that is, the Adamical beastial Man; and so he
being advertised of it, he altered that Expression, and used it no more any
further.

-- or Son or Heart; exalted it self, intending to triumph over the Divine
Birth, and to lift up or extol it self above the Heart of God.

Here Observe the Depth.

38. In the middle or central fountain or wellspring, which is the Heart;
where the Birth rises up; the astringent or harsh quality rubs it self with
the Bitter and Hot, and there the light kindles, which is the Son, of which
it is always impregnated in its Body, and that enlighteneth and makes it
living.

39. Now that light in Lucifer was so fair bright and Beautiful, that he
excelled the bright form of heaven, and in that light was perfect
Understanding: for all the seven qualifying or fountain spirits generate that
same light.

40. But now, the seven qualifying or fountain-Spirits are the Father of the
Light, and may permit or suffer the Birth of the Light to be as much as they
please: and the light cannot exalt or raise it self higher, then the qualifying
or fountain-spirits will permit, or give it leave.

41. But when the Light is generated, then it enlightneth all the seven
qualifying or fountain spirits, so that all seven are Understanding; and do all
seven give their will to the Birth of the Light.

42. But now, every one has power and Might to alter its will in the Birth of
the light, according as there is need: now if that be so, then the spirit
cannot triumph thus, but must lay down its prancing Pomp.

43. And therefore it is that all seven spirits are in full power, every one of
them has the Reins in its hand, that it may hold in and check the generated
spirit, from triumphing any higher, then is fit for it.

44. But the seven spirits, which are in an Angel, which generate the light and
understanding, they are bound and united with the whole God, that they should
not qualify any other way, either higher or more vehemently, then God himself;
but that there should be one and the same manner and way between them both.

45. Seeing they are but a part or piece of the whole, and not the whole it
self, for God has therefore created them out of himself, that they should
qualify operate or Act in such a manner form and way as God himself does.

46. But now the qualifying or fountain spirits in Lucifer did not so, but they
seeing that they sat in the highest Primacie or Rank, they moved themselves so
hard, and strongly, that the spirit, which they generated was very fiery, and
climbed up in the fountain of the heart, like a Proud Damsel or Virgin.

47. If the qualifying or fountain spirits had moved qualified or acted gently
and lovely, as they did before they became creaturely, as they were universally
in God before the Creation, then had they generated also a gentle lovely mild
and meek Son in them, which would have been like to the Son of God; and
then the Light in Lucifer and the Light of the Son of God had been One thing,
one qualifying operating acting and affecting, one and the same lovely kissing,
Embracing and struggling.

48. For the great Light, which is the Heart of God, would have played meekly
mildly and lovingly with the small Light in Lucifer, as with a young son, for
the little son in Lucifer should have been the dear little brother, of the
Heart of God.

49. To this End God the Father has created the Angels, that as he is manifold
and various in his Qualities, and in his alteration or variegation is
incomprehensible in his Sport or Scene of Love; so, the little spirits also, or
the little Lights of the Angels, which are as the Son of God, should play or
sport very gently or lovely in the great light before the Heart of God; that
the Joy in the Heart of God might here be increased, and that so there might be
a holy Sport Scene or play in God.

50. The seven spirits of Nature in an Angel should play and rise up gently in
God their Father, as they had done before their creaturely Being, and rejoice
in their Newborn son, which they have generated out of themselves, which is
the Light and Understanding of their Body.

51. And that light should rise very gently or mildly in the Heart of God, and
rejoice in the light of God, as a child with its Mother, and so there should be
a Hearty loving, and friendly kissing, a very meek and pleasant Taste or relish.

52. In this the Tone should rise up, and sound, with singing and ringing
forth; in praising and jubilating: also all the qualities should rejoice
therein, and every spirit should exercise or practice its Divine work or
labor, as God the Father Himself does.

53. For the seven spirits had this in perfect knowledge, for they were united
and actuated with God the Father, so that they could all see, feel, taste,
smell and hear, what God their Father did, or wrought and made.

54. But when they elevated themselves in a sharp or strong kindling, then they
did against Natures Right, otherwise then God their Father did, and this was a
stirring quality or rising up, against or contrary to the whole Deity.

55. For they kindled the Salitter of the Body, and generated a high triumphing
Son, which in the astringent quality, was hard, rugged or rough, dark and
cold; in the sweet, was burning bitter and fiery: The Tone was a hard fiery
noise; The Love was a lofty Emnity against God.

56. Here now stood the kindled Bride in the seventh Nature-spirit, like a
Proud Beast; now she supposed she was beyond or above God, nothing was like her
now: Love grew cold, the Heart of God could not touch it, for there was a
contrary will or opposition betwixt them. The Heart of God moved very meekly
and lovingly, and the heart of the Angel moved very darkly hard cold and fiery.

57. And the heart of God should now unite and qualify with the Heart of the
Angel, but that could not be; for there was now hard against soft, and sour
against sweet, and dark against light, and fire against a pleasant gentle
warmth, and a hard knocking or rumbling against a loving melodious song.

Question.

Hearken Lucifer, Where lies the fault now, that thou art become a Devil? Is
God in fault, as thou lyingly say?

Answer.

58. O no, thou thy self art faulty, the qualifying or fountain Spirits in thy
Body, which thou thy self art, have generated thee such a little son: Thou
can not say, that God has kindled the Salitter, out of which he made thee,
but thy qualifying or fountain spirits have done it, whereas thou were clearly
before, a Prince and King of God.

59. Therefore, when thou say, God Created thee thus, or that he has without
sufficient cause spewed thee up out of thy place: then art thou a Liar and
Murderer. For the whole heavenly Host or Army bears witness against thee,
that thou have thy self erected and prepared this fierce Quality for thy self.

60. If it be not so, then go before the face of God, and Justify thy self.
But thou see it plain enough without that; and besides, thou dare not look
on that matter: Would not thou fain have a friendly kiss of the Son of
God, that thou might once be eased or refreshed? if thou art in the Right,
then do but once look upon HIM: perhaps thou may be made sound or whole again.

61. But stay a little, another sits on thy Throne, He is kissed, and he is
an obedient son to his Father, and does as the Father does.

62. Stay yet a little while, and the Hellish fire will kiss thee; in the mean
while, make much of this Latin till more grows out of it; thou will suddenly
lose thy Crown.

Now one might Ask:

What then in Lucifer, is properly, that Emnity against God; for which he was
Thrust and driven out of his place?

63. Here I will show you exactly the Pith Kernel and Heart of Lucifer, and
then you will see, what a Devil is, or how he is become a Devil. Therefore take
heed, and do not Invite or Entertain him as a Guest, for he is the Arch-sworn
Enemy of God, and of all Angels and Men, and that in his Eternity.

64. Now if thou understandest and apprehendest this aright, then thou will not
make of God a Devil; as some do, which say: God has created the Evil, and that
his will is, that some men should be Lost; which men, that so say, help to
increase the Devils Lies, and bring upon themselves the severe Judgment, by
their perverting Gods truth, and so turning them into Lies.

Now Observe.

65. The whole Deity has in its innermost or beginning Birth, in the Pith or
kernel, a very tart terrible sharpness, in which, the astringent quality is a
very horrible, tart, hard, dark and cold attracting or drawing together, like
winter, when there is a fiery bitter cold frost, when water is frozen into Ice,
and besides is very Intolerable.

66. Then think or suppose if in such a hard Winter, when it is so cold, the
Sun should be taken away, what kind of hard Frost, and how very rough fierce
and hard darkness would it be, wherein no life could subsist.

67. After such a manner and kind is the astringent quality in the innermost
kernel or Pith in it self, and to it self alone, without the other qualities in
God; for the austerenesse or severity makes the attracting or drawing
together, and fixation or Glutinousnesse of the body, and the hardness dries
it up, so that it subsisteth Creaturely.
as a Creature.

68. And the bitter quality is a tearing, penetrating, and cutting bitter
quality or source: for it divedeth and drives forth the hard and astringent
Quality, and makes the mobility.

69. And betwixt these two qualities is heat generated from its hard and fierce
bitter rubbing, tearing and raging, which rises up in the Bitter and hard
quality, as a fierce wrathful kindling, and presses quite through, as a hard
fiery Noise.

70. From whence existeth the hard Tone, and in that rising up, or climbing, it
is environed and fixed in the astringent quality, so that it becomes a Body,
which subsisteth.

71. Now if there were no other quality in this Body, which could quench the
fierceness of these four qualities, then there or were.
would be a perpetual Emnity therein. For the bitter or were.
would be against the astringent, in that it stormeth and teareth so vehemently
therein, and breaks open the astringent.

72. And then the astringent also would be against the bitter, in that it
attracteth, draws together and holds fast, the bitter, captive, that it could
not have its own course.

73. And the Heat would be against both, in that with its fierce wratful
kindling and rising up, it makes all hot, burning, and raging, and is fully or
totally against the cold.

74. And so the Tone would be a great Emnity in all the other, in that it
penetrateth forcibly through all like a Tyrant.

75. And thus, this is the very deepest and innermost hidden Birth of God,
according to which, he calls himself an angry zealous or Jealous God, as may
be seen by the Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. 5. Deuteronomy. 5. 9.

76. And in this quality stands Hell and Eternal Perdition, as also the
eternal Emnity and murtherous Den, and such a creature the Devil is come to be.

77. But now, seeing he is a sworn Arch-enemy of God, and though indeed the
Disputants and Helpers of the Devil will needs force it so, in arguments; that
God wills the good and also the evil, and that he has created some men to
Damnation; therefore and thereupon the Spirit of God cites them upon pain of
eternal Emnity, to come before this Looking-glass, wherein their Heart shall
be laid open; and they shall see, what God is, and who the Devil is, or how he
is become a Devil.

78. If thy heart be not bolted and barred up in death, through thy stubborn
wilfulness aed Blasphemy, and drowned in horrible sins, purposing not to
desist from them, or leave them, then awake, and behold; I take Heaven and
Earth; also the Stars and Elements, and all the Creatures, and Man himself also
in his whole substance, to witness, and so I will prove it also plainly and
clearly in its due place, with all these forementioned things, especially, when
we come to treat of the Creation of all the Creatures.

79. If these things will not give thee satisfaction; then pray to God, that He
would open thy Heart, and then thou will know and see Heaven and Hell, as also
the whole Deity with all its qualities; and then no doubt thou will forbear,
and justify the Devil no more: I am not able to open thy heart for thee.

Now observe the true or the Divine Birth.
Birth or Geniture of God.
80. Behold, as I have mentioned above; the Birth or Geniture of God in its
innermost Being, in these four qualities; is thus Sharp or Tart.

Thou must understand it exactly.

81. The astringent quality is thus sharp in its own proper quality in it self:
but it is not alone, or without the other; neither is it generated of or in it
self, as being wholly free, but the other six Spirits generate it, and they
also hold it by the Reins, and may let their Reins and authority go as far
only, as they please.

82. For, the sweet spring or fountain water is suddenly a whip scourge or Lash
upon the astringent quality, and mitigateth softneth or suppleth it, so that it
grows very thin, gentle mild and soft, as also very Bright.

80. But that it is thus sharp in it self, is to the end, that a Body may be
Imaged or framed through its attracting or drawing together, otherwise the
Deity would not subsist, much less a creature.

84. And in this sharpness, God is an All-comprehensible and all-fixing or
all-fastning sharp God: for the Birth Geniture and sharpness of God is thus
every where.

85. But if I shall describe the Deity in its Birth or Geniture in a small
round circle, in the highest Depth, then it is thus

In a Similitude.

86. As suppose a WHEEL standing before thee, with seven wheels one so made in
the other, that it could go on all sides, forward, backward, and cross ways,
without need of any turning back or stopping.

87. And in its going, that, always one wheel in its turning about generateth
the other, and yet none of them do vanish out of sight, but that all seven be
visible; or in sight.

88. And the seven Wheels always generating the Naves in the midst or center
according to their turning about, so that the Nave stand always free without
alteration or removing; whether the wheels go forward or backward or cross
ways, or upward or downward.

89. And the Nave always generating the Spoaks, so that in their turning
about, they stand right and direct from the Nave to the Felleys of the wheel:
and yet none of the spoaks to be out of sight, but still turning about, thus
one with another, going whithersoever the wind drive it, and that without need
of any turning back or stopping.

Now observe what I shall inform you in the application of this.

90. The seven Wheels are the seven Spirits of God, the one always generating
the other; and are like, the turning about of a wheel, which has seven wheels
one in another, and the one always wheeleth it self otherwise then the other
in its station, and the seven wheels are Felleyed, or hooped Round with
Felleys, like a round Globe.

91. And yet that a man may see all the seven wheels turning round about
severally apart, as also the whole fitness or compass of the frame, with all
its Felleys and Spoaks and Naves.

92. And the seven Naves in the midst or Center being as it were one Nave,
which does fit every where in the turning about, and the wheels continually
generating these Naves, and the Naves generating the Spoaks continually in all
the seven wheels, and yet none of the wheels, as also none of the Naves, nor
any of the Felleys or Spoaks to be out of sight, and as if this wheel had seven
wheels, and yet were all but one wheel, and went always forward,
whithersoever the wind drove it.

Now Behold, and Consider.

93. The seven wheels one in another, the one always generating the other,
and going on every side, and yet none out of sight, or turning back: these are
the seven qualifying or fountain Spirits of God the Father.

94. And they generate in the seven wheels, in each wheel a Nave, and yet
there are not seven Naves, but only One, which fitteth in all the seven
wheels: And this is the Heart or innermost Body of the wheels, wherein the
wheels run about, and that signifies the Son of God.

95. For all the seven Spirits of God the Father generate continually in their
circle, and that, is the son of all the seven spirits, and all those qualify
or act in his Light, and is in the midst or Center of the Birth, and holds
together all the seven spirits of God, and they in their Birth turn about
therewith, thus.

96. That is, they clime either upward or downward, backward or forward or
crosse-wayes, and so the Heart of God is always in the midst or center, and
fitteth always every qualifying or fountain Spirit.

97. Thus there is One Heart of God, and not seven, which is always generated
from all the seven, and is the heart and life of all the seven.

98. Now the Spoaks, which are always generated from the Naves and Wheels,
and which do fit all the wheels in their turning, and are their Root, stay,
and fastening, in which they stand, and out of which they are generated;
signify God the Holy Ghost, which goes forth from the Father and the Son,
even as the Spoaks go out from the Nave and Wheel, and yet abide also in the
wheel.

99. Now as the Spoaks are many, and go always about with and in the wheel; so
the Holy Ghost is the Workmaster in the wheel of God, and forms, Imageth and
frames all, in the whole or total God.

100. Now this wheel has seven wheels one in another, and one Nave, which is
fitted in all the seven wheels: and all the seven wheels turn on that one Nave:
Thus God is one God, with seven qualifying or fountain spirits, and yet is but
one God, just as these seven wheels are but One wheel.

Now Observe:

101. The wheel in its incorporated structure and frame signifies the
astringent quality, which attracteth or draws together the whole corporeal
Being of the Deity, and holds it, and dries it, so that it subsisteth.

102. And the sweet spring or fountain water is generated by the driving about
or rising up of the spirits, for when the light is generated in the Heat, then
the astringent quality is amazed or terrified for great Joy, and this is a
submitting or lying down, or growing thin, and the hard corporeal being,
sinketh down like a meekness or mildness.

103. And so now the terror or the glance of the Light rises up in the
astringent quality very gently and shivering, and trembles; which now in the
water is bitter, and the Light dries it, and makes it friendly and sweet.

104. Now therein stands life and joy: for the terror or flash rises up in
all the qualities, like the wheel aforementioned which turns about, and then
there all the seven spirits rise up one in another, and generate themselves, as
in a Circle, and the light is shining in the midst or Center of the seven
Spirits, and re-shineth back again in all the spirits, and all the spirits
triumph therein, and rejoice in the light.

105. And as the seven Wheels turn about upon one Nave, as upon their Heart,
which holds them, and they hold the Nave; so the seven spirits generate the
Heart, and the heart holds the seven spirits, and so there arise voices, and
divine joyfulnesse, of or Glorious.
hearty loving and kissing.

106. For when the spirits with their light move, or boil, turn about and rise
one in another, then the life is always generated: for one spirit always
affords to the other its taste or relish, that is, it is affected with the
other.

107. Thus the one tastes and feels the other, and the Tone presses forth
from all the seven spirits toward the Heart, and rises up in the heart in the
flash of the light, and then rise up the voices and joyfulnesse of the Son of
God: and all the seven spirits triumph and rejoice in the Heart of God, each
according to its quality.

108. For in the Light in the sweet water, all astringency, and hardness, and
bitterness, and heat, are mitigated and made pleasant; and so there is, in the
seven spirits nothing else but a pleasant striving struggling and wonderful
generating like a divine holy Sport or Scene of God.

109. But their sharp or Tart Birth, of which I have written above, abides
hidden as a kernel, for it becomes mitigated by the light and sweet water.

110. Just as a four bitter green Apple is forced by the Sun, that it becomes
very pleasant or lovely to be eaten, and yet all its qualities are tasted: so
the Deity keeps its qualities also, but striveth or struggleth gently, like a
pleasant lovely Sport or Scene.

111. But if the qualifying or fountain spirits should extol or lift up
themselves, and penetrate suddenly one into another, driving hard, rubbing and
thronging, crowding or sqeezing; then the sweet water would be squeezed out,
and the fierce heat would be kindled, and then would rise up the fire of the
seven spirits, as in Lucifer.

112. This is now the true Birth or Geniture of the Deity, which has been so
from eternity in all Corners and Places whatsoever, and abides so in all
Eternity.

113. But in the Kingdom of Lucifer, (...) Rev. 9. 11.
the Destroyer; it is otherwise; as I have written above concerning the
fierceness; and in this world which is now half kindled also, it is likewise
after another manner; and will be so till the day of the Restitution; of which
I shall write when I treat concerning the Creation of this world.

114. Now in this glorious lovely and heavenly Salitter or divine Qualities,
the Kingdom of Lucifer also was created without any greater motion, then the
other.

115. For when Lucifer was created, he was altogether perfect, and was the
fairest Prince in heaven, adorned and endued with the fairest clarity or
Brightness of the Son of God.

116. But if Lucifer had been spoiled or destroyed in the moving of the
Creation, as he pretends, then he had never had his Perfection, beauty and
clarity; but would have been presently a fierce dark Devil, and not a Cherubin.

Of the glorious Birth and beauty of King Lucifer.
117. Behold thou murtherous and lying spirit! here I will describe thy Royal
Birth, how thou were in thy Creation, how God created thee, and how thou
becamest so beautiful, and to what end God created thee.

118. If thou say any other thing then this, which Heaven and Earth, and all
the Creatures testify, then thou Lie, nay the whole Deity testifies against
thee; that God created thee for his praise out of himself, to be a Prince and
King of God, as he did Prince Michael and Prince Uriel.

Now Observe:

119. When the Deity moved it self to Creation, and would form Image or frame
Creatures in its Body, it kindled not the qualifying spirits, else they would
have burnt Eternally, but it stirred them very gently or softly in the
astringent quality.

120. That, drew or attracted the Divine Salitter together, and dried it so
that it became a Body, and so the whole divine power of all the seven
qualifying or fountain-spirits of that place or Room, as far as that of the
Angels reached, was captivated in the Body, and became the propriety of the
Body, which neither can nor shall, be destroyed again, in Eternity, but shall
remain the Bodies propriety or proper own, in Eternity.

121. Now the captivated or incorporated power of all the seven qualifying or
fountain spirits had its propriety in the Body, and is risen in the Body, and
has generated it self in the same manner as the Deity generateth it self from
all the seven qualifying or fountain spirits.

122. One quality has always generated the other alike, and none of them have
vanished or gone out of sight, just as it is in the whole Deity: and then the
whole Body, as it is also in the Ternarie, generated it self just as the Deity
generateth it self without or distinct from the Body, in the Ternarie.

123. But this I must mention here; viz. that Lucifer, the King, was
incorporated together out of his whole Kingdom, as the Heart of the whole
place or Room thereof, so far as his whole Angelical Host or Army reached when
it was created, and so far as that circumference or circle, Region or Quarter,
reached, wherein He and his Angels became a creature, and which God before the
time of Creation had enclosed or concluded as a Room or Space for a Kingdom,
whose circuit or Extent comprehends Heaven and this world; as also the Deep
of the Earth, and of the whole Circle Sphere or Circumference of this whole
world of the Heavens and Stars.

124. And according to the qualities were his qualifying or fountain Princes
created, which are his Kingly Counselors, and so also were all his Angels
created.

125. Yet you are to know, that every Angel has all the seven spirits in him,
but one of the seven is chief or principal.

Now behold!

126. When the King was thus incorporated or compacted together, as one
comprehending his whole Kingdom, then instantly, the same hour, and in the same
Moment: when he was incorporated or compacted together: the birth of the Holy
Trinity of God, which he had for a propriety in his Body,

[ Understand in the Liberty, not essentially, but as the fire shines forth or
gloweth through the Iron that is flaming hot, and the Iron remains Iron
still; or as the light replenisheth or fills the Darkness, the dark source
or quality being changed into Light, and so becomes joyful, and yet in the
Center remains a darkness, which is understood to be Nature; for a spirit;
is repleninish'd only with the Majesty:] rose up and generated it self
without, distinct from the Creature, in God.

127. For in the driving together of the Body presently likewise rose up the
Birth also in great triumph, as in a Newborn King, in God; and all the seven
qualifying or fountain spirits showed themselves very joyful and triumphing.

128. And instantly in the same Moment the light was generated and rose up out
of the seven spirits in the Center of the heart, as a newborn son of the
King, which also instantly in a Moment, clarified or brightened the Body of all
the seven qualifying or fountain spirits from the Center of the Heart; and
externally from without, the light of the Son of God clarified or brightened
it.

129. For the Birth of the new Son in the Heart of Lucifer also penetrated
through the whole Body, and was glorified from the Son of God, which was
without distinct from the body, and was friendlily welcomed with the greatest
Beauty of Heaven, according to the Beauty of God the Son, and it was to him
as a loving Heart or propriety, with which the whole Deity qualified or
operated.

130. And then instantly also the spirit of the new born son in the Heart,
went forth from the light of Lucifer through his Mouth, and united qualified or
cooperated with the holy Spirit of God, and was with highest Joy received and
embraced, as a dear little Brother.

131. Now here stands the Beauteous Bride: what shall I write of her now? was
she not a Prince of God; as also the most beautiful; moreover in Gods love
also, and as a dear Son of the Creatures?

Of the horrible, proud, and henceforth doleful Lamentable Beginning of Sin.
The highest Depth.

Observe here.

132. When King Lucifer was thus fairly gloriously Beautiously highly and
holily framed or built, he should surely have now begun to praise, honor and
magnify his Creator; and should do that, which God his Creator does.

133. Viz. God his Creator qualifieth or operateth very meekly, lovingly and
Joyfully, and one qualifying or fountain-spirit of God always loves the
other, and brings its affection into the other, and always helps the other
to Image form and frame all in the heavenly Pomp.

134. Whereby, in the heavenly pomp always such fair beauteous forms, Ideas,
figures, and vegetations, spring up, as also various colors and fruits; and
this the qualifying or fountain spirits of God do, in God, as a holy Play Sport
or Scene.

Now behold!

135. Seeing then God had incorporated or compacted together out of himself,
Eternal Creatures, they should not qualify or operate in the heavenly pomp in
such a way and manner, as to be like God himself.

136. No, by no means; for they were not thus Imaged or framed to that End:
For, the Creator had for this cause incorporated or compacted the Body of an
Angel together, to be more dry, then he is in his Body; that he might be and
remain to be God; so that the qualities should be harder and tougher, that the
Tone or Sound might be loud clear and shrill.

137. So that, when the seven qualities in an Angel, in the Center of the
heart, do generate the Light and the spirit or understanding; that then, that
same spirit, which in the light of the heart, goes forth at the mouth of the
Angel, in the Divine power; should as a loud clear shrill sound in the power of
all the qualities in God; sing and ring forth as a melodious Music, and in the
forming Imaging framing or qualifying of God, rise up as a pleasant hearty
loving voice; in Gods forming.

138. And when the Holy Ghost forms the heavenly fruit, then should the Tone,
which should rise up in the praising of God, from the Angels, be also together
in the forming or Imaging of the fruit; and so on the other side again, the
fruit should be the food of the Angels.

139. And therefore also we pray in Our Father, saying, GIB uns unser Taglich
Brodt, GIVE us our daily Bread,
Mat. 6. 11so that the Tone or word GIB, GIVE
which, we thrust forth from our Center of the Light, through the animated,
animal or Psuchicall.
Soulish spirit, out at the Mouth forth from us, into the divine power; should
in the divine power, as a co-forming.
fellow-forming or co-generating.
fellow-generating, help to Image or frame Unser Taglich Brodt Our daily Bread,
which afterward Der Uater gibet Uns the Father gives to us
for Food. printed Copy, (in fide et dilectione Dei.)


140. And then when our Tone is thus incorporated in Gods Tone, so that the
fruit is formed Imaged or framed, it must needs be wholesome or healthful for
us, and so we are in Gods Love, and have that food to make use of, as by the
right of Nature, being our spirit in Gods Love did help to Image and form the
same.

141. Herein stands the innermost and greatest depth of God, O, Man, consider
thy self! I will more largely declare it, in its due place.

142. Now for such an end has God created the Angels, and they do so too: for
their spirit, which in the Center or heart goes forth from their light in the
power of all the seven qualifying or fountain-spirits, that goes forth at
their Mouth, as God the Holy Ghost goes forth from the Father and Son, and
helps to form Image or frame all, in God (that is to say, in the Divine
Nature) through the Mercurius song and speaking and Sport or Scene of Joy.

143. For, as God works in Nature to the producing of all manner of forms,
Ideas, Images vegetations springings, fruits and colors: so do the Angels also
in very great simplicity or sincerity; and though they should scarce touch the
least Twigg, or scarce rejoice in the beauteous flowers in the heavenly May,
and discourse and confer never so little, weakly meanly or simply thereof; yet
nevertheless that very Tone or speech rises up together in the Divine
Salitter, and helps to co-Image and frame or form all.

144. Thou have many examples thereof in this world, that if some Creature or
Man look upon a thing, it perishes because of the Poison or venom in the
Creature: On the other side again, some men, as also Beasts and other Creatures
can with their Tone or words change or alter the malignity or evilnesse of a
thing, and bring it into a right form.

145. And that how is the Divine Power, which all the Creatures are subjected
to; for all whatsoever ^t is (...) and moves, is in God, and God himself is
all, and all whatsoever is formed or framed, is formed out of HIM, be it either
out of Love or out of Wrath.

The Head Spring or fountain Vein of Sin.
146. Now Lucifer being so Royally Imaged or framed, that this spirit in his
forming and imaging rose up in him, and was received or embraced of God very
excellently and lovingly, and was set or put into Glorification; then instantly
he should have begun his Angelical Obedience and course, and should have moved
(as God himself did) as a loving ^on in the house of his Father, and that he
did not.

147. But when his light was generated in him in his heart, and that his
qualifying spirits were instantly affected or environed with the high light
they then became so highly rejoicing, that they elevated themselves in their
Body against the Right of Nature, and presently began as it were a Higher
statelier, more Pompous or Active qualifying or Operation, then God himself
exercised.

148. But these spirits elevating themselves thus, and triumphing so eagerly
and vehemently one in another, and rising up against the right of Nature, by
that means they kindled the qualifying or fountain spirits too exceeding much;
viz. the astringent Quality attracted or compacted the Body too hard together,
so that the sweet water was dried up.

149. And the powerful and great Bright Flash, which was risen up in the sweet
water in the Heat, from whence the bitter Quality existeth in the sweet water,
that rubbed it self so horribly hard with the astringent quality, as if it
would break in pieces for great Joy.

150. For the flash was so Bright, that it was as it were intolerable to the
qualifying or fountain spirits, and therefore the bitter quality or source
trembled and rubbed it self so hard in the astringent, that the heat was
kindled contrary to the Right of Nature, and the astringent also dried up the
sweet water by its hard attracting together.

151. But now the quality of Heat was so severe, furious and eager, that it
bereaved the astringent quality or source of its power: for the heat existeth
in the fountain or source of the sweet water.

152. But the sweet water being dried up through the astringent attracting
together, therefore could not the Heat any more rise to a flame or to any
light, (for the light existeth in the unctuosity or Oylinesse of the water;)
but glowed like a red hot Iron, or like Iron not quite glowing, but very dimly
and darkly: or as if you should put a very hard stone into the fire, and should
let it lie there in great heat, as long as you please, yet it would not be
glowing light, because it has too little water, or Oylinesse in it.

153. Thus now the Heat kindled the dried water, and the light could no more
elevate and kindle it self, for the water was dried up, and was quite consumed
by the fire or great Heat.

154. The meaning is not here, as if the spirit of the water were swallowed up
or devoured, which dwells, in all the seven qualities, but its Quality or
upper place or predominancy was changed into a dusky hot and sour Quality.

155. For here in this place the sour quality has taken its first original and
beginning, which now also is inherited in this world; which is not in Heaven in
God, after such a manner at all, nor in any Angel: for it is, and signifies,
the house of affliction trouble and misery, and is a forgetfulness of all Good.

156. Now when this was done, the qualifying or fountain spirits rubbed
themselves one upon another in that manner and way, as I have mentioned above
concerning the Figure of the Sevenfold wheel, for they use thus to rise up one
in another, and to taste one another, or to affect one another, from whence
life and love existeth.

157. Now in all the spirits there was nothing else but a mere Hot Fiery Cold
and Hard corruption, and so one evil quality tasted the other, whereby the
whole Body grew so very fierce and wrathful; for the Heat was against the
Cold, and the Cold against the Heat.

158. And so the sweet water being dried up, the bitter quality (which existed
and was generated by the first flash, when the light kindled it self;) rose up
in the Body through all the spirits, as if it would destroy the Body, and so
raved and raged like the rankest or worst Poison.

159. And from thence existed the first Poison, wherein we poor men now in this
world have enough to chew upon; and thereby the bitter poisonous Death is come
into the flesh.

160. In this raging and tearing now, the life of Lucifer was generated, that
is, his dear little son in the circle or center of his heart: and what manner
of life and dear little son came to be, I offer to any Rational Soul to
consider of.

161. For such as the Father was, such was the Son also, viz. a dark,
astringent, Cold, hard, bitter, hot, sour, stinkiug, fountain or source, and
the Love stood in the Bitter quality, in its penetrating taste and relish; and
became an emnity against all the qualifying or fountain spirits in the Body of
the high minded arrogant King.

162. Thus the Tone rose up through the penetrating of the bitter quality
through the heat and dried water, and through the astringent hard quality; into
the heart, into the little new dear son.

163. And here the spirit went forth; and as He was generated in the heart, so
he went forth now at the Mouth, but how welcome a Guest he was before God, and
in God, also before the Holy Angels of the other Kingdoms, I leave to thee to
consider of.

164. He should now have united with the Son of God, as one Heart and one
God: Alas for ever! Who can write or express this sufficiently.

The Fourteenth Chapter.
How Lucifer, who was the Beautiousest Angel in Heaven, is become the most
horrible Devil.

The House of the murtherous Den.
1. HEre King Lucifer pull thy Hatt down into thy Eyes, lest thou should see
how man will take off thy Crown away from thee, thou can no more Rule in
Heaven; stand still a little while, we must first view thee, and observe what a
Beauteous fair Bride thou art; and whether the filth of thy whoredom may not be
cleansed and washed away from thee, that thou may be fair again, we will a
little describe thy chastity and virtue.

2. Come on ye Philosophers and ye Lawyers and Advocates, that justify and
defend King Lucifer! Come near and bring him to the Bar, whilst he has yet
the Crown upon him, for here we will hold a Court of Judgment against
Malefactors, for him; If ye can maintain his cause to be right, then he shall
be your King; if not, then he shall be turned out and cast down into Hell; and
another shall get his Royal Crown, who will Govern Better then He.

Now Observe:

3. When Lucifer had thus horribly spoiled and destroyed himself, all his
qualifying or fountain spirits were Emnity against God, for they all qualified
or acted much otherwise then God, and so there came to be an eternal Emnity
betwixt God and Lucifer.

But now it might be Asked:

Question.

How Long did Lucifer stand in the Light of God? The Depth.

Answer.

4. When the Royal Body of Lucifer was incorporated or compacted together, in
that very Hour the Light kindled it self also in Lucifer.

5. For as soon as his qualifying or fountain spirits in the framing of the
Body began to qualify or operate, and to generate themselves, according to the
right of Nature, then rose up the flash of life in the heart in the sweet
spring or fountain water, and so the Royal Body was ready furnished or
complete, and the spirit went forth in the heart from the light through the
mouth into the Heart of God.

6. And so he was a most exceeding beautiful Prince and King, and very dear
and acceptable to the Divine Being, and was received and embraced with great
Joy.

7. In like manner also the spirit went forth from the heart into all
qualifying or fountain veins of the Body, and kindled all the seven spirits,
and so the Royal Body was glorified in the twinkling of an Eye, and there he
stood as a King of God, in an unsearchable clarity, or Brightness,
transcendently excelling the whole heavenly Host or Army.

8. Now in this clear and light flash the seven qualifying or fountain spirits
were instantly or infected.
affected as a man kindles a fire, for they were affrighted at the terrible
clarity or brightness of their spirit, and so instantly at the first flash
suddenly became highly triumphing rising aloft extreme stately, and overjoyful,
and so moved themselves toward a higher Birth.

9. But if they had continued in their seats, and had qualified or operated, as
viz. the seven spirits of Nature which they were constituted of.
they had done from eternity, then that high Light had not hurt them.

10. For they were not new spirits made of any new thing, but they were the Old
spirits, which had no beginning; which had been in God from Eternity; and knew
very well the Right of the Deity and of Nature, how they should move and stir.

11. Also when God figured or framed the Body together, he did not aforehand
destroy the qualifying or fountain spirits, but figured or framed the Body of
King Lucifer together out of the kernel of that which was the best, wherein was
the best knowledge of all.

12. Else if the qualities had been dead aforehand, they had had need of a new
Life, and it wonld have been in doubt, whether the Angels could have subsisted
Eternally.

Conceive it aright.

13. God created Angels out of himself, therefore, that they might be harder
and dryer incorporated or compacted together, then the Ideas, figures, shapes
or forms, which through the qualifying or operating of the Spirits of God in
Nature, rise up, and also through the moving of the spirits vanish or pass
away again, that their light in their hardness should shine the clearer and
Brighter, and that the Tone of the Body should sound the clearer and shriller,
whereby the joyfulness should increase the more, in God. This was the cause,
that God created Angels.

14. But that it is said, the Angel generated a new Light, or a new Spirit,
that, is thus to be understood,

15. When the qualifying or fountain Spirits were incorporated or compacted
together, then the light shone much brighter and clearer in the Body, and from
or out of the body, then it did before, in the Salitter; for there then rose up
a much clearer and brighter flash in the body, then before, whilst the
Salitter was Thin and Dim.

16. And therefore the qualifying or fountain spirits also became stately and
Proud, and supposed they had a much fairer little son or Light then the Son
of God was; and therefore they would also the more earnestly and eagerly
qualify or operate, and elevate themselves, and so despised the qualifying or
Acting which is in God their Father, and the Birth of the Son of God, as also
the Exit or going forth of God the Holy Ghost; and supposed, they could do it,
because they were so gloriously incorporated or compacted together, therefore
they would now exalt themselves gloriously and stately, and show forth
themselves, as if they were the most fair and Beauteous Bride of Heaven.

17. They knew very well, that they were not the whole or Total God, but were
only a piece or part thereof; they also knew very well, how far their
Omnipotence reached or extended, and yet they would no more have their Old
condition, but would be higher then the whole or Total God; and supposed,
thereby they should have their place Region Quarters or Court above the whole
or Total Deity, above all Kingdoms whatsoever.

18. And therefore they elevated or extolled themselves, intending to kindle or
inflame the whole God, and to Govern or rule the whole God by their power and
might. All forms and Ideas should rise up in the qualifying and acting of their
Spirit. He would be Lord of the Deity, and would not endure any Corrival.

19. Now this is the Root of Covetousness, Envy, Pride and or Anger.
Wrath; For in the fierce qualifying or acting and boiling, rose up the wrath,
and burnt like fire of Heat and Cold, and was also bitter as Gall.

20. For the qualifying or fountain spirits had no outward impulse upon them
gotten into them, but the impulse to Pride elevated it self within the Body, in
the council of the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, these agreed and
united in a compact, that they would be God alone.

21. But because they could not begin it in their Old seat, and so bring it to
effect, they therefore dissembled or played the Hypocrite together, and
flattered one with another, and so combined, intending to extol themselves
against the Birth of God, and would needs qualify or work in the highest
depth, and then nothing could be like them, being they were together the most
Mighty Prince in God.

22. The Astringent quality was the first Murderer flatterer and Hypocrite,
for when it saw, that it generated so fair and bright a Light, then it
compressed it self together yet harder, then God had created it to be,
intending to be much more terrible, and to draw together all in its whole
Region Circuit or circumference, and keep it fast as a stern severe Lord:

23. And so in a degree then it had Effected somewhat from whence Earth and
Stones have their Original: which I will write of, when I treat concerning the
Creation of the World.

24. The Bitter Quality was the second Murderer, which when it rose up in the
Flash, did tear with breaking and great Power in the Astringent quality, as if
it would break the Body in pieces.

25. And the astringent quality permitted it, or else it was very well able to
have stayed and captivated the Bitter spirit, and to bathe or steep it in the
sweer-water, till his high mind had been allayed and gone: But it would needs
have such a little Brother, because it was so serviceable to its turn; Else,
being the bitter spirit takes its original from it, as it were from its
Father, it could well have stopped or hindered that.

26. The Heat is the third Murtherous spirit, which killed its Mother the sweet
water, but the astringent spirit is the cause thereof, for by its stern severe
attracting together and hardening, it has thus vehemently awakened and kindled
the fire by the bitter Quality: for the fire is the Sword of the astringent and
Bitter quality.

27. But being the fire rises up in the sweet water, therefore it self has
the whip or scourge in its own power, and might have stayed or kept back the
astringent quality in the water, but it also became a flatterer, or hypocrite,
and dissembled with the great quality, viz. the astringent, and did help to
destroy the sweet water.

28. The Tone is the fourth Murderer: for it takes its ringing sound in the
fire in the sweet water, and rises up very gently and lovely in the whole Body.

29. Yet it did not so here, but after it was risen up in the water, in the
astringent quality, it rose up so furiously like a Thunderclap, whereby it
would prove and show forth its New Deity: And so the fire rose up, as when
there is a Tempest of Lightning, intending thereby to be so great, as to be
above all things in God.

30. And this they practiced so long, till they had murdered their mother the
sweet water: and therein the whole Body became a dark valley, and there was no
more remedy or Council in God that could help here: For, Love was turned into
Emnity, and the whole Body became a black dark Teufel. Teuffel. quasi Teu-fall.
Devil.


31. Of the word (Teufel): Teu- has its origiginal from hard beating Drumming
or Thumping; and the word or syllable, -fell has its original from the fall,
fall,
and so Lord Lucifer is called Teuffel, Devil,
and is no more called a Cherubin or Seraphin.

Here it may be Asked:

Question.

Could not God have hindered and prevented the Pride of Lucifer, that he might
have abstained from his highmindednesse?

Answer.

32. This is a high Question, on which all those lay hold that justify and
plead the Cause of the Devil; but they are all Cited to appear at the Court of
Justice held for Trial of Criminal Malefactors: let them have a care how they
plead for their Master, else the Sentence of Judgment will be pronounced
against him, and he will lose his Crown.

The wonderful Revelation.
33. Behold King Lucifer was the Head in his whole Region Circuit or
Circumference, also he was a mighty King, and was created out of the kernel or
marrow of his whole Region and circumference, also he would fain have kindled
that whole circumference by his Elevating, that so all might have burned and
qualified, or operated as he did in his own body.

34. Though indeed the Deity without or distinct from his Body, would have
meekly and gently qualified or acted toward him, and have enlightened and
exhorted him to Repentance; yet now there was no other will in Lucifer, but
that he would needs rule over the Son of God, and kindle that whole Region or
circumference, and in such a way himself would be the whole God, above and over
all the Angelical Hoasts or Armies.

35. Now when the Heart of God with his meekness and Love made haste toward
Lucifer, he despised it, and thought himself far better then it, and then
stormed back again with fire and coldness in hard Claps of Thunder against the
Son of God, supposing he must be in subjection under him, and that He himself
was Lord. For he despised the Light of the Son of God.

Question.

Then thou Ask: How? Had he such Power?

Answer.

36. Yes, he had; for he was a great part of the Deity; and besides, was from
or out of the kernel thereof, for he made an attempt also upon that King and
Great Prince MichaEL, to spoil and destroy him, who at last fought with him,
and overcame him, in whom the power of God in Lucifer's Kingdom fought
vehemently also against its King, till at last he was thrust down from his
Kingly seat, as one that was vanquished, Apocal. 12.

Objection.

Now thou will say:

God should have enlightened his Heart that he might have Repented.

Answer.

37. No! He would receive no other Light then his own, for he scorned the Light
of the Son of God, which did shine without, distinct from his Body, being he
had such a glittering light in himself, and so elevated himself more and more,
till his water --

[ This here, is the water of eternal Life, Generated in the Light of the
Majesty, but in the Center it is like the Sulphur or Brimstone spirit, or to
Aquafortis, or the water of separation*]

-- was quite dried up and burnt, and his light was quite put out, and then all
was done with him.

Concerning the Fall of all his Angels.

One might Ask.

Question.

How comes it, that at this time all his Angels did fall also?

Answer.

38. As this Lord commanded, so his Subjects obeyed: when he elevated himself,
and would be God, his Angels seeing it, followed their Lord, doing as he did,
all made a proffer to assault and storm the Deity.

39. For they were all in subjection under him, and he ruled in all his Angels,
for He was created out of the Pith or kernel of that Salitter, out of which his
Angels were all created, and he was the Heart and Lord of all his Angels.

40. Therefore they all did as he did, and all would sit in the Primacie of the
Deity, and would rule powerfully in the whole Region Circuit or circumference,
over and above the whole Divine power: They were all of one will, and would not
suffer the same to be taken from them.

Now thou will Ask.

Question.

Did not the whole Total or Universal God know this, before the time of the
Creation of Angels; that it would so come to pass?

Answer.

41. No: for if God, had known it, before the time of the Creation of Angels,
it had then been an eternal predestinate purposed will in God to have it so,
and it had been no Emnity against God, but God had indeed at the beginning
created and made him a Devil.

42. But God did create and make him a King of Light, and when he became
disobedient and would be above the whole or Total God; then God did spew him
out of his seat; and in the midst or Center of our Time did create another King
out of the same Deity, out of which Lord Lucifer was Created: [understand it a
right; out of the Salitter, which was without distinct from the Body of King
Lucifer:] and did set him on the Royal Throne of Lucifer, and did give him
might authority and Power, as Lucifer had, before his Fall.

43. And the same King is called JESUS CHRIST, and is the Son of God and of
Man.

44. And this I will demonstrate clearly and at Large in its proper Place.

Note

[45. This is explained in the Second and Third Book: God knew this very well
according to his wrath, but not according to his Love, according to which, God
is called God: into which no fierceness nor ^magination enters, neither^is
there any searching in the Love concerning the Hellish Creature.

46. This foregoing Question is thus understood or meant; as when I say; God
knows not the Evil; Also God wills not the Evil, according to the Tenure of
the Scripture, then I understand, or mean, that in his Love (which alone is the
one only or Godnesse.
Good, and is alone called God;) there is no glimpse of Evil revealed or
manifested; otherwise if any evil were revealed or manifested therein, then
the Love were not the Eternal Meekness and Humility.

47. But in the outspeaking of his word, wherein the Nature of the spiritual
World existeth, wherein perceptibility or Sensibility is understood to consist,
and wherein God calls himself an angry zealous or Jealous God, and a
consuming fire: Therein indeed God has known the Evil from eternity, and that
in ease he should once move himself in that according to which he is called a
Consuming fire.
therein, that the source or Quality thereof, would become creaturely also, but
therein is he not called God, but a consuming fire.

48. I understand the abovesaid Question magically, taking notice how Gods Love
and wrath differ, and are distinguished, and how the Knowledge of Evil, viz, of
the Devil and Fall is discerned to differ from his wellspring or source, from
whence the Fall also took its Original.

49. And so also in Gods Love there is only the fountain and knowledge of
Joyfulnesse, for every Science or Root causes or produces its like.

50. For if I should say, Gods Love had willed the Evil, or that there were
Text Scientz.
a false Science or Root in Gods Love and Meekness, then I should speak
contrary to the Scripture: for what Gods love knows sensibly or feelingly in
it self, that it also wills, and nothing else.

51. From hence, in the Creation, Good and Evil is existed: and I exhort the
Reader to conceive our very deep sense aright, and not mistake or go astray
here, but to read our other writings, where these things are sufficiently
explained:]

Of the great Sin, and contrary or opposite will; and of the Eternal Emnitie,
of King Lucifer, together with his whole Hoastor Army against God.
52. This is the right Looking-glass of Man; before this Court of Justice for
Malefactors the Spirit inviteth and cites all men to stand, as before a
Looking-glass; wherein they may see themselves, and what the hidden Secret Sin
is.

53. This has remained hidden ever since the World began, and was never so
fully and altogether revealed in any Heart of man: I also my self do wonder
much more then the Reader can wonder, at this high Revelation or manifestation.

54. I do not write this for my own Glory; for my Glory stands in my Hope of
that which is to come: I am a poor sinner as well as other Men, and ought also
to come before this Glass;

55. But I marvel, that God should reveal himself thus fully to such a silly
Man, and that he thus impelleth him also to set it down in writing: whereas
there are many learned Writers, which could set it forth and express it better
in a more flourishing style, and demonstrate it more exactly and fully then I,
that am but a scorn and Fool to the world.

56. But I neither can nor will oppose him: for I often stood in great striving
against him, that if it were not his impulse and will, that he would be pleased
to take it from me; but I find, that with my striving against him I have but
merely gathered stones for this Building.

57. But I am climbed up and mounted so very high, that I dare not look back,
for fear a giddiness should take me, and I have now but a short length of
Ladder to the Mark: when I go upward, I have no giddiness at all; but when I
look back, and would return, then am I giddy, and afraid to fall.

58. Therefore have I put my confidence in the strong God, and will venture,
and see, what will come of it. I have no more but one Body, which nevertheless
is mortal and corruptible, I willingly venture that; if the light and knowledge
of my God do but remain with me, then I have sufficiently enough for this life
and the life to come.

59. Thus I will not be angry with my God, though for his Names sake I should
endure shame ignominy and reproach, which springs buddeth and blossometh for
me every day, so that I am almost enured to it: I will sing with the Prophet
David, Psalm. 73. 26. Though my Body and Soul should faint and fail; yet thou, O
God, art my trust and confidence; also my salvation, and the Comfort of my
heart.

60. Sin has Seven kinds forms species or sorts; among which there are four
special wellsprings or sources: and the Eighth Kind or Sort is the House of
Death.

Now Observe.

61. The Seven Forms are the seven qualifying or fountain spirits of the Body;
viz. the Astringent Quality, the Water, the Bitter, the Heat, the Sound, the
Love, the Nature or beginning from the other Six: And when these are kindled,
Each spirit generateth a several Emnity against God.

62. Out of these Seven are generated other four new sons, and they together
are the new God, which is wholly against the old God, as two professed Armies
of Enemies, which have sworn Eternal Emnity one against the other.

The first Son is Pride.

The second Son is Covetousness.

The third Son is Envy.

The fourth Son is Wrath.

63. Now let us view these in the Ground, from whence all has its Original,
and see how it is an Emnity against God: and therein you will see, what is the
beginning and Root of Sin, and wherefore in God it cannot be suffered or
endured.

64. Therefore come on ye Philosophers and Lawyers, you that will maintain and
undertake to prove it, that God also created the Evil, and that he wills the
same; also that it is his predestinate purpose, that the Devil fell, and that
many Men are Damned; else he could have altered all, and turned it some other
way.

The Citation or Summons.
65. Here the Spirit of our Kingdom cites you, together with your Prince
Lucifer, whom you defend and lustifie; the third time, before the final Court
of Justice for Criminal Malefactors, give in your answer there;

66. For as to these seven Kinds or Forms, and four new Sons, the Right shall
be prosecuted in the heavenly Fathers House.

67. If you can prove and maintain, that the seven Spirits of Lucifer, have of
Right and Equity generated these four New Sons, so that they of Right and
Equity should Govern Heaven and the whole Deity, the King Lucifer shall be
Re-inthroned again and set upon his Seat, and his Kingdom shall be re^^^ed to
him again.

68. If not, then a Hell or Hole, Borough or Dungeon shall be given to him for
an Everlasting Prison, and there shall He together with his Sons be Prisoners
for Ever: And you should take heed lest a Court of Justice be held and pass
upon you also.

69. Now seeing then you will plead the Right of the Devils Cause; wherewith
shall he requite you? or what Fee shall he reward you with? He has nothing in
his power but the hellish abomination; what will then be your recompense?
Guess Sir: even the best of all that he has; the Best fruits and Apples in
his Orchard, and best perfumes and incense of his Garden.

Of the First Kind or Form.
70. The first spirit is the Astringent or Harsh Quality, which in God is a
gentle attracting or drawing together, a drying and cooling or refreshing, and
is made use of in and for the Imaging or framing of things, and though in its
Depth it be somewhat Sharp or Tart, yet it tempereth it self with the sweet
water, so that it is meek soft pleasant and full of Joy.

71. And when the light of the sweet water comes into it, then it willingly,
friendlily and freely yields up its birth thereunto, and makes it dry, and
shining Bright.

72. And when the Tone or Tune rises up in the Light, then it also gives up
its Tone Tune and ringing sound very gently and brotherly thereunto.

73. Also it receives the Love from all the spirits.

74. Also the Heat favors it, giving way friendly, that it may be cooled,
and so it is a friendly will, in and with all the Qualities; It readily helps
also to Image or frame the spirit of Nature, and to form therein all manner of
shapes, figures, fruits and Growths or vegetations according to the will of all
the six spirits.

75. It is a very humble Father to its children, and loves them heartily, and
plays with them friendly: for it is the right Father of the other six
spirits, which are generated in it, and it helps to generate them all.

76. Now when God constituted Lucifer with his Host or Army, he created them
out of this friendly Deity, out of himself, out of the Place of Heaven and of
this wotld, there was no other matter to make them of, this living Salitter was
very gently and softly attracted or drawn together without any Killing or
slaying it, or without any great stirring or motion.

77. These Spirits thus incorporated or compacted together had the knowledge,
the skill and the eternal infinite er beginning less Law, of God, and knew
full well, I. How the Deity had generated them.

78. II. They knew also well, that the heart of God had the Primacie in the
whole Deity: III. They knew well also, that they had no more for their proper
own, to deal with and to dispose of, then their own compacted incorporated
Body; for they saw very well, that the Deity generated it self without,
severally distinctly, apart from their body, as it had done from Eternity.

79. IIII. They knew likewise very well, that they were not the whole Room or
Place; But were therein to increase the Joy and wonderful proportion variety
and Harmony of that same place, and were to accord, qualify and act friendlily
with that Room or Place of the Deity, and friendlily affect the Qualities, that
are without distinct from their Bodies.

80. V. They had also all power to dispose of all the Ideas, figures and
growths or vegetations, as they would, all was a hearty Love-play Sport or
Scene in God, they had not at all moved God their Creator to any contrary will,
though they had broken all the heavenly Ideas figures or vegetations and
growths, and had made of them all, Horses to Ride on; God had still always
cause enough of other, to come up instead of them, for it had all been but a
play or Scene in God.

81. For to that very End also they were created, that they should play and
sport with the Ideas, figures and growths or vegetations, and dispose of them
for their own use as they pleased.

82. For, the Ideas or figures have in a manner framed themselves thus from
eternity, and that is, have come and gone perpetually.
have passed away and altered again through the qualifying or fountain spirits:
for this was the Eternal Play Sport or Scene of God, before the Times of the
Creation of the Angels.

83. Thou have a very good Example and Instance of this, if thou will but see,
and wilt not be stark blind here: viz. In the Beasts, Fowls, and all
vegetations or growths in this world: all these were created aforehand, e're
Man was created, who is and signifies the second Host or Army, which God
created instead of expelled Lucifer, out of the Place of Lucifer.

Question.

But now: What did the Astringent or harsh quality, do in Lucifer?

Answer.

84. When God had thus gently incorporated it or compacted it together, then it
found and felt it self to be mighty and powerful, and saw that it retained a
Body as fair and excellent, as the figures were that were without distinct from
it: thereupon it became high minded, and elevated it self in its Body, and
would be more severe and eager, then the Salitter was, which was without
distinct from its Body.

85. But being the Astringent or harsh Spirit.
it could not do any thing alone, it flattered and played the hypocrite with the
other Spirits, so that they followed it as their Father, and did all as they
saw it do, each in its own Quality.

86. Now being thus agreed, they generated also such a spirit which did come
forth at the Mouth, at the Eyes, at the Ears and at the Nostrils, and affected
or mixed it self with the Salitter that was without distinct from the Body;

87. For, the intent and purpose of the astringent or harsh quality, being it
was so glorious, when the kernel was incorporated or compacted together out of
the whole Kingdom, viz. its intent was, that it also through its spirit, which
it did generate by or with the other spirits, would rule powerfully with the
sharpness Externally without its own Body, in the whole Salitter of God, and
that all should stand and be in or under its own Power and Authority.

88. It would Image frame and form all through its own spirit, which it
generated; as the whole Deity did, It would have the Primacie in the whole
Deity: This was its purpose.

89. But being it could not effect it in its true Netural seat, it thereupon
elevated it self, and kindled it self.

90. And so by this kindling it kindled its spirit also, which now went forth
at the Mouth, the Ears, the Eyes and the Nostrils as a very fierce furious
spirit, and strove against the Salitter in its place, as a furious storming
raging Lord, and kindled the Salitter, and attracted or drew all forcibly
together.

Thou must understand it aright.

91. The astringent or harsh Quality in the spirit that went forth, kindled the
astringent or harsh Quality which was in the Place of its Region, or in Nature,
viz. in the seventh qualifying or fountain Spirit, and ruled powerfully in the
astringent quality in the Salitter, and that, the Astringent Quality in the
Salitter would not have, but strove with the sweet water against this spirit,
but all would not help, the storm grew hotter and hotter, the longer the
greater, till at length the astringent or harsh Quality of the Salitter was
kindled.

92. And so when this was done, then the storm grew so hot, that the astringent
quality drew the Salitter together, so that hard stones proceeded from it,
whence the stones in this world have their Original: And the water in the
Salitter was also attracted or drawn together, so that it became very thick, as
it is now at present in this world.

93. But when the astringent quality was kindled in Lucifer, then it became
very Cold: for the Coldness is its own proper spirit, and thereupon now it
kindles with its cold fire also, all, in the Salitter.

94. And hence the water of this world became so cold dark and thick, and hence
it is that all is become so hard and palpable, which was not so before the
Times of the Angels.

95. And this now was a great contrary will in the Divine Salitter, a great
Battle and strife, and an Eternal Emnity.

But now thou will say:

Objection.

God should have withstood him, that it might not have come so far.

Answer.

96. O, Dear Blind Man! it was not a Man nor a Beast that stood here before
God; But it was God against God; one strong one against another: Besides, How
should God withstand him? with the friendly Love? that could not avail, for,
Lucifer did but scorn and despise that, and would himself be God.

97. Should God withstand him then with Anger or Wrath, which indeed must be
done at length; then God must have kindled himself in his qualities in the
Salitter, wherein King Lucifer dwelt, and must in the strong zeal or Jealousy
strive and fight against him, which he did: and so this striving made this
kingdom so dark waste and evil, that another Creation must needs afterward
follow upon it.

98. Ye Philosophers and Jurists or Lawyers of Prince Lucifer, here you must
first defend the astringent or harsh quality in Lucifer, and answer whether it
has dealt righteously or no, and prove it in Nature. I do not accept of your
extorted wrested bowed stretched and far-fetched Texts of Scripture, brought in
by head and shoulders for a proof, but I will have living Testimonies.

99. And I will set before you also living Testimonies, viz. the created and
comprehensible Heaven, the Stars, the Elements, the Creatures, the Earth,
Stones, Men, and lastly your dark, cold, hot, hard, rough smoaky wicked Prince
Lucifer himself: all these are come into this present condition, through his
elevation.

100. Here bring in your defense, and answer for your spirit; if not, it will
be condemned. For this is God Jus Right or Law, which has no beginning, that
the child, which is generated of the mother, should be Humble before the
mother, and be obedient to her; for it has its life and Body from the mother,
who has generated it.

101. Also the house of the Mother, as long as the mother lives, is not the
child's proper own; but the mother keeps the child with her in love, she
nourishes it, and puts on it the best and bravest Attire which she has,
and gives the same to it for its own, that her joy may be increased by the
child, and that she may have Joy in it.

102. But when the child rebelleth and resists against the mother, and takes
away all from the mother, and domineers over her, and moreover strikes at her,
and forces her to change into a low condition, contrary to Right and Equity:
then it is but Just, that the child should be expelled out of the house, and
left to sit behind the Hedge, and quite lose its child's portion and Inheritance.

103. And thus it was between God and his child Lucifer. The Father did put on
him the fairest Attire, hoping to have Joy in him: But when the child got the
Robe and Ornament, he despised the Father, and would domineer over the Father,
and would ruin his Fathers house; and besides, struck at the Father, and would
not be advised or taught to do otherwise.

Of the second Species form sort or spirit, of Sins beginning, in Lucifer.
104. The Second Spirit is the Water: And as the astringent or harsh quality is
the Father of the other six spirits, which attracteth or draws them together,
and so holds them: so the sweet water is the Mother, in which all spirits are
conceived, kept and generated, that softneth and moistneth or soaketh them,
wherein and whereby they get their life, and then the light of joyfulnesse
rises up therein.

105. Thus King Lucifer in the same manner did get the sweet water for his
corporeal Government, and indeed the very kernel and Best thereof. For God put
on to his little son the Best Onrament, Robe and Attire of all, hoping to
have great Joy in him.

Question.

Now what did this astringent or harsh Quality with its Mother the sweet Water?

Answer.

106. It flattered with the Bitter Quality, and with the Heat, and persuaded
them that they should elevate themselves and be kindled, and so together they
would destroy their mother, and turn her into a sour form or property, whereby
they would domineer with their spirit very sharply, over the whole Deity, all
must bow down and crouch to them, and they would form frame figure and image
all with their sharpness.

107. According to this false or wicked conclusion, and result they agreed to
do one and the same thing, and so dried up the sweet water in Lucifer's Body,
the heat kindled it, and the astringent dried it, and then it became very sour
and sharp.

108. And when in this qualifying or acting they had generated the Spirit of
Lucifer, then the life of the spirit, which rises up in the water, as also the
light, became very sour and sharp.

109. And now this sour spirit also stormed with all its powers against the
sweet water, which was without distinct from the Body, in Gods Salitter, and
thought, it self must needs be the Prime and chief, and should in its own
power, from frame and Image every thing.

110. And this was the Second Emnity against God, from whence is existed the
sour quality in this world, for it was not so from Eternity; as you have an
Example thereof in this; viz. if you set any sweet thing in the warmth, and let
it stand therein, it grows sour of it self: as also Water, Beer or Wine in a
vessel will do; but none of the other qualities do alter, but only into a
stinck, which is caused by the Quality of Water.

Now thou will Ask:

Question.

Why did God suffer Lucifers Evil spirit which proceeded out of the Body of
Lucifer, to come into Him? could he not hinder it?

Answer.

111. Thou must know, that betwixt God and Lucifer there was no other
difference, then there is between Parents and their Children; nay, there was
yet a nearer relation between them: For as Parents generate a child out of
their Body according to their Image, and keep it in their house, as a natural
Heir of their Bodies, and cherish it: thus near also is the Body of Lucifer to
the Deity.

112. For God had generated him out of his body, and therefore also made him
the Heir of his Goods, and gave him the whole Region or Extent of the place in
which he created him, (...) Possession.

The highest Depth.

113. But here thou must know, what it was, that Lucifer did fight against God
with, and so moved God to Anger. For, he could not do it with his Body: for his
Body reached no further, then the place, where he then stood; he could Effect
little with that, but it was something else.

Be attentive here.

114. The spirit, which is generated from or out of all the seven qualifying
Spirits in the Center of the Heart; the same does (while it is yet in the Body,
when it is generated) qualify mix or act in and with God, as one substance or
thing, neither is there any difference.

115. And when that same Spirit, which is generated in the Body, sees any
thing through the Eyes, or neareth through the Ears, or smells through the
Nostrills, then it is already in that thing, and works labors or acts
therein as in its own propriety.

116. And if the same be pleasing to it, it eats thereof, and is affected
with the thing, and wrestleth ^^erewith, and makes a mixture or Temper
together: let the thing be as far off as it will, even so far as the
Originality of its Kingdom, in God, reaches; so far can the Spirit govern or
rule in a Moment, and is withheld or hindered by Nothing.

117. For it is, and comprehends the Power, as God the Holy Ghost does; and
in this there is no difference at all betwixt God the Holy Ghost, and the
Spirit of the Body, save only this, that the Holy Spirit of God, is the whole
fullness, and the spirit of the Body is but a Piece, or Part, which presses
through the whole Fullness, and where ever it comes, there it is mixed or
affected with the place, and presently rules with God in the same place.

118. For it is of God and in God, and cannot be withheld or hindered, save
only by the seven Nature-spirits of the Body, which generate the animated or
Soulish spirit; they have the Reins in their Hand, and generate it as they
please.

[ Gods Spirit has all the qualities fountains or fire according to the first
principle, and the second in the light in the second principle, and the third
in the spirit of this world in the Aeriall and Astrall source:]

119. When the astringent or harsh quality; as the Father, forms the Word or
Son, or Spirit, then it stands captive in the Center of the Heart, and is
examined or tried by the other spirits, whether it be good or no. Now if it
please the fire, then the fire lets the flash (in which the Bitter spirit
stands) go through the sweet water, wherein it conceives the Love, and goes
therewith into the astringent Quality.

120. Now when the flash returns with the Love into the astringent quality
again, together with the new generated spirit or will; then the astringent
quality rejoices in the New young Son, and elevateth it self.

121. Then the Tone lays hold thereon, and goes forth therewith at the Mouth,
Eyes, Ears, and Nostrills, and executes that which is decreed in the council
of the seven spirits: for as the Decree of the Council is, so also is the
spirit; and the Council can alter the same, as it will.

122. Therefore the original Lust sticks in the circle of the Heart, in the
Council of the seven spirits; and as they generate the spirit, so also it is.

123. And so in this manner Lord Lucifer brought the Deity into Anger and Wrath:

that is, Kindled the Eternal Nature according to the first principle:]

Being he, together with all his Angels, as a malicious Devil, fought or strove
against the Deity, intending to bring and subdue the whole Circumference
Circuit or Region under his innate Spirits, that they should form frame figure
and Image all, and the whole Circumference Region or Extent should bow, yield,
and suffer it self to be ruled and formed by the kindled sharpness of the
innate spirits.

124. And or as this condition is in Angels, so there is such a condition in
Man also.
as this has a Being or substance form or condition in Angels, so it has also
a being substance form or condition in Man. Therefore bethink and consider your
selves, you, that are proud, covetous, theevish, Extorting Usurers,
calumniating, Blasphemous, Envious, and Whorish or Lascivious, what manner of
little son or Spirit you send into God.

The soul was originally comprehended in the Eternal Nature with the Word Fiat,
which is Gods Nature according to the first Principle and eternal Original of
Nature; and if it kindles it self in the Original, then it kindles Gods
wrath in the eternal Nature:]

Objection.

Thou will say:

We do not send this into God, but only into our Neighbor, or into his work
which we like and have a or meddle with in our Minds.
Mind to.

Answer.

125. Now show thou me any Place, to which thou sendest thy Covetous or Lustful
spirit, be it to Man, Beasts, Garments, Fields, Money, or any thing whatsoever,
where God is not: from him is all, and he is in all, Note.
Himself is All, and he upholdeth and supporteth all.

Objection.

Then thou will say:

But he is with his Wrath in many things which are so hard and Evil, that they
are not suitable to or capable of the Deity.

Answer.

126. Yes, dear Man, all this is true; The wrath of God is certainly every
where all over, In Silver, Gold, Stones, Fields, Garments, Beasts and Men, and
all whatsoever is comprehensible and palpable; otherwise they would not be so
hard and harsh to be felt as they are.

127. But thou must know; that the kernel of Love also, sticks in all in the
hidden Center, unless it be too too altogether Evil, and so Evil a thing Man
has no liking to at all, neither.

Note.
God possesses all, only, as to Nature He is not the essence, He possesses
himself.

Or do thou think thou do well, if thou bathest or soakest thy self in Gods
wrath? take heed, that it does not kindle thy Body and Soul, and so thou will
burn therein eternally, as befell Lucifer.

128. But when God shall bring forth the hidden things, at the End of this
time, then you will discern, Note.
in what Gods love or wrath has been. Therefore have a care, and take heed,
and turn thy Eyes from Evil, or else thou undoest thy self, and so bring thy
self into Perdition.

129. I take Heaven and Earth to witness, that I have performed here, as God
has revealed it to me, that it is his Will.

130. Thus has King Lucifer, in his body turned the sweet water into a sour
sharpness, intending therewith, in his haughty-mindednesse, to rule in the
whole Deity.

131. And he has brought it so far to pass, that, in this world, with that
sharpness he reaches into the heart of all living Creatures, as also into
vegetables, leaves and grass, and into all other things, as a King and Prince
of this world.

132. And if the Divine Love were not yet in the whole nature of this world,
and if we poor Men and Creatures had not in and about us the Champion in the
Fight, we should all perish in a Moment in the hellish horrible Abominations.

133. Therefore we sing very rightly thus; Mitten wir im Leben seynd, Mit them
Todt umbfangen; Woe sollen wir dan fliehen hin, dass wir G^ad erlangen? Zu dir
Herr Christ alleine.

Daist nun Der Held im streit, Zu them wir fliehen musien, Welcher is it unset
Konig.

JESUS CHRISTUS.

In the midst of this our Life, Death does us round embrace, whither shall we
fly away, that we may obtain Grace? To thee Lord Christ alone.

This is the Champion in the Fight, To Him it is we must fly, Who is, Our King,
JESUS CHRIST.

134. He has the Fathers Love in him, and fights in Divine Power and Might
against the kindled hellish Abomination. To Him we must fly: and he it is that
preserves and retains the Love of God in all things in this world; else all
would be lost and perish.

But ho^^, wart, and belt.
(...) Does ein Kleine Zelt.
(...) des Tenfels Reich dan^^t leit.
Now Hope, pray, and wait
But a small Time, and then strait
The Devill's Kingdom will be quite down laid.
135. Ye Philosophers and Jurists or Lawyers, that make God to be as a Devil,
in saying, That He wills Evil: bring in your Plea, and answer once more
here, and try whether you can maintain your Cause to be just; if not, then the
sour sharp Tart spirit in Lucifer shall be also condemned, as a Destroyer; and
the enemy of God, and of all his heavenly Hoasts and Armies.

The Fifteenth Chapter.
Of the Third Species kind or form and manner of Sins beginning in Lucifer.

1. THe third Spirit in God is the Bitter Spirit, which existeth in the flash
of Life* for the flash of Life rises up in the sweet water through the rubbing
or fretting of the astringent and hot quality: but the body of the flash
abides in the sweet water, subsisting very meekly as a Light or heart, and the
flash is very trembling, and by the terror, and fire, and water, and
astringent spirit, it becomes bitter through the original of the water, in
which it rises up.

2. And that flash or raging terror, or bitter spirit is caught or laid hold
on by the astringent quality, and in the clear bright light in the astringent
spirit, is Glorified, and exceeding highly Joyful: which now is the mobility
or the root of life, which in the astringent quality Imageth frames and
forms the Word, or makes it distinct or several, so that in the body, a
Thought or Will does exist.

3. Now this highly triumphing and Joyous spirit is very fitly and excellently,
in the Divine Salitter, used to the Imaging or framing; because it chiefly
moves in the tone or Tune, and in the Love, and is nearest to the heart of God
in the Birth, and bound or united therewith in joy, which indeed is it self
also the spring and source of Joy, or the rising up in the heart of God.

4. And there is no difference here but only such as is between the Body and
Soul in Man: and so the Body signifies or Resembles the seven qualifying
spirits of the Father; and the Soul signifies or Resembles the only begotten
Son of God the Father.

[The spirit of the Soul signifies or represents Heart of God; and the Soul,
the Eye of God in the first principle: as is declared in our Third Book,
concerning the Threefold Life of Man:] 5. Now as the Body generateth the soul,
so the seven Spirits of God generate the Son: and as the Soul is a peculiar
distinct thing when it is generated, and yet is united with the Body, and
cannot subsist without the Body; so also is the Son of God, when he is
generated, a peculiar several distinct thing also, and yet cannot subsist
without the Father.

Now Observe:

6. Just in such a Kind and manner was also the bitter quality in Lucifer, and
had no cause to elevate it self, neither had it any driving* to it from any
thing, but followed the proud loftiness of the astringent quality, as its
Father, and supposed also, it would reign in its kind and manner over the whole
Deity, and so kindled it self in its elevation.

7. Now when it had half generated the animated or soulish spirit in the Body,
that spirit became in this kind and manner a fierce, stinging, raging, kindled,
and tearing spirit, bitter as Gall, and is rightly the Quality of Hell fire, a
very fierce and Enimicitious hostile Being.

8. Now when this spirit in the animated or soulish spirit out of or from the
heart of Lucifer and his Legions, roved [or speculated] into the Deity; [that
is, brought its will thereinto, as into the Genitrix:] then it was no other but
a tearing, breaking, murdering and poisonous burning: concerning which Christ
said; The Devil is a Liar and murderer from the beginning; and has not
continued in the truth, Joh. 8. 44.

9. But Lucifer intended, by that means, to be above God, none could domineer
and rule so terribly as himself, all must stoop to him; he would with his
spirit in the whole Deity, Rule as a powerful King over all; being he was the
fairest and beautifullest, he would needs also be the most Potent.

10. But he saw and knew very well the meek and humble Being, in God his
Father: moreover he knew also very well, that it stood in such meekness from
eternity, and that he also should generate in such meekness, as a loving and
obedient Son.

11. But now being he was so beautiously and gloriously Imaged or formed as a
King in Nature, his beauteous form and feature tickled him, and so he thought
with himself, I am now God; and formed or framed out of God; who can vanquish
me; or who can alter or change me? I myself will be Lord; and with my
sharpness rule in all things, and my Body shall be the Image, which shall be
worshipped; I will prepare and erect for my self a new Kingdom: for the whole
circumference Extent or Region is mine, I am God alone, and none else.

12. And in his pride he struck and smote himself with darkness and
blindness, and made himself a Devil, and that he must be and abide so
Eternally.

[ He knew in God, only the Majesty, and not the Word in the Center, which
has the Fan or Casting shovell: He blinded himself with the astringent
darkness; for he would needs inflame himself, and rule in the fire over the
light, and over the Meekness:]

13. Now when these Evil Devilish Spirits [understand the Center of the
Genitrix:] moved or boiled in Gods Salitter, and Imagined Speculated or roved
thereinto, then there was nothing but stinging, burning, murdering, Robbing,
and a mere Opposite or contrary will.

14. For the Heart of God delighted in Love and meekness; and Lucifer would
needs turn the same by force into a Raging Tyranny: And so there was nothing
but Emnity and a contrary or Opposite will; for by force he kindled the
Salitter of God, which had rested from Eternity and stood in its Meekness.

15. Concerning this kindling in this circumference or Extent, it is, that God
calls himself an angry Zealous or Jealous God, against those that hate him,
Exodus 20. 5. Deuteronomy. 5. 9. that is, against those, who kindle his wrath and
fierceness yet more, with their diabolical spirits, with swearing, cursing,
blaspheming, and all manner of furious fierceness and wrath, which sticks in
the Heart, with pride, covetousness, envy, and Anger; all that, whatsoever is
in thee, thou castest into God; [that is, into the of Nature, and therefore
that must be proved and tried through the fire, and the Soul's spirit also, and
the wickedness or malice must abide and remain in the Fire:]

Now thou Ask:

How can that be?

Answer.

16. When thou openest thy Eyes, and feast the Which is every where in this
world in every Creature.
Being of God; then thou prickest, as it were with Thorns, into the Being of
God, and movest or stirrest up the Wrath and Anger of God.

17. And when a Tone or Noise sounds in thy Ears, so that thou receivest or
catchest it up from the Being of God; then thou infectest it, as if thou did
dart Thunderclaps into it.

18. Consider what thou do with thy Nostrills, and with thy Mouth, whence thy
dear newborn little son rusheth forth with thy speech, as a little son of
all the seven spirits, and observe whether it does not storm and assault in
Gods Salitter, as Lucifer did? O! there is no difference at all in this.

19. But again on the other side, God says; I am a merciful God to those that
love me; Those I will do good to, and bless them, to a thousand Generations,
Exodus 20. 6. Deuteronomy. 5. 10.

Here Observe:

20. And such are those, who contrary to the kindled wrath-fire, do with their
Love, meekness, and industrious earnest yernings and kindlings of love, with
their prayers Quench the wrath-fire, and press on against the kindled
fierceness.

21. And here indeed is many a hard Blow or Crushing: for the kindled
wrath-fire of God falls many times so heavy upon them, that they know not where
to bestow themselves; heavy Mountains lie upon them, the Love-Crosse presses
sore, and is heavy.

22. But this is their Comfort and Strong Helmet against the fierceness, and
the kindled fire; according as the Kingly Prophet David says, To the Honest or
the upright the light rises up in the darkness, Psalm* 112. 4.

23. And in this strife and fight against the wrath of God, and the kindled
fierceness of the Devils, and of all wicked Men; the Light rises up in the
heart of the Honest and upright; and the friendly Love of God embraces him,
that he may not despair in his Cross; but strive further still against the
wrath and fierceness.

24. If there were not at all times some honest upright Men on Earth, who
quench the wrath of God with their opposing; the Hellish fire had kindled^ self
long ago; and then it would have well been seen where Hell is, which men do not
now believe.

25. But thus says the Spirit; as soon as the fierceness overcomes the
opposition of love in this world, then the fire kindles it self, and then
there is no more time in this world.

26. But, that the fierceness does terribly burn now at present, it needs no
proof here, for it is known as clear as the Day, by woeful experience. Behold
there rises up yet, a little fire, in the opposition against the wrath, out of
a singular especial Love-restraint of God: when this grows weak also, then
is the End of this Time.

27. But whether Lucifer has done rightly, in that he has awakened and
stirred up the fierceness in the Salitter of God, whence this world is become
Stinging, Venomous, Thorny, Rocky, Envious and Evil false or wicked; let the
Atturneys, Proctors, Advocates, and defenders of Lucifer, answer plead and
justify it if they can; if not, then this third Bitter stinging venomous
spirit shall be condemned also.

Of the Fourth Kind Species form or manner of Sin's beginning in Lucifer.
28. The Fourth Spirit of God is Heat, which is generated between the bitter
and astringent quality, and is conceived or bred in the sweet water, and is
shining and giving light, and is the true fountain of life.

29. For in the sweet water, it is very meek, from whence Love existeth, and is
only a loving warmth and no fire.

30. And though indeed it be in the hidden kernel of the fires quality or
Original; yet that fire is not kindled or burning, for it is generated in the
sweet water.

31. Now where the water is, there is not burning fire, but a pleasing warmth
and gentle qualifying or vivifying; but if the water should be dried up, then
there would be burning fire there.

32. Thus Lord Lucifer thought also, if he did but kindle his fire, then he
might domineer forcibly in the Divine power: but he thought it would have burnt
Eternally, and also have given Light; his purpose was not to put out the Light,
but he would have it burn continually in the fire: he thought he would dry up
the water, and then the light would move stir or shine in the burning fire.

33. But he knew not, that if he kindled the dried water, that the kernel, that
is, the unctuosity oil or heart of the water would be consumed, and that the
light would turn into darkness, and the water turn into a sour stinck.

34. For the oil or unctuosity in the water is generated through meekness or
well-doing, and that is the unctuosity oil unction marrow or fatness, wherein
the Light becomes shining. But if the unctuousnesse be burnt up, then the water
is turned into a sour stinck, and moreover becomes very dark.

35. And thus it befell the Pride of Lucifer, he triumphed a little while with
his kindled Light; but when his light was spent and burnt up, then he became a
Black Devil.

36. But he supposed he would Eternally reign thus in his burning light in the
whole Divine power, as a very terrible God, and so with his fire-spirit he
wrestled with the Salitter of God, intending to kindle the whole circumference
or Extent of his Kingdom.

37. And indeed he has done somewhat, in that he has set the Divine power
into a burning, which appears even in the Sun and Stars; also the fire in the
Salitter in the Elements, is often kindled, so that it seems as if the Deep
were of a burning fire; of which, I shall speak in another place.

He stepped back out of the meekness into the anxious fire-will; and fell into
darkness. The Reader is advertised, that he must not understand in any place,
as if the Devil had kindled or fired the Light of God, no, but the forms of
Nature only, out of which, the light shines. For he has not comprehended the
Light, as little as the fire does, which cannot lay hold on the Light: But he
entered into the fire, and is expelled into the Darkness; and has neither fire
nor light besides without or distinct from his creature.] or own
Creaturelinesse.

38. Now in this quality, King Lucifer has prepared for himself the right
Hellish Bath or Lake. He dares not say, that God has framed or erected the
Hellish quality for him, but he himself has done it: Moreover he has offended
the Deity, and turned the powers of God into a hellish Bath or Lake, for his
own Eternal habitation.

39. For when he and all his Angels had kindled in their Bodies the qualifying
or fountain spirit of the fire, then the unctuousnesse marrow or fatness burnt
in the sweet water, and the flash or terror, which rises up fiercely in the
birth of the light, became raging and tearing, burning and stinging, and a
being or substance of a mere opposite or contrary will.

40. And here, in this quality, the Life was turned into a Sting of Death; for
through Heat the bitter quality grew so fierce, stinging, raging and burning,
as if the whole body were mere fiery Stings; these did tear and rage in the
astringent quality, as if one did thrust fiery Pins, Needles or red-hot Bodkins
through the Body.

41. On the other side, the cold fire of the astringent quality was in a mad
furious rage against the heat, and against the bitter venom or Poison, like a
great Uproar or hurliburly; and now furthermore, in the Body of Lucifer, there
was nothing else but a murdering, rubbing, fretting, burning and stinging, a
most horrible hellish fire.

42. This fire-spirit, and right Devils-spirit, elevated it self now also in
the Center of the heart, and would rule through the animated or soulish spirit
--

[ Hereby is understood the spirit of the will, out of the Center, which is
generated out of the Genitrix, viz. out of the seven qualifying or fountain
spirits; which is the Image of God.] -- in the whole Divine power, and kindle
the whole Salitter of God as a new and potent God: and so the formings and
Heavenly Imagings, should rise up in a horrible fiery Qvality, and suffer
themselves to be Imaged and framed according to this fierceness.

43. Now when I write of the animated or soulish spirit, then thou must exactly
know, what it is, or how it is, else thou will read this Birth or or Nativity.
Geniture in vain, and it will happen to thee, as it did to the wise Heathens,
who climbed up to the very face or countenance of God, but could not see it.

44. The or Soulish spirit.
Spirit of the Soul is very much subtiler and more incomprehensible then the
Body, or the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, which hold retain and form
the Body; for it goes forth from the seven spirits; As God the Holy Ghost,
goes forth from the Father and the Son.

45. The seven qualifying or fountain Spirits have their compacted or
incorporated Body, out of Nature, that is, out of the seventh Nature-spirit in
the Divine power; which in this Book, I call the Salitter of God, or the
comprehensibility, wherein the heavenly figures or shapes arise.

46. And that is a spirit, as all the rest of the seven Spirits are, only the
other six are an incomprehensible Being therein: for the Divine power
generateth it self in the comprehensibility of the seventh Nature-spirit, as it
were hidden or concealed, and incomprehensible to the Creatures.

47. But the animated or soulish spirit generateth it self in the heart out of
or from the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, in that manner as the Son
of God is generated; and keeps its seat in the heart, and goes forth from
that Seat in the Divine power, as the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son;
for it is of such a subtilnesse as the Holy Spirit of God has, and uniteth
qualifieth or operateth with God the Holy Ghost.

48. And when the animated or soulish Spirit goes forth out of the Body, then
it is one thing with the hidden Deity, and is together the midst or center in
the Imaging or framing of a thing in Nature, as God the Holy Ghost himself is.

49. An example whereof you have in this: as when a Carpenter will build a
curious house or Artificial piece of Architecture, or any other Artist goes
about the making of some artificial work, the Hands which signify Nature,
cannot be the first that begin the work; but the seven Spirits are the first
Workmasters about it, and the animated or soulish spirit shows the form
figure or shape of it to the seven spirits.

50. And then the seven spirits Image or frame it, and make it comprehensible,
and then the hands first begin to fall to work, to make the Structure according
to the Image or frame contrived: For a work must be first brought to the sense,
before you can make it.

51. For the Soul comprehends the highest sense, it beholds what God its
Father acts or makes, also it Co-operateth in the heavenly Imaging or
framing: And therefore it makes a description draught platform, or model, for
the Nature-spirits, showing how a thing should be Imaged or framed.

52. And according to this delineation or prefiguration of the Soul, all things
in this world are made; for the corrupted soul works or endeavors
continually, to bring forth or frame heavenly forms, but cannot bring that to
Effect, for the materials for its work are only the earthly corrupted
Salitter, even a half-dead Nature, wherein it cannot Image or frame heavenly
Ideas shapes or figures.

53. By this you may understand, what great power the spirits of the expelled
Angels have had in the heavenly Nature; And what manner of substance this
perdition or Corruption is of; How they have corrupted and spoiled Nature in
heaven in their place with their horrible kindling: from whence the horrible
fierceness which is predominant in this world is existed.

54. For the kindled Nature burns still continually until the last Judgment
Day, and this kindled fire fource or quality is an Eternal Emnity against God.

55. But yet whether this kindled fire-spirit has Right therein; and whether
God himself has kindled it, from whence the wrath-fire is existed; let the
Electionists or Predestinarians, or those that dispute so about Election,
justify it, and prove it in Nature, if they can; if not, then this fire-spirit
is to be condemned also.

Of the Fifth kind Species form or manner of Sin's beginning, in Lucifer and
his Angels.
56. The fifth qualifying or fountain spirit in the Divine power, is the
Gracious amiable and blessed Love, which is the very Glance or aspect of
meekness and humility, which is also generated in the flash of life.

57. For the flash as a Crack penetrateth suddenly, whereby Joy existeth, and
then the stock of the kindled light in the sweet water, abides standing, and
presses gently after the flash through the fire, even into the astringent
quality, and mitigateth the fire, and mollifyeth softneth or suppleth the
astringent quality, which is also a Birth or geniture of the water.

58. But when the fire tastes the mild sweet and pliant Taste, then is it
mitigated and forms it self into a meek warmth, very lovingly, and there
rises up a very friendly life in the fire, and penetrateth the astringent
Quality with this pleasing lovely gentle warmth, and allayeth or stilleth the
cold fire, and mollifieth or suppleth the hardness, attenuateth the thick, and
makes the dark to be Light.

59. But when the Bitter flash together with the astringent and fire-spirit,
tastes this meekness, there is nothing else then but a mere longing, desiring
and replenishing, a very gentle pleasant tasting, wrestling, kissing, and
love-Birth: For the severe births of all the qualifying or fountain spirits in
this penetrating, become very gentle, pleasant, humble and friendly, and the
very Deity rightly subsisteth therein.

60. For in the first four qualifying or fountain spirits stands the Divine
Birth or Geniture, therefore they must be very Earnest and strong also, though
they have among them too, their meek mother the sweet water, and in the fifth
stands the gracious amiable and blessed Love, and in the sixth the Joy, and
in the seventh the framing Imaging or comprehensibility.

61. Now Lucifer! come on, with thy Love: how have thou behaved thy self, is
thy Love also such a Wellspring or fountain as this? We will now view that
also, and examine what manner of loving Angel thou art turned into.

Observe.

62. If Lucifer had not elevated and kindled himself, then his fountain of Love
would be no other then that in God, for there was no other Salitter in him,
then there is in God.

63. But when he elevated himself, intending to rule the whole Deity with his
animated or soulish spirit, then the stock and heart of light, which is the
kernel marrow or pith of love in the sweet water, became a fierce and corroding
crouding fire source or quality, from whence, in the whole body existed a very
trembling, burning, government and Birth or Geniture.

64. Now when the animated or soulish spirit was generated in this severe and
astringent fire's-Birth, then it pressed very furiously forth from the Body
into Nature, or the Salitter of God, and destroyed the gracious amiable and
blessed love in the Salitter: for it pressed very fiercely furiously and
firily, as a raging Tyrant, through all, and supposed, that it self alone was
God; it self alone would govern with its sharpness.

65. From hence now is existed the great contrary opposite will and Eternal
Emnity between God and Lucifer; for the power of God moves very softly meekly
pleasantly and friendly, so that its Birth cannot be conceived of or
apprehended, and the spirits of Lucifer move and tear very harshly,
astringently firily swiftly and furiously.

66. An example whereof you have in the kindled Salitter of the Stars, which
because of this kindled fierceness, must Roll with the vanity, even to the
last Judgment Day: And then the fierceness will be separated from them, and be
given to King Lucifer, for an Eternal house.

67. But that this is a great opposite contrary will in God, needs no proof:
but a Man may think, in case such a fierce fire source or quality should rise
in his Body, what an untowardnesse and contrary will he should have in him, and
how often the whole Body would be in a rage and fury.

68. Which indeed befalls those, who lodge the Devil within them, but so long
as he is but a Guest, he lies still like a Tame Whelp: but when he becomes
the Host himself and Master of the house, then he stormeth and makes havoc in
the House, as he did to the Body of God.

69. And therefore it is, that, the wrath-fire of God, is yet in the Body of
God which is in this world, till the End, and many a creature is swallowed up
and devoured in the wrath-fire, of which much is to be written, but is referred
to its proper place.

70. But now whether God himself has created and kindled this Emnity and
fierce fire-source in Lucifer, they are to plead for and justify, which
dispute for Predestination, Foreseeing, and the Election of Grace, and they are
to prove it in Nature, if they can; if not, then this corrupted fire-source,
which stand^s in the place or stead of Love, shall be condemned also.

Of the Sixth Species Kind form or manner of Sin's beginning in Lucifer, and in
his Angels.
71. The Sixth qualifying or fountain spirit in the Divine power is the
Mercurius or Tone or Tune, wherein the distinction and heavenly Joy rises up.

72. This spirit takes its original in the fire-flash, that is, in the bitter
quality, and rises up in the flash through the sweet water, wherein it
mitigateth it self, so that it becomes clear and bright, and is reserved and
kept in the astringent quality, and there it touches or stirs all the
spirits: and from this touching or stirring rises up the Tone; its rising
source or quality stands in the flash, and its Body or Root stands in the
sweet water in the Love.

73. Now this Tone or Tune is the Divine Joyfulnesse, the triumphing, wherein
the Divine and meek Love-play sport or scene in God rises up, as also the
formings Imagings and all manner of Ideas shapes and Figures.

74. But here thou must know, that this quality penetrateth very gently and
pleasantly with its touching or stirring, through all the Spirits, in such a
way and manner, as when a pleasant and meek fire of Joy rises up in the heart
of a man, in which fire of Joy, the animated or soulish Spirit triumphs as if
it were in Heaven.

75. Now this spirit does not belong to or concern the Imaging or framing of
the body, but to the distinction diversifying and mobility, especially to the
Joy, and to the distinction or difference in the Imaging or shaping.

76. And when the animated or soulish Spirit in the Center of the heart, in the
midst or Genter of the seven qualifying or fountain spirits is generated, so
that the will of the seven Spirits is incorporated or compacted together, then
the Tone brings it forth from the Body, and is its Chariot, on which the
spirit rides, and executes that, which is Decreed in the Council of the seven
spirits.

77. For the Tone goes through the animated or Soulish spirit into the nature
of God, and into the Salitter of the seventh qualifying or fountain spirit in
the Divine power, which is its ^^ceptive or beginning Mother, and uniteth
qualifieth or co-operateth with the same in the forming or framing, and also in
the distinguishing or diversifying of the Imaging or shape.

78. Therefore when King Lucifer changed or transmuted his high-minded prancing
Nagg or Palfrey in the Tone, into a fiery or Restivenesse.
resting, in all the seven spirits; that was a terrible contrary or opposite
will in the Salitter of God.

79. For when his animated or soulish spirit was generated in his body, then he
stung forth from his Body into the Salitter of God, as a fiery Serpent, out of
a hole.

80. But when the Mouth opened to speak, that is, when the seven spirits had
incorporated or compacted the word together, in their will, and sent it through
the Tone into the Salitter of God, then it was no otherwise, then if there went
a fiery Thunderbolt into Gods Nature; or as a fierce Serpent, which
tyrannizeth raveth and rages, as if it would tear and rend Nature all to
pieces.

81. Hence that takes its original; that the Devil is called the old Serpent,
Apocal. 12. 9. and also, that there are Adders and Serpents in this corrupted
world; moreover, all manner of vermin, or venomous Broods of Worms, Toads,
Flies, Lice and Fleas, and all such like things whatsoever; and from hence also
Tempestuous weather of Lightning, Thundering, Flashing and Hailstones take
their Original in this world.

Observe:

82. When the Tone rises up in the Divine Nature, then it rises up gently
from all the seven qualifying or fountain spirits jointly together, and
generateth the word, or Ideas figures and shapes very gently:

83. That is, when one qualifying or fountain spirit attracteth a will to the
Birth or Geniture, then it presses very gently through the other qualifying or
fountain spirits even into the Center of the Heart, and there that will is
formed and approved by all the spirits.

84. And then the other six spirits speak it forth in the Tone, out from Gods
animated or soulish spirit, forth, understand out from the heart of God, out
from the Son of God, which abides standing in the center as a compacted
incorporated Word.

85. And the flash out of that same Word, or the stirring of the Word, which is
the Tone, goes forth very finely and gently from the Word, and executes
effects or performs the will of the Word.

86. And that same forthgoing from the Word is the Holy Ghost, which forms
frames and Imageth all whatsoever was Decreed in the center of the heart, in
the Council of the seven spirits of God the Father.

87. In such a gentle way and manner should King Lucifer also have generated
qualified or operated, and according to the Right of the Deity, with his
animated or soulish spirit in the Salitter, or in the Nature of God, have
helped to Image or frame things as a dear son in Nature.

88. Just as a son in the House helps his Father to drive or manage his work,
according to his Fathers way and profession Kind and Art: and so should Lucifer
also with his Angels, in the great House of God the Father, according to the
manner and way of God, have helped with his animated or soulish spirit, to
Image all the forms Ideas and vegetations in the Salitter of God.

89. For the whole Salitter should be a House of pleasure and delight for
Angelical Bodies, and all should rise up according to the delight of their
spirit, and Image themselves so, that they should never at all have any
displeasure in any figure shape or creature, but their animated or soulish
spirit should be Co-operative in every Imaging;

[ The Imaging out of the heavenly Essences, is Magically, all according to the
will and ability or potentiality of Nature and the Creatures:] and then the
Salitter should have been the Creatures proper own.

90. If they had but continued in their meek Birth or Geniture according to the
Divine Right, then all had Been their own, and their will would have been
always fulfilled eternally; and nothing had been among them and in them but
merely the Joy of Love, to speak after an Earthly manner, as it were an Eternal
Laughing and a perpetual rejoicing in an eternal hearty delight. For God and
the creatures had been one heart and one will.

The Image out of or proceeding from the Soul's fire, and the Love, and the
Divine Center, are in one Being:]

91. But when Lucifer exalted himself, and kindled his qualifying or fountain
spirits, then the animated or soulish spirit went forth in the Tone out of or
from all the Bodies of Lucifers Angels, into the Salitter of God, as a fiery
Serpent, or Dragon, and Imaged or framed all manner of fiery and poisonous
forms and Images, like to wild cruel and Evil Beasts.

92. And from hence these wild fierce and Evil Beasts have their original in
this world. For the Host or Army of Lucifer had kindled the Salitter of the
Stars and of the Earth, and half killed spoiled and destroyed it.

93. But when God, after the fall of Lucifer, made the Creation of this world,
then all was created out of the same Salitter, wherein Lucifer had his Seat:
And so afterward the creatures also in this world must needs be created out of
that same Salitter, which now form themselves according to the condition or
kind of the kindled Qualities Evil and Good.

94. And that Beast, which had most of the fire or the Bitter or the astringent
quality, in the Mercurius; that became also a bitter, hot, and fierce Beast,
all according as the quality was predominant or chief in the Beast.

95. This I set down here only for a manuduction: you will find it demonstrated
more at large, concerning the Creation of this world.

96. Now whether this fiery Tone or Dragon-spirit in Lucifer and in his Angels
be right, and whether God has thus created him, let the Atturneys or Advocates
of Lucifer, which make God to be as a Devil, justify it here by their Answer,
and prove it in Nature if they can, whether God be such a God, as wills the
Evil, and as has created the Evil.

97. If not, then shall this spirit also be condemned to the Eternal Prison:
and they should give over their lying and blaspheming of God; or else they are
worse then the wild Heathen or Pagans, which know nothing of God; who
notwithstanding, live in God, and shall sooner possess the Kingdom of heaven,
then many of these blasphemers of God shall, which I shall demonstrate also in
its proper Place.

The Sixteenth Chapter.
Of the Seventh Species kind form or manner of Sin's beginning in Lucifer, and
his Angels.

1. HEre thou should open thy Eyes wide, for thou will see the hidden secret
things, which have been kept hidden from all men since the world began. For
thou will see the murtherous Den of the Devil, and the horrible sin, Emnity
and Perdition.

2. The Devil has taught man Sorcery or Witchcraft, thereby to strengthen and
fortify his Kingdom. But if he had revealed to man the right true fundamental
Ground, which did lurk behind or under it, many would have altogether let it
alone, and not have meddled with it at all.

3. Come on ye Jugglers and Sorcerers or Witches, you that go a wooing and a
whooring after the Devil: Come to my School; I will show you, how with your
Necromancie or Art you are carried into Hell.

4. You tickle your selves with this, that the Devil is in subjection to you,
and ye suppose that ye are gods: Here I will describe the Original and Ground
of Necromancie, for I am become also a Nature Kundiger. Naturalist Physicus, or
Natural Philosopher.
searcher into Nature, but not after your way and manner, but to discover your
shame by a Divine Revelation, for an advertisement to this last world, and for
a sentence of Condemnation upon their skill and knowledge: for the Judgment
follows upon knowledge.

5. Being the Bow of fierceness is already Bent, let every one look to
himself, lest he be found in the limit of the Mark. For the time is at hand, to
awake from sleep.

6. Now the seventh form or the seventh spirit in the divine power, is Nature,
or the issue or exit from the other six. For the astringent qual^^y attracteth
the Salitter together, or the Fabric or product of all the six spirits, even
as a Magnet or Loadstone attracteth to it self the Salitter of the Iron: and
when it is attracted together, then it is a comprehensibility; in which the six
spirits of God qualify act or operate, in an incomprehensible way or manner.

7. This Seventh spirit has a color and condition or kind, of its own, as all
the other spirits have: for it is the Body of all the spirits, wherein they
generate themselves as in a Body: Also out of this spirit, all figures shapes
and forms, are Imaged or fashioned: moreover the Angels also are created out of
it, and all Naturelinesse, or the universal Nature.
Naturality stands therein.

8. And this Spirit is always generated from the six, and subsisteth always
continually, and is never missing or wanting, nor does ever pass away, and it
again continually generateth the six; for the other six are in this seventh, as
in a Mother enclosed or encompassed; and they receive their nourishment power
and strength always, in their mothers Body or Womb.

9. For the Seventh spirit is the Body, and the other six are the Life, and in
the middle center is the heart of Light, which the seven spirits continually
generate as a Light of Life; and that Light is their Son, and the boiling
mobility or Penetration through all the spirits, expandeth it self aloft in the
Heart, in the exit or rising up of the Light.

10. And this is that spirit of all the seven, which goes forth out of the
heart of God, which forms frames and Imageth all in the seventh, and wherein
the qualifying or fountain spirits, with their Love-wrestling present and show
themselves infinitely.

11. For the Deity is like a wheel, which with its Felleys and Spoaks, and with
all the Naves, turns about, and is felleyed together as seven wheels, so
that it can go any way forward, backward, downward, upward, and crosse-wayes,
without turning back.

12. Whereas yet always the form of all the seven wheels and the One only
Nave in the Center of all the wheels, is fully in sight, and so it is not
understood, how the wheel is made; but the wheel always appears admirable
wonderful and mavelous with its rising up, and yet abides also in its own
Place.

13. In such a manner the Deity is continually generated, and neverpasseth
away, cease, or vanishes out of sight; and in this manner also is the Life
in Angels and Men, continually generated.

14. But according to the moving of the seven spirits of God, the figures and
Creatures of the transitorinesse are formed, and not thus generated: though
indeed the Birth or geniture of all the seven spirits shows it self therein,
yet their quality stands only in the seventh Nature-spirit, which the other
six spirits do form figure frame alter and change according to their wrestling
and rising up.

15. And therefore also the figures and transitory forms and creatures are
changed, according to the condition of the seventh Nature-spirit, in which they
rise up.

16. But the Angels are not only Imaged or framed out of the seventh
Nature-spirit, as the transitory creatures are, but when the Deity moved it
self to the creating of Angels, then in every circle, wherein each Angel was
incorporated or compacted together; there the Deity with its whole substance
and being, was incorporated or compacted together -- [ Understand; the two
Eternal Principles, viz. the Fire and the Light, and yet not the quality or
source of the Fire, But the Essence of it:]

-- and became a Body, and yet the Deity continued in its seat, as before.

Understand this wall:

17. The Angels Body or the comprehensibility, is from or out of the Seventh
spirit, and the Birth or Geniture in that Body, is, the Six qualifying or
fountain-spirits; and the spirit or the heart, which the six spirits generate
in the center of the Body, in which the Light rises up, and the animated or
soulish spirit out of the Light, which also qualifieth uniteth or operateth
with the Deity, without, distinct from the Body: that signifies the Heart of
God, out of which the Holy Ghost goes forth.

18. And it also was from or out of the heart of God co-united or mixed in the
Body of the Angel in their first compacting or incorporating together;
therefore the Angels Government in the Mind generateth it self, as the Deity
does.

19. And as in the Seventh Nature-spirit of God, which existeth out of the
other six, there does not stand the whole perfect knowledge of the other six
spirits; for it cannot search or dive into their deep Birth or Geniture, in
that they are its Father, and generate it out of themselves.

20. No more does the whole full and perfect knowledge of God stand in the
Angelical Body, but in the Spirit, which is generated in the Heart, which goes
forth from the Light, which qualifieth or operateth also with the heart and
spirit of God, wherein the whole full and perfect knowledge of God stands:
but the Body cannot apprehend that animated or soulish spirit; as also the
seventh Nature-spirit comprehends not the deepest birth or Geniture of God.

21. For when the seventh Nature-spirit is generated, then it is dried by the
astringent Quality, and is as it were staid and kept by its Father, and cannot
go back again into the Deep, that is, into the Center of the Heart, where the
Son is generated, and from whence the Holy Ghost goes forth, but must hold
still as a Generated Body, and must give way to the qualifying or fountain
Veins, that is, to the spirits, to qualify work and labor the rein as they
Please.

22. For it is the proper house and habitation of the six spirits, which they
continually build according to their pleasure, or as a Garden of delight, into
which, the Master of it, sows all manner of Seeds according to his pleasure,
and then enjoys the fruit thereof.

23. Thus the other six spirits continually erect this garden of delight and
pleasure, and sow their fruits thereinto, and seed upon it to strengthen their
Mig^t and joy: and this is the Garden, in which the Angels dwell, and walk up
and down in, and wherein the heavenly fruit grows.

24. But the wonderful proportion or variety of Harmony which appears in the
growths or vegetations and figures or forms in this Garden, arises from the
qualification or operation, and from the loving wrestling or struggling of the
other spirits.

25. For that which is predominant or chief in the striving, Imageth or forms
the growth and vegetation according to its kind, and the other always help to
promote it; one while one is at it, by and by the other, then the third, and so
on.

26. And therefore also there arise so many several growths vegetations and
figures, as are altogether insearchable and incomprehensible to the Bodily
Reason of the Angels; but to the animated or soulish Reason of the Angels, they
are wholly fully and perfectly comprehensible.

27. And this is also wholly hidden as to my Body, but not as to my animated or
soulish spirit, for so long as it qualifieth or works with and in God, it
comprehends the same, but when it falls into Sin, then the Door is shut
against it, and the Devil bolteth it up fast, and it must be set open again
with great labor and industry of the spirit.

28. I know very well, that the wrath of the Devil will mock and scoff in the
hearts of wicked men, at this Revelation. For he is mightily ashamed because of
this revelation, he has also given my soul many a Pang and Crush for it: but I
leave it to Gods direction, that will have it so; I cannot resist him, though
my earthly Body should go to wrack for it, yet my God will glorify me in my
knowledge.

29. The Glorification of this my knowledge, I desire, and no other; for I
know, that when this my spirit in my new body, which I shall get at the Day of
my Resurrection, out of this my now corrupted Body; shall arise, that it will
appear like the Deity, as also like the holy Angels.

30. For the triumphing Joyous Light in my spirit shows me it sufficiently,
in which I have also searched, into the depth of the Deity, and described it
rightly according to my gifts, and the impulse of the spirit, though in great
feebleness and weakness, in that my original and actual sins have often
bolted the Door against me, and the Devil has danced before it, as a whorish
woman, and rejoiced at my Captivity and anguish; yet that will bring very
little profit to his Kingdom.

31. Therefore I must now look for no other then his fierce wrath, but my stay
trust and Refuge is the Champion in the Fight, who has often delivered me from
his Bands, in whom I will fight against him, till my departure out of this Life.

Of the terrible, lamentable and miserable perdition of Lucifer in the Seventh
Nature-Spirit.
The Sad mourning House of Death.

32. If all Trees were Writers or Clerks, and all Branches were Pens, and all
Hills were Books, and all Waters were Ink, yet they could not sufficiently
describe the lamentable misery, which Lucifer, together with his Angels, has
brought into his place or whole space of that World wherein he was Created.

33. For he has made the House of Light to be a House of Darkness, and the
House of Joy to be a House of Mourning Lamentation and Sadness; that which was
the house of pleasure delight vivifying and refreshing, he has made to be a
House of thirst and hunger; the House of Love to be a House of eternal Emnity,
and the house of meekness to be a House of knocking rumbling thundering and
lightning; the house of Peace to be a House of lamenting and eternal Howling;
the House of laughing to be a House of eternal trembling and Horror.

34. The Birth or Geniture of light, munificence and well-doing to be an
eternal hellish Pain and Torment: the food of pleasing relish to be an eternal
Abomination and Stinck, a Loathing of all fruits; and the house of Lebanon and
Cedars, to be a Stony and Rocky House of Fire; the sweet sent or relish to be a
stinck and a house of ruin and desolation, an End of all Good; the Divine Love
to be a black, cold, hot, eating corroding, and yet not consuming Devil, who
is an Emnity against God and his Angels; and so he has all the heavenly Hoasts
or Armies against him:

Now Observe:

35. The Learned have had many Disputations Questions Conceits and Opinions
concerning the fierce malignity and evil that is in all the Creatures, even in
the very Sun and Stars in this world; moreover, there are some so very
poisonous and venomous Beasts, Worms and Vegetables in this world, that
thereupon Rational men have justly wondered, and some have concluded
peremptorily, That God must needs have also willed the Evil, being He has
Created so much that is Evil: And some have laid the blame and fault thereof
upon the Fall of Adam, and some have imputed it to the work and doings of the
Devil.

36. But being all the Creatures and vegetables were created before the Time of
man, therefore the fault ought not to be laid upon man: for man gat not the
beastial Body in his creation, but it first came to be so in his Fall.

37. Neither has man brought the malignity poison and venom into the Beasts,
Birds, Worms, and Stones, for he had not their Body, otherwise if he had
brought malignity and fierceness or wrath into all Creatures, then he could
never have looked for mercy at Gods Hands, no more then the Devil.

38. Poor Man did not fall out of a resolved purposed will, but through the
poisonous venomous infection of the Devil, else there had been no Remedy for
him.

39. Now this true information thou will find described here following, not
from a zeal, to vilify any body thereby, but in Love, and as a humble
information and instruction from the Abyss of my spirit, and for an assured
comfort to the poor sick old Adam, which now lies at the point of his Last
departure from hence out of this world.

40. For in Christ we are all one Body, therefore also this spirit would
heartily fain have it so, that its fellow Members might be refreshed with a
draught of the precious Wine of God before their departure from hence, whereby
they might encounter and stand in the great fight with the Devil, and obtain
the Victory, that the victory of the Devil in this modern Drunken world might
be disappointed and destroyed, and the great Name of the LORD might be
Sanctified.

Now behold!

41. When King Lucifer together with his Angels so gloriously beautifully and
divinely created, as a Cherubin and King in God, then he suffered his bright
beauteous form to befool him, in that he saw how noble, glorious and fair a
Spirit rose up in him.

42. Then his seven qualifying or fountain spirits thought they would elevate
and kindle themselves, and so they also would be as fait, glorious and mighty,
as the animated or soulish spirit, and thereby would domineer, by their own
Power and Authority in the whole Court Circumference Dominion or extent as a
New God.

43. They saw very well, that the animated or soulish spirit, qualified mixed
or operated with the Heart of God, and thereupon they were resolved, they would
elevate and Kindle themselves, hoping to be as bright illustrious, deep, and
Almighty as the deepest Ground in the Center of the Heart of God.

44. For they thought to elevate the natural Body, which was compacted together
or incorporated out of the Nature spirit of God, up into the hidden Birth or
Geniture of God, that their seven qualifying or fountain spirits might thus be
as high, and as all comproh^^^sible as the animated or soulish spirit.

45. And the animated or soulish spirit should triumph over the Center of the
Heart of God, and the Heart of God should be subjected under it; and so the
seven Spirits of God should Image frame and form all, by their animated or
soulish spirit.

46. And this High mind, and self-will, was directly and wholly against the
Birth or Geniture of God: for the Body of the Angels should abide and remain in
its seat, and be Nature, and as an humble mother, hold still and be quiet, and
should not have the Omniscience and own self rational comprehensibility of the
Heart, or of the deepest Birth or Geniture of the holy Trinity; but the seven
spirits should generate themselves in their Natural Body, as is done in God.

47. And their comprehensibility should not be in the hidden kernel, or in the
innermost Birth or Geniture of God, but the animated or soulish spirit, which
they generate in the Center of their Heart; should qualify mix or operate with
the innermost Birth or Geniture of God, and help to form all figures shapes and
Images, according to the pleasure delight and will of the seven spirits,
whereby in the Divine pomp, all might be but One Heart, and one will.

48. For the Birth or Geniture of God also is thus; the seventh Nature-spirit
does not reach back into its Father, which generateth it, but holds still and
is quiet as a Body, and lets the Fathers Will, which is, the other six
spirits, to form and image in it, how they please.

49. Neither does any one spirit particularly and severally reach with its
corporeal Being, after the Heart of God, but includes closes or joyneth its
will with the other, in the Center, to the Birth or Geniture of the Heart, so
that the Heart and the seven Spirits of God are One will.

50. For this is the Law of the comprehensibility, that it do not elevate it
self up into the incomprehensibility: for the power, which in the Center or
midst, is compacted together or incorporated out of all the seven spirits; is
incomprehensible and unsearchable, but not invisible, for it is not the power
of one spirit alone, but of all seven.

51. Therefore one spirit in its own Body, besides and distinct from its
Instehenden Gebuhrt.
instanding or innate instant Birth or Geniture, cannot reach into the whole
Heart of God, and examine try and search all, for it comprehends, besides and
distinct from its instanding Birth or Geniture, only its own Birth or Geniture
in the heart of God; but all the seven spirits jointly together comprehend the
whole heart of God.

[ And so also in Man, but understand it as to the Light, wherein the Image of
God stands:]

52. But in the instanding or innate Birth or Geniture of the spirits, where
the one still generateth the other, there every spirit generateth all the seven
spirits, but yet only in the rising flash of the life.

53. But the Heart, when it is generated, is singular, or distinct, viz. a
peculiar Person; and yet not separated from the Spirits, but the spirits cannot
transmute or change themselves in their first Birth or Geniture one into
another.

54. Also the second cannot change it self into the third, which is the exit of
the spirit; but every Birth or Geniture abides in its seat, and yet all the
Births or Genitures together, are but the One Only God.

55. But being the Body of Lucifer was created out of Nature and the most
outward Birth or Geniture, therefore it was unjustly done, that he should
elevate himself into the innermost and deepest, which he could not do or Jure
Divino.
in the Divine Right, but must so elevate and kindle himself only, that
thereby the qualifying or fountain-spirits might be set or put into the
sharpest penetrating and Infecting.

56. I verily suppose indeed, that thou fair Necromancer, have changed thy self
to purpose; and may well teach men also thy Black Art, that they perhaps
might also become such potent Gods, as thou art.

57. Ye blind and proud Necromancers, Jugglers and Sorcerers, your Art
consists in your changing the Elements of your Body by your conjurations and
Instruments of the Qualities or qualifying Properties, which you make use of to
that purpose, and ye think ye have Right so to do; but is it not against the
Birth or Geniture of God? If you think so, make that appear.

58. How can you well suppose, that you can change your selves into another
form? Indeed you suffer the Devil thus to play the Ape with you, and cheat
you: and all this while you are but blind in your own skill, though you have
learned your Art never so well, yet you do not know the Scope it drives at;
for the Pith and Heart therein, is the changing or altering of the qualifying
or fountain-spirits, as Lucifer did, when he would needs be God.

Now thou Ask:

How can that be?

Answer.

59. Behold, when the corporeal qualifying or fountain spirits set their will
into Sorcery or Witchcraft, then the animated or soulish spirit, which they
generate, and which, in the Astral Elementary Quality rules in the hidden and
deepest Center; is clearly already a Sorcerer or Witch, and has changed
transformed or metamorphosed it self into Sorcery or Witchcraft.

60. But the Bestial Body cannot follow so suddenly and nimbly, but must be
charmed to it, by Characters and Conjurations, and some instruments for that
purpose, whereby the animated or soulish spirit makes the bestial Body
invisible, and changes it into such a form, as the will of the quaifying or
fountain spirits was, at the beginning of its purpose to a Metamorphosis, or
Transmutation.

61. The Bestial flesh cannot well change it self, or put it self into another
Birth or Geniture, but is brought into a slender and inferior Base form, as of
a Beast, of Wood, or such like thing, which has its Body qualifying or boiling
in the Elements, as in their fountain.

62. But the Astral spirits can well cloth themselves in another form or
shape, but that continues only so long, as the Birth or Geniture of Nature
above their Pole or Zenith permits them.

63. For when it changes it self with its wheeling and penetrating, so that
another qualifying or fountain spirit becomes chief or predominant, then their
Art lies down upon the ground; and their Deity in the first qualifying or
fountain spirit, in which they had begun their Art, has an End.

64. Now if it be to last any longer, then it must be made again afresh
according to the qualifying or fountain spirit then ruling at that Present, or
the Devil with his animated or soulish spirit must be in the astra^l spirits
of the Body, which instantly and suddenly changes it, or else his Art is here
at an End also.

65. For Nature will not suffer it self to be Juggled with, at all times and
hours, as the spirits would have it, but all must be done, according to that
spirit, which then at that present time is Lord and chief or predominant.

66. It is not that Spirit of God which is Lord and chief in Nature, which
causes or makes the Juggling, but it is made, in the fierceness of the
Salitter, which Lord Lucifer has kindled with his elevation, which is his
eternal Kingdom.

67. But when the power or might of that spirit is allayed, then the kindled
fire can be no more useful to the Juggler.

68. For the wrath-fire in Nature, is not, during this Time of the world, the
Devils own house of his power; for the love stands hidden in the Center of
the wrath-fire, and Lucifer, together with his Angels, lies imprisoned in the
outward wrath-fire even until the Judgment of God: then, he will have the
wrath-fire separated from the Love, for an eternal Bath or Lake, and
doubtless he will wash his Juglers Head and Face withal.

69. This I set thee down here for a warning, that thou may know, what manner
of Ground Sorcery or Witchcraft has, not in such a way as if I would write any
heathenish forcery or witchcraft, neither have I studied any; but the animated
or soulish spirit beholds their Juggling, which in the Body I do not
understand.

70. But being it runs counter clean contrary to the Love and Meekness of
the Birth or Geniture of God, and is a contrary or opposite will in the Love of
God, so that he is loath without pressing necessity drives him to it to hurt
Man; therefore will the spirit have the wrath-Bath or Lake of Nature, set apart
to be an Eternal Parching or drying place, for Jugglers, perverters or changers
of Gods Ordinance or Order: And therein they may practice and show forth their
new Deity.

Of the Kindling of the Wrath-Fire.
71. Now when King Lucifer, together with all his Angels, kindled himself, then
the wrath-fire rose up instantly in the Body, and the gracious amiable and
blessed Light was extinguished in the animated or soulish spirit, and became a
fierce furious Devilish Spirit, all according to the kindling and will of the
qualifying or fountain spirits.

72. Now this animated or soulish spirit was bound or united with the Deity, in
Nature, and could qualify mix or operate in and with the same, as if it were
one and the same thing: and that now stung forth out of the Bodies of the
Devils into the Nature of God, like a Thief and a Murderer, that desired to
Rob murder and spoil all, and bring all under its power, and so kindled all
the Seven spirits in Nature, and then there was nothing else but an Astringent,
Bitter, fiery and cracking burning tearing and raging.

73. Thou must not think, that the Devil has thus powerfully and mightily
overcome the Deity: No; but he has kindled the wrath of God, which indeed had
otherwise rested Eternally in secret, and so he has made the Salitter of God
to be a Murtherous Den; for if fire be cast into a heap of straw and kindled,
it will burn.

74. Moreover, the wrath-fire of God does not reach in Nature into the
innermost kernel of the Heart, which is the Son of God; much less into the
Secret glory or Holiness of the Spirit; but into the Birth or Geniture of the
six qualifying or fountain spirits, in the place where the seventh is generated.

75. For in that place or in this Birth or Geniture is Lord Lucifer become a
Creature, and his dominion did reach no further or deeper then so: but if he
had continued in the Love, then his animated or soulish spirit had reached even
to the Center of the Heart of God, for Love presses or penetrateth through the
whole Deity.

76. But when his Love was extinguished, then the animated or soulish spirit
could no more reach into the heart of God, and so his attempt was in vain, but
he raved and raged in nature, that is, in the seventh qualifying or fountain
spirit of God.

77. But being the power of all the seven spirits stood in this One; therefore
also all the seven were kindled in the wrath, but yet only in the outward and
comprehensible qualification or constitution.

78. For the Devil could not touch the heart, neither could he touch the
innermost Birth or Geniture of the qualifying or fountain spirits; for his
Glory of the seven spirits was already mortified in the first flash of
kindling, and was presently held captive and imprisoned in the first exit of
the animated or soulish Spirit.

79. In this Hour King Lucifer prepared for himself, the Hell and eternal
Perdition, which now stands in the outermost qualifying or fountain spirit of
the Nature of God, or in the outermost Birth or Geniture of this world.

80. But when Nature kindled it self thus horribly, then the house of joy came
to be a house of trouble affliction and misery: for the astringent quality
became kindled in its own House, which is a very hard cold and dark Being, like
a cold hard frosty Winter, which only attracted the Salitter together, and
dried it up, so that it became rugged cold and sharp like Stones, wherein the
heat was captivated imprisoned and also attracted together, and so formed or
framed into a hard cold, dark Being.

81. When this was done, the Light in Nature was extinguished in the outermost
Birth or Geniture also, and all became very dark perished and spoiled; the
water became very cold and thick, and staid here and there in the Clefts: this
is the original of the Elementary Water on Earth.

82. For before the Times of the world the water was very Thin or rarefied like
Air, and then the life was generated therein also, which water is now so mortal
corrupted perished and spoiled, and so rolleth and runs to and fro.

83. The Gracious amiable and blessed Love, which rose up in the flash of the
life, became a fierce and bitter venom or Poison, a very murtherous Den, a
Sting of Death: the Tone or Tune became like the hard knocking or Loud Rumbling
of stones, and a house of Lamentation.

84. Briefly, all was a mere dark and miserable Being in the whole
Circumference Extent or Dominion, in the outermost birth or Geniture of the
Kingdom of Lucifer*

85. But thou must not think, that Nature was thus corrupted and kindled even
to the innermost ground, but only the outermost Birth or Geniture; but the
innermost, in which the seven qualifying or fountain spirits generate
themselves; retained its own Right to it self, being the kindled Devil could
not reach into it.

86. But now the inner Birth or Geniture has the Fan or Casting-shovel in
its Hand, and will one Day purge its floor, and give the Chafe or husks to the
Kingdom of Lucifer for Eternal food.

87. For if the Devil could have reached into the innermost Birth or Geniture,
then instantly the whole Circumference Court or Extent of his Kingdom would
have been the kindled burning Hell.

88. But now he must lie captivated and imprisoned in the outermost Birth or
Geniture even till the last Judgment Day, which is at hand, and very near to be
Expected.

89. But Lucifer has kindled his qualifying or fountain spirits even in the
innermost Birth or Geniture, and now his qualifying or fountain spirits
generate an animated or soulish Devils spirit, which is an eternal Enemy of
God.

90. For when God was angry in his outermost Birth or Geniture in Nature, then
it was not his purposed determinate will, to be kindled, neither has he
effected that kindling: but he has drawn the Salitter together, and thereby
has prepared an eternal Lodging for the Devil.

91. For he cannot be expelled quite out away beyond God, into another Kingdom
of Angels; but a place must be reserved to him for a Habitation.

92. Neither would God presently give him the kindled Salitter for an eternal
Habitation, for the internal Birth or Geniture of the spirits stood yet hidden
therein.

93. For God intended to do somewhat else with it, and so King Lucifer should
be kept a Prisoner, till another Angelical Host or Army, out of the same
Salitter, should come in his stead; which are Men.

94. Now come on ye Atturneys Lawyers and Advocates of Lucifer, maintain the
Cause of your King now, and show whether he has done Right, in kindling of the
wrath-fire in Nature: if not, then he must burn therein eternally, and your
Lies against the Truth must burn with him.

95. These are the Seven kinds species forms or manners of Sin's beginning and
eternal Emnity against God.

Now follows briefly concerning the Four new little Sons of Lucifer, which
he has generated in himself in his corporeal Regiment: for which he was
expelled from his Place, and is become the Horriblest Devil.

Of the First Son Pride.
Now it may be asked: What moved Lucifer to this? that he would needs be above
God?

Answer.

96. Here thou must know, that without distinct from himself he had no impulse
at all to his Pride, but his Beauty and brightness deceived him; when he saw
that he was the fairest and beautifullest Prince in Heaven, then he despised
the friendly qualifying mixing Operating and generating of the Deity, and
thought with himself that he would rule with his Princely power in the whole
Deity, all must stoop and bow to him.

97. But when he found, that he could not effect it, then he kindled himself,
intending to do it some other way, and so then, the Son of Light became a
Son of Darkness; for he himself consumed the power of his sweet water, and
made it to be a sour stinck.

Of the Second Son, Avarice.
Covetousness.
98, The second Will was Covetousness, which grew out of Pride, for Lucifer
thought with himself, that he would reign over all Kingdoms, as a Sole God; all
should bow to him, he would form and frame all with his own power; and besides
also his beauty so deceived him, that he thought he would have all in his sole
possession alone.

99. This Modern World should do well to speculate on this Pride and
Covetousness, and to consider, How it is an Emnity against God, and that
thereby they go headlong to the Devil, and there must have their Jaws and
Throat open eternally to rob and devour, and yet find nothing but hellish
Abomination.

Of the Third Son or Spite.
Envy.
100. This Son is the very Podagra.
Gout of this world: for it takes its original in the flash of Pride and
Covetousness, and stands on the Root of Life as pricking and bitter Gall.

101. This spirit also came at first from Pride, for Pride thought and said to
it self, Surely thou art beautiful and mighty potent: and Covetousness
thought, and said to it self, All must be Thine; and Envy thought and said to
it self, Thou must kill all with thy stinging, which is not obedient unto thee;
and thus it Stung at the other Gates of Angels, but all was in vain, for its
power and might reached no further, then in the Extent of the place, out of
which it was created.

Of the Fourth Son or Anger.
Wrath.
102. This Son is the very burning Hellish Fire, and takes its original also
from Pride. For when Lucifer with his hateful and Odious Envy could not fill
his Pride and Covetousness, then he kindled the Wrath-fire in himself, and
roared therewith, into Gods Nature, as a fierce Lion, and from whence then
arose the wrath of God and all Evil.

103. Of which much were to be written, but you will find it more
apprehensibly, at the place concerning the Creation: For there are to be found
living Testimonies Enough, so that none need doubt, whether the things be so or
no.

104. Thus King Lucifer is the beginning of Sin, and the Sting of Death, and
the kindling of Gods wrath, and the beginning of all Evil, a corruption
perdition and destruction of this world, and whatever evil is done, there, he
is the first Author and Causer thereof.

105. Also he is a murderer and Father of Lies; and a founder of Hell, a
spoyler and corrupter and destroyer of all that is Good, and an eternal Enemy
of God, and of all good Angels and Men; against whom, I, and all men that think
to be saved, must daily and hourly struggle and fight, as against the worst and
Archest Enemy.

The final Condemnation.
106. But being God has accursed him as an eternal Enemy, and condemned him
unto eternal Imprisonment, where he now sees his hour-Glasse more and more
plainly before his Eyes: And being his hellish Kingdom is revealed to me by the
Spirit of God; so I curse him also together with and amongst all holy Souls of
Men, and renounce and defy him as an eternal Enemy, who has often spoiled and
Torn up my Vineyard.

107. Moreover I defy also all his Jurists.
Lawyers and Helpers, and will with the Divine Grace from hence forth fully
reveal his Kingdom; and demonstratively prove, that God is a God of Love and
Meekness, who wills not the Evil, Psalm. 5. 5. and who has no pleasure in
the perdition of any, but wills that all men should be helped or saved, Ezekiel.
18. 23. and 33. 11. And then I will show and prove also, that all Evil comes
from the Devil, 1 Timothy 2. 4, and takes its original from him.

Of the final Fight and Expulsion of King Lucifer, together with all his Angels.
108. Now when this horrible Lucifer as a Tyrant, and raging spoiler of all
that is Good, showed himself thus terribly, as if he would kindle and destroy
all, and bring all under his Jurisdiction; then all the heavenly Hoasts and
Armies were against him, and he also against them all, there now the fight
began: for all stood most terribly, one party against another.

109. And the great Prince MICHAEL with his Legions fought against him, and the
Devil with his Legions had not the victory; but was driven from his place, as
one vanquished, Apoc. 12.

Now it may be Asked:

What manner of fight was this? how could could they fight one with another
without weapons?

Answer.

110. The Spirit alone understands this Hidden secret; which must fight Daily
and Hourly with the Devil, the outward flesh cannot comprehend it; also the
Astral spirits in Man cannot understand it, neither is it comprehended by man
at all, unless the animated or soulish spirit unite qualify and operate with
the innermost Birth or Geniture in Nature, in the Center, where the Light of
God is set opposite against the Devils Kingdom, that is, in the Third Birth or
Geniture in the Nature of this world.

111. When it uniteth qualifieth or operateth with God in this seat, then the
animated or soulish spirit carries it into the Astrall: for the Astrall must
in this Place fight hourly with the Devil.

112. For the Devil has power in the outermost Birth or Geniture of Man, for
his seat is there, the murtherous Den of Perdition, and the House of misery
and woe: wherein the Devil whetteth the Sting of Death, and through his
animated or soulish spirit, he reaches in into the Heart of Man in his
outermost Birth or Geniture.

113. But when the Astrall Spirits are enlightened from the animated or soulish
spirit, which in the Light uniteth with God, then they grow fervent and very
Longing and desirous of the light: on the other side, the animated or soulish
spirit of the Devil which rules in the outermost Birth or Geniture of Man, is
very terrible and angry, and of a very contrary or opposite will.

114. And then there rises up the striving or fighting fire in Man, just as it
rose up in Heaven with Michael and Lucifer, and so the poor Soul comes to be
miserably crushed stretched, tormented, and put upon the Wrack.

115. But if it get the victory with its piercing penetration; then it brings
its light and knowledge into the outermost Birth or Geniture of Man: for it
presses back with force through the seven Spirits of Nature which I call here
the Astrall Spirits, and as an assessor governs also in the council of
Reason.

116. And then man first knows what the Devil is, how much an Enemy he is to
him, and how great his power is; also how he must fight with him, very secretly
every day hour and Moment.

117. Which thing Reason, or the outward Birth or Geniture of Man, without the
experience of this fight or battle cannot comprehend: for the Third or
outermost Birth or Geniture in Man, which is the carnal or fleshly Birth, and
which man, through the first Fall in his Lust, has raised and prepared for
himself, is the Devils Castle or Fort of Prey or Robbery and dwelling house,
wherein the Devil, as in a Bull-wa^^ fights with the Soul; and gives it
many a Hard thump upon its Breast, which goes to the very Heart.

118. Now this Birth of the Flesh, is not the Mansion House of the soul; but in
its strife it goes in with its Light into the Divine power, and fights
against the Murder of the Devil.

119. On the other side, the Devil with his Poison shoots and darteth at the
seven qualifying or fountain spirits, which generate the soul, intending to
destroy and to kindle them, that thereby he may get the whole Body for his own
propriety.

120. Now if the soul would fain bring its light and knowledge into the Humane
Mind, then it must fight and strive hard and stoutly, and yet has a very
narrow passage to enter in at, it will be often knocked down by the Devil, but
it must stand to it here, like a Champion in the battle. And if it now gets the
Victory, then it has conquered the Devil; but if the Devil prevails and gets
the better, then the soul is captivated.

121. But being the fleshly Birth or Geniture is not the soul's own proper
House, and that it cannot possess it as an Inheritance, as the Devil does,
therefore the Fight and Battle lasts so long, as the House of Flesh lasts.

122. But if the House of Flesh be once destroyed, and that the Soul is not yet
conquered or vanquished in its House, but is free and unimprisoned; then the
fight is ended, and the Devil must be gone from this spirit Eternally.

123. Therefore this is a very difficult Article to be understood; nay it
cannot be understood at all unless it be by experience in this fight: though I
should write many Books thereof, yet thou would understand nothing of it,
unless thy spirit stand in such a Birth of Geniture, and that the knowledge be
generated in thy self; otherwise thou can neither comprehend nor believe it.

124. But if thou comprehendest this, then also thou understandest the strife
or the Fight, which the Angels held with the Devils: for the Angels have not
Flesh nor Bones, no more have the Devils.

125. For their Bodily or Corporeal Birth stands only in the seven
qualifying or fountain spirits, but the animated or soulish Birth in the
Angels, uniteth mixeth or operateth with God; but it is not so in the Devils.

126. Therefore thou must here know, that the Angels with their animated or
soulish Birth, in which they qualify and unite with God, have striven and
fought in Gods power and Spirit against the kindled Devils, and turned them
out from the Light of God, and driven them together into a Hole, that is, into
a narrow Court Quarter or Compass, like a Prison, which is the place or space
in upon and above the Earth up to the Moon, who is a Goddess of the Earthly
Birth or Geniture.

127. So far reaches their Extent now, till the Last Day, and then they will
get a House in that Place, where the Earth now is and stands, --

[ That is, in the outermost Birth in the Darkness, Light:]

-- and this will be called the burning Hell.

128. Lord Lucifer, wait for it, and in the mean while take this for an assured
Prophecy concerning it: for thou will get the kindled Salitter in the
outermost Birth or Geniture, which thou thy self have so prepared and fitted,
to be thy Eternal House to dwell in.

129. But not in such a form as it now stands, but all will be separated in
the kindled wrath-fire, and the dark, hot, cold, rugged, hard, bitter, stinking
relics dregs or dross, will be left thee for an eternal Inn and Lodging.

130. And thou will be such an Eternal Almighty God therein, as a Prisoner in a
deep Prison or Dungeon; where thou will neither attain nor see the Eternal
light of God: But the kindled bitter wrath of God will be thy Grate Bolts and
bounds, out of which thou can never Get.

The Seventeenth Chapter.
Of the lamentable and miserable State and Condition of the Corrupt perished
Nature, and Original of the four Elements, instead of the Holy Government of
God.

1. ALthough God be an Eternal Almighty Regent or Governor, whom none can
resist, yet Nature, in its kindling, has now gotten a very monstrous strange
government, such as was not, before the times of the wrath.

2. For the six qualifying or fountain spirits did generate the seventh
Nature-spirit before the Times of the wrath, in the Place of this world; very
meekly and pleasantly, as is now done in heaven, and not so much as the least
spark of Wrath or Anger did rise up therein.

3. Moreover, all was very Bright and light therein, neither was there need of
any other Light; but the fountain or wellspring of the Heart of God enlightened
all, and was a light in all, which did shine every where all over incessantly
without any obstacle: For Nature was very rarefied and thin or Transparent, and
all stood merely in power, and was in a very pleasant lovely Temper.

4. But as soon as the fight began, in Nature, with the proud Devil; then in
the seventh Nature-spirit, in the Court Region or Extent of Lucifer, which is
the place of this world, all gat another form and operation.

5. For Nature gat a Twofold source, and the outermost Birth or Geniture in
Nature, was kindled in the wrath-fire, which Nature-Fire, Gods Anger, Hell.
fire, now, is called the wrath of God, or the burning Hell.

Note

6. Here is required, most Inward Sense or Perception to understand this; for
the place, where the Light is generated in the heart, only comprehends it,
the outward Man does not comprehend it at all.

7. But behold! when Lucifer with his Host or Army stirred or awakened the
wrath-fire in the Nature of God, so that God was moved to anger in Nature in
the place of Lucifer; then the outermost Birth or Geniture in Nature gat
another quality, which was very Fierce, Astringent, Cold, Hot, Bit^^^* and S^wr.

8. The moving or Boiling spirit, which before qualified or operated very
meekly in Nature, that became in its outermost Birth or Geniture very elevating
and terrible, which now in the outermost Birth is called the Wind, or the
Element of Air, in regard of its elevation or expansion.

9. For when the seven spirits kindled themselves in their outermost Birth or
Geniture, then they generated such a violent moving spirit; and so the sweet
water, which before the times of the wrath was very rarefied and thin and
incomprehensible, grew very thick and elevated and swelled, and the astringent
quality grew very sharp and Cold-firie, or fierce-cold, for it got a strong
attracting together, like Salt.

10. For the Salt Water or or Saltpeter.
Salt, which still to this Day is found in the Earth, has its original and
descent from the first kindling of the Astringent Quality: and so the Stones
also have their beginning and descent from thence, as also the Earth.

11. For the astringent quality now, attracted the Salitter very strongly
together, and dried it, whence the bitter Earth is proceeded, but the Stones
are from the Salitter, which at that Time stood in the power of the Tone or
Tune.

12. For, as Nature with the working, wrestling, and rising up of its Birth or
Geniture, stood in the time of the kindling, Just such a Matter attracted it
self together.

Now it may be Asked:

How then is a comprehensible or palpable Son come to be out of an
incomprehensible Mother?

Answer.

13. Thou have a Similitude of this, in that the Earth and Stones are proceeded
out of the incomprehensibility.

14. For behold the Deep between Heaven and Earth is also incomprehensible, and
yet the Elementary Qualities at sometimes generate living comprehensible flesh,
therein, as Grasshoppers* Flies and Worms or creeping things.

15. Which is caused by the strong attracting together of the qualities, in
which attracted Salitter, the life is suddenly generated; For when the heat
kindles the astringent Quality, then the life rises up, for the Bitter
quality stirs it self, which is the original of life.

16. So in like manner the Earth and Stones have their descent; for when the
Salitter kindled it self in Nature, then all became very rugged thick and dark,
like a thick dark Mist or Cloud, which the astringent quality dried up hard
with its coldness.

17. But, being the Light in the outermost Birth was extinguished, the Heat
also was captivated in the Comprehensibility or palpability, and could no more
generate its Life: from thence Death did come into Nature, so that Nature or
the corrupt Earth could no more help it, and thereupon another creation of
Light must needs follow, or else the Earth would have been an Eternal
undissolvable Death, but now the Earth generateth or brings forth fruit in
the power and kindling of the created Light.

Now one might ask:

What is the condition then of this Twofold Birth or Geniture? Is God then
extinguished in the kindling of the wrath-fire, in the place of this world, so
that nothing is there else but a mere wrath-fire? or is the One only God
become a Twofold God?

Answer.

18. Thou can not better comprehend apprehend or understand this then in and
by thy own Body, which through the first fall of Adam with all its Birth or
Geniture, fitness faculties and will, is become just such a House.

19. First, thou have the Beastial Flesh, which is come to be so through the
Lustful longing Bit of the Apple: for it is the House of Corruption; For, when
Adam was made out of the corrupted Salitter of the Earth, that is, out of the
Seed or Text Massa.
Mass or Lump, which the Creator extracted out of the corrupted Earth; he was
not then at first, such flesh; else his Body had been created Mortal, but he
had an Angelical powerful Body, in which, he should subsist Eternally, and
should eat Angelical fruit, which did grow for him in Paradise before his fall;
before the LORD cursed the Earth.

20. But being the Seed, or Mass or Lump, out of which Adam was made, was
somewhat infected with the corrupt disease or malady of the Devil, Adam
therefore longed after his Mother, that is, to eat of the fruit of the
corrupted Earth, which then in its outward comprehensibility was become so
Evil, and in the wrath-fire was become so hard palpable and comprehensible.

21. But being Adams spirit longed after that fruit, which was, of the Quality
of the corrupted Earth, therefore also Nature formed or framed such a Tree for
him, as was like the corrupted Earth.

22. For Adam was the Heart in Nature, and therefore his animated or soulish
spirit did help to Image fashion or frame this Tree, of which he would fain eat.

23. But when the Devil saw, that the Lust was in Adam, then he stung lustily
and briskly at the Salitter in Adam, and infected the Salitter, out of which
Adam was made, yet more and more.

24. And now then it was time, that the Creator should frame a wife for him,
which afterward set the Sin on work, and did eat of the evil or corrupt
fruit: Else if Adam had eaten of the Tree, before the woman had been made out
of him, then it would have been far worse then it is.

25. But being this requires a high and deep Description, as also requires
much Room, therefore seek for it concerning the Fall of Adam, where you will
find it largely described.

So, now I return to the forementioned Similitude.

26. Now when Adam did eat of the fruit, which was Good and Evil, then he
suddenly gat such a Body also: The fruit was corrupt or perished and palpable,
as to this day all fruits now on Earth are, and so such a flesly and palpable
or comprehensible Body Adam and Eve gat instantly.

27. But now the flesh is not the whole Man: for this flesh cannot comprehend
or apprehend the Deity, else the flesh were not Mortal and corruptible, or
fading and transitory; for Christ says, John 6. 63. or The Spirit is the Life.
It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing.

28. For this flesh cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven neither, but is only a
Seed which is sown into the Earth, out of which will grow an impalpable or
incomprehensible Body, such as the first was, before the Fall. But the Spirit
is eternal life, which uniteth qualifieth or mixeth with God, and comprehends
the internal Deity in Nature.

29. Now as Man in his outward Being is corrupted, and as to his fleshly Birth
or Geniture, is in the wrath of God, and is moreover also an Enemy of God, and
yet is but one Man, and not Two: and on the other side, in his spiritual Birth
or Geniture he is a Child and Heir of God, which rules and lives with God,
and qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with the innermost Birth or Geniture of God:
Thus also is the Place of this world come to be.

30. The outward comprehensibility or or feelablenesse.
Palpability in the whole Nature of this world, and of all things which are
therein, stands all in the wrath-fire of God: for it is become thus through
the kindling of Nature; and Lord Lucifer with his Angels, has his dwelling now
in the same outward Birth or Geniture which stands in the wrath-fire.

31. But now the Deity is not separated from the outward Birth or Geniture, so,
as if they were Two things in this world; if so, Man could have no Hope, and
then this world did not stand in the Power and Love of God.

32. But the Deity is in the outward Birth, hidden, and has the Fan or
Casting shovel in its hand, and will one Day cast the chafe and the kindled
Salitter upon a Heap, and will draw away from it its inward Birth or Geniture,
and give them to Lord Lucifer and his Crew of followers for an Eternal House.

33. In the mean while Lord Lucifer must lie captive and Imprisoned in the
outermost Birth in the Nature of this world, in the kindled wrath-fire: and
therein he has great Power, and can reach into the Heart of all Creatures with
his animated or soulish spirit in the outermost Birth or Geniture, which
stands in the wrath-fire.

34. Therefore the Soul of man must fight and strive continually with the
Devil, for he still presents before it the Swine-Apples of Paradise, --

[ That is, the fierce source of Malignity, wherewith ]

-- and invites it also to Bite thereof, that he thereby may also bring it into
his Prison:

35. And if that will not succeed to his purpose, then he strikes many a hard
blow at the stomach ready to choke it, and that man must continually lie under
the Cross, affliction, and misery, in this world.

36. For he hides the Noble Grain of Mustardfeed, so that, Man does not know
himself: And then the world supposes, that he is thus plagued and smitten of
God, whereby the Devils Kingdom remains always hidden and undiscovered.

37. But stay a little: thou have given me also many a Blow, I have
experimental knowledge of thee, and here I will open thy Door to thee a
little, that another also may see what thou art.

The Eighteenth Chapter.
Of the Creation of Heaven and Earth; and of the first Day.

1. MOses writes in his first Book as if he had been Present, Genesis 1.
and had beheld all with his Eyes; but without doubt he received it in writing
from his Forefathers: it may be, He might have well discerned somewhat more
herein in the Spirit then his Forefathers.

2. But because at that time, when God created Heaven and Earth, there was yet
no Man which saw it, therefore it may be concluded, that Adam before his Fall,
while he was yet in the deep knowledge of God, did know it in the Spirit only.

3. But yet when he fell, and was set into the outward Birth or Geniture he
knew it no more; but had only a Remembrance of it, as of a dark and secret
Action or History, and so left it to his Posterity.

4. For it is manifest, that the first World before the Deluge or Flood, knew
as little of the qualities and Birth or Geniture of God, as this last world
wherein we now live: for the external fleshly Birth or Geniture could never
apprehend or understand the Deity, otherwise somewhat more would have been
written of it.

5. But being through the Divine Grace in this High Article, this Great Mystery
has been somewhat revealed to me, in my spirit according to the inward Man,
which qualifieth mixeth and uniteth with the Deity, therefore I cannot forbear
to describe it according to my Gifts: And I would have the Reader faithfully
admonished, not to be offended at the Simplicity of the Author.

6. For I do it not out of a desire of Boasting and vainglory, but in a humble
information to the Reader, that thereby the works of God might be somewhat
better known, and the Devils Kingdom revealed and laid open, being this present
Modern world moves and lives in all malice wickedness and Devilish vicious
Blasphemies, that it might once see; in what kind of power impulse or driving
it lives, and in what kind of Inn it takes up its Lodging.

7. And try, whether I may happily with the entrusted Talent get gain of Usury,
and not return it to my God and Creator again singly and empty, without
improvement, like the lazy servant, who had stood idle in the vineyard of the
Lord, and would require his wages without having labored at all.

8. But if the Devil should raise Mockers and despisers, who would say; It does
not become me to climb so high into the Deity, and to dive so deeply thereinto:

9. To all of them, I give this for an Answer: That I am not climbed up into
the Deity, neither is it Possible for such a mean man, as I am, to do it; but
the Deity is climbed up into me, and from its Love are these things revealed to
me, which otherwise I in my half-dead fleshly Birth or Geniture must needs have
let alone altogether.

10. But being I have such an impulse upon me, I let him act and move in me,
who knows and understands what it is, and whose pleasure it is that I
should do it; I poor man of Earth, Dust and Ashes, could not do it. But the
spirit inviteth and Cites all such mockers and despisers before the innermost
Birth or Geniture of God in this world, to desist from their wickedness and
malice: If not, then they shall be spewed out as Hellish chafe into the
outermost Birth or Geniture in the wrath of God.

Now Observe:

11. When God was now moved to Anger in the Third Birth or Geniture in the
Court Quarters or Region of Lucifer, which was all the space and room or Extent
of this world, then the light was extinguished in the third Birth or Geniture,
and all became a Darkness, and the Salitter in the third Birth or Geniture was
rough, wild, hard, bitter, sour, and in some parts stinking, Muddy and Brittle,
all according to the Birth or Geniture of the qualifying or fountain spirits,
then at that time working.

12. For in that place wherein the astringent quality was predominant, there
the Salitter was attracted together and dried, so that hard dry Stones came to
be* but in those places, where the astringent spirit, and the bitter were
equally alike predominant, there sharp small Gravel and Sand came to be, for
the raging bitter spirit brake the Salitter all to pieces.

13. But in those places, where the Tone together with the astringent spirit,
were predominant in the water, there Copper, Iron, and such like rocky Oar of
Minerals came to be, but where the water was predominant, together with all the
spirits jointly and equally; there the wild Earth came to be, and the water was
here and there like a cloud or vapor held captive in the Clefts and veins or
spaces of the Rocks: for the astringent spirit, as the Father of corrupted
Nature, held it captive with its sharp attracting together.

14. But the Bitter spirit is the chiefest cause of the black Earth, for
through its fierce bitterness the Salitter became killed in its outermost
Birth or Geniture, from whence existed the wild or Barren Earth.

15. But the Heat in the astringent spirit chiefly helped to make the
Hardness; but where that came to be, there it generated the noblest and
pretiousest Salitter in the Earth, as Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones.

16. For when the shining Light by reason of the hard, dry and rough matter
became extinguished, then it was together dried up and incorporated in the
Heat, which is the Father of the Light.

Yet you must understand it, thus:

17. Viz. where the Hot spirit in the sweet water was predominant in Love;
there the astringent spirit attracted the matter together, and so thereby the
noblest Oar of minerals and Precious Stones were generated.

18. But concerning Precious Stones, as Carbuncles, Rubies, Diamonds, Smaragds
or Emerauds, Onixes and the like, which are of the best Sort, they have their
Original where the flash of the light rose up in the Love. For that Flash
becomes generated in the meekness, and is the Heart in the Center of the
qualifying or fountain spirits; therefore those Stones also are Meek, full of
virtue, delightsome pleasant and lovely.

Now it might be Asked:

Why, Man in this world is so in love above all other things, with Gold,
Silver, and Precious Stones, and uses them for a Eccles. 7. 12. with Money and
Treasures, men defend themselves, as with a shield.
Defense or Protection, and the maintenance of his Body?

Answer.

19. Herein lies the Pith or kernel; for Gold, Silver and Precious Stones, and
all bright Oars of Minerals, have their Original from the Light, which did
shine before the Times of wrath in the outermost Birth or Geniture of Nature;
that is, in the seventh-Nature-spirit: And so now seeing every Man, is, as the
whole House of this world is, therefore all his qualifying or fountain spirits
love the kernel or the best thing that is in the corrupted Nature, and that
they use for the defense protection and or Livelihood.
maintenance of themselves.

20. But the innermost kernel, which is the Deity, that they can no where
comprehend, for the wrath of the fire lies before it, as a strong or Bullwark.
wall, and this wall must be broken down with a very strong storm or assault,
if the Astrall spirits will see into it. But the Door stands Open to the
Animated or Soulish spirit, for it is withheld by Nothing, but is as God
himself is in his innermost Birth or Geniture.

Now then it might be asked:

How shall I then understand my self in or according to the Threefold Birth or
Geniture in Nature?

The Depth!

21. Behold, the First innermost and deepest Birth or Geniture stands in the
Center, and is the Heart of the Deity, which is generated by the qualifying or
fountain spirits of God; and this Birth or Geniture is the Light, which though
it be generated out of the qualifying or fountain spirits; yet no qualifying or
fountain spirit of it self alone can comprehend it, but every qualifying or
fountain spirit comprehends only its own instanding innate place or seat in
the light, but all the seven spirits jointly together comprehend the whole
Light, for they are the Father of the Light.

22. Thus also the qualifying or fountain spirits of Man do not wholly
comprehend the innermost Birth or Geniture of the Deity, which stands in the
light, but every qualifying or fountain spirit reaches with its animated or
soulish Birth or Geniture into the Heart of God, and uniteth qualifieth or
mixeth in that Place therewith.

23. And that is the hidden Birth or Geniture in Nature, which no Man by his
own Reason, wit, or capacity can comprehend; but the Soul of that Man, which
stands in the Light of God only comprehends it, and no other.

The Second Birth or Geniture in Nature, are the seven Spirits of Nature.
24. This Birth or Geniture is more intelligible and comprehensible, but yet
also only to the children of this Mystery; the Plowman does not understand
it, though he sees, smells, tastes, hears, feels it, yet he looks on
it, but how the Being thereof is.

[ By this is meant or understood the corrupt Reason in its own wit ingenuity
or capacity, without the Spirit of God: The Doctor as well as the Plowman is
here meant, the one is as blind concerning the Deity, as the other, and
sometimes the Peasant or Plowman exceeds the Doctor in knowledge, if he cleave
close to God:]

25. Now these are the Spirits, wherein all things stand both in Heaven and in
this world, and from these the third and outermost spirit is generated, wherein
corruptibility stands.

26. But or third Spirit.
this Spirit, or this Birth has seven kinds or species, viz. the Astringent,
the Sweet, the Bitter, the Hot; these four generate the comprehensibility in
third Birth or Geniture.

27. The fifth Spirit is the Love, which existeth from the Light of the life,
which generateth sensibility and Reason.

28. The sixth Spirit is the Tone, which generateth the sound and Joy, and is
the spring or source rising up through all the spirits.

29. In this sixth Spirit now stands the spirit of life, and the will, or
Reason and Thoughts of all the Creatures; and all Arts, Inventions, Formings
and Imagings of all that which stands in the Spirit in the
incomprehensibility.

30. The seventh Spirit is Nature, in which stands the corporeal Being of all
six spirits, for the six spirits generate the seventh. In this spirit, stands
the corporeal being of Angels, Devils and Men, and is the Mother of all the six
spirits, in which they generate themselves, and in which they also generate the
light, which is the Heart of God.

Of the Third Birth or Geniture.
31. Now the third Birth or Geniture is the comprehensibility or palpability of
Nature, which was rarefied and Transparent lovely pleasant and Bright, before
the time of Gods wrath, so that the qualifying or fountain spirits could see
through and through all.

32. There was neither Stone nor Earth therein, neither had it need of any such
created or contracted Light, as now, but the light generated it self every
where in the Center, and all stood in the Light.

33. But when King Lucifer was created, then he excited or awakened the wrath
of God in this third Birth or Geniture; for the Bodies of the Angels came to be
Creatures in this Third Birth.

34. Now then seeing the Devils kindled their own Bodies, intending thereby to
domineer over the whole Deity, therefore the Creator also in his wrath kindled
this third spirit, or this third Birth or Geniture in Nature, and imprisoned
the Devil therein, and made an eternal Lodging therein for him, that he might
not be higher then the whole God.

Understand, in the outward sources or Qualities: for, the outermost of all, is
also the Innermost of all:]

35. But seeing the Devils kindled themselves out of Pride wantonness and
wilfulness, therefore they were quite thrust out from the Birth or Geniture of
the Light, and they can neither lay hold of, or comprehend it, Eternally.

36. For the Light of their Heart, which qualified mixed or united with the
heart of God, they have extinguished that themselves, and instead thereof have
generated a fierce, hot, astringent, bitter, and hard stinging Devilish Spirit.

37. But now thou must not think, that thereupon the whole Nature or Place of
this world is become a mere bitter wrath of God. No; here lies the Point: the
wrath does not comprehend the innermost Birth or Geniture in Nature, for the
Love of God is yet hidden in the Center, in the whole place of this world, and
so the House, which Lord Lucifer is to be in, is not fully separated, but there
is still in all things of this world, both Love and wrath one in another, and
they always wrestle and strive one with another.

38. But the Devils cannot lay hold on the wrestling of the Light, but only on
the wrestling of the Wrath, wherein they are Executioners or Hangmen, to
execute the Justice or Law, which was pronounced in Gods wrath, against all
wicked Men.

39. Neither ought any man to say, that he is generated in the wrath-fire of
the total corruption or perdition, out of Gods predestinate purpose. No: the
corrupted Earth does not stand, neither, in the total wrath-fire of God, but
only in its outward comprehensibility or palpability wherein it is so hard, dry
and bitter.

40. Whereby every one may perceive, that this Poison and fierceness does not
belong to the Love of God, in which there is nothing but Meekness.

41. Yet I do not say this, as if every Man were Holy as he comes from his
mothers womb, but as the Tree is, so is its Fruit. Yet the Fault is not Gods,
if a Mother bears or brings forth a child of the Devil; but the Parents
wickedness.

42. But if a wild twigg be planted in a Sweet Soil, and be ingrafted with some
other of a better and sweeter Kind, then there grows a Mild Tree, though the
twig were wild. For here all is possible; as soon is the good changed into
Evil, as the Evil into Good.

43. For every Man is free, and is as a God to himself; he may change and alter
himself in this life either into wrath or into light: such Clothes or Garments
as a man puts on, such is his ornament or luster: and what manner of Body
soever man sows into the Earth, such a Body also grows up from it, though
in another form clarity and Brightness: yet all according to the quality of
the Seed.

44. For if the Earth were quite forsaken of God, then it could never bring
forth any Good Fruit, but mere bad and Evil Fruit. But being the Earth stands
yet in Gods Love, therefore his wrath will not burn therein Eternally, but the
Love which has overcome will spew out the wrath-fire.

45. And then will the burning Hell begin, when the Love and the wrath shall be
separated. In this world the Love and the wrath is one in another in all
creatures, and that which overcomes in the wrestling, inheriteth the House of
or by Right, whether it be the Kingdom of Hell or of Heaven.

46. I do not speak so as if the Beasts in their Birth or Geniture, were to
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; No; for they are like the corrupted Earth, Evil
and good; but if they be sown again into their mother the Earth, then they are
Earth.

47. But the Salitter in a good Beast shall not therefore be left to the Devil
for a propriety, but will in the separated part, in the Nature of God,
Eternally blossom --

That is, their Figure will stand as a Shadow upon the holy Ground, in the
wonders, viz. in the eternal Magia:]

-- and bring forth other heavenly figures. But the Salitter of the Beast from
or belonging to.
of Gods wrath will in the wrath of God bear eternal Hellish Fruits.

48. For if the Earth be once kindled, then in the wrath, burns the Fire; and
in the love, the Light: and then all will be separated, for the one cannot
comprehend the other any more.

49. But in this Time every thing has a Twofold source and quality; whatsoever
thou buildest and sowest here in the spirit, be it with words, works or
Thoughts, that will be thy Eternal House.

50. Thus thou see and understandest, out of what the Earth and Stones are
come to be: but if that kindled Salitter should have continued to be thus in
the whole Deep of this world, then the whole place thereof would have been a
dark valley, for the Light was imprisoned together also with and in the Third
Birth or Geniture.

51. Not that the Light of the Heart of God in its innermost Birth, is
imprisoned; No, but that Luster and the shining thereof in the third Birth or
Geniture was together incorporated or compacted in the outermost
comprehensibility, and therefore it is that Men are in Love with all those
things, which stand in that Salitter.

52. But being the whole Deep in the third Birth or Geniture was very dark in
regard of the corrupted Salitter of the Earth and Stones, therefore the Deity
could not endure it to be so, but created and compacted the Earth and Stones
together as in one Lump, or as on a Heap.

Concerning which, Moses writes thus:

Am Anfang schuff GOT,
At the Beginning, Created, GOD,
Himmel and Erden. Genesis 1. 1.
Heaven and Earth.
53. These words must be considered exactly, or, how these German words are
framed in the Articulation by the Instruments of Speech: that what they
signif^e according to the Language of Nature, may be understood.
what they are. For the word ( Am) conceives it self in the Heart, and goes
forth to the Lips, but there is captivated and goes back again sounding, till
it come to the place from whence it went forth.

54. And this signifies now, that the Voice of God.
Sound went forth from the Heart of God, and encompassed the whole place or
Extent of this world, but when the place of this world.
it was found to be Evil, then the Sound returned again into its own place.

55. The word or syllable ( An-) thrusts it self out from the Heart and
presses forth at the Mouth, and has a long following or murmuring Sound.
pressure; but when it is spoken forth, then it closes it self up in the midst
or Center of its Seat with the or Palate.
upper Gums, and is half without, and half within.

56. And this signifies, that the Heart of God had a Loathing against the
corruption, and so thrust away the corrupted Being from himself, but laid hold
on it again in the midst or Center at the Heart.

57. And as the Tongue breaks off or divides the word or syllable, and keeps
it half without, and half within: so the Heart of God would not wholly reject
the kindled Salitter, but the malignity malice and malady of the Devil, and
the other part should be re-edified or built again after this Time.

58. The word or syllable ( -fang) goes switfly from the heart out at the
mouth, and is staid also by the hinder part of the Tongue, and the Gums; and
when it is let loose, it makes another swift pressure from the Heart, out at
the Mouth.

59. And this signifies the sudden Rejection at the riddance and thrusting
out of the Devils, together with the corrupted Salitter: for the strong and
swift spirit thrusts the breath strongly away from it, and retains the true
Tone of the word, or the expression, with it at the hindermost Gum, and that
is, the true spirit of the word or syllable.

60. And this signifies, that the corrupted fierceness is thrust out
eternally from the light of God, but the inward spirit, which is laden
therewith against its will, shall be set again in its first House.

61. The last following pressure ( -ang) signifies, that the innermost spirits
in the corruption are not altogether pure, and therefore they need a sweeping
away, purging, or consuming of the wrath, in the fire, which will be done at
the End of this Time.

62. The word ( Schuff) conceives it self above and under the Tongue, and
shuts the Teeth in the upper and lower gummes, and so presses it self close
together, and being held together, and spoken forth again, then it opens the
Mouth again swiftly, like a Flash.

63. And this signifies the astringent spirit's strong driving together of the
corrupted Salitter as a Lump on a Heap.

64. For the Teeth retain the word, letting the spirit go forth leisurely
between the Teeth: And this signifies, that the astringent quality holds the
Earth and Stones firmly and fast together; and yet for all that, lets the
spirits of the Earth spring up, grow and bear Blossoms out of the astringent
spirit: which signifies the Regeneration or Restitution of the spirits of the
Earth.

65. But that the Mouth is swiftly opened again after the word is Ended, it
signifies concerning the Deep above the Earth; that God the Lord will
nevertheless dwell there, and reserve his Regiment for himself, and hold the
Devil as a Prisoner in the wrath-fire.

66. The word ( GOT) conceives it self in the midst or Center upon the
Tongue, and is thrust thither out of the Heart, and leaves the Mouth open, and
stays sitting on its Royal Seat, and sounds without and within: but when
it is spoken forth, then it makes another pressure between the upper* Teeth
and the Tongue.

67. And this signifies; that when God created Heaven and Earth, and all the
Creatures, he nevertheless remained in his Divine, Eternal, Almighty Seat, and
never went away from it at all, and that HE alone is ALL. The Last pressure,
signifies the sharpness of his spirit, whereby in a Moment he effects all
in his whole Body.

68. The word ( Himmel) conceives it self in the Heart, and is thrust forth to
the Lips, there it is shut up, and the syllable ( -mel) sets the Lips open
again, and is held on the middle of the Tongue, and so the Spirit goes forth
on both Sides of the Tongue out of the Mouth.

69. And this signifies, that the innermost birth is become shut up from the
outermost, by the horrible Sins, and is incomprehensible to the outward
corrupted Birth or Geniture.

70. But being it is a word with a Twofold syllable, and that the second
syllable -mel opens the mouth again, it signifies, that the Gates of the
Deity are become opened again.

71. But that by the word or syllable -mel it is conceived again upon the
Tongue, and held fast with the upper Gumms, and that in the mean while the
spirit slippeth forth on both sides of the Tongue.

72. This signifies, that God would again give to this corrupted Kingdom or
Place in God, a King or Great Prince, who should open again the innermost Birth
or Geniture of the clear and Bright Deity, and thereby the Holy Ghost should go
forth on both sides, that is, out of the innermost Depth of the Father and of
the Son, and should go forth again into this world, and should new regenerate
this world again, through the New King.

73. The word, und, conceives it self in the Heart, and is staid and compacted
or incorporated by the Tongue on the upper Gummes; but when it is let loose, it
makes another pressure from the Heart, out at the Mouth.

74. Now this signifies the difference or distinction between the Holy and the
Earthly Birth or Geniture. This syllable comes indeed from the Heart, but is
staid by the Tongue on the upper Gummes, so that one cannot yet perceive what
kind of word it is: And this signifies, that the earthly and corrupt Birth or
Geniture, cannot lay hold on, or apprehend the innnermost Birth or Geniture,
but is foolish and silly a foolish or silly Virgin.
.

75. The last pressure from the Heart, signifies, that the Earthly Birth.
it will indeed qualify mix or unite with the innermost Birth or Geniture in
its sensibility perception or Thoughts, but cannot apprehend it in its Reason:
therefore this syllable or word alone by it self is Dumb, and has no
signification or understanding in it alone, but is used only for distinction
sake, with some other word.

76. The word Erden, is thrust forth from the Heart, and is conceived on the
hinder part upon the Tongue at the hinder Gummes, and trembles: the Tongue is
used about the first syllable Er- yet not steadily, but it or staggers.
recoiles inward at the nether gummes, and croucheth as it were before an
enemy trembling.

77. The other syllable -den, is conceived by the Tongue and the upper Gumms,
and leaves the Mouth open, and the spirit of formation goes forth at the
Nostrills, and will not go forth together in this word out at the Mouth; and
though it carries forth somewhat indeed along with it, yet the true Tone or
Noise of the true spirit goes only forth through or at the Nostrils, or Organ
of Smelling.

This is a great Mystery:

78. The word or syllable Er- signifies the kindled astringent and bitter
quality, the earnest severe wrath of God, which trembles at the hinder part of
the Gummes, before which the Tongue is as it were afraid, and croucheth at the
nether gums, and flies as it were from an Enemy.

79. The word or syllable, den, conceives it self on the Tongue again, and the
spirit attracteth the power and virtue out of the word, and therewith goes
forth another way at the Nostrills, and so goes therewith up into or toward
the Brain before the Royal Seat. And this signifies, that the outermost
Salitter of the Earth is eternally rejected from Gods Light and Holiness.

80. But, that the Spirit lays hold on the power and virtue of the word, and
goes another way through the Nostrills into the Brain before the Throne of the
Senses or Thoughts; it signifies, that God will extract the Heart of the Earth
from the wrath of wickedness, and use it to his eternal Royal Praise.

Observe.

81. He will extract from the Earth the Kernel, and the Best or the Good
Spirit, and will Regenerate it anew, to his honor and Glory.

82. Here, O Man, consider thy self well, and mind, What manner of seed thou
sowest into the Earth, the very same will spring up, and bear Blossoms and
fruit for ever, either in the Love or in the Wrath.

83. But when the good shall be separated from the Evil, then thou will live in
that part, which thou have labored for, here, be it either in Heaven or in
Hellfire.

84. In Whether Heavenly or Hellish, Good or Evil matter or thing.
what soever thou endeavourest, Labourest and actest here, into that thy Soul
goes, when thou Dyest.

85. Or do thou think, that my spirit has sucked this which I have set down
here out of the corrupted Earth, or out of an Old Felt Hatt, or Old Shoe?

86. Truly no; for the spirit at this Time of my description and setting it
down did unite and qualify or mix with the deepest Birth or Geniture of God;
in that, I have received my knowledge, and from thence it is sucked, not in
great Earthly Joy, but in the anxious Birth or Geniture, perplexity and Trouble.

87. For what I did hereupon undergo suffer and endure from the Devil and the
Hellish quality, which as well does rule in my outward Man, as in all Men
whatsoever: this thou can not apprehend, unless thou also Dancest in this
Round.

88. Had not our Philosophers and Doctors always played upon the Fiddle of
Pride, but on the Musical Instrument of the Prophets and Apostles, there would
have been far another knowledge and Philosophy in the world.

89. Concerning which in regard of my imbecility, want of Literature or
Learning and study, as also the slownesse and dullness of my Tongue, I am very
insufficient, but not so slender in the knowledge: Only I cannot deliver it in
profound Language and the Ornament of Eloquence, but I rest contented with my
gift I have received, and am a Philosopher among the Simple.

Concerning the Creation of the Light in this world.
90. Here shut the Eyes of thy Flesh, a little, for here they will profit thee
nothing, being they are blind and dead; and open the Eyes of thy spirit, and
then I will rightly show thee, the Creation of God.

Observe:

91. When God had driven the corrupted Salitter of Earth and Stones, which had
generated it self in the outermost Birth, by the kindling, together on a Heap
as in a Lump, then, for that cause, the third Birth or Geniture in Nature in
the Deep, above the Earth, was not pure and Bright, because the wrath of God
did yet burn therein.

92. And though the innermost Birth or Geniture was light and Bright, yet the
outermost, which stood in the wrath-fire, could not comprehend it, but was
altogether dark.

93. For Moses writes, in Genesis 1. Und es war Finster auff der Tieffe:
And it was Dark on the Deep:
The word ( auff) on, signifies the outermost Birth or Geniture, and the word
( in) signifies the innermost Birth or Geniture.

94. But if the innermost Birth had been dark, then the wrath of God had rested
in this world Eternally, and it would never have been Light: but the wrath has
not thus touched or reached the Heart of God.

95. Therefore He is a sweet, friendly, Bounteous, Good, Meek, Pure and
Merciful God, according to his Heart in the innermost Birth or Geniture in the
place of this world, and still continues to be so: and his meek Love presses
forth from his Heart into the outermost Birth or Geniture of the wrath, and
quenches the same, and therefore Sprach Er, he said, Er werde Licht. Let there
be Light.

Here observe the sense in the Highest Depth!

96. The word ( Sprach) or said, is spoken after the manner of Men: Ye
Philosophers, open your Eyes, I will in my simplicity teach you, the [Sprach
Gottes] the Speech Speaking or Language of God, as, when he says a thing; and
indeed, it must be so.

97. The word, Sprach* conceives itself between the Teeth, for they bite or
join close together, and the spirit hisseth forth through the Teeth, and the
Tongue boweth or bends in the middle, and sets its forepoint, as if it did
listen after the hissing, and were afraid.

98. But when the spirit conceives the word, that shuts the Mouth, and
conceives it at the hinder gums upon the Tongue in the hole or hollownesse, in
the bitter and astringent Quality.

99. And there the Tongue is terrified, trembles and croucheth to the nether
Gums, and then the spirit comes forth from the Heart, and closes the word,
which conceives it self at the hinder Gums in the astringent and bitter
quality, in the wrath; and goes forth mightily and strongly through the
fierceness, as a King and Prince, and also opens the mouth, and rules with
a strong spirit from the heart through the whole Mouth within, and also without
the Mouth, and makes a mighty and long syllable, as a spirit which has broken
the wrath.

100. Against which the wrath with its snarling in the astringent and bitter
Quality at the hinder gums in the hollow on the Tongue struggleth; and keeps
its right to it self, and keeps its seat in its Place, and lets the meek
spirit come forth from the heart, through it, and thundreth with its snarling
after it, and so helps to form or frame the word, yet with its thundering cannot
get away from it seat, but abides in its hollow Hole, as a Captive Prisoner,
and looks terribly.

This is a great Mystery,

101. Here observe the sense and meaning, if thou apprehendest it, then thou
understandest the Deity a right, if not, then thou art yet blind in the Spirit.

102. Judge not, else here thou runnest counter against a strong Gate, and wilt
be imprisoned: if the wrath-fire catches thee, then thou will remain eternally
therein.

103. Thou Child of Man: Behold now, how great a Gate of Heaven, of Hell, and
of the Earth, as also of the whole Deity, the spirit opens to thee.

104. Thou should not think, that God at that time did speak in that way as
Men do, and that it was but a weak impotent word, like Man's word.

105. Indeed Man's word conceives it self just in such a form, manner,
proportion, quality, and correspondency; only the half dead Man does not
understand it: And this understanding is very noble dear and precious, for it
is generated only in the knowledge of the Holy Ghost.

106. But Gods Word, which He spoke then in power, has encompassed Heaven and
Earth, and the heaven of heavens; yes, and the whole Deity also.

107. But it frames ann conceives it self first between the Teeth closed or
clapped together, and hisseth, which signifies, that the Holy Ghost at the
beginning of the Creation went through the firmly closed wall of the Third and
outermost Birth or Geniture, which stands in the wrath-fire in this world.

108. For it is written, And it was dark on the Deep, and the Spirit of God
moved on the water. The Deep signifies the innermost Birth or Geniture; and
the darkness signifies the outermost corrupt Birth or Geniture, in which the
wrath burned. The water signifies the allaying or Mitigation of the spirit.

109. But that the spirit does hiss through the Teeth, it signifies, that the
spirit is gone forth from the heart of God through the wrath: but, that the
Teeth remain closed together, whilst the spirit hisseth, and do not open
themselves, it signifies, that the wrath has not comprehended or reached the
Holy Ghost.

110. But that the Tongue does crouch toward the nether gums, and is sharp at
the point, and will not be used about the hissing; it signifies, that the
outward Birth or Geniture, together with all the Creatures which are therein,
The Natural man cannot perceive the things of God. Query the Text.
cannot comprehend or reach to apprehend the holy Spirit, which goes forth out
of the innermost Birth or Geniture out from the Heart of God, neither can they
hinder him by their power.

111. For he goes and penetrateth through all shut or closed Doors, Closets
and Births, and needs no Opening of them; as the Teeth cannot stay or hinder
the spirit or breath from going or passing through them.

112. But that the Lips stand open, when it is come hissing through the Teeth,
it signifies, that the Holy Ghost.
he with his going forth out of the Heart of God, in the Creation of this
world, has opened again the Gates of heaven, and is gone through the Gates of
Gods wrath, and has left the wrath of God strongly shut and bolted up, and
has left the Devil his eternal kindled wrath-house close locked up, out of
which he cannot come Eternally.

113. It further signifies, that the Holy Ghost in like manner has an open
Gate in the wrath-house of this world, where he may drive and perform his work,
incomprehensibly as to the Gates of Hell, and where he gathers or
congregateth a holy Seed to his eternal Praise, against or without the will of
the strong fast shut hellish Gates, and altogether incomprehensibly as to them.

114. But as the spirit effects his going forth, and his conceived or
intended will, through the Teeth, and yet the Teeth do not stir; nor can
comprehend the will of the spirit: so the Holy Ghost also, without the
apprehension or comprehension, either, of the Devil or of the wrath of God,
builds or erecteth continually a holy Seed and Temple in the house of this
world.

115. But that the whole word Sprach [said] forms or conceives it self at
the hinder gummes on the Tongue in the hollow hole in the Center of the
astringent and bitter quality, and snarleth; it signifies, that God has
conceived or framed the place of this world at the heart in the midst or Center
of it, and has built to himself again a house to his praise, against all the
grumbling murmuring and snarling of the Devil; in which he rules with his
Holy Ghost.

116. And as the spirit goes forth from the heart through the grumbling
murmuring and snarling of the bitter and astringent quality very strongly and
powerfully, and with its going forth rules in the astringent and bitter
quality, incomprehensibly as to the astringent and bitter quality as a potent
King: so also the Spirit of God rules in the outermost Birt^ or Geniture of
this world (in the wrath-house) mightily, and generateth to himself a Temple
therein incomprehensibly as to the wrath-house.

117. But that the astringent and bitter spirit does so grumble and murmur,
when the spirit from the Heart goes through its House, and rules powerfully:
it signifies, that the wrath of God, together with the Devils, are in the
house of this world, set in opposition to the Love, so that both these, all the
time of this world, must fight and strive one against the other, as two Armies
in the Field; from whence also wars and fightings among Men, and among Beasts,
and All Creatures have their Original.

118. But, that the astringent and bitter quality conceive themselves together
with the word, and unite and agree one with another, and yet the spirit of the
Heart only speaks forth the word at the Mouth: it signifies, that all
Creatures, which were only produced and put forth by the word, viz. the
Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Worms, Trees, Leaves, Herbs and Gr^sse, were formed from
the whole Body, being Good and Evil.

119. And that, in all these, there would stand both the angry and corrupt
quality, and also the love of God; and yet all would be driven on by the spirit
of Love, though those two would disturb, rub, plague, squeeze and vex one
another.

Note

120. Whereby then, in many a Creature the wrath-fire would be so very hard
kindled, that the Body together with the spirit, will afford and produce an
Eternal wrath- Salitter in Hell.

121. For, the spirit, which is generated in the Heart, must in its Body walk
through the midst or Center of the Hellish Gates, and may very easily be
kindled, they are as wood and fire, which will burn, if thou pourest no water
in among them.

122. O man, thou were not created together with and as the Beasts, by the
word, from Good and Evil; and if thou had not eaten of good and Evil, then
the Wrath-fire would not have been in thee, but by that means thou have also
gotten a bestial Body: It is done, The Love of God take pity, and have Mercy in
that behalf.

123. But, that after the conceiving and compa^^ing of the word together in the
astringent quality at the hinder gums upon the Tongue, the Mouth opens it
self wide, and the compacted and united spirit goes forth together at the
Mouth, which Spirit is generated both ou^ of the Heart, and also out of the
astringent and bitter quality: it signifies, that the creatures would live in
great anguish and adversity, and would not be able to generate through one
Body, but through Two.

124. For the Astringent and bitter quality receives the power from the spirit
out of the Heart, and infecteth or affects it self therewith: And therefore
is Nature now become too weak in the spirit of the heart, and is not able to
elevate its own innermost Birth of the Heart, and for that cause Nature has
brought forth a Male and a Female.

125. Thus it denotes also the Evil and Good will, in the whole or universal
Nature, and in all the Creatures; that there would be a continual wrestling
fighting and destroying, from whence this world is rightly called a valley of
Misery, full of Crosses, Persecutions, Toils and Labors. For when the spirit
of Creation entered into the midst and interposed its power, it was fain to make
and for^ the Creation in the midst or center of the Kingdom of Hell.

126. And now seeing the outermost Birth or Geniture in Nature, is Twofold,
that is, both Evil and Good, therefore it is that there is a perpetual
tormenting, squeezing, lamenting and howling; and the Creatures in this life
are subject to torments, and afflictions, so that this Evil World is justly
called a murtherous Den of the Devil.

127. But, that the astringent and bitter spirit sits still in its seat at
the hinder gums on the Tongue, and thrusts forth the word at the Mouth, and
yet cannot get away from thence; it signifies, that the Devil and the wrath of
God would indeed be domineering in all the Creatures, yet should not have full
power in them, but must stay in Prison, and there would belch forth or blow
into all the creatures, and plague them, but should not overcome them, unless
the Creatures themselves are minded to tarry there, in that place: or love to
live in the qualities, and be of the conditions of the Devil, and wrath of God*

128. Just as the Meek spirit of the Heart goes througb the astringent and
bitter quality, and overcomes it; and though it be indeed infected with the
astringent and bitter spirit, yet it teareth and breaks thorough, as a
Conqueror: but if it should wilfully sit still in the hollow hole in the
astringent and bitter spirit, and suffer it self to be taken captive, and would
not fight, then the fault were its own.

129. And thus it is also with those Creatures, which will continually sow and
reap, in the Hellish fire, especially that man, who lives in a continual
desire of Pride, Covetousness, Envy and Wrath, and will at no time fight and
strive against them with the spirit and fire of Love; such a one himself
pulls the wrath of God, and the burning hellish fire, upon his Body and Soul.

130. But, that the Tongue does crouch so much toward the nether gums when
the word goes forth, it signifies and denotes the animated or soulish spirit
of the Creatures, especially of Man.

131. The word, which conceives it self at the upper Gums, and which
qualifieth or uniteth with the astringent and bitter spirit, signifies the
seven spirits of Nature, or the Astrall Birth or Geniture, in which the Devil
rules, and the Holy Ghost opposes him therein, and overcomes the Devil.

132. But the Tongue signifies the Soul, which is generated from the seven
spirits of Nature, and is their Son: and so now when the seven spirits will,
then the Tongue must stir, and must perform their demands.

133. If the Astrall spirits would not prove false, and would not woo the
Devil to commit adultery with him, then they would hide the animated or
soulish spirit, and hold it fast in their Bands as a Treasure, when they fight
with the Devil: Just as they hide and cover the Tongue; when they wrestle with
the astringent and bitter quality; as their best Jewel.

134. Thus you have a short and real Introduction concerning the word, which
God has spoken; rightly described in the knowledge of the Spirit faithfully
imparted according to my Gifts, and the Talent, I am entrusted with.

Now it may be Asked:

What then is it that God Spoke, when He said; Let there be light, and there
was Light?

The Depth.

135. The Light went forth from the innermost Birth or Geniture, and kindled it
self in the outermost.

Note

It gave again to the outermost, a natural peculiar Light of its own.

136. Thou must not think, that the Light of the Sun and of Nature is the Heart
of God, which shines in secret. No; thou ought not to worship the Light of
Nature, it is not the Heart of God, but it is a Kindled Light in Nature; whose
Power and Heart stands in the unctuosity or fatness of the sweet water, and
of all the other spirits in the third Birth or Geniture; and is not called God.

137. And though it be generated in God and from God, yet it is but the
instrument of his handiwork which cannot apprehend and reach back again to the
clear Deity in the deepest Birth or Geniture, as the flesh cannot apprehend or
reach the Soul.

138. But it must not so be understood, as if the Deity were separated from
Nature; no, but the are as Body and Soul: Nature is the Body, and the Heart of
God is the Soul.

Now a Man might Ask:

What kind of Light then was it, which was kindled; was it the Sun and Stars?

Answer.

139. No: the Sun and Stars were first created but on the Fourth Day, out of
that very Light: there was a Light arisen in the seven spirits of Nature, which
had no peculiar distinct seat or place, but did shine every where all over, but
was not bright like the Sun, but like an azure Blew and Light, according to the
kind and manner of the qualifying or fountain spirits; till afterward the
right Creation and kindling of the fire in the water in the astringent spirit,
followed, viz. the Sun.

The Nineteenth Chapter.
Concerning the Created Heaven, and the form of the Earth and of the Water, as
also concerning Light and Darkness.

Concerning Heaven.
1. THe true Heaven, which is our own proper humane Heaven, into which the Soul
goes when it parts from the Body, and into which Christ our King is entered;
and from whence it was that he came from his Father, and was born, and became
Man in the Body or Womb of the Virgin Mary; has hitherto been close hidden
from the children of men, and they have had many Opinions about it.

2. Also the learned have scuffled about it with many strange scurrilous
writings, falling one upon another in calumnious and disgraceful terms, whereby
the holy Name of God has been reproached, his Members wounded, his Temple
destroyed, and the holy Heaven profaned with their calumniating and malicious
Enmity.

3. Men have always been of the Opinion, that Heaven is many hundred, nay many
thousand Miles distant from the face of the Earth, and that God dwells only
in that Heaven.

4. Some Physiol. Studiers of Natural Philosophy called Physics* or the
Mathematicians.
Naturalists or Artists have undertaken to measure that height and distance,
and have produced many strange and monstrous devices. Indeed, before this my
knowledge and Revelation of God, I held that only, to be the true Heaven,
which, in a round Circumference and sphere, very azure of a Light Blew color,
Extends it self above the Stars, supposing that God had therein his peculiar
Being, and did rule only in the power of his holy Spirit in this world.

5. But when this had given me many a hard blow and repulse, doubtless from
the holy Spirit.
the Spirit, which had a great Longing yerning toward me, at last I fell into
a very deep Melancholy and heavy sadness, when I beheld and contemplated the
great Deep of this world, also the Sun and Stars, the Clouds, Rain and Snow,
and considered in my spirit the whole Creation of this world.

6. Wherein then I found to be in all things, Evil and Good, Love and Anger; in
the inanimate creatures, viz. in Wood, Stones, Earth, and the Elements, as also
in Men and Beasts.

7. Moreover, I considered the little spark of light, Man, what he should be
Esteemed for, with God in comparison of this great work and fabric of Heaven
and Earth?

8. But finding that in all things there was Evil and Good, as well in the
Elements as in the Creatures, and that it went as well in this world with the
wicked, as with the virtuous honest and Godly, also that the Barbarous People
had the best Countries in their possession, and that they had more Prosperity
in their ways, then the virtuous honest and Godly had.

9. I was thereupon very Melancholy perplexed and exceedingly troubled, no
Scripture could Comfort or satisfy me, though I was very well acquainted with
it, and versed therein; at which time the Devil would by no means stand Idle,
but was often beating into me, many Heathenish Thoughts, which I will here be
silent in.

10. But when in this affliction and trouble I elevated my spirit, which, then
I understood very little or nothing at all what it was, I earnestly raised it
up into God, as with a great storm or onset, wrapping up my whole Heart and
Mind, as also all my Thoughts and whole will and resolution, incessantly to
wrestle with the Love and Mercy of God, and not to give over, unless he
blessed me, that is, unless he enlightened me with his holy Spirit, whereby I
might understand his will, and be rid of my sadness. And then the spirit did
break thorough.

11. But when, in my resolved zeal, I gave so hard an assault storm and onset
upon God, and upon all the Gates of Hell, as if I had had more reserves of
virtue and power ready, with a resolution to hazard my life upon it, which
assuredly were not in my ability, without the assistance of the Spirit of God;
suddenly after some violent Storms made, my spirit did break thorough the Gates
of Hell, even into the innermost Birth or Geniture of the Deity, and there I
was embraced with Love, as a Bridegroom embraces his dearly beloved Bride.

12. But the greatness of the triumphing that was in the spirit, I cannot
express either in speaking or writing: neither can it be compared with any
thing, but with that, wherein the life is generated in the midst of Death, and
it is like the Resurrection from the Dead.

13. In this light my spirit suddenly saw through all, and in and by all the
Creatures even in Herbs and Grass it knew God, Who he is, and How he is, and
What his will is: and suddenly in that light my will was set on by a Mighty
impulse, to describe the Being of God.

14. But because I could not presently apprehend the deepest Births of God in
their Being, and comprehend them in my Reason, there passed almost Twelve
years, before the exact understanding thereof was given me.

15. And it was with me as with a young Tree, which is planted in the Ground,
and at first is young and tender, and flourishing to the Eye, especially if it
comes on lustily in its growing: But does not bear fruit presently; and though
it blossometh, they fall off; also many a cold wind, frost and snow, puff upon
it, before it comes to any growth, and bearing of Fruit.

16. So also it went with this spirit: the first fire was but a Seed, and not a
constant lasting Light: since that time many a cold wind blew upon it: but the
Will never extinguished.

17. This Tree was also often tempted to try whether it would bear Fruit, and
show it self with Blossoms; but the Blossoms were struck off till this very
time, wherein it stands in its first Fruit in the growth or vegetation.

17. From this Light now it is, that I have my knowledge, as also my will
impulse and driving, and therefore I will set down this knowledge in writing
according to my Gift, and let God work his will; and though I should Irritate
or enrage the whole world, the Devil, and all the Gates of Hell, I will look
on and wait what the LORD intends with it.

18. For I am too too weak to know his Purpose; and though the spirit affords
in the Light to be known some things, which are to come, yet, according to the
outward man I am too weak to comprehend the same.

19. But the animated or soulish spirit, which qualifieth or uniteth with God,
that comprehends it well, but the bestial Body attains only a Glimpse thereof,
Just as if it lightened: for this is the posture of the innermost Birth or
Geniture of the soul, when it teareth through the outermost Birth or Geniture
in the elevation of the Holy Ghost, and so breaks through the Gates of Hell;
but the outermost Birth presently shuts again: for the wrath of God bolteth up
the firmament, and holds it captive in its Power.

20. And then the knowledge of the outward Man is gone, and he walks up and
down in an afflicted and anxious Birth or Geniture, as a woman with child, who
is in her travel, and would always fain bring forth her child, but cannot, and
is full of Throes.

21. Thus it goes also with the bestial Body, when it has once tasted of the
sweetness of God, then it continually hungreth and thirsts after it: But the
Devil in the power of Gods wrath opposes exceedingly, and so a Man in such a
course must continually stand in an anxious Birth or Geniture, and so there is
nothing but fighting and warring in his Births or Genitures.

22. I write not this for mine own glory, but for a comfort to the Reader, so
that if perhaps he be minded to walk with me upon my Narrow Bridge, he should
not suddenly be discouraged dismayed and distrustful, when the Gates of Hell
and Gods wrath meet him, and present themselves before him.

23. When we shall come together over this narrow Bridge of the fleshly Birth
or Geniture, to be in yonder green Meadow, to which the wrath of God does not
reach or come, then we shall be fully requited for all our damages and hurts we
have sustained: though indeed at present the world does account us for fools,
and we must suffer the Devil in the power of Gods wrath, to Domineer, Rush and
roar over us: It should not trouble us, for it will be more excellent
Reputation to us in the other life, then if in this Life we had worn a Royal
Crown: and there is so very short a time to get thither, that it is not worth
the being called a Time.

Now Observe:

24. If thou fixest thy Thoughts concerning Heaven, and would fain conceive
in the Mind What it is, and Where it is, and How it is; thou need not to
swing or cast thy Thoughts many thousand Miles off, for, that Place or that
Heaven is not thy Heaven.

25. And though indeed that is united with thy Heaven, as one Body, and so
together is But the One Body of God, yet thou art not in that very place, which
is become a Creature aloft many hundred thousand Miles off, but thou art in the
Heaven of this world, which contains also in it just such a Deep, as is not
of any Humane Number, [or is Circumscriptive].

26. For, the true Heaven is every where, even in that very Place where thou
stand and go, and so when thy spirit apprehends the innermost Birth or
Geniture of God, and presses in through the astral and fleshly geniture, then
it is clearly in Heaven.

27. But that there is assuredly a pure glorious Heaven in all the three Births
or Genitures aloft above the Deep of this world, in which Gods Being together
with that of the holy Angels rises or springs up, very purely, brightly
beautiously and joyfully, is undeniable and he is not born of God that denies
it.

But thou must know,

28. That the place of this world with its innermost Birth or Geniture uniteth
or qualifieth with the Heaven aloft above us, and so there is one Heart, one
Being, one Will, one God, All in All.

29. But that the place of this world, is not called Heaven, and that there is
a firmament or fast enclosure between the upper Heaven above us; it has this
understanding or meaning, as follows.

30. The upper Heaven compriseth the two Kingdoms, that of Michael and that of
Uriel, and of all the holy Angels, which are not fallen with Lucifer, and that
Heaven continues as it was from Eternity, before the Angels were created.

31. The Other Heaven is this world, in which Lucifer was a King, who kindled
the outermost Birth or Geniture in Nature, and that now is the wrath of God,
and cannot be called God or Heaven, but Perdition.

32. Therefore the upper Heaven includes it self up so far in its outermost
Birth or Geniture, and reaches so far as the wrath of God reaches, and so far
as the Government or Dominion of Lucifer has reached, for the corrupted or
perished Birth or Geniture cannot comprehend the Pure.

33. That is, the outermost Birth or Geniture of this world cannot comprehend
the outermost Birth or Geniture of Heaven aloft above this world, for they are
one to the other as the Life and the Death, or as a Man and a Stone are one to
the other.

34. And therefore there is a strong firmament or enclosure between the
outermost Birth or Geniture of the upper Heaven, and that of this world: for
the firmament between them is Death, which rules and reigns every where in
the outermost birth in this world, and this world is so bolted up therewith,
that the outermost Birth of the upper Heaven cannot come into the outermost
Birth of this world, there is a great Cliff or Gulf between them. And
therefore in our outermost Birth or Geniture we cannot see the Angels, neither
can the Angels dwell with us in the outermost Birth of this world, but in the
innermost they dwell with us.

36. And so when we fight with the Devil, they keep off his Blows in the
innermost Birth, and are the Defense and Protection of the holy Soul.

37. Therefore we can neither see nor comprehend the holy Angels: for the
outermost Birth of their Body is incomprehensible to the outermost Birth or
Geniture of this world.

38. The second Birth of this world stands in the life, for it is the Astral
Birth, out of which is generated the third and holy Birth or Geniture, and
therein Love and wrath strive one with the other.

39. For the second Birth stands in the seven qualifying or fountain spirits
of this world, and is in all places, and in all the Creatures, as also in Man:
But the Holy Ghost also rules and reigns in the second birth, and helps to
generate the third holy Birth or Geniture.

40. But this third Birth or Geniture is the clear and holy Heaven, which
qualifieth or uniteth with the Heart of God without distinct and above all
Heavens, as one Heart; also they are the one Heart, which holds and bears
up or sustaineth the place of this world, and holds the Devil Captive in the
outermost birth in the Anger fire, as an Almighty incomprehensible God.

41. And out of this Heart, JESUS CHRIST the Son of God, in the Womb or Body
of the Virgin Mary, went into all the three Births or Genitures, and assumed
them really, that He might through and with his innermost Birth or Geniture,
take the Devil Death and Hell Captive in the outermost Birth, and overcome the
wrath of God as a King and Victorious Prince; and in the power of his Geniture
or Birth in the flesh, press thorough all Men.

42. And so by this entering of the innermost Birth of the Heart of the Heaven
of this world, into the Astrall and outermost, is JESUS CHRIST the Son of God
and of Mary, become the Lord and King of this our Heaven and Earth, who rules
and reigns in all the three Births or Genitures over Sin, the Devil, Death,
and Hell, and so we with him, press through the sinful corrupted and outermost
dead Birth or Geniture of the flesh, through Death and the wrath of God into
our Heaven.

43. In this Heaven now sits Our King JESUS CHRIST, at the right hand of
God, and encompasseth or surroundeth all the three Births, as an almighty Son
of the Father, who is present in and throughout all the three Births in this
world in all Corners and Places, and comprehends, holds, and bears up or
sustaineth all, as a new Born Son of the Father, in the power and upon the
Seat or Throne of the once Great mighty Potent, and now expelled, accursed, and
Damned; King Lucifer the Devil.

44. Therefore thou child of man, be not discouraged, be not so timorous and
pusillanimous: for if thou sowest in thy zeal and earnest sincerity the seed of
thy Tears, thou do not sow it in Earth, but in Heaven; for in thy astral
Birth, thou sowest, and in thy animated or soulish Birth, thou reapest, and in
the Kingdom of heaven thou, possessest and enjoyest it.

45. While thou live in this struggling or striving Birth or Geniture, thou
must Buckle and suffer the Devil to ride upon thee: but so hard as he strikes
thee, so hard thou must strike him again, if thou will defend thy self. For
when thou fightest against him, thou stirrest up his wrath-fire, and destroyest
his Nest, and this is then, as a great combustion, and as a great strong Battle
maintained against him.

46. And though thy Body perhaps is put hard to it and suffers pain in misery,
yet it is much worse with him when he is vanquished, for then he roareth like a
Lion, which is robbed of her young whelps, for the fierceness and wrath of God
tormenteth him: but if thou let him Lodge within thee, then he grows fat
and wanton, and will vanquish thee, in Time.

47. Thus thou have a real description of Heaven: And though perhaps thou can
not in thy Reason conceive it: Yet I can very well Conceive it, therefore
consider Rationally and seriously upon it: What God is.

48. Thou see in this world Nothing but the Deep, and therein the Stars, and
the Birth or Geniture of the Elements: now will thou say, God is not there?
'pray then what was there in that place before the time of the world? Will thou
say, there was Nothing: then thou speak without Reason, for thou must needs
say, that God was there, or else nothing would there have come to be.

49. Now if God were there then, who has thrust him out from thence, or
vanquished him, that he should be there no more? But if God be there, then he
is indeed in his Heaven, and moreover, in his Trinity.

50. But the Devil has kindled the Bath or Lake of wrath, whence the Earth and
Stones, also the Elements, are become so fluctuating, as also cold bitter and
hot, and so has killed or murdered.
destroyed the outermost Birth or Geniture.

51. Whereupon now this Treatise and my whole purpose is to describe, how it is
come to be living and revived again, and how it regenerateth it self again. And
from the wrath Bath.
thence also in the Creatures the beastial Flesh is come to be, but Sin in the
Flesh is the Wrath of God.

Another Question, which is chiefly treated of in this Book, is this, viz.

Where then shall the Wrath of God become?

Answer.

52. Here the spirit answers, that at the End of the Time of this corrupted
Birth or Geniture after the Resurrection from the Dead, this place or space,
where the Earth now is, will be given to the Devil for a propriety or
Possession and House of wrath, yet not through and in all the three Births or
Genitures, but only in the outermost, in which he now stands: But the
innermost will hold him Captive in its might and strength, and use him for a
footstool, or as the Dust under its foot, which innermost Birth he will never
be able either to comprehend or to touch.

53. For it has not this understanding or meaning, that the wrath-fire should
be extinguished, and be no more; for then the Devils also must become Holy
Angels again, and live in the holy Heaven: but that not being so; a Hole
Borough or Dungeon in this world must remain, to be their Habitation.

54. If Man's Eyes were but opened, he should see God every where in his Heaven;
for Heaven stands in the innermost Birth or Geniture every where.

55. Moreover when Stephen saw the Heaven opened, and the Lord JESUS at the
right hand of God, there his spirit did not first swing it self up aloft into
the upper Heaven, but it penetrated or pressed into the innermost Birth or
Geniture, wherein Heaven is every where.

56. Neither must thou think, that the Deity is such a kind of Being as is
only in the upper Heaven, and that the Soul when it departs from the Body,
goes up aloft into the upper Heaven many hundred thousand Miles off,

57. It needs not do that, but it is set or put into the innermost Birth, and
there it is with God, and in God, and with all the holy Angels, and can
suddenly be above, and suddenly beneath, it is not hindered by any thing.

58. For in the innermost Birth, the upper and nether Deity is one Body, and
is an open Gate: the Holy Angels converse and walk up and down in the innermost
Birth of this world by and with our King JESUS CHRIST, as well as in the
uppermost world aloft in their Quarters Courts or Region.

59. And where then would or should the Soul of Man rather be, then with its
King and Redeemer JESUS CHRIST. For, near and afar off in God is one thing, one
comprehensibility, Father Son and Holy Ghost, every where, all over.

60. The Gate of the Deity in the upper heaven is no other, also no brighter,
then it is in this world; and where can there be greater Joy then in that
place, where every hour and Moment beautiful loving dear new born children and
Angels come to Christ, which are pressed or penetrated through Death into Life?

61. Doubtless they will make large Relations of many Fights; and where can
there be greater Joy, then where, in the midst or Center of Death, life is
Generated continually?

62. Does not every soul bring along with it a new Triumph? and so there is
nothing else, but an exceeding friendly well coming and Salutation there.

63. Consid^^ ^hen the Souls of children come to their Parents, who in the
Body did Generate them, whether Heaven can choose but be there? or do thou
think my writing is too Earthly?

64. If thou were come to this Window, thou would not then say, that it is
earthly; And though I must indeed use the earthly Tongue, yet there is a true
heavenly understanding couched under it, which in my outermost Birth I am not
able to express either in writing or in Speaking.

65. I know very well, that the word concerning the three Births, cannot be
comprehended or apprehended in every Man's Heart, especially where the Heart is
too much steeped soaked or drowned in or fleshly matters.
the flesh, and bolted and Barred up with the outermost Birth.

66. But I cannot render it otherwise then as it is, for it is just so: and
though I should write mere Spirit, as indeed and truth it is no other, yet the
heart understands only Flesh.

Concerning the Constitution and form of the Earth.
67. Many Authors have written, that Heaven and Earth were created out of
NOTHING: but I do wonder, that among so many excellent Men there has not one
been found, that could yet describe the true Ground; seeing the same God which
now is, has been from Eternity.

68. Now where nothing is, there nothing can come to be: All things must have a
Root, else can nothing grow: If the seven Spirits of Nature had not been from
eternity, then there wo^^^ no Angel, no Heaven, also no Earth, have come to be.

69. But the Earth is come from the corrupt Salitter of the outermost Birth or
Geniture, which thou can not deny, when thou look on Earth and Stones, for
then thou must needs say, that Death is therein: And on the other side also
thou must needs say, that there is a Life therein, otherwise neither Gold nor
Silver, nor any Plant Herb Grass or Vegetable could grow therein.

Now one might Ask:

Are there also all the three Births or Geniture^ therein.

Answer.

70. Yes: the Life presses thorough Death: the outermost Birth is the Death:
the second is the Life, which stands in the wrath-fire and in the Love; And
the Third is the Holy Life.

An Instruction, or Information.

71. The outward Earth is a bitter stinck, and is dead, and that every man
understands to be so. But the Salitter is destroyed or killed through Death:
for thou can not deny, but that Gods wrath is in the Earth, otherwise it
would not be so astringent, bitter, sour, venomous and poisonous, neither would
it engender such poisonous venomous Evil worms and creeping things. But if
thou should say, that God has created them thus, out of his Purpose, that is
as much, as if thou should say, that God himself is Evil, Malice, Malignity
or Wickedness?

Pray tell me; Why was the Devil expelled or Thrust out?

72. Surely thou will say, because of his Pride, In that he would needs be
above God.

But Guess Sir, with what he would do so: what Power ha^ he to do it?

Here tell me, if thou know any thing of it; if thou know Nothing, be
silent and attentive.

37. Before the Times of the Creation He sat in the Salitter of the Earth,
when it was yet Thin or Transparent, and stood in a heavenly holy Birth or
Geniture, and was in the whole Kingdom of this world, therein it was neither
Earth nor Stones, but a heavenly Seed, which was generated out of the seven
qualifying or fountain spirits of Nature; for therein sprung up heavenly fruits
forms and Ideas, which were a pleasant delightful food of Angels.

74. But when the wrath did burn therein, then it was killed and destroyed in
Death: Yet not so to be understood, as if it were therefore altogether quite
dead: For how can any thing in God dye totally, that has had its Life from
eternity?

75. But I. the outermost Birth or Geniture was burnt up, frozen, drowned,
stupefied, chilled, and stark benumbed.

76. But II. the Second Birth or Geniture generateth the Life again in the
outermost.

77. And III. the Third Birth.
is generated between the first and the second, that is, between Heaven and
Hell in the midst or Center of the wrath-fire, and the spirit presses thorough
in the wrath-fire, and generateth the Holy Life, which stands in the power of
the Love.

78. And in this same Birth or Geniture shall those Dead arise who have sown a
holy Seed, and those who have sown in the wrath, will arise in the Wrath-fire:
for the Earth will revive and be living again: seeing the Deity in Christ has
regenerated it a new again through his Flesh, and exalted it to the right hand
of God: but the wrath-fire abides in its own Birth or Geniture.

79. But if thou say, that there is no Life in the Earth, thou speak as
one that is blind; for thou may see plainly, that Herbs and Grass grow out
of it:

80. But if thou say, it has but one kind of Birth or Geniture: thou
speak again also like one that is blind: for the Herbs and Wood, which grow
out of it, are not Earth, neither is the fruit which grows upon a Tree, wood;
so also the power and virtue of the Fruit is not God, neither; but Note how God
is in all things, yet no Creature is He.
God is in the Center, in the innermost Birth in all the three natural Births
or Genitures, hiddenly, and is not known, but only Note how God is in all
things, yet no Creature is He.
in the Spirit of Man; also the outermost Birth in the fruit does not
comprehend conceive or contain him, but he contains the outermost Birth of
the fruit, and forms it.

Another Question is,

Why then is the Earth so Mountainy, Hilly, Rocky, Stony, and uneven?

Answer.

81. The Hills came to be so in the driving together or Compaction: for the
corrupted Salitter was more abounding in one place, then in another;
accordingly as the wheel of God was, as to its innate instanding or instant
qualifying or fountain spirits.

82. For in those Places, where the sweet water in the standing wheel of God
was chief or predominant, there much Earthly comprehensible or palpable water
came to be.

83. But where the astringent Quality in the bitterness in Mercurius was chief
or predominant, there much Earth and Stones came to be.

84. But where the Heat in the Light was chief or predominant, there much
Silver, and Gold, as also some fair clear Stones, in the flash of the Light
came to be; but especially where the Love in the Light was chief or
predominant, there the most precious Stones or Jewels, as also the best purest
and finest Gold came to be.

85. But when the Lump of the Earth was pressed and compacted together, then
thereby the water came to be squeezed and pressed forth: but where it was
enclosed and pressed in with the astringent quality by hard Rocks, there it is
yet in the Earth still, and has since that time worn and made some great Holes
or Veins for its passage.

86. In those places, where there are great Lakes and Seas, there the water was
chief or predominant over that place in that Zenith or Elevatien of the Pole;
and there not being much Salitter in that place, there came to be as it were a
Dale or Valley, wherein the water remained standing.

87. For the thin water seeks for the valley, and is an humility of the life,
which did not elevate it self, as the astringent, bitter and fire's Quality
has done in those Creatures the Devils:

88. Therefore it always seeks the Lowest Places of the Earth; which rightly
signifies or resembles the spirit of meekness, in which the life is
Generated: as you may read concerning the Creation of Man, as also before,
concerning the Species or condition of Water, Meekness, and such Qualities.

Of Day, and Night.
89. The whole Deity with all its Powers and operations, together with its
innare or Instant Being, as also its rising up, penetration, changing and
alteration; that is to say, the whole Machine fabric and work, or the whole
generating or production, is all understood in the spirit of Of every word or
syllable in every Language or dialect of Language.
the Word.

90. For in what proportion or Harmony soever, or innate or instant generating
or production of Qualities soever, the spirit comprehends conceives and
forms the Word, and goes forth therewith; Just such an innate or instant
Birth, penetrating, rising, wrestling and overcoming, it has also in Nature.

91. For when Man fell into Sin, he was removed out of the innermost Birth or
Geniture, and set or put into the other two, which presently embraced him, and
mixed qualified or united with him and in him, as in their own propriety, and
so Man instantly received the spirit, and all generatings or productions of the
Astral Birth, and also of the outermost Birth or Geniture.

9^. Therefore now it Expresses or speaks forth all words, according to the
innate instant generating or production of Nature: for the spirit of Man, which
stands in the Astrall birth, and qualifieth or uniteth with the total
universal Nature, and is as it were the whole Nature it self; that forms the
word, according to the innate instant Birth or Geniture.

93. When it sees any thing, then it gives a Name to it according to its
Qualification or condition: and if it be to do so, then it must also form or
frame or put it self into such a form, and generate it self also with its Tone
Sound or Articulation, just so as the thing which it will give a Name to, does
generate or Compose it self.

And herein lies the kernel of the whole understanding of the Deity.

94. I do not write this, and bring it to light, that others after me should
presently fall a writing, and publish the conceits of his own spirit herein,
and cry it up for Sanctity or a Holy Thing.

95. Hearken friend, there belongs more then so to this: thy animated or
soulish spirit, must first qualify operate or unite with the innermost Birth
or Geniture in God, and stand in the Light, that it may rightly know and
understand the Astrall Birth or Geniture, and that it may have a free and open
Gate into all the Births or Genitures, else thou will not be able to write a
Holy and true Philosophy, but as it were full of or many evil Beasts and
Creeping vermin.
Lice and Fleas, and so thou will be found a Mocker against God.

96. I conceive already, the Devil will get many a one to ride upon his proud
prancing Nagg: and many will make themselves ready for the Journey before they
be well Girt with the Gir^le of Truth.
: I will not bear the blame!

97. For what I here reveal or manifest: I must do it; for the time of Breaking
through is at Hand: He that will now sleep, the stormy Tempest of the
fierceness, will rouse him.

98. But now that every one might have a care of his affairs and doings; I
would have them faithfully warned according to the impulse driving and will of
the spirit.

Observe:

99. The Writer Moses says, Genesis 1. God separated the Light from the
Darkness, and called the Light Day, and the Darkness, Night, so out of
Evening and Morning, the first Day came to be.

100. But being these words, Evening, and Morning, are contrary to the Current
of Philosophy and Reason, therefore it may be conceived, that Moses was not
the sole Original Author thereof, but that it was derived down to him from his
Forefathers, who reckoned all the six Days of the Creation in one continued
course, and preserved and kept the memory of the Creation, from Adam, in an
obscure word, and so left it to posterity.

101. For Evening and Morning were not before the Time of the Sun and Stars,
which most certainly and really were first created but on the Fourth Day, which
I shall demonstrate from an assured certain ground, concerning the Creation of
the Sun and Stars.

102. But there was Day and Night, which I will here declare according to my
knowledge: Thou must here once more open the Eyes of thy spirit wide, if thou
intendest to understand it; if not, then thou will remain blind.

103. And though this great work in Man has remained hidden till this very
day, yet God be praised, it will now once be Day, for the Dayspring or
Morning-Rednesse breaks forth. The Breaker-through or Opener of the innermost
Birth shows and presents it self with its Red, Green, and White, Flagg, in
the outermost Birth upon the Rainbow.

Observe: Now thou Objectest:

How then could there be Day and Night, and not also Morning and Evening?

Answer.

104. Morning, and Evening, is and reaches only up from the Earth to the Moon,
and takes its Original from the Light of the Sun, and this makes Evening, and
Morning, as also the outward Day and the outward dark Night, as every one
knows.

105. But there was not a twofold Creation of Evening and Morning at that time;
but when Evening and Morning did once begin, they kept their constant course
all along from that time to this.

Of the Day. Tage.

106. The word ( Tage) conceives it self at the Heart, and goes forth at the
mouth through the Way or Passage of the astringent and bitter quality, and does
not awaken or rouse up the astringent and bitter quality, but goes directly
through their place, which is at the hinder Gums upon the Tongue, forth, very
softly or gently, and incomprehensibly as to the astringent and bitter Quality.

107. But when it comes forth upon the Tongue, then the Tongue and the upper
Gums close the mouth, but when the spirit thrusts at the Teeth, and will go
forth, then the Tongue opens the mouth at the Teeth, and will go forth before
the word, and does as it were leap for Joy forth at the mouth.

108. But when the word breaks thorough, then the Mouth within opens wide,
and the word conceives it self once more with its sound behind the astringent
and bitter qualities, and rouzeth them up, as if they were lazy sleepers in the
Darkness, and goes forth suddenly out at the Mouth.

109. And then the astringent quality drayleth after it as a drowzie Man, which
is awakened from sleep: but the bitter spirit which goes forth from the fire
flash, lies still, and hears or regards not, neither does move.

These are very great things, and not so slight matters, as the Countryman
supposes.

110. Now, that the spirit first conceives it self at the heart, and breaks
through all Watches and Guards till it come upon the Tongue, unperceived, or
unobserved: it signifies, that the Light Brake forth out of the Heart of God,
through the corrupted, outermost, fierce, dead, bitter and astringent Birth or
Geniture in the Nature of this world, incomprehensibly both as to Death and the
Devil, together with the wrath of God, as it is written in the Gospel of St.
John, 1. Chap. verse 5. The Light shone in the Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehended it not.

111. But that the Tongue and the upper Gums close the Mouth, when the spirit
comes upon the Tongue: it signifies, that the seven qualifying or fountain
Spirits of Nature in this world, at the time of the Creation were not mortified
and Dead through the wrath of God, but were lively active and vigorous. For the
Tongue signifies or denotes the life of Nature, in which stands the
animated Soulish and Holy Birth or Geniture: for it is a Prefiguration or
Resemblance.
Type of the Soul.

112. But that the Spirit suddenly affects the Tongue, when it comes upon
it, whereupon it leapeth for Joy, and will go before the Spirit forth at the
Mouth; it signifies, that the seven qualifying or fountain spirits of Nature,
which are called the Astrall Birth: when the Light of God, which is called the
Day, rose up in them, they suddenly gat the Divine Life and Will, and so highly
rejoiced, as the Tongue in the Mouth here does.

113. But that the fore Gums widen inward, and give room for the spirit to do
as it pleases: it signifies, that the whole Astral Birth yielded it self very
friendly and Courteously to the will of the Light, and did not awaken the
fierceness in it.

114. But that the spirit, when it goes forth at the Mouth, conceives it self
yet once more behind the astringent quality upon the Tongue at the hindermost
gums, and awakeneth or rouzeth up the astringent quality, being as it were
asleep, and then goes suddenly forth at the Mouth;

115. It signifies, I. that the astringent spirit indeed must hold preserve
and Image or frame all in the whole Nature, but it is after the spirit of the
Light has first formed it, and that then first the Light awakeneth the
astringent spirit, and gives all into the Hands thereof to hold or preserve it.

116. And that must be, because of the outermost comprehensibility or
Palpability, which must be held and sustained by the astringent fierceness,
else nothing would subsist in its Body, neither could the compressed Compacted
Earth and Stones subsist; but would be again a broken Thick muddy and dark
Salitter, such as at first moved in the whole Deep.

117. It signifies also, 2o that this Salitter, at last, when the spirit has
done with its Creation, and work, in this world; shall be rouzed up and revived
at the Last Judgment Day.

118. But, that the spirit conceives it self behind the astringent quality,
and not in the astringent quality, and so awakeneth or rouzeth it up: it
signifies, that the astringent Nature will not comprehend the Light of God in
its own proper Way, but shall rejoice in the Light of the Grace, and be
awakened or raised up thereby, and perform the will of the Light, as the
beastial Body of Man effects and performs the will of the spirit, and yet
these are not two severed Things.

119. But why the bitter spirit lies still, and neither hears nor
comprehends or apprehends the work of the spirit, it signifies, that the
bitter wrath-fire, which existeth in the flash of fire, at the time of the
Birth or Geniture of the Light, and still also, is not awakened by the Light,
also does not comprehend it, but lies Captive imprisoned in the outermost
Birth or Geniture, and must give leave to the spirit of Light, to do its work
in Nature, how it pleases, and yet can neither see, hear nor comprehend the
work of the Light.

120. Therefore no Man ought to think, that the Devil is able to tear the
works of the Light, out of his Heart, for he can neither see nor comprehend
them: And though he rages and raveth in the outermost Birth in the Flesh as in
his Castle of Robbery or Fort of Prey; be not discouraged or dismayed: only
take heed thou thy self bring not the works of wrath into the Light of thy
Heart, and then thy soul will be safe enough from the deaf and dumb Devil, who
is blind in the Light.

121. Thou should not suppose, that which I write here, to be as a doubtful
Opinion, questionable whether it be so or no: For, the Gate of Heaven and Hell
stands open to the spirit, and in the light presses through them both, and
beholds them, also proves or Examineth them: for the Astrall Birth or
Geniture lives between them both; and must endure to be squeezed.

122. And though the Devil cannot take the Light from me, yet he hides or
eclipseth it often with the outward and fleshly Birth or Geniture, so that the
Astrall Birth or Geniture is in anxiety, and in a straight, as if it were
captivated or imprisoned.

123. And these only are his Blows and Strokes, whereby the Mustard Seed is
overwhelmed, covered, and obscured: Concerning which also the Holy Apostle Paul
says, that a great Thorn was given him in his Flesh, and he besought the Lord
earnestly, to take it from him, Whereupon the Lord answered, Let my Grace be
sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12. v. 7, 8, 9.

124. For he was also come to this place, and would fain have had the Light
without obstruction or hinderance as his own in the Astrall Birth or Geniture.
But it could not be: for the wrath rests in the fleshly Birth, and must bear
or endure the corruption or putrefaction in the flesh: but if the fierceness
should be quite taken away from the Astrall Birth or Geniture, then in that, he
would be like God, and know all things, as God himself does.

125. Which now at in this Life.
present that Soul only knows, which qualifieth operateth or uniteth with
the Light of God, but cannot perfectly bring it back again into the Astral
Birth or Geniture; for it is another Person.

126. Just as an Apple on a Tree cannot bring its Smell and Taste back again
into the Tree or into the Earth, though it be indeed the son of the Tree; so
it is also in Nature.

127. The Holy Man Moses was so high and deep in this Light, that the Light
glorified Clarified or Brightned the Astrall Birth also, whereby the outermost
Birth of the Flesh in his Face was clarified brightned or Glorified; and he
also desired to see the Light of God perfectly in the Astrall Birth or Geniture.

128. But it could not be; for the Bar or Bolt of the wrath lies before it:
for even the whole or universal Nature of the Astral Birth in this world cannot
comprehend the Light of God, and therefore the Heart of God is hidden and
concealed, which however, dwells in all places, and comprehends All.

129. Thus thou see, that the Day was created before the time of the Sun and
Stars: for when God said, Genesis 1. v. 3. Let there be Light: there the Light
brake thorough the Darkness, but the Darkness did not comprehend it, but
remained siting in its Seat.

130. Thou see also, how the Wrath of God in the outermost Birth of Nature
lies hid, and rests, and cannot be awakened, unless men themselves rouse or
awaken it, who with their fleshly Birth or Geniture qualify operate or unite
with the wrath in the outermost Birth of Nature.

131. Therefore if any one should be Damned into Hell, he ought not to say;
that God has done it, or that he wills it to be so; but Man awakeneth or
stirs up the wrath-fire in himself, which if it grows burning, afterward
qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with Gods wrath, and the hellish fire, as one
thing.

132. For when thy Light is extinguished, then thou stand in the Darkness,
and in the Darkness the wrath of God is hidden, and so if thou awakenest it,
then it burns in thee.

133. There is fire even in a Stone, but if you do not strike upon it, the fire
remains hidden, but if you strike it, then the fire Springs forth; and then
if any combustible matter be near it, that will take fire and burn, and so it
comes to be a Huge fire: and thus it is also with Man, when he kindles the
resting wrath-fire, which is otherwise at Rest.

Of the Night. Nacht.

134. The word ( Nacht) conceives it self first at the Heart, and the spirit
grunteth with or in the astringent Quality, yet not wholly comprehensible to
the astringent Quality; afterward it conceives it self upon the tongue: But
all the while it grunteth at the Heart, the Tongue shuts the Mouth, till the
spirit comes, and conceives it self upon the tongue, but then it opens the
Mouth suddenly, and lets the spirit go forth.

135. And now, that the word conceives it self first at the Heart, and
grunteth with or in the astringent Quality, it signifies, that the Holy Ghost
conceived it self in the Darkness upon the Heart of God in the Astrall Birth
or Geniture of the seven qualifying or fountain spirits: But that it grunteth
within or at the astringent Quality, it signifies, that the Darkness was a
contrary or opposite will against the Holy Ghost, at or against which, the
spirit was displeased.

136. But that it goes likewise through the dark way or Passage, it
signifies, that the spirit goes forth also through the Darkness, which is
yet in a quiet Rest, and generateth it to be Light, if it hold still, and does
not kindle the fire.

Note

137. Here is cause for the Judging world to see, and consider; who condemn Man
in his Mothers Body or Womb, whereas they do not know, whether the wrath-fire
of the Parents be fully kindled in the fruit, or not: and seeing that the
Spirit of God moves also in the Darkness which stands yet in Quiet Rest,
and can easily generate the Darkness to be Light: And moreover the Hour of
Man's Birth or Nativity is very helpful and profitable for it: but in many it is
very hurtful and obstructive, but not compulsive.

138. But that the Mouth shuts, when the spirit conceives it self upon the
Heart, and that the astringent quality grunteth against and with or in it, it
signifies, that the whole Court Extent or Place of this world was very dark in
the Astrall, and also in the outermost Birth or Geniture, and by the strong
going forth of the spirit, became Light.

139. But that the bitter spirit is not awakened, whilst the spirit goes
through its Place, it signifies, that the dark Night in the outermost Birth or
Geniture of this world has never comprehended the Light, also never shall
comprehend it in all Eternity.

140. Hence it is, that the Creatures see only the Astrall Light with their
Eyes, else if the darkness were not yet in the outermost Birth or Geniture,
then the Astrall spirit could see through Wood and Stones, as also through the
whole Earth, and could not be hindered by any thing; Just as it is in Heaven.

141. But, now the Darkness is separated from the Light, and abides in the
outermost Birth or Geniture, wherein the wrath of God rests till the Last
Judgment Day, but then the wrath will be kindled, and the darkness will be the
House or Habitation of Eternal Perdition, wherein Lord Lucifer together with
all wicked Men, which have sown into Darkness into the soil of the wrath,
shall have their eternal Dwelling and Residence.

142. But the Astrall Birth, in which the natural Light now stands, and
wherein the holy Birth is Generated, shall be also kindled at the End of this
Time, and the wrath and the holy Birth shall be separated asunder, for the
wrath shall not comprehend the holy Birth or Geniture.

143. But the wrath in the Astrall Birth shall be given to the House of
Darkness for a Life, and the Wrath shall be called the Hellish fire: And the
House of darkness, which is the outermost Birth, shall be called Death: And
King Lucifer shall be the God therein, and his Angels and all Damned Men shall
be his Ministers Officers and Servants.

144. In this Devouring Gulf or Throat will rise up all manner of Hellish
Fruits and Forms, all according to the hellish quality and kind; as in Heaven
there spring up Heavenly fruits and forms according to the heavenly quality and
kind.

145. Thus you may understand, what the Creation of Heaven and Earth,
signifies and is, also what God made on the first Day. Though indeed the first
Three Days were not distinguished or severed asunder by Evening and Morning,
but a Time is to be reckoned and accounted as of Twenty four Hours, as there is
on high above the Moon, such a Time and Day.

146. Secondly, it is also therefore counted for a Humane Day, because
doubtless the Earth instantly began its Revolution, and did turn Round about,
once in such a period of Time, while God was separating, and so till he had
separated, the Light from the darkness, and thus the Earth.
it performed and finished its course the first Time.

The Twentieth Chapter.
Of the Second Day.

1. IT is written thus, concerning the second Day: And God said; Let there be a
Firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it be a distinction or division
between the waters: so there God made the Firmament, and divided the waters
under the firmament, from the waters above the firmament: and it was so done.
And God called the firmament, Heaven; and so out of the Evening and the Morning
the second day came to be, Genesis 1. v. 6, 7, 8.

2. This description shows once more, that the Dear Man Moses was not the
Original Author thereof; for it is written very Obscurely, and not fnlly
expressed, though indeed it has a very excellent understanding and meaning.

3. And without Doubt the Holy Ghost would not have it revealed, lest the
Devil should know all the Mysteries in the Creation. For the Devil, does not
know the Creation of the Light, viz. how Heaven is made out of the midst or
Center of the water.

4. For he can neither see nor comprehend or apprehend the Light and holy
generation or production, which stands in the water of the Heaven, but the
Generation or production only which stands in the Astringent, Bitter, Sour,
and Hot Quality, from whence existed the outermost Birth or Geniture, which is
his Royal Fort or Castle.

5. The meaning is not, that he has no power in the Elementary water, to
possess it; for the outermost corrupted Birth or Geniture in the Elementary
water belongs also to the wrath of God, and Death is also therein, as well as
in the Earth.

6. But the spirit in Moses means here, quite another sort of water, which
the Devil can neither understand, nor comprehend: But if it should have been
declared so long a time ago, then the Devil would have learned it from Man,
and had without doubt strowed his hellish chaff also into it.

7. Therefore the Holy Ghost has kept it hidden almost till the last Hour
before the Evening, wherein his Thousand years are accomplished, and then he
must be let loose again for a little season, as is to be read in the Revelat.
chapter 20. v. 3.

[After that Summer, comes the Last Winter: but the Sun will shine warm yet,
before that Time:] 8. But being he is now loose from the chains of Darkness,
God causes Lights to be set up every where in this world, whereby Men might
learn to know him and his feats and wiles, and beware of him.

9. Whether he be loose or no, I offer it to every one to Consider; view but
the world in the clear Light, and thou will find, that at present the four new
Sons, which the Devil generated, when he was thrust out of Heaven; do govern
the world, viz. 1. Pride, 2. Covetousness, 3. Envy, 4. Wrath; These rule the
world at present, and are the Devils Heart, his animated or soulish spirit.

10. Therefore view the world very well, and then thou will find, that it fully
qualifieth uniteth and Co-worketh with these four new Sons of the Devil.
Therefore men have cause to look circumspectly to themselves. For this is the
Time, of which, all the Prophets have prophesied: and Christ in the Gospel,
saying: Think thou, that the Son of Man will find any faith, when he shall
come again to Judge the world, Luke 18. v. 8.

11. The world supposes, that it flourishes now, and stands in its Flower,
because the clear Light has moved over it; But the spirit shows to me, that
it stands in the midst or Center of Hell.

12. For it forsakes the Love, and hangs on Covetousness, Extortion and
Bribery; there is no Mercy at all therein: Every one cries out, if I had but
Money! Those that are in Authority and power su^k the very Marrow from the
Bones of Men of low Degree and Rank, and feed upon the sweat of their Brows.
Briefly, there is nothing else but Lying, Cozening, robbing and murdering, and
so may very justly be called the Devils Nest and dwelling House.

13. The Holy Light is now adays accounted a mere History and bare knowledge,
and that the spirit will not work therein; and yet they suppose, that is Faith,
which they profess with their Mouths.

14. O thou blind and foolish world! full of Devils. It is not Faith, to know,
that Christ dyed for thee, and has shed his Blood for thee, that thou might
be saved: This in thee is but a mere History and knowledge, The Devil also
knows as much, but it profits him Nothing: so thou also, thou foolish
world, go no further, but contentest thy self with the bare knowledge, and
therefore this thy knowledge will Judge thee.

15. But if thou woudlst know, what the true Faith is, then observe: Thy heart
must not qualify or cooperate with the four Sons of the Devil, in Pride,
Covetousness, Envy, Wrath, Extortion, Oppression, Lying, Deceiving, Murder,
and tearing the Bread out of thy neighbors Throat, studying day and night to
do mischief, in bringing subtle Devices and designs to Effect, that thou may
give satisfaction to the Proud Covetous Envious and wrathful Devils, to Court
them, and exercise thy self in worldly pleasures and voluptuousness.

16. For thus says the spirit in its zeal or in the Jealousy of Gods wrath in
this world: while thy spirit and will qualifieth or co-operateth with and in
the four Abominations of the Devil, thou art not one spirit with God: and
says the spirit, though thou presentest me every Hour with thy Lips, and
Prayest, and bowest thy knees before me, yet I will accept none of thy Labor:
Is not thy breath however continually before me? whar shall thy Incense be to
me in my fierce wrath? do thou think, I will recive the Devil into my self?
or exalt Hell into Heaven?

17. Convert! Convert! and strive against the malice and wickedness of the
Devil, and incline thine heart toward the LORD thy GOD, and walk in his will,
Heart will incline to me, says the spirit, then will I also incline to thee:
or do thou think, that I am false and wicked as thou art?

18. Therefore I say now, if thy heart does not qualify mix or Cooperate with
God in thy knowledge: out of a true Purpose of Love, then thou art a
Dissembler, Liar, and Murderer in the sight of God: for God does not hear any
man's Prayer, unless his Heart be fully directed and bent, in Obedience to God.

19. Would thou fight against the Wrath of God? then thou must put on the
Helmet of Obedience and of Love, otherwise thou will not break thorough; and if
thou do not break thorough, then thou fightest in vain, and remainest to be a
Servant or Minister of the Devil in one way as well as in the other.

20. What will thy knowledge do thee Good, if thou will not strive and fight
therein? It is Just as if one knew of a great Treasure, and would not go for
it, but though he knows he might have it, would rather starve for hunger in
the bare knowing of it.

21. Thus says the spirit, many Heathens, who have not thy knowledge, and yet
strive or fight against the wrath, will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
before thee.

22. For who shall Judge them, if their Heart do qualify unite or operate with
God? For, though they do not know him, and yet work and labor in his spirit,
in Righteousness and in the purity of their Heart, in true Love one to
another; they testify assuredly, that the Law of God is in their Heart? Romans
2. 15.

23. But being thou know it, and do it not, and the other know it not, but
yet do it, they with their Doing judge thy knowledge; and thou art found to be
a hypocrite, dissembler, and an unprofitable Servant, who were put into the
Vineyard of the Lord, and wilt not work therein.

24. What do thou suppose, the Master of the House will say to thee, when he
shall require and demand his Talent, which he entrusted thee with, thou having
buried it in the Earth? will he not say, thou Perverse wicked servant, why
did thou not put my Talent out upon use, and then I could have demanded the
Principal and the Interest or profit?

25. Note: And so the sufferings of Christ will be quite taken from thee, and
will be given to the Heathens, who had but One Talent, and yet made Five good,
for it, to the Master of the House; and thou must howl with the Dogs.

Now Observe:

26. Now if we will rightly consider, How God separated the water under the
Firmament, from the water above the Firmament, then great Things are to be
found herein.

27. For the water, which rests on the Earth, is as a corrupt perished and
mortal or Dead Being or Thing as the Earth is, and belongs also to the
outermost Birth, which with its comprehensibility, or as to its palpability
stands in Death, even as the Earth and Stones do.

28. The meaning is not, that it is quite reprobated rejected or thrust out
from God: for the Heart therein belongs yet to the Astrall Birth or Geniture,
out of which the holy Birth becomes Generated.

29. But Death stands in the outermost Birth, and therefore is the palpable
water separated from the impalpable.

Now thou will Ask:

How is that?

Answer.

30. Behold the water, in the Deep above the Earth, which qualifieth mixeth or
uniteth with the Elementary Air and Fire, that, is the water of the Astrall
Birth or Geniture, wherein stands the Astral life, and wherein especially the
Holy Ghost moves, and through which the Third and innermost Birth does
generate incomprehensibly as to the wrath of God therein: and that water to our
Eyes seems like the Air.

31. But, that Water, Air, and Fire, are one in another, in the Deep above the
Earth; every intelligible Man may see and understand.

32. For thou see that often the whole Deep is very clear and pure, and in a
quarter of an Hour is covered with watery Clouds, that is, when the Stars from
above, and the water upon the Earth from beneath kindle themselves, and so
water is suddenly there also generated; which would not be, if the wrath did
not also stand in the Astral Birth or Genitute.

33. But being all is corrupted, therefore must the upper water in the wrath of
God, come to help the Astringent, Bitter, and Hot quality of the Earth, and
allay mitigate and quench its fire, so that the life may always be generated,
and that the holy Birth between Death and the wrath of God, may be generated
also.

34. But, that also the Element of Fire is, and does rule, in the Deep of the
Air and Water; thou see in Tempests of Lightning: also thou perceivest, how
the Light of the Sun kindles the Element of Fire on the Earth with its
reflection, although many times aloft in the upper Region toward the Moon it
is very cold.

35. But now, God separated the palpable water from the impalpable, and placed
the palpable on the Earth, and the impalpable remained still in the Deep in its
own Seat as it had been from Eternity.

36. But being the wrath also is in that water in the Deep above the Earth,
therefore constantly through the kindling of the Stars and of the water in the
wrath, such palpable water generateth it self, which with its outermost Birth
stands in Death.

37. Which, being it qualifieth or uniteth with its innermost Birth of the
Astrall Birth or Geniture, it comes to help the Salitter of the corrupted
Earth, and quenches its wrath, whereby in the Astrall Birth or Geniture all
stands in the Life, and so the Earth generateth the Life through the Death.

The Gate of the Mystery.
38. But, that there is a Firmament, between the Waters; which Firmament is
called Heaven; it has this understanding or meaning.

39. The whole Deep, from the Moon to the Earth, stands all with its working
in the wrathful and comprehensible or palpable Birth or Geniture: for the Moon
is the Goddess of the palpable Birth, and so the House of the Devils of Death
and of Hell is in the circuit orb or Extent between the Moon and the Earth.

40. Where therefore the fierce wrath of God in the outermost Birth or Geniture
in the Deep becomes daily kindled and blown up by the Devils and all wicked
Men, through the Great Sins of Man, which still qualify mix unite or
cooperate with the Astral Birth or Geniture in the Deep.

41. Now Therefore God has made the Firmament, which is called Heaven, between
the outermost and innermost Birth, and that is a Partition or division between
the outermost and innermost Birth or Geniture.

42. For, the outermost Birth of the water cannot comprehend the innermost
Birth of the water, which is called Heaven, and which is made out of the midst
or Center of the water.

[ Heaven is the Firmament, viz. the fire-Sea, or FIAT: And it has or
contains both fire and water, and hangs in it self inwardly on the first
Principle, and shall bring its wonders, with or as to the figure of them, into
the Eternal; but its Birth or Geniture fades or passes away:]

43. Now the innermost Birth of Heaven reflects strongly upon the Earth, and
holds the outermost water upon the Earth, together with the Earth also,
strongly captive.

44. And if that were not, then with the Revolution of the Globe of the Earth
the water would be divided or dissolved again; also then would the Earth
Crumble, break, and moulder away in the Deep, [and all would be a Chaos again.]

45. But now therefore that Firmament between the outermost palpable water and
the Inward; holds the Earth and the palpable water Captive.

But now thou may Ask:

What? is the fire then a Firmament of that Heaven, which I can neither see nor
apprehend?

Answer.

46. Yes; It is the Firmament between the clear Deity and the corrupt Nature,
which thou must break through, when thou intendest to come to God; and it is
that very Firmament, which does not quite stand in the wrath, neither is it
altogether or perfectly pure: concerning which it is written, the very Heavens
are not pure in the sight of God, as in Job 15. 15. and at the last Judgment
Day the wratn will be purged from them. For it is written, Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away, says Christ, Matthew. 24.
35. Mark 13. 31.

47. Now that impurity in that Heaven is the wrath, but the purity is the word
of God, which he once spoke, saying; Let the water under the Firmament be
separated from the water above the firmament, Genesis 1.

And that Word stands, and is comprised, in the firmament of the water; and
holds the outward water together with the Earth, captive or fixed.

The Gate of the Deity.
Observe here the hidden Mystery of God.

48. When thou beholdest the Deep above the Earth, thou ought not to say,
that it is not the Gate of God, where God in his holiness dwells: No, no,
think not so: For the whole holy Trinity God the Father Son and Holy Ghost,
dwells in the Center under the Firmament of Heaven, but that very Firmament
cannot comprehend him.

49. Indeed all is as it were one Body, the outermost and inhermost Birth,
together with the Firmament of heaven, as also the Astrall Birth therein, in
and with which the wrath of God also qualifieth mixeth and uniteth; but yet
they are one to another as the Government frame or constitution in Man.

50. Note. Three sorts of Births or Genitures in Man.
The Flesh signifies, 1o. The outward Birth or Genitute, which is the House of
Death. 2o. The second Birth or Geniture in Man is the Astrall, in which the
Life-standeth, and wherein Love and wrath wrestle one with another: And thus
far Man himself knows himself: for the Astrall Birth generateth the Life in
the outermost, that is, in the dead Flesh: 3o. The Third Birth, is generated
between the Astrall and outermost, and that is called the animated or soulish
Birth or Geniture, or the Soul: and is as Large as the whole Man.

51. And that Birth or Geniture, the outward Man neither knows nor
comprehends, neither does the Astrall comprehend it, but every qualifying or
fountain spirit comprehends only its innate or instant Root, which
signifies, or resembles the Heaven.

52. And that animated or soulish Man must press through the Firmament of
Heaven to God, and live with God, else the whole man cannot come into Heaven to
God.

53. For every Man, that desires to be saved, must with his innate instant
Births, or Genitures, be, as the whole Deity with all the three Births in this
world, is.

54. Man cannot be absolutely or wholly pure without wrath and sin, for the
Births of the Depth in this world are not fully pure before the Heart of God,
Job 15. v. 15. but always Love and wrath wrestle one with another, whence God
is called an angry zealous God, Exodus 20. 5. Deuteronomy. 5. 9.

55. Now as man is, in the Government or Order of his Nativity Birth or
Geniture: Just so also is the whole Body of God in or of this world; but in the
water stands the meek Life.

56. As, I. First in the outward Body of God, in or of this world, there is the
congealed, astringent bitter and Hot Death, in which the palpable water is also
congealed and Dead.

57. And therein now is the Darkness, wherein King Lucifer with his Angels, as
also all fleshly or carnal wicked Men lie captive even with or in their living
Bodies, as also the Separated spirits of damned Men.

58. This birth can neither see, hear, feel, smell nor comprehend the Heart of
God: but is or Folly
a Foolish Virgin; which King Lucifer in his Pride has caused to be so.

59. And II. The second Birth is the Astrall, which thou must understand to be
the Life of the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, wherein now the Love and
the wrath is against one another, and therein stands the upper water, which
is a spirit of the life, and therein, or between is the Firmament of Heaven,
which is made out of the midst or Center of the water.

60. Now this Birth or Geniture presses through the outward congealed Birth
quite through Death, and the Astral Life in the death, that is, in the
congealed Earth, Water, and Flesh, of the Beasts and of Men, also of the Fowls,
Fishes, and Worms, or Creeping things.

61. And the Devil can reach half into this Birth, so far as the wrath
comprehends or reaches, and no deeper, and thus far goes his dwelling, and
no Deeper; therefore the devil cannot know, how the other Part in this Birth
has a Root. And so far Man is come in his knowledge from the Beginning of the
world to this time, since his Fall. But the other Root, called the Heaven, the
spirit has kept that hidden and concealed from Man, till this Time, Left the
Devil should have learned it from Man, and should have strowed Poison into it,
for Man, beforehis Eyes.

62. This other Part of the Astrall Birth, which stands in the Love in the
sweet water, is the Firmament of Heaven, which holds the kindled wrath
together with all the Devils, captive. For they cannot enter thereinto, and in
that Heaven dwells the Holy Spirit, which goes forth from the Heart of God,
and striveth or fights against the fierceness, and generateth to himself a
Temple in the midst in the fierceness of the wrath of God.

63. And in this Heaven dwells the Man, that fears God, even with and in
or, alive in the Body here upon Earth.
the living Body: for that Heaven is as well in Man, as in the Deep above the
Earth; And as the Deep above the Earth is, so is Man also both in love and
wrath, till after the departure of the soul: but then when the soul departs
from the Body, then it abides either only in the Heaven of Love, or only in
the Heaven of Wrath.

64. That Part which it here has comprehended in its departure, that is now
its Eternal permanent incessant dwelling House, and from thence it can never
get: for there is a great * Cliff between them and the other: as Christ speaks
of the Rich man, Luke 16. 26.

65. And in this Heaven the Holy Angels dwell amongst us: and the Devils in the
other Part: And in this Heaven, Man lives between Heaven and Hell, and must
endure and suffer from the fierceness, many hard Blows, Temptations,
Persecutions, and many times Torments and Squeezings.

66. 1. Cross. 2. Patience. 3. Hope. 4. Faith.
The wrath is called the Cross, and the Love-Heaven is called Patience, and
the spirit that rises up therein is called Hope and Faith, which qualifieth
mixeth or uniteth with God, and wrestleth with the wrath till it overcomes and
gets the victory, 1 John 5. 4.

67. And herein lies the whole Christian doctrine: He that teaches otherwise,
does not know, what he teaches, for his doctrine has no foot ground or
foundation, and his heart always tottereth wavereth, and doubts and knows
not what it should do.

68. For his spirit always seeks for Rest, but finds it not, for it is
impatient, and always seeks after Novelties, or some New thing; and when it
finds somewhat, it tickleth it self therewith, as if it had found some new
Treasure, and yet no steadfastness stability or certainty in him, but he
seeks continually for Abstinence or for a Diversion.

69. O ye Theologists, the Spirit here Opens a Door and Gate for you: If you
will not now see, and feed your Sheep and Lambs on a green meadow, but on a dry
sear Heath, you must be accomptable for it before the severe earnest and
wrathful Judgment of God; therefore look to it.

70. I take Heaven to witness, that I perform here what I must do: for the
spirit drives me to it, so that I am wholly captivated therewith, and cannot
be freed from it, whatever may befall me hereafter, or ensue upon it.

The Holy Gate.
71. III. The Third Birth or Geniture in the Body of God in or of this world,
is under the firmament of Heaven, hidden or concealed; and the Firmament of
heaven qualifieth mixeth or uniteth there. with, but yet not fully Bodily, but
creaturely, as the Angels, and the Souls of Men do.

72. And this Third Birth or Geniture is the Almighty and Holy Heart of God,
wherein our King Jesus Christ with his natural Body sits at the right hand
of God, as a King and Lord of the whole Body or place of this world, who
encompasseth holds and preserves all, with his Heart.

73. And this Firmament of Heaven is his Throne or footstool, and the
qualifying or fountain spirits of his natural Body rule in the whole Body of
this world, and all is tied bound or united with them, whatsoever stands in
the Astral Birth in the Part of Love: The other part of this world is tied
bound and united with the Devil.

74. Thou must not think, as Johannes Calvus or Calvinus, thought, which was,
that the Body of Christ is not an Almighty Being, and that it comprehends or
reaches no further then a little Circumscribed Place wherein it is.

75. No; thou child of Man, thou errest, and do not rightly understand the
Divine Power; Does not every man in his Astrall qualifying or fountain Spirits
comprehend the whole place or Body of this world, and the place comprehends
Man? it is all but one Body, only there are distinct Members.

76. Why then should not the qualifying or fountain spirits in the natural
Body of Christ qualify mix or unite with the qualifying or fountain spirits of
Nature? Is not his Body also out of the qualifying or fountain spirits of
Nature, and his heart animated or become soulish from or out of the third Birth
or Geniture, which is the Heart of God, which comprehends all Angels and the
Heaven of Heavens; even the whole Father.

77. Ye Calvinists, desist from your Opinion, and do not Torment your selves
with the comprehensible or palpable Being; for God is a Spirit; John 4. 24. and
in the comprehensibility or palpability stands Death.

78. The Body of Christ is no more in the hard comprehensibility or
palpability, but in the Divine comprehensibility or Palpability of Nature, like
the Angels.

79. For our Bodies also at the Resurrection will have no more such hard Flesh
and Bones, but be like the Angels; and though indeed all forms and powers shall
be therein, and all faculties and Members even to the Privy Parts, and these
shall be in another manner of form, and so also the Entralls and Guts, and yet
we shall not have the hard comprehensibility or Palpability.

80. For Christ says to Mary Magdalen in Joseph's Garden at the Sepulcher,
after his resurrection: Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my God and
to your God, Joh. 20. v. 17. As if he would say, I have not now the Bestial
Body any more, although I show my self to thee in my form or shape which I had,
otherwise, thou, in thy bestial could not see me.

81. And so during the Forty Days after his Resurrection he did not always
walk vifibly among the Disciples, but invisibly; according to his heavenly and
angelical Property; but when he would speak or talk with his Disciples, then he
showed or presented himself in a comprehensible or palpable manner and form,
that thereby he might speak natural words with them, for the corruption cannot
comprehend or apprehend the Divine [words or things].

82. Also it sufficiently appears, that his Body was of an angelical kind, in
that he went to his Disciples through the Doors being shut, John 20. 19.

83. Thus, thou must know now, that his Body qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with
all the seven spirits in Nature in the Astrall Birth in the part of Love, and
holds Sin, Death, and the Devil captive in its wrath-Part.

84. And thus thou now understandest, what God made on the Second Day, when he
separated the water under the Firmament, from the water above the Firmament.
Thou see also, How thou art in this world every where in Heaven and also in
Hell, and dwell between Heaven and Hell in great Danger.

85. Thou see also, how Heaven is in a Holy man, and that every where,
wheresoever thou stand, go or lie, if thy spirit do but qualify or
cooperate with God, then as to that Part, thou art in Heaven, and thy Soul is
in God. Therefore also says Christ; My Sheep are in my Hands, no man can pull
them away from me, John 10.

86. In like manner thou see also, How thou art always in Hell among all the
Devils, as to the wrath, if thy Eyes were but open, thou would see wonderful
things, but thou stand between Heaven and Hell, and can see neither of
them, and walk upon a very Narrow Bridge.

87. Some Men have many Times, according to or in the Sidereal or Astral
spirit, entered in thither: being ravished in an Ecstasy, as men call it: and
have presently known the Gates of Heaven and of Hell, and have told showed and
declared how that many men dwell in Hell with or in their living Bodies, or
with their Bodies alive: And such indeed have been scorned derided or laughed
at, but with great ignorance and indiscretion; for it is Just so as they
declare: which I will describe also more at large in its due place, and show in
what manner and condition it is with them.

88. But that the water has a Twofold Birth, I will here prove it also with or
by the Language of Nature. For that is the Root or Mother of all the Languages,
which are in this world; and therein stands the whole perfect knowledge of
all things.

89. For when Adam Spoke at the first, he gave Names to all the Creatures,
according to their qualities and innate Instant Operations, virtues or
faculties. And it is the very Language of the total universal Nature, but is
not known to every One. For it is a hidden secret Mystery, which is imparted to
me by the Grace of God from the Spirit, which has a Delight and Longing
toward me.

Now Observe:

90. The word Wasser [water] is thrust forth from the Heart, Wasser.
and closes the Teeth together, and passes over the astringent and Bitter
qualities and touches them not, but goes forth through the Teeth, and the
Tongue contracteth and rouzeth up it self together with the spirit, and helps
to hiss, and so qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with the Spirit, and the spirit
presses very forcibly through the Teeth. But when the spirit is almost quite
gone forth, then the Astringent and Bitter spirit contracteth and rouzeth up it
self, and afterward first qualifieth with the word, but yet it sits still
in its seat, and afterward jarreth mightily and strongly in the syllable- ser.

91. But now, that the Spirit conceives it self at the Heart, and comes
forth, and closes the Teeth together, and hisseth with the Tongue through the
Teeth; it signifies, that the Heart of God has moved it self, and made a
closure round about it, which is the Firmament of Heaven: Also, as the Teeth do
shut and close together; and then the Spirit goes through the Teeth: so also
the spirit goes forth from the heart into the Astrall Birth or Geniture.

92. And as the Tongue frames it self for the hissing, and qualifieth mixeth
or uniteth with the spirit, and moves therewith: so the soul of Man co-Imageth
or frames it self with the Holy Spirit, and qualifieth operateth or uniteth
therewith, and presses jointly together in the power thereof, through Heaven,
and rules together also therewith in the Word of God.

93. But that the Astringent and Bitter qualities awaken behind afterward, and
co-image afterward to the framing of the word: it signifies, that indeed all
is as it were one Body, but the Heaven and the Holy Spirit together with the
Heart of God, has its proper One Copy has, Life.
Seat to it self, and the Devil together with the wrath of God, can neither
comprehend the Holy Spirit, nor the Heaven; but the Devil together with the
wrath, hangs in the outward Birth in the word, and the wrath helps to Image
all in the outermost Birth in this world, whatsoever stands in the
comprehensibility or palpability: Just as the astringent and bitter qualities
rouse themselves behind afterward to the framing of the word, and qualify
operate or unite therewith.

94. But that the spirit first goes over the astringent and bitter qualities
unperceived; it signifies, that the Gate of God is every where in this world
all over, wherein the Holy Ghost rules, and that the Heaven stands open
every where, even in the midst or center of the Earth: And that the Devil no
where can either see comprehend or apprehend the Heaven, but is a grumbling and
snarling HellHound, which afterward first comes out from behind, when the
Holy Ghost has built or raised to himself a Church and Temple; and destroys
it in the wrath, and hangs behind at the word as an Enemy, who will not
endure, that a Temple of God should be raised or built in his Land or Country,
whereby his Kingdom might be lessened or diminished.

The One and Twentieth Chapter.
Of the Third Day.

1. ALthough the Spirit in the Writings of Moses has kept the Deepest
Mysteries secret hidden and concealed in the Letter, yet all is so very
regularly described, that there is no Defect at all in the Order thereof.

2. For when God through the Word had created Heaven and Earth, and had
separated the Light from the Darkness, and had given a place to each of them,
then presently each began its Birth or Geniture, and qualifying or working.

3. On the First Day, God drove together [or compacted] the Corrupt Salitter
which came to be so in the kindling of his wrath: I say, God then drove it
together or Created it through the strong spirit; for the word Schuff [created]
signifies here, a Driving together, [or Compaction].

4. In this driving together or compaction of the corrupted wrath- Salitter,
was King Lucifer also, as an Impotent Prince together with his Angels, driven
into the Hole of the wrath- Salitter into that place, where the outward half
dead comprehensibility is generated, which is the place or Space between the
Nature-Goddesse the Moon, and the Dead Earth.

5. Now when this was done, the Deep became clear, and with the hidden or
concealed Heaven, the Light was separated from the Darkness, and the Globe of
the Earth in the great wheel of Nature was rolled or turned once about; and
accordingly there passed the Time of the Diurnal motion of the Earth 24 Hours.
one Revolution, or of One Day, which contains Twenty Four Hours.

6. In the Duration of the Second Day, began the sharp separation; and the
incomprehensible Cliff between the Wrath and the Love of Light was made, and so
King Lucifer firmly strongly or fast bolted up into the House of Darkness, and
was reserved to the final Judgment.

7. And so also the water of Life was separated from the water of Death, yet in
that manner as that they hang one to another in this Time of the world, as Body
and Soul, and yet neither of them comprehend the other; but the Heaven which
was made out of the midst or center of the water, is the Cliffe between them,
so that the comprehensible or palpable water is a Death, and the
incomprehensible or impalpable is the Life.

8. Thus now the incomprehensible spirit, which is God, rules every where in
this world, and replenisheth or fills all, and the comprehensible hangs or
depends on him, and dwells in the Darkness, and can neither see, hear,
smell, nor feel the incomprehensible one, but sees the works thereof, and is a
Destroyer of them.

9. And now when God had bound up the Devil in the Darkness through the
closure of the Heaven, which Heaven is every where in all places; then HE
began again his wonderful Birth or Geniture in the seventh Nature-spirit, and
all generated again as it had done from Eternity.

10. For Moses writes thus: And God said, Let the Earth send forth Grass and
Herbs that yield a Seed, and the fruit Tree yielding or bearing fruit after its
kind, and which has its own seed in it self upon the Earth, and it was so
done. And the Earth sent forth grass, and the herb that yields seed each
after its kind, and the tree yielding fruit, and which has its seed in it
self, every one according to its kind, and God saw that it was good. And so out
of Evening and Morning the Third Day came to be, Genesis 1. v. 11, 12, 13.

11. This indeed is very rightly and properly described, but the true ground
sticks hidden or concealed in the Word, and has never been understood by
Man. For Man since the Fall could never comprehend or apprehend the inward
Birth or Geniture to perceive, How the heavenly Birth or Geniture is: but his
Reason lay captivated in the outward comprehensibility or palpability, and
could not penetrate and press through Heaven, and see the inward Birth or
Geniture of God, which also is in the corrupted Earth and every where in all
Places.

12. Thou must not here think, that God has made some New thing, which never
was before. For if that were so, then there had been another God, which is not
possible to be. For without, or besides, this one only God, nothing is at all,
for the Gates of Hell are not any where without beyond or absent from this one
only God; only there is a Partition or distinction between the love in the
light, and the kindled wrath in the Darkness, so that the one cannot
comprehend the other, and yet hang one to another as one Body.

13. The Salitter, out of which the Earth is come to be, was from Eternity, and
stood in the seventh qualifying or fountain spirit, which is the Naturespirit,
and the other six have generated the seventh continually, and are encompassed
or surrounded therewith, or lie captivated or enclosed therein as in their
Mother, and are the power and life of the seventh, just as the Astrall Birth
is, in the Flesh.

14. But when King Lucifer had stirred the wrath in this Birth or Geniture, and
had with his loftiness brought the Poison and Death into it, then in the
wrathful Birth, in the fierceness, or Sting of Death, such Earth and Stones
were Generated.

15. And upon this now ensued the Spewing out thereof: for the Deity could not
endure such a Birth or Geniture in the Love and Light of God, but the corrupted
Salitter must be driven together in a Lump, and Lord Lucifer also with it, so
then presently the innate Light in the corrupted Salitter, went out or
extinguished, and the closure of the Heaven between the Wrath and the Love was
made, that so such Salitter might be generated no more, and that Heaven might
hold the Wrath in the outermost Birth or Geniture in Nature captive in the
Darkness, and be an Eternal Partition or separation between them.

16. But this being accomplished in the Two Days, then on the Third Day the
Light rose up in the Darkness, and the Darkness together with the Prince
thereof, could not comprehend it:

17. For there, out of the Earth sprung up Grass and Herbs, and Trees, and
there now also it stands written thus: Each according to its kind, Genesis 1. v.
12. In these words lies the Kernel of the eternal Birth or Geniture hidden or
concealed, and cannot be comprehended or apprehended by or with Flesh and
Blood, but the Holy Ghost through the animated or soulish Birth, must kindle
the Astrall man, otherwise he is blind herein, and understands nothing but
concerning Earth and Stones, also Grass, Herbs, and wooden Trees.

18. But now is it written here; God sprach, said,
Let the Earth bring forth Grass, and Herbs, and fruitful Trees.

Observe here:

19. The word Sprach, [Said] is an Eternal word, and was before the times of
the wrath; from eternity in this Salitter, when it stood yet in the heavenly
form and life, and now also it is not quite dead in its Center, but only in the
comprehensibility or palpability.

20. But now when the Light rose up again in the outward comprehensibility, or
in Death, then the Eternal Word stood in its full Birth, and generated the life
through and out of Death, and the corrupted Salitter brought forth fruit again.

21. But being the eternal word must qualify mix or unite with the corruption
in the Wrath, thereupon the Bodies of the fruits were Evil and Good. For the
outward Birth or Geniture of the fruits must be out of or from the Earth which
is in Death; And the spirit or life must be out of the Astral Birth, which
stands in Love and Wrath.

22. For thus stood the Birth or Geniture of Nature in the Time of the
Kindling, and was thus together incorporated in the Earth, and must also in
such a Birth spring up again: For it is written; that the dead Earth should let
the Grass and Herbs, and Trees spring up, each according to its kind, Genesis 1.
12. that is, according to the kind and quality, as it had been from eternity,
and as it had been in the heavenly quality, kind and form. For that is called
its own kind, which is received in the mothers Body or Womb, and is its own by
right of Nature, as its own peculiar Life.

23. Thus also the Earth brought forth no strange Life, but even that which had
been in it from eternity; And as before the time of the wrath it had brought
forth heavenly fruit, which had a holy pure heavenly Body, and were the food of
Angels: so now it brought forth fruits, according to its comprehensible
palpable hard, Evil, wrathful, poisonous, venomous, half-dead kind: for as the
Mother was, so were her children.

24. Not that the fruits of the Earth are thereupon wholly in the wrath of God:
for the incorporated or compacted Word, which is immortal and incorruptible,
which was from eternity in the Salitter of the Earth, sprung up again in the
Body of death, and brought forth fruit out of the dead Body of the Earth: but
the Earth comprehended not the Word, but the Word comprehended the Earth.

25. And now as the whole Earth was, together with the Word; so was the fruit
also, but the word remained in the Center of the Heaven, which is also in this
place, hiddenly; and this Birth or Geniture caused the seven qualifying or
fountain spirits, out of or from the outermost, corrupt and dead Birth or
Geniture to form the Body; and it self, viz. the Word or Heart of God remained
in its heavenly seat sitting on the Throne of Majesty, and filled the Astrall
and also the mortal Birth or Geniture, but to them was the holy life altogether
incomprehensible.

26. Thou must not think, that thereupon the outermost dead Birth or Geniture
of the Earth has gotten such a Life through the risen word that sprung up, so
that it is no more a Death: No; that can never be, for that which is once dead
in God, that, is really dead, and in its own power can never be living again,
but the Word, which qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with the Astrall Birth in the
Part of the Love, that generateth the Life through the astrall Birth or
Geniture; through the Death.

27. For thou see plainly, How all the Fruits of the Earth, whatsoever it
brings forth, must putrify and Rot; also they are a Death.

28. But, that the Fruits get another Body, then the Earth is; which is much
fuller of virtue, fairer, or more beautiful; also of a better taste relish and
smell: it is, because the Astrall Birth or Geniture receives power or virtue
from the Word, and forms or frames another Body, which stands half in the
Death, and half in the Life, and stands hidden between the Wrath of God, and
the Love.

29. But, that the Fruits upon the Body, are much pleasanter lovelier sweeter
and milder, and with a Good Taste and relish: that, is even the Third Birth out
of the Earth; according to which the Earth shall be purged and cleansed at the
End of this time, and shall be set or put again into its first Place, but the
Wrath will abide in Death.

The richly joyful Gate of Man.
30. Behold, thus says the Spirit in the Word, which is the very Heart of the
Earth, and which rises or springs up in his Heaven, in the half flash of the
Life, wherewith my spirit in its knowledge qualifieth mixeth or uniteth, and
through which I write these words.

31. Man is made out of the Seed of the Earth, out of an incorporated or
compacted Mass or Lump;

[ Understand out of the Matrix of the Earth, wherein ]

and not out of the wrath, but out of the Birth or Geniture of the Earth: and
stood in the Astrall Birth or Geniture in the part of the Love, but wrath hung
to him, which he should have put forth from himself as the the fruit puts
forth from it, the bitterness of the Tree.

32. And that he did not, but reached back from the Love into the wrath, and
lusted after his dead or mortal Mother to eat of her, and to suck her breast,
and to stand upon her stock.

33. Now according to his wrestling, so also it befell him, and so he brought
himself with his outermost Birth or Geniture into the Death or mortality of his
mother, and with his life he brought himself out from the Love into the Part of
the wrathful Astral Birth or Geniture.

34. And there he stands now between Heaven and Hell in the Face of the
Devil in his kingdom, against whom the Devil warreth fights and striveth
continually, that he might either banish him out of his Country into the Earth,
or make him a child of wrath in Hell.

And what is Now his Hope?

Answer.

35. Behold! thou blind Heathen: behold! thou Render Perverter Obscurer and
wrester of the Scriptures, open thy eyes wide, and be not ashamed at this
simple plainness; for God lies hid in the Center, and is yet much more Simple
and plain, but thou see him not.

36. Behold! thy spirit or thy soul, is generated from or out of thy Astral
Birth or Geniture, and is the Third Birth in thee; Just as an Apple upon a Tree
is the Third Birth or Geniture of the Earth, and has not its vegetation in
from or within the Earth, but from above the Earth: and if it were a Spirit, as
thy soul is, it would not suffer the Earth any more to tie or bind it to
corruption.

37. But thou must know, that the Apple on its stock or Branch, however with
its innermost Birth or Geniture, qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with the Word of
God, through whose power it is grown out of the Earth.

38. But being the wrath is in its or Mother of its Body.
Bodily or Corporeal Mother, therefore it cannot set or put it out from the
Comprehensible or palpable Birth, but must remain with its Body in the
palpablenesse or comprehensibility in Death.

39. But in its power, in which its life stands, wherewith it qualifieth
mixeth or uniteth with the Word of God, it will in its mother in the power of
the Word at the last Judgment Day be set or put again into its heavenly Place;
and be separated from the wrathful and dead or mortal palpablenesse, and
spring up in the Heaven of this world, in a heavenly form, and (...) a Fruit
for Men in the other LIfe.

[ Here understand; The power of the Principle, out Apple and All grows,
shall in the Renovation of the world spring up again in Paradise, with the
wonders:]

40. But being thou art made out of the Seed of the Earth,

[ Red Earth, is Fire and Water, conceived with or Fiat, out of the Matrix of
the Earth; but when Man Imagined or set his desire into the Earth, he became
Earthly. and have set or put thy Body back again into thy Mother, therefore thy
Body also is become a palpable dead or Mortal Body, such as thy Mother is.

41. And thy Body has the same Hope which thy Mother the Earth has, viz. that
at the last Judgment Day, in the power of the word, it shall be set or put
again into its first Place.

42. But being thy Astral Birth stands here on Earth in the wrath, and
qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with the Love in the Word, Just as the Fruit on
the Tree does: for the power of the fruit qualifieth or uniteth with the word;
Therefore thy Hope stands in God.

For the Astrall Birth or Geniture stands in Love and Wrath; and, that, in
this time it cannot prevent, in regard of the outermost Birth or Geniture in
the Flesh, which stands in Death.

43. For the dead or Mortal Flesh has encompassed the Astrall Birth, and Man's
Flesh is a dead Carcass, whilst it i^ yet in the Mothers body or womb, and is
encompassed with Hell and Gods wrath.

44. But now the Astrall Birth generateth the animated soulish Birth, viz. the
Third, which stands in the word, (...) the incorporated or compacted word
lies hidden in i^s Heaven.

The Sulphur to he [production of the] Soul, is the first Principle in the
eternal will-spirit, and comes to Life in the third Principle, and so lives
between love and wrath, and hangs to born:]

45. But now being thou have thy Reason, and art not like the Apple on the
Tree, but art Created an Angel and the similitude or Image of God, instead of
the Expulsed Devils, and know how thou can with thy Astrall Birth, in the
part of Love, qualify or unite with the Word of God; therefore thou can in
the Center in the Word, set or put thy animated or soulish Birth into Heaven,
and thou can with thy soul, even with thy or, Body alive.
living Body in this Dead or Mortal palpability rule with God, in Heaven.

46. For the Word is in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Romans 10. 8. and qualifieth or
uniteth with the Soul as if it were one Being; and if thy Soul stands in the
Love, then it also is one Being. And, thou may say, that according to thy
soul thou sit in Heaven, and live and reignest with God.

[ Understand; according to the spirit of the soul, ]

47. For, the soul, which apprehends the Word, has an open Gate in Heaven,
and can be prevented by nothing, neither does the Devil see the soul, because
it is not in his Country or Dominions.

48. But being thy Astrall Birth stands with the one part in the wrath, and
that the Flesh through the wrath stands in Death, thereupon the Devil, in the
part of the wrath, sees continually even into thy Heart, and if thou lets him
have any Room or place there, then he teareth that part of the Astrall Birth,
which stands in the Love, out from the word.

49. And then thy Heart is a dark Valley: And if thou do not Labor and work
quickly again to the Birth of the Light, then he kindles the wrathfire
therein, and then shall thy soul be spewed out from the Word, and then it
qualifieth or uniteth with the wrath of God, and so afterward thou art a Devil,
and not an Angel, and can not with thy animated or soulish Birth, reach the
Gates of Heaven.

50. But if thou fightest and strivest with the Devil, and keep the Gate of
Love in thy Astrall Birth, and so departest from hence as to the Body, then thy
Soul remains in the Word quite hidden from the Devil, and rei^neth with God,
even unto the Day of the Restitution of that which was Lost.

51. But if thou stand with thy Astrall Birth in the wrath when thou
departest from hence as to the Body, and thy Soul not comprehended in the word;
then thou can never reach the Gates of Heaven, but into what thou have sown
thy seed, that is, thy Soul, in that very Part shall thy Body also arise.

The Gate of the Power.
52. But that, Soul and Body, shall or find one another.
come together again, at the Day of the Resurrection, thou may perceive so
much, here by the Earth. For the Creator said; Let the Earth bring forth Grass
and Herbs, and Trees bearing Fruit, each according to its Kind. And then each
sprung up according to its kind; and grew, and as before the time of the wrath
it had a Heavenly Body, so it got now an Earthly one, answerable to its Mother.

53. But it is to be considered, how all was comprised in the word at the great
tumult and uproar of the Devil, so that all sprung up in its own Being
according to its Power virtue and kind, as if it had never been destroyed or
altered at all.

54. Now if it were thus at that Time, when there was such murdering and
robbing, sure it will be much more so at the Last Judgment Day, when the Earth
shall be separated in the kindled wrath-fire, and shall be living again or
revived, then surely it will be comprehended in the Word of Love, as it has in
the same Word here generated its Fruit, of Grass, Herbs and Trees, as also all
manner of mineral Oras of Silver and of Gold.

55. But being the Astrall Birth of the Earth stands in the Love, and the
outward in Death, therefore will each remain in its seat, and so Life and Death
will sever themselves.

56. And where now would the Soul of Man rather be at the day of Regeneration,
then with its Note, Christ's not being ascended to his Father.
Father; that is, in the Body, which has Generated it?

57. But being the Soul, all the while the Body had been in Death, remained
hidden in the Word, and being the same Word also holds the Earth in the
Astral birth in the Love, therefore it qualifieth mixeth or uniteth through the
Word, all the time of its hiddennesse and secre^ie, also with its Mother the
Body, according or as to the Astral Birth or Geniture in the Earth, and so Body
and Soul in the Word, were never separated one from another, but live jointly
and equally together in God.

58. And though indeed the Bestial Body must putrify and Rot, yet its power
and virtue lives, and in the mean while there grow out of its power, in its
Mother, fair beautiful Roses Blossoms and Flowers: and though it were quite
burnt up and Consumed in the Fire, yet its power and virtue stands in the
four Elements in the Word, and the Soul qualifieth mixeth or uniteth therewith:
for the Soul is in Heaven, and the same Heaven is every where, even in the
midst or center of the Earth.

59. O Dear Man view thy self for a while, in this Looking-glass; thou will
find it more largely to be read of concerning the Creation of Man: this I set
down here for this very cause, that thou might the better understand the
power of Creation, and that thou might the better conceive, and fit thy Self
for, this Spirit, and so learn to understand its Language.

The open Gate of the Earth.
Now it might be Asked:

From or Out of what matter or power and Virtue then did the Grass, Herbs, and
Trees spring forth? what manner of substance or condition or Constitution has
this kind of Creature?

Answer.

60. The simple says, God made All things out of Nothing: but He knows not,
That God; neither does he know, what He is: for when he beholds the Earth,
together with the Deep above the Earth, he thinks, verily, all this is not
God, or else he thinks, God is not there. He always Imagines with himself,
that God dwells only above the Azure Heaven of the Stars, and rules as it
were, with some Spirit which goes forth from him into this world; and that his
Body is not present here upon the Earth, nor in the Earth.

61. And just such Opinions and Tenants I have read also in the Books and
Writings of Doctors ( der Doct. Tho^en. Learned in Folly; of verbal Trifles.
Doctoren): and there are also very many Opinions Disputations and
Controversies arisen about this very thing among the Learned.

62. But seeing God opens to me the Gate of his Being in his great Love, and
remembers the Covenant, which he has with Man, therefore I will faithfully
and earnestly according to my Gifts, unshut and set wide Open All the Gates of
God, so far as God will give me leave.

63. It is not so to be understood, as that I am sufficient enough in these
things, but only so far as I am able to comprehend.

64. For, the Being of God, is like a Wheel, wherein many wheels are made one
in another, upward, downward, crosse-ways, and yet continually turn all of them
together.

65. Which indeed when a man beholds the wheel, he highly marvaileth at it,
and cannot at once in its turning learn to conceive and apprehend it: but the
more he beholds the wheel, the more he learneth its Form or frame; and the
more he learneth, the greater Longing he has to the Wheel; for he continually
sees somewhat, that is more and more wonderful, so that a man can neither
behold it or learn it Enough.

66. Thus, I also, what I do not enough describe in one place concerning this
Great Mystery, that you will find in another place: and what I cannot describe
in this book in regard of the Largeness of the Mystery, and my Incapacity,
that you will find in the other following.

67. For this Book is the first sprouting, or vegetation of this Twigg, which
springs or grows Green in its Mother, and is as a Child, which is learning
to go, and is not able to run a Pace at the First.

68. For though the Spirit sees the Wheel, and would fain comprehend its form
or frame in every Place, yet it cannot do it exactly enough, because of the
turning of the wheel: But when it comes about again, so that the spirit can
see the first apprehended or conceived form again, then continually it learneth
more and more, and always delights and loves the wheel, and longs after
it still more and more.

Now Observe:

69. The Earth has just such qualities and qualifying or fountain spirits, as
the Deep above the Earth, or as Heaven has, and all of them together belong to
one only Body: and the whole or universal God is that one only Body: but that
thou do not wholly and fully see and know him, Sins are the cause, with and
by which, thou in this great Divine Body, Lie shut up in the dead or m^^tal
Flesh, and the power or virtue of the Deity is hidden from thee, even as the
marrow in the Bones is hidden from the Flesh.

70. But if thou in the spirit breakest through the Death of the Flesh, then
thou see the hidden God. For as the Marrow in the Bones penetrateth presses
or breaks thorough, and gives virtue power and strength to the Flesh, and
yet the Flesh cannot comprehend or apprehend the Marrow, but only the power
and virtue thereof: no more can thou see the hidden Deity in thy Flesh, but
thou receivest its power, and understandest therein that God dwells in thee.

71. For the dead or mortal Flesh belongs not or, into.
to the Birth of life, as that it can receive or conceive the life of the Light
as a propriety, but the life of the Light in God rises up in the dead or
mortal Flesh, and generateth to it self, from or out of the dead or mortal
Flesh another heavenly and Living Body, which knows and understands the
Light.

72. For this Body is but a Shell, from which the new Body grows.

[ The new Body grows out of the heavenly substantiality Mystery of the Old
Body:]

As it is, with a Grain of wheat in the Earth. The Husk or shell shall not rise
and be living again, no more then it does in the wheat, but will remain forever
in Death and in Hell.

73. Therefore, Man carries about with him here upon Earth, in his Body the
Devil's Eternal Dwelling house. O thou fair excellent Goddess! may thou not
well Prance and Trick thy self therein, and in the mean while invite the Devil
into the new Birth for a Guest, will it not profit thee very much; take heed,
thou do not Generate a New Devil, who will remain in his own House.

74. Behold the Mystery of the Earth, As that Generateth or brings forth, so
must thou Generate or bring forth. The Earth is not that Body, which grows or
sprouteth forth, but is the Mother of that Body, As also thy Flesh is not the
spirit, but the Flesh is the Mother of the Spirit.

75. But now in Both of them, viz. in the Earth and in thy Flesh, there is the
Light of the clear Deity hidden, and it breaks thorough, and generateth to it
self a Body according to the kind of each Body, for Man according to his Body;
and for the Earth, according to its Body; for as the Mother is, so also is the
child.

76. Man's Child, is the Soul, which is generated out of the Astral Birth from
or out of the Flesh; and the Earths child is the Grass, the Herbs, the Trees,
Silver, Gold, and all mineral Oars.

Now thou Ask:

How then shall I do, that I may understand somewhat concerning the Birth or
Geniture of the Earth?

Answer.

77. Behold! the Birth of the Earth stands in its Birth or Geniture, as the
whole Deity does, and there is no difference at all, but only as to the
corruption in the wrath, wherein comprehensibility or palpability stands:
that only is the difference or distinction, and is the Death between God and
the Earth.

78. Thou must know, that all the seven spirits of God are in the Earth, and
Generate, as they do in Heaven: For, the Earth is in God, and God never Dyed,
but the outermost Birth or Geniture is dead, in which the wrath rests, and is
reserved, for King Lucifer; to be a House of Death and of Darkness, and to be
an eternal Prison or Dungeon.

Of the seven Spirits of God, and of their operation in the Earth.
79. The First is the astringent Spirit, and that contracteth or draws
together in the Astral Birth of the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, a
Mass or Lump in the Earth, through the kindling of the superior Birth or
Geniture above the Earth, and dries that up with its sharp coldness, just as
it contracteth or draws the water together, and makes Ice thereof, so it
also contracteth or draws together the water in the Earth, and makes thereof
a dry Mass or Lump.

80. Then next, the Bitter spirit, which existeth in the fire-flash, is also in
the Matter or Mass, and that cannot endure to be captivated or imprisoned in
the dried exficcated Matter, but rubs it self against the astringent spirit in
the dried Mass or Lump, so long till it kindles the fire; and so when that is
done, then the Bitter spirit is terrified, and gets its life.

Conceive this here aright.

81. In the Earth, thou can not perceive, find, or search out any thing,
besides the Herbs Plant or Vegetables and Metals, more then Astringency,
Bitterness, and water: But the water now therein is sweet, opposite to the
other two Qualities: Also it is thin or Transparent, and the other two are
Hard, Rough and Sour, and always the one is against the other. Thereupon there
is a perpetual struggling fighting and wrestling, but in the struggling of
these three, the Life does not yet stand: but they are a dark valley, and they
are three things which can never endure one another, but there is an eternal
struggling amongst them.

83. And from hence mobility takes its Original, also Gods wrath which
rests in the hidden secrecy, takes its original from hence: and so also the
Original of the Devil, of Death and of Hell, it arises from hence; as you may
read thereof, concerning the Fall of the Devil.

The Depth in the Center of the Birth or Geniture.
84. Now when these three, viz. the Astringency, Bitterness and Sweetness rub
themselves one against another, then the astringent quality grows
predominant, for it is the strongest, and forcibly attracteth or draws the
sweetness together, for the Sweetness is meek and extensive in respect of its
Supplenesse, and must yield to be captivated or imprisoned.

85. And so when that is done, then the Bitterness is also together captivated
or imprisoned in the Body of the sweet water, and becomes also together dried
up, and then the Astringent sweet and bitter are one in another, and struggle
so strongly in the dried Mass or Lump, till the Mass be quite dry: For the
Astringent quality always contracteth it together, and dries it more and more.

86. But when the sweet water can defend it self no longer, then ( anguish)
rises up in it, just as in Man, when he is Dying, when the spirit is departing
from the Body, and so the Body yields it self captive as a Prisoner to Death:
just so the water also yields it self captive as a Prisoner.

87. And in this (anxious rising up) an anguishing Heat is generated, whereby a
Humor or moisture.
Sweat presses forth, as it does in a dying Man; and that sweat qualifieth
mixeth or uniteth with the astringent and bitter qualities, for it is their
son, which they have generated out of the sweet water, which they had killed
and brought to Death.

88. Now when that is done, then the Astringent and Bitter qualities rejoice in
their son, understand in the Sweat, and each of them gives to it their power
virtue and Life, and stuff it, like a greedy Gurmandizing Hogg, so that it
soon comes to grow full and swelled: For the astringent quality, as also the
bitter, always draw the sap out of the Earth, and stuff it into their young
son.

89. But the Body, which was first contracted or drawn together out of the
sweet water, remains dead or Mortal, and the or Juice of the Body.
Sweat of the body, which qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with the astringent and
bitter qualities, has the house therein, where it spreads it self forth,
grows Gross Fat, Luscious, Lascivious.
full and Lusty or Wanton.

90. But now the Two Qualities, viz. the Astringent and Bitter cannot leave
their contention and opposition or contrary will, but wrestle continually one
with another: The astringent is strong, and the bitter is swift.

91. And so now when the astringent grapleth with the bitter, then the bitter
leaps aside, and takes the sonne's sap along with it; And then the astringent
every where presses hard after it, and would fain captivate it, then the
Bitter rusheth out from the Body, and extends it self so far as it can.

92. But then when the Body begins to be too straight or narrow for it, that it
can extend or stretch it no more, and that the contention be too great, then
the bitter must yield it self captive. Yet for all that, the astringent cannot
kill the bitter, but only holds it captive, and so the strife in them is so
great, that the bitter breaks out of the body in Fibrae.
strings like Thrids, and takes some of the Sons sap or Body along with it.

And this now is the vegetation or growing and incorporating or imbodying of a
Root in the Earth.

Now thou Ask:

How can God be, in that Birth or Geniture?

Answer.

93. Behold! that is the Birth or Geniture of Nature: and so now, if in these
three qualities, viz. the astringent, bitter and sweet, the wrath-fire were not
kindled, then thou would plainly see, where God is.

94. But now the wrath-fire is in all Three: for the astringent is too very
cold, and contracteth or draws the Body too hard together, and the sweet is
too very thick and dark, which the astringent soon catches, and holds it
captive, and dries it too much: and then the bitter is too stinging,
murtherous and raging; and so they cannot be reconciled to agree.

95. Else if the Astringent were not so much kindled in the cold fire, and the
water not so thick, also the bitter not so swelling rising and Murtherous, then
they Might kindle or, that Fire.
the fire, from whence the Light would Exist, and from the light the Love, and
so out of the fire flash, the Tone would Exist: and then thou should see
plainly, whether there would not be a heavenly Body there; wherein the light of
God would and does shine.

96. But being the astringent is too cold, and dries the water too much,
thereupon it captivateth the Hot file in its coldness, and kills or
destroys the Body of the sweet water, and so the bitter captivateth it, and
dries it up.

97. And so in this ex^iccation or drying up, the unctuousnesse or fatness in
the sweet water is killed or destroyed, in which the fire kindles it self, and
so out of that unctuosity or fatness an astringent and bitter spirit comes to
be. For when the unctuousnesse or fat in the sweet water dies, then is it
turned into an anguishing sweat, in which the astringent and bitter do qualify
mix or unite.

98. The meaning is not, that the water dies quite; no, that cannot be, but
the astringent spirit takes the sweetness or the unctuosity and fatness of
the water captive in its cold fire, and qualifieth mixeth or uniteth therewith,
and makes use thereof for its Spirit: Its own spirit being wholly benumbed,
and in Death, therefore it makes use of the water for its Life, and draws
out its unctuosity or fatness to it self, and bereaveth it of its power.

99. And then the water becomes an anguishing sweat, which stands between
Death and Life, and so the fire of the Heat cannot kindle it self: For the
unctuosity or fatness is captivated in the cold fire, and so the whole Body
remains a dark Valley, which stands in an anguishing Birth or Geniture, and
cannot comprehend or reach the life. For the life which stands in the Light,
cannot elevate it self in the hard, bitter, and astringent Body: for it is
captivated in the cold fire, but not quite dead.

100. And thou must see, that all this is really so: for Example, take a Root
which is of a Hot quality, put it in warm water; or take it into thy Mouth, and
make it warm and supple or moist; and then thou will soon perceive its life,
and active or operative quality: But so long as it is without or absent from
the Heat, it is captivated in Death, and is cold as any other Root or piece of
wood is.

101. And then thou see, that the Body upon the Root is dead also: for when
the virtue is gone out of the Root, then the Body is but a dead Carcass, and
can operate or Effect Nothing at all: and that is, because the astringent and
bitter spirit has killed or destroyed the Body of the water, and attracted the
fatness or unctuosity thereof to it self; and thus they have drawn Bred or
hatched up their spirit in the dead Body.
or sucked up the Spirit thereof, into the dead Body.

102. Otherwise, if the sweet water could keep its unctuosity or fatness in
its own power, and that the astringent and the bitter spirit did rub themselves
one with another very gently in the sweet water, then they would kindle the
unctuosity or fatness in the sweet water, and then the Light would instantly
generate it self in the water, and would enlighten the astringent and the
bitter quality.

103. Whereupon they would get their true Life, and would be satisfied by the
Light, and rejoice highly therein, and from that living Joy, Love would arise
up, and then the Tone would rise in the fire-flash, through the rising up of
the Bitter quality in the astringent. And if that were done, there it would be
a Heavenly Fruit, just as it springs up in Heaven.

104. But thou art to know, that the Earth has all the qualifying or fountain
spirits: for through the Devils kindling, the spirits of Life were incorporated
or compacted together also in Death* and as it were captivated, but not quite
murdered.

105. The first three, viz. the Astringent, Sweet, and bitter, belong to the
Imaging or framing of the Body, and therein stands the mobility and the Body
or Corporeity: and these now have the comprehensibility or palpability, and are
the Birth of the outermost Nature.

106. The other three, viz. the Heat, Love, and Tone stand in the
incomprehensibility, and are generated out of the first Three; and this now, is
the inward Birth, wherewith the Deity qualifieth mixeth or uniteth.

107. And now, if the first three were not congealed or benumbed in Death, so
that they could kindle the Heat, then thou would soon see a bright shining
heavenly Body, and thou would see plainly, where God is.

108. But being the first Three qualities of the Earth are congealed or
benumbed in death, therefore they remain also a Death, and cannot elevate their
life into the Light, but remain a dark valley, in which, there stands Gods
Wrath, Death, and Hell, as also the Eternal Prison, and Source or Torment of
the Devils.

109. Not that these three qualities of the outermost Birth, in which the
wrath-fire stands, are rejected and reprobated even to the innermost; no, but
only the outward palpable Body, and therein the outward hellish source quality
or Torment.

110. Here thou see once more, how the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Hell
hang one to another, as one Body, and yet the one cannot comprehend the other.
For the second Birth, viz. the Heat, Light, Love and the Sound or Tone, is
hidden in the outermost, and makes the outward moveable, so that the outward
gathers it self together, and generateth a Body.

111. And though the Body stands in the outward palpablenesse, yet is it
formed according to the kind and manner of the inward Birth, for in the Inward
Birth or Geniture stands the Word, and the Word is the Sound or Tone, which
rises up in the Light in the fire-flash through the bitter and the astringent
quality.

112. But being the Sound of Gods Word must rise up through the astringent
bitter Death, and generate a Body in the half-dead water, thereupon that Body
is Good and also Evil, dead and living; for it must instantly attract the sapp
of Fierceness, and the Body of Death, and stand in such a body and power, as
the Earth its Mother does.

113. But that the Life lies hid under and in the Death of the Earth, as also
in the children of the Earth; I will here demonstrate it to you.

114. Behold! Man becomes weak faint and sick, and if no remedy be used, then
he soon falls into Death. The sickness caused either by some bitter and
astringent Herb, which grows out of the Earth, or else caused by an evil
mortiferous deadly water, or by several mixtures of earthly Herbs, or by some
evil stinking and rank flesh or Meat, and surfeit from thence to Loathing.

115. Now if a Learned Physician inquireth from the sick Person from what his*
Disease is proceeded, and takes that which is the cause of the Disease,
whether it be Flesh, Water, or Herbs, and distills or burns it to powder,
according as the Matter is, and so burns away the outward Poison thereof,
which stands in Death; then, in that distilled Water or burnt Powder the
Astral Birth remains in its Seat, where life and death wrestle o^e with
another, and are both capable of being raised up; for the Dead^Body is gone.

116. And so now, if thou minglest with this water or powder, some good Treacle
or the like, which holds Captive the rising up and the power of the wrath in
the Astrall Birth, and give it to the sick party or Patient in a little warm
drink, be it Beer or Wine; then operateth the innermost and hidden Birth of the
thing, which has caused the Disease in man through its outermost dead Birth.

117. For when it is put into warm Liquor, then the life in the thing becomes
rising, and would fain raise it self, and be kindled in the Light* ^ut it
cannot because of the wrath, which is opposite to it in the Astral Birth or
Geniture.

118. But it can do thus much, viz. or, it dot^ take away the disease.
it can take away the Disease from a Man: for the Astral Life rises up through
Death, and takes away the power from the Sting of Death: and so when that has
gotten the victory, then the Party becomes sound again.

119. Thus thou see, how the power or virtue of the Word and eternal life in
the Earth and in its children lies hidden in the center in Death, and
springs up through Death, incomprehensibly as to the Death, and continually
travelleth in anguish to the Birth of life, and yet cannot flourish or budd
till the Death be severed from it.

120. But it has its Life in its Seat, and that cannot be taken from it, but
Death hangs to it in the outermost Birth or Geniture, as also the wrath in
Death: for the Wrath is the life of Death and of the Devil: and in the wrath
stands also the corporeal Being or the Bodies of the Devils, but the dead
Birth or Geniture is their Eternal Dwelling House.

The Depth in the Circle of the Birth or Geniture.

Now one might Ask:

What manner of substance has it, or what is the condition thereof, that the
Astral Birth of the Earth did begin its qualifying operating and generating one
Day sooner then the Astral in the Deep above the Earth: seeing the fire in the
Deep above the Earth is much sharper and easier to be kindled, then the fire in
the Earth: and seeing also that the Earth must be kindled by the fire in the
Deep above the Earth, else it can Bear no fruit?

Answer.

121. Behold! thou understanding Spirit; the Spirit speaks to thee, and not
to the dead spirit of the flesh: Open the Door of thy Astral birth wide, and
elevate that one Part of the astral Birth in the light, and let the other in
the wrath stand still, and take heed also that thy animated or soulish spirit
do wholly unite with the Light.

122. And so when thou stand in such a form, then thou art as Heaven and
Earth is, or as the whole Deity is with its Births or Genitures in this world.

123. But now if thou art not thus, then thou art blind herein, though thou
were the wittiest and wisest Doctor, that ever could be found in the world.

124. But if thou art Thus, then raise up thy spirit, and look through thy Art
of Astrology, thy deep sense, and measuring of Circles, and see if thou art
able to apprehend it? It must be born IN THEE, Else thou gettest neither Grace
nor Art

125. If the Eyes of thy Spirit shall stand open, then thou must generate thus,
else thy Comprehensibility is a Foolish Virgin, and it befalls thee as if a
Limner should offer to pourtray the Deity on a Table, and tell thee, It is made
right, the Deity is just so.

126. Then the Believer and the Limner are both alike, both of them see nothing
but only wood and Colors, and the one blind leads the other: surely thou art
not to fight here with Beasts, but with Gods.

Now Observe:

127. When the whole Deity in this world moved it self to the Creation, then
not only the one part did Move, and the other rest; but all stood jointly in
the Mobility, Even the whole Deep, so far, as Lord Lucifer was King, and so far
as the place of his Kingdom reached, and so far as the Salitter in the
wrath-fire was kindled.

128. The motion of the three Births lasted the length of six Days and Nights,
wherein all the seven Spirits of God stood in a full moving Birth or Geniture,
as also the Heart of the spirits; and the Salitter of the Earth turned about in
that while, six times in the great wheel; which wheel is the seven qualifying
or fountain spirits of God; and at each turning about, or Diurnal Revolution,
there was generated a several special fabric or work, according to the innate
Instant qualifying or fountain spirits.

129. For the First qualifying or fountain spirit is the Astringent, cold,
sharp and hard Birth or Geniture, and that belongs to the first Day in the
Astrall Birth or Geniture, the Astrologers call it the Saturnine, which was
performed on the First Day. For therein the hard dry sharp Earth and Stones
came to be: and were incorporated or compacted together, moreover then was also
generated the strong Firmament of Heaven; and the Heart of the seven spirits of
God stood hidden in the hard sharpness.

130. Astrologers appropriate or attribute the Second Day to Sol or the Sun,
but it belongs to Jupiter, to speak of it Astrologically: for on the second
Day the Light brake forth out of the Heart of the seven qualifying or fountain
spirits through the hard quality of the Heaven, and caused a mitigation or
allaying in the hard water of the Heaven, and the light became shining in that
meekness and allay.

131. And then the meekness and the Hard water separated themselves asunder,
and the hardness remained in its hard place, as a hard Death, and the
meekness or softness penetrated through the Hardness in the power of the
Light.

132. And this now is the water of Life, which is generated in the Light of God
out of the hard Death. And thus the light of God in the sweet water of Heaven
brake through the astringent and hard dark Death, and thus the Heaven is made
out of the midst or Center of the water.

133. The hard Firmament is the astringent quality, and the gentle Mild or meek
firmament is the water, in which the Light of Life rises up, which is the
Clarity or Bright Light of the Son of God. And in this manner or form also
the knowledge, and the light of life rises up in Man, and the whole light of
God in this world stands in such a Form, Birth, and rising up.

134. The Third Day is very rightly attributed to Mars, because it is a bitter,
and a furious raging and stirring spirit. In the third Revolution of the Earth
the bitter quality rubbed it self with the astringent.

Understand this thing rightly.

135. When the Light in the sweet water did penetrate through the astringent
spirit, then the fire- flash terror or crack of the Light, when it kindled it
self in the water, rose up in the astringent and hard dead quality, and made
all stirring, from thence existed the (...)

136. Now I speak here not only of the Heaven above the Earth, but this
stirring and Birth or Geniture was also in the Earth and every where.

137. But being the heavenly fruits before the time of the wrath, sprung up
only in this stirring of the seven qualifying or fountain spirits, and
vanished or passed away again by their stirring, and so changed or altered
themselves; therefore on the third Day of the Birth or Geniture of the
Creation, they sprung up also through the stirring of the fire-flash in the
astringent quality of the Earth.

138. And though indeed the whole Deity is in the Center of the Earth hidden,
yet the Earth could not for all that bring forth heavenly fruit, for the
astringent quality had shut and barred the hard Bolt of Death upon it, and so
the Heart of the Deity remained hidden in its meek and Light Heaven.

139. For the outermost Birth is Nature, and that ought not to reach back into
the Heart of God, neither can it, but is the Body, in which the qualifying or
fountain spirits generate themselves, and show forth and manifest their Birth
or Geniture by their fruits.

The Two and Twentieth Chapter.
Of the Birth or Geniture of the Stars, and Creation of the Fourth Day.

1. HEre now is begun the describing of the Astrall Birth, and it ought well to
be observed, what the first title of this Book means, which is thus Expressed.

The Dayspring or Dawning in the East, or Morning-Rednesse in the Rising.

For here will a very simple Man be able to see and comprehend or apprehend the
Being of God.

2. The Reader should not make himself blind through his unbelief and dull
apprehension: for here I bring in the whole or Total Nature with all her
children, for a witness and demonstration. And if thou art rational, then
look round about thee, and view thy self, also consider thy self aright, and
then thou will soon find from or out of what spirit I write.

3. For my part, I will obediently perform the command of the spirit, only
have thou a care, and suffer not thy self to be shut up by or in an open Door:
for here the Gates of knowledge stand open to thee.

4. And though the spirit will indeed go against the Current of some
Astrologers, that is no great matter to me, for I am bound to obey God rather
then Men: they are blind in or concerning the spirit, and if they will not see,
then they may remain blind still.

Now Observe:

5. Now when upon the Third Day the fire-flash rose up out of the Light, which
was shining in the sweet water; which flash is the bitter quality, which
generateth it self out of the kindled terror or crack of fire in the water.

6. Then the whole Nature of this world, became springing boiling and moving in
the Earth, as well as above the Earth, and every where, and began to generate
it self again in all things.

7. Out of the Earth sprung up Grass, Herbs and Trees, and in the Earth
silver, gold, and all manner of Oar came to be; and in the Deep above the Earth
sprung up the wonderful forming of power and virtue.

8. But that thou may understand, what manner of Substance and condition all
these things and Births or Genitures have, I will describe all orderly one
after another, that thou may rightly understand the Ground of this Mystery.

And I will treat,

1. Of the Earth.

2. Of the Deep above the Earth.

3. Of the incorporating or compacting of the Bodies of the Stars.

4. Of the seven chief qualities of the Planets, and of their Heart, which is
the Sun.

5. Of the Four Elements.

6. Of the outward comprehensible or palpable Birth or Geniture, which existeth
out of this whole Regiment; or Dominion.

7. Of the wonderful proportion and fitness or dexterity of the whole wheel of
Nature.

9. Before this Looking Glass I will now invite all Lovers of the Holy and
highly to be Esteemed Arts, of Philosophy, Astrology, and Theology, wherein I
will Lay open the Root and Ground of them.

10. And though I have not studied nor learned their Arts, neither do I know
how to go about to measure Circles and use their Mathematical Instruments and
Compasses; I take no great care about that: However, they will have so much to
learn from hence, that many will not comprehend the ground thereof all the
days of their Lives.

11. For I use not their Tables Formula's or Schemes rules and ways, for I
have not learned from them, but I have another Teacher, or Schoolmaster, which
is the whole or Total NATURE.

12. From that whole Nature, together with its innate instant Birth or
Geniture, have I studied and learned my Philosophy, Astrology and Theology,
and not from Men, or by Men.

13. But being Men are Gods, and have the knowledge of God the only Father,
from whom they are proceeded or descended, and in whom they Live, therefore I
despise not the Canons Rules and Formula's of their Philosophy, Astrology and
Theology. For I find, that for the most part they stand upon a right Ground,
and I will diligently endeavor, to go according to their rules and Formula's.

14. For I must needs say, that their Formula or Scheme is my master, and I
have my beginning and first knowledge from their Formula or Positions: neither
is it my purpose, to go about to amend or cry down theirs; for I cannot do it,
neither have I learned them, but leave them standing in their own Place and
Worth.

15. But I will not build upon their Grounds, but as a laborious careful
servant, I will digg away the Earth from the Root, that thereby men may see the
whole Tree with its Root, Stock, Branches, Twiggs and Fruits: And may see that
also my writing is no new thing, But that their Philosophy and my Philosophy
are one Body, one Tree, bearing one and the same sort of fruit.

16. Neither have I any command, to bring in complaints against them, to
condemn them, for any thing, but for their wickedness and Abominations, as
Pride, Covetousness, Envy and Wrath, against which the spirit of Nature
complains very exceedingly, and not I: ^^r what can I do, that am poor Dust
and Ashes, also very weak, simple and altogether unable?

17. Only the Spirit shows thus much, that to them is delivered and
entrusted the weighty Talent, and the Key; and they are drowned in the
pleasures of the flesh, and have b^ried their weighty Talent in the Earth, and
have lost the key in their proud Drunkenness.

18. The spirit has a long time waited on them and importuned them, that they
would once open the Door, for the clear D^y is at Hand, yet they walk up and
down in their Drunkenness, seeking for the Key, when they have it about them,
though they know it not; and so they go up and down in their proud and covetous
Drunkenness, always seeking about like the Country man for his horse, who all
the while he went a seeking for him, was riding upon the Back of that very
Horse he looked for.

19. Thereupon says the Spirit of Nature, being they will not awake from
Sleep, and open the Door, I will therefore do it my self.

20. What could I simple vulgar Layman teach or write of their high Art, if it
were not given to me by the Spirit of Nature, in whom I live and subsist, or
have my being.
am? I am in the Condition or state of a vulgar or Layman, and have no Salarie
Wages or Pay for this writing: and should I then oppose the Spirit, that He
should not begin to open, where and in whom he pleases? I am not the Door, but
an ordinary wooden Bolt upon it: and now if the Spirit should pluck me out
from thence, and fling me into the Fire, could I hinder it?

21. But if I would be an unprofitable Bolt, which stubbornly would resist to
be pulled out, and should bolt up and hinder the Spirit in the opening, would
not the Spirit be angry with me, tear me off, and cast me away, and provide a
more profitable and a fitter Bolt? Then I should lie on the ground and be
trampled under-foot, when as formerly I made so fair a show upon the Door: what
should this wooden Bar then serve for, but to be cast into the Fire and
burnt?

22. Behold! I tell thee a Mystery, so soon as the Door is set wide open to its
Angle, all useless fastnailed sticking Bolts or Bars will be cast away, for
the Door will never be shut any more at all, but stands open, and then the
Four winds will go in and out at it.

23. But the Sorcerer sits in the way, and will make many so Blind, that
they will not see the Door: and then they return Home, and say; there is no
Door at all, but that it is a mere Fiction, and so they go thither no more.

24. Thus men suffer themselves easily to be turned away, and so live in their
Drunkenness.

25. And now when this is done, then the Spirit is angry, which has opened the
Gates, because none will go OUT and IN at its Doors any more, and then it
flings the Door-Posts into the Abyss, and then there is no more Time at all:
those that are within, remain within; and those that are without, remain
without. AMEN.

Now it may be Asked:

What are the Stars?

Answer.

26. Moses writes concerning them thus: And God said; Let there be Lights in
the Firmament of Heaven, to divide or distinguish the Day from the Night: and
let them give signs and seasons, Days and Years: and let them be Lights in the
firmament of Heaven to shine or give light upon the Earth, and it was so done.
And God made two great Lights: the greater Light to rule the Day, and the
lesser Light to rule the Night; as also the Stars. And God set them in the
Firmament of the Heaven, to shine or give Light upon the Earth: and to rule
Day, and Night, also to divide or distinguish the Light from the Darkness, and
God saw that it was good, so out of the Evening and the Morning the fourth day
came to be, Genesis 1. v. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

27. This description shows sufficiently, that the Dear man Moses was not the
original author thereof: for the first writer thereof did not know either the
true God, or the Stars, what they were. And it is very likely, that the
Creation, before the Flood, was not described in writing, but was kept as a
Dark word in their memories, and so delivered from one generation to another,
till after the Flood, and till people began to lead Epicurean Lives, in all
voluptuousness.

28. And then the Holy Patriarchs, when they saw that, they described the
Creation, that it should not be quite forgotten, and that the swinish Epicurean
world might have a Looking-glass in the Creation, wherein they might see, that
there is a God, and that this Being of the world did not so stand from
Eternity; whereby they might have a Glass to look into, and so fear the Hidden
God.

29. And it was the Chiefest Iustruction and Doctrine of the Patriarchs before
and after the Flood, that they led Men to the Creation: as the whole book of
Job also does drive at That.

30. After these Patriarchs came the wise Heathens, who went somewhat deeper
into the knowledge of Nature: and I must needs say, according to the Ground of
the Truth, that they in their Philosophy and Knowledge did come even before
the face or Countenance of God, and yet could neither see nor know Him.

31. Man was so altogether Dead in Death, and so bolted up in the outermost
Birth or Geniture in the dead Palpability: or else they could have Thought,
that in this Palpability, there must needs be a Divine power hidden in the
Center, which had so created this Palpability, and moreover preserves
upholdeth and rules the same.

32. Indeed they honored prayed to or worshipped the Sun and Stars for Gods,
but knew not how they were created or came to be; or out of what ^hey came to
be: for they Might well have thought, that they proceeded from somewhat, and
that, That, which created them, must needs be Older and higher or Greater then
all the Stars.

33. Besides, they had the Stones and the Earth for an Example, to show, that
they must proceed from somewhat, as also Men and all the Creatures upon the
Earth. For all give testimony, that there must needs be in these things a
mightier and greater Power at hand which had so created all these things, in
that manner, as they are.

34. But indeed why should I write much of the blindness of the Heathens, are
not our Doctors in their Crowned Ornaments of Hoods and Corn^r'd-Caps, as blind
as they? They know indeed that there is a God, who has created all this, but
they know not, where that God is, or how he is.

35. When they would write of God, then they seek for him without, and absent
from this world, only above in a kind of Heaven, as if he were some Image,
that may be likened to somewhat: Indeed they grant, that, That God rules all
in this world, with a Spirit; but his corporeal propriety or habitation they
will needs have in a certain Heaven aloft many Thousand Miles off.

36. Come on ye Doctors! if ye are in the Right, then give answer to the
Spirit: I will ask you a few Questions; 1o. What do you think stood in the
Place of this world, before the Time of the world? Or 2o. Out of what do you
think the Earth and Stars came to be? Or, 3o. What do you think there is in the
Deep of the Earth? Or, 4o. From whence did the Deep exist? Or, 5o. How do you
think Man is the Image of God, wherein God dwells? Or 6o. What do you suppose
Gods wrath to be? Or, 7o. What is that in man which displeases God so much,
that he tormenteth and afflicts man so, being he has created him? And 8o.
that he imputes Sin to Man, and condemns him to eternal Punishment? 9o.
Why has he created that, wherein or wherewith Man commits sin? Surely that
thing must be far worse: 10o. Wherefore and out of what, is that come to be? Or
11o. What is the cause, or the beginning, or the Birth and Geniture of Gods
fierce wrath, out of or from which, Hell and the Devil, are come to be? Or,
12o. How comes it, that all the creatures in this world do bite, scratch,
strike, beat and worry one another, and yet sin is imputed only to Man? Or,
13o. Out of what are Poisonous and venomous Beasts and worms, and all manner of
Vermin come to be? Or 14o. Out of what are the holy Angels come to be? And 15o
What is the Soul of Man? And lastly, 16o. What is the Great GOD Himself?

37. Give your direct and fundamental answer to this, and demonstrate what you
say, and leave off your Verbal Contentions.

Now if you can demonstrate out of all your books and writings, 1o. that you
know the true and only God; and 2o. How he is in Love and Wrath: Also, 3o.
What that God is? and 4o. if you can demonstrate, that God is not in the Stars,
Elements, Earth, Men, Beasts, Worms, Leaves, Herbs and Grass, also in Heaven
and Earth; also that all this is not God Himself, and that my spirit is false
and wicked; then I will be the first, that will burn my book in the Fire; and
recall and recant all whatsoever I have written, and will accurse it, and in
all obedience willingly submit my self to be instructed by you.

38. I do not say, that I cannot err at all. For there are some things, which
are not sufficiently declared, and are described as if it were from a Glimpse
of the great God, when the wheel of Nature whirled about too swiftly, so that
Man with his half dead and dull capacity or apprehension cannot sufficiently
comprehend it; but what thou find not sufficiently declared in one place,
thou will find it done in another; if not in this, yet in the other Books.

Now thou will say:

It does not become me, to ask such Questions: for the Deity is a Mystery,
which no man can search into?

Answer.

39. Hearken; If it does not become me to ask, then it does not become thee to
Judge me. Do thou boast in the knowledge of the Light, and art a Leader of
the blind, and yet art blind thy thy self? How will thou show the way to the
blind? must ye not both fall, in your blindness?

But you will say:

We are not Blind: for we well see the way of Light, though none can see it
rightly.

40. Ye teach others the way, and you are always seeking after it your selves;
And so you grope in the dark, and discern it not! Or do you suppose, that it is
Sin, for any Man to ask after the way?

41. O ye blind Men! leave off your contentions, and shed not innocent blood;
also do not lay waste Countries and Cities, to fulfill the Devils will; but put
on the Helmet of Peace, Girt your selves with Love one to another, and practice
Meekness: Leave off Pride and Covetousness, Grutch not the different forms of
one another, also suffer not the Wrath-fire to kindle in you, but live in
Meekness, Chastity, Friendlinesse and Purity, and then you are and live ALL in
God.

42. For thou need not to Ask: Where is God? Hearken thou Blind Man: thou
live in God, See the 14. Chap. 127 verse.
and God is in thee, and if thou live holily, then therein thou thy self art
God: For wheresoever thou look, there is God.

43. When thou beholdest the Deep betwixt the Stars and the Earth, Can thou
say, that is not God, or, there God is not? O, thou miserable corrupted man! Be
instructed; for in the Deep above the Earth, where thou see and know
nothing, and say, there is nothing, yet even there is the Light-Holy God in
his Trinity, and is generating there, as well as in the high Heaven aloft
above this world.

44. Or do thou think, that he departed and went away from his seat wherein
he did sit from eternity, in or at the time of the Creation of this world? O
no; that cannot be, for though He would himself do so, He cannot do it, for he
himself is All: And as little as a member of the Body can be rent off from it
self, so little can God also be divided rent or separated from Being Every
where.

45. But that there are so many Formings figurings or framings in him, is
caused by his Eternal Birth or Geniture, which first is Threefold, and out of
or from that Trinity, or Ternarie, it generateth it self infinitely or
immensely unconceiveably.

46. Of these Births or Genitures I will here write, and show to the children
of the last world, what God is, not out of any Boasting or Pride, thereby to
disgrace or reproach any body! No; the Spirit will instruct thee meekly and
friendly, as a Father does his children; for the work is not from or the Reason
of my flesh.
my fleshly Reason, but the Holy Ghosts dear Revelation, or breaking through in
the Flesh.

47. In my own faculties or powers I am as blind a Man, as ever was, and am
able to do nothing, but in the Spirit of God, my or, the Spirit that is
generated, or rather regenerated in in me.
innate spirit sees through ALL, but not always with long Stay or
Continuance, only when the Spirit of Gods Love breaks thorough my spirit,
then is the animated or soulish Birth or Geniture and the Deity one Being, one
Comprehensibility, and one Light.

48. Am I alone only so? No, but All Men are so, be they Christians, Jews,
Turks or Heathens; in whomsoever Love and Meekness is, in them is also the
Light of God.

If thou say, No, this is not so: Consider.

49. Do not the Turks, Jews, and Heathens live in the same Body, or Corporeity,
wherein thou live, and make use of that power and virtue of the same Body,
which thou usest, moreover they have even the same Body, which thou have, and
the same God, which is thy God, is their God also.

But thou will say:

They know him not; also they honor him not.

Answer.

50. Yes Dear Man, now boast thy self that thou have hit it well! Thou know
God indeed above others. Behold thou blind Man, where ever Love rises up in
Meekness, there the Heart of God rises up. For the Heart of God is generated
in the meek water of the kindled Light, be it in Man, or any where else without
Man, it is every where generated in the Center, between the outermost and
innermost Birth or Geniture.

51. And whatsoever thou do but look upon, there is God, but the
comprehensibility stands in this world, in the wrath, which the Devil has
kindled; and in the hidden kernel in the midst or center of the wrath the light
or Heart of God is generated, incomprehensibly as to the wrath, and so each of
them remains in its Seat.

52. Yet for all that, I do no way approve or excuse the Unbelief of the Jews,
Turks and Heathens, and their stiff-necked stubbornness, and their fierce
wrath, furious malice and hatred against the Christians. No; these things are
mere Snares of the Devil, whereby he allureth Men to Pride, Covetousness, Envy
and Hatred, that he may kindle in them the hellish fire: neither can I say,
that these four sons of the Devil are not domineering in Christendom, nay
indeed in every Man.

Now thou say:

What then is the difference between Christians, Jews, Turks and Heathens?

Answer.

53. Here the Spirit opens both Doors and Gates; if thou will not see, then
be blind.

54. The first I. difference is, which God has always held and maintained;
that all those, who know, what God is, and how they should serve him, that they
should be able by their knowledge to press through the wrath into Gods Love,
and overcome the Devil: but if they do it not, then they are no better, then
those, that know it not.

55. But if he, that knows not the way, presses through the wrath into the
Love, then is he like him, who pressed thorough by his knowledge; but those
that persevere in the wrath, and wholly kindle it in themselves, they are all
alike one and other, be they Christians, Jews, Turks or Heathens.

Or what do thou suppose it is, wherewith Man can serve God?

56. If thou will Dissemble with Him, and adorn or magnify thy Birth, then I
suppose thee to be a very fine Angel indeed: But He that has Love in his
heart, and leads a merciful meek and lowlyminded life, and fights against
malice and hatred, and presses through the wrath of God into the Light, he
lives with God, and is One Spirit with God.

57. For God needs no other Service, but that his creature, which is in His
Body, do not slide back from Him, but be Holy, as He is.

58. Therefore also God gave the Law to the Jews, that they should diligently
study and endeavor after meek Holiness and Love, that thereby all the world
might have them for their Looking-glass: But when they grew proud, and boasted
in their Birth, instead of entering into Love, and turned the law of Love into
the sharpness of wrath, then God removed their Candlestick and went to the
Heathens.

59. Secondly II. There is this Difference betwixt the Christians, Jews, Turks
and Heathens, that the Christians know the Tree of Life, which is CHRISTUS,
CHRIST, who is the Prince of our Heaven and of this world, and rules in all
Births or Genitures as a King in God his Father, and Men are his Members.

60. And now Christians know, how they may, by the power of this Tree, press
out from their Death through his Death to him into his life, and reign and live
with him, wherein they also with their pressing through with their new birth,
out from this Dead Body, may be and are with him in Heaven.

61. And though the dead Body is in the midst or Center of Hell among all the
Devils, yet for all that, the new Man reigns with God in Heaven, and the Tree
of life is to them a strong Gate, through which they do enter into Life: But of
this thou shall find more largely in its proper Place.

Now Observe:

62. Moses writes, that God said; Let there be Lights* in the Firmament of
Heaven, which should therein give a Light to the Earth, and divide or
distinguish Day and Night, also make Years and Times or Seasons.

63. This description shows, that the first writer did not know, what the
Stars are: But He took hold on the Deity at the Heart, and looked upon or had
respect to the Heart, to consider what the Heart and kernel of this Creation
is, and the Spirit kept the Astral and outermost Dead Birth or Geniture hidden
from him, and did only drive him in Faith to the Heart of the Deity.

64. Which is also the Principal Point, most necessary for Man: For when he
lays hold on true Faith, then he presses through the Wrath of God, through
Death into life, and reigns with God.

65. But being Men now at the End of this time, do listen and long very much
after the Root of the Tree, through which Nature shows, that the time of the
discovery of the Tree is at hand: therefore the Spirit will show it to them:
and the whole Deity will reveal it self; which is the Dayspring dawning, or
Morning-Rednesse, and the breaking forth of the great Day of God, in which,
whatsoever is generated from Death, to the Regeneration of Life, shall be
Restored and Rise again.

66. Behold, when God said, Let there be light, then the light in the powers of
Nature, or the seven spirits of God rose up, and the Firmament of Heaven, which
stands in the Word, in the Heart of the water, between the astrall and
outermost Birth or Geniture was closed or shut up by or with the Word and Heart
of the water, and the Astral birth is the Place of the parting-mark or Limit
which stands half in Heaven, and half in the Wrath.

67. For from or out of that half Part of the wrath, the Dead Birth generateth
it self continually, and out of the other half Part, which reaches with its
innermost Degree even into the innermost Heart and light of God, generateth it
self now continually through Death, and yet the Astrall Birth or Geniture is
not two, but One Body.

68. But when in these two Days the Creation of Heaven and of Earth was
completed, and that the Heaven was made in the heart of the water, for a
difference or distinction between the Light of God, and the Wrath of God, then
on the Third Day, through the terror or crack of the fire-Flash, which rose up
in the heart of the water, and pressed through Death, incomprehensibly as to
Death, there sprung up all manner of Ideas Forms and Figures, as was done
before the time of the kindled wrath.

69. But being the water, which is the Spirit of the Astral Life, stood in the
midst or Center of wrath, and also in Death, thereupon also every Body formed
it self, as the Birth or Geniture to Life and mobility was.

Of the Earth.
70. But now, the Earth was the Salitter, which was cast up out of the
innermost Birth, and stood in Death: but when the fire-flash, through the Word,
rose up in the water, then it was a terror or crack, from which existed the
mobility in death, and that Mobility in all the seven spirits, is now the
Astrall Birth or Geniture.

The Depth. Understand this aright.

71. Now when on the the Third Day the fire-flash in the water of death had
kindled it self, then the Life pressed forth quite through the dead body of the
water and of the Earth.

72. But yet the Dead water and Earth, comprehend no more then the flash or
terror or crack of the Fire, where-through their mobility existeth: But the
Light which rises up very softly Gently or meekly in the fire-flash, that,
neither the Earth, nor the dead water, can comprehend.

73. But it retains its Seat in the kernel, which is the unctuosity or
fatness, or the water of life or the Heaven; for it is the Body of Life, which
the Death cannot comprehend, and yet it rises up in the Death.

74. Neither can the wrath take hold of it or apprehend it, but the Wrath
remains in the terror or crack of the Fire-Flash, and makes the Mobility in
the dead body of the earth and the water.

75. But the Light presses in very gently after, and forms the Birth, which
through the terror or crack of the fire-flash has gotten its compacted Body.

Of the Growths or Vegetables of the Earth.
76. When now the Wrathful fire-flash awakened and rouzed up the spirits of
Nature, which stand in Death in the Earth, by its fierce terror or crack; then
the spirits began, according to their peculiar Divine Right to generate
themselves, as they had done from eternity, and form figure or frame a Body
together according to the innate instant qualities of that Place.

77. Now that kind of Salitter which in the time of the kindling of the wrath,
dyed in Death, and as it did qualify or operate at that time, in the innate
or, Instanding.
instant Life of the seven spirits of God, so also it did rise again in the
Time of the Regeneration in the Fire-Flash, and is not become any New thing,
but only another form of the Body, which stands in the comprehensibility or
palpability in Death.

78. But now the Salitter of the Earth and of the water is no more able to
change or alter it self in its dead Being, and show forth it self infinitely,
as it did in the heavenly place or Seat; but when the qualifying or fountain
spirits form the Body, then it rises up in the power and virtue of the Light.

79. And the Life of the Light breaks through the Death, and generateth to it
another Body out of Death, which is not conformable to, or of the condition of
the water, and the dead Earth; also does not get their taste and smell, but the
power of the Light presses thorough, and tempereth or mixeth it self with the
power of the Earth, and takes from Death, its Sting, and from the wrath its
poisonous venomous power; and presses forth up together in the midst or center
of the Body in the growth or vegetation, as a Heart thereof.

80. And herein sticks now the kernel of the Deity in the Center in its
Heaven, which stands hidden in the water of Life: if thou can now,
apprehend or lay hold on it.

Of the Metalls in the Earth.
81. The Metals have the same substance, condition and Birth or Geniture, as
the vegetables upon the Earth have. For the Metalls or Mineral Oars at the
time of the kindling of the wrath in the innate instant Wheel of the seventh
nature-Spirit, stood in the Fabric work or operation of the Love, wherein the
meek beneficence or well-doing generateth it self behind the Fire-Flash;
wherein the Holy Heaven stands, which in this Birth or Geniture, when the
Love is predominant, presents or shows forth it self in such a gracious
amiable and blessed Clarity or Brightness, and in such beauteous colors, like
Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones.

82. But Silver and Gold in the dead Palpability or Tangibility are but as a
Dark stone in comparison of the Root of the heavenly Generating: but I set it
down here only, that thou may know, from whence it has its Original.

83. But being it has been, the excellentest rising up and generating, in the
holy heavenly Nature, therefore also it is loved by man above all other in this
world. For Nature has indeed written in Man's Heart, that it is better, then
other Stones and Earth, but Nature could not reveal or manifest to him, the
ground thereof from whence it is come or proceeded, whereby now thou may
Observe the Dayspring or Morning-Rednesse.

84. There are many several sorts of mineral Oars, according as the Salitter
in Natures Heaven was predominant at its rising up, in the Light of Love: For
every qualifying or radical spirit in the heavenly Nature contains the
property or kind of all the qualifying or fountain spirits, for it is ever
infected or affected with the other, from whence the Life and the unsearchable
Birth or Geniture of the Deity, existeth: But yet is predominant as to one
Power, and that is its own Body, from whence it has the Name.

85. But now every qualifying or fountain spirit has the property of the whole
or Total Nature, and its Fabric or Work at the time of the kindling of the
wrath was together also incorporated in Death, and out of every Spirits fabric
or work, Earth, Stones, mineral Oars, and water came to be.

86. Therefore also in the Earth there are found according to the quality of
Each Spirit, mineral Oars, Stones, water, and Earth; and therefore it is that
the Earth is of so many various qualities, all as Each qualifying or fountain
Spirit with its innate Instant Birth or Geniture, was, at the time of the
kindling.

87. Nature has likewise Manifested or revealed so much to man, that he
knows, how he may melt away the strange or Heterogene matter from every
qualifying or fountain Spirits strange infected innate Birth or Geniture:
whereby that qualifying or fountain spirit might remain chief in its own
Primacy.

88. You have an Example of this in Gold and in Silver, which you cannot make
to be pure or fine Gold or Silver, unless it be melted seven times in the
fire, Psalm. 12. 7. But when that is done, then it remains in the middle or
Central Seat in the Heart of Nature, which is the water, sitting in its own
quality and Color.

I.
89. First, the astringent quality, which holds the Salitter captive in the
hard Death, must be melted away, which is the gross stony Dross.

II.
90. Then Secondly, the astringent Death of the water is to be separated, from
which proceeds a poisonous venomous water of separation or Aquafortis, which
stands in the rising up of the fire-flash, which is the evil Malignant, even
the very worst source of all in Death, even the Astringent and Bitter Death it
self; for this is the Place, where the Life, which existeth in the sweet water,
or dyed the Death.
dyed in Death; And that separateth it self now in the second Melting.

III.
91. Thirdly, the Bitter Quality, which existeth in the kindling of the water
fire-flash is melted away, for that is a Rager Raver Tyrant and destroyer; also
no Silver nor Gold can subsist, if that be not killed or mortified, for it
makes all dry and Brittle, and presents or shows forth it self in several
Colors; for it rides through all spirits, assuming the Colors of all spirits.

IIII.
92. Fourthly, the fire spirit also, which stands in the horrible anguish,
and pangs of life, must be also melted away, for it is a continued Father of
the Wrath, and out of or from that is generated the Hellish woe.

93. Now when the wrath of these four spirits is killed, then the mineral Oary
Salitter stands in the water like a tough Matter, and looks like that
spirit, which is predominant in the mineral Ore: and the light, which stands
in the Fire, or Tinctureth.
colors it according to its own Quality, be it Silver or Gold.

94. And now this matter in the fourth melting looks like Silver or Gold, but
it is not yet Subsistent
sixth, nor is it tough or malleable and pure enough, its body indeed is
Subsistent, but not the Spirit.

V.
95. Now when it is melted a Fifth Time, then the Love-spirit rises up in the
water through the Light, and makes the dead Body living again, so that the
matter, which remained in the first four Meltings, gets power or strength
again, which was the proper own of that qualifying or fountain-spirit, which
was predominant in this Mineral Oar.

VI.
96. Now when it is melted the sixth Time, then it grows somewhat harder, and
then the Life moves, which is risen up in the Love, and stirs it self: and
from this stirring existeth the Tone in the Hardness, and the mineral Oar gets
a clear sound, for the Hard and dead beating or noise of the bitter fiery
matter is gone away.

97. In this sixth Melting I hold, to be the greatest Danger for den
Alchymisten.
Chemists about the or making.
preparing of their Silver and Gold. For there belongs and is required a very
subtle fire for it, and it may soon be burnt and made dead or Deaf; and it
becomes very dim or blind, if the fire be too cold.

98. For it must be a middle or mild fire, to keep the spirit in the Heart from
rising, it must be gently Simpring, then it gets a very sweet and meek
ringing sound, and continually rejoices, as if it should now be kindled again
in the Light of God.

99. But if the fire be too Hot in the Fifth and Sixth Melting, then the new
life, which has generated it self in the Love in the rising up of the Lights
power out of the water, is kindled again in the fierceness in the wrath-Fire,
and the Mineral Oar becomes a burnt scum and Dross, and the Chemist has dirt
instead of Gold.

VII.
100. Now when it is melted the Seventh time, then there belongs and is
required yet a more subtle fire, for therein the life rises up, and rejoices
in the Love, and will show forth it self in infinity, as it had done in Heaven
before the Time of the wrath.

101. And in this motion it grows unctuous or fat and luscious or luxuriant,
it increases and spreads it self, and the highest depth generateth it self
very joyfully out of or from the Heart of the Spirit, just as if it would begin
an angelical Triumph, and present or show forth it self infinitely in divine
power and form according to the Right of the Deity: and thereby the Body
gets its greatest strength and power, and the Body colors or tinctureth
it self with the highest degree, and gets its true beauty excellency and
virtue.

102. And now when it is almost made, then it has its true virtue and color,
and there is only one thing wanting, that the spirit cannot elevate it self
with its Body into the Light, but must remain to be a dead stone; and though
indeed it be of greater virtue, then other Stones, yet the Body remains in
Death.

103. And this now is the earthly God of Blind men; which they Love and Honor,
and leave the living God, who stands hidden in the Center, sitting in his
Seat. For the dead Flesh comprehends only a Dead God, and longs also only
after such a dead God.

But it is such a GOD, as has Thrown many men headlong into Hell!

104. Do not take me for a Chemist, for I write only in the knowledge of the
spirit, and not from Experience. Though indeed I could here show something
else, viz. in how many Days, and in what Hours these things must be prepared:
for Gold cannot be made in one Day, but a whole Month is requisite for it.

105. But it is not my purpose, to make any trial of it, because I know not
how to manage the Fire, neither do I know the colors or tinctures of the
qualifying or fountain-spirits in their outermost Birth or Geniture, which are
Two Great Defects; but I know them according to (another) or the Regenerate
Man, which stands not in the palpability.

106. At the Description of the SUN you will find more and deeper things
concerning it: my intention is only, to describe the whole or Total Deity, as
far as I am capable, in my weakness to apprehend, viz. How, that is in Love
and Wrath, and how it does generate it self now at present in this world.

You shall find more concerning Jewels and precious stones at the description
of the seven Planets.

The Three and Twentieth Chapter.
Of the Deep above the Earth.

1. When Man beholds the Deep above the Earth, he sees nothing, but Stars
and Clouds of water, and then he thinks, Sure there must be another place,
where the Deity presents or shows forth it self, together with the
heavenly and Angelical Government: He will needs have the Deep together with
its regiment or Dominion severed from the Deity: for there he sees nothing,
but Stars, and the regiment or Dominion between, is Fire, Air and Water.

2. Then presently he thinks, God has made this thus out of or from his
predestinate purpose, out of Nothing; How then can God be in this Being? or,
Can that be God Himself? He continually Imagines, that this is only a House,
wherein God rules and dwells by his Spirit: God cannot be such a God, whose
being consists in the power of this government, or Dominion.

3. Many will dare to say, what manner of God would that Be, whose Body, Being,
and Power or, virtue stands or, consists in Fire, Air, Water, and Earth?

4. Behold! thou unapprehensive Man, I will show thee the true ground of the
Deity: If this whole or universal Being, be not God, then thou art not Gods
Image: If he be any other, or strange God, then thou have no Part in him: For
thou art created out of this God, and live in this very God, and this very
God continually gives thee power, or virtue and Blessing, also meat and drink
out of Himself, also all thy knowledge stands in this God, and when thou
dyest, then thou art Buried in this God.

5. Now, if there be any other or strange God without and besides this God, who
then shall make thee living again out of this God, in whom thou shall be
departed and turned to dust? How shall that strange God, out of whom thou art
not created, and in whom thou did never Live, bring thy Body and spirit
together again?

6. Now if thou art or, of any other Materials.
of any other Matter, than God himself, how can thou then be his Child? or
how can the Man and King Christ be Gods Bodily or corporeal Son, whom he has
generated or begotten out of his Heart?

7. Now, if his Deity be another Being substance or thing, than his Body;
then there must be a twofold Deity in him, his Body would be of or from the
God of this world, and his Heart would be of or from the unknown God.

8. O, thou Child of Man! open the Eyes of thy Spirit, for I will show thee
here, the right and real proper Gate of the Deity, as indeed that very One
only God will have it.

9. Behold! that is the true One only God, out of whom thou art created, and in
whom thou Live: and when thou beholdest the Deep and the Stars, and the
Earth, then thou beholdest thy God, and in that same thou Live, and also art
or have thy Being therein, and that same God governs or rules thee also,
and out of or from that same God also thou have thy Senses, and thou art a
Creature out of or from Him and in him; else thou had been Nothing, or
would never have been.

10. Now perhaps thou will say; I write Heathenishly.

Hearken and behold! Observe the distinct understanding, How all this is so:
for I write not Heathenishly or Babarously, but Philosophically; neither am I a
Heathen, but I have the Deep and true knowledge of the One only great God, who
is ALL.

11. When thou beholdest the Deep, the Stars, the Elements and the Earth, then
thou comprehendest not with thy Eyes, the bright and clear Deity, though
indeed it is there and in them; but thou see and comprehendest with thy Eyes,
First, Death, and then, the Wrath of God, and the Hellish fire.

12. But if thou raisest thy Thoughts, and considerest where God is, then thou
apprehendest the Astral Birth or Geniture, where Love and Wrath move one
against another; but when thou drawest up the Faith in God, who rules in
holiness in this Government or Dominion, then thou breakest thorough Heaven,
and apprehendest or layest hold on God at his holy Heart.

13. Now when this is done, then thou art as the whole or total God is, who
himself is Heaven, Earth, Stars, and the Elements, and have also such a
regiment or Dominion in thee, and art also such a Person, as the whole God, in
the place of this world, is.

Now thou say:

How shall I understand this: for the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Hell
and of the Devil are distinct one from another, and cannot be one Body? Also
the Earth and Stones are not God? nor the Heaven, Stars and Elements: much
less can a Man be God: for if so, he could not be rejected by God.

Here I will tell thee the ground of all by degrees, one thing after another:
therefore keep the Question in Mind.

Of the Astral Birth or Geniture, and of the Birth or Geniture of God.

14. Before the Times of the created Heavens, the Stars and the Elements, and
before the creation of Angels there was no such wrath of God, no Death, no
Devil, no Earth nor Stones, neither were there any Stars, but the Deity
generated it self very meekly and lovingly, and formed framed and figured it
self in Ideas shapes and Images, which were incorporated according to the
qualifying or fountain spirits in their generating, wrestling and rising up,
and passed away again also through their wrestling; and figured or framed
themselves into another form or condition, all according to the primacy or
predominancy of each qualifying or fountain spirit, as you may read before.

15. But observe here rightly, the earnest and severe Birth or Geniture, out of
which the wrath of God, Hell and Death are come to be; which indeed have been
from Eternity in God, but not kindled or Domineering.
not accensible nor elevable.

16. For the whole or Total God stands in seven Species or Kinds; or in a
sevenfold Form or Generating: and if these Births or Genitures were not, then
there would be neither God nor Life, nor Angel, nor any Creature.

17. And these Births or Genitures have no Beginning, but have so generated
themselves from Eternity; and as to this Depth, God Himself knows not what He
is: For He knows no Beginning of himself, also he knows not anything that
is like Himself, as also he knows no End of himself.

18. These seven Generatings in all are none of them the first, the second, or
the Third, or Last, but they are all Seven every one of them, both the first
second third, fourth and last: yet I must set them down one after another
according to a creaturely way and manner, otherwise thou could not understand
it: For the Deity is as a Wheel with seven wheels made one in another, wherein
a man sees neither Beginning nor End.

Now Observe:

I.
19. First, there is the Astringent quality, which is always generated from
the other six Spirits, which in it self is hard, cold, sharp like Salt, and yet
far sharper. For a Creature cannot sufficiently apprehend its sharpness,
seeing it is not singly and alone in a creature; but according to the manner
and kind of the kindled Hellish quality, I know How it is: This astringent
sharp quality attracteth or draws together, and in the Divine Love holds or
retains the forms and Images, and dries them so, that they subsist or are
fixed.

II.
20. The Second Generating is the Sweet water, which is generated also out of
all the six spirits: for it is the Meekness, which is generated out of the
other six, and presses it self forth in the astringent Birth or Geniture, and
always kindles the astringent again, and then quenches and matigateth it,
that it be not too much astringent, as it might be in its own sharpness, if it
were not for the water.

III.
21. The third Generating is the Bitterness, which existeth out of the fire in
the water: for it rubbeth and vexes it self in the astringent and sharp
coldness, and makes the coldness moveable, from whence mobility existeth.

IIII.
22. The Fourth Generating is the fire, which existeth from the mobility or
rubbing in the astringent spirit, and that is now sharp burning, and the bitter
is stinging and raging. But when the fire-spirit rubbeth it self thus ragingly
in the astringent coldness, then there is an anxious horrible quaking
Trembling and sharp opposite contentious generating.

Observe here the Depth.

23. I speak here as to the kind and manner of the Devil, as if the Light of
God had not yet kindled it self in these four kinds: and as if the Deity had a
beginning, I can no other or nearer way offer it to your Judgment that you may
understand it.

24. In this Fourth rubbing is a very hard and most horrible sharp and fierce
coldness, like a refined melted and very cold salt water, which yet is not
water, but such a hard kind of power and virtue as is like Stones.

25. There is also therein a raging raving stinging and burning, and that water
is continually as a Dying Man, when Body and Soul are parting asunder, a most
horrible anxiety, a woeful painful Birth or Geniture.

26. O man! here consider thy self, here thou see, from whence the Devil, and
his fierce Wrathful Malice has its original, as also Gods Wrath, and the
Hellish fire, also Death and Hell, and eternal Damnation. Ye Philosophers
observe that!

27. Now when these four Generatings rub themselves one upon another, then heat
gets the Primacy and predominancy, and kindles it self in the sweet water, and
then instantly the Light rises up.

Understand this rightly:

28. When the Light kindles it self, then the fire-terrour or crack comes
forth first, as when you strike upon a Sto^^ the fire-crack is first, and then
the light first ^^^ceiveth it self from the fire-crack.

29. Now the fire-crack in the water goes through the astringent quality, as
makes it moveable, but (...) light generateth it self in the water, and
becomes shining Light, and is an impalpable meek and most richly loving Being,
which neither I nor any other Creature can sufficiently write or speak of, but
I stammer only like a Child, which would fain learn to Speak.

30. That same Light is generated in the midst or Center out of these four
Species out of the unctuosity or fatness of the sweet water, and replenisheth
the whole Body of this Generating. But it is such a meek, pleasing, well-doing,
well-smelling and well-tasting Relish, that I know no similitude to liken it
to, But where Life is generated in the midst or Center of Death; or as if a Man
did sit in a huge scorching hot flaming fire, and were suddenly snatched out
from thence, and set in such a very exceeding easy place of refreshment, where
instantly all the smarting scalding pains which he felt before by the burning of
the Fire should suddenly pass away, and he be put into such a pleasing temper
and soundness: Just so the Generating of the 4. Kinds or Species are set or
put into such a soft and meek well-doing, and refreshment, as soon as the Light
rises up in them.

Thou must understand me here aright.

31. I write and mean it in a creaturely kind and manner, as if a Man had been
the Devils Prisoner, and were suddenly removed out of the Devils fire into the
Light of God.

32. For the Light has had no beginning in the generating of God, but has
shined or given Light so from eternity in the Generating, and God himself
knows no beginning therein.

33. Only the Spirit here sets Open for thee the Gates of Hell, that thou
may see, what is the condition of the Devils and of Hell, and what the
condition of Man is, when the divine Light extinguisheth in him, so that he
sits in the wrath of God, and then he lives in such a Generating in such an
anguish, Smarting Pains, woe and misery.

34. Neither can I declare it unto thee in any other manner: for I must write
so, as if the Generating or Geniture of God had or took a beginning, when
things came to be thus; but I write here very, really true, and Precious dear
words, which the Spirit alone understands.

Now Observe: The Gates of God.
35. The Light, which generateth it self from the Fire, and becomes shining in
the water, and replenisheth or fills the whole Geniture, and enlightneth it,
and mitigateth it, that, is the true Heart of God, or Son of God. For he is
continually generated out of the Father, and is another Person then the
qualities and Geniture of the Father.

36. For the Generating or Geniture of the Father cannot catch or comprehend
the Light, and use it to its Generating, but the Light stands by it self, and
is not comprehended by any Geniture, and it replenisheth and enlightneth the
whole Geniture, viz. the only begotten Son of the Father, John 1. 14. And
this Light I call in the humane Birth or Geniture, the animated or Soulish
Birth,

understand, the Image, which Budded forth out of the Essences of the Soul,
according to the similitude of God:] or the Birth or Geniture, which qualifieth
mixeth or uniteth with this animated or soulish Birth or Geniture of God; and
herein is Man's soul one heart with God, but that is when it stands in this
Light.

V.
37. The fifth Generating in God, is, when this Light thus very gently mildly
and amiably presses through the first four Births or Generatings, and then it
brings along with it the Heart and most pleasant lovely power and virtue of
the sweet water, and so when the sharp Births or Genitures taste of it, then
are they very meek and richly full of Love, and is as if continually the life
did rise up in and from Death.

38. There each spirit tastes of the other, and gets mere new strength and
power, for the astringent quality grows now very pliable and yielding,
because it is mitigated by the power of the Light that springs out of the
sweet water, for it warmeth the coldness, and the sweet water makes the sharp
taste very pleasant lovely and mild*

39. And so in the sharp and fiery Births or Generatings there is nothing but a
mere longing of Love, a tasting, friendly affecting, gracious amiable and
blessed Generating, there is nothing but mere Love, and all wrath and
Bitterness in the Center is Bolted up as in a strong Hold. This generating is
a very meek beneficial well-doing, and the bitter spirit now is the Living
Mobility.

VI.
40. Now the Sixth Generating in God, is, when the Spirits in their Birth or
Geniture thus taste, one of another, for then they become very full of Joy: For
the fire-flash or the sharpness out of or from the Birth or Geniture rises up
aloft, and moves as the Air in this world does.

41. For when one power or virtue touches the other, then they taste one
another, and become very full of Joy; for the Light becomes generated out of
all the powers, and presses again through all the powers; whereby and wherein
the rising Joy generateth it self, from whence the Tone or melody or Music.
Tune existeth.

42. For from the touching and moving the living Spirit generateth it self, and
that same Spirit presses through all-Births or Generatings, very
unconceiveably and incomprehensibly to the Birth or Geniture, and is a very
richly Joyful pleasant lovely sharpness, like melodious sweet Music.

43. And now when the Birth generateth, then it conceives or apprehends the
Light, and speaks or inspireth it again into the Birth or Geniture through
the moving Spirit.

And this moving Spirit is the Third Person in the Birth or Geniture of God,
and is called God the Holy Ghost.

VII.
44. The seventh Generating is, and keeps its Birth or Geniture, and Forming
in the Holy Ghost, and so when that goes through the sharp Births or
Genitures, then it goes forth with the Tone, and so forms and Imageth all
manner of Figures, all according to the wrestling of the sharp Births or
Genitures one with another.

45. For they wrestle in the Birth or Geniture continually one with another
like a loving Play or Scene, and according as the Birth or Geniture is with the
colors and taste in the rising up, so are the figures also Imaged.

46. And this Birth or Geniture now is called, GOD the Father Son and Holy
Ghost: and neither of them is the First, and neither of them is the Last:
though I make a distinction, and set the one after the other, yet neither of
them is the first or the last, but they have all been from Eternity thus seated
in the same Equality of Being.

47. I must write by this way of distinction, that the Reader may understand
it: for I cannot write mere heavenly words, but must write humane words. Indeed
all is rightly truly and faithfully described; But the Being of God consists
only in Power, and the Spirit only comprehends it, and not the dead or mortal
Flesh.

48. And thus thou may understand, what manner of Being the Deity is, and
how the three Persons of the Deity are: thou must not liken the Deity to any
Image; for the Deity is the Birth or Geniture of all things. And if there were
not in the First four Species or kinds the sharp Birth or Generating, then
there would be no mobility, neither could the Light kindle it self, and
generate the Life.

49. But now this sharp Birth or Geniture is the original of mobility and of
Life, as also of the Light, from whence existeth the Living and Rational
spirit, which distinguishes forms and Imageth all in this Generating.

50. For the astringent cold Birth or Geniture is the beginning of all things,
which, is astringent, severe, contracting and retentive, and forms and
contracteth the Birth together, and makes the Birth thick or solid, so that
out of it Nature comes to Be: and hence Nature and comprehensibility, has
its original in the whole Body of God.

51. Now this Nature is as a dead unintellectual Being, and stands or
consists not in the power of the Birth or Geniture, but is a Body, wherein
the power generateth.

52. But it is the Body of God, and has all power as the whole Geniture has,
and the generating spirits take their strength and power out of or from the
Body of Nature, and continually generate again, and the astringent spirit
continually compacteth or draws it together, and dries it; and thus the Body
subsisteth, and the generating spirits also.

53. Now the other Birth or Geniture is the Water, which takes its original in
the Body of Nature.

Observe:

54. Now when the Light shines thorough the astringent contracted Body, and
mitigateth it, then the mild beneficient well-doing generateth it self in the
Body, and then the hard power grows very mild, and melts as Ice in the Heat
of the Sun, and is extenuated or rarefied as water is in the Air; and yet the
stock of Nature as to the heavenly comprehensibility remains standing.

55. For the astringent and fire-spirit holds it fast, and the meek water,
which melts from the Body of Nature in the kindling of the Light, that goes
through the severe and earnest, cold and fiery Birth or Geniture, and is very
sweet pleasant and lovely.

56. Whereby now the earnest and austere Birth or Geniture is refreshed; and
when it tastes thereof, it grows capable to be raised up, and rejoices, and
also is a joyful rising up, wherein the life of Meekness generateth it self.

57. For this is the water of Life, wherein the Love, in God, as also in Angels
and Men, generateth it self: For it is all of one sort of Power Virtue and
Birth or Geniture.

58. And now when the Births or Genitures of the powers taste the water of
Life, then they quake or Tremble for very Love and Joy, and that trembling or
moving, which rises up in the midst or center of the Birth or Geniture, is
Bitter. For it rises up swiftly out of the Birth, when the water of life
comes into the Birth or Geniture; like a Joyful leaping or springing up of the
Birth.

59. But being it rises up so swiftly, that the Birth elevateth it self so
suddenly before it be fully affected with the water of life, thereupon that
terror or crack keeps its bitterness which it has out of or from the
austere Birth: for the beginning or incaptive Birth or Geniture is very
austere, cold, fiery and astringent.

60. Therefore also is the terror or Crack now so swelling and trembling; for
it moves the whole Birth, and rubbeth it self therein, till it kindles the
fire in the hard fierceness, from whence the Light takes its original: And
then the trembling crack becomes enlightened with the Meekness of the Light,
and goes in the Birth or Geniture up and down, and crosse-wayes both upwards
and downwards like a wheel made with seven wheels one in another.

61. In this pressing through and turning about existeth the Tone, according to
the Quality of each spirit, and always one power affects the other, for the
powers are as loving Brethren in one Body, and the meekness rises up, and the
spirit generateth and shows it self infinitely.

62. For that power, which in the turning about shows it self the strongest
in the generating, according to that power, manner and color the Holy Ghost
also imageth shapeth or frames the figures in the Body of Nature.

63. Thus thou see, that none of the powers is the first, also none the
second, third, fourth or Last: but the last generateth the First as well, as
the first the Last, and the middle most takes its original from the Last as
also from the First, as well as from the Second, Third, or any of the rest.

64. Thou see also, that Nature cannot be distinguished from the powers of
God, but is all one Body.

65. The Deity, that is, the holy power of the Heart of God is generated in
Nature, and so also the Holy Ghost existeth or goes forth out of the Heart of
the Light continually, through all the powers of the Father, and figureth all,
and Imageth or frames All.

66. This Birth or Geniture is now in Three distinct Parts, every one being
several and Total, and yet neither of them is divided asunder from the other.

The Gate of the Holy Trinity.
67. The whole Birth or Geniture which is the Heaven of all Heavens, as also
this world, which is in the Body of the whole, as also the place of the Earth
and of all creatures, and whatever thou can think on, all that together is
God the Father, who has neither beginning nor end, and wheresoever and
whatsoever thou think upon even in the smallest circle, that can be
imagined, is the whole Birth or Geniture of God, perfectly incessantly and
irresistably.

68. But if in a Creature or in any Place the light be extinguished, then is the
austere Birth or Geniture there, which lies hid in the Light in the innermost
kernel; And this now is One Part.

69. The second part or the second Person is the Light, which is continually
generated from or out of all powers, and enlightneth again all the powers of
the Father, and has the fountain of all powers. But is therein distinguished
from the Father as a singular Person, in that it cannot comprehend the Birth or
Geniture of the Father, and yet is the Fathers Son, which is always
generated from or out of the Father: An instance whereof you have in all the
kindled Fires, in this world, do but consider of it.

70. And the Father loves this his only begotten or innate Son therefore so
heartily, because he is the Light and the meek beneficent well-doing in his
Body, through whose power the Fathers Joy and Delight rises up.

71. Now these are two Persons, and neither of them can apprehend retain or
comprehend the other, and the One is as great as the other; and if either of
them were not, the other could not be neither.

72. Observe here ye Jews, Turks and Heathens, for it concerns you; to you
here are opened the Gates of God, harden not your selves, for now is the
acceptible time.

73. You are not forgotten of God at all, but if you convert, then the Light
and Heart of God will rise up in you, as the bright Sun at Noonday.

74. This I write in the power and perfect knowledge of the great God, and I
understand his will herein very well. For I live and or have my Being in him.
am in him, and spring up with this work and Labor out of his root and stock,
and it must be so: Only take thou heed; if thou blindest thy self, then there
is no Remedy more; neither can thou say, thou knew not of it, therefore
arise, for the Day breaks!

75. The third diversity, or the third Person in the Being of God is the moving
Spirit, which existeth from the rising up in the terror or Crack, where life
is generated, which now moves in all powers, and is the Spirit of Life; and
the powers can no more comprehend him or apprehend him, but he kindles the
powers, and by his moving makes figures and Images, and forms them according
to that kind and manner, as the wrestling Birth stands in every place.

76. And if thou art not wilfully blind, thou may know, that the Air is that
very spirit, but in the Place of this world Nature is kindled therein very
swellingly in the wrath-fire, which Lord Lucifer effected, and the Holy Ghost,
who is the Spirit of Meekness, lies hidden therein in his Heaven.

77. Thou need not to ask, where that Heaven is. It is in thy Heart, do but
open it, the Key is here showed to thee.

78. Thus there is one God and three distinct Persons one in another, and
neither of them can comprehend or withhold or fathom the Original of the other,
but the Father generateth the Son, and the Son is the Fathers Heart, and
his Love and his Light, and is an original of Joy, and the beginning of all
Life.

79. And the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Life, and a former, framer and Creator
of all things, and a performer of the will in God, that has formed and created
out of or from the Body and in the Body of the Father, all Angels and
Creatures, and holds and forms all still daily, and is the sharpness and
the Living Spirit of God: And as the Father speaks or Expresses the Word out
of or from his powers, so the Spirit forms or frames them.

Of the great simplicity of God.
80. Come on Brave Sir, upon thy Brown Nagg! who ridest from Heaven into Hell,
and from Hell into Death, and therein the sting of death lies: view thy self
here thou worldly wise Man, that art full of base wit Cunning and subtle
Policy.

81. Take notice ye worldly wise Lawyers, if you will not, come before this
Looking-glass, even before the bright and clear face of God, and view your
selves therein, then the Spirit presents to you the Birth or Geniture in the
innermost astringent circle; where wit cunning and prudence is generated, where
the sharpness of the anxious Birth or Geniture of God is, for there your
prudence cunning and deep reaching wit is generated.

82. Now if you will be Gods, and not Devils, then make use of the Holy and
meek Law of God, if not, then you shall for ever Eternally generate in the
a^stere and severe Birth or Geniture of God.

This says the Spirit, as the Word of God, and not of my dead or mortal Flesh.

83. Thou must know, that I do not suck it out from the dead or mortal Reason,
but my spirit qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with God, and proves or searches
the Deity how it is in all its Births or Genitures in its taste and smell: and
I find, that the Deity is a very simple, pure, meek, loving and Quiet Being;
and that the birth of the Ternarie of God generateth it self very meekly,
friendly, lovingly and unanimously, and the sharpness of the innermost Birth,
can never elevate or swell it self into the meekness of the Ternarie, but
remains hidden in the Deep.

84. And the sharpness in the hidden secrecy is called God's WRATH, and the
Being of meekness in the Ternarie or Trinity, is called GOD. Here nothing
goes out of or forth from the sharpness, which perishes, or which does
kindle the wrath, but the spirits Play very gently one with another, like
little children, when they rejoice one with another, where every one has his
work, and so they play one with another, and lovingly kiss and court one
another.

85. Such a work also the Holy Angels exercise themselves in, and in the
Ternarie of God there is a very meek, pleasant, and sweet being, where the
Spirit always elevateth it self in the Tune melody or Music.
Tone, and the one power touches the other, as if there were pleasant
Melodious Hymns or Songs and consorts of musical Instruments played upon.

86. And as the rising up of the spirits, in every place is, so the Tone also
forms it self, but very meekly, and incomprehensibly to the Bodies of the
Angels, but very comprehensibly to the animated or soulish Birth or Geniture of
Angels: and as the Deity presents it self in each place, so the Angels also
present themselves: For the Angels were created out of this Being, and have
among them their Princes of the qualifying or fountain spirits of God, as they
are in the Birth or Geniture of God.

87. Therefore as the Being of God presents or shows forth it self in the
Birth or Geniture, so do the Angels also, and that power, which at any time
has the primacie in the Birth or Geniture of God, and rejoices out of the
Heart of God in the Holy Ghost, that Power's Prince of the Angels begins
also his Hymn, and Jubilateth with his Host or Army, now one, then suddenly
another, for the Birth or Geniture of God is like a Wheel.

88. But when the Heart of God shows forth it self with its Clarity or
Brightness, then there rises up the whole Host or Army of all the three
Kingdoms of the Angels, and in this rising up of the Heart of God the Man JESUS
CHRIST is King and Chief, he leads the Royal Chorus or Quire with all the
holy Souls of Men till the Last Judgment Day: And then the Holy Men are perfect
Angels, and the wicked perfect Devils, and that in its eternity.

89. Here view thy self, thou witty subtle world, and consider, from whence thy
prudence suttlety and wit proceeds.

Now thou will say to me:

90. Do not thou seek after deeper suttlety than we? thou will needs clime
into the most hidden secrets of God, which is not fit for any Man to go about.
We seek only after humane Prudence and suttlety, but thou would be equal
with God, and know all; How God is, in every thing both in Heaven and in Hell,
in Devils, Angels and Men. Therefore sure it is not unlawful to seek for a
cunning sharp wit and after crafty Designs, which bring Honor Power or
Authority and Riches.

A Reply.

91. If thou climest up this Ladder, on which I climb up into the Deep of God,
as I have done, then thou have climbed well: I am not come to this meaning, or
to this work and knowledge through my own Reason, or through my own will and
purpose, neither have I sought this knowledge, nor so much as knew any thing
concerning it, I sought only for the Heart of God; therein to hide my self from
the tempestuous storms of the Devil.

92. But when I gat in thither, then this great weighty and hard Labor was
laid upon me, which is, to Manifest and reveal to the world, and to make known
The great Day of the LORD; and being they seek and Long so eagerly after the
Root of the Tree; to reveal to them, what the whole Tree is, thereby to
intimate, that it is the Dawning or Morning Redness of the Day, which God has
long ago Decreed in his Council. AMEN.

93. Thus thou see, What God is, and How his Love and Wrath has been from
eternity, also how his Birth or Geniture is: and now thou can not say, that
thou art not in God, or do not live in God, or that God is any strange T^ing,
which thou can not come at, but must confess, that where thou art, there is
the Gate of God.

94. Now if thou art holy, then as to thy Soul thou art with God in Heaven; but
if thou ar^ wieked, t^en as to thy Soul thou art in Hellfire.

Now Observe further:

95. When God created the Angels, all of them were created wholly out of this
Birth or Geniture of God, their Body was compacted or incorporated out of
Nature, therein their Spirit and Light generated themselves, as the Deity
generated it self. And as the qualifying or fountain spirits of God always
took their power and strength out of or from the Body of Nature, so the Angels
also, they took their power and strength always out of or from the Nature of
God.

96. And as the Holy Ghost in Nature forms and Imageth or frames all, so the
spirit of the Angels also qualified or united with the Holy Ghost, and did help
to form frame and Image all, that all might be One Heart and will, and a mere
delight and Joy: For the Angels are the Children of the Great God, which He
has generated in his Body of Nature for the multiplying of the divine Joy.

97. But here thou must know, that the Bodies of Angels cannot apprehend the
Birth or Geniture of God, neither does their Body understand it, their spirit
only understands it, but the Body holds still, as the Nature in God does,
and lets the spirit co-work and Labor with God, and Play lovingly.

98. For the Angels Play before and in God, as little children play before
their Parents, whereby the Divine Joy is increased.

99. But when the mighty potent Prince and King Lucifer was created, he would
not do so, but elevated and swelled himself, and would be God alone, and
kindled the wrath-fire in himself, and so did all his Angels also.

100. But when that was done, he roared with his kindled fire-spirit, abroad
into the Nature of God, and then the whole Body in the Nature of God, as far as
his Kingdom and Dominion reached, was kindled: But being his light was
instantly extinguished, he could no more qualify or unite with his Spirit in
the two Births or Genitures, viz. of the Son of God, and of the Holy Spirit
of God, but remained standing in the sharp Birth or Geniture of God.

101. For the light of God and the Spirit of God, cannot comprehend the sharp
Birth or Geniture, and therefore they are two distinct Persons: And so Lord
Lucifer could no more touch, see, feel or taste the Heart of God and the Holy
Spirit of God, with his austere, cold, and hard fire-Birth, but was Spewed out
with his fire-spirit, into the outermost Nature, wherein he had kindled the
wrath-fire.

102. And that Nature is indeed the Body of God, wherein the Deity generateth
it self, but the Devils cannot apprehend the meek Birth of God, which rises up
in the Light: For their Body is dead to the Light, and lives in the outermost
and austere Birth or Geniture of God, wherein the Light never kindles it self
again any more.

103. For their unctuousnesse or fatness in the sweet water is burnt up, and
that water is turned into a sour stinck, wherein the Light of God can no more
kindle it self, and the Light of God can no more enter into it.

104. For the qualifying or fountain spirits of the Devils are shut up in the
hard wrath, their Bodies are a hard Death, and their spirits are a fierce Sting
of the wrath of God, and their qualifying or fountain spirits generate
themselves continually in the innermost sharpness, according to the sharp
right or Order.
Law of the Deity.

105. For otherwise they cannot generate themselves, neither can they dye or
pass away, vanish and be no more, but they stand in the most anguishing Birth
or Geniture, and there is nothing in them* ^ut mere fierceness, wrath and
malice; the kindled fire-source rises from eternity to eternity, and they can
never touch nor see nor apprehend the Sweet and Light Birth or Geneniture of
God any more.

Of the kindled Nature.
106. But God has therefore kindled Nature so much and so hard, and did so
kindle the burning in his wrath therein, that he might thereby build a dwelling
house for the Devils, and keep them Prisoners therein, in that they were the
children of wrath, in whom he must rule with his fierce Zeal or Jealousy, and
they also in the wrath of God.

The Four and Twentieth Chapter.
Of the Incorporating or Compaction of the Stars.

1. NOw when the whole Body of Nature in the Extent Space or Circumference of
this world, Printed Copy. Of the Dead Nature, and of the Fourth Day.
was benumbed or deadned as in the hard Death, and yet that the Life was hid
therein, thereupon God moved the whole Body of the Nature of this world on the
Fourth Day, and generated the Stars from or out of Nature out of the risen
Light. For the wheel of Gods Birth or Geniture moved it self again, as it had
done from eternity.

2. Indeed it had moved on the First Day, and began the Birth or Geniture in
the Body of the corrupt Nature: for on the first Day, the life separated it
self from the Death, and on the second Day a firmament was Created between,
and on the third Day the Life brake forth through Death. For there the light
brake forth through the Darkness, and made the dead body of Nature to spring
flourish and to be stirring and agile.

3. For on the third Day the Body of Nature did travel so hard in anxietie,
till the Love fire had kindled it self in the Death, and till the Light of
life was broken forth through the congealed Body of Death; and sprung up out of
Death; but on the third Day it stood only in the Fire crack, from whence
mobility existed.

4. On the fourth Day the Light rose up, and made its seat in the house of
death, and yet Death could not, nor cannot comprehend it: As little as the
austere Birth of God, which stands in the innermost kernel, from whence life
existeth, can apprehend the meekness, and the light of the meekness together
with the Spirit in the meekness; so little also can the dead Darkness of this
world comprehend the Light of Nature; no more can the Devils neither.

5. But the light shines through Death, and has made its Royal seat in the
midst or center in the House of Death, and of Gods wraths, and generateth to it
self a new or, Divine Body.
Body of God, out of the house of wrath which subsisteth eternally in the Love
of God in comprehensibly to the old kindled Body in the outmost Birth or
Geniture.

Now thou will Ask.

How shall I understand this?

Answer.

6. I cannot at all write it in thy Heart, for it is not for every Man's
capacity, understanding and apprehension, especially where the Spirit stands
in the House of wrath, and does not qualify operate or unite with the Light of
God. But I will show it to thee in an Earthly similitude, that thou might if
possible get a little into the deep Sense.

7. Behold and consider a Tree, on the outside it has a hard gross Rind or
Bark which is Dead benumbed, and without Vegetation, yet it is not quite Dead,
but in a faintness or imbecility, and there is a great difference between it
and the Body, which grows next under the Rind or Bark. But the Body has its
Living Power, and breaks forth through the Withered Rind, and generateth many
fair young Bodies or Twigs, all which stand in the old Body.

8. But the Rind is as it were dead, and cannot comprehend the Life of the
Tree, but only hangs to it, and is a Cover to the Tree in which worms do
Harbor, which in the End destroy the Tree.

9. And thus also is the whole House of this world: the outward Darkness is
the House of Gods Wrath, wherein the Devils dwell, and it is rightly the House
of Death, for the Holy Light of God has dyed therein.

[ Understand, it stepped into its principle, and is the in God, but in another
Source or Quality]

10. But the Body of this great House, which lies hid under the Shell or Rind
of darkness, incomprehensibly to darkness, that is the house of Life, wherein
Love and Wrath wrestle one with another.

11. Now the Love always breaks through the House of Death, and generateth
holy heavenly Twigs in the great Tree; which Twiggs stand in the Light: For
they spring up through the shell or skin of Darkness, as the Twiggs do through
the shell or Bark of the Tree, and are One Life with God.

12. And the wrath springs up also in the House of darkness, and holds
many a Noble Twigg captive in Death through its infection in the house of
fierceness.

13. And this now is the Sum, or the Contents, of the Astral Birth or
Geniture, of which I here intend to write.

And now it may be Asked:

What are the Stars? or out of what are they come to be?

14. They are the power of the seven Spirits of God: for when the wrath of God,
was kindled by the Devil, in this world, then the whole House of this world in
Nature or the outermost Birth or Geniture was as it were benumbed or chilled in
Death, from whence the Earth and Stones are come to be. But when this hard
dross or Scum was driven together into a Lump or Heap, then the Deep was
cleared, but was very dark, for the light therein was dead in the wrath.

15. But now the Body of God, as to this world, could not remain in Death, but
God moved himself with his seven qualifying or fountain spirits to the Birth or
Geniture.

But thou must understand this high thing rightly:

16. The Light of God, which is the Son of God, as also the Holy Ghost, died
not, but the Light, which is gone forth from or out of the heart of God from
eternity, and has enlightened Nature, which is generated out of the seven
spirits, that is departed or gone away from the hard corrupted Nature; from
whence it is that the Nature of this world with its comprehensibility or
palpability has remained in Death, and cannot apprehend the Light of God, but
is a dark House of Devils.

17. Upon this On the fourth Day of the Creation God regenerated anew the whole
House of this world with the qualities thereof, and has placed or set the
qualifying or fountain spirits in the House of Darkness, that he might
generate to himself again out of that, a new Body, to his praise honor and
Glory.

18. For his purpose was to create another Angelical Host or Army, out of this
House; which was thus to be done: He would create an Angel, which was Adam, who
should generate out of himself Creatures like himself, which should possess
the House of the New Birth, and in the middle of Time, their King should be
generated or born out of a Humane Body, and possess the newborn Kingdom as a
King of these Creatures, instead of the corrupted and expelled Lucifer.

19. And at the fullness or accomplishment of this Time, God would adorn and
Trim this House with its qualities, as a Royal Government, and let those very
qualifying or fountain spirits possess the whole House, that they might in
that House of darkness and of Death, bring forth Creatures and Images again,
as they had done from eternity, till the accomplishment or fulfilling of the
whole Host or Army of the new created Angels, which were Men: And Then, God
would bolt and bar up the Devil in the House of darkness in an eternal Hole,
and then kindle the whole House in its own Light again, all but the very Hole
Hell or Dungeon of the Devils.

Now it may be Asked:

Why did not God bolt him up instantly, and then he had not done so much
mischief?

Answer.

20. Behold! this was Gods purpose, and that must stand, which is, he would
re-edifie out of the corrupted Nature of the Earth, or build again to himself
an Angelical Host or Army: Understand, viz. a true Body, which should Subsist
eternally in God.

21. It was not Gods intention at all to let the Devil have the whole Earth for
an eternal dwelling house, but only the Death and fierceness of the Earth,
which the Devil had brought into it.

22. For what sin has the Salitter committed against God, that it should stand
totally in Eternal shame? None; It was only a Body, which must hold still,
when the Devil elevated or swelled himself therein.

23. Now if He should have instantly left it to the Devil for an Eternal
dwelling House, then out of that place a New Body could not have been built.
Now what Sin had that space place or Room committed against God, that it should
stand in eternal Shame? None: and therefore that were unequal to be so.

24. Now the purpose of God was, to make a curious excellent Angelical Host or
Army out of the Earth, and all manner of Ideas forms or Images. For, in and
upon that all should Spring, and generate themselves anew, as we see in mineral
Oars, Stones, Trees, Herbs and Grass, and all manner of Beasts; after a
heavenly Image or Form.

25. And though those Imagings were transitory, being they were not pure before
God, yet God would at the End of this time, extract and draw forth the Heart
and the kernel, out of the new Birth or Geniture, and separate it from Death
and Wrath, and the new Birth should Eternally spring up in God, without,
distinct from this place, and bear Heavenly fruits again.

26. But the death of the Earth and the wrath therein should be Lord Lucifers
eternal House, after the accomplishing of the new Birth or Geniture: in the
mean while Lord Lucifer should lie captive in the Darkness in the Deep above
the Earth; and there he is now, and may very shortly expect his Portion.

27. And that this New Birth or Geniture might be accomplished, whether the
Devil will or no, the Creator has therefore in the Body of this world
generated himself, as it were creaturely in his qualifying or fountain spirits,
and all the Stars are nothing else but Gods powers, and the whole Body of this
world consists in the seven qualifying or fountain spirits.

28. But that there are so many Stars of so manifold different effects and
operations, it is from the Infiniteness, which is in the Infection or
Affectings.
efficiency of the seven spirits of God, in one another, which generate
themselves infinitely.

29. But that the Birth or the Bodies of the Stars do not change or alter in
their seat, but do as they did from eternity, it signifies that there shall
be a constant continued Birth or Geniture, whereby the benumbed Body of the
Earth should continually and constantly, in one uniform operation, which yet
stands in the infiniteness, be kindled again, and generate it self a new,
and so also should the House of darkness of the Deep above the Earth; whereby
the new Body might continually and constantly be generated out of Death, till
time should be accomplished, and the whole newborn Body.

Now thou will object and say.

Then sure the Stars are God, and they must be honored and worshipped as God?

30. The wise Heathen also came to this who indeed in their sharp or acute
understandings far excelled our Philosophers, but the right Door of knowledge
has remained yet hidden to them.

13. Behold! the Stars are plainly incorporated or compacted out of or from
God, but thou must understand the difference between them: for, they are not
the Heart, and the meek pure Deity, which man is to honor and worship as God,
But they are the innermost and sharpest Birth or Geniture, wherein all things
stand in wrestling and fighting, wherein the Heart of God always generateth it
self, and the Holy Ghost continually rises up from the rising of the Life

32. But the sharp Birth or Geniture of the Stars cannot apprehend the Heart
of God again, nor the Holy Ghost; but the Light of God, which rises up in the
anxiety, together with the moving of the Holy Ghost remains free to it self
as the Heart, and rules in the midst or center of the Closure of the hidden
Heaven, which is from ^r out of the Water of Life.

33. For from the Heaven the Stars have their first kindling, and are only as
an instrument, which God uses to the Birth or Geniture.

It is Just such a Birth, as is in Man; the Body is even the Father of the
soul, and when the Body stands in the anguishing Birth or Geniture of God,
as the Stars do, and not in the fierce hellish Birth, then the soul of Man
qualifieth mixeth or uniteth with the pure Deity, as a Member in or of his
Body.

35. Thus also is the Heart or Light of God always generated in the Body of
this world, and that generated Heart is one Heart with the eternal beginning
less infinite Heart of God, which is in and above all Heavens.

36. It is not only generated in and from the Stars, but in the whole Body of
this world, but the Stars always kindle the Body of this World, that the
Birth or Geniture may subsist every where:

But here thou must well observe this.

37. The light or the Heart of God takes not its original, barely from the
wild rough Stars, where indeed Love and wrath are one in another, but out of
or from the Seat where the meek water of Life is continually generated.

38. For that water, at or in the kindling of the wrath was not apprehended by
Death, but subsisteth from eternity to eternity, and reaches to all the Ends
and Parts of or in this world, and is the water of Life, which breaks through
Death, out of which the new Body of God in this world is built.

39. But it is in the Stars as well as in all Ends corners and places, but not
in any place, comprehensible or palpable, but fills or replenisheth all alike
at once: It is also in the Body of Man, and he that thirsts after this water,
and drinks thereof, in him the light of life kindles it self, which is the
heart of God, and there presently springs forth, the Holy Ghost.

Now thou Ask:

How then do the Stars subsist in Love and Wrath?

Answer.

40. Behold! the Stars are risen or proceeded out of the Kindled House of Gods
wrath, as the the first inward stirring of Life in the Child.
mobility or stirring of a Child in the Mothers Body or Womb in Three as Genesis
38. 24.
Months: But now they have attained their kindling from the eternal benumbed
water of Life, for that water in Nature was never dead.

41. But when God moved himself in the Body of this world, then on the third
Day the anxiety, in the birth of this world rubbed it self, from whence the
fire-flash existed, and the light of the Stars kindled it self in the water of
Life.

42. For till the third Day from the time of the kindling of Gods wrath in this
world, Nature in the anxiety was a dark valley, and stood in Death, but on the
third Day the life brake through Death, and the New Birth began.

43. For so long, and not an hour longer, the new born King and Grand Prince of
this world, JESUS CHRIST, rested in Death, and has born or generated the first
three Days of the Creation of Nature, and that very Time; in Death to Light
again, that this time might again be one Time with the Eternal Time, and that
no Day of Death might be between: and that the Eternal Love, and the new born
or Regenerated Love out of the new Body of Nature might be one Eternal Love,
and that there might be no difference between the eternal Love, and the newborn
or regenerated Love, but that the newborn Love might reach into the Being or
Substance, which was from Eternity, and it self also be in Eternity.

44. Thus the newborn Love, which rose out of the water of Life in the light
in the Stars, and in the whole Body of this world, is wholly bound and united
with the eternal beginning less infinite Love, so that they are one Heart and
one Spirit, which supporteth and preserves all.

45. In this kindling of the Light in the Stars and Elements, the Birth of
Nature did not thereupon wholly transmute or change it self into the holy
Meekness, as it was before the Time of the wrath, so that the Birth of Nature
is now altogether holy and pure; No, but it stands in its sharpest,
austerest, and most anxious Birth, wherein the wrath of God uncessantly
springs up like hellish-Fire.

46. For if Nature had fully changed it self with its sharp Birth into Love,
according to the heavenly Right Law or Manner, then were the Devils again in
the Seat of God.

47. And this thou may very well perceive and understand in Extreme Heat and
Cold, as also by the Poison, Bitterness and Sowrnesse in this world; all which
stand in the Birth or Geniture of the Stars, wherein the Devil lies Captive.

48. The Stars are only the kindling of the great House: for the whole house
is benumbed in Death, as the Earth is, for the outermost Birth or Geniture is
dead and benumbed, as the Rind Shell or Bark of a Tree: but the Astral birth is
the Body in which the Life rises up.

49. But it is in its Body very sharp, yet the new Birth, which rises up in
the water of Life, and presses through Death, mitigateth it. But it cannot
alter the kernel of the sharp Birth, but is generated out of it, and keeps its
holy new life to it self, and presses through the angry Death, and the angry
Death comprehends it not.

50. Now this love and wrath is indeed one Body, but the water of Life is the
heaven of Partition between them, so that the Love does not receive or
comprehend the Wrath, nor the wrath the Love, but the Love rises up in the
water of Life, and receives into it self from the Earth and austere Birth, the
power, which is in the Light, which is generated out of the Wrath; so that, the
New Body is born out of the Old.

51. For the old Body, which stands in the austere Birth, belongs to the
Devil for a House, and the new belongs to the Kingdom of Christ.

Now it may be Asked:

Are not all the Three Persons of the Deity in the Birth or Geniture of
Meekness, in this World?

Answer.

52. Yes, they are all three in this world in the full Birth or Geniture of
Love, meekness, Holiness and purity, and they are always generated in such a
substance and B^eing, as was done from Eternity.

53. Behold! God the Father Spoke to the People of Israel on Mount Sinai, when
he gave the Law to them, saying, I am an angry zealous or Jealous God to those,
that hate me, Exodus 20. 5. Deuteronomy. 5. 9.

54. Now thou can not make of this One only Father, who is both Angry and
also full of Love, two Persons, but he is one only Father, which continually
generateth his heartily beloved Son, and from both these the Holy Ghost goes
forth continually.

Observe the depth in the Center.

55. The Father is the One only being, who himself is ALL; who continually
generateth his heartily beloved Son from eternity, and in both of them the
Holy Ghost is continually standing in the Flash, wherein the Life is Generated.

56. But now from the austere and earnest Birth or Geniture of the qualifying
or fountain spirits of the Father, wherein the Zeal or Jealousy and the wrath
stands, the Body of Nature always comes to be, wherein the Light of the
Son, viz: of the Fathers Heart stands, incomprehensibly as to Nature.

57. For the light is in the Midst or Center of the Birth or Geniture, and is
the place of Life, wherein the meek Life of God is generated from or out of all
the powers of the Father, and in the same place the Holy Ghost goes forth from
the Father and the Son.

58. Now those powers of the Father, which stand in the kindling of the Light,
are the holy Father, and the meek Father, and the pure Birth or Geniture of
God, and the Spirit, which rises therein, is the holy Ghost; but the sharp
Birth or Geniture is the Body, wherein this Holy Life is continually generated.

59. But when the Light of God shines through this sharp Birth or Geniture,
then it becomes very meek, and is as it were like a Man that is a sleep, in
whom the Life still moves, and the Body is in a sweet quiet rest.

60. And in this Body of nature now was the kindling made, for out of this Body
the Angels also were created; and if they had not elevated and kindled
themselves in their Highmindednesse; then their Body might have stood eternally
in a stillnesse and in an incomprehensible meekness, as it is in the other
Principalities of Angels that are without, distinct from this world, and their
spirit had generated it self eternally in their Body of meekness, as the holy
Trinity does in the Body or Corporeity of God, and their inborn or innate
spirit had been one Heart, one Will, and one Love with or in the Holy Trinity:
for to that end also they were created in the Body of God, to be a joy to the
Deity.

61. But Lord Lucifer, would himself be the Mighty God, and kindled his Body,
and excited or stirred up therein the sharp Birth of God, and opposed the Light
or bright Heart of God, intending to rule therein with his sharpness, which
was a thing impossible to be done.

62. But being he elevated and kindled himself against the Right of the Deity,
thereupon the sharp Birth in the Body of the Father rose up against him: and
took him as an angry Son Prisoner or Captive, in the sharpest Birth, and
therein now is his eternal Dominion.

63. But now when the Father kindled himself in the Body of the sharpness, he
did not for all that kindle the holy source, wherein his most loving Heart
generateth it self, and so thereupon his Heart should sit in the source of
wrath. No! that is impossible that it should be, for the sharp Birth cannot
apprehend the holy and pure Birth, but the holy and pure presses quite through
the sharp, and generateth to it self a new Body, which stands again in
meekness.

64. And that new Body is the water of Life which is generated when the light
presses through the wrath, and the holy Ghost is the Former or ^ramer therein:
but He^ven is the Partition between love and wrath, and is the seat, wherein
the wrath is transmuted or changed into Love.

65. Now when thou beholdest the Sun and Stars, thou must not think, that they
are the Holy and pure God, and thou must not offer to pray to them or ask any
thing of them, for they are not the Holy God, but are the kindled austere Birth
or Geniture of his Body, wherein Love and Wrath wrestle one with another.

66. But the holy God is hidden in the Center of all these things in his
Heaven, and thou can neither see nor comprehend him, but the soul
comprehends him, and the Astral Birth but half, for the Heaven is the
Partition between Love and Wrath: That Heaven is every where, even in thy self.

67. And now when thou worshippest or prayest to the Holy God in his Heaven
then thou worshippest or prayest to him, in that heaven, which is in thee, and
that same God with his light; and therein the holy Ghost breaks through in
thy Heart, and generateth thy Soul to be or New Divine Body
a New Body of God, which rules and reigns with God in his Heaven.

68. For the earthly Body, which thou bear, is one Body with the whole
kindled Body of this world and thy body qualifyeth mixeth or uniteth with the
whole body of this world; and there is no difference between the Stars and the
Deep, as also the Earth and thy Body; it is all one Body: This is the only
difference; thy Body is a Son of the whole; and is in it self as the whole
Being it self, is.

69. And now as the new Body of this world generateth it self in its Heaven,
so the new man also generateth himself in his Heaven, for it is all but one
Heaven, wherein God dwells, and therein thy new man dwells, and they cannot
be divided asunder.

70. But if thou art wicked, then thy Birth or Geniture is not capable of
Heaven, but of the wrath, and remains in the other part of the Astral Birth
or Geniture, wherein the earnest and austere fire-source rises up, and bolts
it up into Death, so long, till thou breakest through Heaven, and live with
God.

71. For instead of thy heaven thou have the wrath-Devil sitting there; but if
thou breakest thorough, then he must get him gone, and the Holy Ghost rules
and reigns in that Seat, and in the other Part viz. the fierceness, the
Devil tempts thee, for it is his Nest, and the Holy Ghost opposes him, and
the new man lies in his own Heaven hidden under the protection of the Holy
Ghos^, and the Devil knows not the New man, for he is not in his House, but
in Heaven, in the Firmament of God.

72. This I write as a Word, which is Generated in its Heaven, where the Holy
Deity always generateth it self, and where the moving spirit rises up in the
Flash of Life, even there this Word and this knowledge is generated, and risen
up in the Love-fire through the Zealous spirit of God.

73. I know very well, what the Devil intends; for, that Part of the earnest
and austere Birth or Geniture, wherein Love and wrath are set opposite one to
another, sees into his very Heart. For when he comes with his fierce and
hellish Temptation, like a fawning Dog, then he sets upon us with his wrath
in that part, wherein the austere Birth or Geniture stands, and therein the
Heaven is set in opposition to him, and there the fair Bride is known.

74. For he stingeth through the Old Man, with an intent, to spoil or destroy
the New; but when the new rises against him, then the Hell-Hound retireth, and
then the new Man feels very well, what device the Hell-hound has darted or
spit into the astral Birth, and then is it time to Purge and scour it out.

75. But I find, that the cunning'st Devil is set against me, he will raise
scorners and mockers, who will say, that I intend by mine own conceit to grope,
dig deep and search out the Deity. Yes, Mr. Scorner, thou art indeed an
obedient son to the Devil, thou have great cause to mock Gods children, as if I
were able in mine own power to fathom the depth of the Deity; No! but the
Deity searches the Ground in me: Or, do thou think, that I am strong enough
to stand against it?

76. Indeed thou proud Man, God is a very meek, simple and quiet still Being,
and groapeth not in the Bottom of Hell and Death, but in his Heaven, where
there is nothing, but an Unanimous meekness: therefore it is not meet for me
to do so.

77. But behold! it is not I that have made way for this, but thy desire and
highly raised lofty Lust, has moved the Deity, to reveal to thee the desire
of thy Heart in the highest simplicity in the greatest depth, that it may be a
witness against thee, and denunciation of the earnest severe Day of God;

78. This I speak to thee as a word of the earnest Severity of God, which is
generated or born in the Flash of Life.

The Five and Twentieth Chapter.
Of the whole Body of the Stars Birth or Geniture, that is, the whole
Astrology, or the whole Body of this World.

1. THe learned and highly experienced Masters of Astrology or the Starry Art,
are come so high and deep in their understanding, that they know the course and
Effects of the Stars, what their conjunction, infection.
influence and breaking through of their powers, and virtues denotes and
produces; and How thereby wind, rain, snow and heat is caused, also Good and
Evil, Good Hap, Bad Hap: Good Luck and M^schance or Mischiefs.
Prosperity and Adversity, Life and Death, and all the drivings and agitations,
in this world.

2. And indeed it has a true foundation which I know in the spirit, to be so,
but their knowledge stands only in the House of Death in the outward
comprehensibility or palpability, and in the beholding with the Eyes of the
Body; but the root of this Tree has hitherto remained hidden to them.

3. Neither is it my purpose, to write of the Branches of the Tree, and to
invert or disprove their knowledge, neither do I build upon their Ground, but I
leave their knowledge to sit in its own seat, being I have not studied it: but
I write in the spirit of my knowledge concerning the root stock Branches and
Fruits of the Tree; as an industrious and laborious Servant to his Master; in
discovering the whole Tree of this world.

4. Not with an intent to set any new thing on foot, for I have no command to
do so, but my knowledge stands in this Birth or Geniture of the Stars, in the
Midst or Center, where the Life is generated, and breaks through Death, and
where the moving spirit existeth and breaks thorough, and in the impulse and
moving thereof, I also write.

5. Also I know very well, that the Children of the flesh will scorn and mock
at me, and say, I should look to my own Calling, and not trouble my Head about
these things, but rather be diligent to bring in food for me and my family:
and let those meddle with Philosophy that have studied it, and are called and
appointed to it.

6. With such an attempt the Devil has given me so many assaults, and has so
wearyed me, that I have often resolved to let it alone, but my former purpose
was too hard for me. For when I took care for the Belly, and to get my Living,
and resolved to give over this business in hand, then the Gate of Heaven in my
knowledge, was bolted up.

7. And then my soul was so afflicted in anxiety, as if it were captivated by
the Devil, whereby reason gat so many checks and assaults, as if the Body were
presently to fall to the ground, and the spirit would not give over, till it
brake thorough again through the Dead or Mortal Reason, and so has broke
open to pieces, the Door of darkness, and has gotten its seat again, in the
stead thereof.

8. Whereby I understand, that the spirit must be tried through the Cross and
Affliction, and I have not failed of bodily Temptation, but was feign always
to stand ready for an encounter, so much has the Devil set himself against
this.

9. But when I perceived, that my Eternal Salvation was concerned therein, and
that through my negligence the Gates of the Light would be shut against me,
which yet was the very Firmament and Fort of my Heaven, wherein my soul did
hide it self from the storms of the Devil, which I took in, and gained with
great toil and many hard assaults, and stormings through the Love of God, by
the breaking through of my Redeemer and King JESUS CHRIST, and therefore I
leave my care to God, and will take my fleshly Reason Captive.

10. And I have chosen the Gate of knowledge of the Light, and will follow
after the impulse and knowledge of the spirit, though my bestial Body should be
brought to beggary or quite fall to the ground, I regard none of these things:
but will say with the royal prophet David ( Psa. 73. 26.) though my Body and
Soul should faint and fail, yet thou O God art my Salvation, my comfort, and
the refuge of my Heart.

11. In thy Name I will venture it, and will not strive against thy Spirit:
though the flesh be troubled, and must endure misery, yet faith in the
knowledge of the Light, must move and soar above Reason.

12. And I know also very well that it is not fit for the disciple to fight
against his Master, and I know that the high experienced Masters of Astrology
do far exceed me in their way. But I labor in my calling, and they in theirs,
lest I should be found a Lazy Idle Servant to my Lord, at his coming, when he
shall demand the Talent he has entrusted me withal; but that I may present
into him with usury, or profit and gain.

13. Therefore I will not bury his Talent in the Earth but lend it out upon
usury or interest, lest he should say to me at that time, of his requiring it
of me, Thou wicked sloathfull Servant, why have thou hid my Talent in the
Darkness, and did not put it out upon use, and so now I might have received
it with usury, gain and profit? and so then he will take it quite away from me,
and give it to another, who has gained many Talents with his one. Therefore I
will sow, let him water it, I leave the care to him.

Now Observe.

14. The whole House of this World, which stands in a visible and
comprehensible or Palpable being, is the old House of God, or the Old Body,
which stood before the time of wrath in a Heavenly claritie and brightness:
But when the Devil stirred up the wrath therein, then it became a House of
darkness and of Death.

25. Therefore then also the holy Birth or Geniture of God, as a special Body
of it self; separated it self from the wrath, and made the Firmament of
Heaven, between the Love and the Wrath, so that the Birth or Geniture of the
Stars stands in the middle: understand it thus; viz: with its outward
comprehensibility and visibility it stands in the wrath of Death, and with
the New Birth, rising up therein, which stands in the middle or central
seat, where the closure of Heaven is, it stands in the meekness of the Life.

16. For Meekness moves against the wrath, and the wrath against the
Meekness, and so both are distinct Kingdoms in the one only Body of this
World.

17. But being the Love and Meekness of God would not leave the Body or place
of this kindled wrath world, sticking in eternal wrath and ignominy, therefore
he generated the whole old Body of this world again into a rectified reformed
Body, wherein life did rule in a divine manner and way, though in the kindled
wrath, yet it must subsist according to the Law and Order.
Right of the Deity, that out of it, a New Body might be generated, which
should subsist in holiness and purity, in Eternity.

18. For which cause there is appointed in God, a Day of separation, on which,
Life and Wrath shall be separated asunder.

19. Now when thou beholdest the Stars, and the Deep, together with the Earth,
then thou see with thy bodily Eyes, nothing else but the old Body in the
wrathful Death, thou can not see Heaven with thy Bodily Eyes; for the Blew
or Azure Sphere which thou see aloff, is not the Heaven, but is only the old
Body, which may be justly called the corrupted Nature.

20. But that there seems to be a Blew or Azure Sphere above the Stars,
whereby the place of this world is closed and shut out from the holy Heaven, as
Men have thought hitherto: yet it is not so, but it is the superior water of
Nature, which is much brighter then the water below the Moon: And now when the
Sun shines through the Deep, then it is as it were of a Light-Blew or Azure
color.

21. But how deep or how large the place of this world is, no Man knows,
though some Natural Philosophers Mathematicians Astronomers or Astrologers have
undertaken to measure the Deep with their Measures of Circles; their measuring
is but conjecturall or a measuring of somewhat that is comprehensible or
Palpable: as if a Man would grasp the wind in his Fist.

22. But the true Heaven is every where all over, to this very time, and till
the last Judgment Day* and the Wrath House of Hell and of Death is also in this
world every where, even to the last Judgment day.

23. But the dwelling of the Devils is now from the Moon to the Earth, and in
the deep Caves and Holes thereof: especially in Wildernesses and Desert Places,
and where the Earth is full of Stones and Bitterness.

24. But their Kingly Regiment or Government is in the Deep in the four Coasts
or Quarters of the Equinoctial Line or Circle, of which I will write in another
place.

25. But here I will show thee, 1o. How the Body of this World came to be, and
2o. How it is at present, and then 3o how the Regiment or Government therein,
is.

26. The whole Body of this world is as a Man's Body, for it is surrounded in
its utmost Circle with the Stars and arisen powers of Nature, and in that Body
the seven spirits of Nature, Govern, and the Heart of Nature stands in the
Midst or Center.

27. But the Stars in general are and signify the wonderful proportion or
changing variety of God: For when God Created the Stars, he created them out of
the rising up of the infinity, out of the Old-Body of God, then further kindled.

28. For, as the seven spirits of God, had before the time of the wrath,
generated themselves infinitely by their rising up and Effectings, whence rose
up so many several varieties of figures and Heavenly Ideas or vegetations: So
also the Holy God formed his old body of this corrupted Nature, into as many
and various powers as ever stood in the Birth or Geniture in the Holiness.

Understand this high thing rightly.

29. Every Star has a several peculiar property, which thou may perceive by
the curious Ornament of the budding blossoming Earth; And the Creator has
therefore rebuilt and revived again the old kindled Body into so many and
various powers, that through this Old Life in the wrath, such a new life might
generate it self therein, through the closure of Heaven, that, that New Life
might have all the powers and operations, that ever the old had before the
times of wrath, that it might qualify mix or unite with the pure Deity
distinct from this world, and that it might be One holy God, together with the
Deity without, distinct from this World.

30. Also the New Birth blossomed in the time of the Creation, when Man had not
spoiled or corrupted it, but by him Nature was still more corrupted and so God
cursed the Ground. But being Man took hold of the fruit of the old Body,
thereupon the fruit of the new Body was hidden in its Heaven, and Man must now
behold it with the new Body, and cannot partake of it with the natural Body.

31. Of which I have a great longing to eat, but I cannot reach to it, for
Heaven is the closure or Firmament between the old and new Body. And therefore
I must let it alone till I come into the other Life, and must give my bestial
Body, Mother Eve's Wrath-Apples to Eat.

Concerning

The kindling of the Heart or Life, of this World.

32. When God had brought the Body of this world, in two Days into a right
form; and had made the Heaven for a Partition between the Love and the Wrath,
then on the Third Day the Love pressed through the Heaven and through the
wrath, and then instantly the old Body in Death stirred and moved it self to
the Birth or Geniture.

33. Eor the Love is hot, and that kindled the fire-source or quality, and that
rubbed it self in the astringent and cold quality of benumbed Death, till the
astringent quality was heated on the third Day, whereby the mobilitie or the
astringent Earth, became moveable.

54. For all stood in the fire-crak till the fourth Day, and then the Light of
the SOL
Sun kindled it self for the whole Body stood in anguish or Pain in the Birth,
as a woman in Travel.

35. The Astringent quality was the encompasser or incloser of the life, in it
now; the Heat was anxious, which was kindled through the Love of God, and did
thrust forth the astringent quality as a dead Body, but the Heat retained its
seat in the midst or center of the Body, and so pres^'d through.

36, But when the Light of the Sun kindled it self, then the nex Circle or Orb
above the Sun, stood in the fire-crak, for the Sun or the Light was shining in
the Water, and the bitterness ascended also in the fire-crack out of the
water: But the light made very great haste after it, and laid hold on the fire
crak, and there it remained standing as a Captive, and became corporeal.

37. In this Revolution the Planet MARS
Mars came to be, whose power stands in the Bitter firecrak, for it is a
Tyrant, Rager, Raver and Stomer, like a fire-crak, moreover it is Hot, and a
poisonous venomous enemy of Nature, through whose rising up and Birth or
Geniture in the Earth all manner of Poisonous Venomous evil Worms and Vermin
are come to be.

38. Bu^ being the Heat in the middle point or center of the Body was so Mighty
Great, thereupon it extended it self so very largely, and opened the Chamber of
Death so wide before its kindling of the Light, that it, the SUN, is the
Greatest Star.

39. But as soon as the Light kindled it self in the heat, so instantly was that
Hot place caught in the Light, and then the Body of the Sun could grow no
bigger: For the light mitigated the Heat, and so the Body of the Sun remained
there standing in the midst or center as a Heart, for the Light is the Heart
of Nature; not the Heat.

But here thou must observe exactly.

40. As far as the middle point or center has kindled it self, Just so bigg
is the Sun; for the Sun is nothing else but a kindled poin^ in the Body of
Nature.

41. Thou must not think, that there is any oother power or virtue in it or
belonging to it, then there is in the whole Deep of the Body every where, all
over.

42. For should the Love of God, through its Heaven kindle the whole body of
this world through the Heat, it would be every where all over as Light as it
is now in the Sun.

43. And now if the great Heat were taken away from the Sun, then it would be
One Light with God: but seeing that cannot be in this time, therefore it
remains a King and Regent in the old corrupted and kindled Body of Nature:
and the clear Deity remains hidden in the meek Heaven.

44. But the light of the meekness of the Sun qualifieth mixeth or uniteth
with the pure Deity, but the Heat cannot comprehend the light, and therefore
also the place of the Sun remains in the Body of Gods wrath, and thou must
not worship, pray to or honor the Sun as God, for its place or Body cannot
apprehend the water of Life, because of its Fierceness.

The Highest ground of the SUN and of ALL the PLANETS.

45. And here I shall have adversaries enough who will be ready to censure me,
for they will not have regard, to consider the Spirit, but will mind their old
Rules, and say: Astrologers understand it better, who have written of such
matters: and they will look On this Great open Gate, as a Cow looks on a new
Barn Doare.

46. Dear Reader, I understand the Astrologers meanings and sayings full well,
and I have perused their writings also, and taken notice, how they describe the
course of the Sun and Stars, neither do I despise it, but hold that for the
most part to be good and right.

47. But that I write otherwise then they in some things, I do it not out of
self will or conceit and supposition, doubting, whteher it be so or no: I dare
not make any doubt herein, neither can any man instruct me herein.

48. I have not my knowledge by Study, indeed I have read the order and
Position of the Seven Planets in the Books of Astrologers: and find them to be
very right, but the Root, how they came to be, and from what they are
proceeded, I cannot learn it from any Man; for they know it not, neither was I
present, when God created them.

49. But being the Doors of the Deep, and the Gates of wrath, and the Chambers
of Death also are set open in my spirit through the Love of God; the spirit,
therefore, must needs look thorough them.

50. And accordingly I find, that the Birth or Geniture of Nature stands to
this Day, and generateth it self just fo as it first took its beginning, and
whatsoever rises up in this world, whether Men, Beasts, Trees, Herbs, Grass
Mineral Oars, or what it will, all rises up in such a quality manner and
form, also every Life be it good or bad, takes its original thus.

51. For this is the Right or Law of the Deity, that every Life in the body of
God, should generate it self in one manner or uniforme way, though it be done
through many various Imagings, yet the Life has one uniform way, and Original,
in all.

52. I see not this knowledge with my fleshly Eyes, but with those Eyes,
wherein life generateth it self in me, in that seat the Gates of Heaven and
Hell stand open to me, and the new Man Speculateth into the midst or center of
the Astral Birth or Geniture, and to him the inner and outermost Gate stands
Open.

53. While he yet sticks in the Old Man of Wrath and Death, and sits also
in his Heaven; he sees through both, in such a manner also he sees the Stars
and Elements: For in God there is no place of hinderance: for the Eye of the
LORD beholds all.

54. Now if my spirit did not see thorough his spirit, then I were but a blind
Stock, but being I see the Gates of God in my spirit, and have the impulse to
do it, I will therefore write directly according as I have seen it; and will
not regard any Man's Authority.

55. Thou must not conceive it so, as if my Old man were a living Saint or
Angel. No, friend, He sits with all Men in the house of Wrath and of Death,
and is a constant Enemy to God, and sticks in his Sins Wickedness and
Malice, as all Men do, and is full of faults defects and Infirmities.

56. But thou must know this, that he sticks in a continual anxious Birth or
Geniture, and would fain be rid of the wrath and wickedness, and yet cannot:
For he is as the whole house of this world, wherein always love and wrath
wrestle one with another, and the new Body always generateth it self in the
midst or center of the anguish* For so it must be, if thou will be born anew,
otherwise no man can reach the Regeneration.

57. Man is always seeking here for soft Days of Ease for the Flesh, and
after Riches beauty and Bravery, and knows not, that he sits therewith in
the chamber of Death, where the Sting of wrath darteth into Him.

58. Behold! I tell this to thee, as a word of Life, which I receive in the
knowledge of the Spirit in the midst or center in the Birth or Geniture of the
new Body of this World, over which the Man JESUS CHRIST is Ruler and King,
together with his Eternal Father.

59. Also I receive it from before the Seat of his Throne, where all Holy
Souls of men stand before him, and rejoice before him: That the Desire of the
flesh in soft pleasingnesse, to be Rich, to be Handsome, Beautiful and Fair, or
to be Mighty or Potent, is a very Bath or Lake of hellish Wrath, into which
thou crowdest and runnest, as if thou were drawn in with Cartropes: for there
is very great danger therein.

60. But if thou would know, how it is, behold I will tell thee in a Parable
or similitude: When thou art pressed according to the desire of thy Heart, into
Riches and Power, then is it with thee, as if thou stoodst in a deep water,
where the water always stands up to thy very mouth, and thou feel no
ground under thy Feet, but thou swimmest with thy Hands, and struggling
waverest thy self; suddenly thou art deep in water, suddenly above water again,
yet always in a great Terror and danger, Expecting to sinck down to the bottom;
the water coming often into thy Mouth, always expecting Death by being Drowned.

61. Just in this manner thou sit and no other, when thou art in the
pleasures of the flesh, if thou will not Fight, thou can not look for any
Victory, but thou will be murdered in thy soft Bed of Down: For man has a
continual Host or Army before him; which fights with him continually; if he
will not defend himself, then he is taken captive and slain.

62. But how can he defend himself, that swimmeth in a Deep water, he has
enough to do, to keep himself up struggling and wavering in the water, and yet
nevertheless he is there also assaulted and stormed by the Devils.

63. O Danger upon Danger! as our King Christ also says; It is very hard for a
Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; a Camel will easier go through
the Eye of a Needle, then a Rich man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Math. 19.
24. Mark. 10. 25.

64. But if any will be new born again, he must not yield himself to be a
servant to Cove toufnesse, Pride, State and self-power, to take delight in the
will or desires of his Flesh, but he must struggle and fight against himself,
against the Devil, and against all the Lusts of the Flesh, and he must think
and consider that he is but a Servant and Pilgrim on Earth, which must wander
through many miserable Seas of danger into another world; and there he will be
a LORD, and his dominion will consist in power and perfect delight beauty and
brightness, this I tell as the word of the Spirit.

Now Observe.

65. The Sol.
SUN has its own Royal place to it self, and does not go away from that
place, where it came to be at the first; as some suppose, that it runeth round
about the Globe of the Earth in a Day and a Night; and some of the Astrologers
also write so, and some have undertaken to measure, how far its Orb and
Circumference of its supposed Motion, is.

66. This opinion or supposition is not right, but the Earth roueth it self
about; and runs with the other Planets, as in a wheel, round about the Sun.
The Earth does not remain staying in one Place, but runs round in a year,
once about the Sun as the Venus Mercury
other Planets next the Sun, but Saturn Jupiter Mars
Saturn and Jupiter, as also Mars by reason of their great Orb circumference,
and great height cannot do it, because they stand so high above and far distant
from the Sol.
SUN.

How it may be asked, what is the SUN, and what are the other PLANETS? or how
are they come to be?
67. Behold! the other Planets are peculiar Bodies of their own which have a
corporeal propriety of themselves, and are not bound to any settled or fixed
place, but only to their Circle Orb or Sphere wherein they run their course.
But the SUN is not such a Body, but is only a place or Locality kindled by the
Light of God.

Understand it aright.

68. The place, where the SUN is, is such a place, as you may choose or suppose
any where above the Earth: and if God should kindle the Light by the Heat, then
the whole world would be such a mere SUN; for that same power, wherein the Sun
stands, is every where, all over; and before the time of wrath, it was every
where all over in the place of this world, as Light as the Sun is now, but not
so intolerable.

69. For that heat was not so great as in the Sun, and therefore the light also
was very meek, and thus in respect of the horrible fierceness of the Sun, the
Sun is differenced or distinguished from the Meekness of God. So that Man
should not dare to say: that the Sun is an open Gate of the light of God: but
is as the Light in a Man's Eye, whereas also the place of the Eye belongs to
the Body, but the Light is different or distinct from the Body.

70. And though indeed it existeth by the Heat in the water of the Body, yet
it is a peculiar distinct thing, which the body cannot comprehend; and such a
distinct difference there is also between God the Father and the Son.

71. Thus on the Fourth Day in the anxious Birth or Geniture of this world in
the middle point or Center of this World, the SUN is Sprung up and stands
still in its Eternal Corporeal place, for it cannot rise up in one place, and
set in another.

72. For it is the only and Sole natural Light of this world, and besides it
there is no more any true Light in the House of Death, and though it seems as
if the other Stars did shine Bright and give Light also, yet it is not so, but
they take all their luster and shining Light from the Sun; as hereafter
presently follows.

The true Birth or Geniture and descent of the Sun and of the other Planets Is
just thus as follows.
73. Now when the Heaven was made for a distinction or partition between the
Light of God and the kindled corruption of the Body of this world: then was the
Body of this world a dark valley, and had no light that could have shone forth
in the outward Body besides the Heaven, there stood all powers as it were
captivated in Death, and were in great anguish, till they had heatt themselves
in the midst or center of the Body.

74. But when this was done, so that the anxious Birth or Geniture stood so
severely in the Heat, then the Love in the Light of God brake through the
Heaven of the Partition, and kindled the Heat.

75. And there rose up the shining light in the Heat, in the water, or in the
fat or oylinesse of the water, and the Heart of the water kindled it self, and
this was done in the twinkling of an Eye.

76. For as soon as the Light had rightly laid hold on the Body, the Body was
captivated in the Light; and the Heat was captivated, and was changed into a
competent Meekness, and could stand or extend no further in such Anguish.

77. But being the Heat was so terrified by the Light, thereupon its horrible
fire-source was allayed and so could kindle it self no further, and so also
the breaking through of the Love in the Light of God through the Heaven at this
time, with its breaking thorough, extended or stretched it self no further out
of or from Gods predestined purpose: therefore also the SUN came to be no
bigger.

Of the Planet Mars.
78. But when the Sun was kindled, then the horrible fire-crack went forth
upward from the Place of the Sun, distant from the Place of the Sun, as a
horrible Tempestuous Flash, and in its corporeal: Being took along with it the
fierceness of the fire, whereby the water became very bitter, and the water is
the kernel or stock of the Crack.

79. Now the Astrologers write, that the Planet Mars stands aloft about
15750, Miles off from the Sun: which I contradict not, because I meddle not
with the measuring of Circles: And so far that fire-crack went on a sudden
from its own Place, till the light also laid hold on it, and then it also was
captivated by the Light, and staid, and took possession of that Place.

80. But that the Light could lay no sooner hold of it; was caused by the
earnest fierceness and sudden flash, for it was not taken hold of by the Light
before the Light had wholly or thoroughly affected or possessed it.

81. And there it is now as a Tyrant Rager and Stirrer of the whole Body of
this world: for that is its very Office, that with its Revolution in the wheel
of Nature it moves and stirs all, from whence every life takes its
Original.

Of the Planet Jupiter
82. Now when the bitter firecrack was captivated by the Light, then the light
in its own power pressed yet higher in the Deep, till it reached into the hard
and cold seat of Nature. And there the power of the first going forth or
rising up from the Sun could not get Higher, but fitting stayed there
corporeally, and took possession of that Place for a Habitation.

But thou must understand this thing aright:

83. It was the power of the Light, which stayed in this place, which is a very
Meek, friendly, gracious, amiable blessed, and sweet Being. The Astrologers
write, that this Planet is distant aloft above Mars, about 7875 Miles: But it
is the Mitigator of the destroying furious Raging Raving Mars, and an original
of the Meekness in every Life, an original also of the water, from which the
life generateth it self, as I shall mention hereafter.

84. Thus far the power of the Life reached forth from the Sun, and not
higher, but the luster or shineing thereof which has its power also; reaches
even to the Stars, and through the whole Body of this world.

But thou must understand this exactly, from whence these two Planets are come
to be.

85. When the power of the Heart of God pressed forth out of the eternal
inexhaustible fountain of the water of life through the Heaven of the
Partition, and kindled the water in the place of the Sun; then the flash,
understand the fire-flash did shoot forth or went forth out of the water, which
was very terrible and bitter, out of which, Mars came to be.

86. After this Flash the power of the Light shot nimbly after it, like a meek
elevated life, and overtook the fire crack, and mitigated it, so that it became
somewhat weaker, and could break no farther through the deep, but stayed
trembling.

87. But the power that was gone forth in the Light had more strength then the
fire-crack, and so it rose up higher then then the fire-crack, Mars, till it
came very deep into Natures austerenesse, and there it became feeble also, and
stayed there.

88. From or out of this power the Planet Jupiter came to be, and not out of or
from that place, where he is, but it always kindles that very place with its
power, but it is as one of the Household Servants in that place, who must
always walk about in the place of its office and service. But the Sun has a
house of its Own, but no other Planet has any House of its Own.

89. If we will rightly search into the Original of the Stars Birth and
Geniture or their beginning, then we must exactly know the Birth or Geniture of
the Life, viz: How the Life generateth it self in a Body; for these all are
one kind of Birth or Geniture.

90. He that does not know nor understand this, he does not at all know the
Birth of the Stars, for, all concrete together, is one Body. Every Creature,
when life is once generated in it, then afterward its Life stands or
subsisteth in its Body, as the Birth or Geniture of the natural Body of this
world does, for every Life must be generated according to the right Law or
Ordinance of the Deity, as the Deity generateth it self continually.

91. If this be rightly considered, which indeed, cannot be done, without a
special illumination of the holy God; then first of all a Man finds the
astringent, cold and austere Birth or Geniture which is the cause of the
Corporeal Nature, or of the imaging fashioning or framing of a thing.

92. Now if it were not for this severe and cold sharp contracting, compacting
power, there would be no natural or corporeal being, neither could the Birth
or Geniture of God subsist, and all would be insearchable.

93. But in this hard, severe and cold power stands the corporeal being, or
the Body, wherein the spirit of life is generated, and out of that same spirit
the light and understanding is generated whereby then the senses and Trial or
Probation of all powers, does exist.

94. For when the Light is generated, it is generated, in the midst or Center
of the Body, as a Heart or spirit out of all powers, and there it stands and
remains in the place where it had its beginning, and goes forth thorough all
the powers.

97. For as it is generated out of all powers, and has the fountain of all
powers, so with its shining luster also it brings the Fountain of all powers
into each power, from whence then existeth the taste and smell, also seeing,
feeling, and hearing; as also Reason and understanding.

96. Now as the original and beginning of the life, in a Creature, is; so is
the first Regeneration of the Nature of the new Life in the corrupted Body of
this world: And he that denies it, he has not the true understanding, nor any
knowledge of Nature, and so his knowledge is not generated in God, but he is a
Mocker of God.

I
97. For, first behold! thou can not deny it, that the Life in a creature
existeth in the Heat of the Heart, and in that Life also stands the Light of
the animated or soulish Birth or Geniture.

98. Now the Heart signifies the Sun, which is the beginning of Life in this
outward Body of this world: and now thou can not say, that the animated or
soulish Birth goes away or departs from the Heart, whilst the Body stands
in the mobilitie or Life.

99. No more does the Sun go away or depart from its seat, but retains and
keeps its own place, as a Heart, to it self, and shines forth as a Light or
as a spirit of the whole Body.

100. For its Birth also, has a beginning out of all powers; and therefore
with its Light and Heat it is again one spirit and Heart in the whole Body of
this world.

II.
101. And secondly thou can not deny neither, but that the Gall in a
Creature, is not existed from the Heart, and yet is the mobilitie or stirring
of the Heart, by a Vein that goes from the Gall to the Heart, from whence the
Heat existeth. But it has its first original from the flash of Life, and so
when the life generateth it self in the Heart, and the Light rises up in the
water, then the fire-crack goes before, which rises up out of the anxietie of
the water in the Heat.

102. For when heat, is so anxious in the cold in the astringent quality that
the Light kindles it self through the hidden Heaven of the heart in the
corporeity, then the anxious Death in the wrath of God is terifyed, and
departs as a crack or flash from the Light, and climeth upward very terribly
trembling and timorously, and the Light of the Heart hastneth after it and
affects or possesses it, and then it remains sitting still.

103. And this, is and signifies the Planet Mars, for thus it is become a
Being, and its own quality is nothing else but a Poisonous Venomous bitter
fire-crack which is risen up from the Place of the Sun.

104. But now it is always a kindler of the Sun, just as the Gall of the
Heart, whence the Heat, both in the Sun and in the Heart, existeth; and whence
the Life takes its Original in all things.

III.
105. Thirdly, thou can not deny, but that the Brain in the Head in a
Creature is the power of the Heart, for from the Heart all powers rise up into
the Brain, from whence, in the Brain, the senses of the Heart exist: The
Brayn in the Head takes its original from the power of the Heart.

Observe:

106. After the fire-crack of the Gall, or Mars, was departed from the Light of
Life, then the power pressed out of the Heart of Life after it, even into the
Head into the austere quality, and when the power can rise up no higher, then
it is stayed or captivated by the austere Birth, and is dried up by the cold.

107. Now here it stays, and qualifieth, mixeth or uniteth with the spirit of
life in the Heart, and is a Royal seat of the spirit of the Heart, for thus
far the spirit of the Heart's power presses forth, and there is it approved.

108. For the Brain sits in the severe Birth or Geniture, and in its own
Body it is the meek power of the Heart, and signifies the new Birth which is
new regenerated in the midst or center of the austerenesse of Death and wrath,
in its Heaven, and presses forth through Death into Life.

109. For there the spirit or the Thoughts become a whole creaturely Person
again through the affecting or proving of all powers, which in Man I call the
animated or Soulish Birth.

110. For when the new spirit in the Brain is well settled, then it goes to
its Mother again, into the Heart, and then it stands as a perfect spirit or
will, or as a new born Person, which, in Man, is called the Soul.

111. Now behold! as the Brain in Man is a Being and product, so is the Planet
Jupiter also, a being and product: for it has his original from the rising up
of Life, from the power, which is risen up out of the water of Life out of the
Place of the Sun, through the Light.

112. And that power is risen up so high, that it is caught or captivated
again in or by the austere, hard and cold power, and there it remains at a
stand, and by the first Revolution, or going forth is become corporeal, and
became exsiceated or dried by the austere and cold power.

113. And is rightly* the Brain in the corporeal Government of this World,
from whence the senses and Reason are generated, also all Meekness and wisdom
in Natural things, but the right and holy spirit in Man, is generated in the
hidden Heaven in the water of Life.

114. The outward Jupiter is only the Meekness and understanding in the
outward comprehensibilitie or palpable things: but the holy fountain or
wellspring is incomprehensible and unsearchable or unfathomable to outward
Reason. For the Astral Birthor Geniture stands with the Root in the holy
Heaven, and with the Corporeity in the wrath.

The Six and Twentieth Chapter.
Of the Planet, Saturnus.

1. SAturn; that cold sharp austere and astringent Regent, takes its beginning
and Original, not from the Sun; for it has, in its Power, the chamber of
Death, and is a dryer up of all powers, from whence Corporeity existeth.

2. For as the Sun is the Heart of the Life, and an original of all spirits in
the Body of this world: so Saturn is a beginner of all corporeity and
comprehensibilitie or palpability, and in the power of these two Planets
stands the whole Body of this world: and there cannot be any Creature or
imaging, nor any mobilitie, without the power of these two, in the natural Body
of this world.

3. But Saturnes original is the earnest astringent and austere anxietie of the
whole Body of this world: for as in the time of the kindling of the wrath the
Light in the outermost Birth or Geniture of this world, was extinct; which
Birth or Geniture is the Nature or comprehensibilitie or the rising up of the
Birth of all qualifying or fountain spirits; Naturligkeit.
so also the astringent quality stood in its sharpness and severest Birth or
Geniture, Naturalnessa
and attracted or contracted most strongly and eagerly, the whole work or
effect of the qualifying or fountain spirits.

4. From whence then the Earth and Stones came to be, and were very rightly the
House of Death, or the enclosing or shutting up of the Life, wherein King
Lucifer was captivated.

5. But when, on the first day, the Light somewhat brake forth again, through
the word or Heart of God in the Root of the Nature or Body of this world, as a
choosing or appropriating of the Day or beginning of the mobilitie of Life,
then the severe and astringent Birth or Geniture obtained again a glimpse, or
rising up of the life in the Birth or Geniture.

6. And from that time it stood as it were in an anxious Death, till after the
third Day, when the Love of God pressed through the Heaven of the Partition,
and kindled the Light of the Sun.

7. But being the Heart or power of the Sun could not open the anxious Birth or
quality of fierceness and wrath, and temper the same, especially aloft in
that height above Jupiter, thereupon that whole circumferen^e or sphere, stood
in a Horrible anxietie just as a woman in travel, and yet could not awaken or
raise the Heat, because of the horrible coldness and astringency.

8. But being the mobilitie nevertheless was risen up through the power of the
hidden Heaven, therefore nature could not rest, but was in anguish to the
Birth, and generated out of or from the Spirit of sharpness, an astringent,
cold and austere Sun or Star which is Saturn.

9. For the Spirit of Heat, could not kindle it self, from whence the Light
existeth, and out of or from the Light through the water, the Love and
meekness exist, but it was a Birth or Geniture of an austere cold and severe
fierceness, which is a dryer, spoyler, and enemy, of meekness, which in the
Creatures generateth the Hard Bones.

10. But Saturn was not bound to its place, as the Sun is, for it is not a
Corporeal place or space in the room of the Deep, but Saturn is a son
which is born or generated out of the Chamber of Death, out of the kindled,
hard, and cold anxietie, and is only one of the Household or family in that
space or room, in which it has its Course and Revolution: For it has its
corporeal propriety to it self, as a Child, when it is born or generated
from the Mother.

[ Saturn indeed was Created together with the wheel, when the FIAT Created
the wheel; but it does not go forth or proceed from Sol.]

11. But, why it did rise up thus from God out of the austere Birth, and what
its Office is, I will mention hereafter, concerning the driving about or
revolutions of the Planets.

12. But its height or distance cannot be exactly known: But I am fully
persuaded that it is in the midst, in the deep between Jupiter and the general
Sphere of the fixed Stars or constellations, for it is the Heart of the
Corporeity in Nature.

13. For as the Sun is the Heart of Life, and a cause of the spirits of Nature;
so Saturn is the Heart and the cause of all Bodies and Imagings formings and
framings in the Earth, and upon the Earth, as also in the whole Body of this
world.

14. And as in Man the Skull is a contayner or incloser of the Brain, wherein
the Thoughts are generated: So the Saturnine power is an environer, dryer and
contayner of all Corporeity and comprehensibilitie or Palpability.

15. And as the Planet Jupiter, which is an unshutter, and Generator of
meekness, and is between the fierce Mars and the austere Saturn, and
generateth the Meekness and wisdom in the Creatures, so the Life and the
Senses of all Creatures, are genenerated between these two qualities,
especially the new Body of this world, as also the new Man, of which thou will
find more concerning the description of Man.

Of the Planet Venus.
16. Venus that gracious amiable and blessed Planet, or the kindler of Love in
Nature, has its original and descent or proceeding from the Springing up of
the Sun also, but its condition, quality, being, and proceeding or descent, is
thus.

Here observe this rightly and exactly.

17. When the Love of God kindled the place of the Sun, or the SUN, then there
sprung up first out of the anxietie, out of the Place of the Sun, out of the
seven qualifying or fountain spirits of Nature; the terrible fierce, bitter,
fire-crak, whose Birth and principal or first original is the kindled bitter
wrath of God, in the astringent quality, through the water.

18. And that, sprung up first, in the kindling of the Sun out of the Chamber
of Death, and was an awakener or rouser of Death, and a beginner of life, and
climed up aloft very fiercely, and trembling, till the Light of the Sun laid
hold on it, and affected or possessed it, and there it was caught or captivated
by the meekness of the Light, and stayed; from which the Planet Mars came to
be,

19. After that fire-crack, the power of the light; which at the beginning had
generated it self out of the unctuositie or fatness of the water behind the
fire crack; instantly shot forth after it like a mighty potencie or power, and
took the fierce Fire-crack captive, and highly elevated it self aloft beyond
it, as a Prince and subduer of the fierceness, from whence now existed the
sensibilitie of Nature, or the Planet Jupiter.

The Gate of Love.
20. But when the two spirits, of the mobilitie, and of the Life, were risen up
out of the Place of the Sun through the kindling of the water; then the
meekness, as a seed of the water, pressed downward in the Chamber of Death,
with the power of Light, with a very gentle and freindly affection or influence
from whence existed the Love of Life, or the Planet Venus.

But thou must here understand this high thing.

21. The Birth or the rising or springing up of the seven Planets, and of all
the Stars; is no otherwise, then as the Life, and wonderful proportion,
variety and harmony of the Deity, has generated it self from Eternity.

22. For when King Lucifer had caused this place of the world to be appointed
as a House of wrath for him, and supposed thus fiercely and powerfully to Rule
there^n then presently the Light in Nature went out, wherein he supposed to be
the Lord; and the whole Nature was benumbed and congealed as a Body of Death,
wherein was no mobilitie, and he must remain there in darkness as an Eternal
Captive Prisoner.

23. But now the Holy God would not let this place of his Body, understand, the
space or room of this World, stand in eternal darkness and ignominy, and
leave it to the Devils for their proper own, but generated a new Regiment or
dominion of Light, and of all the seven qualifying or fountain spirits of the
Deity; which the Devil could neither apprehend nor lay hold on or touch;
neither was it useful or profitable to him at all.

24. For he can no more see in the Light of the Sun, but in the darkness, for
he is not become a Creature in this Light, and therefore it is not profitable
or useful to him.

25. But being there must be a new Government or dominion, it must needs be
such a one as the Devil could lay no hold on or touch, or that he could make no
(...) as his corporeal proper own.

Now that is thus constituted.

26. The Love, or word, or Heart, that is, the innate or only begotten Son
of the Father, who is the Light, and meekness, and the Love, and Joy of the
Deity: As He hin self said, when he assumed the humanity, I am the Light of
the World. John 8. 12; He took the place of this world by the Heart, and sat
in the midst or center of this space or room, in that place, where the mighty
Prince and King Lucifer did sit before his fall, and there he was newborn to
be, a Creature.

27. And so out of this kindled place of the Sun, there existed and were
chiefly generated, six sorts of qualities, all according to the right Law or
Order of the divine Birth or Geniture.

28. 1o, First there arose the fire-crack, or the mobility in the Heat, and
that is the beginning of Life in the Chamber of Death.

2o, After this secondly, the Light in the unctuositie or fattness of the water
became shining in the Heat, and that is now the Sun.

3o, And thirdly when now the Light of the Sun had affected or possessed the
whole Body of the Sun, then the power of Life, which rose up out of the first
affecting or possessing, ascended as when wood is kindled, or when fire is
struck out of a Stone.

29. Then first is discerned the Glance or splendour, and out of the splendour,
the fire-crack, and after the fire-crack the power of the kindled Body; and the
Light with the power of the Body, elevateth it self instantly above the crack,
and rules or reigns much higher deeper and more powerfully then the
fire-crack.

30. Also the power of the kindled Body in the outgone power without and beyond
the fire, qualifieth mixeth or uniteth gently, pleasantly and very sensibly:
and herein rightly is understood the Divine Being.

31. In the same manner also is the existency of the Sun, and of the two
Planets, Mars and Jupiter.

32. But being the Place of the Sun, that is, the SUN it self, contained all
qualities according to the Right of the Deity, as also all other places had;
thereupon instantly in the first kindling, all the qualities went upward and
downward, and generated themselves according to the eternal beginning less
infinite Law, and Right.

33. For the power of the Light, which did mitigate the astringent and bitter
quality in the place of the Sun: and made it thin like water or the Love of
Life, that went downwards according to the Nature of Humility.

34. Out of this the Planet Venus existed: for in the House of Death it is an
opner of meekness, or a kindler of the water, and a soft penetrater into the
hardness, a kindler of the Love, in Venus
which the upper Regiment or Dominion, as the bitter Heat, is desirous or
longing after Mars, and the hearty sensibilitie, is desirous or longing after
Jupiter.

35. From whence the affections or insinuations exist: for the power of Venus,
makes fierce Mars or the fire-crack mild, and mitigateth it, and makes
Jupiter humble, else the power of Jupiter would break through the hard Chamber,
Saturn; and in Men and Beasts, through the Scul or Brain-pan, and so the
sensibilitie would transmute it self into highmindednesse above the
Birthright, or right Law or order of the Geniture, of the Deity, in the
manner and way of the proud Devil.

Of the Planet Mercurius.
36. If we would exactly and fundamentally know how the Birth or beginning is,
of the Planets and Stars, and of the Being of all Beings, in the deep of this
world, we must accurately consider the instant or innate Birth or beginning of
Life, in Man.

37. For that takes such a beginning and rising, and stands also in such an
Order, as the Birth or Geniture of the Being of all Beings in the Body of this
World, does.

38. For the instant or innate wheel of the Stars and Planets is no otherwise,
then as the Birth of the seventh spirit of Nature, before the time of the
world rose up, wherein were formed images and figures, forms, shapes, or
Ideas, as also heavenly fruits, according to the eternal right Law or Order of
the Deity.

39. And in that, Man is created according to the qualifying or fountain
spirits of God, and also out of the divine Being, therefore man's Life has such
a beginning and rising up as that of the Planets and Stars was.

40. For the beginning, instant or innate State and Being of the Planets and
Stars is no other, then the beginning and impulse or government and Dominion in
Man.

41. And now as the humane Life rises up, so has also the Birth of the seven
Planets and Stars risen or sprung up, and therein there is no difference at all.

The Center or Circle of the Birth of Life.

The great depth.

42. The spirit cites Di M^dicos:
the Physicians to come before this Looking-glass, especially Anatomists and
dissectors of Men who by their Anatomy would learn the Birth and rising or
springing up of Man's Life, and have murdered many innocent men, against the
Right and Law of God and of Nature, hoping thereby to find out the wonderful
proportion Harmony and form of Nature, that they might thereby be useful to
restoring the Health of others.

43. But being they are found in Nature to be Murderers, and Malefactors,
against the Law and Right of God and Nature, therefore the spirit, which
qualifyeth, mixeth or uniteth with God, does not justify them in their
murtherous way.

44. They might have had a nearer and surer way to learn the wonderful Birth
or Geniture of Nature, if their lofty Highmindednesse and Devilish Murtherous
Lust would have given them leave, which has perverted their true divine senses
or understandings.

45. Their intent was only to sight with Men and not with Gods, therefore it
is just they should receive such a reward of their error.

46. Come on ye crowned Ornaments of Caps and Hoods, etc! Let us see whether a
simple Layman, may be able to search into the Birth or Geniture of Man's Life,
in the knowledge of God? if it be amiss, then reject it; if it be right, let
it stand.

47. I here set down this description of the Birth or Geniture of Man's Life, to
the end that the original of the Stars and Planets may be the better conceived:
at the description of the Creation of Man, thou will find all more
fundamentally and deeply, what the beginning of Man, is.

Now Observe.

48. The Seed of Man is generated in such a manner, as the wonderful
proportion harmony or form of Nature in its wrestling and rising up, is
generated from Eternity.

49. For the humane Flesh, is, and resembles, Nature in the Body of God, which
is generated from the other six qualifying or fountain spirits, wherein the
qualifying or fountain spirits, generate themselves again, and show forth
themselves infinitely, wherein forms and images rise up, and wherein the Heart
of God, or the holy clear Deity in the middle or central seat generateth it
self above Nature in that center, wherein the Light of Life, rises up.

50. But now in Man's Body in the government or dominion of the Birth or
Geniture, there are three several things, each of them being distinct and yet
are not divided asunder one from another, but all three together are one only
Man, after the kind and manner of the Ternarie or Trinity in the divine Being.

51. The Flesh is not the Life, but is a dead inaminate being, which when the
Government or Dominion of the spirit cease to qualify or operate therein,
soon becomes a dead Carcass, and putrifieth and turns to Dust or Ashes.

52. But now no spirit can subsist in its perfection without the Body, for
as soon as it departs from the Body, it loses its Government or Dominion.
For the Body is the Mother of the Spirit in which the spirit is generated, and
in which it receives its strength and power, it is and remains a spirit,
when it is separated and departed from the Body, but it loses its Rule
Dominion or Government.

53. These three Dominions or Regiments are the whole Man together with Flesh
and Spirit, and they have severally for their beginning and Dominion or
Government, a seavenfold form after the kind and manner of the seven spirits
of God or of the seven Planets.

54. Now as the Dominion or Government of Gods Eternal beginning less
infinite Birth or Geniture is, so also is the beginning and rising or springing
up of the seven Planets and the Stars, and just so also is the rising or
springing up of Man's Life.

Now Observe.

55. When thou mindest think and considerest what there is in this world,
and what there is without besides or distinct from this world, or what the
being of all Beeings, is; then thou speculatest, contemplatest, meditatest, in
the whole Body of God, which is the Being of all Beings, and that is a
beginninglesse infinite Being.

56. But in its own seat there is no mobilitie, rationability or
comprehensibilitie, but it is a dark Deep which has neither beginning nor
End. Therein is neither thick nor thin, opake nor transparent, but is a dark
Chamber of Death, where nothing is perceived, neither cold nor warmeth, but it
is the End of all things.

57. And this now is the Body of the Deep, or the very real Chamber of Death.

58. But now in this dark valley there are the seven spirits of God, which
have neither Beginning nor End, and the one is neither the first, second, third
or last.

59. In these seven Dominions or Regiments, the Regiment divides it self
into three distinct Beings, where the one is not without the other, nor can
they be divided the one from the other: But those seven spirits do each of
them generate one another, from Eternity to Eternity.

60. The first Dominion or Regiment stands or consists, in the Body of all
things, that is, in the whole Deep, or Being of all Beings, which has in all
corners and places thereof in it self the seven spirits in possession or in
propriety indivisibly, or irresistibly for its proper own.

61. Now if these seven spirits in any one place wrestle not triumphingly,
then in that place there is no mobilitie, but a deep darkness; and although
the spirits are perfect in that place, yet that place is a dark House, as you
may perceive and understand by a dark Cave or Room close shut up, in which the
kindled spirits of the Planets and Stars cannot kindle the Elements.

62. But now the Root of the seven spirits is every where all over, but when
there is no wrestling, then it stands still and quiet, and no mobilitie is
perceived.

63. And such a House is the whole Deep without, within, and above all
Heavens; which house is called the Eternity: and such a House also is the
House of Flesh in Man and in all Creatures.

64. And this Being, together, comprehends the Eternity, which is not called
God, but the UN-Almighty Body of Nature, wherein indeed the Deity is immortal
or not Dead, but standing hidden in the kernel of the seven spirits, and yet
not comprehended or understood.

65. And such a House also, the whole space or extent of this world came to be;
when the Deity in the seven spirits had hidden it self from the horrible
Devils.

66. And had so continued, if the seven Planets and Stars had not risen or
sprung up from Gods spirits, which opened a-gaine and kindled the Chambers of
Death in the dark House of this world in all places every where, from whence
existeth the regiment or Dominion of the Elements.

67. Moreover thou art to know also, that the regiment or Dominion of the
seven spirits of God in the House of this world, is not thereupon exsiccated
or dried up in Death, that all must needs receive its Life and beginning from
the Planets and Stars.

68. No! for the clear Deity stands every where hidden in the Circle in the
Heart of the whole Deep, and the seven spirits stand in the body of the Deep
in anxietie and great longing, and are still kindled by the Planets and Stars,
from whence existeth the mobilitie and the Birth or Geniture in the whole Deep.

69. But being the Heart of the Deity hides it self in the Body of this
world in the outermost Birth or Genitnre which is the corporeity, thereupon the
corporeity is a dark House, and all stands in great anguish and needs a
Light, to shine in the Chamber of the darkness, which is the Sun, and that so
long till the Heart of God will move it self again in the seven spirits of
God in the House of this world, and kindle the seven spirits.

70. And then the Sun and Stars will return again to their first place and
will pass away in such a form or manner, for the Heart and Light of God shall
give Light and shine again in the Corporeity, that is, in the Body of this
world, and replenish or fill all.

71. And then the anxietie cease; for when the anxietie in the Dominion of
the Geniture or Birth regiment, tastes of the sweetness of the Light of God;
so that the Heart of God triumphs together in the Birth Regiment, then all is
richly full of Joy, and the whole Body triumphs.

72. Which at present in this time, in the House of this world cannot be,
because of the fierce Captive Devil, which keeps House in the outermost
Birth or Geniture in the Body of this world, till the Judgment of God.

73. Now here thou may understand, How the Heart of God has the Fann or
Casting shovel in its hand, and will one Day cleanse his floor, which I
herewith earnestly declare to you as in the knowledge, in the Light of Life,
where the Heart in the Light of Life, breaks thorough, and Proclaims the
Bright clear Day.

Of Man and the Stars.
74. Now as the Deep, or the House of this world is a dark House, where the
whole Corporeity generateth it self, and so is very thick, dark, anxicu, and
half dead, and takes its moving from the Planets and Stars which kindle the
Body in the outermost Birth or Geniture, from whence existeth the mobilitie of
the Elements, as also the figured and Creaturely being; so also the Humane
house of Flesh is a dark valley, wherein is indeed the anxietie to the Birth of
Life, and it always highly endeavoreth, intending to elevate it self into the
Light, from whence the Life might kindle it self.

75. But being the Heart of God did hide it self in the center or kernel,
therefore it cannot be, and thereupon the anxietiegenerateth no more but ONE
Seed. The House* of the flesh generateth a Seed of its liknesse to the
propagating of a Man again, and the House of the spirit in the instant or
innate state of the seven spirits generateth in the Seed another spirit after
its likeness, to the propagating of the spirit of Man again.

76. And the House of the hidden Heart generateth also such a spirit as
stands hidden, in the Body, to the spirit of the House of Flesh as also to
the spirit of the Astral Birth or Geniture: just as the Heart of God in the
seven spirits of God stands hidden in the spirits in the Deep of this
world, and does not kindle them, till after this enumeration or account of Time
is out.

77. This third spirit is the soul in Man, and qualifieth, mixeth or uniteth
with the Heart of God, as a Son or little God in the great immense or
unmeasureable God.

78. Now these three distinct Dominions or Regiments are generated in the seed,
which takes its original in the flesh, as I have mentioned before within three
leaves from this.

Now observe this hidden secret Mystery. Ye Phisici Natural Philosophers*
Naturalists, observe. The Gate of the Great mystery.
79. Out of the anguishing Chamber in the Body of this world out of the seven
spirits of God, are risen or sprung forth the Stars, which kindle the Body of
this world, and out of or from the Body the fruit or seed generateth it self,
which is the Water, Fire, Air, and Earth.

80. The Earth is the fruit of the seventh spirit of God, which is Nature or
Corporiety; wherein the other six spirits generate themselves again, and
figure or frame the Salitter of the seventh spirit into infinite sorts of
forms or shapes; so that the Earth also generateth its seed, which is the
fruit of vegetation, as is apparent to the Eye.

81. Now Man's House of Flesh is also such a house as the dark deep of this
world is, wherein the seven spirits of God generate themselves.

82. But being Man's Body is its proper own, and is a Son of the whole Body of
God, therefore it generateth also a proper seed of its own according to the
Government or Dominion of his corporeal qualifying or fountain spirits.

83. The Body takes its food, from the seed of the seven spirits of God, in
the Body of the great Deep, which is, Fire, Air, Water and Earth.

84. Of or from the Earth it takes the Birth of the Earth or the Fruit, for it
is much more Noble then the Earth: It is an extracted Mass out of the Salitter
out of the seventh Nature spirit.

85. For when the Body of Nature was kindled by the Devil, then the word or
the Heart of God drew the Mass together, before the corrupted Salitter was
pressed together, which now is called the Earth because of the hard fierceness
or corruption.

86. But when the Earth was pressed together, then the Mass stood in the dark
Deep in the created Heaven between the anxious Birth or Geniture and the Body
of the Heart of God, till the sixth Day; and then the Heart of God breathed the
Light of Life out of or from his Heart into the innermost or third Birth or
Geniture of the Mass.

87. Now when this was done, then in the Mass, the seven spirits of the
qualities began to qualify or operate, and in the Mass, the seed of the
seven qualifying or fountain spirits generated it self, as Fire, Air, and
Water, as in the Body of the Deep.

88. Thus MAN became a living Soul, in that kind and manner, as the Sun is
risen or sprung forth, and out of that the rest of the seven Planets.

89. The Light in Man, which the Heart of God ^ad breathed in, signifies or
resembles, the Sun which shines in the whole Deep; concerning which you will
find more clearly, about the Crea^ion of Man.

90. Now behold! As in the Deep of this world, through the kindling of the
Stars a seed is generated out of the Body of the dark deep, like the
Creaturely Body: so also in like manner in Man's House of Flesh there is
generated, a seed, according to the Eternal Birth Right of the seven
qualifying or fountain spirits.

91. And in the seeds there are three distinct things, whereof the one cannot
fathom the other, and yet are in that one only seed, and qualify, mix or
unite one with another, as one being, and is also one being, and yet also three
distinct things, according to the kind and manner of the Ternarie or Trinity
in the Deity.

92. First there is the whole Body of Man, which is a dark House, and has no
mobilitie besides or without distinct from the qualifying or operation of the
seven spirits, but is a dark valley, as the Body of the Deep of this world is.

93. Now in the dark Body of Man there is such a Regiment or Dominion also as
to the seven spirits as is in the Body of the Deep; And when the seven
spirits qualify or operate according to the Birthright of the Deity, then
out of the wrestling of the seven spirits a seed generateth it self
according to their likeness.

94. Now that seed has first a Mother, which is the dark Chamber of the House
of Flesh. Secondly it has a Mother, which is the wheel of the seven spirits,
according to the kind and manner of the seven Planets. Thirdly it has a
Mother which is generated in the Circle of the seven spirits in the center,
and is the Heart of the seven spirits.

95. And this now is the Mother of the soul, which shines thorough the seven
spirits, and makes them living, and in their steed the seed qualifyeth mixeth
or uniteth with the Heart of God: But it is that seed only, in which the Light
is kindled; but in that, in which the wrath fire burns there this third
Mother remains Captive in the dark Chamber.

96. And though indeed it is the third Mother, yet it remains to be but a
foolish Virgin, if the Light be not kindled in it; just as the Deep of this
world is * a foolish Virgin before the Heart of God in which the wheel of the
seven spirits stands in such anxietie, in so much corruption and redemption
in heat and cold as is apparent to the Eye.

97. But when the third Mother is kindled in the Light then it stands in the
created Heaven of the holy Life, and shines through the second Mother, the
seven spirit, ^herby the seven spirits get a friendly courtous will, which is
the Love of the Life, as you may read in the Eighth Chapter of this Book,
Concerning the Love-Birth or Geniture of God.

98. But the third Mother, they cannot constantly or permanently shine
thorough, for it stands in the house of darkness, but they often cast a
Glimpse upon it, even as if it lightened, whereby the third Mother many times
becomes very longing, and rejoices highly, but is soon bolted up again by
the fierceness of Gods wrath.

99. The Devil also danceth at this Gate, for it is the Prison, wherein the
new Man lies hidd, and wherein the Devil lies Captive.

100. But I mean, in the House of the Deep of this World; though indeed the
House of Flesh and the Deep, altogether qualify mix or unite one with
another, as one Body, and is one Body, only they have distinct parts or Members.

The Deep in the Center.

101. Now behold! When the seed is generated, it stands in the center or
midst of the Body in the Heart: for there the Mother catches the Ternarie or
Trinity.

102. First the astringent spirit catches hold, and that draws together a
Mass or Lump out of the sweet water, that is, out of or from the unctuositie
or fatness of the Blood of the Heart, or from the Sap or Oil of the Heart.

103. Now that Oil has clearly the root of the Ternarie or Trinity in it,
viz: the whole Man, for it is just as when kindled Tinder is cast into Straw.

Now it may be asked, How comes this to pass?

104. Here now is the true ground of Man; observe it exactly, for it is the
Looking Glass of the great Mystery, the deep secret of the Humanity, about
which all the learned since the beginning of the World have danced, and have
sought after this Doare, but have not found it.

105. But I must once mention that it is the dawning or Morning Redness of the
Day, as the Doare keeper will have me do.

Now Observe.

106. Just as the first Mass was, out of which Adam became a living Man: so
also in like manner is every Mass or seed of the Ternarie or Trinity in every
Man.

Observe:

107. When the Salitter or Fabric of the six qualifying or fountain spirits,
which is the seventh Nature spirit in the space or room of this World, was
kindled, then the word or Heart of God stood everywhere in the center or midst
of the Circle of the seven spirits, as a Heart, which replenished all at once,
viz: the whole space or room of this World.

108. But being the Deep, that is, the whole space of this World, was the Body
of the Father, understand the Father of (the Heart of God) understand the
Fathers Body; and the Heart in the whole Body did shine forth, viz: The Fathers
Luster or Brightness then the corrupted salitter was affected or possessed
every where with the Light and the Heart of God could not fly out from it, but
did hide its Luster and shining Light in the Body of the whole Deep, from the
horrid kindled Spirits of Devils.

109. And when this was done, then the qualifying or fountain spirits became
very fierce and vehemently struggling, and the astringent spirit, as the
strongest, in the seventh nature-spirit, drew very terribly together, the
fabric and effects of the other five, from whence the bitter Earth and Stones
came to be, but were not yet driven together, but moved in the whole Deep.

110. In this hour the Mass was drawn together; for when the Heart of God did
hide it self in the Salitter, then it cast a glance again on the whole space
or Body, and thought how it might be Remedied again, whereby another Angelical
Kingdom might be in the Deep of this world.

111. But the Glance was the Love-spirit in the Heart of God, which in that
place of the Glance, affected or possessed the Oil of the water, where before
the Light was risen up.

112. Here consider Saint Peter's glance that was cast upon him in the house of
Caiphas, it is the very same.

113. As the Man casts a Glance on the woman, and the woman on the Man, and so
the spirit of the Man, understand the Root of the Love, which in the rising up
of Life out of the water, rises up through the Fire, as also the woman's spirit
does; and so one spirit catches the other in that Oil of the Heart, whereby
presently a Mass, Seed, or driving will, or desire, to the propagating of a
Man again, arises in the Mass.

114. Just in such a way and manner, the first Mass also came to be, for the
Love-Spirit in the Heart of God cast a Glance in the Body of the kindled
wrathful Father on the water of Life, whereby, and out of which, the Love in
the fire-Flash arose or sprung up before the time of the wrath.

115. In this casting of the Glance, the one spirit caught the other, the
unctuous Oil or Water in the wrath, conceived from the Love-Spirit in the
Heart of God, and qualified mixed or united with the same, and the astringent
spirit drew the Mass together: and there was clearly a Birth, or a will, or
desire, to the producing of a whole creature, just as the Seed in Man is.

116. But now, the Firmament of Heaven that is between the Heart of God and the
kindled hard Chamber of Death, was closed or shut up; else the Life in the
Mass had suddenly kindled it self.

117. For the firmament was within in the Mass as well as without distinct
from the Mass, which is the parting mark, or limit of separation between the
Heart of God and the fierce Devils.

118. Therefore the word or Heart of God must blow up the moving^spirit in the
Mass, which was first done but on the sixth Day; for very assured causes.

119. For if Heaven had not as a Firmament been shut up in the Mass, between
the Heart of God and the corporeal qualifying or fountain spirits of the
Mass, then the Mass might have kindled the Soul, from or by its own power, as
it was with the Holy Angels.

120. But it was to be feared, that it would come to pass, as it did with that
fair little Son Lucifer, being the corporeal qualifying or fountain spirits in
the Mass, were kindled in the wrath-fire.

121. Therefore Heaven must be a Firmament, between the sparkle which had
conceived from the Heart of God in the first Glance, that though the Body might
happen to perish, yet the holy Seed might remain, which is the Soul, which
qualifyeth mixeth or uniteth with the Heart of God, out of which a new Body,
might come to be; when the whole God should kindle again the Deep of this
world in the Light of the Heart of God: and just so it is come to be with the
Body: The Love of God have mercy and take pity on it.

122. The dear man Moses writes that God made Man out of a Clod of Earth, as
the Learned have rendered it. But Moses was not present, when it was done.

123. But this I must needs say, that Meses has written very right, but the
true understanding or meaning, out of what the Earth proceeded, remained hidden
to Moses and them that have come after him in the Letter, and the spirit has
kept it hidden to this very time.

124. It was also hidden from Adam, while he was yet in Paradise; but now it
will fully be revealed: for the Heart of God has set upon or assaulted the
Chamber of Death, and will shortly break quite thorough.

125. And therefore in these our present times, some Beams of the Day will
more and more break thorough in the hearts of some men, and make known the Day.

126. But when the Dawning or Morning Redness shall shine from the East to the
West or from the rising to the setting, then assuredly, time will be no more;
but the SUN of the Heart of God rises or spriugeth forth, and, Behmes Epistle
23. verse. 12.
RA. RA. R. P. will be pressed in the Wine Press without the City, and
therewith to R. P.

127. These are hidden mystical words, and are understood only in the Language
of Nature.

128. Mises writes very right, that Man was created out of the Earth, but at
that time, when the Mass was held by the word, then the Mass was not Earth:
But if it had not been held or kept by the word, then at that very hour it had
become Black Earth, but the cold wrath-fire was in it already.

129. For at the very hour, when Lucifer elevated himself, the Father was
moved to wrath in the qualifying or fountain spirits against the Legions of
Lucifer, and the Heart of God hid it self in the Firmament of Heaven, where
the Salitter, effect, product or Fabric, of the corporeity, was burning
already, for without or distinct from the Light, is the dark Chamber of Death.

130. But the Mass was held or kept in the Firmament of Heaven, that it might
not be congealed: for when the Heart of God Glanced on the Mass with its hot
Love, then the unctuositie or oil in the Mass, which rose up out of the water
through the fire, out of which the Light rises up, and out of which the
Love-Spirit rises up; caught hold of the Heart of God, and was impregnated
with a young Son.

131. And that was the Seed of Love; for one Love embraced the other, the Love
of the Mass embraced and conceived from the Love out of the Glance of the
Heart of God; and was thereby impregnated: and this is the Birth or Geniture of
the Soul; and as to this Son, Man is the Image of God.

132. But the qualifying or Fountain spirits in the Mass, could not presently
be kindled thereby from the Soul; for the Soul stood only in the seed in the
Mass, hidden with the Heart of God in its Heaven* till the Creator blew upon
the Mass, and then the qualifying or Fountain spirits kindled the Soul also,
and then both Body and Soul lived equally together.

133. Indeed the Soul had its Life, before, the Body, but it stood in the Heart
of God, hidden in the Mass in Heaven, and was a kind of holy Seed qualifying
mixing or uniting with God, which is Eternal, incorruptible, and undestroyable,
for it was a new and pure Seed, for an Angel and Image of God.

134. But the Fabric, effect, or product, of the whole Mass, was an extract,
or attraction of the word of God, out of the Fabric or effect of the
qualifying or fountain Spirits, or of the Salitter, out of which the Earth came
to be.

135. This extract was not yet become Earth, though it was the Salitter of the
Earth, but was held or kept by the word.

136. For when the Love-Spirit out of the Heart of God Glanced on the Salitter
of the Mass, then the Salitter did catch hold of it and conceive from it, and
was impregnated in the Center of the Soul, and the word stood in the Mass in
the Sound, but the Light abode in the Center of the Mass, in the Firmament of
Heaven, standing hidden in the unctuous oil of the heart, and did not move it
self forth out of the Firmament of Heaven, in the Birth of the qualifying or
fountain Spirits.

137. Else if the Light had kindled it self in the Birth or Geniture of the
Soul, then all the seven qualifying or fountain Spirits, according to the
eternal Birthright of the Deity, had triumphed and qualifyed mixed or united
in and with the Light, and had been a Living Angel; but being the wrath had
clearly already infected the Salitter, therefore that danger was to be feared,
which befell Lucifer.

Now it may be Asked.

138. Why were not many Masse's Created, at this time, out of which instantly
at once, there might have been a whole Angelical host or Army, instead of
fallen Lucifer.

139. Why should there be so long a time of stay in the wrath.

140. And why should the whole Host or Army be generated out of that one
Mass, in so very long a Time?

141. Or did not the Creator at this time see and know of the Fall of Man.

Answer.

142. This now is the very Doare of the hidden secret mystery of the Deity.
Concerning which the Reader is to conceive, that it is not in the power or
capacity of any Man to discern or to know it, if the Dawning or
Morning-Rednesse, did not break forth in the Center in the Soul.

143. For they are divine mysteries, which no Man can search into by his own
Reason, and I also esteem my self most unworthy of such a gift, and besides I
shall have many scorners and mockers against me; for the corrupted Nature is
horribly ashamed, before the Light.

144. But for all that, I cannot forbear: for when the divine Light breaks
forth in the Circle or Birth of Life, then the qualifying or fountain Spirits
rejoice, and in the Circle of the Life, reflect or look back into their Mother,
into the Eternity, and they also look forwards into the Eternity.

145. But it is not a constant and lafting thing or being, clarifying or
brightning, of the qualifying or fountain Spirits, much less of the Bestial
Body, but it is the Ray of the breaking through of the Light of God with a
fiery impulse, which rises up through the meek water of Life in the Loye, and
remains standing in its Heaven.

146. Therefore I can bring it no further, then from the Heart into the Brain
before the Princely Throne of the Senses, and there it is shut up in the
Firmament of Heaven, and goes not back again through the qualifying or
fountain Spirits into the Mother of the Heart, that it might come on to the
Tongue, for if that were done, I would tell it with my mouth, and make it known
to the World.

147. But for that cause I will let it stand in its Heaven, and write according
to my gifts, and with wonder and admiration expect what will become of it. For
in the qualifying or fountain Spirits* I cannot sufficiently comprehend or
apprehend it, because they stand in the anxious Chamber.

148. As to the Soul I see it very well, but the Firmament of the Heaven is
between, in which the Soul hides it self, and there receives its Rays from
the Light of God; and in that respect it goes through the Firmament of Heaven
as a Tempest of Lightning, but very gently in a most amiable and pleasant
delight and Joy.

149. So that I cannot in the comprehensibility in my innate instant or present
qualifying or fountain Spirits, or in the Circle of Life, discern or know it
otherwise, for the Day breaks forth apace.

150. For that cause I will write according to this knowledge, though the
Devil should offer to assault and storm the world, which however he cannot
do: Yet his Houre-Glasse is showen to him and set before him.

151. Now come on you That contend about Election and Predestination.
Electionists and contenders about the Election of Grace, you that suppose you
only are in the right, and esteem a simple Faith to be but a foolish thing,
you have danced long enough before this Door, and have made your boast of the
Scriptures, that they maintain that God has of Grace chosen some Men in their
Mothers* Womb, to the Kingdom of Heaven, and reprobated or rejected others.

152. Here make to your selves many Masse's, out of which there may proceed
other manner of Men of other qualities, and then you may be in the right: But
out of the one only Mass you can make no more then one only Love of God, which
presses forth, through the first Man, and so presses through and upon all. If
God should have permitted Peter or Paul to have written otherwise: however look
you to the Ground, of the Heart,

152. If you lay hold on the Heart of God, then you have Ground enough.

154. If God give me Life for a little while longer, I will well show you,
Saint Paul's Election of Grace.

The Seven and Twentieth Chapter.

Note
See Behmes third Epistle* to Abraham von Somerfeld, verse. 30. anno 1620.
I advertise the Reader who loves God; that this book the Aurora or Morning
Redness, was not finished: for the Devil intended to put a stop to it and
suppress it, when he preceived that the Day would break forth therein. And the
Day has clearly made haste after the Morning Redness, so that it is become
very Light. There want yet about Thirty sheets to the end of it. But being the
storm has broken them off, therefore it was not finished; and in ^heme (...)
while it is come to be Day, so that the Morning Redness is passed away, and
since that time, the work has gone on by Day. And it shall so stand, for an
eternal Remembrance, being the defect herein, is supplied in the Three
Principles. Threefold Life. 40 Questions.
other Books.

Jacob Behme
1620.
The Dawning o^ Morning (...) In^ancie and Childhood, and (...) the Creation
of all Beeings, but very mystically, (...) not sufficiently clear, but full of
Magical Understanding, for there are some Mysteries therein, which are (...) to
come to pass*

Note

This is the deep hidden Magical Book, which the Author at that time might
not make clearer, but may now do it, through the Grace of God, 1621.

Note*

This book is written in a Magical sense or understanding, for the Author
himself only, who knew of no other Readers; he supposed, he made this work
only for himself, (...) God has disposed it otherwise.

Note

The Author expressed the first syllable MER, in the word MERCURIUS, with an A,
as MAR, MARCURIUS; not without a special Mystical cause, with the first
Vowell A; But because the self conceited wise in Reason, dislike it,
accounting it but a Country vulgar expression; Therefore the transcriber of the
High Dutch Copy, from whence this was translated, wrote it according to the
common received word, MERCURIUS.

See the third Epistle to Abra^^^ von (...)
The Corn grows against the will of the Enemy; For that which is sown by
God, no Man can prevent or hinder the growing thereof.


