Le Lutrin: AN HEROIC POEM, WRITTEN Originally in FRENCH, BY MONSIEUR BOILEAV:

Made ENGLISH BY N. O.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Benjamin Alsop at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultrey, 1682.

Le Lutrin: AN HEROIC POEM.
CANTO I.
The ARGUMENT.
The Argument? what needs a Proeme,
To vamp a Three-half-penny Poem?
No, Reader, No; 'twas never writ
For thy sake, but for little Chitt.
St. George oth' backside of the Horn-book,
The Dragon kills, to Humor Scorn-book.
And thus to wheddle in young Fops,
The gilded Sign hangs over the Shops:
Miss will not come in to Buy, before
She spies the Knick-knacks at the Door.
Thus Queasie Madams meat forbear
Until they read, The Bill of Fare.
Instead of Frontispiece, or Babbie, Canto 1.

We placed to please some puiney Rabbie,
Who hates an Author that enlarges,
And cons the Index to save charges.
Discord, that Tearing, Hectoring Ranter,
Provokes a Dean and his Arch-chanter,
Who had lived friendly forty years,
To fall together by the ears;
A Rotten Pulpit placed in the Quire
Furnished fuel to the Fire:
Three swashing Blades, blind Fates agree
Should do the work: but who they be,
Pray ask the Canto, that can tell
Better than I: and so Farewell.
Thus far the Porch, now view the House,
Here is the Mountain, there is the Mouse.
IMmortal feuds, and more than Civil Wars,
And Fights tho fierce, disfigured with no Scarrs.
I sing! And thee Great Prelate, who of late,
Maugre the Chanter, and Reluctant Fate
Did raise at length a Pulpit in the Quire,
The immortal Trophee of thy Mortal Ire.
Twice the Pragmatick Chanter, tho in vain,
Presumed to discompose thy peaceful Reign;
Twice with Schismatic Pride did enterprise
To force the Chapter in Rebellion rise;
As often the Dean him swollen with envious rage,
Hurled Headlong from high hopes; and by the sage
Sexton assisted, terrified the People
Who durst dispute the Title to his Steeple.
Instruct me Muse, for thou can tell, what Thirst
Of sweet Revenge, tho Dire, engaged first
Religious Souls to break the Sacred Tie
Of blessed Peace and heaven-born Amity,
To make old Friends new Rivals; can there rest
Such bitter Gall in a Religious Breast?
And thou Great Hero, whose wise conduct stifled
The growing Schism which else thy Church had rifled,
With favor influence my Adventurous Verse,
Nor dare to laugh, whilst I thy Acts rehearse.
In melting Pleasures of Fraternal Peace
An ancient Abbey long had dwelt at ease,
Whose Scarlet Prebends blear'd poor Mortals eyes,
Whose Ermines, Winters Frost, and Snow defies;
Basking in fat, and Wealth, themselves they Bless
In sweet Repose of Sacred Idleness:
Thus Stretched at length on downy Featherbeds,
To chaunt their Matines never lift up their Heads,
But before Dinner waked; for they could smell
The Kitchen Steams, though Deaf to the Prayer-bell;
When Eyes and Ears Nights leaden Key composes,
Kind Sleep yet open left their subtle Noses;
These always Eat in Person, but did praise
Their God by Proxy, in Harmonious Lays,
Pawning the Chanters, and Poor Singing-boyes
Condemned to those inferior Drudgeries.
When Discord dappled over with thousand Crimes,
The Villainies of our Debauched times
Quitting the humble Seat of Parish Churches,
On a Magnificent Cathedral Perches,
The hideous clang of her hate-bearing wing
Peace trembled: whilst the Fiend armed with her Sting
Allighting swift before the Pompous Pile
Of her proud Palace, stood and paws'd a while.
Thence with observing eye, her Empire viewing,
Fomented Feuds and Wars thereon ensuing,
Hatred, and variance, her self she blesses,
Applauds her Wit in these Achieved successes;
From Norwich there, and Bristol Coaches, she
Legions of Tories dear, arrived might see,
And could her Vassals boast of all Degrees,
Citizens, Nobles, Clerks, Priests, Dignities;
But above all her Feats renowned in stories,
In this she Prides her self, in this she Glories,
That Troops of Barr-gowns ranged under her Banner
Had routed Themes, and now Triumph't on her;
And yet she saw, and raged, and Grieved to see
One Church disturb this rare Felicity,
One Church to brave her triumphs; one Alone
Threaten to shake the firmness of her Throne,
That amidst all these Herricanes and Scuffles
No breath of Stormy Wind it is Quiet ruffles.
Needs must so Odious a sight as this
Awake her Rage, make all her Serpents hiss;
With Stygian Aconite her mouth she fills,
From glaring eyes she streams of Flame distills:
"What? (said she with a tone made windows Quiver,)
"Have I been able hitherto to Shiver
"The Union 'twixt Cordeliers, Carmelites,
" Dominicans, Franciscans, Minorites,
"Betwixt the Molinists, the Celestines,
" Jansenists, Jesuits, and Augustines?
"Have I by secreet Arts, nourisht the Stickle
" Between the Churchmen, and the Contenticle?
"And shall one Paultry Chapel dare to Brave me;
"Nay hope in time to it is nice Laws to inslave me?
"And am I Discord still? who any more
" With Incense will my Sacred Shrines Adore?
Thus spoke the Hagg! And in a trice unseen
Of an Old Chanter takes the shape and mien:
A cornered Cap her Snake-wigg'd Head did cover,
Her rich Face sparkling Rubies studded over,
Her Nose, embossed with Carbuncles Divine
Before her steps did like a Flamboy shine;
Accoutred thus, with Red-coat Soldiers pace
Haughty she marched to find the Prelates Grace.
A Stately Bed, the Posts most richly Gilt,
Covered with Sumptuous Crimson Damask Quilt,
Enclosed with Double Curtains, scorning light
Of midday Sun, and counterfeiting Night,
Stood close in an Appartment like a Cell
Where Sweet Repose and Silence chose to Dwell;
The Tester was all faced with Looking Glass,
The rare Invention of this Golden Ass,
Contrived mysteriously that he might peep
And see how Blithe he looked, when fast a-sleep.
Here lay the Mitred Head! in slumber drowned,
Whilst gentle fumes his Dreaming Temples Crowned;
A Sprightly Air adorns his Youthful Face,
His double Chin hangs down with goodly Grace;
The Claret shined through the transparent Skin,
A broad conjecture where he late had been;
And his Fat comely Corpse, so thick and short
Made the Soft Pillows groan under his Port:
Here, in Sack-posset armed, without repining
He waits in patience the blessed hour of Dining.
The Goddess entering, saw the Table spread,
And all within doors rarely ordered,
Then Softly marching to his lodging, took him
Profoundly napping, and thus she bespoke him.
"Sleep'st thou, Great Prelate? Sleep'st thou then Supine?
"And to the Chanter mean thy Place Resign?
"Whilst he sings Oremus, makes Grave Processions,
"And hurls about by wholesale Vows and Blessings?
"Sleep'st thou securely, till the Chanter come,
"And without Bull, or Brief procured from Rome,
"Whilst you are wrapped up in sloth, and free from Fears,
" Rotchet and Surplice shall pluck over thy Ears?
"Sluggard, awake, arise, bestir thee quick,
"Renounce thy Ease, or quit thy Bishopric!
She spoke; and from her Poisonous Mouth did fling
Into his Soul the Zeal of Quarrelling.
The Dean awakes; The choler in his breast
Fermented boils; yet he the Fury Blessed!
Have you not seen a Bull by Gad-fly stung,
When his tormented pride flownc'd, kick't, and flung?
The vexed Air, with Echoes frighted rings!
Whilst he exhales his Rage in Bellowings!
So stormed the Prelate, with his Dream o're-heated,
Poor Page, and Chambermaid were rudely treated;
His mettle moved with conceived Indignation,
Needs will he go to'th' Quire before Collation.
When Prudent Gilotin his Almoner
With grave Advice stepped into stint the Stir;
Shows him the Danger of that Rash Design,
How mad to go to Prayers, before he Dine;
"What Rage (quoth he) is this? what headstrong crotchet?
"Pray Sir, regard the Honor of your Rotchet!
"He that for Chapel lets warm Dinner cool,
"May think himself Devour, I Will think him Fool!
"Does our Church consecrate Prelates to Pray?
"For shame, this Zeal unseasonable allay!
"Shall all your Learning e're make me believe,
"That this is Lent, or any Saints days Eve?
"Then Reassume your self, forbear to Dote,
"Meat heated twice, is not worth half a Groat!
Thus reasoned Gilotin, and very loath
TO adjourn a Meal, bad 'em serve in the broth.
The Prelate stood a while in deep suspense,
He eyed the Soupe with Holy Reverence;
Overcome at last with Reason and good Nature
He yields, and sits him down to taste the Creature:
'Yet inward Rage did all the while provoke him,
It Was feared each Morsel would go near to choke him;
Gilotin saw't, and sighed! in Zeal he rises
TO acquaint his party with these Enterprises;
Tells them with Grief of Heart, what rude Affronters
Of Lawn-sleev'd Grandeur were these Saucy Chanters;
Protests they would vex't his Lordship so that day
His Meat went down like Orts, or old chopped Hay!
Nay I may safely say it without Presumption,
This Course must bring him int' a Deep Consumption!
Now might you see whole troops of Chanons, all
To Rendevouz in the great Pallace-hall!
So have you seen perhaps Legions of Cranes,
Marching on Wing over Strymons Spacious plains,
When the proud Pygmies, must'ring their warlike Nation
Design against them an Unjust Invasion!
Surpised at sight of this great friendly Rabble,
The Sweetened Prelate rises from the Table;
Nodding he Touched his Hat, to keep Decorum;
Nor seemed to slight, nor basely to Adore 'um!
His face no longer shone with Orient Flame,
But pleased, recalls the good Westphalia Ham;
Then takes himself a lusty Beer-bowl brimmer
Of Racy Claret, and Commends a Swimmer
To the good Company; they with joint consent
Follow the Prelates gracious Precedent;
And, whilst their circling Healths and Heads go round,
Arnold and all his little Whigs, Confound!
With Nectar, killing-thirst they will allay;
The Voider comes, the Cloth is taken away,
The Prelate then with words expressing Grief,
Unto his Confidents declaims in brief!
"My brave Confederates, in all Intriegues,
"Propping my Interest with your holy Leagues,
"Whose Votes Unanimous once made me Dean,
"What boots this Meagre Title? Honor Lean?
"My Name but mentioned; Ay, and scarcely that,
"Unless perhaps at the Magnificat;
"How can you bear to see this Rascal Nose me,
"And his Combined mates thus dare to oppose me?
"Invading all my Rights and Privileges,
"My Compeer the Impudent, himself Alleges.
"Thus leaping over all bounds of Law and Reason,
"I think t'Indite the Rebel of High Treason;
"For I have by me, or at least can get
"Such VVitnesses, be sure shall do the feat!
"This very Morn ('it is no fond tale I tell thee,
"A Goddess in a Dream showed what befell me)
"This Insolent Vpstart e're I was Dressing
"Stepped up into my Throne, and gave the Blessing;
"And now to cut my Throat, the last of Harms,
"The Villain would usurp my proper Arms. --
More would he fain have said, but briny tears
Mixed with redoubled sighs and inward fears,
Did intercept his speech, cut short his Story,
And spoiled the Tenor of his Oratory.
But Zealous Gilotin, who condol'd his Merits,
Had one Device yet left to cheer his Spirits:
For marking how the Prelates speech did vary,
He calls for a brisk Glass of old Canary.
Mean time came Sidrac in, whom Age made slow,
Limping upon his crutch, the News to know;
Full fourscore years, this Dotard in the Quire
Had practiced; all the Customs of his Sire,
All Ancient usages he could Describe,
For he was Dad of all the singing Tribe;
Him time preferred, when waving many another,
From poor Churchwarden to a Vestry-brother;
He by the Prelates pale and fading color
Had quickly ghess't the nature of his dolor,
And sweetly smiling, he Addresses thus:
"And why, my Lord! so Pusillanimous?
"Leave to the Chanter fruitless moans and tears,
"Attend the wisdom of now fourscore years,
"Enricht with large experience of affairs;
"If of thy wrongs thou hopest for Repairs,
"Then lend thy Ear attentive, Sir, be wise,
"And put in practice what the Heavens Advise!
"At the end of the Quire where now the Haughty Knave
"Enthroned in borrowed luster dares to Brave
"Thy Sovereignty, upon that Iron Grate
"Stood once a Pulpit square of Ancient date,
"Behind this Machine, covered as with a skreen,
"The Sneaking Chanter scarce could then be seen;
"Whilst on the opposite Seat, our Dean did shine
"In Humane eyes with Majesty Divine;
"How't came about I know not, but some Devil
"I do conclude the Author of this Evil;
"Whether some envious hand had plucked it down
"By Night; or Time, or rigid Fate had thrown
"The Structure from it is Base, yet this is true,
"One morn we found in the Floor the Sacred Pew!
"The Chanter I suppose might Plot with Heaven;
"Be It so! we may with both in time be Even:
"But down it came, and for the better Grace,
"That Holy things might rest in Holy Place,
"We lodged it in the Vestry straight, and there
"'T has lain despised in dust, these thirty year
"Fighting with Worms and Spiders, who therein
"Their curious Webbs do weave, and fine thread Spin;
"And thirty more might lie, for use of Preaching,
"Yet it is a Tool for this Rogues overreaching.
"Now mark me Sir! no sooner shall the Night
"His sable Wings spread over the vanquished Light,
"But three out of our Number, without Riot,
"Will Slip into the Church, while all is quiet,
"And under Covert of the darkness Strive
"Once more the Ruinous Pulpit's Mass Revive:
"And if next day the Chanter dares overthrow it,
"By twenty Actions thou shall make him know it,
"What it is to rouse a sleeping Prelate! This
"The Proper Glory of a Prelate is,
"To Vindicate against Malignant People
"The Jus Divinum of his Ancient Steeple;
"To rescue from base Sacrilegious hands
"His Tithes, his Offerings, Perquisites, and Lands;
"This makes him Glorious to the present Age,
"This future Immortality Presage:
"What, wilt confine thy Glories to a Quire?
"To Preach and Pray did Heaven award thy Hire?
"Such Virtues might Adorn the days of Yore,
"When Prelates only Humble, Pious, Poor,
"Boasted in empty Epithetes; new Times
"Require new Manners, suited to our Crimes;
"Let Churchmen now frequent the Bar and Plead,
"And Cook and Littleton, not Fathers read;
"The Law, the Law's thy work! then shall the Crowd
"Pressing they Throne, with Prayers implore aloud
"Thy Benedictions, which thou may Dispense
"By dozens, scores, and Hundreds, and from thence
"To his Regrett, the fretting envious Elf
"Shall see thee thousands Bless; and hang himself!
To see the Mighty Power of Eloquence,
How little short it is of Omnipotence!
Sidrac's discourse had charmed their Ears and Heart,
And Planet-strook the Dean stood for his part;
Now on the Place before a foot they stir,
The Lot must tell whom Destinies prefer
To this important service; All pretend
Both Zeal, and Fitness for this Noble end;
The Prelate then stroaking his Milk-white Beard
With Wisdom spoke, with Reverence was Heard:
The Lot, my Masters! I ordain your Law;
From Vrn Impartial each his Fortune draw:
'Twas said, 'twas done; Now all leave off their Quibling,
Each Mothers Son betakes himself to Scribbling;
Full thirty Names at least, in Tickets rolled
Were reckoned; And that none might be cajolled,
William, a Novice amongst the singing boys
(Who served in time of Need to make a Noise,)
Must draw the Lots; And now from fatal Bonnet
Each man abides his Doom, what e're comes on it.
Thrice had the Dean with hands lift up to Heaven
Unto this Pious Work the Blessing given;
His holy Hand thrice shakes the fatal Cap,
And happy man he is Dole who has the Hap!
Now William trembling to the Work Addresses,
Him too the bounteous Dean All-to-be-Blesses;
The Boy was newly shorn, of ruddy Hew,
But when he came to it, the poor Lad looked Blew;
And now he draws! first Brontin's Name appears,
Thrice happy Name to cure the Prelates fears!
For what less could that Thundering Name presage,
Than that he would prove The Terror of the Age?
All Is hushed again; and for the second turn
The boy advanced his shaking hand to the Urn;
When the kind fates gave out the Auspicious Name
Of John the Clockmaker: A Cock oth' Game,
This John had been, but now a jolly fellow
Had yoked himself to Nan, his dear Bedfellow;
This happy pair, (say they) before their Marriage
Had guilty been of some unhandsome carriage,
But after three years stealing secret pleasure
The Priest had joined their hauds, at least, together.
A third remains; The Prelate takes the Urn,
And to play fair gives it a double turn:
Their fligg'ring Souls do now on Tiptoes stand,
'Twixt fears and hopes for the deciding hand;
How blithe wast thou, how Buxome, and how chicket,
When once thy Name proclaimed by the Ticket,
Past all the fear of Contingent Disaster,
Appeared before the face of thy great Master,
Boirude (I mean) the Sexton? Some do say,
Thy livid Front e're while as pale as Clay,
Glowed into Sanguine; and thy Rosy Hew
Did the Wan Sallow of thy Hide Subdue!
Thy Gouty Legs and Toes benumbed before,
Ventured to cut three Capers on the Floor!
Now might you hear the Crowd at cheerful Rates
Applaud the Justice of the Gentle Fates,
Who by their peremptory strict commands
Disposed the work into such able Hands;
Faith with the Court Dissolves, all satisfied,
And to their Quarters in great Triumph hy'd.
The Dean alone, to cool his Zeal enraged,
Slumber'd till a soft Supper might assuage it!
CANTO. II. Canto 2.

The ARGUMENT.
Forsaken Nancy in this Canto,
Brings against her John a Quo Warranto,
'Cause he had left her in the Lurch,
To rear a Pulpit in the Church:
And under color of Religion
Courted another pretty Pigeon.
Now you must know that all the Blame
Was laid upon the Baggage Fame;
Who raised between them the sad Squabble,
By forging of this Idle Fable!
Next you shall see in Sluggish Dress,
That Gallant Lady Idleness;
Who has more Suitors waiting on her,
Than the most virtuous Maid of Honor;
But here I almost had forgot
To own the Error of our Plot,
The Poet laid his Scene in France,
But I cannot tell by what Mischance,
He now and then dares venture over,
And steps as far as Deal or Dover.
MEan while a Hagg, made up of Mouths and Ears,
Who prates both what, and more than what she hears,
The Moderns call her Fame: This crafty Jade
Of Slandring drives an unknown subtle trade;
For she had got the Faculty to Brew
With dubious, Certain; and with false, things true;
And with such Art she her Ingredients mixed,
That where she pleased A Calumny she fixed;
This Baggage once in her mad Moods and Tenses
Had Lombard nead, the Master o'th Sentences;
Thence she had learned to spread a Lie Malicious,
And then to serve a Turn, used the Officious;
When her light business called her to the Court
Used the Jocose, and lewdly ly'd in sport;
Her trade she practiced first in private Letters,
Bespattered there, and vilifi'd her Betters:
In Coffee-houses then she grew a Prater,
Broke off all Trades, she sets up Observator.
A Justice once clapped her in the Stocks and stripped her,
Then by a tough-back't Knave severely Whipped her;
Not warned, the Brazen-face would out be flying
Against the State with her Opprobrious Lying;
Jockey for Leasing put her to the Horning,
In England she was Pillory'd for Suborning;
A thousand pounds for False News she was fined;
And till she paid the fine to Gaol Confined:
Venturing at last on Scandalum Magnatum,
Two Thousand more; yet still the Jade did rate 'um:
Thus did the Gypsey flutter up and down
Through City, Country, Village, and good Town;
Once at a Barbers Shop she took a Lodging,
But fickle in her Humor soon was trudging
To the Cross-keys, Gun, and Ship: still her Headquarters
Where e're she roam'd by day, was the Crack-farters!
Forging, and telling Stories, with swift Wings
This tale at last to Jealous Nancy brings:
She tells (her tale I Am sure, lost naught in the telling,)
How John's misguided zeal, against Vows rebelling,
Under a quaint pretense to set upright
A Pew (forsooth!) intends to watch that Night;
But the perfidious wretch, intends (says fame)
To Gratify another kind of Flame!
For tired with Lawful Love, and honest Kisses,
He elsewhere pays the Tribute of Caresses
Due to his Spouse alone: Easy Belief
Received the News with Terror mixed with Grief!
With finger in Eye, and Hair about her Shoulders,
Poor Nan runs out; thought Mad by the beholders,
Nor caring much whether she wrong or right him,
In this rude language straight begins t'Indite him.
Dissembling Traitor! could not Faith once plighted,
Nor those Embraces wherein we delighted,
Nor thy Poor Wench ready to run a Madding,
Cool thy hot Cod-piece, but thou must be Gadding?
Perfidious Wretch! did thou sit up to make
A Clock or Watch, some Comfort I might take;
And hope of Lawful gain might slake my Anguish,
Whilst in thy Absence, I, poor I did Languish:
But what wild Phrenzie? what capricious Folly?
What Whimsey? what Religious Melancholy?
What strange Conundrum's got into thy Head,
To leave for Rotten Pulpit thy sweet Bed?
Ah! whether go my John? do Fly thy Nancy?
Can our delightful Nights forsake thy Fancy?
What! can with dry Eyes view my tears still Dropping?
See how the Stupid Block stands mute, and moping!
If my soft Heart easy to thy Desires
Has always met with Equal Flames thy fires;
And if to gratify thy Itch, (my Honey,)
I stood not on the nice points of Matrimony;
If in my Arms, thou, thou have had sole part,
Speak not that wounding, killing word, Depart.
Thus spoke our Lover whining, plain and round,
And closed her speech with an half-dying swoon;
Upon a Pallet backwards down she fell,
Fortune had placed the Couch exceeding well;
Twenty to one she else had broke her Rump,
Up starts amazed John, bestirs his Stump,
'Twixt Zeal and Love, his heart stood long divided,
Till Zeal at last the Question decided;
And thus his smothered passion got vent,
Smoothing with kind words over his wild Intent.
Dear Spouse, (said he with voice unkindly kind)
Shall e're thy favors slide out of my mind?
The Rhine shall first his streams mix with the Loire,
E're I forget the sense of my Devoire;
Nay first shall France keep Faith and Oath with Spain,
E're I thy lovesick Agonies disdain:
But never Dream, that when I gave my Troth,
I would become a Slave unto my Oath;
Our Nation knows no such nice Obligation,
The Ancient Faith's now quite worn out of fashion;
Had the Fates trusted me with mine own Lot,
I never had rashly knit the Wedlock Knot;
But from those subtle Rites had still been free
To taste the fruit of the forbidden Tree;
But since that matters in this posture stand,
Grudge not my Glory, if I lend a hand
To this blessed work, the Height of my desire,
To Raise the Pulpit in the sacred Quire.
Compose these passions struggling in thy Breast,
Dry up those Tears! Come Sweet! Lie down and rest!
He said; but what, the Wench regarded not,
E're half was done, the first she had forgot;
With hollow Cheeks, and staring Eyes she viewed him,
Trembling she lay, and in her heart beshrew'd him;
Long silent, stifled thoughts with pain at last
Broke prison, Raging then she Railed as fast.
No, no, Base Varlet! Thy Sire never was Baker,
Nor came thou of the blood of a Clock-maker!
Thy Mother never rode in Hackney Coach,
A Bastard-brat rather of some Turn-broch,
Or Caucasus did form thee, of a Pebble,
Or some fell Tigress nursed thee with her nibble;
Sure with her milk thou drew'st in Feritie,
Other I Will never believe until I Die:
For to what end should I the Rascal flatter?
Let me sob, roar, or swoon, it is all a matter
To marble-hearted John; and all I gain
Is to draw on fresh injuries again!
A Pew! what Mortal throat can ever gulp it,
Thus to compare me with a Rotten Pulpit!
Has all my scolding squeezed from's Eyes one Tear?
Has he expressed the least Remorse for's Dear?
When he came hither first, this paltrey Jack
Had scarce a Shoe to's foot, a Rag to's back;
Nay I can safely swear't, because I know it,
The Villain was not worth a single Groat;
I like a Fool took him to Bed and Board,
And now the Rascal swaggers like a Lord:
But why thus Raving do I beat a Rock,
Only to purchase foam? Base Spirits mock
Abject complaints; Humble Petitionings,
Are still contemned, but in the breasts of Kings.
Then study brave Revenge, despised Love,
Nor shall Repentance e're my Pity move;
And when thy Ears shall hear my Passing Bell,
Then, then expect Another kind of Knell;
My Angry Ghost shall haunt thy Conscious Soul,
I Will Ring thee such a Peal, shall make thee Howl;
Hobgoblins shall thy house turn topsey-turvey,
Conscience shall then upbraid thee, what a Scurvey
Knave thou have been to thy Deserted Wife,
And make thee Pulpits Curse, whilst thou have Life!
Nay, I Will pursue thee to the Stygian Lake,
And ugly Ballads, Boys of thee shall make.
This said, she dropped backwards upon her breech,
For raging sorrow quite had stopped her speech;
The noise awakened Ass her trusty Maid,
Who Hobling soon came in unto her Aid.
Now Darkness had exiled the expiring Day,
Supper to Service had given leave to play;
The fudling, Chanters now in Clubs were got,
Wetting their Whistles with the good Ale-pot.
Brontin, whom Zeal for the service had made quicker,
Bethought himself, A Punch of Nappy Liquor
In a Gold Winters Night was no false Latin,
To qualify Devotion for the Matine;
This Cargo, Gilotin's deep providence
Laid in; he was (say truth) A man of sense,
The smell of the Bottle made him easily lugg
The grateful Cumber of the Double Jugg;
Thus trudged he nimble: Whom should he stumble next on,
But that tough stick of Wood, Boirude the Sexton?
Now both together warmed with Zeal were hasting
To meet the Clock-maker, for Time was wasting:
Come! come away! (cried they) with quick devotion,
The Sun's now gone to tipple in the Ocean!
The Murky Night which veils the Evenings bravery,
Will make a handsome Cloak to hide our Knavery;
What ails thee Man? where have of late been mewed up?
Thou look as if first eaten, and then spewed up:
Where is that morning Zeal, that with thee rose?
Cheer up, and pluck thy Heart out of thy Hose!
Come, fear no Colors! The end the Act will hallow!
Then whether Honor calls thee, bravely follow.
The Clock-maker knew not well how to take it,
Nor whether Jest or Earnest he should make it,
Half Pale, half Red he looked with motley passion,
For Shame and Rage had died him in that fashion;
Yet, on my word the Knave had wit in's Anger,
And wisely took along his rusty Hanger;
For he resolved at a Dead pinch to knock it,
And scorned to stand, and sneak with hands in Pocket:
Nails he a handful took, and on his shoulders
A Massy Beetle, frighted the beholders;
An Axe, a Saw, a Hammer, and a Mallet
The sturdy knave had trussed in Leathern Wallet;
They march accoutred in Warlike Parade,
And John appears at the Head of the Brigade;
The silent Moon, viewing their stately Port,
Withdrew her Beams, she might not spoil the sport.
Discord saw all, and set up a loud Laughter,
The Echo rebounds and shook Heavens hollow Rafter;
The Noise had almost wakened Idleness
As she at Court with Ease held sweet Caress,
The frisking Pleasures danced by her side,
The Nuns her Votaries, her Deify'd;
One, in a Corner Stufft the Prebends hides,
One, pleasantly the Chanons robes Deribes;
Luxury to her State devoutly bows,
And Sleep dropped Poppy-water on her Brows.
This Even the sleepy Dose they had redoubled,
In vain! for Discord's cries her sleep had troubled!
And envious Night conspiring with that Devil,
Buzzed in her Drowsy Ears the Tragic Evil;
Night tells her how the Prelate did design
To make Disturbance in the Sacred Shrine;
How she had seen three Mortal Foes to Quiet,
March in Battalia; and Three will make a Riot:
How Discord threatened, to augment the fray,
A Pulpit to erect by Break of Day;
Which would the people raise in Mutinies,
Thus, thus the Fates had written in the Skies!
At this Report, portending deadly Harm,
Idleness raised her self up on one Arm,
One Languid Eye she opes, and with weak Voice
Dropped these soft whispers; fearing her own Noise.
Ah Night! sad tale thou tell! what envious Fiend,
With new Combustions does my Quiet rend?
Ah! what is become of those thrice blessed Days,
When Idle Princes crowned with withered Bays
Slept on their Thrones, and tamely worshipped me,
Leaving their Scepters to a Deputy?
All Night the Court did Feast, and slept all Day,
Creeping abroad perhaps when verdant May
With Gentle breathing Zephyrs sweet approaches
Called them to the Park, drawn in six Horse-and-Coaches.
That happy Age is fled; for now a Prince
Has got the Throne, and banished me long since;
Scorning my Pleasures: to my melting Charms
He stops his Ears with Thundering Drums Alarms:
And breaks my pleasing Dreams with Trumpets Sound,
Nor Summers Heat, nor VVinters Frost confound
His Daring projects; warlike preparations,
Resolved to Attack the World with fresh Invasions!
Nay all my Subjects ripe for Insurrection
Imbibe with eagerness the Dire Infection.
'Twice had I hoped with flattering Peace to cool
His Martial Ardor; 'twice to shut the School
Of Janus: All in Vain! except I find
More Worlds to satiate his Ambitious Mind!
'Twould tire my feeble feet to trace the way
Where the hard Stages of his Valor lay;
But yet I pleased my self with hopes to meet
For my disturbed Soul some safe Retreat:
I fancied that A Church might ease afford,
Where Churchmen sleep in Bed, and wake at Board;
But Oh! these Chanters, Chanons make a Pother,
A Dog cannot rest, whilst one worries another:
And which provokes me most to Indignation,
The whole world's set a gog on Reformation.
What Holy Mother Church, Imposing says,
This Age receives not with Implicit Faith;
Nay Blind Obedience now is styled A Vice,
Saucy Dissenters will be counted wise;
Men now Plead Conscience, make a heavy Din
With Heaven and Hell; of Duty prate, and Sin:
These empty Names have set the World on fire!
Now e're they swallow, they will first enquire;
They Will see a Reason given for Church Commands,
And use their Eyes, e're they bestir their Hands.
Who can Remember, and not sadly grieve,
Those easy days when on the Prelates sleeve
The supple Laity had pinned their Soul,
Nor Private durst the Public Faith Control;
When Canons, Conscience; Rubric, Reason mated,
And Souls had learned to bow, and never debate it?
Then Masse's, Ave's, Credo's Glory earned, Canto 3.

Blind Vot'ries then could reach it unconcerned!
But now the Begging Friars are all for travel,
They exercise their Toes in Dust and Gravel;
The preaching Friars such a coil do keep,
My aching head can get no wink of Sleep!
Yet my Cistercians did a little bless
My hopes, in Cloisters pamp'ring Idleness,
When a Mischievous Pulpits Cursed intent
Threatens to force me thence to Banishment!
Ah Night! the Dear Associate of my Sleep,
VVilt with these Villains Correspondence keep?
Ah Night! Sweet Night! If e're thou did Essay
With me the Joys concealed from the Day,
Then suffer not -- Much more she would have spoke,
Had not a Qualm crept over her heart, and broke
The Languid purpose: Down she sank in Bed,
Sighed, stretched her Arms, closed Eyes, and Slumbered!
CANTO III.
The ARGUMENT.
An Owl instructed by the Night,
Cunningly counterfeits A Sprite:
In Pulpit close she lies Perdue,
And terrifies the Prelates Crew!
They Routed fly with heavy Clatter,
The Canto tells you, what is the matter;
But Discord to Retrieve the sport
Rallies them soon in Warlike sort:
All Oppositions overpast,
They set the Pulpit up at last:
But fear not lest the Prelate Preached in it;
Alas he has a further reach in it!
To spite his Foes, yet for all is Feating,
The proof of the Pudding's seen in the eating.
BUt Night in have with her Dark Canopy,
Shrowding the viny Plains of Burgundy,
Flew back to the City; and as suddenly
Wheeled round to view the Towers of Monlheri;
Those walls, whose towering Summits mate the skies,
Built on a Rock which Duskie Clouds disguise.
And objects representing seen from far,
That they did move persuade the Passenger.
Here ominous Birds, here Ravens foreboding fate,
In ruinous Chinks do roost, and keep their state;
Here thirty Winters mur'd in obscure Cell
An Owl-secure from hateful Light did dwell:
This trusty Messenger of Dire mishap
Has the first News of Ill dropped in her lap;
And always ready to proclaim sad Tiding
Waits in these Deserts, Nights approach abiding:
At whose return her Accents rend the Skies,
And fright the Vicinage with black Destinies;
Complaining Progne answers to her Tones,
And mourning Philomel renew her Groans.
To whom Night thus: Come, follow me! The Bird
Obeyed, when first her Mistress voice she heard:
With flight Precipitant, the Pair, out spring
And reach the Town high sailing on the Wing,
Then wafting at one Reach, they proudly Perch
On highest Pinnacle of the fatal Church!
Night cursed her Eyes to see the Camrades march,
For now All three had reached the Porches Arch;
She saw the Clock-maker, with faithful fingers
A glass of smiling Wine hold, glad, nor lingers:
Here Trusty Mates, A health I here Begin,
They pledged him, to their Patron Gilotin:
Oh see (says Night) these Rogues sing Huzza! proud
Of sure success, under my favoring Shroud;
But come! the Traitors soon shall feel our Might,
If I at least be justly styled Night!
This said, she leads into the Sacred Vault,
Into the Vestry flies, there makes an Alt,
And in the Concave of the fatal Pew,
Orders Madge-Howlet there to lie Perdue!
Mean while, our three great Champions flown with Wine,
And Wines effects, Audacity; with Design
To push their Project on, without regard
To Danger near, had passed the Pallace-yard,
Emboldened with success, still on they go
And mount the Stairs, leading to the Portico,
Here a Bookseller in his back-shop slept,
And under double Padlock safely kept
Rogero's worthy Works! and he may still
Keep 'em entire, for sure no other will.
Now wary Boirude, fearing Danger nigh
Stops his rash Friends in heat of Zeal; to try
How they might light a Candle: from his Pocket
He takes his Marchasite, begins to knock it
With hardened Steel, out springs an Active spark,
The hope of Light in the Despair of Dark;
The spark in Tinder cherisht, touched with Metch
In Sulphur dip't, kindles with quick dispatch
The Torch; which like a Comet blazing bright
Supplies the Office of Don Phoebus Light.
Boirude the Sexton, kept the Church-dore Key,
And if he entrance got, then why not they?
With equal pace the Temples Nave they measure!
Into the Vestry came: Here lies the Treasure!
Here prostrate they behold the Pulpit's frame,
And with due Reverence adore the same!
The Gloomy shades of that Religious place
Horror begat, the Bigot Church-man's Grace,
Horror awakes Devotion; they pray!
And dread those Deities they Scorned by day.
When thus the Clock-maker: Why stare ye thus,
My Masters, A-la-mort? time's precious!
Why stand we trembling, trifling, shall I, shall I?
Our work's before us, let us no longer dally!
The Pulpit must be raised, that by to morrow
Our Dean may see it with Joy, his Foes with Sorrow!
So said, he laid his bones to it; and did strain
To roll it over, with all his Might, and Main;
He scarce had moved it, O portentous wonder!
When from its hollow womb a Voice did Thunder;
Brontin starts back! The Sexton looked like Dead!
John with his Dear, twice wished himself in Bed!
But on their purpose obstinately bent,
They roll it over, true Zeal will never relent!
Out flies the broad-fac'd Chorister of the Night,
And with her ruffling wings strikes out the Light:
This struck their Souls with horrible Confusion,
Amazed they stand, they doubt; but in conclusion,
As soon as Fear lent them the use of Feet
Away they trudge, filled with shame and Regret;
The Nave they soon recover; whilst their hair
Stands bristling on their heads, dissolving fear
Makes their Knees quiver underneath their Bodies,
And there they sneaking stand like baffled Noddies,
Sheltred by the same Darkness brought them thither,
The Squadron flies at last, they knew not whither.
So when a Jolly Crew of Truants gather
Into some Nook, to play their pranks together,
Secure of Eyes from Monitor and Master,
They burn the day in game, and sport the faster;
If now by chance, the Tyrants Eye does watch 'em,
And unawares at Cards or Dice he catch 'em;
The sad surprise, their Mirth and Pastime dashes,
And each shifts for himself to escape his lashes.
Such was our Warriors plight when once the Owl
Sprung from the Pew, set up her Doleful howl.
Discord, who saw unseen their fowl disgrace,
Clapping her wings, pitied their woeful case:
Their Spirits quail'd, their Courages abated;
Rallies in have the Troop disanimated.
Of Sidrac, she the Audacious Visage borrowed,
His front she smoothed into a smile; but furrowed
His face with wrinkles deep; A Truncheon strong
Confirms his staggering steps; thus stalks along
The Marble Pavement; guided by a Torch,
Finds out the skulking Cowards near the Porch;
Then with a squeaking Voice spoke fourscore years,
A wakes their mettle, dissipates their Fears.
Rascals! where are you? what Pannick Dread does rout you?
Run from one paultry Owl? never look about you!
Where are those boasts which late breathed naught but Thunder?
Fie! shall a harmless Bird disperse y' asunder?
How would you sneak, vile Souls, if at the Bar,
My daily sport, you met with horrid War?
How would you stand a tedious Chanc'ry Hearing,
If poor Hobhowchin puts you in this fearing?
How would your hearts misgive to bide a Trial,
No Friend at Hand, nor in your Purse a Ryall?
Believe me (Cowards!) I, with Grace be it spoken,
Simply tho I stand here, have foiled and broken
A Chapter, with her Chanons, Prebends, Dean;
Nor was my Soul so Abject, Base, so Mean,
But I durst look the Proctors in their faces,
And scorn their proudest braves, their stern Menaces!
I have pursued 'em all, Ashamed, confuted,
It Is Persecutors, cried out, Persecuted!
All this I did, and ten times more in sooth,
With the sole Breast Plate armed of Naked Truth!
The Church of old was manned with Gallant Spirits,
A Novice then confiding in the Merits
Of the famed Good Old Cause, dared to Defend it
In forma Pauperis, and make 'em end it!
But this Decrepid Age to Sloth inclines,
Nor brings forth now such Puissant Divines!
Thus far however their Virtues imitate,
Let not an Owl your Courages abate:
Think what a Blot it draws upon your Glory,
How it does stain the luster of your story:
If once the Chaunter learns your base Defeat,
Your flight Ignoble, and your vile Retreat,
Where e're he meets you, he will thus fleer and flout you;
Hark, the Owl cries! brave Soldiers look about you!
Then will your conscious guilt with shame upbraid you,
You Will curse your slavish fears that Cowards made you!
Then reinforce your Spirits, by preventing
The Affronts, which will be bitter in resenting:
Remember, Sirs, whose Cause your hands engages,
First win, then bravely wear his Laurel wages:
Recall your wonted worth, new frights forgetting;
It Is Yorkshire Cloth, you know, that shrinks in the wetting!
But I perceive success my speech does follow,
Then march, run, fly (brave Boys!) where dangers call you!
That our Great Mitred Prince, may see his Engines
Before the Affront be spread, taking due Vengeance.
This spoke, the Fiend disguised in flash of Fire
Vanished, with fresh rage did their hearts inspire.
Just so it was, Great Conde! at that battle
When thy brave Arms made Rhine and Sheld to rattle,
Thy wings, and Battle on Lens spacious Border
Inclined to rout, and leaned to foul disorder,
Thy Valor firm'd the wavering Troops that day,
And spirited their Files with flesh arry!
Inspired new Hearts, and gave 'em all New Hands,
Till vanquished Victory followed thy Commands!
Thus in a moment Rage succeeded Fear,
And clouded courage once again shone clear!
They countermarch! The Owl Retreats quite routed,
And now they scorn her, whom so late they doubted.
Not unrevenged! for as she flew, she muted
In Boirude's gaping mouth, triumphed and hooted;
Rascally Bird, (said he) All Face and Feather!
The Shame of Day; the Boder of Ill Weather!
Dare thou presume (profane!) to spice in the Quire?
And make the Pulpit A Sir-Reverence higher?
And Scot-free this! No, no, I Am not in sport;
I Will trounce and bounce thee for it in the Spiritual Court;
Where Doctors, Proctors, Paritors together
Shann't leave upon thy Naked back one Feather;
I Will make thee then for all thy Hooting, sneak
Like her that escaped the Devils Arse in the Peak:
But talk's but talk! Come Boys, let us fall to action!
The Owl is flown! the last of the Chanters faction!
The Pulpit now is heaved into the Quire,
And on the Chanter's Seat advanced higher,
Her Rotten ledge repaired; her Joints that gaped
With Planes united; all was comely shaped!
The Wainscott eccho's to the laboring hammer,
The Roof back to the Walls resounds the Clamor;
The Organ-pipes provoked with this rude Rumbling,
Struck up a Base, and gravely fell a grumbling!
Now Chanter! black's thy Day, thou little think
What work's a brewing; Sleep in Boles thou drinkest,
On both ears; snoring after late Debauches,
Nor dream'st what mischief now thy Head approaches:
Secure thou lie unarmed, unwarn'd of Harms,
Hugging thy Dainty Doxy in thy Arms!
O that some friendly Ghost, in Nightly Vision
Would timously reveal thy sad condition!
Now! now they heave! the hateful Pulpit rearing!
'Twould strike thee dead, were thou within the Hearing;
Alas! above thy Seat, the Machine glories
To have surmounted thee five lofty stories;
The Sexton at three strokes, makes the Nail enter,
And now the Pulpit stands firm on its Center.
CANTO IV.
The ARGUMENT.
Alas! The Poems curious Model
Is Altered quite in the Poets Noddle!
So Nature often, for want of Tools,
Decrees Wise men, produces Fools:
To tell you True, my Muse and I
Designed at first, the Victory
To Master Dean; how 't came about
I cannot tell; but now the Rout
Is His: yet so, The Fancy's richer
To end in Pot, commence in Pitcher!
Such was the Project! such the Event!
But listen to the Argument!
The Chanter's Dream: A Chapter called;
Fine Speeches made; The Pulpit mawled;
This Counter-Scuffle, I dare stand in it,
The Goddess Discord had a hand in it:
The Prelates foes; Canto 4.
The Chanters friends;
The Canto, and the Poem ends.
THE Pulpit now lifting its lofty Head
With carved Canopy stands Covered;
When the Church-clocks with their melodious chime,
Summoned the Singing-boyes to rise: It Is time
To Rise to Matins! Thus the Bells did Chink!
Thus did at least the dreaming Sluggard think.
Drowned in sweet Sleep the Arch-chanter rolled at ease,
(A Sovereign Medicine against the twinging Fleas,)
Whose roving Fancy traverst many a Theme,
Startled at last with terror of a Dream;
He cried out, wakened at his own fierce crying,
And parboiled in his mellow Sweat lay frying.
His Pages starting at the sudden Noise,
Began to bussle, rubbing their gum-glew'd Eyes;
One frighted runs, but poor fool, knew not whither,
And from the door leaps back, e're well got thither:
Girot, (a trustier Slave never waited on him,)
Runs to his Master, never a Rag upon him;
What the Rope ails you? (cried the testy Lacquey,)
Does the Nightmare ride you, or the Old Witch make you
Roar at this rate? What a mad coil you keep here,
That people cannot steal a Nap, or sleep here?
Compose your self for shame! The wiser Sun
His race Nocturnal has but halfway run;
Is this a time for Prayers? Let Singing-boyes
Whose Pension's pay for it, do those Drudgeries!
Ah friend! (replied the quaking Chanter) friend!
Insult not over my juster Passion; lend
Thy patient Ear to my sad Fate, and join
Thy secret sorrows to these tears of mine!
Attend I say! (I tremble whilst I Am speaking,)
The weighty Reasons of my poor heart breaking!
God Morpheus long before the peep of day,
Had locked my Senses up with leaden Key
In second sleep; when dulcid fumes and vapors,
In Fancies Cell, disport in frolic Capers;
Methought I sat enthroned in the Quire,
Where crowds of Choristers my Grace admire;
There blessed the gawping throng; there Incense sweet,
Stolen from the Saints, my pleased Senses meet,
When from the bottom of the Vestry came
A Prodigy too terrible to name;
From Dusky Clouds (methought) of wreathed Smoke
Wide opening, A Hideous Monster broke,
Whose Mouth, Eyes, Nostrils, vomit flame, fume, fire,
How pale looked all the Choristers in the Quire!
Him the proud Prelate dragged along in Chains,
Tame like a broken Colt, with Bit and Reins;
But, that which struck us all more than half dead,
A Pulpit issued from the Dragons Head.
Horripilation seized me! my flesh quiver'd!
My loins relaxed with dismal horror shivered!
We all conclude from the Sulphurous smell,
Dragon and Pulpit both must come from Hell;
Led by his Guide, the Monster does aspire
Unto my Seat, there placed himself in the Quire.
Think! think, my Ganymede, how was I appalled
To see the Horrid Fiend thus high installed;
I scriecht in vain, in vain I fled the Fury!
This I Will depose, is Truth before a Jury!
But here the Chaunter paws'd: he judged it best
To let his Eyes and Looks speak out the rest.
Girot essayed to comfort him in vain;
This Vision, Sir! perhaps might rise from pain
In your disturbed Head; Melancholy Vapors
Careering in the Brain beget these Capers:
The Chaunter crossed, storms, rages, and in choler
Leaps out of bed to mitigate his dolor;
Scorning with sorry Page to brawl, and quarrel,
He calls in have for's Holy Day Apparel!
A fair silk Cassock, richly lined with Plush
Though dusty ( Girot could not find the Brush,)
He first put on; next a silk Mohair Gown
Which to his heels with dragling train hung down;
A pair of Purple Gloves his proper badges,
A Rotchet which the Dean once gave as wages;
Yet jealous lest his Tail the ground should sweep,
The Shears had dockt it short, three Inches deep.
His cornered Cap (for fear of cold) on's Head,
His Hood in's hand for have, he hurried;
Away he speeds thus gorgeously equipped,
Never did seventy years so nimbly trip it!
He cursed an old Sciatica that Stopped him,
But yet his wooden Crutch most stoutly prop't him;
Rage added wings; inspired with Zealous Fire
(Whilst others lagg'd) he first arrived in the Quire.
O Thou, who in a Rapture, tranc'd in Boggs,
Describ'st the Battle of the Mice and Froggs!
And Thou! whose curious Pencil drew to the Life
All Italy for Goats-wooll fallen at strife;
Or rather thou, whose Muse did Pen the Stories
Of the sad Contrasts 'tween the Whiggs and Tories!
Lend me a Tongue that may express a Passion,
Of mixed Envy, Spite, Rage, Emulation,
First pale and dumb he stood, like one confounded;
As if ten thousand Furies him surrounded;
His Mass of Blood boils, all his Humors bubble;
Such power have Pulpits to create our trouble!
His belly swelled like Sybils raptured Priest,
With hollow sounding noise like Pythonist,
Struggling he stood under this inward load,
Released at last he thus shook off the God!
See! Girot see! the True Interpretation
Of my late Phantasme, which thy foolish Passion
Called a Delusion! thus the Dream I conster,
This Pulpit is the Hideous Hell-born Monster!
This! this the fatal, the Malignant skreen
Will never more let me, poor me, be seen!
Ah Prelate! trebble Vengance now indeed
Thy plotting pate has heaped upon my Head!
Could not thy Malice hugg it self in bed,
Between two Nappy blanckets covered?
To force my cold Seat, thy warm Couch resign?
Put out thy right Eye, to put out both mine?
O Heavens! O Hell! see how this Hateful Mass
Has made a Tomb of my once glorious Place?
Where I may sleep Inglorious, Sans Regard,
Nor more than Powers Unseen, be seen, or heard!
Nay rather than endure this fowl disgrace,
A thousand times I Will quit this loathed Place:
Never sing Te Deum more! Renounce the Alter!
And end my days at Tyburn in a Halter!
I ought not, cannot, will not live a Minute
IN the Church, whilst hateful Pulpit triumphs in it;
Come Girot! lend thy friendly helping hand,
If I have breath and strength, it shall not stand!
He spoke! his Arm waited upon his words,
Strength filled his Arm, and Fury strength affords:
Arrests the Pulpit; and with haughty frown,
Come down thou Idol! or I Will pluck thee down!
Just in the juncture of this flaming hate,
As the wise Destinies ordained, and Fate,
Who should come in, but Girard the Bell-ringer?
And at his heels amain, Ribout the Singer?
No couple greater Bigots of the Chanters,
Against the Prelate none more desperate Ranters;
At the Dire sight though both did Sympathize,
Yet they advised his Worship to be wise!
Pray Sir! said they, for once be ruled by Fools!
It Is dangerous meddling naked, with edged Tools!
It Is ten to one the Prelate will Allege
This fact of yours guilty of Sacrilege!
Nay who can tell but at the General Diet
We may be Questioned, and Condemned of Riot?
Call then a Chapter; put it to the Vote,
Let faithful tellers take the Poll, and note
The Ay's and Noe's; And if we carry't, then Sir!
Down goes the Innovation, once again Sir!
This sage Advice reprieved some little while
The trembling Pulpit: The Chanter feigns a smile!
Call then a Chapter! Run! Make have! Away!
Summon the Drowzy Drones! Nay Pray you stay,
Quoth Honest Ribout the famed Chorister;
No more have than good speed, beseech you Sir!
Rash actions often bring too late Repentance!
Girard was hugely taken with the sentence,
And seconds him: Great Sir! this weighty Business,
This Nice point will not bear Haste, or Remisness!
Perhaps the Chanters and the Monks may be
Awaked, but did your Reverence ever see
Prebends and Canons before break of Day
Frequent the Chapel, there to sing, or say
Sursum Corda! Believe me, Sir! believe me,
I speak't with troubled Heart, the thing does grieve me,
When six bells jangling, for these thirty Years
Could never pierce their Barricado'd Ears,
What hope two sniveling Chanters cries should wake 'em,
And to Cold Prayers from their warm Beds betake 'em?
Could you send Jove with his loud Thunderclaps,
Your Plot perhaps might take, and but perhaps:
With what Charms then, hope you here to prevail?
These Adders stop their Ears with their own Tail.
The Chanter netled heard in fustian fume
Rejoyning Girard thus sawcily presume,
And thus! Nay now false heart, I plainly see
What leg thou halt'st on! It Is the Prelate, he
That mortifies thy base enfeebled Spirits,
Vile Venal Soul! what know thou not my Merits?
I often have seen thee cringe with supple Hams,
To woe his blessings; Alas! mere flim-flams!
Well! go, and basely bend thy Oyled knees,
I have enough without thee, to make 'em rise.
Come Girot! Come, my trusty steel-edg'd friend,
Thee on this desperate Errand I dare send,
Nor fear success: Take me the Thundering Hammer,
On Holy Thursday used to raise a Clamor;
And trust me friend, The Rising Sun shall see
The Chapter met in it is Formality!
'Twas said, 'twas done! forth from the sacred Chest
Where it did lie from year to year at rest,
The Mawl is brought: Away they March, and cry
The Chapter waits you; waits you instantly!
Discord would not be wanting in the Brawl,
She enters straight the Prelates Palace-Hall,
Augments the Din; the Neighborhood she scares
With rising Scare-fires, sudden Massacres;
The Chanons now Awake! Strange tale to tell,
Such wonder in an Age had scarce befell!
One swears the Lightnings did invest the Town,
That Thunderbolts had beat the Houses down,
And one cries, Fire! Fire! Fire! the Church does burn
A second time; A third hopes a new turn,
For Holy Thursday! some whose gutts chim'd Noon
Bless't the Occasion that called them so soon
From Bed to Board; for all Agree, no Knell
Could more concern them than the Dinner-bell!
But yet the Noise that had unglew'd their eyes
Could not persuade the Sluggish Chanons rise,
Nor leave the Pleasures of the enchanted Bed,
Till wily Girot got this trick in's Head;
With Stentors Voice he makes loud Proclamation*
O yez! In The Chapter House, A rare Collation
Stands ready dress't to meet your Appetite!
He needed say no more: O blessed sight
To see the Prebends have in Numerous throngs!
What Rhetoric has Soup! how little Songs!
Deaf Bellies now found Ears: one Chanon ran
With one hose off, the other scarcely on;
Another durst not stay to tie his shoes,
But slip-sho'd hobbl'd, lest he Breakfast loose.
A third, whose appetite severely itches
Had not due time to hook his dropping Breeches!
Fallacious Hopes! here was nor bread, nor Wine!
The cheated Fools must with Duke Humphrey dine!
Yet mute they sat, expecting when at last
The Servitors bring in the hoped Repast?
Nor was it Reason that the gutled Fops
Should spend their Tongues, who could not use their Chops.
The Chanter though he saw his plot succeed,
Yet feared Delay might unseen Danger breed;
Rising with blubbered eyes brim full of Tears,
Unbosoms to them all his Griefs and Fears.
But Chanon Everard, whose barking Maw
All Hungry Guests, but yet no Victuals saw,
Impatient of delay, as he was able,
Cried out aloud; Pray Sirs, bring in the Table;
What mean you thus to frustrate our raised Hopes?
Must we sit always pining in our Copes?
The Chanter conscious of his cheat, gave way
To his Just Indignation; nor durst say
Ought in Reply; till Father Allain broke
The Horrid silence, and most gravely spoke:
This Allain you must know, was a learned Rabbin,
Who spent his days at study in his Cabin;
Twice twenty times had he turned over the Sums
Of Father Bauny, had picked up the Crumbs
Of Thomas a Kempis; he knew the Lattin,
Although his Gown was neither Silk nor Satin;
He gravely cought, and coughing gravely Rose,
Discharged his mind in Ciceronian Prose;
Which cause the sense was Great, the language terse,
The Poet has Immortalized in Verse.
I Will pawn my Life on it (said the Canonist)
This is the Knavery of some Jansenist!
I dare believe my own eyes Information!
Our Prelate's pleased with Gurniers Conversation:
Arnold that Heretic waits our Destruction,
And this Tool uses for the Deans seduction:
No doubt but he can from St. Austin prove
That one St. Lewis sent from Heaven above,
In after Ages rising in our France,
A Pulpit in this Chapel should advance:
Now to confute him there lies all the skill,
He Will plague us with the Torrent of his Quill;
One Argument we have yet left to confute him,
Let Us burn him in Effigy, that will rout him!
Let others turn over each Voluminous Father,
That Is not my Province; To be short, I Would rather
Consult with Father Bauny; he alone
With me is twenty Anstins, all in One:
Go then and Rumage all Antiquity,
If any footsteps there, of Pulpits be;
We Have time enough e're day! fall to your task,
No longer space than till daybreak we ask:
So many Heads, and hands I doubt not, can
Before Sunrise perufe the Vatican!
This uncouth motion startled all that heard it,
Till fat-guts Everard opened, and quite marred it:
A wise device! (quoth he) And pray, what Gains
Shall answer all this Cumber, all these pains?
For one poor lowzy Pew, to break our Brains:
It Is more Ingenious to Study Meat,
Let his Thin Chops his Musty Authors Eat!
We Have other Fish to fry! I am a man
That Read alike Bible and Alchoran!
If I can learn what Rents my Tenants owe;
When Mortgaged Vineyards forfeited do grow;
Can I precisely learn the Quarters day,
When wooden Shoes trudge up their dues to pay;
There lies my Talent! I no Learning lack,
But what is entered in my Almanac.
Imprimis, fifty Marks a year in Ground-Rents;
Item, twice fifty more Per-ann. in Pound-Rents!
When Wheat, and Malt in crowded Garners lie,
I boast me of a well-stor'd Library!
Why vex we then Dead Fathers, Greeks and Lattins?
Our Mother Tongue will serve to Mumble Mattins;
I Will ask no help of Scotus to pull down
A Pulpit! This great Arm the Work shall Crown.
All Is one to me, let Arnold judge or quit me,
I Will hit him home again, whoever dares hit me:
Fie on these long Harangues! Let Us live, and Drink!
And let censorious Whigs think what they think!
Thus Everard spoke! A heavy Abbey Lubber!
Whose Head was always nuzling in the Cubber'd!
Ribout the Chorister then demurely rose,
And these Impertinencies stiffly oppose.
I never liked tedious Circumlocutions,
And shall advise to more concise conclusions!
Let Trombaut make but the great Organs roar,
They Will blow the Pulpit quickly out of the door!
Needs must the Chanter own each man his friend,
Though differing in the Means, they jumpt in the Eend!
The General cry went still, Ay! one and all!
Let the Proud Pulpit, Let the Pulpit fall!
Thus all Unanimous held the Conclusion,
But in the Premises was great Confusion:
Just so at Trent, when Concord in a Bag
Came Post from Rome, they hit it to a Tag!
The least he liked was he that last had spoke,
His Patience that a little did provoke:
I never Approved (quoth he) this moral work!
Who knows what fallacy may under't lurk?
Who can assure me but the Pulpits blast
May puff the Organs out of Doors at last?
We sometimes saw the sad experiment,
Away with that Dubious Expedient;
Come, Come! Lets make (said he) a Quick dispatch!
Whilst we prate here, we fast in pain, and watch!
Down with the Idol! As I am a sinner,
My eager stomach crokes, and calls for Dinner!
There will we sit, Chat, Eat, Drink, Laugh, grow fat,
Exiling fretting Care, that kills a Cat!
He rose in hasty Zeal; The faithful Troop,
Armed with the Pregnant hopes of Sacred Soup,
Follow their Leader: to the Quire they go,
There view the Object of their Rage, and Woe;
There on the Common Enemy they lay
United hands; and at the first essay
Pluck down the Provocation of their Spleen;
So in the Woods of Ardenne have I seen,
Sacred to Jove, an Ancient spreading Oak
Fall at the Axes often redoubled stroke!
The Boards they rend in Pieces; and the Quarry
In Triumph to the Chanters Kitchen carry!
So Arduous was the work! of such Renown!
To set a Pulpit up, to pluck a Pulpit down!
FINIS.

