THE LIVELY PORTRAICTURE OF SIR THOMAS OVERBURY.


A mans' best fortune or his worst's a wife:
Yet I, that knew nor marriage peace nor strife,
Live by a good, by a bad one lost my life.
A wife like her I writ, man scarce can wed:
Of a false friend like mine, man scarce has read.
Laur: Lisle excud.
A True and Historical RELATION Of the Poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury.

With the Several Arraignments and Speeches of those that were executed
thereupon.

Also, all the passages concerning the Divorce between ROBERT late Earl of
Essex, and the Lady FRANCES HOWARD: with King JAMES'S and other large Speeches.

Collected out of the Papers of Sir Francis Bacon, the Kings Attorney-Generall.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. and A. C. for John Benson and John Playford, and are
sold at their Shops in S. Dunstans Churchyard, and in the Middle Temple. 1651.

The proceedings which happened touching the Divorce between the Lady Frances
Howard, and Robert Earl of Essex.
THE Lady Frances Howard, before the Kings Delegates, Geor. Canterbury, John
London, Lanc* Ely, Rich. Leichfield and Coventry, Doctor Caesar, Thomas Parry,
Daniel Dunne, John Bennet, Franc. James, and Thomas Edwards, authorized under
the Kings Broad Seal, Plaintiffs, in Ian. 1616.

That she and Robert Earl of Essex were married by public Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, in Ian. 1603.

That she at the same time was fully thirteen years old, and is at this time
twenty two, or twenty three.

That the foresaid Robert at the time of the pretentended Marriage was about
fourteen, and is about two and twenty, or three and twenty at this time; and
ever since, and at this present is a man (as far forth as a man may judge) and
has been in good health and perfect estate of body, not any way hindered by any
ague or sickness, but that he might have carnal copulation with a woman.

That since the pretended Marriage at least by the space of a whole year, and
continued three years after the said Robert had fully attained the age of
eighteen years (as time and place did serve) after the fashion of other
married Folks, the said Frances Howard in hope of lawful Issue and desirous to
be made a Mother, lived together with the said Robert at bed and board, and lay
both naked, and alone in the same bed (as married Folks use) and desirous to be
made a Mother from time to time, again, and again yielded herself to his
power, and as much as lay in her offered her self and her body to be known, and
earnestly desired conjunction and copulation: And also the said Earl in the
same time, very often, again and again, did try to have copulation as with his
lawful wife, which she refused not, but used the best means she could.
Notwithstanding all this, the said Earl could never carnally know her, nor
have that copulation in any sort which the Married-bed allows; yet before the
said pretended Marriage and since, the said Earl has had, and has power and
ability of body to deal with other women, and to know them carnally, and
sometimes has felt the motions and pricks of the flesh carnally and tending to
carnal copulation as he says, and believes: but by perpetual and natural
impediment has been hindered all the former time, and is at this present, that
he can have no copulation with the said Lady Frances.

Furthermore, the said Lady Frances has been, and is a woman fit and able to
have copulation with a man and such an one as may be carnally known, neither
has in this regard any impediment.

Moreover the said Lady Frances remains, and is at this present a Virgin.

Also at the time of the pretended marriage, the said Lady Frances was
unacquainted with the said Earls want of ability and impediment formerly
mentioned.

And furthermore, the said Earl long before this Suit commenced, has very
often, and at sundry times confessed in good earnest, before witnesses of good
credit, and his friends and kinsfolks, that although he did his best
endeavor, yet he never could not, nor at this time can have Copulation with
the said Lady Frances, no not once.

And also in regard of womanish modesty, the said Lady Frances has concealed
the former matter, and had a purpose ever to conceal it, if she had not been
forced through false rumors of disobedience to the said Earl to reveal them.

She requires, since this pretended Matrimony is but a fact, and not in right;
It may be Pronounced, Adjudged, and Declared, as none of none effect, and she
may be quit and freed from all Knot and Bond of the same, by your Sentence and
Authority.

The Earl of Essex replyeth, 5. Jun. 1614.
TO the first and second, he answers affirmatatively.

To the third, he thinks that at the time of his Marriage he was full
fourteen years, and is now twenty two and upwards; neither since has had, or
has any sickness or impediments to hinder him, but that he might have had
Copulation of a woman, saving in the time of his sickness of the Smal-Pox, two
or three years after the said Marriage, which continued for a month or six
weeks, and at another time, when he had few fits of an Ague.

To the fourth he affirms, that for one year he diverse times attempted: that
the two other years he did lie in bed most commonly with her, but felt no
motion or provocation; and therefore attempted the first year: when he was
willing, she showed her self sometimes willing, but other times refused.

To the fifth, he answers, that he never knew her carnally, but found not any
defect in himself; yet was not able to penetrate into the womb, nor enjoy her.

To the sixth, he believes, that before and after the marriage, he has found
an ability of body to know any other woman, and has oftentimes felt motions
and provocations of the Flesh, rending to carnal copulation; but for perpetual
and natural impediments he knows not what the words means, but that he has
layen by the Lady Frances two or three years, and has no motion to know her,
and believes he never shall.

To the seventh, he believes not that the said Lady Frances is a woman apt and
fit for carnal copulation, because he has not found it.

To the eighth and nineth, he believes them both to be true, and thin' eth
that once before some witnesses of credit, he did speak to this purpose, that
he had oftentimes endeavored carnally to know her, but that he did not nor
could.

The Lord Archbishop his Speech to his Majesty.
IN as much as we firmly believe that the Scripture directly or by consequence
does contain in it* sufficient matter to decide all controversies, especially
in things appertaining to the Church, and that Marriage amongst Christians can
be no less accounted then a sacred thing, as being instituted by God himself
in Paradise, honored by the presence of our Savior himself, declared by St.
Paul to be a sign of the spiritual conjunction between Christ and his Church.

I would be glad to know by what Text of Scripture either by the Old or New
Testament, a man may have a warrant to make a Nullity of a Marriage solemnly
celebrated propter maleficium versus hanc: which I do the rather ask, because
I find warrants expressly (in the Scriptures) to make a Nullity of marriage,
propter frigiditatem, by the words of our Savior, Matthew. 9.12. For there be
some which are Chaste or Eunuchs, which are so born of their Mothers belly,
and there be some which are made chaste of men, and there be some which have
made themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heaven.

I would also know gladly, what ancient Father amongst the Greeks or Latins,
by occasion of interpretation of Scripture, or any disputation has mentined
maleficium versus hanc.

The like I demand touching ancient Councels, either General or Provincial, and
concerning Stories Ecclesiastical, whether any such matter be to be found in
them. If (for ought that appears) never mention was made of this until
Hercanus Rhemesis Episcopus, who lived 400. years after Christ, it may well be
conceived that this was a concomitant of darkness and Popish superstition,
which about that time grew to so great an height (God permitting them) that
punishment might fall upon the Children of Unbelief.

But since the light of the Gospel is now in so great a measure broken forth
again, why should not I hope that those who have embraced the Gospel should be
free from this maleficium, especially, since amongst a million of men in our
age, there is not one found in all our Country, who is clearly, and evidently
known to be troubled with the same, and if there should be any, which should
seem to be molested, we are taught to use two remedies, the one spiritual
physic, the other external.

For the first, our Savior said, hoc genus demonirum non ejicitur nisi per
orationem and Iejunium. And St. Peter speaking of the Devil, cui resistite
firmi in side: and the Canonists themselves prescribe Alms, Fasting and Prayer,
to be used in that case; but that they join Supplication and their exorcismes
thereunto: And for corporal medicine to be applied there with, as against a
disease. So is the Judgment of our late Divines, whether they speak of
Maleficium or not.

Now admit the Earl of Essex might be imagined to be troubled with maleficium
versus hanc, I demand what Alms has been given, what Fasting has been used,
and what Prayers have been poured forth to appease the wrath of God toward him
or his wife; or what Physic has been taken or medicine applied for three
years together: Not one of those things, but the first hearing must be to
pronounce a Nullity in the Marriage; of which Declaration, we know the
beginning, but no mortal man's wit can foresee the end, either in his person, or
in the example.

The Archbishop for Confirmation of this opinion showed the testimony of Beza,
Melancthon, Perillus, Hemingus, Pollanus, Feriterius, and Gautius.

The Kings Answer.
TO the first Article, That the Scripture does directly or by consequence
contain sufficient matter to decide all controversies, especially in things
appertaining to the Church, this is in my opinion proposites, and one of the
Puritans arguments, without a better distinction or explanation.

For the Orthodox proposition is, that the Scripture does directly or by
consequence contain in it sufficient matter to decide all Controversies in
points of Faith and Salvation; of which sort a nullity of marriage cannot be
accounted, and therefore your consequence upon the Proposition must fail. For
satisfaction of your following Question, I say, your second question does
answer it: if there be warrant in Scripture for pronouncing a Nullity propter
frigiditatem, then all the means which make him frigidus versus hanc, must be
comprehended therein: for, why does our Church justly condemn the Marriage of a
man with his Sisters Daughter, or the marriage of two Sisters, but a paritate
rationis, for none of them is in terminis prohibited by Scriptures, only the
construction is gathered a paritate rationis: for if it be not lawful to marry
your Fathers Wife, because thereby you discover your Fathers shame; nor his
Sister, because she is his Kinswoman; nor your own Sister, because thereby you
discover your Father and Mothers shame; it can no more be lawful to marry your
Sisters Daughter, for thereby you discover also your own shame, as also the
same reason serves for ascending or descending in points of Consanguinity, Quia
par est ratio.

The like is in this case: for although Christ spoke only of three sorts of
Eunuchs, yet ratio est quia non potest esse copulatio inter Eunuchum and
muli^rum; and therefore St. Paul in the 1. of Cor. v. 7. tells us clearly,
that it is not conjugium sine copulatione: I conclude therefore, a paritate
rationis, that Christ did comprehend under these three sorts all inability,
which does perpetually hinder copulationem versus hanc: whether it be natural
or accidental, for what difference is there between cutting off the hand, and
being made impotent thereof? Amputatio and mutilatio membri, is all one in the
Civil law; and it is a little defrauding of the woman, when either he who is to
be her Husband is Gelded, or when the use of that member toward her is by any
unlawful means taken from him: neither is it any way needful to crave the
particular warrant of the Scripture for a Nullity, no more then of warrantie in
that place for any Nullity at all: For Christ does not directly say, that a
marriage so married shall be Nullified, neither does he teach us what form of
Process shall be used, in that neither makes he mention of the triennial
probation, no more then he forbids marrying within the fourth degree without
leave obtained of the Bishop of the Diocese: It is then sufficient for all
moderate examinants to be taught out of the Word of God, that marriage is nulla
sine copula; and that word, quos Deus conjunxit, is never found in Scripture
where durant ius does not proceed ( viz.) they two shall be one flesh.

But whether the impediments be universal, or versus hanc only, or whether the
fault thereof has been born with him, or done to him by violence, or fallen to
him by disease, or disproportion or inaptitude betwixt the persons, or
unnatural practices, that is ever par ratio, he is Eunuchus versus hanc, and
omnes alias, seeing to her only was he married.

Then paritate rationis, such nullities are grounded upon the foresaid
warrantie of Scripture; neither has Christ any occasion to speak of Jews
marrying, concerning maleficium versus hanc; for although it be apparent that
God made King Abimelech and his servants unable to abuse Sara Abraham's wife,
and so was made by God himself Eunuchus versus hanc, and that be not
improbable, that the Devil being Gods Ape, should imitate Gods works by his
filthy Witchcraft by making such as God will permit unable versus hanc;
howbeit, it be very probable that it was long after that the Devil put that
trick upon the earth.

As for the third and fourth questions, what mention the Fathers and Councils
do make of maleficium versus hanc. I answer, that it may be (if they were
searched) that either something to this purpose in them, or at least aliquid
analogum, with a paritate rationis, or by consequence, may serve to decide the
question.

But leaving this to search, my main answer, is, that we must distinguish of
times: for in all the first ages as long as persecution lay heavy upon the
Church, and before the Empire Christian, the Church did not meddle with any
thing which drew a consequence after it of possession or inheritance, as
marriage does. Nay, even diverse hundred years after the Conversion of the
Emperors, the judgment and disposition of all such questions did still remain
in foro civili, until the Popedom began to wax great, and to assume, or
rather to usurp to her self a supreme and independent Judicature in all
Ecclesiastical Causes; and therefore the Fathers and the Councils had no
occasion to make mention of that which was not prefori at that time.

And besides, that is an evil argument to say such a thing is unlawful,
because the the Fathers and Councils make no mention of it: for you know much
better then I, diverse and many Points betwixt the Papists and us are never
mentioned by the Fathers, because that they could never have dreamed that such
questions would arise, and therefore are the Fathers exact only in such
questions, as were agitated upon the stage in their time, as de Trinitate, de
Duabus in Christo naturis, and such like; and therefore sufficient, that there
can be nothing found which may justly be understood to contradict this opinion:
and it is very probable (J say) before that, this trick of maleficium had not
been put in practice in the world; and therefore not known or mentioned by
them. For why may not the Devil as well find out new tricks of Witchcraft
(when God will permit him) as he does daily new Sects and Heresies? for his
malice can never end until the end of times.

To the fifth Argument my former question does also serve, for till the four
hundred year after God (it may be) that divellish trick came never to be
discovered; you know the old Proverb, Ex malis moribus bonae leges; and it is
not unlikely, that that time of darkness gave the devil occasion to devise
such new tricks, (look my Demonologie) and yet was that law for which you cite
Ibircanus by Charles the Great, who in many great points (as you know) had so
great light as I do scarce term this time a time of blindness; but how great
soever that darkness was in point of Superstition, I will still maintain as I
have ever done, that for matter of order and policy, all the world shall never
be able to find out any so good, and so old an order of Government to be put
in the place of that; in sign whereof there is no well governed Commonwealth
in the Christian world wherein the Common Law is not received to judge in
questions of that nature. And it is certain that this question now in hand is
only a question of order and policy, for the ground of this question, that
the essential point of Matrimony cannot be accomplished sine copula, is
warranted by Scripture, and warranted by your self.

To your sixth Argument, or rather hope, I fear that hope shall prove contrary
to faith; for as sure as God is, there be devils, and some devils must have
some power, and their power is in this world, neither are the elect exempted
from this power: Job was not, St Paul was not; Christ said to all his
Disciples, Crebuerit vos Sathanas: and if the Devil has any power, it is over
their flesh; and if over their flesh, rather over the filthiest and most sinful
part thereof, whereunto Original sin is soldered. As God before, and under the
Law, to show officii altum of purging man's original sin, the praeputium of the
foreskin. And to exempt these of our Profession from the power of Witchraft, is
a Paradox never yet maintained by any learned or wise men.

That the Devils power is not so universal against us, I freely confess, but
that it is utterly restrained, quoad nos, how was then a Minister of Geneva
bewitched to death? and were the Witches daily punished by our Law, if they can
harm none but the Papists, we are too charitable for avenging them only.

Satan is permitted to punish man as well for the breach of the second, as of
the first Table, and therefore are we no less guilty then the Papists are; and
if the power of Witchraft reach to our life, much more to a member not so
governed by the fancy wherein the Devil has his principal operation; and he
may so enstrange the Husbands affections toward the Wife, as he cannot be able
to perform that duty unto her; for that is a common thing in many men's
natures, that they cannot do that thing but where they love, nor fight but
where they are angry: God keep us therefore from putting the trial of our
Profession upon Miracles; let the Miracle-mongers live by their own Trade.

To the seventh Argument touching Remedies, what do you know whether both
parties, or either of them, have used their means of remedy or not? and that
special remedy should be used publikly? for then I can see no necessity, for
non interest reipub. nec ecclesiae, and private persons are commanded to their
fastings, and their Alms secretly and in private; no such cure also is likely
to succeed well, except the parties own hearts and desires be set thereupon.

And as for your conclusion upon the incommoda, whether upon his person or the
example, I can see none in either, so as to the couple between the marriage was
never accomplished; truly they will peradventure both of them by the
Declaration of the Nullity be made capable to accompish Marriage with others,
which they could never do between themselves, wherein they may have the
satisfaction of their hearts, and enjoy the blessing of Procreation of
Children. And as for the Example, the Law should be fulfilled, with due
administration of Justice, which cannot serve for an example or president of a
counterfeit Nullity hereafter: authoritas facti, or rather non facti sed luce
clarior in this case; besides the many probations, and confessions of the
parties which have been taken in this process: whereas by the contrary if they
shall be forcibly kept together, their names and shadows may be kept together,
but never their persons or affections, and they still be forced to lie in
perpetual scandal and misery, or both; and what such a kind of forced
continency may avail, the Monks continency may teach us. And for a president
in time to come, that reaches no further then to open a way of lawful relief
to any persons who shall chance to be distressed in that sort.

And for the Legal Doubts, they concern none of your calling; for if your
conscience be resolved in point of Divinity, that is your part to give your
consent to Nullity, and let the Lawyers take the burden of making it so formal.

And as for the Trienial probation, I hope no man can be so blind as to make a
doubt whether it be taken before or after the suit began.

And in conclusion of divine solution of this question, proved clearly, that
this resolution of this doubt, howsoever it was in blindness, as you think,
that is now proved in the greatest time of light and purity of the profession
of the Gospel: And for your extract upon the late Divines opinions upon this
question, I cannot guess what your intent was in sending them to me, for they
all agree in terms of my opinion; but there is such a thing as Maleficium and
maleficiale versus hanc: And your very interlude passage proves the clearest;
and for that advice concerning the Remedies that is consilium non decretum, not
imposing a necessity, but is to be used by discretion, as occasion shall serve
or require it.

To conclude then, if this may satisfy your doubts, I will end with our
Saviors words to St Peter, Cum conversus fueris confirma sratres tuos; for on
my conscience, all the doubts that I have seen, are nothing but Nodos in scirpo
quaerere.

The Midwives appointed to make inspection upon the Ladies body, gave in, that
the Lady of Essex is a woman apt to have copulation, to bring forth children,
and that the said Lady is a Virgin and uncorrupted. Three Ladies affirm that
they believe the same, for that they were present when the Midwives made their
inspection, and did see them give good reasons for it.

There is a sentence of Divorce given for the Nullity of the Marriage, and both
parties married again.

The Commissioners that gave the Sentence.
Bishops Winchester. Bishops Ely. Bishops Coventry and Liechfield. Bishops
Rochester. Doctors Sr Julius Caesar. Doctors Sr Thomas Parry. Doctors Sr Daniel
Dunne.
Commissioners dissenting.
Bishops Arch. B. of Canterbury. Bishops Bishop of London. Doctors Sr John
Bennet. Doctors Fran. James. Doctors Tho. Edwards.
The proceedings against Richard Weston, at his Arraingment at Guild Hall,
Novem. 19. 1615. before the Lord Mayor, the Lord Chief Justice of England, and
three other Justices of the Kings Bench, Crook, Dodrige, and Hanton, and
Sergeant Crew another of the Commissioners.
THE Court being set, the Kings special Commission being read, the Lord Chief
Justice gave the Charge; the effect whereof was, First, to express the Kings
pious inclination and command unto just proceedings against all such as should
be any way proved to be guilty of the murdering and poisoning of Sr Tho.
Overbury, his Majesty's prisoner in the Tower.

Secondly, to aggravate the manner, and quality of the murder, in showing the
baseness of poisoning above all other kinds of murder; declaring the
vengeance of God, and his justice in punishing the offenders; he alleged Genesis
9.6. Quicunque effunderit humanum sanguinem effundetur sanguis illius, ad
Imaginem quippe factus esthomo: He also took the example of Vrias by David; he
therein observed how adultery is most often the begetter of that sin.

Then he declared that of all Felonies, murder is the most horrible; of all
murders, poisoning the most detestable; and of all poisoning, the lingering
poisoning.

He showed how by an Act of Parliament, 22. H. 8, 9. it was made Treason, and
that wilful poysoners should be boiled to death, rehearsing the example of one
Richard Rouse that had poisoned a man and woman, and was therefore scalded to
death.

Then he laid open to the Jury the baseness and cowardliness of poysoners, who
attempt it secretly, against which there is no means of preservation or defense
for a man's life; and how rare it was to hear of poisoning in England, so
detestable to our Nation, but that since the Devil has taught diverse to be so
cunning in it, so that they can poison in what distance of place they please by
consuming the Nativum calidum, or humidum radicale, in one month, two or three,
or more as they list, which they four manner of ways do execute, 1 Gustu. 2
Haustu. 3 Odore. 4 Contactu.

He finisheth his charge with serious exhortations to the Jury to do justice in
presenting the truth, notwithstanding the greatness of any that upon their
evidence should appear to be guilty of the same offense, comforting both Judge
and Jury with the Scripture, Psalm. 5.8. fin. For thou Lord wilt bless the
righteous, with favor will thou comfort them as with a shield.

The charge being ended, the Jury consisting of fourteen persons, did for the
space of an hour depart from the Court into a private room, where they
received their evidence from Mr. Fanshaw his Majesty's Coroner, and his
Highness Council prepared and instructed for that purpose, with the
examinations and confessions as well of the Prisoner himself, as of diverse
witnesses before that time taken by the Lord Chief Justice of England, and
others of the Lords of his Majesty's Council.

In the mean time Mr. William Goare Sheriff of London, was commanded to fetch
his Prisoner remaining in his house, to be ready in Court for his Arraignment:
So a certain space after, the Grand Jury returned to the Bar, and delivered in
their Bill of Indictment, signed Billa vera; whereupon the Prisoner was set up
to the Bar, and the Indictment read by Mr. Fanshaw, which contained in effect:

That Richard Weston being about the age of sixty years, not having the fear
of God before his eyes, but instigated by the Devil, devised and contrived not
only to bring upon the body of Sir Tho. Overb. great sickness and diseases,
but also deprive him of his life: and to bring the same to pass, the ninth of
May 1613. and in the eleventh year of his Majesty's Reign, at the Tower of
London in the Parish of Alhallows Barking, did obtain and get into his hands
certain poison of green and yellow color, called Rosacar (knowing the same to
be deadly poison) and the same did maliciously and feloniously compound and
mingle with a kind of Broth powered into a certain dish, and the same Broth so
infected, did give and deliver to the said Sr Th. Overb. as good and wholesome
Broth, to the intent to kill and poison the said Sr Tho. Overb. which Broth he
took and did eat.

Also the said Weston upon the first of July, an. 11 Reign aforesaid, did in
like manner get another poison or poisonous powder, called White-arsnick, and
knowing the same to be deadly poison, did give unto the said Sr Tho. Overb. as
good and wholesome to eat, who in like manner took and eat the same.

Also that Weston upon the said nineteenth of July following, did get another
poison called Mercury sublimate, knowing the same to be mortal poison, and put
and mingled the same in Tarts and Jellies, and gave the same to the said Sr
Tho. Overb. as good and wholesome to eat, which he in like manner took, and did
eat.

Also the said Weston, and another man unknown (being an Apothecary) afterward
upon the fourteenth of December. felloniously did get a poison called Mercury
sublimate, knowing the same to be deadly poison, and ^ut the same into a
Glister; and the said Glister, the said Apothecary for the reward of 20 li.
promised unto him, did put and administer as good and wholesome into the guts
of the said Sr Thomas; and that Weston was present and aiding to the said
Apothecary in ministering and infusing the said Glister; and immediately after
Sr Th. did languish, and fell into diseases and distempers, and from the
aforesaid times of taking and eating the said poisoned meats, and ministering
the said Glister, he dyed. And so the Jury gave their verdict that Weston in
this manner had killed, poisoned, and murdered the said Sr Tho. Overbury,
against the Kings peace and dignity.

Which Indictment being read, he was demanded if he were guilty of the Felony,
murdering and poisoning as aforesaid, yea, or no? To which he answered,
doubling his speech, Lord have mercy upon me; Lord have mercy upon me. But
being again demanded, he answered, Not guilty; and being then demanded how he
would be tried, he answered. He referred himself to God, and would be tried by
God, refusing to put himself and his cause on the Jury or Country according to
the Law and Custom.

Hereupon the Lord Chief Justice, and all other in their order, spent the
space of an hour in persuading him to put himself upon the trial of the Law,
declaring unto him the danger and mischief he runs into by resisting his
ordinary course of trial, being the means ordained by God for his deliverance
if he were innocent; and how by this means he should make himself the author
of his own death, even as if he should with a knife or dagger kill or stab
himself; exhorting him very earnestly either with repentance to confess his
fault, or else with humility and duty to submit himself to his ordinary trial;
whereupon he stubbornly answered, Welcome by the grace of God; and he referred
himself to God, and so no persuasions would prevail: The Lord Chief Justice
plainly delivered his opinion, that he was persuaded that Weston had been dealt
withal by some great ones (guilty of the same fact) as accessory, to stand
mute, whereby they might escape their punishment; and therefore he commanded
(for satisfaction of the world) that the Queens Attorney there present should
declare and set forth the whole evidence without any fear or partiality; and
yet notwithstanding, he once more used much persuasion to the Prisoner to
consider what destruction he had brought upon himself by his contempt, and
declared unto him his offense of contempt was in refusing his trial, and how
the Laws of the Land had provided a sharp and more severe punishment to such
offenders, then unto those that were guilty of high Treason, and so repeated
the form of the Judgment given against such, the extremity and rigor whereof
was expressed in these words; Onore, frigore, and fame.

For the first, that he was to receive his punishment by the Law, to be
extended, and then to have weights laid upon him, no more then he was able to
bear, which were by little and little to be increased.

For the second, that he was to be exposed in an open place near to the prison
in the open air being naked.

And lastly, that he was to be served with the coursest bread to be gotten, and
water out of the next sink or puddle to the place of Execution; and that day he
had water, he should have no bread; and that day he had bread, he should have
no water: and in this torment he was to linger as long as nature could linger
out; so that oftentimes they lived in the extremity eight or nine days: adding
further, that as life left him, so judgment should find him; and therefore he
required him upon considerations of these reasons, to advise himself to plead
to the Country, who notwithstanding absolutely refused.

Hereupon the Lord Chief Justice willed Sr Lawrence Hide the Queens Attorney,
and there of Counsel for the King, to manifest unto the audience the
guiltiness of the said Weston by his own confession, signed with his own
hand; and if in the declaration thereof they met with any great persons
whatsoever (as certainly there was great ones confederates in that fact) he
should boldly and faithfully open whatsoever was necessary, and he could prove
against them; whereupon Mr Attorney began his accusation.

First, he charged the Countess of Somerset and and the Earl to be principal
movers of this unhappy conclusion, Mrs. Turner to be of the confederacy, and
the pay-mistresse of the Poysoners rewards; in which I could not but observe
the Attorneys boldness in tearming the Countess a dead and rottten branch,
which being lopt off, the whole Tree (meaning that noble Family) would prosper
the better.

Secondly, he proceeded to the cause, which he affirmed to be the malice of the
Countess, and the ground of this malice he alleged, and by many inducements
he evidently affirmed that Sr Tho. Over. had persuaded him from that adulterate
marriage of the Countess of Somerset then Countess of Essex, and for this he
alleged as follows.

Sr Tho. Over. having diverse times dissuaded the Earl, then Viscount
Rochester, from seeking by any means to procure marrying with the Countess of
Essex (to which he saw the Earl too much inclined) having very earnest
conference with the Earl one night in private in the Gallery at White Hall
concerning his intendments, perceiving the Earl that time too much to desire
that unlawful conjunction; in the ardency of his fervent affection unto the
Earl, and great prescience of future misery it would inevitably bring unto him
(his wel-beloved Lord, and friend) used speeches to this effect: Well my Lord,
if you do marry that filthy base woman, you will utterly ruin your honor, and
your self; you shall never do it by mine advice or consent: and if you do, you
had best look to stand fast.

My Lord replied (bewitched with the love of the Countess, and moved with the
words of Sir Tho. Over. for sleighting her) My own legs are straight, and
strong enough to bear me up; but in faith, I will be even with you for this:
and so parted from him in a great rage.

This conference was overheard by some in an adjoining room, and their
depositions for the truth thereof were read in Court.

Although this conference moved the Earl to such a sudden choler, yet it
seemed Sir Tho. Over. conceited it not to be otherwise then a sudden extreme
distemperature, or passion, and not a final conclusion of their bosom
friendship; in which the Earl seemed as reciprocal as before, howsoever in his
double dealing it seemed to be clearly otherwise.

For upon this the Earl moved the King to appoint Sir Tho. Over. to be
Ambassador for Russia: the King willing to prefer Sir Thomas, as one whose
worth and valor was yet unknown to his Majesty, accordingly enjoined him that
service; the which Sir Thomas was most willing to accept of as a gracious
aspect of the King toward him: which willingness of his was proved by the
depositions of two or three witnesses read in Court, and by the oath of Sir
Dudly Diggs, who voluntarily at the arraignment, in open Court upon his oath
witnessed how Sir Thomas had imparted to him his readiness to be employed in
an Embassage.

The Earl as well abusing the Kings favors in moving to show favor, wherein
he meant the party should take no benefit, as bearing unhonest friendship in
conference with Sir Thomas concerning that employment, persuaded him to refuse
to serve Ambassador, whereby (quoth he) I shall not be able to perform such
kindness to your advantage, as having you with me; and (quoth he) if you be
blamed or committed for it, care not, I will quickly free you from all harm:
Sir Thomas thus betrayed by a friend, refused to serve in that nature,
whereupon by just equity he was committed to the Tower.

Being thus committed, he was presently committed close prisoner, and a Keeper
he must have, and who must that be but this Weston, who was commended by the
Countess of Essex to Sir Thomas Monson to be by him commended over unto the
Lieutenant of the Tower to be Keeper to Sir Tho. Over. Sir Tho. Monson
according to the Countesses request, commended the said Weston to Sir Iervas
Elvis: whereupon the Lieutenant entertained the said Weston, and appointed him
to be Keeper to Sir Th. Overb. The said Weston upon his own confession read in
Court, signed with his mark, had during the time that she was Countess of
Essex, been a procurer and a Pander to the said Earl Viscount Rochester, and
the said Countess of Essex, for the convening and effecting of their
adulterate desires, which they did diverse times consummate, meeting in Mrs.
Turners house once between the hours of eleven and twelve at Hamersmith, and
diverse times elsewhere for that purpose: so that now by the procurement of the
said Countess (who hated Sir T. Overb. for being a means to keep them from
contaminating themselves with such lustful imbracements, and from the proposed
Marriage they mutually labored to compass) Her Pander was become his Keeper, a
fit Agent for Lust and Murder.

Weston now being become Sir Tho. Overb. Keeper, kept him so close, that he
could scarce have the comfort of the days brightness, neither suffered he any
one to visit him, father, brother, his best friends, his nearest kindred were
strangers to him from the beginning of the imprisonment unto the end.

Mrs. Turner, upon the first days keeping, promised him a contented reward if
he would administer such things to Sir Tho. Overb. as should be sent unto him,
thinking him a fit instrument to compass black murder, that was so well
acquainted with foul lust (and so indeed they found him,) for he agreed, and
did promise to administer whatsoever she would send him. Mrs. Turner upon this
murtherous promise, the very same day Weston became Sir Tho. Keeper, being 6.
May, 1613. sent unto him the said Weston certain yellow poison called Rosacar,
in a vial; Weston having received that poison the foresaid 6. May, at night
bringing Sir Tho. Overb. supper in one hand, and the vial in the other, meets
with the Lieutenant, and asks him in these terms, Sir, shall I give it him now;
upon this word now my Lord Chief Justice demurs to aggravate the maliciousness,
affirming that this particle now showed a resolution to poison him, only fit
time and circumstances were to be respected by him. What shall you give him?
replies the Lieutenant. Weston replies, As if you do not know Sir. The
Lieutenant blaming him, he carries the poison into an inner room, which Weston
did administer to Sir Tho. Overb. the 9. May in broth: this was proved both by
Weston and the Lieutenants Confession.

Weston having given this poison, which wrought very vehemently with him by
vomits, and extreme purging, he presently demands his reward of Mrs. Turner,
who replies, The man is not yet dead, perfect your work, and you shall have
your hire. This was confessed by Weston under his mark.

Sir Tho. Overb. by his close imprisonment and poison, growing sick, and daily
languishing, after three or four weeks space considering he had not obtained
his freedom and release, having no friends suffered to come unto him, but
only such as the Earl sent to comfort him (of his own followers) wrote to the
Earl to remember his imprisonment, who returned answer, The time would not
suffer, but as soon as possible it might be he would hasten his delivery (so
indeed it seems he intended to do) but not so as Sir Tho. Overb. conceived,
whose true affection would not admit his judgment to debate the strangeness of
his imprisonment, which he might well think then the Earl might easily have
relieved.

On the 5. of June Viscount Rochester sent a Letter to Sir Tho. Overb. in the
Letter he sent him a white powder, willing Sir Tho. to take it, It will (quoth
he) make you more sick, but fear not, I will make this a means for your
delivery, and for the recovery of your health: Sir Tho. never dreaming of base
treachery, but conceiving of it as friendly policy, received the said powder,
which wrought upon him most vehemently, whereupon his sickness grew more
violent, and his languishment increased: which white powder upon Westons
confession was poison.

Sir Tho. Overb. his sickness increasing, and with it his wondering that he
could not in two months be released after his Physic taken, he thus wrote to
the Earl, lamenting his own estate, and taxing the Earl of his forgetfulness of
his weak estate; for his faith being thus shaken with the Earls unkindness,
gave way for his judgment to scan those actions, rather like an understanding
man, then a loving friend, as appears by his Letter sent to Rochester, the
effect whereof was thus, as is averred by the depositions of Sir Tho. Overb.
servants, who saw the Letter.

Sir, I wonder you have not yet found means to effect my delivery: but I
remember you said you would be even with me (not suspecting, as it seems, any
poisoning, but an unkind forgetfulness of my Lord of Rochester) and so you are
indeed; but assure your self my Lord, if you do not release me, but suffer me
me thus to dye, my blood will be required at your hands*

My Lord comforts him, and excuses, that it cannot yet be compassed. Sir Tho.
after the powder taken languished deadly, and to comfort him some followers of
my Lord of Rochester are sent to him daily, in the name of my Lord, by the
appointment and procurement of the Lady Essex (as Weston confessed) to visit,
and comfort him, and entreat him, if he desired any meats, he should speak, and
it might better (perhaps be provided for him then he should have any from the
Tower. This was three months after his imprisonment.

He, as men sick, desired luscious meats, Tarts and Jellies, which were
provided by Mrs. Turner with the knowledge of the said Countess, and sent unto
him, of which he did eat, the which Tarts were poisoned with Mercury sublimate,
not being so well colored as other Tarts are; and Weston confessed, that he
was straightly charged not to taste thereof.

Sir Tho. thus continuing languishing and consuming with the extremity of
sickness until 6. September. then the aforesaid Mrs. Turner did procure an
Apothecaries boy for 20. l. to poison a Glyster, which was by the boy and
Weston afterward administered as good Physic upon 7. October. After the receipt
of the Glyster, he fell into great extremity of vomiting and other purging,
which left him not till it caused his soul to leave his poisoned body. This
Weston confessed and signed.

Being thus dead, he was presently and very unreverendly buried in a pit dug
in a very mean place. On his body thus venomously infected appeared diverse
blains and blisters, whereupon they to take away as well his good name as his
life, did slanderously report that he dyed of the French Pox; but this report
was cleared in Court by the depositions of his servants and other men of worth
there read, that before his imprisonment he was a clear and sound body, only he
had an Issue in his left arm purposely made for the benefit of his nature, for
the avoiding of Rhume and ill humors, which with continual sitting at his
study he had subjected himself unto. He further observed the confession of the
Lieutenant to be, that if any prisoner dyed there, his body is to be viewed,
and inquisition to be taken by the Coroner.

But Sir Tho. Overb. friends and others might by no means be suffered to see
his body, although it was reported that there was Inquisition taken, yet it
could by no means be found.

After Mr. Attorney had ended his speech, Mr. War also of Counsel for the
King, declared to the Court what familiarity he had with Sir Tho. being both of
the Temple together, much commending his singular honest and virtuous
conversation, affirming that he was addicted to no dishonest actions; and from
this he proceeded to urge his hard usage in the Tower, where he might have no
company but the Apothecary and a Walloon, and repeating the sending of the
Tarts and Jellies in my Lord of Somersets name, and ending his speech with this
saying, Pereat unus ne pereant omnes; pereat peccans, ne pereat Respub. Then by
the commandment of the Court were read by Mr. Fanshaw the examination of diverse
witnesses taken before the Lord Chief Justice and others, which in effect was
as follows.

Lawr. Davis servant to Sir Tho. Overbury examined 15. October. 1615. before the
Lord Chief Justice.
HE said, that he had served Sir Tho. Overb. eight or nine years, in all which
time he was very healthful, and never kept his bed for any sickness, only he
was troubled sometimes with the Spleen, for ease whereof he had by the advice
of his Physician an Issue made in his left arm, but before his imprisonment he
had no sores, blisters, or other defects in his body. Also he says, Sir Tho.
would have gone over upon the Embassage, but was dissuaded by Somerset, who
promised to bear him out. He complained, he needed not to be a prisoner, if
Somerset would; and if he dyed his blood should be required at his hands: That
Somerset was as good as his word, who told him at Newmarket he would be even
with Sir Tho. Overb.

Henry Payston another servant of Sir Tho. Overb. examined, 15. October- 1615.
HE affirms, that Sir Tho. was of a very good constitution of body; that he
used sometimes to run, to play at Foiles, and such like; that he was of a
moderate diet, never had any sores saving the said Issue in his arm; that Sir
Tho. wrote Letters to Somerset, signifying he needed not to lie in prison if
Somerset would, and if he dyed, his blood should be required at his hands; also
that Sir Tho. at one of the clock at night meeting Somerset in the Gallery at
White Hall, had speeches with him touching the Countess, whom he called base
woman, and told Somerset he would overthrow all the Kings favors and honors:
and upon displeasure between them at this conference, Sir Tho. desired Somerset
he might have his portion due, and he would shift for himself, whereunto
Somerset answered, And my legs are strong enough to carry me, and so flung away
in an anger; all which this examinant heard, being in a chamber next to the
Gallery.

Sir Dudly Diggs being present in Court, and sworn, declared Viva voce, that he
was sent by a Privy-Councellor a great man to Sir Tho. Overb. to bring him to
this great man, which he did, and coming back together over the water in a
Boat, Sir Tho. was much discontented, the reason whereof he said was, that he
was persuaded by the great man to withdraw himself from the Court for some
reasons which he disclosed; not and Sir Dudly being sent afterward by the
Lords to know the resolution of Sir Tho. touching the Embassage, he found him
to rely upon my Lord of Somerset, saying, My precious Chief knows the Kings
mind better then any, and I the mind of my precious Chief.

Richard Weston the Prisoner 6. October. coram Cook and Crew.
HE affirms, that before Sir Tho. was in the Tower, he this examinant carried
three Letters to Somerset for the Lady Essex, to Royston, Newmarket, and
Hampton Court, and he delivered answer to Mrs. Turner, and that upon the Letter
to Hampton Court he had answer by word of mouth, only that his Lordship would
come; and that coming back he met with the Countess and Mrs. Turner half way,
in the Coach, whom he told that the Lord only answered so, whereupon the
Countess struck out of the way into a Farmers house hard by, whither within a
little space Somerset came; and that afterward they met in the night at Mrs.
Turners house in Paternoster Row; and he confesses, that of a year before Sir
Tho. his imprisonment no man carried Letters between them but he.

Sir Tho. Monson, 5. October. coram Cook and Crew.
HE says, that he never knew Weston until Sir Tho. Overb. was prisoner in the
Tower, and that he preferred him to the Lieutenant to be Keeper to Sir Tho.
Overb. at the request of the Countess.

Anne Turner widow examined 11 October. 1615. coram Cook.
SHe says that Weston was an ancient servant, and her husbands Bayliffe in the
Country: she denies to have any thing to do in placing him in the Tower; but
says the Countess of Essex did effect it, and used the help of Sir Tho.
Monson therein.

Sir Jervas Elvis examined 3. October. 1615. coram Cook and Crew.
HE says, that he had a letter from Sir Tho. Monson, requesting him that
Weston might be Keeper to Sir Tho. Overb. and that he did perform it; and
afterward having conference with Sir Tho. Monson, told him that his Keeper was
not to suffer any letters or tokens to be delivered to him.

Richard Weston the prisoner examined again.
HE confesses he showed the Glass that was delivered him by his son from the
Countess, to the Lieutenant, and told him it came from the Countess of Essex,
and that he persuaded him not to give it to Sir Tho. Overb. and says he had
diverse Tarts from the Countess to give to Sr Thomas, with Caveats that himself
should not taste of them, and confesses he thought they were poisoned. He
says Mrs. Turner appointed him to come to White Hall, and that she dealt with
him to give Sir Tho. Overb. the water, and told him he should not drink
thereof, and promised him a great reward, and he suspected it was poison; his
son afterward delivered him the glass which he showed to the Lieutenant, who
rebuked him; and so he set the glass in a study near to Sir Thomas his
chamber, but gave it him not, although he told Mrs. Turner the next day he had
given the water, which made Sir Thomas to vomit aften, and to be exceeding
sick. He says Mr. James, and Mr. Rawlings, servants to the Countess, came
often to know of this Examinant how Sir Thomas did, and what he would eat, and
they delivered him Jelly and Tarts, which he gave to Sir Thomas who did eat
thereof. He says he demanded of Mrs. Turner his reward, who answered, he was
not to have his reward until Sir Thomas was dead, and that he was promised a
Pursevants place, but confesses that afterward at two several times he
received secretly after the death of Sir Thomas for a reward by Mrs. Turner,
from the Countess, 180 li.

William Weston, son to the prisoner examined.
HE confesses he received a Glass from the Countess by her servants two
inches long, being wrapped in a paper, which he delivered to his father in the
Tower.

Then was read the confession of the Lieutenant to the King, that Weston met
him, carrying Sir Thomas's supper in one hand, and the glass in the other, and
demanded of the Lieutenant thus; Sir, shall I give it him now? whereat the
Lieutenant stepped to him, and asked him what? to which Weston said, why, know
you not what is to be done? and so the Lieutenant having made him to confess
the matter, dissuaded him, and he seemed to be resolute not to do it; and
afterward this Weston confessed to the Lieutenant an Apothecary had twenty
pound for ministering a Glister to Sir Tho. Overbury.

Weston the prisoner examined before the Lord Zouch, and others.
Confesses, that Sir Thomas had a Glyster which gave him sixty stools and
vomits: also being confronted with the writings of Sir Ier. Elvis, and charged
therewith, confesses the same to be true.

Simon Marson Musician examined.
Says he served Sir Tho. Monson six years, and was preferred by him to the
Kings service, but waited sometimes upon Sir Thomas Monson: he says he
received diverse Tarts and Jellies from the Countess of Essex, to be carried to
the Lieutenant of the Tower for Sir Tho. Over.

Paul de la Bell examined.
Says, that the third of July, he made Sir Tho. Over. a Bath by Dr. Michams
advice to cool his body, and he saw his body exceeding fair and clear; and
again, he saw his body (being dead) full of Blisters, and so consumed away as
he never saw the like body.

Giles Rawlings a kinsman of Sir Thomas Overbury examined.
Says, upon the bruit of the murder of Sir Tho. he was taxed by some why he
made no prosecution; he thereupon made a Petition, and delivered it to the
King, that the examination of the cause might be referred to the judgment of
the Law, and denies that he was persuaded by any to the contrary. He says,
that he coming often to the Tower to see Sir Thomas, could not be suffered to
see him so much as out of the windows, and Weston told him it was the commands
of the Council, and the Lieutenant.

The Lieutenant of the Tower examined.
HE says, that after the death of Sir Thomas, Weston came to him and told
him, he was much neglected and slighted by the Countess, and could receive no
reward; but afterward he confessed he had received a hundred pounds, and
should receive more: and the Lieutenant also says, that Sir Thomas was very
angry with his Apothecarie at certain Vomits which he had; and also that the
Tarts and Jellies which he had, would be found within a day or two standing ill
colored; and that no body did eat thereof but Sir Thomas: and Weston
confessed to him that an Apothecarie had twenty pounds for ministering the
Glyster. These examinations being read and applied to the purpose, the Lord
Chief Justice said he would discharge his duty first to God, in giving all
glory for the bringing to light of so horrible and wicked a fact; and next to
the King (his great Master) who as in case of the like nature, in the case of
Zanq. and Turner, so specially in this case has given given straight charge of
due and just examination to be had without any partiality or fear of the world;
to the intent as well the innocent might be free, as the nocent and guilty
severely punished.

And for this purpose, his Majesty had with his own hand written two sheets of
paper on both sides, concerning Justice to be administered to all persons which
were to be examined; which writing the Lord Chief Justice showed to the Lord
Mayor, and the rest of the Commissioners: and then he declared the Kings
justice, who albeit the many favors and honors which his Majesty had bestowed
upon the Lord of Sommerset, and his nearness to his person by reason of his
office; yet he had committed him prisoner to the Dean of Westminster under the
custody of Sr Oliver, and Sr John; and also had committed his Lady: so having
last of all demanded again of the prisoner, if he would put himself to be tried
by the Country, which he refused; the Court was adjourned until Monday
following at two of the clock in the afternoon.

The second Arraignment of Richard Weston.
ON Monday the 23 Oct. 1615. to which day the Court was adjourned by the said
Commission; afer Proclamation made, the Jury of life and death called the
prisoner, Weston was set to the Bar, and Mr Fanshaw Clerk of the Crown,
declared to him that he had been formerly arraigned, and pleaded not guilty: so
he demanded of him how he would be tried? whereunto the prisoner answered, by
God and his Country; and thereupon the Jury being sworn, the Indictment being
read, as before, Sir Lawr. Hide the Queens Attorney, being of the Council for
the King, having briefly rehearsed the effect of the Indictment, showed how
that he must necessarily mention others that were guilty of the same fact,
wherein if any other man were touched, their cause it was, and not he that
touched them.

And therefore Weston being but a stranger to Sir Tho Overbury, and one who by
himself could reap no benefit by his death, it was against all reason he would
do it himself, therefore (said he) I must needs open the whole plot; and having
first declared the worth and honesty of Sir Tho. Overb. showed his familiarity
with the Lord of Rochester, and how he often willed him to forbear the company
of the Lady Essex, tearming her a vile and base woman, which stirred up the
anger and malice of the Countess against him.

And afterward the King intended for the honor and preferment of Sir Tho.
Overb. to send him upon an Embassage; whereunto he was willing, but was dealt
with, and persuaded by Rochester to disobey the Kings direction and counsel,
with promises that he would bear him out; upon which contempt Sir Thomas was
committed to the Tower 22 April 1613. Sir William Wade heing Lieutenant of the
Tower; and the 6. of May following, Sir William was removed, and Sir Ier. Elvis
put in his place.

And the very next day after, Weston by the procurement of the Countess, was
preferred to the service of the Lieutenant, and to be Keeper of Sir Tho. Overb.
which Weston had been servant to Mrs. Turner, and the only agent in conveying
letters and messages between Roch. and the Countess; and he whose office
should have been to save and keep, was now appointed to kill and murder him.

He showed how the very same day of his entertainment at the Tower, he was sent
for to the Countess, who promised him that if he would give Sir Thomas a Water
that should be delivered to him, he should be well rewarded; and she bad him
not taste of it himself.

And that the ninth or May aforesaid, the said water was secretly sent from the
Countess to Weston by his son; and the same night Weston meeting the
Lieutenant, with Sir Thomas's supper in one hand, and the Glass in the other,
he demanded of him, Sir, shall I give it him now? whereupon the Lieutenant took
him aside, and dissuaded him so far forth, that he confessed he thanked God on
his knees that he had met with him: But Mr. Attorney observed this
notwithstanding, that the Lieutenant did let him go away with the poison; and
albeit he now denies he ever gave the poison, yet said he did deliver it: He
confesses to Mrs. Turner he had done it, saying, It made him very sick, and to
vomit often, demanding of her his reward; she answered; he was not to have it
till Sir Tho. was dead. Then he showed, 30. June following a certain powder was
sent in a Letter to Sir Tho. from Roch. persuading him not to fear, though it
made him sick, for that should be his reason to move the King for his
enlargement. And that the 14 September. Weston and the Apothecary ministered the
Glyster to Sir Tho. which gave him 60. stools and vomits, and that he dyed the
next day, remembering the botches and blisters on his body being dead. He showed
how Weston came to Mrs. Turner for his reward, which was deferied till his
death; and that he had received in secret from the Countess by Mrs. Turner at
several times for his reward 180. l. and that the Apothecary had for his reward
20. l. all which Weston had confessed to be true.

Then remembering how ignominiously they buried him, not suffering any to see
him for fear he should be dug up again, and without any Coroners inquest
that should be found: And thus he ended his speech.

And all this opened and set forth by Mr. Attorney, Mr. War only added thus
much, which he desired the Jury to consider, that Weston was servant to Mrs.
Turner when Sir Tho. was committed, and then he was entertained and made Keeper
to Sir Tho. and having dispatched his business, Sir Tho. being dead and
poisoned, he stays no longer at the Tower, but returns again to his Mrs.
Turner.

Then the Lord chief Justice exhorted the Jury to take God before their eyes,
with equal balance to weigh as well the answer of the prisoner as the proofs
and examinations against him, declaring unto them how quietly and freely he had
examined him without any menacing, or threatening, or rough usage, which the
prisoner confessed; and my Lord, for matter of Law, satisfied the Jury, that
albeit in the Indictment it be said to be Rosacar, white Arsnick, Mercury
sublimate, yet Jury were not to expect so precise proof in that point, showing
how impossible it were to convict a poysoner, who uses not to take any
witnesses to the composing of this slibber sauces; wherefore he declares the
Law in the like case, as if a man be indicted for murdering a man with a
dagger, and it fall out upon evidence to have been done with a sword, or with a
Rapier, or with neither, but with a staff; in this case the instrument
skilleth not, so that the Jury find the murder; and so in the Prisoners case,
if they would be satisfied of the poisoning, it skilleth not with what,
therefore he required them to attend the proofs.

Then were read first the Examinations of Lawr. Davis as at the first
Arraignment, then of Henry Payton, both servants to Sir Tho. then of Weston
himself formerly read; the examination of Sir David VVood taken the 21. October.
1615. since the first Arraignment. He says he had obtained the Kings consent
to a suit, for which he was a Petitioner, and that he was crossed by Roch. and
Sir Tho. Overb. that for certain words he had received from Sir Tho. he
intended to bastinado him; that his suit would have been worth 2200. l. and
that Roch. would not let it pass unless he might have 1200. l.

That the Lady Essex sent for this examinant upon the day that the King and
Queen went to Roches^. with the Lady Eliz. and told him she understood he had
received much wrong from Sir Tho. Overb. and that he was a Gent. that could
revenge himself, and that Sir Tho. had much wronged her; and Sir David
answered, that Sir Tho. had refused him the Field; she persuaded him to kill
him, and promised him for his reward -- and protection from his enemies, which
he refused, saying, He would be loath to hazard going to Tyborn upon a woman's
word; but she still persuaded him he might easily do it, as he returned late
home from Sir Charles VVilmots in his Coach.

Then were read the Examinations of Sir Tho. Monson and Mrs. Turner, as at the
first Arraignment.
NExt, the Examination of Weston before the Lord Zouch, Sir Ralph VVinwood,
Sir Tho. Parry, and Sir Foulk Grevill, at the Duchy house 21. September. 1615.
where Weston did confess he was preferred to the keeping of Sir Tho. Overbury
by Mrs. Turner upon the means and request of Sir Tho. Monson to the Lieutenant,
and that she told him he should be well rewarded: and being confronted with a
relation in writing which Sir Ier. Elvis had made to the King, as touching Sir
Tho. Overbury, he confessed the same to be true.

The Examination of the Lieutenant, taken 5. October. 1615.
HE says, that having conferred with his servants about the time of Westons
coming to the Tower, he found it to be the very next day after he was made
Lieutenant, and had possession of the Tower, and that he had Letters from Sir
Tho. Monson that Weston might be Keeper to Sir Tho. Overb. which Letters he
has lost; and Sir Tho. Monson told him the chief purpose of Westons keeping
Sir Tho. Overb. was to suffer no Letters or other message to pass to or from,
and to that purpose he advised the Lieutenant.

Westons Examination, 5. of October, 1615.
HE confesses, that the next day he was preferred to the Tower, he had the
keeping of Sir Tho. Overb. and soon after he received the glass by his son
secretly from the Countess, and that the Lieutenant told him all the Tarts came
likewise from her; and he confesses, that the Countess willed him to give them
to Sir Tho. but not to taste of them himself.

Weston examined, 1. October. 1615.
Confesses, that Mrs. Turn. appointed him to come to White Hall to the
Countess the next day that he was at the Tower, and that he went, and that the
Countess did request him to give Sir Tho. Overb. what she should deliver him,
but not to drink of it himself; she promised to give him a good reward, and he
suspected it was poison, and he received the glass by his son, and told the
Lieutenant of it, who did rebuke him; and he set the Glass in a little study.
He confesses he told Mrs. Turner he had given it him, and demanded his reward.
That Mr. James and Mr. Rawl. my Lord of Somersets men came often to know of him
what Tarts, Jellies, or Wine Sir Tho. would have, and they brought diverse times
Tarts and Jellies, whereof he did eat.

The Confession of the Lieutenant to his Majesty. Your Majesty's servant Sir
Jervas Elvis.
AFter Weston was placed in the Tower, he met with me with Sir Tho. supper and
the glass, and asked me, Sir Shall I give it him now? wherein I protest unto
your Majesty my ignorance, as I would also be glad to protest the same to the
world; so I privately conferred with Weston, and by this means made him assured
unto me, and knew all, but dissuaded; and as Weston has since the death of Sir
Tho. confessed unto me, that the Glyster was his overthrow, and the Apothecary
had 20. l. for administering it.

Here the Lord Chief Justice observed by this question of Weston to the
Lieutenant, Sir shall I give it him now? that it was presently agreed and
plotted before what should be done, and that nothing more was doubted on, but
the time when it should be done.

The testimony of Lawrence Davis, taken upon Oath before Cook and Crew.
HE affirms that Weston delivered him a Letter from Sir Tho. Overb. to Roch.
the effect whereof was, that he would do his endeavor in being a means of
friendship between Roch. and some others, but as touching the Marriage with the
Countess of Essex, he would never give his consent: and also bringing a Letter
from Roch* to Sir Tho. Monson, he delivered it to Weston, and a paper of white
powder fell out, which Roch. persuaded Sir Tho. Overb. to eat, and not to
fear, though it made him sick, for that should be a means for his enlargement,
so they put the powder into the Letter again: He says, he saw some part of the
powder in Westons hand after the death of Sir Tho. Overbury.

The Examination of Simon Weston and Paul de la Bell as at the first
Arraignment, and Giles Rawlings Esquire, 15. October. 1615.
Says, that upon the bruit of poisoning of Sir Tho. Overb. being taxed of
diverse for that he stirred not in the matter, Sir Tho. being his kinsman, and
means of his preferment, he did of himself prefer a Petition to the King, that
the cause might be referred to the Judges of the Law for ordinary course of
Justice, rather then to the Lords of the Council, by them to be examined; of
which he had a gracious Answer, and says, that of 14. days before the death
of Sir Tho. he could never be suffered to see him either in his chamber, or out
of the window, which Weston said was the commandment of the Lords and the
Lieutenant.

And here the Lord Chief Justice observed what a scandal they put upon his
Majesty and the State, that a Gentleman and a Freeman being only committed
upon contempt, should more straightly and closely be kept then a Traitor or
Bondslave, so that neither his father, brother, or friend might possibly see
him: and to that point Mr. Overbury, father to Sir Tho. swear, being present in
Court, who said that his son being prisoner in the Tower, and himself not being
suffered to have access unto him, he found at last that Roch. was the man that
withstood it.

The Lieutenants Examination, the 5. of October.
Says, that after the death of Sir Tho. Overb. Weston told him that he was
neglected by the Countess, and demanding his reward, Mrs. Turner told him the
Countess had no money; but afterward he confessed he had received some, and
should receive more. That Mr. James told him, Somerset would reward him for the
pains he took with Sir Tho. He says the Tarts were sent from the Countess to
Sir Tho. which looked ill-favouredly, and the Jellies with a little standing
would be furred, and thinks they were poisoned. Also Weston told him that
the Apothecary had 20. l. for giving the Glyster, and that he was poisoned with
the Glyster.

Hence was observed as well by the Court as the Queens Attorney, that Weston
was not single in his Confession; but whenever he had confessed any thing in
any of his Examinations, it was likewise confirmed by the Examination of
others, as the Lieutenant and his son.

The Examination of William Goare, one of the Sheriffs of London.
Says Weston being in his custody, he often persuaded him to put himself to be
tried by his Country, Weston telling him he would first kill himself, and ask
God forgiveness afterward: and said, he hoped they would not make a Net to
catch little birds, and let the great ones go.

Then Mr. War craving leave of the Court to speak, pro^^^^^ conscience he never
found a business prosecuted so by degrees, which were the ground of Sir Tho.
his overthrow; he urged the evidence in the examination of Sir David VVood, and
showed the reasons of the malice against him to be, for that he was so great an
impediment to affections: then he made the dependency Mrs. Turner had to the
Lady, and Weston to Mrs. Turner, and how they all concluded to kill Sir Tho.
Overbury; the like whereof (he said) our Fathers never saw before us: and he
lamented much the place from whence the poison came should be from the Court,
the place (said he) from whence all men expected their safeties and protection.
Lastly, he observed the finger of God even in this, that the poison had
scarcely been suspected at all, or enquired after, had it not been for the
extraordinary strange things appearing after his death; which was the first
only cause of suspicion and muttering.

The evidence being given, Weston was demanded what he could say for himself,
who although he had before confessed all his examinations to be true, yet he
seemed to excuse himself in a kind of ignorance or unawares; he said he
received the Glass, and thought it was not good, but denied the giving of it
to Sir Thomas: being demanded why he accused one Franklin for delivering to him
the said Glass from the Countess (from whom it was sent) he confessed indeed
it was to save his child: And finally, could say nothing that had any color
of material or substantial point to excuse or argue innocence in him; so the
Court referred him to the Jury, who went together, and within short space
returned, being agreed upon their verdict, and there at the Bar gave in, that
Weston was guilty of the fellonies of murdering and poisoning of Sir Tho.
Overbury; and then the Clark of the Crown demanded of him what he could say for
himself, why Judgment should not be pronounced against him according to the
Law. To which he answered, he referred himself to my Lord and the Country; and
then the Lord Chief Justice before he pronounced sentence of death, spoke to
this effect, That for the duty of the place he must say somewhat, and that to
two several parties; first, to the auditory; secondly, to the prisoner; and
that which he spoke to the auditory, he divided into four parts, viz. 1 The
manifestation of the glory of God, and honor of the King. 2 The preventing of
other damned crimes of poisoning. 3 Answer to certain objections. 4 That there
is no practice of conspiracy in prosecution of the business.


1 For the first, he observed the finger of God in the manifestation, and
bringing to light of this matter, having slept two years, being shadowed with
Greatness, which cannot overcome the cry of the people; he observed also the
providence and goodness of God to put into the hearts of himself, and the rest
of the Judges the day of the last Arraigning, when the prisoner stood mute, not
to give judgment against him for that time, but deferred it till now; and how
in the mean time, it pleased his Majesty out of his gracious care and pity, to
send to the prisoner, first the Bishop of London, next the Bishop of Ely, to
admonish and persuade him for the saving of his soul, who after each of them
had spent two hours with him, and when all the means of man not prevailing with
him, it pleased God (when they had left him) to move his heart so, that now he
did put himself to be tried by his Country; by which means, using VVestons own
words, he said, the greatest Flies shall not escape, but receive their
punishment. For conclusion of this first point, he lastly observed, Divinum
quiddam in vulgi opinione, for that so many uncertain rumors touching this
case, at last proved to be true.

Secondly, he declared how for previntion of this damned crime of poisoning,
Justice was the golden mean; and declared his Majesty's resolution strictly to
execute justice for that Treason, and he used this saying, Nemo prudens, etc.
and desired God that this president of Overburies might be an example, and
terror against this horrible crime; and therefore it might be called the great
Oyer of Poisoning.

Thirdly; he said that at the Arraignment were certain Critiques who had given
out, the prisoner should deny his Examinations, and found so much fault for
that the Examinations were read, the prisoner standing mute: but for the first,
how untrue it was, all the world saw, the prisoner here confessing them all
being read and showed unto him. And for the second, besides that it was
exceeding discreet and convenient, the world should receive some satisfaction
in a cause of that nature, he cited and showed what by the Laws of the Land
they ought and were bound to do, notwithstanding the greatness of any that
might thereby be impeached, of whom he said, although this was Vnicum crimen,
yet it was not unicus crimon.

Fourthly, as touching the supposed practice or conspiracy, he solemnly
protested to God he knew none, nor of any semblance or color thereof; and
therefore he much inveighed against the baseness and unworthiness of such as
went about so untruly and wickedly to slander the course of Justice: and so he
came last of all to that which he had to speak of Weston the prisoner.

First, touching the wickedness of the fact, he very seriously exhorted him to
an unfeined confession and contrition for the same; declaring unto him how that
his confession would be a satisfaction to God and the world, if by faith and
true repentance he would lay hold upon the merits of his Savior. He persuaded
him that no vain hope, (which is a witch) should keep him back from giving
satisfaction to the world, by discovering the Great ones; assuring him that
after this life, as death left him, so judgment should find him.

And lastly, taking occasion there to remember this poisoning to have been a
Popish trick, which he instanced by the example of Gurnandus di Birlanus
mentioned 22 Ed. 1. Squire, that attempted to poison Queen Elizabeth's Saddle;
Lopez, and Mrs. Turner: and proceeded to give Judgment, which was, That the
prisoner should be carried from thence to the place whence he came, and from
thence to Tiburn, there to be hanged by the neck till he were dead.

Justice being given, the Lord Chief Justice commanded that the prisoner might
have convenient respect, and the company of some godly learned men to instruct
him for his souls health.

The Arraignment of Anne Turner a widow, at the Kings Bench Bar at Westminster,
7. Novem. 1615.
THe Indictment whereupon Richard Weston took his trial, being repeated
verbatim; she was Indicted for comforting, aiding, and assisting the said
Weston in the poisoning to death of Sir Thomas Overbury; to which she pleaded
not guilty, putting her self upon God and the Country: whereupon a very
sufficient Jury of two Knights, and the rest Esquires and Freeholders of
Middle sex were sworn and impannelled; for the trial whereof, Sir Tho. Fouler
was Foreman.

The Lord Chief Justice told her, that women must be covered in Church, and
not when they are Arraigned, and so caused her to put off her Hat; which done,
she covered her hair with her handkerchiffe, being before dressed in her hair,
and her Hat over it.

Sir Lawr. Hide the Queens Attorney, opened the matter much to the effect as he
did at Westons Arraignment; showing the wickedness and hainousness of
poisoning: he showed further, there was one Dr. Forman dwelling at Lambeth, who
dyed very suddenly, and a little hefore his death, desired that he might be
buried very deep in the grave, or else (said he) I shall fear you all. To him in
his life time often resorted the Countess of Essex, and Mrs Turner, calling him
Father; their cause of coming was, that by the force of Magic he should
procure the now Earl of Somerset then Viscount Rochester to love her; and Sir
Arthur Mainwaring to love Mrs Turner, by whom (as it was there related) she had
three Children: About this business the Countess wrote two Letters, the one to
Mrs. Turner, the other to Doctor Forman as follows: The Countesses Letter to
Mrs. Turner.
SWeet Turner, I am out of all hope of any good ^n this work; for my Father,
Mother, and Brother said I should lie with him; and my Brother Howard was here,
and said he would not come from this place all this Winter; so that all comfort
is gone: and which is worst of all, my Lord has complained, he has not lain
with me, and I would not suffer him to use me: my Father and Mother are angry,
but I had rather die a thousand times over; for besides the sufferings, I shall
lose his love if I lie with him, I will never desire to see his face, if my
Lord do that unto me: my Lord is very well as ever he was, and so you may see
in what a miserable case I am; you must send the party word of all: he sent me
word all should be well; but I shall not be so happy as the Lord to love me: as
you have taken pains ever for me, so now do all you can; for never so unhappy
as now, for I am not able to endure the miseries that are coming on me; but I
cannot be happy as long as this man lives: therefore pray for me, for I have
need; but I should be better if I had your company to ease my mind: let him
know this ill news; if I can get this done, you shall have as much money as you
can demand, and this is fair play.

Your Sister. Fran. Essex.
Burn this Letter.

A Letter from the Countess to Doctor Forman.
SWeet Father, I must still crave your love, although I hope I have it, and
shall deserve it better hereafter; Remember the Galls, for I fear, though I
have yet no cause but to be confident in you, yet I desire to have it: as it is
remaining yet well, so continue it still, if it be possible; and if you can,
you must send me some good fortune, alas I have need of it; keep the Lord still
to me, for that I desire; Be careful that you name me not to any body, for we
have so many spies, that you must use all your wits, and all little enough, for
the world is against me, and the Heavens favor me not, only happy in your
love: I hope you will do me good, and if I be ungrateful, let all mischief come
upon me: My Lord is lusty and merry, and drinks with his men, and all the
content he gives me is to abuse me, and use me as dogedly as before. I think I
shall never be happy in this world, because he hinders my good, and will ever:
So remember (I beg for Gods sake) and get me from this vile place.

Your affectionate loving Daughter, FRAN. ESSEX.




Give Turner warning of all, but not the Lord, I would not have any thing come
out for fear of my Lord Treasurer, for so they may tell my Father and Mother,
and fill their ears full of toys.

There was also showed in Court certain pictures of a man and woman in
copulation made in Lead, as also a mould of Brass, wherein they were cast: A
black Scarf also full of white crosses, which Mrs. Turner had in her custody.
At the showing of these and enchanted papers and other pictures in Court, there
was heard a great crack from the Scaffolds, which caused a great fear, tumult,
and confusion amongst the spectators, and throughout the Hall, every one
fearing hurt, as though the Devil had been present, and growing angry to have
his workmanship shown by such as were not his own scholars; and this terror
continuing about a quarter of an hour, silence proclaimed, the rest of the
cunning tricks were likewise showed. Doctor Formans wife being Administrix of
her husband, found Letters in packets, by which much was discovered; she was in
Court, and deposed, that Mrs. Turner came to her house immediately after the
death of her husband, and did demand certain pictures which were in her
husbands study, namely one picture in wax, very sumptuously appareled in silk
and sattins, as also one other picture sitting in form of a naked woman,
spreading and laying forth her hair in a Looking-glass, which Mrs. Turner did
confidently affirm to be in a box, and that she knew in what part of the study
they were.

Mrs. Forman further deposes, that Mrs. Turner and her husband would be
sometimes three or four hours locked up in his study together: She did depose
further, her husband had a Ring would open like a Watch.

There was also showed a Note in Court made by Doctor Forman, and written in
parchment, signifying what Ladies loved what Lords in the Court, but the Lord
Chief Justice would not suffer it to be read in open Court.

Mrs. Turner sent Margaret her Maid to Mrs. Forman, and wished that all such
Letters and papers as did concern the Earl of Somerset and the Countess of
Essex should be burned, or any other great personages, telling her that the
Councels Warrant should come to search the study, and that all his goods might
be seized; whereupon she and her Maid Margaret, with the consent of Mrs.
Forman, burnt diverse Letters and papers, but that she kept some without their
privitie.

There were also enchantments showed in Court written in parchment, wherein
were contained all the names of the blessed Trinity mentioned in the
Scriptures; And in another Parchment Cross B. Cross C. Cross D. Cross E. in a
third likewise in parchment were written all the names of the holy Trinity, as
also a figure in which was written this word Christus, and upon the parchment
was fastened a little piece of the skin of a man.

In some of these parchments the Devils had particular names, who were conjured
to torment the Lord Somerset and Sir Arthur Manwaring, if their loves should
not continue, the one to the Countess, the other to Mrs. Turner; Mrs. Turner
also confessed, that Doctor Savorius was used in succession after Forman, and
practiced many sorceries upon the Earl of Essex his person.

Mrs. Turner being almost close prisoner in one of the Sheriffs houses in
London, before she was brought to the Bar, knew not that Weston was executed;
but by the proceedings having understanding thereof, and hearing diverse
examinations read, it so much dejected her, that in a manner she spoke nothing
for her self, also examinations and witnesses Viva voce that were produced at
Westons arraignment, and diverse others were read again, as the Examinations of
Edward Pain, Io. Wright, Robert Freeman, Symcock Rawlings, Payton, Williams:
one of these Examinations gave in evidence, that one Franklyn being an
Apopothecary and Drugster, was the provider of all the poisons given to Sir
Tho. Overbury.

A Chyrurgeon there deposed, that he cured Franklyn of the Pox, and that at
several times he demanded of his Chyrurgion what was the strongest poison. The
Chyrurgeon demanded what he would do with it, Franklyn replies, Nothing but for
his experience, and to try conclusions.

Another Examination of one Merser who had conference with the said Franklyn,
calling him Cosen, who demanded of the examinant, What news? he answered, Ill
news: I am sorry that my old Lord and Masters son is found insufficient, and
not able to content the Lady. Franklyn replies, I have a hand in that business,
I have a great friend of my Lady Essex, she allows me 2. s. 6. d. a day for my
Boat-hire, and 10. s. a week for my diet, I could have any money if I would.
Merser replies, but Cousin, how can God bless you in this business? Franklyn
answered, Let them talk of God that have to do with him: my Lord of Somerset
and the Countess will bear me out in any thing I do; if you have any suit
wherein you may do your self any good, and I may gain by it, I will warrant you
I will get it.

Francis deposes, that Franklyn married his sister, and that he thinks in
his conscience she was poisoned; upon some coffeehouse he heard him say, he
would not be hanged for never a whore or queen of them all. The Lord Chief
Justice made a speech upon diverse examinations there read, that the Earl of
Somerset gave directions, that of the powder he sent to Sir Thomas Overbury
that which should be left should be brought back again, his pretext was that it
should make him sick, which should be the ground to make the King grant his
liberty, saying further, it would do him good: and he had Tarts and Jellies
sent him likewise by the Countess, with express commandment that none must eat
of them but Sir Tho. Overb. saying, they would do him no harm.

At another time the Countess sent Tarts, Jellies, and Wine, with directions
that those which had been formerly sent, should be brought back again, and
those last brought should be given him at supper, and then all should be well;
but directions given that neithe Lieutanant nor his wife might eat of them,
but they might drink of the wine, for in the Tarts and Jellies there might be
letters, but in the wine none; and afterward it was openly related and proved
by diverse examinations, that those words Letters were private tokens between
the Countess and the Lieutenant, and Weston to give notice what things were
poisoned, and what not.

In the Examination that was of Weston, it was related, that Mr. James told
him that the Earl his Master would pay him for his pains taken with Sir Tho.
Overb. Then the Lord Chief Justice gave in charge to the Jury concerning the
evidence they had formerly told them, and heard that Weston at his Examination
confessed all he had said formerly was true.

He further related what a great vexation and grief it was to the King, that
Somerset only by making use of his favors and love, so foul a fact was done,
as first to be the occasion to put Sir Tho. Overb. to employments for the
Embassage of Russia. 2. To make him refuse them, and to give right cause for
his commitment. 3. To bear him in hand that he would work his liberty, but
still aggravated and labored the contrary, and gave directions to the
Lieutenant to look surely to him, and to keep him close prisoner, and that he
should send to none of his friends, or they to him, urging great matters
against him.

Sir Tho. Monson was often employed to give directions to the Lieutenant
therein, a most barbarous course to be so dealt withal only for a contempt;
concluding that Sir Tho. Overb. was a close prisoner to all his friends, but
open to all his enemies; such as Somerset would have, or send to him.

The Lord Chief Justice told Mrs. Turner she had the seven deadly sins, viz. a
Whore, a Bawd, a Sorcerer, a Murderer, a Witch, a Papist, a Felone, the
daughter of the Devil: Forman wishing her to repent, and to become the servant
of Jesus Christ, and to pray him to cast out those seven Devils. She desires
the Lord Chief to be good to her, saying, she was ever brought up with the
Countess of Somerset, and had been of a long time her servant, and knew not
there was poison in any of those things sent to Sir Tho. Overb. then the Jury
went forth, and not long after returned, finding her guilty, who being asked
what she could say for her self why judgment should not be pronounced against
her, she only desired favor, but could not speak any thing for weeping.

Then Judge Crook made another grave Speech, exhorting her to repentance, and
to prepare her self ready for death, and that the little time which should be
assigned her to live, she should not spend it either in labor or imagination
to get her life, for that hope was but a VVitch: upon conclusion of which
Speech he gave Judgment, and told her she had a very honorable Trial by such
men as he had not seen in his time for one of her rank and quality, and so was
delivered to the Sheriff.

Upon the wednesday following she was brought from the Sheriffs in a Coach to
Newgate, and was there put into a Cart, and casting money often amongst the
people as she went, she was carried to Tyborn, where she was executed, and
whither many men and women of fashion came in Coaches to see her dye, to whom
she made a speech, desiring them not to rejoice at her fall, but to take
example by her: she exhorted them to serve God, and abandon ill company, and
all other sins, relating her breeding with the Countess of Somerset, having had
no other means to maintain her self and her children, but what came from the
Countess; And said further, that when her hand was once in this business, she
knew the revealing of it would be her overthrow; by which, with other like
speeches, and great penitence there showed, she moved the Spectators to great
pity and grief for her.

The proceedings against Sir Iervas Elvis, Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower, at
his Arraignment at Guild Hall, the 16. of November. 1615.
THe form of the Indictment was, the malicious aiding, comforting, and abetting
of Weston in the poisoning and murdering of Sir Tho. Overb. whereupon it was
laid against him as follows.

First, when Weston received the Vial of poison of two inches long, to give
Sir Tho. he having the Glass in the one hand, and the broth for Sir Tho. in the
other, meeting the Lieutenant, asking him this, Sir shall I give it him now?
The Lieutenant reproved him, yet that night he gave it him in his broth, Ergo,
the Lieutenant knew of the practice and poisoning of Sir Tho. Overb. Et qui non
propulsat injuriam cum possit eam infert, Cicero.

After this was known to be poison, yet he kept Weston still, he favored,
countenanced, and graced him, and one time sent him a cup of Sack, and bad his
man tell him he loved him as well as ever he did; all this while he paid him no
wages, and as soon as Sir Thomas Overbury dyed, Weston was removed.

The Countess writ a Letter to the Lieutenant, with the Letter she sent
poisoned Tarts to Overbury, and Wine to the Lieutenants wife, and bad him give
the Tarts to Overbury, for there were Letters in them; but his wife and
children might drink the Wine, for she was sure there were no Letters in it.

The Earl of Northampton writ a Letter to the Lieutenant concerning the
imprisonment of Overbury; the said Earl writ three Letters to Rochester
contaiing these words: SWeet Lord, think not I find pain in that which gives
me sweetest pleasure, which is any thing which falls from your Pen. Three
things concur to my exceeding joy in your worthy Letters; proof of your love,
comfort of your words, and judgment in your writing: you may believe the words
of him that will rather dye then flatter you, my heart is full of the love of
you; your Characters are no pain for me to peruse, being as well acquainted
with your hand, as mine own: the pain is no more then the cracking of a Nut for
the sweet kernel, or my Neeces pain in the silver-dropping streams of your Pen.
(There the Lord Chief Justice left off reading for the baudiness of it; then
after in the Letter followed:) I spent two hours yesterday in prompting the
Lieutenant with cautions and considerations; observing with whom he is to deal,
that he might the better act his part for the adventure in which he deals.

Henry Northampton.


Another Letter to Rochester.
SWeet Lord, I cannot deliver unto you with what caution and consideration,
etc. and the Lieutenant looking to his business, which concerns me more then
Text affords, that marching in his affairs, I shall hold him discreet, and love
him better whilst I live for this his conclusion, for this Negro can no more
change his skin, then the Leopard his spots.

Hen. Northampton.


Another Letter to Rochester.
SWeet Lord, Overbury being viewed, there was found in his arm an Issue, and on
his belly twelve kernels like to break to issue, each as broad as three pence,
as big as a small button; an Issue in his back with a tawny plaster on it,
this was strange and ugly, he stank intolerably, insomuch that he was cast into
a Coffin with a loose sheet over him: God is gracious in cutting off such ill
instruments from the factious crew; if he had come forth, they would have made
use of him. Thus sweet Lord wishing you all increase of happiness and honor, I
end

Your Lordships more then any man's, Hen. Northampton.




The Lieutenant writ a Letter to Northampton, certifying him, that he undertook
Sir Tho. Overbury according to his Instructions; that as soon as he came to the
place, Sir Thomas protested his innocence upon the Bible, and then (quoth he)
he asked me what they meant to do with him? I answered, they mean to refine
you, that your pureness may appear the better: after I walked with him in his
Chamber, and advised him to give way to the match between Rochester and the
Countess, but then he grew hot against your Lordship, and the Countess of
Suffolk, saying if he were the Countess of Suffolks prisoner (as he thought he
was) then (said he) let her know that I care as little to dye, as she to be
cruel. The Countess I find to be joined with you in this plot, though the
Chamberlain knows not of it, nor any one else: but Rochesters part I shall most
fear until I see the event to be clearly conveyed: and so he concluded his
Letter.

The Answer of Sir Jervas Elvis to the points proposed.
MY Lord, before I answer the matter of charge against me, let me remember your
Lordship of one speech I learned from your mouth, I have heard you speak it at
the Council Table, and at the Assizes in the Country; that when a prisoner
stands at the Bar for his life comfortless, allowed no counsel, but strong
counsel against him, perchance affrighted with the fear of death, his wife and
his children to be cast out of doors, and made to seek their bread, you have
always pitied the cause of such an one, you have protested you had rather hang
in hell for mercy to such an one, then for judgment.

My Lord, you have not observed your own rule in my cause, you have paraphrased
upon every examination, you have aggravated every evidence, and applied it to
me; so that I stand clearly condemned, before I be found guilty: if I were so
vile a man as your Lordship conceives me, I were unworthy of any favor, but I
hope your Lordship shall not find it.

So I will deny nothing that has evidence of truth against me; I will not tell
a lie to save my life: and beseech your Lordship so to conceive of me, move
your charity toward me.

Then desired he the Court, that the heads of the Accusations might be
collected by the Council of the King, which were the same which were mentioned
before, to which he severally answers:

To the first, Shall I give him now? he answered, That when Weston asked him
the question, he saw no poison in his hand and therefore (said he) in Westons
and my Examinations the question was, Shall I give it him now? not, Shall I
give him this now? for there is a great difference between hoc, and id, in
matters of prevention.

But further, when Weston had told me that it was poison which he meant to
give, I reproved him, and beat him down with Gods Judgments: nay I humbled him
so, that he thanked God and me on his knees, and told me that he and his had
cause to bless God for me, for that I withheld him from doing that act; and
if you call this comforting and abetting, to terrify a man for his sins, and
to make him confess his faults to God, and to abhor and detest the act, then
was I an abettor, and comforter of Weston.

To the second, after I had thus terrified him with Gods Judgments, and saw
him cast down for his offense, I could do him no better office then to raise
him up, who was thus cast down, and therefore favored him; I showed him
kindness, I drank to him, to the intent I might encourage the intentions of his
mind, which I found then in abhorring the fact; and for that I gave him no
wages, it is true; I took him from the commendations of my Lord of Northampton,
and Sir Tho. Monson, whom I took to be my friends, and thought they would
commend no man to be a Keeper, which might endamage me.

To the third, I never knew any other meaning of the Countesses words in her
Letters, but the bare literal meaning; and sure (quoth he) after I had received
the Tarts, and they stood a while in my Kitchen, saw them so black and foul,
and of such strange colors, that I did cause my Cook to throw them away and to
make other Tarts for him.

To the fourth he says, the Earl of Northamptons Letter to him, was not any
thing touching the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, but for a close restraint,
to the end that Overbury might agree to their purposes concerning the marriage
to be had between Rochester and the Countess: if the Earl of Northhampton had
any plot to take away his life, I was not of his counsel, nor had knowledge
therein.

To the fifth, it is said, I received him according to my instructions; I meant
no other thing then I had delivered before, which was concerning the closeness
of his imprisonment; but being asked what he meant by these words, Rochesters
part I shall greatly fear, until I see the event to be clearly carried: In
this he staggered and wavered much, and gave his answer, It was long since I
writ this Letter, and for the particular circumstance that induced me to this
speech, I cannot now call to memory: but sure I am, (knowing my self to be
innocent) I satisfy my remembrance, so that I meant nothing concerning the
taking away of his life: but because I was a stranger to Rochester, and had
heard, and known of that great league that was between them, I might well
think, suspect, and fear whether he would always continue those projects for
his restraint. These were the answers he made to his accusations: and after he
had made many protestations betwixt God and his soul of innocence, in the
mallicious plotting and abetting of Overburies death, he appealed himself to
the Jury, and said,

I will prove unto you by many infallible and unanswerable reasons, that I
could not be aider and complotter with Weston in this poisoning: first, I made
a free and voluntary discovery of it my self, I was not compelled; will any man
imagine I would discover a thing wherein I am not able to clear my self? Nature
is more kind then to be its own accuser.

Besides, that my clearness might more appear and remain in the world without
any suspicion, I proceeded and accused the murderer Weston. It had been a
senseless thing in me (if I had not thought my self clear) to have accused
him, who might have done as much for me. Nay Weston himself proved me to be an
honest man before the Chancellor of the Exchequer, for he confessed to him and
others being present, that he thought the Lieutenant knew not of the poison;
and in his Examination before the Lord Chief Justice, and Sergeant Crew, being
asked the meaning of those words ( Shall I give it him now?) he answered, That
he thought that those which had set him on work, had acquainted the Lieutenant
with their plot.

And also I was so confident in mine own innocence, that I told my Lord Chief
Justice, and my Lord Zouch, that the way to make Weston confess, and to
discover all, was by fair and gentle entreaty of him; and so by this means they
might search to the very bottom of his heart: in this the Lord Chief Justice
witnessed with him.

And after Sir Thomas was dead, Weston and Mrs. Turner were sent to me to know
whether I had any inkling of the death of Sir Thomas: what need they have made
this question, if I had known any thing thereof?

Also that which I do know concerning the poisoning of Sir Thomas, was after
his death by the relation of Weston; and I am here indicted as accessory before
the fact, when I knew nothing till after the fact.

After that he had confirmed these reasons by sundry-proofs and witnesses, he
went further in his own defense. If I be in the plot, my Lord Treasurer is, I
have his Letter to show in it, he called me to his lodging, and said, The plots
you know them as well as I. The plots were only to repair her honor: my wife
has the Letters from the Lord Treasurer and Munson: for these plots I will run
willingly to my death, if circumstances be knit with any manner of fact.

He proceeded further, and told the Lord Chief Justice, that he spoke not this
to justify himself, so that no blemish or stain might cleave unto him, for
(said he) this visitation is sent me from God, and whether I live or dye, it is
the happiest affliction to my soul that I ever received: I have laid open my
whole heart from blood guiltiness, I have not repented me other then for errors
of my judgment in not detecting what I suspected, and yet I ask God
forgiveness for less sins, but of this I know no other then the gross error of
my judgment in not preventing it, when I saw such intendment and imagination
against him.

Then he put my Lord Chief Justice this question: If one that knows not of
any plot to poison a man, but only suspecteth, is no actor or contriver
himself, only imagines such a thing, whether such a one be accessory to the
Murder? for the words of the Indictment are abetting and comforting with
malice. Now if there be any man that charges me expressly or in direct terms
that I was an abetter; or if the Court shall think fit in this case that I have
put, that such a concealing without malice in an abetting, I refuse not to dye;
I am guilty: this was the sum of his speech.

Then the Lord Chief Justice replied, That to his knowledge he spoke no more
concerning the evidence then he could in conscience justify, which was only
to explain the evidence, and not wresting any thing in prejudice of his life.

But further, he told him, that two days before Sir Thomas dyed, you wished
his man to bring in his best Suit of hangings to hang his Chamber, which you
knew were your Fees: after he told him that his accusation of the Lord
Treasurer was very malicious; for in all the Examinations he had taken, in all
the exact search he could make for the finding out of the truth; he saw not
that honorable Gentleman any way touched. In conclusion, he told him, It is
not your deep protestations, and your appealing to God and his Throne, that can
sway a Jury from their evidence, which is not answered unto.

But to leave you without excuse, and to make the matter as clear as may be;
here is the Confession of Franklin, which he then drew out of his bosom,
saying, This poor man not knowing Sr Iervis should come to his Trial, this
morning he came unto me at five of the clock, and told me that he was much
troubled in his conscience, and could not rest all night, until he made his
Confession, and it is such an one (these were his words) as the eye of England
never saw, nor the ear of Christendom ever heard.

The Confession of James Franklin, 16. Novem. 1615.
MIstress Turner came to me from the Countess, and wished me from her to get
the strongest poison I could for Sr Th. Overbury* accordingly I brought seven
sorts; Aquafortis, White-Arsnick, Mercury, Great-spiders, Powder of Diamonds,
Lapis Costitus, Cantarides; all these were given to Sir Tho. at several times:
and further confesses, that the Lieutenant knew of these poisons; for that
appeared (said he) by many Letters which he writ to the Countess of Essex,
which I saw, and thereby knew that he knew of that matter; one of them I read
for the Countess, because she could not read it her self, in which the
Lieutenant used this speech: Madam, This Scab is like the Fox, the more he is
cursed, the better he fares: and other speeches.

Sir Tho. never eat white Salt, but there was White-Arsnick put into it; once
he desired Pigge, and Mrs. Turner put into it Lapis Costitus; the white powder
that was sent Sir Thomas in a Letter, he knew to be White-Arsnick, a very
deadly poison.

At another time he had two Partridges sent him from the Court, and water and
onyons being the sauce, Mrs. Turner instead of Pepper put in Cantarides, so
that there was scarce any thing that he did eat but there was some poison in
it; for these poisons the Countess sent me rewards, she sent me gold many times
by Mrs. Turner.

She afterward writ unto me to buy her more poisons: I went to her, and told
her, I was weary of it: I besought her upon my knees, that she would use me no
more in these matters; but she importuned me, bid me go, and enticed me with
fair speeches and rewards; so she overcame me, and did bewitch me.

The cause of this poisoning was, as the Countess told me, because Sir Thomas
would pry so far into the state, as he would put them down: he did also say,
that the toothless Maid trusty Margaret was acquainted with the poison: so was
Mrs. Turners man Stephen, so also Mrs. Horn, the Countesses own hand.

He says, on the marriage of the Countess with Somerset; she sent him twenty
pound by Mrs. Turner, and he was to have been paid by the Countess two hundred
pound per. an. during his life.

That he was urged and haunted two hundred several times at the least by the
Countess to do it against his conscience: he says, she was able to bewitch
any man: and then he wrought the love between Rochester and her, and that he
had twelve several Letters from her to prosecute it, and was to have two
hundred pound, to continue their love till the Marriage.

These are all the materials in Franklins Confession; to this Sir Iervis knew
not what to answer, or to make of his own Letters.

Then presently the Jury departed from the Bar, and presently after returned,
and found him guilty, and the Lord Chief Justice gave judgment, and he was
executed accordingly in manner following.

Sir Jervas his Confession.
ON Monday the 20. of Novem. 1615. he was executed upon Tower hill, upon a
Gibbet there set up of purpose about six of the clock in the morning (he being
arraigned in a black Suit and Jerkin with hanging sleeves, having on his head a
crimson satin Cap, from the top downwards, and round about laced, under that a
white linen Cap, with a border, and over that a black Hat with a broad
Ribbond, and a ruff Band thick couched with a lace, and a pair of
skie-coloured silk stockings, and a pair of three soaled shoes.)

He came on foot from Sheriff Goars house to the Gibbet, between Dr. Whiting,
and Dr. Felton, two of his Majesty's Chaplains, and coming to the Ladders
foot, he talked a word or two to the Executioner; then he went up the Ladder
four or five steps, the Executioner sitting over his head upon the top the of
the Gibbet; Sir Iervis finding the Ladder to stand too upright, for his case,
spoke to have it amended; which forthwith he coming down was done, being
fastened in the ground, and then he went up again six steps, where after a while
sitting, uttered to this, or the like effect.

NOble, Right worshipful, and others: I am here come as well to show, explain,
and unfold that which passed at the time of my Arraignment, to so many of you
as were present; as also to show that there I perceived I had lost the good
opinion of many in standing so long upon mine innocence, which was my fault I
confess, hoping now to recover the same, and your good charitable opinions of
me; which fault I then saw not, being blinded with my own error, which made me
account it no sin.

But since my condemnation, by the means and help of these two Gentlemen here
present (the Doctors) I was persuaded of the greatness of my sin, and that it
was so much the greater, by how much the more I did conceal it: which by Gods
mercy I perceiving, consulted not with flesh and blood, but thought it in this
my condemnation the best way for my souls health to reveal to the Omnipotent
and All-seeing God, the most secret and inward intentions and thoughts of my
deceitful heart; not once respecting the praises or dispraises of the world,
which I regard not at all.

It may not be some will say, That this place was most unfit for my execution,
appointed to terrify and daunt me so much the more; but (alas!) I fear not
death, place, nor any such like thing; for I account it the King and Councels
special favor, that I dye here, for that J requesting the same it was
granted, whereby J see now this Tower, late wherein J should have been called
to State business, and still might, if J had performed a more loyal service to
my King and Country then J did.

Next, in that J was not appointed to Tyburn, a place of more public reproach
then now J am brought to, being worthy to die by due and lawful Justice, in
prosecuting this bloody enormous act against a kind Gentleman, who deserved no
ill at my hands, nor any man's else, for ought J know.

But were it J had not trusted him who was a most perfidious wretch, J had not
fallen into this shame, which may warn all here present to take heed whom they
trust in a bad matter; and to admonish you that are trusted never to break
honest and just fidelity.

I was by diverse tricks drawn to this action, which I received from the Earl
of Northampton, and Sir Thomas Monson, and none other; but had I remembered the
115. verse of the 119. Psalm, and said with the holy Prophet, Away from me ye
wicked, for I will keep the commandments of my God: Then had J refused such
like tricks, alas! now too late, there was my fault that J did not refuse them,
and cast my self upon Gods providence without any dependence on man, though
never so honorable: Was ever any deceived that did trust in God? there was
never any: Therefore J admonish you all, let none how honorable soever they
be, or the King himself, move you to any thing not agreeable to Gods word; do
it not, reject it; for that was my fault, that J had not at the first opened
this plot to his Majesty, who no doubt would most justly and thoroughly have
punished the same.

You Noble, Worshipful, and others; let my example teach you thus much, That
you profane not the holy Sabbaths of the Lord, nor his good creatures, nor
that you turn (by a lascivious course) days into nights, and nights into
days, as J have done; and that in serving God, you must not only read the
Scriptures, but join practice therewith; for what good will the same effect, if
the heart be foul, bloody, and impure? some here knew my forwardness therein,
but J pretend not innocence that way, but cast it off, and confess that of
this great Assembly I am the most wretched sinner.

You expect speeches from me of some concealed matters, and upon some of my
speeches used at the closing up of my Arraignment; but J stand here loco
peccatoris, non oratoris: yet J will show you that J have opened to my Lord
Chrief Justice since my Arraignment, that with the utmost of my power J was
able to verify, upon which J took the body and blood of Jesus Christ, and in
further testimony, J will now seal it with my last and dearest breath.

Nobles, and others, to see your faces it rejoices me, whereby you manifest
your loves in granting my request to be eyewitnesses of my death: J see a
number of my friends here, (pointing as he spoke) who out of their loves J
entreated to beseech God to strengthen me in death, though ignominious to some,
yet to me a bitter cup mingled with Gods mercies, a special favor this way to
call me home; whereas he might have taken away my life by shooting the Bridge,
or some fall, or otherwise; and then this unrepented sin, which J accounted no
sin (such was my blindness) had been damnation to me; for God is just, and the
unrepented sinner shall have no salvation.

There is none of you here present that knows how or in what sort he shall
dye, it may be in his bed, it may be otherwise (God knows) J protest before you
all, J never came over this hill in the chiefest of all my prosperity with more
joy then now J have at this present; for now J know J shall behold the glorious
face and sight of my Creator.

Take heed, let my ensample incite you to serve God truly and uprightly, lest a
shameful death overtake you, as it has me, who am unworthy of my Parents care
in bringing me up.

It may be some will say, J have a flinty heart, because J shed no tears; my
heart is flesh as others be, and J am as faint-hearted to look death in the
face as any others because my use has not been to shed tears, J cannot now
easily, except it be for the loss of some dear friend; albeit now my heart
begins to melt within me being wounded (with that the tears stood in his
eyes) to see the faces of some here present, whom J most earnestly love, and
now must depart from with shame, though worldly regard J respect not, for well
Mr. Sheriff knows, that (to shame this my sinful flesh the more) J wished if it
had him pleased, to have been brought through the City, to have warned all the
spectators how they should not escape without Judgment for blood, for God is
just.

J had almost forgotten to show you a most strange thing which God brought to
my memory the last night, which is this: J confess J have been a great
Gamester, and have played and wasted many great sums of money which exhausted
a great part of my means, which J perceiving, vowed seriously, and not
slightly or unadvisedly, to the Lord in my vow and prayers, Lord, let me be
hanged if ever I play any more! which not long after is justly come upon me,
whereof ye are all eyewitnesses, for a thousand times since J have broke this
my vow.

Then he espied one Sir Maxamilian Dalyson standing near to the Gibbet on
horseback, and said to him, You know Sir Maxamilian what gaming we have had,
and how we have turned days into nights, and nights into days: J pray you in
time to leave it off, and dishonor God no more in breaking his Sabbath, for he
has always enough to punish, as you now see me, who little thought thus to
dye.

To which Sir Maxamilian answered him, Sir Iervas, J am much gieved for you,
and shall never forget what you have said; whereunto he said, Look to it, do
then.

Further he continued his Speech, Let no man boast of the abilities and gifts
of Nature which God gives him, for therein I displeased God, being overmuch
transported with the pride of my Pen, which obsequious Quill of mine procured
my just overthrow. Upon the knitting up of my Lord Chief Justices Speech at my
Arraignment, by reason of two or three passages at the bottom of my Letter,
subscribed with my own hand, which I utterly had forgotten, because I felt not
my fin, (which I heard;) I saw no other but the finger of God would thus point
to this Fact: By this means, I do protest before God, and confess before you
all, that I was so overtaken with this bloody Fact, that for satisfaction of
the same, I willingly yielded my dearest blood, to the shame of this my
wretched Carcass, not being so much grieved for the same, as for others; that I
wish I had hanged in Chains perpetually, so that I had at first revealed this
heinous plot.

Then should I have saved the lives of some already dead, some in the Tower,
and some in the City, some over Seas; so should I have prevented many from
being Widows, some from being fatherless, and some from being childless, among
whom my own wife for one, and eight Fatherless children of mine, which I now
leave behind me; and God knows how many are guilty of this Fact, and when it
will be ended.

The Lord Chief Justice upon closing up of my speeches at my Arraignment, said,
I was a Anabaptist: I would I were as clear from all other sins, as from that,
for I always detested that condition.

As for my wife, some said she is a Papist; True it is, she came so short of a
sincere Protestant. I mean in that respect, that when she is amongst Papists,
she cannot well forbear them.

Then he spoke to the Sheriff, saying, If it may be permitted without offense,
I have somewhat to say, and that is this; Is it lawful for any one here to
demand of me any questions? to which the Sheriff answered, It is not lawful,
wherefore, good Sir Iervas, quoth he, forbear. Sir Iervas said thereunto,
(doubling his words) it is enough, it is enough; I have, quoth he, one that
holds my cloak, may I bestow somewhat on him? The Sheriff answered, That you
may Sir; whereupon, he called the young man unto him by his name, who stood
waiting at the Ladders foot, and gave him out of his pocket some pieces of gold
or silver, and said, Here, take this, spend it; which he with bitter tears
thankfully accepted.

Doctor Felton and Doctor Whiting strained courtesy which of them should begin
a public Prayer for this parties condition; one of them willed the other, but
at last Doctor VVhiting said, If you Sir Iervas can perform it your self, you
of all men are fittest to do it, with efficacy both of soul and spirit;
whereupon he said, I shall do my best then; but my hearers, I crave your
charitable constructions, if with half words, and imperfect speeches, I chatter
like a Crane.

His Prayer.
O Eternal, Omnipotent, and Omniscient God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth,
and of me a most miserable and horrible wretch, by reason of my unmeasurable
sins and transgressions, whereof I am wholly guilty; take pity of me, that
have so many ponderous sins, that without thy special favor and mercy, they
will be ready to press me into perpetual destruction; thy full and free pardon
in Jesus Christ I humbly crave, with this assurance, that immediately my soul
shall be translated hence, into those inestimable joys which the heart of man
is unable to conceive, the tongue to utter, the ear to hear: Then Lord hear
the petition of me a most miserable wretch, according to thy promise made unto
the repentant sinner: my sins yet unknown, and unrepented of, which are my
secret sins, Lord call not to account: disburthen me, O Lord, of my unknown
sins, I desire to give a true sigh for them all, my sins of youth, and riper
years, O Lord, pardon; thou, O Lord, know how many they are; let the misty
clouds of all my sins whatsoever be scattered by the bright beams of thy
merits: Be merciful to me in Christ Jesus, that these weak poor prayers may be
available in thy sight; this comfort yet I have, that I am thine; for, were I
not thine, then out of the roots of me could not the buds of repentance appear,
by which I know thou love me; it is not I, but thou, O Lord, have drawn me to
thee, for thine own mercies sake, In which thy mercies and thy promises made to
the true repentant sinner, once again I rely: for if thou killest me by this or
any other ignominious death, yet will I trust in thee. I crave thy assistance;
Protect my soul from that great Adversary of mine, I mean Satan, who with pale
death and the infirmities of flesh, do band their balls together, then
especially at the last gasp; in which great conflict, Lord strengthen me, that
they may not overcome, but be overcome.

Amen.
This Prayer being ended, he asked if he might not pray privately: The Doctors
answered, Yea; then made he a short Prayer to himself with his face covered;
and after he uncovered it, and said, Now I have prayed, now must J pay, J mean
do the last office to Justice: with that Doctor VVhiting said, Sir Iervas, you
may stand one step lower upon the Ladder; to whom the Sheriff answered, It is
better for him Mr. Doctor to be where he is; Stay, quoth the Doctor to the
Executioner, for he has given a watchword, he is in private prayer again;
Yea, quoth he, for he has given me a watchword when J shall perform my office
to him.

He uncovered his face after his second short prayer: And first took his leave
of all the assembly, saying with a cheerful voice and countenance, J pray you
pray for me, who shall never more behold your faces; then he said with great
fervency of spirit, Lord I desire at thy hands this bitter Cup of death, as the
Patient receives a bitter Potion, not once demanding what is in the Cup, but
takes and drinks it off, be it never so bitter.

As soon as he had then said audibly, Lord Jesus receive my soul, which belike
was the Executioners watchword, he turned him off the Ladder, and the
Executioners man catching at one of his feet, and his own man by the other,
they suddenly weighed his life; where hanging a small distance of time, his
body not once stirred, only his hands moved a little, being tied with a black
silk Ribbon, which a little before he had reached to the Executioner, putting
up his hands to him for that purpose; all which being ended, both Corpse high
Gibbet were from thence conveyed.

The Proceedings against James Franckling at his Arraignment at the Kings Bench
the 27. of November, An. Dom. 1615.
AFter he had put himself for his Trial upon the Country, a Jury of Esquires
and Gentlemen were impannilled to pass upon his life there; then Westons
Indictment was read, and Francklin accused as accessory to the poisoning of Sir
Thomas Overbury, and then his Examination formerly taken in these words.

James Francklins Confession.
HE confesses, That in a house near Doctors Commons Mistress Turner did first
come unto him about the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, and prayed him to
provide that which should not kill a man presently, but lie in his body a
certain time, wherewith he might languish away by little and little; at the
same time she gave him four Angels, wherewith he bought a water called Aqua
fortis, and sent it to Mistress Turner, who to try the operation thereof, gave
it to a Cat, wherewith the Cat languished, crying pitifully for two days, and
so dyed.

Afterward Mistress Turner sent for Francklin to come to the Countess, who
told him that Aqua fortis was too violent a Water: But what think you, quoth
she, of White Arsnick? He told her, that was too violent: What say you, quoth
she, to Powder of Diamonds? He answered, I know not the Nature of that; She
said then, he was a Fool, and gave him pieces of Gold, and bid him buy some of
that Powder for her: Francklin demanded of the Countess what was her Reason to
poison Sir Tho. Overbury; she told him, He would pry so far into their estate,
that he would overthrow them all.

A little before Sir Tho. Overburies death the Countess sent for Francklin, and
showed him a Letter sent from the Lord of Rochester, wherein he read these
words, I marvel at these delays, that the business is not yet dispatched;
whereby Francklin thinks in his Conscience was meant the poisoning of Sir
Thomas Overbury. And in another Letter from the Lord of Rochester was written,
That Sir Thomas was to come out of the Tower within two days, and they all
should be undone; whereupon the Countess sent for Weston, and was very angry
with him, that he had not dispatched Sir Thomas Overbury; Weston told her, that
he had given him a thing that would have killed ten men.

Also a fortnight after Westons Apprehension, this Countess sent for Francklin
into S. James's Park, where he, the Earl, and the Countess walking together;
and as soon as he came, the Earl went apart into a Chamber, then she told him,
Weston has been sent for by a Pursevant, and has confessed all, and we shall
be hanged; but on your life, quoth she, do not you confess that you brought any
Poison to me or to Mris Turner, for if you do, you shall be hanged, for I will
not hang for you; nor, says Mris Turner, will I hang for you both.

The Countess told him, The Lord who was to examine him would promise him a
pardon to confess, but believe them not, for they will hang thee when all is
done.

Weston came to Francklins House, and told, Now the Countess turn is served,
she uses him unkindly, and they should both be poisoned, and that two were set
on purpose to poison him. Francklin having confessed his former Examination
under his own hand, being permitted to speak for himself, said, That at the
entreaty of the Countess and Mistress Turner, he did buy the Poisons, but
protested his Ignorance what they meant to do with them, and for the rest he
referred to the Conscience of the Jury, who went from the Bar, and within a
quarter of an hour did return and pronounce him guilty: Then Judge Crook after a
brief Exhortation gave the sentence of death upon him. The Lord Chief Justice
made a short Exhortation also with addition of these words, that knowing as
much as he knew, if this had not been found out, neither Court, City, nor any
particular Families had escaped the malice of this wicked cruelty.

The Proceedings against Sir Tho. Monson, at the Guild Hall London, December. 4.
1615.
WHen he came to the Bar, he made a Motion to the Lord Chief Justice, That
whereas he had written to his Lordship to ask the Lord Treasurer two Questions,
which my Lord would do; He desired then an Answer, and that Sir Robert Cotton
might be present; the Question read, he was indicted for Conspiracy with Weston
for poisoning Sir Tho. Overbury, to which he pleaded not guilty; He would be
tried by God and his Country: The Lord Chief Justice broke up the Proceedings,
and made a Speech to this effect.

That he saw a great Assembly, though it had been showed them often, that the
City was much bound to God and his Deputy here on Earth, the King his Master,
for their great deliverance and exact Justice, for God was always good and
just; and for the King, though they were never so high in place, nor so dear to
him, though his own Creatures, yet his Justice is dearer to him, for which we
are upon our knees to give him hearty thanks, as also for so mild Proceedings
in so great an Affair: For neither the great man's House in the Tower, nor this
Poysoners House to my knowledge, has been searched, neither has this Prisoner
been committed to the Sheriff, but to an Alderman, a man who of all others
might be most kind to him; whereas I take it, lest I should be mistaken, Sir
Francis Anderson married Sir Stephen Somes daughter, and Sir Thomas Monson
married Sir Francis Andersons Sister; I never knew the like favor, nor do I
like it so well, but do declare it as a gentle Proceeding from the King. For
other things, I do not discover secrets; but though there were no House
searched, yet such Letters were produced, which makes our deliverance as great
as any that happened to the Children of Israel.

For Weston and Mistress Turner dyed penitently, as it is worthy to be written
in letters of Gold; and for the Lieutenant, though with great Imprecations and
with high hand he denied it, yet to the great Glory of the Kings Justice he
dyed most penitently and resolutely: This is spoken to the great Praise of God,
that has crowned these just Proceedings, Iustitia confirmata non est
Authoritate, though not having Reason for it, wherein we may see the great Hand
of God. For that morning the Lieutenant was Arraigned came to me as one
afflicted in Conscience, not knowing of his Arraignment, one with Evidence
against him, which he delivered to the Jury, one of them heard him say ( the
Lord have mercy upon me,) and for this present ( non est constantia longa de
vita hominis) therefore he must be conveyed to the Tower as a safer place, till
further order be taken.

Then he addressed his Speech to Sir Thomas Monson, saying, Whereas you name my
Lord Treasurer, every man's fame is dear unto him, and he has been dear and
Honorable; you shall hear what he has answered to my Letter.

After my hearty Commendations, I hear that Sir Thomas Monson that I can clear
him, but I hear nothing of him to accuse him, but I hope he is not guilty of so
great a crime.

You hear, quoth he, that he will neither accuse nor excuse you.

Monson. I do not accuse the Lord Treasurer nor calumniate him, for I know he
is very Honorable, but I desire to have Answer to my two Questions.


Lord chief Justice. You shall hear more of that when time shall serve; do you
as a Christian, and as Ioshuah bid Acan, My son, acknowledge thy sin, and give
glory to God.


Monson. If I be guilty, I renounce the Kings mercy and Gods; I am Innocent.


Lo. Chapter Justice. There is more against you then you know of.


Monson. If I be guilty, it is of that I know not,


Lo. Chapter Just. You are Popish, that Pulpit was the Pulpit wherein Garnet
denied, and the Lieutenant as friendly; I am not superstitious, but we will
have another Pulpit*


Just. Doddridge. It is an Atheists words to renounce Gods Mercy; but you must
think the change of your Lodging means somewhat.


Hide. I have looked into this business, and I protest, my Lord, he is as
guilty as the guiltiest man.


Monson. There was never man more innocent in this cause; I will live and dye
an Innocent.


After this Speech, certain Yeomen of his Majesty's Guard, attending for that
purpose, conducted him to the Tower, where between the Yeomen and the Warders
there was some Contention about his Entertainment.

A Relation of the Arraignment of the Lord and Lady of Somerset, on Friday, May
24. 1616.
The Names of the Peers.
THe Earl of Worcester, L. P. Seal. The Earl of Pembrook, L. Chamberlain. The
Earl of Rutland. The Earl of Sussex. The Earl of Mountgomery. The Earl of
Hartford. The Viscount Lifle. The Lord Zouch, Warden of the Cinque Ports. The
Lord Willoughby of Frisby. The Lord de Laware. The Lord Dacres. The Lord
Mountegle. The Lord Wentworth. The Lord Rich. The Lord Willoughby of Parham.
The Lord Hunsdon. The Lord Russel. The Lord Compton. The Lord Norris. The Lord
Gerard. The Lord Cavendish. The Lord Dormer. The Lord Elsmore, Lord Chaniels,
and Lord Steward, hac vice. His Assistants there present in the Commission. Sir
Edward Cook, Lord Chief Justice of England. Sir Hen. Hobart, L. Chief Justice
of the Com. Banc. Sir Law. Tanfield, Chapter Baron. Judge Crook, Banco Rege. Judge
Nichol, Com. Banc. Sir Fran. Bacon, Attor. General. These three only spoke.
Sergeant Mountague. -- These three only spoke. Sergeant Crew. -- These three
only spoke. Sir Hen. Yelverton, Solic. Rege. Sir Fran. More, Servien. Rege. Sir
Lawr. Hide, Attor. Reginae. Mosley, Attornat. Ducat. Sir Io. Davis, Servien.
Rege. Mr Walter, the Princes Attor. Mr Finch, Keeper of the Records of
Attainders. Sergeant More. Sergeant Finch.
The Names and form of their sitting.
WHen my Lord Chancellor, who for his time was High Steward of England, came
into the Court, there came before him six Sergeants at Arms with their Maces,
Sir Geo. Coppin with his Pattent, Sir Rich. Connisby with his White Staff, Mr
Mannering with the Great Seal, he himself at the upper end of the Board sitting
under a Cloth of State, of both hands of him the Peers, under them the Judges,
at the further end of the Kings Council below the Judges, on one side, Finch
the Keeper of Records of Attainders, the Clerk of the Crown and his Deputy in
the midst of the Court, the Sergeant Crier standing by him; Sir Rich. Connisby,
Sir Geo. Coppin the Seal-Bearer, and at my Lord Stewards feet the Prisoner at a
Bar, behind the Kings Council the Lieutenant of the Tower in a little space
adjoining to the Bar.

All being silent, Sir Geo. Coppin arises, delivers the Pattent to the Lord
High Steward, upon his knee, he received it, and kisseth it, and returns it to
Mr Fanshaw, who takes it kneeling; then the Sergeant Crier makes Proclamation
in the Lord High Stewards name to keep silence; then Mr Fanshaw, (which bears
date May 10.) Then there is another O Yes to certify my L. Steward, whether
Weston were committed as principal for the murder of Sir Tho. Overbury: Then
the Lord Chief Justice delivers a Schedule indorsed with Certificates of four
Judges of the Kings Bench, and other the Commissioners; then Fanshaw turning
unto my Lord Steward reads a third O Yes for certifying other Indictments. My
Lord Cook delivers another Schedule, indorsed with Certificate of my Lady of
Somersets Indictment, which Mr Fanshaw as before reads. A fourth O Yes for
Walter Lee Sergeant at Arms to return the Precept for the Peers of Frances
Countess of Somerset, which accordingly he, after his three Reverences to the
Lord High Steward, delivered to Mr Fanshaw, he reads the Indorsement. A fifth O
Yes to call the Lords, summoned by the Command of my Lord High Steward, to
answer to their Names, which accordingly they did, beginning as at the first,
as every one was named putting of their Hats, standing up until the next was
named. A sixth O Yes to the Lieutenant of the Tower to return his Precept, and
bring his Prisoner to the Bar, which he did, and gave his Precept to the
Sergeant, who gave it to Mr Fanshaw, and he as before read the Indorsement. The
Prisoner made three Reverences to his Grace and the Peers, being attired in
black Tammel, a Cyprus Caperoon, a Cobweb Lawn Ruff and Cuffs.

Lord Steward. My Lords, the Reason why you are called hither this day, is to
sit as Peers of Frances Countess of Somerset.

Fanshaw Clerk of the Crown. Frances Countess of Somerset, hold up thy hand;
she does so hold it up, till Mr Lieutenant told her she might hold it down; and
then reads the Indictment, containing Westons Actions, in the poisoning of Sir
Tho. Overbury, and her Abetting him the 8 of May, 1613.

All the while the Indictment was reading, the Countess of Somerset stood
looking pale, troubled, and shed some few tears, and at the first naming of
Weston in the Indictment, she put her Fan before her face, and there held it
half covered, till the Indictment was read.

Fanshaw * Frances, Countess of Somerset, what say thou? art thou guilty of
this Felony and Murder, or not guilty?

She making an obeisance to the Lord High Steward, answered, Guilty, and with a
low voice, but wonderful fearful.

My Lady upon the Arraignment having pleaded Guilty, the Proceedings after was
thus:

Attorney. May it please your Grace, my Lord High Steward of England, I am
glad to hear the Ladies so free Acknowledgment, for Confession is noble: Those
that have been formerly indicted at their Arraignments persisted in denial, as
Weston, Turner, Francklin, Elvish; but you see this Ladies Humility and
Repentance by her pleading, and certainly she cannot be but a spectacle of much
Commiseration, if either you respect the Sex, a woman, or her Parentage,
Honorable.

But this and to morrow day is to crown Justice; the Mercy seat is the inward
part of the Temple, the Throne public; and therefore I do now only pray a
Record of the Confession and Judgment; but since the Peers be met together, for
Honors sake it is good to declare the Kings Justice.

This is the second time since the Kings coming these thirteen years, that any
Peers have been arraigned, and both these times your Grace has had the place
of High Steward.

The first was Gray and Cobham, and though they were convicted, yet Execution
followed not; No Noble blood has been spilt since His Majesty's Reign.

The first was Revenge of Treason against Malcontents, and this of the
particular offense to a private Subject against those that have been so high in
the Kings grace and favor, and therefore deserves to be written in a Sunbeam;
but his being the best Master in the World, hinders him not from being the best
King; for he can as well plain a Hill, as raise a wall; a good Lesson to put to
my Lords, the Peers: He is Lieutenant to him that is no Respecter of persons.

This that I shall now speak of, may be reduced to that which was acted in the
Vault, and since upon the Stage. The first I will not now enter into, because I
will neither grieve a Lady that is present, nor touch a Lord that is absent, my
duty requires it not, and my Humility forbids it. That which has been upon the
Stage, the Theater of Gods Justice; you shall understand that which has been
worthily acted by the King in this whole Work of Justice, and right well by his
Ministers. Overbury dyed poisoned the 15 of September, 1613. in the Tower of
London; He was no sooner dead, but there was a certain Rumor and Muttering,
that Vox Populi, that Overbury came strangely by his death; and at that time on
the contrary there was another Rumor, but that was Vox Diaboli, that he dyed
of a foul disease, so foul a one, as is unfit for me to name; but for two years
after this, though Overburies blood cried for vengeance, Vox Dei was not heard:
Gloria Dei C^lare Regis perscrutare rem; It is the Glory of God to conceal a
thing, of a King to find it out; yet all the while God so dazzled the eyes of
these two great Procurers and their Instruments, that the first looked not
about them, the other fled not.

About the beginning of the first Progress it first broke forth; and as all
Murders are strange in their discovery, so this was miraculous, for it came
out in a Complement, thus: My Lord of Shrewsbury who is now with God, commended
Sir Gervise Elvis to a Councellor of State, and told him that Sir Gervise, in
respect of good report he had heard made of his Honor and Worth, desired to be
made known unto him; That Councellor added, that he took it for a favor from
him, but withal added, there lies a kind of heavy Imputation on him about
Overburies Death, I could wish he could clear himself, or give some
satisfaction in the point: This my Lord related back, and presently Elvis was
struck with it, and made a kind of discovery, that some attempts were
undertaken against Overbury, but took no effect as checked by him.

This Councellor weighing well the Narration from Elvis, acquainted the King
with the Overture, who commanded presently that Elvis should set down his
knowledge in writing, which accordingly he did, but always reserving himself,
still endeavoring rather to discover others, then any else should undertake
that Office, and so accuse him.

The King still endeavors to search the truth of this business, gives Direction
for the Examination of the Truth of it, commits it to certain Counselors; they
pick something out of him and Weston; then the further Enquiry is delivered
over to my Lord Cook, who in this Cause was very painful, took two and three
hundred Examinations; but when he found it might touch upon greater persons,
then he desired some others might be joined with him, which was accordingly
granted, namely, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Steward, and the Lord Zouch; but
then there were no practices left untryed for the suppressing of the Discovery:
Weston was solicited to stand mute, but at last this dumb Devil was cast out,
then followed Elvis, Turner, Francklin; all which were Actors in this Tragedy
without Malice, but no Authors. Now when this Lady comes to her part, she meets
Justice in the way by Confession, which is either the Corner stone of Mercy or
Judgment; yet it is said, Mercy and Truth are met together: Truth you have in
her Confession, and that may be a degree to Mercy; with me it must be, and to
him in whose Power it resides, in the mean time this day must be reserved for
Judgment.

Now to conclude, and give you Account of the often Procrastinations in this
business; the first was due to Humanity, her Childbirth, the second was for
reason of state, and the last had a grave and weighty Cause.

These Directions the King at first gave, written with his own Hand for the
Examination of this business, I desire may be read.

The Kings Instructions.
THere be two contrary things in this Cause to be tried, and the verity can be
but in one of them. First, whether my Lord of Somerset and my Lady were the
Procurers of Overbury's death, or that this Imputation has by some practice
cast an aspersion upon them; I would have you diligently inquire of the first,
and if you find him clear, then I would have you as carefully look after the
other, to the intent such practices may be discovered, and not suffered to pass
without punishing.

Attorney. There be other Directions in these Instructions by way of
Interrogatories, that are not now necessary to be read; let the Lords, the
Peers, view these Directions from the King.

None of these Interrogatories, which the King desired there should be
examination upon, came away empty; and whatsoever whispering there be abroad of
the death of Weston, they all before the hour of their death confessed the
fact, and dyed penitent; and if need should require, I have brought their
Confessor along, namely Doctor Whiting.

Lord Steward. My Lords, you have seen and have heard these Directions under
the Kings Hand, with Glory to God, and Honor to the King.

Attorney. May it please your Grace, whereas Frances Countess of Somerset, as
accessory before the fact of the wilful poisoning and murder of Sir Tho.
Overbury, upon her Indictment she has been Arraigned, then upon her
Arraignment she has confessed Guilty, I desire that her Confession may be
recorded, and Judgment upon the Prisoner.

Fanshaw. Frances Countess of Somerset, thou have been Indicted, Arraigned, and
pleaded Guilty, as accessory before the Fact of the wilful poisoning and
Murder of Sir Tho. Overbury; what can thou say for thy self, why Judgment of
death should not be pronounced against thee?

Countess. I can much aggravate, but nothing extenuate my fault; I desire
Mercy, and that the Lords would be pleased to entreat for me to the King: This
she spoke humbly, fearfully, and so low, that the Lord Steward could not hear
it, but the Attorney related it.

Attorney. The Lady is so touched with remorse and sense of her fault, that
grief surprises her from expressing of her self, but that which she has
confusedly said is to this effect, That she cannot excuse her self, but desires
mercy.

Sir R. Connisby sitting before the Lord High Steward * rises, and upon his
knees delivers him the white staff.

Lord Steward. Frances Countess of Somerset, whereas thou have been indicted,
Arraigned, and pleaded Guilty, and confessed that thou have nothing to say for
thy self, it is now my part to pronounce Judgment, only thus much before; since
my Lords have heard with what Humility and grief you have confessed the Fact, I
do not doubt but they will signify so much to the Kings Majesty, and mediate
for his Grace toward you, but in the mean time, according to the Law, the
sentence of death must be thus:

Thou must go to the Tower of London from hence, and from thence to the place
of Execution, where you are to be hanged by the Neck till you be dead, and Lord
have Mercy upon your Soul.

The Arraignment of the Lord of Somerset, May 25. 1616. being Saturday.
ANd first, what was done before the Pleading. Sergt. Crier. O Yes, My Lord
High Steward of England purposes to proceed this day to the Arraignment of
Robert Earl of Somerset.

O Yes, Whosoever have any Indictments touching this Cause, presently give them
in *

The Lord Cook delivers the Indictment of my Lord of Somerset to Mr Fanshaw
endorsed.

Walter Les Sergeant at Arms, return the Precipe, for the Lords which thou have
warned to be here this day.

O Yes, He calls every Lord by his name, and they stand up as they be called.

The Lord Steward excuses the Lord Mountegle and Russel of their absence in
respect of their sickness.

Fanshaw. Robert Earl of Somerset, hold up thy hand; He held it up so long,
till Mr Lieutenant bid him hold it down. The Indictment is read, containing
VVestons Actions in the poisoning of Sir Tho. Overbury, and his abetting of him
the 8. of May, 1613.

The Lord Somerset was apparelled in a plain Satin Suit, laced with two Satin
laces in a seam, a Gown of uncut Velvit, all the sleeves laid with a Satin
lace, a pair of Gloves with Satin tops, his George about his Neck, his Hair
curled, his Visage pale, his Beard long, his Eyes sank in his Head, whilst his
Indictment was reading he three or four times whispered to the Lieutenant.

Fanshaw. Robert Earl of Somerset, what say thou? art thou guilty of this
Felony and Murder whereof thou stand indicted, or not?

Somerset making obeisance to the Lord Steward, answered, Not guilty.

Fanshaw. How will thou be tried?

By God and the Country; but presently recalling himself, said, By God and my
Peers.

O Yes, all you that be to give in Evidence against Robert Earl of Somerset,
who stands now at the Bar upon his deliverance, make your appearance, and you
shall be heard what you have to say against him.

My Lord of Somerset upon his Arraignment having pleaded not guilty, the
Proceeding after was thus.

Robert Earl of Somerset, you have been Arraigned, and pleaded not guilty, now
whatsoever you have to say in defense of your self, say it boldly without fear;
and though it be not the ordinary custom, you shall have Pen and Ink to help
your memory; but remember that God is the God of Truth; a fault defended is a
double Crime; Hide not the verity, nor affirm not an untruth, for to deny that
which is true increases the offense; Take heed left your wilfulness cause the
Gates of Mercy to be shut upon you.

Now for you my Lords the Peers, you are to give diligent attention to that
which shall be said, and you must not rest alone upon one piece of Evidence,
but ground your Judgment upon the whole.

This moreover I would have you remember, that though you be not sworn as
common Juries upon a Book, yet you are fled in as great a Bond, your own Honors
and Fidelity, and your Allegiance to the King, and thus I leave the whole
Proceedings to your Censure; and for you that be of the Kings Council, free
your discourse from all partiality, and let Truth prevail, and endeavor to make
it appear.

Sergeant Mountague. My Lord High Steward, and you my Lords, I know this cannot
be but a heavy spectacle unto you, to see that man that not long since in a
great place with a white Staff went before the King, should now at this Bar
hold up his hand for blood: But this is the change of Fortune, nay I might
better say the Hand of God, and Work of Justice, which is the Kings Honor. But
now to the Fact.

Robert Earl of Somerset stands indicted as accessory before the Fact of the
wilful Murder and poisoning of Sir Tho. Overbury, done by Weston, but procured
by him.

This, my Lords, is your Charge; the Indictment has been found by men of good
quality, or Knights and Esquires of the best rank and reputation, some of whose
names I will be bold to read unto you, Sir Thomas Fowler, Sir Will. Slingsby,
and five more, these have returned Billae Vera.

Weston at four several times gave Overbury four several Poisons, the first
May 9. 1613. that Rosaker, carrying this Poison in one hand, and the Broth in
the other hand; the second was in June following, and that was Arsnick; the
third was in July 10, then following, and that was Mercury Sublimate; the
fourth was on the 14 of September, and that was Mercury Sublimate in a Glister,
given by Weston, and an Apothecary yet unknown, and that killed him.

Of these four several Poisons, ministered by Weston, and procured by him the
15. of Sept. 1613. Overbury dyed, and the Author is ever worse then the Act.

The first Poison laid in the Indictment that Weston gave Sir Tho. Overbury,
was the 9. of May, and therefore we say, the Lord of Somerset May 8. hired,
counseled and abetted Weston to that Fact: And as this (my Lord) I do charge
you for a King; so King David was charged in the like case for the murder of
Uriah; and though David was under his Pavilion, and Uriah in the Army, yet
David was the cause of his murder: So you were in the Kings Chamber, and
Overbury in the Tower, yet you were the Cause, and it is you that killed him.
It was a stronger hand then Westons that wrought this; the proof Mr Attorney
will follow: And now will I conclude with desires to the Peers, that they will
not expect visible Proofs in a work of darkness.

The second, That whereas in an Indictment there may be things laid only for
form, you are not to look that the Proof should follow that, but only that
which is substantial; and the substance only must be this, Whether my Lord of
Somerset procured or caused the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, or not?

Lord Steward. That indeed, my Lord, is that which you are to look after,
whether my Lord Somerset was the Cause of his poisoning, or not.

Cook. This was well moved by Mr Recorder, and the Law is clear in this point,
that the proof must follow the substance, not the form.

The Judges all rising, affirmed this to be true.

This, my Lord, is certain, the Law gives form in Indictments, but only
substance in Proofs.

I know, my Lord High Steward, and you the Lords the Peers, that you cannot
behold this Lord at the Bar without the remembrance of his former greatness,
yet a Peer amongst you, and therefore I know you will be very tender in the
cutting of him off from your number without good Evidence; We, my Lords, that
be to speak against him, have received an admonition from the King, to use no
Invectives, but give in pertinent Evidence; I think we should have done so
howsoever, but yet we cannot but be glad of so good a Warrant; we will
therefore carry the Proof upright against all Evasion, the Evidence will bear
it self. That which I am now to speak, I will divide into four Parts.

The first shall be of the greatness of the Crime, not to weigh or press you
down (my Lord) but to show that the King was bound by his Oath to bring this
Cause to Judgment, though you had been the Signet of his right Hand.

The second shall be, what Proof I hold to be competent in this Case.

Thirdly, I will state and sum up the Proof*

And fourthly, I will produce Oaths or Writings confessed.

First, Of all kind of Felonies this is the greatest, and that I will urge
thus: First, It is Murder, the first Record we ever read of in the Bible was a
sentence upon Murder; and though Cain was not punished with death in respect
of the Primogenite, or some other secret Causes, which God reserved to himself,
yet he was sentenced. Although Ioabs sentence for the Murder of Abner was
respited, yet it was not forgotten, no Sanctuary could relieve him, he was
taken from the Horns of the Altar. In the second Table the first forbidding
Commandment is, Thou shall not Murder. And some other most learned Rabbis
that referred that Commandment where the Obedience of Parents is expressed to
the first Table; so then this is the first of the second.

My second Aggravation is, that this Murder is by Poison; Poison is a foreign
practice, fit for Rome and her Doctrine; It has these three Attributes.

First, It is fierce, it takes a man suddenly in Gods Peace and the Kings, when
he thinks least of it.

Secondly, It is easily done, and once conceived hardly prevented or
discovered: Princes have their Guards about them to withstand any force or
violence, and Gentlemen their Servants, for that never comes but with a noise;
whereas on the contrary, there are a number of Poisons, that they will neither
distaste nor discolor that they be put into.

Thirdly, It takes not only away the party maliced or meant; it is like an
Arrow shot that has no aim; and if Facts of this kind were not met withal by
condign punishment, what society would there be amongst men?

In the 22. Hen. 8. a Poysoner aiming at one man, poisoned a dish of Barm, at
this time there was a feast at the Bishop of Rochesters, that Barm was
unwittingly used in Broths and boiled meats, sixteen at the Table were poisoned
with it, nay it went as far as the Alms-basket, and some poor dyed of it.

Well, this year Poisoning was esteemed so great an offense, that a Statute was
made to make it High Treason.

My third Aggravation is, That it was against the Kings Prisoner in the Tower,
where the King and State were in a manner bound to answer for him; and, my
Lords, till now there has been no Murder in that place since the Nephews of
King Richard the third were there murdered by his Command.

My second general Division is, What Proofs I hold to be complete in this Case;
I hope my Lords the Peers will consider, that of all Murders Poisoning is the
most secret: And therefore to look for Testimonies direct, is to say, that they
proclaim impunity; who should have impeached Parasapis, who poisoned one side
of a Knife, and eat with the other. But, my Lord, you are not to enquire of
actual impoysoning, but the procuring and faciliating of it; and that is to be
an Abettor before the Fact if any middle course should be used, to the intent
such a matter might be effected, if afterward it be done.

For example; There be three intended to Rob a man, one sends a Letter to him
upon some pretended business to draw him such a way, the other fearing he may
carry some company with him, uses some means to divert him from that, and
proffers to go with him himself, and holds him in discourse, until the third
man comes upon him, and does the fact; certainly all these are guilty.

It is not he only that slips the Dog, but he that loves the Toil, that kills
the Deer. But these things, my Lord, are so perspicuous that I will not dilate.

My third Division was the stating and summing up the Proofs, and that shall be
thus:

First, A plain Narrative of the Fact it self.

Secondly, The distribution of it into parts, and applying of the Evidence.

And thirdly, The Production of Witnesses and Writings.

Somerset. I humbly desire to answer every particular as it is objected against
me; my memory is short, and so I may omit to Answer some of the most principal
Objections.

Lord Steward. The constant course of the Court must be kept; you cannot
interrupt the Kings Council; they must give their Evidence entire before you
come to your Answer; you have now Pen and Ink to observe what they urge against
you; and if after you omit any thing, when you come to your Answer, you shall
have all the Helps that can be afforded you.

Mr Attorney. My Lord of Somerset, in substance I will answer and satisfy your
Request, for you shall have three Cogitations.

First, Take your aim of that that shall be objected against you in the
Narrative; then a second in the distribution of it into parts; and lastly the
third, when the Witnesses shall be produced, and more when you come to your
Answer; if you omit any thing that has been objected against you, I will put
you in mind of it.

Now for the Narrative, the Friendship and familiarity betwixt my Lord of
Somerset, and Sir Thomas was so great, if you believe him in his own Letter,
but he was a Trasonical Fellow, that the Balance had need be altered, that the
greatest matters and secrets of State, which my Lord executed under the King
were all communicated unto him, not whisperingly, or by piece meals, as
sometimes Counselors use to do to their friends for a favor; but Overbury took
Copies, Registers, and Extracts of all that passed; they had Ciphers between
them, which went under the name of Iergins of the King and Queens name, and all
the Counselors of State; and this kind of Characterical writing is never used
but by Princes, or their Ambassadors; if by others, then by such as be
Practisers against them; yet, my Lord, I charge you with no disloyalty.

I remember a Speech Your Grace has often said in Chancery, That Fraud, Frost
and foul weather; I might add without disloyalty, of Friendship of ill men;
And so, my Lord, it proved on your part to Sir Thomas Overbury, occasioned
thus, You went about an Unlawful Love, designed by my Lord of Northampton,
oppugned by him under pretense of Friendship, though in truth that was not the
occasion, but his Unwillingness to have any Partners in your Favor besides
Himself: For He Himself writes in a Letter to you, That you won her by his
Letters; but this impetuous unbounded Fellow, Overbury, first began with
Threats, in respect of the communication of Secrets; Here upon this, there grew
two streams of Hatred upon Him, one from You, and another from my Lady, but
yours of a more nigher nature; for your self confessed, That he had such hold
of you He might overthrow you. There was a third stream besides these, and that
came from my Lord of Northampton; And from you three Overbury was concluded
Filius Mortis.

Now how this should be executed, the means for that was now to be thought on;
And for that there was but two Ways, Violence or Poison.

The first was attempted, but that failing, you fell upon the second, how
should that be effected? If he had been abroad, or at liberty, you know he had
too jealous a Head to be easily entrapped; what then was to be done one way,
but was to be cooped up? but how must that be done? There, my Lord, you plead a
pefidious part by your Plot: OVERBURY was designed for an Honorable Employment
beyond the Sea, and dissuaded by you, animating him to refuse the Kings
Command; upon this, for his contempt he is committed to the Tower; when he was
there must he have the liberty of the Air? No; He must be committed close
Prisoner, that you might the better compass your desires. There you had him
fast, there was no avoiding of it, but death must be his bane.

Now for the knitting up and connection of these things, If you had not a
Lieutenant to your hand, and an Under-Keeper for your purpose, all was but in
vain; and so you ordered it: for Overbury had not been five days in the Tower,
but VVade was dispatched, Elvis put in, Caris his old Keeper put out, and
Weston his Poysoner put unto him. And though the placing of Sir Iervise Elvis
was consulted in ten days before his Imprisonment, yet all was resolved and
done within five days after.

Now for the last Act of the Tragedy; When he was there, and close Prisoner,
none of his Friends might come to him, neither Father, nor Kindred, nor his
Servants, nor none but his Poysoner. Now Franklin was sent for, he must buy
Poisons, not such as would quickly kill him, but by degrees, to avoid all
suspicion. And then there was nothing came to him, Salt, Sauces, Tarts,
Medicines, Glysters, that were not poisoned. All the Petitionary means that
were either made by him or his Friends, for his Liberty, were stopped, though
entertained by you my Lord of Somerset; You used him as Fortune Tellers do poor
people in the Country, hold them in a Tale while they steal away their purse.
Now my Lord of Somerset, for the distributing of it into parts, and applying
the evidence to make you guilty, we will Prove it by matter precedent, present,
and subsequent.

First, There was a mortal hatred on your part against Sir Tho. Overbury.

Secondly, You used the means to expose him to the Tower, and there to keep him
close Prisoner. After these two I will follow the Proofs my self.

Now for matter present, That your hand was in poisoning Overbury, directed,
delivered Poisons, thirsted after the news; The prosecution of this I leave to
speak of. After his death you took the course that every guilty man would do in
such a case, suppressing Testimony, Letters, and going about to get a pardon.

Now for a hate of Sir Tho. Overbury, together with a fear of his revealing of
secrets; You made a vow that he should neither live in Court or Country, that
if he came out of the Tower one of you two must dye. Now of Overburies part he
writes to you, That if he dye, your shame shall never dye; prays God you repent
not the neglect of him in that place from whence he writes to you. Now by way
of exclusion you cannot alledg, That this your hatred to him, and plotting his
Commitment, was in respect to your Wife; why then did you not suffer him to go
beyond Sea? No, the bargain was made, the poisons were ready; there were some
secrets, together with your malice toward him, was so great, that there was no
safe course for you, in your opinion, but this death.

And for the producing of my proofs I will use this course; Those Examinations
that have been taken upon Oath shall be here read, the witnesses also I have
caused to be here, that they may be sworn, and to justify or deny what they
hear read; and to diminish or add to their Examinations: And beside, that you
my Lord of Somerset, and you my Lords the Peers, may ask them what further
questions you please.

Tho. Payton, Sir Thomas his Servant: He saw a Letter of his Masters, whose
hand he knew to be my Lord of Somersets, wherein were these words, If I dye, my
blood lie upon you. And in that or another Letter there was this clause, You
are now as good as your word, you have kept your vow to me; Moreover, that in
the privy gallery in Whitehall my Lord of Somerset coming late to his Chamber
met there with Sir Tho. Overbury; How now, says my Lord, are you up yet? Nay,
answered Sir Thomas Overbury, what makes you here at this time of the night?
Will you never leave the company of the base Woman? and seeing you do so
neglect mine advise, I desire that to morrow morning we may part, and that you
will let me have that portion you know is due to me; And then I will leave you
free to your self, to stand upon your own legs.

My Lord answered, His legs were strong enough to bear himself, and so departed
in great displeasure, and to his knowledge they were never perfectly reconciled
again: And being asked how he heard this discourse, He said, it was in the dead
of the night; and he being in a room within the Gallery, heard all that passed.

Henry Payton. I acknowledge every part of this Examination to be true, and
more, That my Master being in the Tower, he sent a Letter by Weston to me to
carry to my Lord; and more, to deliver my Lord this message, That the powder he
had sent him made him very sick, and gave him in one night sixty stools, beside
vomits. This Letter I carried to the Court, and delivered to Mr Rawlin to carry
in to my Lord, who was then in his Chamber. My Lord presently came out and
asked me how my Master did, I told him, very sick; and withal this message,
and how the Physic had wrought with him; My Lord smiled, and said, Pish, and
so turned him away.

Lawrence Davis, Sir Thomas Overburies Servant, Says, That he has heard his
Master say, that he would have gone Ambassador, but that my Lord of Rochester
dissuaded him; He has seen some Letters of Sir Thomas Overburies, wherein he
wrote, My Lord of Rochester was even with him; but he thinks he never saw those
passages.


Somerset. I pray you my Lords note; He says, I never saw the passages.


Attorney. It is true, those Letters were lost, but easier found by him who
knew his Master Sir Tho. Overburies hand.


Sir Thomas Overburies Letter.
Is this the fruit of my care and love to you? Be these the fruits of common
secrets, common dangers? As a man you cannot suffer me to lie in this misery,
yet your behavior betrays you: All that I entreat of you is, that you would
free me from this place, and that we part friends: Drive me not into
extremities, lest I say something that you and I may both repent: and I pray
God you repent not the emission of this my counsel in this place from whence I
now write this Letter.


Wentworth. How did you know these Letters were sent from him to my Lord of
Somerset.


Attorney. It is true that those letters were lost, but after found by him who
knew his Master Sir Tho. Overburies hand.


Cook. They were found in a Cabinet amongst some other things left in Trust by
my Lord of Somerset with Sir Robert Cotton, who fearing searches delivers them
to a Friend of his in Holborn, one Mistress Farnforth; she, to the intent they
might be safely kept, sent them to a Merchants House in Cheapside, where some
seven Months before she had lodged, and desires they might be safely kept for
her, pretending they were some Writings which concern her Ioyature. On Saint
Thomas day she her self comes to have them again, saying, she must carry them
to her Council to peruse: If you will, suffer me to open it before you (says
the Merchant,) and that there be nothing else, you shall have them. But she by
no means would consent to the breaking of it open: Then he answered, It is a
troublesome time, I will go to the Lord Chief Justice, and if he find no other
Writings but such as concern you, you shall have them again. So coming to my
Chamber, and not finding me within, (for I was gone to Paul's to the Sermon) He
went to my Lord Zouch, one of the appointed Commissioners for this Cause, who
he himself would not break it open, but came to Paul's to me, and in a by-room
brake it open, and found in it many Letters, which were disadvantagious to my
Lord of Somerset.


These matters being made evident, need no further to be amplified; For my
Lord, As it is a principle in Nature, That the best things are in their
corruption the worst; And the sweetest wine makes the sharpest Vinegar; So fell
it out with my Lord of Somerset and Sir Thomas Overbury, that this access (as I
may call it) of Friendship ended in mortal hatred on my Lord of Somersets part.

The Indictment being found, my Lord High Steward, confirmed with the Opinion
of the other Judges, did pronounce the Sentence of Death upon my Lord of
Somerset, and so the Court dissolved.

FINIS.

