A CONSIDERATION Upon the Book of ESAIAS STIEFEL OF THE Threefold State of Man,
and his New Birth.

Written Anno Christi, 1621. BY JACOB BEHMEN, Otherwise called Teutonicus
Philosophus.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, 1653.

The Open Fountain in the Heart of JESUS CHRIST, be our Source and Constant
Quickening.
1. MOst Honored and much Esteemed Sirs, in the Love of Jesus Christ, and in
the Union of his Humanity, my Singular Friends and Brothers: It is mere Joy
unto me, and the Recreation of my Soul, that I do now perceive from diverse
places, that the most precious Tree of Christ our Salvation (hid through the
fleshly Antichrist) begins again to green from the very Root, through all
the Gates of Darkness, in the midst of the Captivity of Babylon: Much more do I
rejoice in the Outgreening Plant of its Amiableness and Loveliness, Power and
and Virtue; since I find my self also to be a little Twig on the same Tree, and
that it is so sweet and pleasant; and I see this with great admiration, that
it, as it were, in the midst of the Night begins to green forth with fair
Twigs; yea, that in the midst of the Winter, Lillies and Flowers grow.

2. Is not this contrary to all Outward Reason, that an old, desolate, broken
house (that continually expects by the Tempest to be thrown into heaps)
begins to become New again? and set forth its first youth, as if it had
never been old? We see now the first shape of this Tree, how it was in its
youth; and how in the age and youth of it there is one Shape, Power and Virtue:
Is not this a great Wonder?

3. We became in our First Mother (that bare us all) blind, and are now in our
old age in the end become seeing again in the Mothers bosom: We became dumb and
lost our Mother Tongue, and find it now in our old age again, so that we know
our Mother in and by the same, and can speak with her out of her own Tongue.
Ought not we justly highly to admire, that we were in our Mother, and knew her
not? that we have been such a long time blind in her, and now become seeing in
the old age?

4. But shall we speak of our Old age? No: We are a New Branch, born of our
first Mother; We were a dried Branch on the Tree, but the Mother has brought
into us her Sap and Virtue, and brought forth a young Twig out of her self,
wherein she will have Joy, and through which she will bring forth her fruit;
yea, she has born a young Son out of the Old; he shall not be blind, neither
go out from her, but abide in her house; for he is her only Heir, in whom she
has Joy.

5. Loving Brothers, Let us rejoice and be glad in the Lord, that our City
Jerusalem in Zion is now a building again, in which our Mother dwells, and
shall also be our Everlasting Habitation.

6. Sithence then, Loving Sirs and Brothers, as I perceive, you stand also with
us in the greening Essence, and have received a seeing Eye; therefore I desire
to refresh my self heartily in my Members in the Essence of my Mother with you,
in our new Life; and I beseech you, that you would understand it no otherwise,
then in true Sincerity and Love, as one Member is bound to the other.

7. That I thus will speak with you, is not done to ascend above your gifts,
nor to exalt my self above you, because a sharper understanding is given me of
the Divine Mystery: but rather take it thus, viz. that I am not become your
Breaker, but rather a Beam in our Building in the House of the Mother of us
all; not through Humane Reason or Art, but he that has Power has so ordained
it; even He that does what he will.

8. Now a House must not only have spars and beams, but also Stones for the
Foundation; and it must have diverse Joints. Now, if the Lord places one for
the Foundation or Cornerstone, and uses another about the Building, then we
ought to learn to acknowledge the one the other, every one according to his
gifts; and not to despise or reject one another, in regard of the unequal
gifts, as is practiced hitherto for a long time in Babel: But rather consider
the good and benefit of the House, and that the one Juncture must not be as the
other, although it is all one within another, and is together but one House.

9. To me it is given to understand and to speak of the Ground; to another of
the whole Building of God, as in a sum: Yet the Ground and the Whole House is
but One, it comes from One Spirit, and all serves for the Wonderful
Manifestation of God.

10. Therefore if I shall speak with you out of my gifts, and show you the
House within, I desire you to understand and take it Lovingly: I do it not out
of Levity and Presumption, but in true Knowledge given to me of God for benefit
and bettering, that our Pearl might be found, and the Enemy (that has so long
detained us captive) be choked in his own Poison* that we may learn to know
the Wonderful God in his bottomless Wisdom, and delight our selves in him as
Children, like as a Branch on a Tree, in his Essence and Power; which Joy and
delight is a greening in our Lives Essence: Therefore you will not interpret it
otherwise.

11. You have sent me a Book to behold my self and also your Friends, and
request me to open my knowledge thereupon unto you; which doubtless in my
Writings (which you have in your hands) might be to you already sufficiently
opened and understood what I would thereupon answer you: Yet seeing it is for
Gods Glory and the Benefit and Salvation of Man, I will give you a short and
summary Answer unto it, and further refer you to my (other) Writings.

12. Of the Author himself, (who indeed according to mine outward Man is
unknown to me, yet in the Spirit is not a Stranger, but born out of my Mothers
Essence and Power,) I see, say and know so much out of his Written Words,
(which without doubt are also his Spirit and full Will,) that he indeed has
wholly given over himself (as he also throughout mentions of himself) into
the Mothers bosom, and desires nothing else but the Mothers Life and Spirit.

13. And that indeed the Mother-spirit is in him, as in the old, and yet now in
a new greening Essence does keep the old in the grim Qualm Prisoner, and is so
sunk down with the old Essence, that he cannot know himself; in that he
supposes, he is wholly and totally and throughout new and without sin and
spot: This is truly and rightly said, yet only according to the Inward new Man
born out of Christ; but not according to the Mortal Corruptible Man, which the
New holds captive in him, as through-piercing and wholly overshadowing him.

14. The Old Stock or Husk (understand the Body, which Adam by his Imagination
into the Earthliness brought into us out of the Earthly and Diabolical Essence,
as a Contrary Qualm) is not that which greeneth, but the disappeared Image of
God, (understand that which was given to Adam out of the Divine Substantiality,
as from the Second Principle, out of the Kingdom of Heaven,) which by the
bringing-in of the Earthly, dyed; or (as I might express it) was again enclosed
or shut up into the Eternal Quietness, as into that Nothing, when it lost its
right Divine Life: and this is it, in which the Eternal Word became Man, and
brought in again the living Substantiality with its Entering and Opening, and
out of Death brought forth Eternal Life. This same Divine, and also in Death
enclosed, humane Substantiality or Flesh, became Man, (to which the Earthly
Husk only did adhere,) and held the Earthly burning Death captive in it self:
Therefore we must observe a Difference when we will speak of our selves.

15. The Holy Scripture also speaks not of a wholly New Flesh, viz. that the
Old comes to be conceived wholly New in Divine Essence, and begotten in God:
otherwise it must follow, that the Evil introduced bestial Flesh with the
bestial Properties were (become) exalted in the Power of the Majesty.

16. And if one would say, that the Earthly Qualm is wholly killed in the New
Birth out of Christ, and that it does wholly and totally dye in the Death of
Christ, as the Author (of the Book) says, That the old Man is altogether Dead
and Nothing, and Christ alone lives and governs in this outward visible
Flesh, and does all: then must and should Man also eat and drink after the
Manner of Paradise, and enjoy only an Heavenly Qualm: For Christ eats no more
Earthly food, but Divine. The bestial Maggot-paunch does neither suffer us to
call the Whole Man (out of all the Three Births) Divine, much less the Kingdom
of this World of Stars and Elements, which is the Qualm, Life and Regiment of
the outward Man.

17. We cannot deny (be a Man so holy as he will) but that the Spirit of the
Outward World is the Spirit, Life and Guide of his Outward Flesh; and we see
clearly, how the outward Man stands in a Starry Constellation; when it
leaves him, he falls away and putrifieth.

18. Yet since it is given to me of Gods Grace, to know what the Earthly, and
also what the Heavenly Man is in One Person; (therefore) I will a little
delineate and signify, how things stand with the Author of the Book sent to
me; and that out of the Ground, although in a childlike simplicity; for a Rule
to the Author, and those that read his Book.

19. As for the Author himself, I understand, that he indeed may well be a
godly Man, born anew, and holy in Christ with his New Birth in the New Man, in
regard of the Inhabitation of Christ: For the Substantial Inhabitation is
throughout agreeing with the holy Scripture; as he also highly assevereth it;
and I have in that Point no Objection at all against him: It is the true
Ground, that God has begotten us for children out of his Heavenly Substance in
himself, through his Power in the Word in Christ's Flesh and Blood, out of his
own Essence.

20. I understand also Flesh and Spirit in one Substance, and by no means
Spirit without Flesh and Blood: I understand also, that it is come to pass in
the Woman's seed, and comes yet always to pass; and I say upon sure ground,
that Christ in and out of mine own humane Essence is born a new Creature in my
self: as the Author also throughout says.

21. But the Author wants the Understanding of the Three Principles in one
another, viz. of the Threefold World, one within another: He distinguishes not
one from another: He has wrapped up himself wholly with all Reason and Senses,
and has cast himself wholly into the Incarnation of Christ, into his
Suffering, Death and Resurrection, and has denied his own outward Life. He
desires to live only in and of Christ: He rejects all, what is and lives
contrary to it: He desires nothing but what is of Christ, that Christ's Life,
Spirit and Will, may be his Spirit, Life and Will. Thus he is, as it were, sunk
down into the Life, Will and Spirit of Christ, so that his old man is, as it
were, dead; although according to the Kingdom and Qualm of this World, in his
own Principle in himself, he lives and is not dead: for he cannot dye, until
the Spirit of the Outward World in his Constellation do leave him: and yet he
does not dye then, but goes into the Mysterium of the Outward Principle with
his Wonders and Works, until the Judgment of God for the Restitution of all
that which we have lost in Adam.

22. This right Christian Entrance of the Author is very Right and without
falsehood: it is also gone rightly with him in Christ, if it be so indeed (as I
fully perceive) as he writes of himself. But his knowledge of himself, what and
how he is, were need better to be declared: He has cast himself into the
middle of the Tree, where he indeed is safe, and stands very Well: But the Root
of the Tree is yet hidden to him, he stands therein as a Twig, but in the
middle.

23. When a man will satisfy the humane Mind, so that it may yield it self
into Eternal Rest, then a man must show it the Root of the Tree whereout Spirit
and Flesh have their Origiginal: A man must show and manifest unto him the
Center both of the Eternal and also of the Original Nature, so that he may
comprehend the Earthly and also the Heavenly Mysterium. Then is the Eternal
Beginning and the Eternal End altogether One; In this the Spirit of the Soul
lies down to rest, for it sees the Wheel wholly and perfectly.

24. With this Description the weak corrupted Nature is very ill contented; for
a thing is requested of it, that it cannot do. The Author says, it ought
altogether to dye, that Christ alone might live in the Flesh: This the Nature
will not, but hops for a Renovation, the which it puts on as a garment,
but not Essentially in Power: But as fire does through-glow a stone; so the
beams of the Holy Ghost go often out of the Second Principle of the New Man
through the Old. And as Iron in the glowing, and without the glowing, is still
Iron at one time as at the other; so is also the Earthly Man.

25. He must be servant to the Inward Man, when the New with his glowing Divine
Fire goes through him; he also willingly does it, so long as the fire-glowing
shines through him; but he cannot change himself into the Inward Kingdom: For
the outward Flesh and Blood, says Christ, shall not inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven; it shall and must putrify, as an husk from the Essence of the Corn
sown in the field.

26. You have, Beloved Sirs, the Ground of this Mystery in my Book of the
Incarnation of Christ, and in a Book of the Threefold Life, very largely, how
Man stands in a Threefold Life: Viz. 1. According to the Soul, in the Eternal
Fathers Nature, and in the Root of the Dark World, in the Center of the Eternal
Original, as in the Spirit of the Eternal Father.

27. 2dly, How the right true Image and Similitude of God greeneth out of the
Soul, as out of the Death in the Souls Magical Spirits Fire, in another
Principium, or in another World, and becomes free (as God himself) from
Nature, as also from Death, Qualm and Pain: and that the true Image of God
lives not in the Regiment of the outward World, nor uses for it self the
outward food and drink, but eats of the Divine Substantiality, as of the
Bread of God, Christ's Flesh and Blood; so that Christ lives in it, and it in
Christ; and that same Eating consists in a Spiritual Desire, and also comes
to pass truly and substantially; and that the Soul is therewith nourished in
her hungers-fire; and that a great Gulf happens between the Soul and the true
Image in the Death of the Fire.

28. As we see this in Fire and Light, and have therein a true form, pattern
and similitude; where a man (by a comparison) understands the Soul by the
fire-glow; for it is in it self (what concerns it alone, without the noble
Image) a fire-eye, consisting in God the Fathers Eternal Nature, brought from
the Spirit of God out of the Fathers Property into the outward Created Image,
which was Created both out of the Outward and Inward heavenly Divine
Substantiality: and we understand the Noble Image in or by the Light, and in
the Virtue of the meek Light, that outshineth from the Dying, as from the
Consuming Qualm of the Fire: Where then we see, how the Light dwells in the
Fire without any feeling of the firequalm; and how the Fire is a painly Essence
to Nature, and the Light is free from the Fires Nature, and yet without the
Fire it is a Nothing.

29. Secondly, I have showed you in the forementioned Books, how the Fire is a
Magick-desire of Meekness to cool it self, and to fill its dry Hunger, whereout
it receives Life and Light; and again, how that the Light is also a great
Desire of the Fire, to awake its Life, Virtue and Power through the Fire.

30. Thirdly, How that the Light in its Desire makes a Substantiality (and
Being) viz. Meekness; which takes its Original in the Dying in the Fire; which
Meekness is called the Water of Eternal Life: for it is a sinking through the
Death; and it gives Sensibility and and Substantiality: and how the Fire does
again draw that same Substantiality into it self, and satiate it self
therewith; and out of that same Indrawing it does again beget a Spirit out of
it self, which continually goes again into the Substantiality, and at length
brings the shining from the Fire and Light into the Substantiality: Which
Shining or Splendour in the Substantiality of the Meekness is called Tincture,
which brings the Substantiality into the highest Ornament and Colors, and
thus Renews the Essence, viz. the forms of the Dark World to the Fire-life,
and high-graduates it, and changes it into another thing: so that out of the
unpleasant painly Qualm of the First Principle through Fire, the highest
Joyfulness arises in the precious Tincture. And thus the worst is the cause of
the best; In which Type (or Figure) we understand in the Inward Birth, the
Birth and the Substance of the Holy Trinity.

31. And then fourthly, I have declared to you in the forementioned Books, how
that the Whole Substance of all Substances is a Continual Desire to manifest it
self in its Desire; and that this Desire to Manifestation is the Fiat, and the
Power in the Light is the Word; and how that the Word has moored the Fiat in
all the Forms of the Eternal Nature, according to the Light, and also according
to to the Dark World; through which the Desire, according to both the Worlds
Properties, has made Substance in it self, whereout in the Substantiality Good
and Evil is sprung, according to the Property of each World: out of which
Substance this visible World is created with the Stars and Elements as an own
and peculiar Life, yet not separated from the Eternal: And moreover it is
declared, how that the Inward Spiritual Substance has in its Desire manifested
it self with this outward visible World, as with an Image.

32. Now, when God created Man as an Image after his Substance, a Similitude
after God, he created him out of the Mother of all Substances, and out of all
the Three Worlds.

33. For God would behold himself through Man in One Image; he should be a
Similitude after God. His Body he created both out of the Outward and Inward
Substantiality, as out of the Earthly and Heavenly; and breathed into it,
through his Spirit, a living Breath, that is, himself, according to the Divine
World, and also according to the Outward World.

34. For the Spirit of God is the Spirit of every Life, but distinguished into
Three Principles of Three Worlds: As, 1. According to the Dark World, after the
First Principle, according to which God calls himself an angry zealous God,
and a Consuming Fire, which is the Eternal Nature.

And, 2dly, According to the Light-World, as according to Gods Love and
Meekness, in regard of which he is called the Holy Spirit.

And, 3dly, According to the Outward World, the Ayr-Spirit, with the Qualm of
the Stars and Elements. Thus Man has received a Threefold Life, the Spirit of
all the Three Worlds.

35. Now it is palpable and plain enough to understand, that the Holy Ghost had
not his Regiment in the outward earthly Flesh; but in the Inward Heavenly: For
with his entering into the Humanity, he also brought in with him the Heavenly
Divine Substantiality.

36. For Gods Spirit dwells from Eternity to Eternity only in Heaven, that
is, only in his own Substance, in the Power of the Majesty. Now when he
breathed himself into the Image of Man, then the Heaven was in Man, for God
would manifest himself in Man as in an Image after himself, and open the great
Wonders of his Eternal Wisdom through Man.

37. Therefore we must rightly consider Man, what he is, and not make an
Earthly Beast of him, neither an Angel of his earthly part; but he is created
into the Wonders in respect of the Earthly Kingdom, viz. according to the Third
Principle, that he should manifest the Wonders in Figures. For to that end he
has the Inward Spirit out of the first Principle; but he should not domineer
therewith, neither with the Outward, but yield himself over to the Holy Ghost
in the Second Principle; and in the outward Life be as a Child in the Mothers
bosom.

38. For the Spirit of God had in him the outward Kingdom, as it were,
swallowed up, like as the Light swalloweth up the dark Night, that a Man sees
it not. But through his Imagination into Earthliness, the Earthliness and the
dark World became manifest in him: For the Souls-fire did imagine after
Earthliness, and brought earthly Infection into it self. Thus the Souls-fire
began to burn in the earthly Qualm, and became manifest in the Earthliness;
whereas yet the earthly form and shape ought not to have been manifest.

39. And thus the Soul also lusted to eat of Evil and Good, as of the evil
poisonous and grim Property, out of the Dark Worlds Substantiality, to wit, of
Lying, Deceit and Falsehood, in which she lived in Gods Anger, and in the Dark
World.

40. For the Outward Earthliness has its Original (in the Creation) out of the
Substantiality of the Dark World, and not only (out of) this, but also out of
the Heavenly: This God forbad Adam, viz. that he should not eat of the Tree of
the knowledge of Good and Evil; otherwise he should dye from Paradise, as from
the Divine Substantiality.

41. For the Heavenly pure Element with the Divine Essence greened through all
the fruits, which were created for Man, and he should have eaten after a
Magical manner; the Separation was in his Mouth, so that the Heavenly swallowed
up the Earthly, like as the Day the Night: as we also know, that our Life,
which we now have, must enter into a Transmutation, if it will be called a
Child of God, it must again put on God, whom in Adam it did put off.

42. For we understand and know, that Adam with his Imagination (understand the
Soul) is gone out of the Divine Power, as from the Second Principle into the
Outward, as into the Third, and the poor Soul lies now captive in a strange
Lodging, where the Devil afflicts her, and still brings his Imagination into
her, unless she gives her self wholly again into the Second Principle, (which
in Christ's Person opened it self again in the Humanity;) and in that same Life,
be again born in God: otherwise she stands merely naked with her Root in the
Dark World, as in Gods Wrath; and with her Imagefigure in the Desire of this
Outward World, and therein she will not be acknowledged and received for a
Child of God.

43. But since it is so, that Adam with his Imagination into the Earthliness,
has awaked the Inward Kingdom in the Anger, that it burns in him and all his
Children, and brought the Earthly Desire into his Heavenly Flesh, thereby we
understand, that there-through the Holy Spirit is departed from the same
Substance: For God cursed the Earth; that is nothing else, but that he departed
with Paradise from Man; the Life of Paradise (which was in Adam in the Divine
Essence) was extinguished: Wherefore God said to Adam, What Day thou eatest of
the Tree or the Plant of the knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall dye; that is
nothing else, but to dye to the Kingdom of Heaven, and to become Living to the
Earthly Qualm.

44. For thus said also the Serpent, Thou shall not dye, but thine eyes shall
be opened thereby, and shall be as God: But the Serpent deceived Eva; indeed
her earthly Eyes were opened, but the heavenly were shut up.

45. Thus we also understand, that Adam with his Imagination has wholly
brought the Will of the Soul into the Outward World, and has made his Outward
Flesh wholly Earthly and Bestial, (in which the Stars and Elements did
immediately domineer,) and so dyed wholly from the Heavenly Substantiality;
although there is no Death or Dying in the Heavenly Substantiality; Only, since
Gods Spirit departed from it, it was shut up into the Quietness (or Stilness)
as into the Nothing: and therethrough Man lost the Similitude of God, even the
Noble Image.

46. Therefore said Christ, You must be born anew of Water and the Holy Spirit,
if you will see the Kingdom of God: The Water is the Heavenly Substantiality,
begotten of the Meekness of the Majesty of God; in which the most noble
Tincture is Heavenly.

47. And understand us, that the Word of God, viz. that which became Man in
Mary, has again brought that same Water or Divine Substance into our, in Death
enclosed and shut up, Substantiality; understand, not into the Earthliness, but
into the Heavenly part, which was brought into Adam with the Holy Ghost, when
He brought himself into the Image: For the seed of the Woman should break the
Serpents head. Gods Essence took upon it the Essence of Man, and became Flesh;
and not only the Essence of the Flesh, but also the Essence of the Soul. Thus
the Divine Life came again into the Flesh, and the Second Principle was again
born in Man to a Life in God; and yet the outward Kingdom adhered unto it.

48. Since then we are all sprung from Adam, we are also all of us born out of
his corrupt sinful Flesh, and are all in Gods Wrath, and with the Soul shut up
in the dark World: for we are born into the Earthly frail Life out of the
Earthly evil and perverse Will, in Disobedience, in mere Anguish, Misery,
Poison, Malice, Hatred and Anger, out of the Eternal Death: we are born from
the Kingdom of Truth into Lies and Deceit: The Devil has brought his Will into
Us, and therein we live and eat continually of the forbidden fruit;

49. Unless we return with our Will, and enter again into the New Birth, which
Christ has opened for us in our Humanity. Then we become again conceived in
the Word that opened it self in Mary, in the true Humane Essence, and become
pregnant of the Savior, as of the Divine Kingdom.

50. God is not revealed in us in the Earthly Essence, but in the true Image,
which disappeared in Adam: but the Outward adhereth to the Inward. The Inward
Man manifests the Divine Mysterium, and the Outward Man manifests the
Outward Mysterium, as the Mirror of the Wonders.

51. Thus the War goes on in the New or Regenerated Man; the New will be
Master, for he beholds the Divine World; and the Old opposes him, and Will
also be Master, for he beholds the Outward World: But if the Inward grows
and waxes strong in the Will of God, (understand, when the Soul has given her
self over wholly thereinto,) then the Outward is taken Captive: For the Inward
kills daily the Outward with Gods Love and Meekness, so that the Outward
cannot bring into the Fire of the Soul his earthly, pestilent, and of the Devil
infected evil Desire and Will.

52. Yet the Outward cannot wholly be killed before his Dissolution: for if the
Outward Man should be wholly killed, then must the Kingdom of this World wholly
break off from him: and the Outward also cannot wholly be put into the
Renovation; for the Devils Infection sticks fast in him: But the Outward must
again be put into the Mysterium, and in the Last Day be brought through the
Everlasting Fire, where then the Turba shall swallow up the Evil Desire in the
Fire, and the Mysterium shall again with its Wonders appear on the Noble Image.

53. Therefore I can with no ground say of mine outward flesh and blood, that
it is Christ's flesh, and moreover perfectly holy and without fault: Only, I can
with Truth say of the Inward Man born of God, that he is conceived in Gods
Essence, as in the Word of Life, which was again promised Adam in Paradise,
which opened it self in the Bound, in the most blessed Virginlike Mirror, as in
the Divine Virginity, in our Substantiality that was shut up in the Death.

54. For in this Conception is the Kingdom of Heaven, or the Heart of God, the
Man to the seed which is sown; and the seed of the Woman (understand the seed
of the Soul and of the noble Image enclosed in the Death) is the Matrix, which
receives into it the seed of God after an Essential manner; so that God and
Man becomes One Person, according to the form (or manner) of the three Worlds,
as they stand one in another, and yet the one is not the other: for they
possess not one the other, but every one dwells in it self; so that although
God in Christ be born in Us, yet we can by no means say, when we speak of the
whole Man, I am Christ; for the Outward is not Christ: But thus we can and may
say upon good ground, I am in Christ, and Christ is become Man in me.

55. But his humane Kingdom is not of this World, and I with my new Man in
Christ am not of this World: For St Paul says also, that our Conversation is
in Heaven, whence We (understand the Outward Mysterium) wait for our Savior
Jesus Christ: For the Outward Mysterium on Man shall put on Jesus Christ first
in the Last Day, when the Turba shall before be taken from the Mysterium, in
which the Sinmirror stands, which belongs to the Anger of God; therefore a
Judgments-day is ordained, when all shall be restored which we have lost in
Adam.

56. But if we with this outward visible and palpable Flesh were wholly
perfect, then must the Outward Man have put on Paradise again, and then the
Outward Man were Immortal and Unperishable, and could go through Earth and
Stones; the four Elements also were, as it were, swallowed up in One, as we
shall be in the Last Day: then must (and should) the Outward Man also eat no
more of the forbidden Tree; the Magical Impregnating would also begin, and we
not be born after a bestial or animal manner.

57. But if the Author has (as he says) put on Paradise, then he is taken up:
I as yet can say no such thing of my self. I have also sought the Pearl with
Earnestness, and have also thereby obtained a Jewel. It is also given me to
know the First Man in Paradise; how he was before the Fall and after the Fall;
and have also seen the Property of Paradise, but not in the outward Man.

58. I say also, that the Inward Man has put on the Kingdom of God, and lives
in Heaven in God; But there is yet a great Difference between the Outward and
the Inward Man, as also between Us and the World of Paradise: Paradise greeneth
no more through the Earth, the Lord has Cursed the Earth, and the Outward Man
dwells on the Cursed Earth, and eats the Cursed fruit, he swalloweth down
the Curse into himself; and therefore here in this World there is no whole (or
absolute) Perfection.

59. But so far indeed it comes with Man, if he enters into the New Birth,
that he can tame the Outward Man, so that he must do what he would not
Willingly; for the Inward depriveth him of the Power, and throughthrongeth him,
as the Gold does in a gross Stone: But as the grossness in the Stone becomes
not Gold, so also the outward Man becomes not God; otherwise it should follow,
that also the Outward World should be changed into the pure Deity.

60. The Outward Man is the Outward World of the Stars and Elements: and the
Inward Man in Christ is the Inward Divine World; and the Soul is the
Fire-world; for she has the Eternal Center to Nature in her self; that Center
is the Dark World; Therefore when she loses Gods Light, she stands in her
self in the Pit in the Dark World, viz. in Gods Anger.

61. That also the Author says; He is through Christ so transmuted in the
Death, that he cannot sin any more, and thereupon leaves the outward name of
the outward Worlds Substance, that needs another far plainer Declaration, and
will hardly be taken (or granted) unless it comes to a clearer Understanding:
For the most holy men have acknowledged themselves sinners, not that they
desire it or would do it, but they complain (of it) before God, that the
outward Man is become Living in the Anger of God, and that the Anger rules in
them; as that high Apostle Paul says, Now if I sin, I do it not, but the sin
that dwells in my Flesh: Romans 7.

62. Now where sin dwells in the Flesh, there is yet no Perfection; therefore
lie says further, Wretched man that I am* who shall deliver me from the Body
of this Death? And says, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: So then,
with my Mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh the Law of Sin.
The Scripture says, Before thee is none living Righteous: Item, The Heavens
are also not pure before God. Why should then also an Angels name be given to
the outward fleshly Man, that lies enclosed in the Anger of God? He is but
evil, and striveth continually against Gods Law, and belongs to the Earth,
and his Mysterium to the Judgment of God; He shall purge the floor.

63. But that it is said, We are dead to sin in the Death of Christ, is very
true; that is once done for us all, but we must yet always die unto Sin in the
Death of Christ; we must always kill the Man of Sin, that the New may live: But
we cannot wholly kill him, but take him captive, and always pour Water on him
out of Gods Meekness into his Fireburning.

64. For the Soul is a Fireeye, and is the greatest Life; it will have
Substance, in which its Fire may burn. But since it is in Adams fall turned
(and bent) into this World, therefore the Kingdom of the Stars and Elements is
entered into it to lodge there, which often bring-in a strange Turba. Now, if
the Heavens be not clean before God, how will then that be clean, that is
governed by the Outward Heaven, namely, the Outward Life, that is only driven
by the Outward Heavens Regiment?

65. The Incorruptible, as the new Man, cannot put on the Corruptible, as the
outward Flesh, for Turba is therein: this shall first come to pass in the
Judgment of God, when the Turba shall be taken away from the Outward Mysterium.

66. But that the Author says, It is not possible that a Regenerate man can
sin; by that we know he understands not sufficiently the Mysterium of the
Soul: We see it was possible in Adam, when his outward Man was pure and
immaculate: for if a Man will search from whence Sin has its Original, he must
look upon the Ground.

67. The new Body works no Sin, but the Soul by Imagining into the Wickedness
brings Sin into it self. Now, since the true Similitude after God has its
Beginning out of the Soul, therefore the heavenly Substantiality becomes
Infected through the Poison, which is taken into the Soul.

68. Sin touches not the Heart of God, as the Center of the New Body, but the
Substantiality is Infected; as when a Man pours Earth into fair Water. The
Flesh of the New Man, and the Spirit of God, is not one thing: the Spirit of
God remains in the new Man, although Adam be spoiled in regard of him; as it
also came to pass in Adam.

69. What falls from the Light-world, it the Fire-world receives; if it be a
grim Substantiality, then it is swallowed up in the Fire, and falls into the
Dark World into Eternal Death. When the new Body is infected it loses its
Divine Life, the Deity loses nothing by it, but only its Mirror of the
Wonders: For the Body is not God; only it is through the Spirit by the noble
Tincture highly graduated with the splendour of the holy Heaven, so that in it
the Colors of the Divine Joykingdom do shine: But if it be darkened, then the
Tincture arises in another Property, viz. according to that, in which the Fire
of the Soul burns, such a Tincture shines also thereout; and as the Spirit
of Man is in himself, such an Heaven he geteth also for his Habitation.

70. Nothing can fall beyond God, for He himself is All; yet he is not called
God in respect of his Anger, because it devoureth much: did it not also devour
the whole royal host of Lucifer? they were Angels, and yet became Devils: how
then should it not be possible in a Man, who as yet bears in him the
Sin-mirror in the outward Flesh?

71. Indeed if the Soul goes not into the false Lust, so that it desires not
sin, then it is not possible: The Soul is free, it has the high Fire-Principle
in it self, both to the Dark and also to the Light World: What it awaketh to it
self, that it has; it can live in Gods Love, or Anger: Whithersoever it
turns it self, there it is received; so that it, as the Mother of the Eternal
Nature, is in all things: Whither the Eternal Will turns it self, according
to that its Image is also figured.

72. Therefore Man should not be secure or bold in this World, but always
humble himself before God, and cast his Will into the Heart of God; all this
time (whilst he carries the outward Cottage) he lives in danger; but while
he abides with his Will in God, he is in Gods hand, and then no man (...)
pluck Christ's sheep out of Christ's hand, John 10. except the Will of the Soul
teareth it self out from thence, which happens, when the Soul is secure, then
the Devil sows his poisonous Imagination into her, so that she therein
begins to imagine after falsehood.

73. You must understand, that the Soul stands in the Fathers Property, and
the fair Image (when it is begotten) stands in the Sons Property: The Soul
has the Center of the Dark World, and the Image has the Center of the Light
World, as Gods Heart: But if it departs from Gods Love, then the Soul
brings its Image into the Fathers Property, into the dark World.

74. Therefore we ought to be very humble and submissive before our God, and
not desire to exalt Our Name, but the Name of God in Us: We are not the Tree
with the Root, but little boughs and twigs on the Tree; We receive indeed the
Essence and Virtue of the Tree, like as the Tree gives it to the Twig: But the
Twig says not, I am the Tree; but it delights it self in the Tree, as in its
Mother.

75. If we put on Christ, then we are truly called Christians; for the new Man
lives in Christ. But we ought not to say, I am Christ in this mine holy flesh
and bones, in this my visible Conversation on Earth: for Christ said also, My
Kingdom is not of this World; Therefore Christ's Kingdom In Us is much less of
this World: For he said, I am gone forth and come from God: Again, I leave the
World, and go the Father; and I will take you to me, that where I am, there ye
may be.

76. Understand it thus: When the noble Seed is sown, so that the Lilly-twig is
born in the Humanity of Christ, then he takes it to himself, where He is: This
noble Twig is not of this World; but it comes from God, and its Plant grows
in Gods Kingdom; not in this World, not in Adams Manhood, neither in the Woman
Eva, but in the Virgin, being neither Man nor Woman, but a chaste Virgin, that
follow-God and the Lamb.

77. For that is the Angel, whereof Christ speaks, Matthew. 22. and Mark 12. In
the Resurrection they are like the Angels of God: When he is born out of
Christ, then he expects no Resurrection for himself, for he is Immortal, if
the Soul does not poison him in the time of this World: But he Waits for the
Outward Mysterium, as the third Principle, in which he has sown all his
Wonders and Works; that same swalloweth up here the Outward Life with its
Works, (and) that shall come again out of the Mysterium.

78. For the First Adam before his Eva (he being neither Man nor Woman) shall
stand: he shall have all the three Principles in him, as God himself, but not
so mingled together as Now, when one is brought into the other.

79. The Outward World is compacted and born out of the Inward in the Desire of
the Inward, and in the Fiat created into a form; not altogether to a fading
transitory Substance, for it shall be renewed in the Fire, and stand again to
Gods Wonder-deed; not four Elements, but One, in which the four do lie hid: For
the Outward World shall not rule, but the Inward Divine World through all
things.

80. As little as the Outward Visible World can be called God; so little also
the Name of God becomes (or befitteth) the outward Life in flesh and bones:
For God gave Adam a name, and called him MAN; he named Adam MAN: This the
highest Tongue understands Well in the Language of Nature, that the name Adam
has its Original from the Second Principle, as from Gods Kingdom, out of the
Divine Essence; and the name Man from the Limus, whereout the outward Body was
created.

81. For every thing gets its right Name out of its Essence according to its
Spirit: like as the most dear Name of JESUS CHRISTUS has a double sense: Viz.
By the Name JESUS in the highest Tongue is understood the Motion of the Divine
Center, as an Out-going Lust or Delight, bringing the Lowliness in the Humility
forth in the Out-going Joy-kingdom, in Majesty.

82. And in the Name CHRISTUS is understood an In-going (or Entrance) of the
Love into the Anger, a Breaking or Killing of the Grimness, and a Perfect
Transmutation, with the forth-bringing of the Joy-kingdom: Wherein we then
understand, that God himself has resisted his Anger, as the First Principle,
with the Second as with his Love, and himself broken the grim Death, the which
the Souls-spirit alone Understands, when it attaineth the Heavenly Mysterium.

83. Therefore we ought to beware, that we do not abuse the most precious Name
of God, but call him only a Christian who is a Christian, viz. the Inward Man
out of Christ: The Outward sinful Man retains justly his own Name from (or
out of) his Mother, wherein he Lives: Seeing God has given to Adam an Outward
Name according to the Outward Man, and the Inward also according to the Inward
Man, why would We then mount higher then we are in the Ground?

84. Now when the Author says of himself, I the living Word of God in this my
holy flesh and bones, say this and do this, then the Dear Name of God is
thereby abused: For when the Spirit of Man is chosen to be a Prophet and Mouth
of God, then says he only, Thus says the LORD; as all Prophets have so
spoken: He does it not out of himself, out of his flesh and bones, but the LORD
reveals his Will through him; He is only an Instrument thereto.

85. He is not in flesh and bones, the LORD, but in the Life of Christ a
fruitful humble Twig, that neither will nor does any thing it self, and also
desires nothing but its Mothers Essence; the Mother may do with it what she
Will: The Mother will only have humble Children to lie on her Breast, and drink
of her Virtue, and live in her Will, so that she may delight her self in them:
for her fruit grows upon their twigs, which is the praise of the Tongues in
Gods Wonderdeed.

86. It must not be taken so, as if I would despise a Christian spirit, but I
teach in the Spirit of Christ in him, seeing I must speak of the Root, and this
is the Office given me, that we may edify our selves in the knowledge in Christ
in One Tree: and I beseech you to understand it right; For to speak with an
Angels Tongue with the Mouth of the Holy Ghost, is a great matter: Let no man
ride unarmed; if Gods Spirit armeth not his Tongue, Heart and Spirit, and
gives assurance and Certainty, then let him not say, The LORD speaks.

87. For often, when the Fire of the Holy Ghost shines out of the Inward, viz.
out of Gods Substance through the Outward, the Outward Mysterium is kindled,
and rejoices exceedingly, and begins in the knowledge of the Light to speak
with Tongues out of the Mysterium: But the Will-spirit ought Well to look to it
self, that the Outward Spirit do not go too high, and speak with Tongues out of
it self in the LORDS Name: For the Outward Spirit triumphs when it gets a
Look, as if it were in the Inward, and mounteth often thus (aloft) with
Joyfulness; But the Outward Reasons-spirit from the Stars mingleth it self
willingly therewith.

88. Therefore it is a very subtle thing to speak with the Outward Mouth out of
Divine Tongues: the Holy Ghost must go upon the Wings of the Wind, and direct
the Understanding, that the Mind may find it experimentally: for the Certainty
must be in the Mind.

89. The Prophet that speaks is not the Assurance, for the speaks out of two
Tongues, as out of the Turba of the Wickedness of Men, which he reproves; and
also out of the Love, out of Christ's Humanity, and shows the right Way.

90. Now the Certainty or Assurance consists in the Mind, that must be
kindled and filled with the Holy Ghost; then the Mouth of the LORD speaks
through the Outward Mouth, not as its Own Word, but as the Word of God: Only
the noble Image in the Inward stands, as it were, trembling before the
Presence and great Power of the Lord.

91. It makes no Words in the Name of the LORD, unless the Spirit of God does
form them: then it must do as a Child in Obedience; and although the LORD
commanded Fire to fall from Heaven, as by Elia, it cannot contain it self, it
shall and must perform the Work of the LORD in Zeal.

92. Therefore I say in good truth out of my gifts, that a man ought to have a
great care of himself, if he must or will speak with the Mouth of the LORD: for
if he will say, I the Living Word of God say and do this, then must the Will of
the LORD be there, and the Spirit of God must arm the Tongue, Heart and Mind,
and even himself go with it, otherwise it is not the Word of the LORD, but of
the Outward Man.

93. What the Author says further of the altogether fleshly Christendom, which
carries no more but only the Name in the Mouth, when the heart and mind are
known before God to be only a Mocker of the Name of Christ, is so indeed; and
he has after his knowledge written very truly of it.

94. This Christendom has now borrowed the Mantle of Christ with his Passion,
Death and Satisfaction, and has thereunder hidden the Antichristian Bastard,
and covers that same Man of Pride and Falsehood with the Purple-mantle of
Christ, and rides therewith in Babel upon the horrible and abominable Beast
(spoken of) in the Revelation of John.

95. It tickleth it self with Christ's Passion and Satisfaction; and yet will
not enter into Christ's Passion, Death and Resurrection, and be born out of
Christ's Spirit; the Bastard must only be comforted.

96. O! to how many an one shall the Mantle of Christ be turned to hellish
fire, wherewith he covers the man of falsehood! There is not spoken only of
Comfort; but, ye must be born anew out of Water and the Holy Ghost, otherwise
ye shall not see the Kingdom of God, says the Mouth Christus.

97. The Will must be turned from Deceit and Falsehood into Righteousness and
Truth, if he will be called a Christian with the ground of Truth, and not only
in the Mouth, but in the Deed be a Christian.

98. But he that carries Christ only in the Mouth, and is not born out of the
Will and Spirit of Christ, he is the Antichrist, and boasts himself unjustly
a Christian; if he striveth not against the Will of the Flesh, and continually
kills it, then the Life of Christ is not in him; but the Outward Worlds and
the Devils Will in the Anger of God is in him: For Christ said, Whosoever
enters not in by the Door into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way,
He is a Thief and a Robber, and comes but for to rob steal; and the Sheep
follow him not, for they know not his Voice: He is but a Hireling, and the
Sheep are not his own; he seeks only the Wool.

99. If any will be a Shepherd of Christ, he must not be a Stranger, but must
be born out of Christ: he must be in Christ, that he may have Christ's Voice in
him; otherwise he cannot feed Christ's Sheep on the green Pasture. What good
does a Wolf in the Sheepfold, that intends nothing but prey? He does only
waste and spoil the Sheepfold: Wherefore then does a Stranger intrude himself
for a Shepherd, not being called of Christ the chief Shepherd? Why goes he
about to teach the Spirit of this World in Man, which is in him before?

100. If he will sound the Inward, in Death enclosed, Bell, then he must have
even that same Clapper, which breaks the Death, so that the dead Bell may
sound: For the Divine Sound was in Adam enclosed in Death: Now if any will
awake the same, he must have in himself that same Living Sound: he must speak
out of Christ's Spirit and Voice, or his teaching is only a Juggling or playing
of tricks before a dead thing, and he is only a belly-servant by Custom, and no
whit profitable to the Temple of Christ; for he himself is not therein; and how
will he then bring others in?

101. The Holy Ghost mixeth not himself in the Voice of the Wicked; the Word of
the Wicked is not the Word of God: Therefore it is a mere Deceit to preach out
of Art; the Art is born out of the Stars, and it awaketh none that lies
enclosed in Death; it must be a right hammer that will make a dead Bell sound.

102. And it is very highly to be lamented, that men do so prank with these
Mouth-Apes, and honor them for Gods, and will also be called good Christians,
and yet name themselves after a Wolf; and besides strive and contend for him,
and make desolate also their Land and Men, and destroy their body and soul for
a Wolfs sake.

103. O thou worthy Christendom in blindness, be seeing, I beseech thee; O how
art thou blinded! Thou suffer thine ears to be filled with a tingling
noise, that thou may but sleep hard in Adams sleep, in the Sinworld with the
Devil, and very securely in the wicked flesh; But an hard thunder will awake
thee, for thou art too too fast a sleep; thou will not yet be awaked; let God
call how he Will, yet Adam the old Man sleeps in his pleasure.

104. That the Author also mentions, That this fleshly Babel will fall, and a
Fountain spring up in Zion out of the true Jerusalem, is very true; and the
Time is already born, that that shall be broken, which is grown unto and of it
self without Divine Order, for it has attained its age and the bound: The
Beginning has found the End, the Middle shall be Manifested, and none shall be
able to hinder it; But seeing the child of sin and Perdition does so rage
against it, therefore it must burst and break it self in pieces in its raging
Madness.

105. But if it would enter into the Beginning, it would abide standing, and
its Wonders only would appear: But seeing it is grown in Pride, Covetousness
and Envy, and in all kind of Wickedness and Malice, to what end shall that evil
Beast abide? It is unfit for an Offering of God; neither will it be converted,
that it might get an humane heart.

106. Therefore God caused it to be denounced, that his Children should depart
from it; for the LORD will afright the Earth, and overturn Babel, and there
shall a River flow out of Zion, that the thirsty Soul may be refreshed: For the
poor shall be refreshed, and eat in his Pasture.

107. The Driver shall be broken in pieces, and then shall thou rejoice a
little while, for thou art Wicked from thy very Youth, and seek only the
Goal in the Wonder: As thy Beginning was, so is also thine End; Whosoever is
blind, will not see it, but sleep till the Day breakon.

108. Christ says, When the Son of Man shall come, think thou that he shall
find Faith on Earth? Therefore the Time of the End is an Evil dreg, and there
shall not be mere Zion, save only in the sanctified Children of Christ: For the
Beginning and the End are altogether like one another.

109. The Wonders with the high Tongue were manifest in the Beginning, and the
Signature was exceeding well known; this comes again in the End: But we
understand also thereby a good and evil Time, when the Gates of all Principles
shall stand open; as we also see this in the Beginning by Cain and Abel.
Therefore let every one look to it, what he speaks, teaches and writes, for
it shall be tried by the highest Tongue.

110. But when we speak of the Temple of Christ, and of the River out of Zion,
then we mean not one certain place in one Land alone; for the Temple of Christ
is over all; we understand in all Tongues and Languages; although the Tongues
shall be brought higher in one place then in another; all things according to
the property of the people, and according as the Spirit is in Man.

111. For the Temple of Christ is In Us: We must hear Christ teaching In Us; if
Christ teaches not In Us, then the outward Mouth-cry is in Vain, and spoken
but into the Air.

112. Therefore let no man think that it will be so, that (such) Men will come,
which shall teach or force the Holy Spirit into Men: No; It is said, To Day,
when you do hear the Voice of the Lord, harden not your ears and hearts: Look
not after another Time, for This is the Time of your Visitation.

113. Incline your Ears and Hearts into the Temple of Christ In You; cast away
your Abominations and false Will from you, and bring your Will earnestly
through Christ into the Father, and resolve to enter no more into the
Wickedness, as into Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Anger and Falsehood: leave off
from all height of this World, and humble your selves in the hand of the LORD,
and in the Love toward the needy.

114. Esteem your selves as simple Idiots in Christ; esteem your Art nothing,
for it draws but away from Christ: Desire to know no more but only that which
the Holy Ghost in Christ will know in you, that he only may be your Knowing and
Willing.

115. For the Fountain in Zion will not be found through any search out of
Reason: Zion will not first be begotten from Without, but from Within: We must
seek and find our selves in our selves: No Man needs to run to another place,
where he thinks the Spirit shall be more powerful; but Within himself is the
Gate of the Holy Deity.

116. He must only enter into himself, and seek and call upon the Holy Spirit
in himself; for in himself is the place where God dwells in his Heaven, and
receives the Will of the Soul with her Desire.

117. Whither will the Soul swing her self, being she her self is the Fountain
of Etetnity? In her stands the Principle of the Light and Dark World; she is
all the Three Worlds.

118. Only this is Necessary, that like as she in Adam has brought her self by
her Imagination into the Earthly World (which stands Essentially within the
dark World) whereby her Almightiness (was and) is broken, and enclosed in the
Death; so she turn her self again into the Light in the Almightiness, in the
Spirit of Christ, who has broke that same Death in her, ( viz. in the Soul;)
she must go again into Gods house into her self.

119. Therefore it is necessary to become new born, to beget out of himself a
New Son out of the Old; not a New Soul, but a New Image out of the Soul in the
Power of the Holy Ghost, a Twig out-greening out of his own Essence in the
Spirit of Christ, and standing within the Light of the Deity, not being shone
upon (from without,) but shining out of it self.

120. The New Image is the food of the Fiery Soul, and fuel for her burning.
The Soul eats the Love-essence of the Image, and gives out of the Consuming,
as out of the grim Dying, the high Light, and in the Light through Fire, out of
the Desire of the Love and out of the Desire of the Fire, the high and noble
Tincture of the Holy Life, with the power of Colors and Virtues.

121. In which Power the Center of the Joy-kingdom of the Light-World stands,
as the Heart of the Deity, out of which the Holy Ghost proceeds: For the
Fires-Center of the Soul, and the Lights-Center in the Souls Image, are it, out
of which the Spirit of God is begotten.

122. The Spirit of God enters not from Without into the Soul, but he opens
himself in himself through the Soulsfire, and through the Light-fire of the
Image: He is the Holy Man's peculiar Propriety.

123. When a Man enters into earnest Repentance, and lays hold on an
earnest Will to enter into the Mercy of God within himself, and casts from
himself all false Will, then is the grain sown, whereout the noble Flower in
the Holy Trinity grows: Understand, that the Souls-Will is turned thereby out
of the Dark World into the Light World.

124. And then when she Imagines into the Light World, into the Center of the
Deity, as she before has Imagined into this World, then she shall in her self,
in her Imagination or Desire, grow pregnant of the Savior; and out of this
Pregnancy God is begotten always and to all Eternity.

125. Thus the true Man becomes the food of God, and God the food of Man; and
so are We in God, and God in Us, and work with and in God, and are his true
Children in him.

126. And this we had not been able (to do,) being Adam brought his Souls-fire
into the Grimness, and his noble Image out of the Soul in God, if Gods Heart
had not entered again into the in Death enclosed Image of the Soul, and given
himself into the Grimness of the Souls-fire, and brought again Divine
Substantiality into the Image; understand, into the Essence of Mary to the
Image.

127. Understand, the Holy Tincture arose together with the divine
Substantiality in the Substantiality in Gods Spirit; and the Holy Blood (which
the Tincture in humane Property makes Blood) went into the middle of the Turba
of the Soul, when the Outward Life broke on the Cross: Then the Grimness of
Death was broken with the Love and Meekness of God, and transmuted into a Life
of Joy: and here Death was showed openly; For divine Love was again begotten in
the grim Essence of the Soul; and that is our New Birth in Christ, into which
the Desire of our Soul must enter, if it will behold God, and be begotten in
Christ out of God.

128. Christ is the New Stock, and we green forth as Branches in him; We must
be born in God, and must also beget God in us, if we will be Branches on the
Tree: For upon the Branches, which we are, the Holy fruit grows, which Gods
Spirit eats in us, viz. the Praise of God.

129. Loving Brothers, jest not, and esteem it not a fiction; it is known in
Ternarium Sanctum, in the pure River out of Zion; Let no man expect or stay for
a golden Time, in which the Holy Spirit shall out of the outward Mouth cry into
the hardened Man, (who will live only in the lust of the flesh,) I say, into
his Bestial Will: O no, that will not be.

130. Whosoever will hear the Holy Ghost teaching out of the Mouth of another,
he must before bring his Will into the Holy Ghost; and then the Holy Ghost
preaches unto him out of the Mouth of another within him.

131. The Time is already, that Henoch teaches, and Noah denounces the
Deluge: there is henceforth no other sign, then the sign of Elias. Why does the
World stand gazing, and suffers its Ears in Vain to be filled with the Stars?
it is all in vain.

132. Whosoever will enter with Zion, and praise God in Jerusalem, he has now
the acceptable time: the Sound of the Seventh Trumpet is already Sounded: The
Fountain of Israel is open: Let no Man imagine, that the Trumpets-Sound will
come from this or that place: For as the Lightening arises and shines unto
the West; so from the Beginning to the End is the Coming of the Son of Man.

133. Let no man expect the Outward Prophet, he shines Inwardly in the Spirit;
the Outward Man shall not know him, for he stands in the Crown-number, and
preaches in the Mysterium: he is already known and found; whosoever desires to
see him, let him seek him in himself, and leave Babel; he will find him.

134. The Right Way into Eternal Life is in Man; he has brought the Will of
the Soul into the Outward World; it must he again bring into himself, into the
Inward World: Paradise must green in Man.

135. But he has a dangerous and tedious Way to go: for the turned Will must
enter into it self again, and, break-through through the Kingdom of the Stars
and Elements. O how is he there held! It must be a great Earnestness, not
Hypocrisy, and an abiding with the Will in the Kingdom of the Stars.

136. The Will must forsake the Outward World; and yet it cannot wholly (do
it,) for it must maintain the Outward Body: O how grievous is this in the
Beginning, when that must be forsaken, which is so dear to the Outward Man,
wherein his joy and glory stands! O how does the Outward Man in the Soulsspirit
hold back!

137. How exceeding many Conflicts and Assaults must there be holden! how busy
is the Devil! and sets before the poor Soul the glory and beauty of this World,
as riches and the pleasures of the Flesh.

138. It falls not so presently on a heap from him; the Outward Will must be
broken in pieces with an hard bickering; and yet it dies not, but is shut up in
the prison of the Inward Will, and must be servant until the breaking or
dissolution of the Outward Life.

139. Therefore I say upon sure ground, that all what is taught of God, out of
the Spirit of the Outward World, and heard in the Outward Spirit, is not the
Word of God, but Babel, a mere Confusion, Misery, Howling and Crying, and no
man hears it but only the Spirit of the Outward World; it is only an
Antichristian Hypocrisy and a glittering Flattery.

140. A Knave goes into the Outward Church, and a Knave sits therein, and a
Knave returns thence, and is an hypocrite, who gives good words before God,
and comfort and tickleth himself from without with Christ's Satisfaction, yet
still remains the old Man in himself.

141. He supposes God forgiveth sins, as Life is of grace and favor given to
a Murderer, although the Conscience does continually accuse the Murderer,
that he is guilty of the deed and of punishment: O no, it is not so: Christ
said, Unless ye turn and become as Children, ye shall not see, the Kingdom of
Heaven: No Verbal Forgiving avails before God; but it is as Christ said to
those that turned to him, Thy Faith has helped thee.

142. For Christ's Spirit went into the Faith of the Patient, and the Faith of
the sick (went) into Christ's Spirit: then the Cure was there; otherwise there
had been no healing.

143. This a Man may see on the Day of Pentecost, when those Men were attentive
to St Peter; whose Will was bent into themselves, and desired the Kingdom of
God, in them the Spirit of Christ sounded out of Peter's Mouth: But as for
those, whose Will was bent into this World, the Spirit past by them, who said,
These men are drunk, because they speak thus.

144. So it goes also Now, when the Spirit of Christ speaks, then says the
Outward Reason, These men are mad and heretics: But as for those whose Will is
turned into themselves in a desire after Gods Kingdom, they hear the Spirit of
Christ speak.

145. Therefore all those into whose heart this throngeth, are admonished to
abide Constant, and to meet the golden River that flows out of Zion, and they
shall find the Pearl, for it is born; Let no man gaze on Time and Person; it is
the Spirit of Christ that speaks.

146. And the Author writes out of the Bride of Christ very well and truly of
the Spirit of Christ, out of the New Man; But he must learn to distinguish this
Old Mortal (being from the Spirit of this corrupted and cursed World) from the
New, and not esteem the mortal corruptible flesh and bones for Christ, his
Flesh:

147. Nor to seek Christ's Flesh in the four Elements, and in the Spirit of the
Outward World; but in the Root of it, as in the Holy Element, one Principle
deeper then this World is; (yet) not absent from the Outward Body.

148. Nor must he think the Old is Transmuted into the New; but as Gold grows
in the gross Stone out of the Stone, the Sun being the Cause of the Tincture,
and the gross Stone the Cause of the Body; and yet it must not be understood,
as if the New Body had any place or room in the Old, in its Principle; for it
stands a Birth deeper in it self.

149. As we may know by this, that God is in this World, and yet the World
neither knows nor sees him; He dwells a Birth deeper in the Center, then
this Outward World is: He fills all in this World, and yet there is nothing
that comprehends or sees him; for he dwells not in the World, but in
himself: So also the New Man: and yet there is no separation from one another.

150. Like as there is a difference between Fire and Light, the Fire not being
able to comprehend the Light, although the Light is born out of the Fire; so
also the New Man out of the Old, through the Entering of the Spirit of Christ,
like as the Sun makes a Tincture of Gold in the Stone.

151. But when the Author writes, that the Old Man falls wholly away in the
Repentance, and dies altogether in the Death of Christ, he erreth; For Christ
is not come for the Old Man's sake, nor is he become Man in the old defiled
sinful flesh, but in the Essence of the Image, that a New Man may be born out
of the Old, and dwell in the Old, yet not in the Third Principle in this
outward World, but in the Second in Heaven, in God, and God in him.

152. Therefore he ought not to write, I Christ the living Word in this my
visible flesh and bones: This none that is born out of Christ will grant him.
The Outward Man is conceived and born in Sin, He is not Christ; but the Inward
Man is in Christ, a Member of Christ's Body, in the Essence of Christ.

153. And that he supposes that Nature falls wholly and altogether away from
Man, when the New Birth arises, that is not so; and in that he understands as
yet nothing of the Eternal Nature: There falls no Nature away from him; for the
Life stands in the Nature, viz. the Life of the Soul in the Eternal Nature, and
the outward Spirit in the Stars and Elements.

154. The Eternal Nature holds in it self the seven Spirits or Forms of the
Deity, from whence the Holy Divine World is sprung, and also this Outward
World: it parts not to all Eternity from Man; otherwise Man were a Nothing:
For out of Nature the Mystery of Eternity is revealed, and also the Divine
Being, as is declared in my Book of the Six Points. Nature came not into Man
for Sins sake; wherefore should it then for the Regenerations sake fall away?

155. By Death the outward Nature falls away from the Nature of the Soul; but
it goes only into the outward Mysterium, until the Day of Judgment; then shall
all its heremade Wonders and Works appear therein: when the Spirit of God shall
moor the Mysterium of this World, then shall all be manifest, and the Turba
shall be separated from the good, and given to the Dark World, and the
Mysterium unto the New Man, yet only Holy and without spot.

156. And this is the Resurrection of the Flesh: it is not the Husk, as the
Bestial flesh, which arises, but the Life in the Outward Mysterium with the
Wonders; it shall be included in the Holy Element, and united with the Body of
Christ the New Man, and in Eternity stand with its Wonders in it.

157. But not in earthly Essence, but as a shadow or figure: For by reason of
the Divine Life this (same) Life of ours is esteemed as dead; for so was Adam
also before his Heva, before the Imagination; but in the Imagination the
Outward Life was made manifest, and the Heavenly dyed.

158. This I could not (Loving Sirs and Brothers) hide from you (nor from the
Author) in an Answer of your Book sent to me; for my Conscience requires it in
the LORD; not in any intention to reject or put down the Authors Book or high
Spirit, but in Love toward him, I would communicate my gifts and understanding
to him, into his gifts, as one member to the other, that we might edify and
acknowledge one another in Christ, as Members in one Body.

159. For I do very well know the Authors Spirit, and I love to speak to him,
seeing he for Christ's Name sake (as you mention) has suffered much, and
willingly has brought his Life into Christ's footsteps: therefore I acknowledge
him for a right true Christian.

160. But he need not to be ashamed to learn to know himself better, and to
learn more in the Spirit in the Spouse of Christ: For Christ says, Seek and ye
shall find: The Wisdom has neither number nor end.

161. I say of my self nothing else, but that I first am become an A. B. C.
Scholar, and will heartily seek in the Spouse of Christ of the Spirit of
Christ, in my Brethren and Members, Me in them, and them in Me.

162. I do not arrogate to me yet any perfect knowledge; for that which is
perfect, is not of mine understanding, but revealed in the Spirit of Christ in
my Brethren; I am in my self as a Nothing, that I might be found and known to
be somewhat in the knowledge of my Brother in his Spirit, and that God in Christ
may be All in us, both the Understanding, Willing and Doing.

163. Therefore I exhort you not to take this otherwise then Christianly and
Brotherly; for I am not a Master of your Spirit and Knowledge, but your help in
the Lord, that the Authors Course may not be in vain, nor the Name of Christ
blasphemed in his Members, as Babel has done. I have written this short
Declaration and Explanation to refresh us in our knowledge in the Lord: What is
more, is to be found in the Book of the Threefold Life, and in the three Books
of the Incarnation of Christ; and do commend you all to the Love of JESUS
CHRIST.

Dated on the Sunday, Quasi modo geniti, Anno 1621.
A Theosophick EPISTLE, or LETTER, WHEREIN The Life of a true Christian is
Described: What a Christian is; and How he comes to be a Christian.

Together with a Description, What a Titular Christian is. What the Faith and
Life of both of them is.

Written to a good Friend of his in Christian, Brotherlike and Memberlike
Admonition, and a good Intention, BY JACOB BEHMEN,

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, 1653.

The Fountain of the Heart of JESUS CHRIST be our Refreshing, Renovation and
Eternal Life.
1. BEloved and much respected Friend in Christ, I do wish to you (out of a
memberlike obligation, as one branch on the Tree is bound to do to the other)
in a cooperating Desire, the open Fountain of Grace, which God has revealed
in Christ Jesus in our Humanity, that the same may flow in you richly, and the
Divine Sun therethrough bring into the Soul his Love-beams, and therewith awake
and open the great Magnetic Hunger of the Soul (as the true divine Mouth)
after Christ's Flesh and Blood; together with bodily Welfare.

2. For as much as I have often perceived by your loving Friend D. K. and also
in my presence marked, that you in the Drawing of the Father have an
extraordinary Thirst and great Longing after his Life, which he has manifested
in Christ Jesus, out of his highest Love; therefore I would not omit out of a
memberlike obligation to visit you with a short Epistle, upon the desire of the
D. and also of your self, and to recreate and refresh my self somewhat in that
same Fountain of the Life of Jesus Christ with you; since it is mere Joy unto
me, that our Paradisical Pearl-tree greeneth and works fruit in our
fellowmembers, to our Eternal Joy.

3. And herewith I will show unto you, out of my small gifts and knowledge, What
a Christian is, and Wherefore he is called a Christian: namely, that only He is
a Christian, who is become capable of this high Title In Himself; who has
turned himself with his Inward Ground, Mind and Will, to the freegiven Grace in
Christ Jesus; and is in his Souls-Will become as a young Child, that only
longs after the Breasts of the Mother, and sucketh the Breasts of the Mother,
whereof it lives.

4. So also this Man only is a Christian, whose Soul and Mind enters again
into the First Mother, whereout the Life of Man is sprung, viz. into the
Eternal Word, which has revealed it self with the true Milk of Salvation in
our Humanity, (being blind in regard of God,) and drinks this Mother-milk
into his hungry Soul; whence the New Spiritual Humanity springs; and the
fiery Soul, being out of the Fathers Propriety, reaches and obtains herewith
the place of the Love of God; in which place the Father begets his Beloved
Son; wherein alone the Temple of the Holy Ghost (which dwells In Us) is
found; and wherein also alone the Spiritual Mouth of the Soul (which eats
Christ's Flesh, and drinks his Blood) is understood.

5. For He alone is a Christian, in whom Christ dwells, lives and Is; in
whom Christ after the Inward Ground of the Soul, and the Heavenly Essence
(which disappeared in Adam) is risen and become Living; He that has in his
Inward Ground put on Christ's Victory against Gods Wrath, as also against Hell,
Devil, Death and Sin, (I say, Christ's Humanity, Passion, Death and
Resurrection,) the Seed of the Woman, to wit, Christ in his Victory, also
overcoming in him, and daily triumphing upon the Serpents head in the Will of
the Wicked Flesh, and killing the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

6. For in Christ alone we are received to be Gods Children and heirs of
Christ; not through an outward strange show of a special grace-receiving,
through a strange merit of a grace imputed from Without, but through a
Childlike, Inhabiting, Memberlike and Essential grace, where the Conqueror of
Death, to wit, Christ, with his Life, Substance, and Power, arises In Us from
our Death, and rules and works In Us, as upon a Branch on his Vine; as the
Writings of the Apostles throughout do witness.

7. He is not a Christian who only comfort himself with the Passion, Death
and Satisfaction of Christ, and imputes the same unto himself as a gracegift,
and yet remains an Unregenerated Wild Beast; such a Christian is every
Ungodly Man; for every one will fain be saved through a grace-gift; The Devil
also would very willingly be an Angel again through Grace received (or applied)
from Without.

8. But that he should turn and become as a Child, and be born a new out of
Gods Grace-Water of Love and the Holy Ghost, that pleases him not: So also it
pleases not the Titular-Christian, who puts about himself the Grace-mantle
of Christ, and yet will not enter into the Childship, and the New Birth;
although Christ says, he cannot otherwise see the Kingdom of God.

9. For what is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, Joh. 6. To be fleshly minded is Enmity with God, but to be spiritually
minded is Life and Peace: and He alone hears Gods Word that is born of God;
for alone the Spirit of Grace in Christ hears Gods Word.

10. For no man has seen God; the Son alone, who is in the Fathers
Unmeasurable Bosom, he declares to Us the Word and Will of God in our selves,
so that we hear and understand his Will and good pleasure within us, and are
willing to follow the same, but yet are often kept back by the outward sinful
flesh; so that the Working of that same divine Power goes not always into the
Outward Figure, and yet it goes into the Inward Figure, in the Inward
Spiritual World, whereof St Paul says, Our Conversation is in Heaven.

11. Of which also all the Saints, and especially St Paul, has complained,
viz. that they have the earnest Will, and with the Mind of the Inward Ground
serve God, but with the flesh the Law of Sin; so that the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit: Which Lust is daily drowned and killed in the Death of Christ
through the Inward Ground, yet only in those in whom Christ is risen from
Death; and thus no Condemnation is to them, who are in Christ Jesus: For the
Bestial Body belongs to the Earth, but the Spiritual Body belongs to God:
But whosoever has not it, is living dead, and neither hears nor perceives
any thing of the Spirit of God, it is foolishness unto him; according to the
Scripture.

12. Therefore this Point is not sufficiently understood and declared, by
maintaining only and alone a Grace received from Without, and also such a
Forgiveness of Sins. The Forgiving of Sins and the Childship received into the
Grace, consists in the Justification of the Blood and Death of CHRIST, when
CHRIST's Heavenly Blood tinctured us, and overcame the Wrath of God in our Soul
and Inward divine Ground, being out of the Substance of Eternity, with the
highest Love of the Deity in the Name of JESUS, and changed it again into the
divine Humility and Obedience; the torn temperature of our humane Property of
Obedience and good Will, entering again into the Harmony and Unity of the
Properties.

13. Then was the Fathers Anger (which was awaked in our Lives Properties, and
had made it self a Governor or Ruler in Soul and Body, whereby we were dead to
the Kingdom of Heaven, and became Children of Wrath) turned again into that One
Only Love and Likeness of God, and our Humane Will dyed away in the Death of
Christ from its own I-hood, and own Willing, and the First Humane Will (which
God out of his Spirit gave into Adam) out-greened again through the Victory of
the sweetness of God in Christ's Heavenly Blood. Then was the Devil and Hell
(which held Men captive) confounded: for this the dry Rod of Aaron did
signify, which greened in one night, and bare sweet Almonds.

14. Now as the Sin came from one, and thronged from one upon all; so also the
sweet Grace and Victory in Christ thronged from one upon all: The Death and the
Anger was broken (in pieces) in Christ, in that one Adamical Soul, and a
possibility to Grace, through the Breaking of Death, was opened: through which
broken Gate the Soulish Will may again turn it self into the first Mother (out
of which it came in the Beginning) as into the Childship or New Birth of a New
Life and Will. There it may attain and reach the sweet Blood of Jesus Christ,
which in Christ in our Humanity brake in pieces the Gates of Death, and changed
the Anger of God in our Humanity in himself into Love, wherein the poor captive
Soul drinks out of Gods Fountain, and refreshes her self in her fire-breath,
whereout the New Greening out-greeneth, the Hunger and Desire of the Soul
becoming (then) Substantial in the Blood of Christ after an heavenly manner.

15. Now like as the Breaking of Death must be done in the Person of Christ in
our Soul and Humanity, so that the Eternity in Christ (wherewith he was come
from Heaven, and also was in Heaven, Joh. 3.) overcame the Time (as the Life
and Will of the Time) and did change Time with its Will into the Eternal Will
of the Deity, and all that was to be done in our received Humanity: So must
also the Desire of our Soul receive into it self that same Eternal Will in
Christ, (where Time and Eternity stand in an Harmony and Concordance,) and
through that Power sink it self into the Childship, as into the Grace, that the
same Inward Paradisical Ground, which dyed in Adam, might again out-green in
the Will of the Obedience of Christ, through his Heavenly and from us received
humane Blood.

16. In our selves must the Expiation be manifested through Christ's once made
Expiation; indeed through that which once was made in Christ's Blood and Death:
But that same which once came to pass in Christ, must also do it in me; it must
now through Christ's Bloodshedding come to pass also in me. Christ sheddeth also
his Heavenly Blood into my Desire in my poor Soul, and tinctureth the Wrath of
God therein, that the First Adamical Image of God may again appear, and become
seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting and smelling.

17. For that Image which dyed in Adam from the Heavenly Worlds Essence, as the
right Paradisical one, dwells not in the four Elements; its Essence and Life
stands not in this World, but in Heaven (which becomes revealed in Christ in
us,) as in the one pure (and) holy Element, whereout the four Elements in the
Beginning of Time are sprung; and that same New Inward Spiritual Man eats
Christ's Flesh and Blood; for he lives and is in Christ: Christ is his Stock,
and he is a branch on the Stock.

18. For every Spirit eats of that of which he has his Original: as, the
Animalish Mortal Soul eats of the Spirit of the World, of the Stars and
Elements, of the Kingdom of this World: But the true Eternal Soul (which is
breathed out of the Eternal Word into Man, as a Divine Life) eats of its
Mother, as out of the Holy Substantial Word of God.

19. But seeing that this, after her separation from God, was not possible for
her, therefore came that same Word of Life, as her true Mother, again to the
out-turned Soul, into this Vale of Misery, into the Prison of Hell, and brought
its Heavenly Substance into our Humane, as a Body for the Soul, and therewith
embraced and encompassed our poor captive Soul, and did open again her heavenly
Mouth (before dead in the Anger of God) with the Tincture of Love, so that the
poor Soul can again eat heavenly Manna: Which eating stood in Christ's Person
(with our received Humanity, in the Temptation of Christ in the Desert) again
in the trial, when Adam in Christ ate Manna again from Paradise forty days.

20. Therefore I say, that if any one be a Christian, he is it not through an
imputed graceshew from Without: his sins are not forgiven him through the once
happened Wordspeaking from Without, as a Lord in this World gives a Murderer
his Life through an outward imputed Grace: No, no, this avails nothing before
God.

21. There is no Grace wherethrough we can come to the Childship, save only in
the Blood and Death of Christ: Him alone God has made and foreordained to be
unto him a Throne of Grace (or Propitiation) in his own Love, which he has
brought into him in the sweet Name JESUS out of JEHOVAH: He is that only
Offering which God receives, that can reconcile Gods Anger.

22. Now if that same Offering shall do me good, then must it also come to pass
in me: the Father must beget and give his Son into the Desire of my Faith, so
that the Hunger of my Faith may lay hold of him; and if the Hunger of my Souls
Faith comprehends him, as in his promised Word, then I put on him in his
whole process of Justification in mine Inward Ground; and immediately the
killing of the Wrath, Devil, Death and Hell begins (and goes on) out of
Christ's Death in me.

23. For I can do nothing, I am dead to my self, but Christ does it in Me; when
He arises in Me, then I am dead in my self, in respect of the true Man, and he
is my Life, and what I live, I live to Him, and not to Minehood: For Grace
kills my Will, and sets it self for a Lord in the place of mine I-hood,
that I may be a Work of God, who does therewith what He Will.

24. And then I live in Two Kingdoms, to wit, with the Outward Mortal Man, in
the vanity of Time, wherein the Yoke of Sin yet lives, it Christ takes in the
Inward Kingdom of the divine World upon Himself, and helps my Soul to bear it.

25. For the Yoke of this World is Christ's Burden, which he must bear until he
shall again deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, which He has given him; for
He said, All Power in Heaven and Earth is given to Me of my Father: So is also
this Burden given to him, that He should bear Gods Anger, Hell, Death, and all
evil in us, as Esaias says: He took on him our Diseases, and carried our
griefs, but we did count him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted.

26. Whence it is, that a Christian must be a Cross-bearer; For so soon as
Christ is born in him, the assaulting of Hell and the Anger of God in the
Eternal Nature goes on; then the Hell in Man is destroyed, and the Serpent is
trampled upon; whence great Unquietness, Persecution and Reproach from the
Devil, and the corrupt World, arises over the outward sinful Man: then the
outward sinful Man must suffer himself to be condemned, and judged to
Damnation, of Gods severe Justice in the Anger, by the Children of the Anger,
seeing that another Man lives in him which is not like to the Outward Mortal:
therefore Gods Justice executes its Judgment in Anger upon the Sin-house, as
also all the Ministers of Gods Anger.

27. Then Christ helps to bear the Yoke, and Man is sacrificed in Christ's
process, contempt, and scorn, in his Suffering and Death, unto the Justice of
God, in the Wrath, and he becomes like unto Christ's Image.

28. The Holy Scripture witnesses in all places, that we are Justified from
sins by Faith in Christ, not by the Works of our Merit, but by the Blood and
Death of Christ; which indeed is so taught of many, but rightly understood of
few that teach us.

29. Men indeed teach us the Imputed grace; but what Faith is, how it is
begotten, what it is in its Essence and Substance, and how it lays hold on
the Merit of Christ with the Grace, in that the most part are dumb and blind,
and rest by an Historical Faith, Jam. 2. which is but a bare knowledge, the Man
of Sin tickling and comforting himself therewith, and through such Imagination
flattering himself, and naming himself a Christian, though he is not become
capable of this so high a Title, but is only a Titular Christian, covered from
Without with Christ's Purpur-mantle; of whom the Prophet says, They draw near
unto me with their lips, but their Heart is far from me: And Christ said, Not
all that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but they that
do the Will of my Father in Heaven.

30. Now Christ alone is the Will of the Father, wherein the Receiving of Grace
and the Childship is; and no man can do the Fathers Love-Will, but only that
only Grace-Throne Christ himself, as the Scripture says, No man can call God,
LORD, without the Holy Spirit In Him.

31. For we know not what we pray before God as we ought, but He, even the Holy
Spirit, makes Intercession for us with inexpressible Sighings before God in
our selves, as it pleases God: We cannot attain unto any thing by our Willing
and Knowing; He is too deeply hidden to us; For it lies not in any Man's
Knowing, Willing or Running, but in Gods Mercy.

32. Now there is no Mercy, but only in Christ: and if I shall reach that
Mercy, I must reach Christ in Me: If my sins shall be blotted in Me, Christ
must perform it in Me, with his Blood and Death, and with his Victory: If I
shall believe, then must the Spirit, the Desire and the Will of Christ, believe
in my Desire and Will; for I cannot Believe.

33. But he receives my Will being resigned to Him, and encloseth it in his
Will, and brings it through his Victory into God: there He intercedeth for
the Will of my Soul in his Will before God, and thus I am received as a
Grace-child in his Love-Will.

34. For the Father has manifested his Love in Christ, and Christ manifests
the same Love in my Will being resigned to him: Christ draws my Will into
himself, and cloateth it with his Blood and Death, and tinctureth it with the
highest Tincture of the Divine Power: Thus it is changed into an Angelical
Image, and gets a Divine Life.

35. Whereupon that same Life begins to hunger after its Body, which Body is
the corrupt fiery Soul, whereout the Will is entered into Christ: thus the New
Life in Christ does now also tincture the Soul, so that the Soul in this
Willspirit gets a right divine Hunger, and becomes desirous of the Divine
Grace; and begineth to behold her self in this Divine Will-spirit in Christ,
what she is; how she in her Properties is separated from God, and how she lies
captive in Gods Wrath, and acknowledges her abominations, as also her
Deformity in the presence of Gods Angels; there she has nothing wherewith she
may protect her self; for she sees that she stands in the Jaws of Death and
Hell, environed with evil Spirits, which bring their Desires always into her to
destroy her.

36. Then she sinketh down into that same Newborn Spirit of the Will, and
ingulfeth her self into the meerest Humility; then the Spirit of Christ takes
hold of her, and brings her into this New-will-spirit, that the Soul
essentially feels it: Whereupon the Divine Joyful Look arises in the Soul
(as a New Eye) wherein the fiery Soul conceives the Ens and Substance of the
Divine Light in her self; whereupon she hungereth and thirsts after Gods
Grace, and enters into a powerful Repentance or Penitency, and bewaileth the
Evil which she has committed.

37. And in this Hunger and Thirst she receives Christ's Flesh and Blood; for
the New Will-spirit (which in the Beginning entered into the Grace of Christ,
which Christ also has received into himself) becomes now Substantial by the
Magnetical Impressing, Hungering and Desiring of the Soul.

38. And this Substantiality is called Sophia, as the Substantial Wisdom, or
the Body of Christ; and in this the Faith in the Holy Spirit consists; here
Christ and the Soul believe in one ground.

39. For the True Faith consists not in thoughts, or in a mere assenting to
the Histories, viz. that a man impresseth into himself, that Christ is dead for
his sins; but it is a Receiving of the promised Grace of Christ; it receives
Christ into it self; it Impresseth him into his Hunger, with his heavenly Flesh
and Blood, with the Grace which God offers in Christ.

40. Christ feeds the Soul with the Substance of Sophia, as with his Body and
Blood; according to his saying, Whosoever eats not the Flesh of the Son of
Man, he has no Life in him; but whosoever eats the same, he abides in him.

41. And herein also Christ's Testaments and also the Christian Faith do
consist: For an Unsubstantial Faith is as a smoking Fire, or mother of Fire, in
a moisture, that would willingly burn, and yet has no right Ens thereto: but
when a right Ens is given to it, then that little spark of fire increases, out
of which a fair Light arises, which shines round about: and then is (revealed
or) manifested, how in the Wood such a fire and fair light lies hidden, which
before was not known.

42. So also in a Child of God: While the poor Soul is wrapped up in the Anger of
God, she is as a glimmering Wiek, that would willingly burn, and yet cannot by
reason of the Vanity of the Sins and the Anger of God; But when the Soul (as
the little spark of the Divine Fire) gets into it self Gods Love- Ens, as
Christ's Flesh and Blood, then that same little Spark begins to become a
great Fire and Light, which shines and lights about it self with fair
Virtues and good Works, and lives in great Patience under the Vanity of this
World, and yet grows forth as a fair Flower out of the wild Earth.

43. Whereof we have a Similitude in the Sun and the Earth; namely, if the Sun
should not shine upon the Earth, no fruit could grow: But when the Sun does
shine on the Earth, and throngeth himself into the Ens of the Earth, then the
Ens of the Earth receives the Virtue of the Sun into it self; whereupon a
great Hunger arises in the Ens of the Earth after the Virtue of the Sun, and
this same Hunger impresseth the Virtue of the Sun; and by this same Hunger of
the Ens of the Earth (which goes after the Ens of the Sun in the height) an
Herb is drawn out of the Earth, with a stalk, wherein the Ens and Virtue of the
Sun also goes in the increase (or growth) in the height, and the Sun with his
Light-beams becomes Substantial in the Ens of the Earth, in the stalk and
root: and a man sees how through the power of the Sun and Stars in the Spirit
of the World another body comes out of the stalk, then the root in the Earth
is: also, how the stalk does bring it self into a button, to a fair flower, and
afterward to fruit: a man may also see, how the Sun afterward from time to
time ripeneth and sweeteneth the same fruit.

44. So also it is with Man: the Soulish ground is the Divine field; when it
gets the Divine Sunshine into it self, then a Divine Plant arises thereout:
This is the New Birth, whereof Christ speaks. Now this Plant must be
nourished and drawn up from above by the Divine Sun, and by the Divine Water
and the Divine Stars, as the Divine Power, until it comes to be a Divine Body
of a Divine and Angelical Figure, as the body on the stalk.

45. And as the body on the stalk must stand in rain, wind and storm, in heat
and cold, and suffer the Sun to ripen it: so must a Christian stand in this
thorny World in the awaked Anger of God, in the Kingdom of the Devil amongst
many wicked Men, and suffer himself to be beaten with scorn and contempt, and
yet must turn his Hope from all Creatures alone into the Divine Sun, and suffer
him to ripen him, and to beget him to an heavenly fruit.

46. Not houses of stone, nor humane Ordinances do beget him; but the Divine
Sun, in the divine Stars of the powers of the Word of God, in the Temple of
Jesus Christ in himself, does beget him out of the Fountain of Life, Jesus
Christ, so that he is a branch on the Vine of Christ, and brings forth good
grapes, which the Divine Sun ripeneth, that Gods children, as his loving
fellow members, may eat them, whereby they also do out-green in and with him;
which grapes are good Doctrine, Life and Works.

47. A man must come to the practice, working and fruitbringing, otherwise the
New Birth is not yet manifest in him, nor the noble Branch yet born: No
tickling, comforting and boasting of Faith, avails (any thing,) if so be the
Faith becomes not a Child conformable to God in Essence and Will, which does
bring forth divine fruit.

48. All that wherefore men now strive and contend, also destroy Land and
people, is only a mere husk without fruit, and belongs to the fiery World,
for separation: There is no true Understanding in any party: they contend all
only about the Name, and the Will of God, and no party will do it: they mean
and mind nothing but their own glory, and the lust of the flesh: Were they
Christians, they would have no strife.

49. A good Tree bears good fruits for every one: and although it must suffer
that the wind often breaks off its branches and fruit, as also that the Sun
dries them up, and when they are ripe that swines devour them, and that they
be trodden under feet, yet it endeavoreth still to bring forth more good fruits.

50. So also a true Christian in Christ can will nothing else but what Christ
wills in him: although he must suffer that his good fruits (which do
out-green and grow forth out of the Inward Man) be often trampled upon, and
spoiled by his Evil flesh and blood, as also by the Devils Wind, and the
Wickedness of the World; yet the Tree of the new Plant abides standing in the
Life of Christ, and out-greeneth through the outward mortal Man against all
hinderance and opposition; like as Eternity greeneth through the Time, and
gives to the Time Life and Power: And as the Day out-greeneth through the
Night, and changes the Night into Day, whereas yet the Night remains in it
self, and is not discerned in the Day: so also the Divine Day outgreeneth in
us, through our Eternal Night, and changes the Night, to wit, Gods Anger,
Hell, Death, Anguish, and Eternal Destruction, into the Divine Day of
Joyfulness; although the Dark Night with the Ens of the Serpent and the Poison
in flesh and blood, rages and striveth against it.

51. Therefore beloved Sir, and Christian Brother, we have more need to
endeavor for the growth of the noble Pearl-tree, and how we may come to it,
then to run after the unprofitable prattling and fancy, where one Brother
despises, reproacheth and proclaims the other for an Heretic, nay, gives
him to the Devil for an Opinions sake, which he has made to himself.

52. I tell you in my knowledge given me of God, that it is a mere Deceit of the
Devil, who does thus bring us poor men into Opinions, contemning and
reproaching, that we strive for the husk, and mean while lose Love and Faith,
and attain not to the New Birth.

53. Our whole Religion is but a Childrens-work, namely, that we wholly go out
from our own Knowing, Willing, Running, Disputing, and resolve to enter into the
Way, which brings us again into our Lost Country, and how we may return to
our Mother, who has born us in the Beginning out of her self.

54. Now if we will do this, we must not come to her in (our) own Will, in
Pride and Contempt of her Children, our Fellow Christians and Fellow Members:
for we are the Lost Son, who is become a Swineherd, and have spent our
Patrimony filthily with the sty-hogs of the Devil and the World: We must enter
into our selves again, and well consider our selves and our Fathers house, and
must set before us the Mirror of the Law and the Gospel, and see how far we are
departed from Gods Righteousness and Truth; as also from the Brotherly Love,
and well examine our Heart whereto it is inclined.

55. Now when we do this, we shall find in our selves many hundred Evil Beasts,
which we have placed in the stead of God, and still do honor the same above
God; and shall then first see what terrible Beasts are become manifest in Adam,
through the false Lust; and wherefore God said to Adam, The seed of the Woman
shall break the Serpents head, to wit, of the monstrous Beasts.

56. Viz. We shall first see in our Desire the proud Lucifer, who is departed
from the Divine and Brotherly Humility, and contemns the Members of his Body,
and has set himself over them as a God and Lord; in whom there is no Divine
Love, either to Love God or his Neighbor.

57. Secondly, We shall find a Beast in our Properties, which is like a
covetous greedy Sow (or swine) which will draw all to it self, and alone eat
and possess all, and desires more then it needs, wherewith the proud Lucifer
may brag and vaunt himself that he is a God over Substance, who can domineer,
and has power and might over his fellow-branches: and we shall see how this
proud Lucifer has broken himself off from the Tree of Life, and from the
growth of Love, and would be a Tree of himself; therefore he is also dried up
in respect of God.

58. Thirdly, We shall find the poisonous envious Serpent in our Property,
which stingeth about it as a Poison, viz. Envy, which wishes no man so well as
it self; which stingeth and rides in other men's hearts, and slandereth them
with words, and praises only the proud Lucifer in it, and calls its falsehood
an Angel of God.

59. Fourthly, We shall find the fiery Dragon sitting in Hellish fire in our
Property, viz. Anger, which (if Covetousness and Envy cannot obtain it) will
strike with fists, and take it by force, and is so raging mad that he bursteth
his Life for Wickedness, and breaks in the fiery Malice, and is a very dry
branch on the Tree, which is only fit for the fire.

60. Fifthly, We shall find many hundred Beasts in our Desire, which Pride
loves and honoreth more then God, and Covetousness draws to it self for a
Treasure, wherewith Pride braggeth as if they were Gods, and thus does withdraw
from his Brother his Life, that he is forced to spend it in misery and trouble,
through his Violence and Extortion.

61. Now when a man does thus behold himself in this Mirror of his Self-hood,
and is become aware of these evil Beasts, then he may rightly imagine them to
himself, and hereby consider the grievous Fall of Adam, and think, that all
these evil Desires, one with another, have their original in him, out of the
Monster of the Serpent, through the Devils bringing-in of them into our first
Parents.

62. For all the Properties of the Desires lay in Adam in an Harmony and
Equality, and the one loved the other: But such false Desires are sprung up in
Men through the Devils Envy, which awaked the false Lust in Adam and Eve, to
prove the Discord and Unequality, and to taste what Good and Evil is, to feel
Heat and Cold, and to try the multitude of the Properties; so that now these
Lusts draw and desire their like unto themselves, and every Desire of these
Properties is a several Liveshunger in Man, which has broken it self off from
the Harmony, and against the Love and Likeness of its fellow-branches and
Brothers, lustfully desires to draw their Life and Maintenance to it self, and
to make it self a Lord over it; and will be its Own.

63. All which runs against the Divine Will and Ground, and is a perjury
against God; and is also against the Course of Nature; as a Man may see by the
Earth, Trees, and all Plants, how all stand and grow lovingly one by the other,
and rejoice in one Mother; and how one branch on the Tree does in-flow to the
other his sap and virtue, and the one serves the other.

64. For so was also the Life of Man ( Joh. 1.) brought out of the Eternal Word
into the Image of Man (being out of the Limus of the Earth) in a lovely
Equality (and Harmony,) so that all the Properties of the Life stood in an
equal Weight in the Temperature in one Love, and did love themselves (or one
another.)

65. But when the Devil did throw his Poison and false Desire therein, then the
Properties of Life were divided into many Desires; whence Strife, Infirmity,
Dissolution, and the Grossness of the Body is sprung, through the false Desire
and Bringing-in of the Bestial Properties, whereby the Image of God (which was
from the Heavenly Substance) disappeared; whereof God said unto them, What Day
thou shall eat of the Plant of knowledge of Evil and Good, thou shall dye the
Death, that is, to the Kingdom of God; as it also came to pass.

66. And we ought to imagine really to our selves, that this Bestial false
Desire in Men, is the Monster of the Serpent, and an Enmity with God and the
Kingdom of Heaven; and that we therein are nothing else but Children of Hell
and the Wrath of God, and may not therein inherit or possess the Kingdom of
God: neither is God revealed in any such Desire, but only his Anger, and the
Property of the Dark and of the Earthly World: and we live therein only to the
Vanity of this World, and stand therewith only upon the Pit of the dark World
of the Anger of God, that is, of Hell, which every hour opened its Mouth after
these Properties, and counts these Properties its (own) fruit and children,
which it shall reap, which also belong to it by right of Nature: for these
Desires are all originally from it, and stand with their root in the ground of
Hell and Destruction, and indeed no otherways.

67. Therefore said Christ, Unless a Man be born a new, he shall not see the
Kingdom of God. All these false Wills and Desires are predestined to
Damnation; if any Will see God, he must turn again, and become as a Child, and
be Newborn in the Holy Ghost, through the Water of Eternal Life, as through
the Heavenly Ens, which God has revealed in Christ, that the first right Man,
which dyed in Adam (being from the Heavenly Worlds Substance) might again in
Christ out-green and become Living.

68. All these Beasts are condemned, and must dye in us; and although somewhat
of their Desires remains yet hanging on us in the flesh, yet they must all be
killed, during this Time, in the Soul, as in the Inward Ground, and the Inward
Soulish Life be tinctured through the true Tincture in the Blood of Christ,
that the Properties of the Inward Ground may again live in Harmony; otherwise
they cannot reach the Deity in themselves.

69. Now when a Man knows this, he cannot better be rid of his evil Beasts,
then that he presently that very hour bring himself, with all his powers, into
such a strong Will and Purpose, that he will hate these Beasts of the Devil,
seeing they are only the Devils Servants; and that he will turn again into his
lost Country, into the Childship and Unity; and look upon himself no otherwise
then upon the poor lost Swineherd, for he is it also himself, and indeed no
other nor better; and so instantly with the turning of his Soul, come to the
Father in highest Humility, with acknowledgment of his own Unworthiness, who
has shamelesly consumed the bestown Inheritance of the Merit of Christ; and so
enter into Repentance.

70. Let him but give his earnest Will thereinto out of all his Powers, that he
this very hour, even now, will repent and amend, and love no more these evil
Beasts: But it must be Earnestness, and not to think of a day, week or year;
but his Mind must condemn them to the Damnation of Death, and not will love
them any more, but count them Enemies, and will turn it self to the Grace of
God.

71. When this comes to pass, I say in high Truth, that then he may turn
himself to earnest prayers in Humility, and beseech God for Grace; and although
his Heart says utterly No, and the Devil says, Stay yet, it is not good Now;
and when to morrow comes, then says he again, To Morrow; and speaks into
the Flesh; thou must first do this or that; gather first a Treasure, that thou
may not need the World, then (afterward) enter into such a Life; Yet, I say,
the Mind must remain and stand firm in the Purpose, and think with it self;
These suggestions are mine evil hungry Beasts, these I will kill, and drown
them in the Blood of Christ, in his Love; none of them shall live any more in
me, for I will have no more of them: I am now in the Way to mine ancient
Father, who has sent his Son to me in my Misery, who said, Come to Me all ye
that are laden with sins, and are grieved with them, I will refresh you; My
Father will give the Holy Ghost to them that ask Him for it.

72. Let him imagine this to himself into his heart, and come with the lost Son
to the Father; and when He shall see that the Soulish Mind is directed to Him,
and would willingly turn, and yet cannot, then He will presently meet him, and
clasp the Soul into the arms of his Drawing, and bring her into the Passion and
Death of Christ; where she through earnest Repentance will dye from the cruel
horrible Beasts, and arise out of the Death of Christ with a new Will, and a
right Divine Desire, and begin to be another Man indeed; and he will then not a
whit esteem that which he has loved before, and held for his treasure; and it
will be to him, as if he had it, and also, had it not: and afterward he will in
all his power esteem himself but a Servant of God.

73. For so soon as he can but master the proud Lucifer with his Pride, all the
other evil Beasts, one with another, grow weak and faint, and lose their
Regiment; although they yet live in this Time in this Earthly Flesh, yet they
are but only as an Ass, which must carry the sack, or as a mad Dog in a chain;
their strength is broken.

74. For when Christ rises, Lucifer must lie captive: and if it should be
Earnest, such a precious Jewel should follow upon it, which this Pen cannot
describe here, and those alone know, who have been at the Heavenly Marriage,
where the noble Sophia is espoused with the Soul; whereof Christ said, That
there is such a great Joy in Heaven over One Sinner that Repents before
ninety nine Righteous: Which Joy is also performed in the Heaven of Man, in the
Desponsation: This is understood of those that are Ours.

75. My Beloved and Christian fellow-Brother, I thought it good Christianly and
Wellmeaningly to put you in mind of this; and out of my little Treasury in a
Childlike Simplicity to decypher it unto you; not intending thereby to show or
set forth my self, but out of a true hearty Desire, in a fellow-wishing, that
this might be felt in your heart; and I also might refresh my self a little
with you, as a fellow-member, though absent, and yet present in the Desire, and
cooperating in the Divine Gifts; and this upon your Desire, as formerly is
said.

76. And if my good Will should find place, and God would open the Door of his
Mystery, then had I yet happily, some other, more precious Jewels in my little
Treasury, wherein Time and Eternity may be known; being ready therewith to
serve you: and so I commend you, together with all your Beloved ones, to the
sweet Love of JESUS CHRIST, into his Grace and into his Will.

FINIS.

