Licensed,

Aug. 2. 1686. R.L.S.

LA MONTRE: OR THE Lover's Watch.

By Mrs. A. Behn.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. for W. Canning, at his Shop in Vine-Court,
Middle Temple. 1686.

TO PETER WESTON, Esquire OF THE Honorable Society OF THE INNER TEMPLE.
SIR,
WHen I had ended this little unlaboured Piece, the Watch, Iresolv'd to
dedicate it to some One, whom I could fancy, the nearest approacht the charming
Damon. Many fine Gentlemen I had in view, of Wit and Beauty; but still, through
their Education, or a natural Propensity to Debauchery, I found those Virtues
wanting, that should complete that delicate Character, Iris gives her Lover;
and which, at first Thought of You, I found centered there to Perfection.

Yes Sir, I found You had all the Youth of Damon; without the forward noisy
Confidence, which usually attends your Sex. You have all the attracting Beauty
of my young Hero; all that can charm the Fair; without the Affectation of
those, that set out for Conquests (though You make a Thousand, without knowing
it, or the Vanity of believing it.) You have our Damon's Wit, with all his
agreeable Modesty: Two Virtues that rarely shine together: And the last makes
You conceal the noble Sallies of the first, with that Industry and Care, You
would an Amor: And You would no more boast of either of these, than of your
undoubted Bravery.

You are (like our Lover too) so discreet, that the bashful Maid may, without
Fear or Blushing, venture the soft Confession of her Soul with You; reposing
the dear Secret in Yours, with more Safety, than with her own Thoughts. You
have all the Sweetness of Youth, with the Sobriety and Prudence of Age. You
have all the Power of the gay Vices of Man; but the Angel in your Mind, has
subdued you to the Virtues of a God! And all the vicious, and industrious
Examples of the roving Wits of the mad Town, have only served to give you the
greater Abborrence to Lewdness. And You look down with Contempt and Pity on
that wretched unthinking Number, who pride themselves in their mean Victories
over little Hearts; and boast their common Prizes with that Vanity, that
declares 'em capable of no higher Joy, than that of the Ruin of some credulous
Unfortunate: And no Glory like that, of the Discovery of the brave Atchievment,
over the next Bottle, to the Fool that shall applaud 'em.

How does the Generosity, and Sweetness of your Disposition despise these false
Entertainments, that turns the noble Passion of Love into Ridicule, and Man
into Brute.

Methinks I could form another Watch (that should remain a Pattern to succeeding
Ages) how divinely you pass your more sacred Hours, how nobly and usefully you
divide your Time; in which, no precious Minute is lost, not one glides idly by;
but all turns to wondrous Account. And all Your Life is one continued Course of
Virtue and Honor. Happy the Parents, that have the Glory to own You! Happy the
Man, that has the Honor of your Friendship! But, Oh! How much more happy the
fair She, for whom you shall sigh! Which surely, can never be in vain. There
will be such a Purity in Your Flame: All You ask, will be so chaste and noble,
and utler'd with a Voice so modest, and a Look so charming, as must, by a
gentle Force, compel that Heart to yield, that knows the true Value of Wit,
Beauty, and Virtue.

Since then, in all the Excellencies of Mind and Body (where no one Grace is
wanting) you so resemble the All-perfect Damon, suffer me to dedicate this
Watch to You. It brings You nothing but Rules for Love; delicate as Your
Thoughts, and innocent as Your Conversation. And possibly, it is the only Virtue
of the Mind, You are not perfectly Master of; the only noble Mystery of the
Soul, You have not yet studied. And though they are Rules for every Hour, You
will find, they will neither rob Heaven, nor Your Friends of their Due; those
so valuable Devoirs of Your Life: They will teach You Love; but Love, so pure,
and so devout, that You may mix it, even with Your Religion; and I know, Your
fine Mind can admit of no other. When ever the God enters there (fond and
wanton as he is, full of Arts and Guiles) he will be reduced to that Native
Innocence, that made him so adored, before inconstant Man corrupted his
Divinity, and made him wild and wandering. How happy will Iris's VVatch be, to
inspire such a Heart! How honored under the Patronage of so excellent a Man!
Whose Wit will credit, whose Goodness will defend it; and whose noble and
virtuous Qualities so justly merit the Character, Iris has given Damon: And
which is believed so very much your Due, by

SIR, Your most Obliged, and Most Humble Servant, A. Behn.

To the Admired Astrea.
I Never mourned my Want of Wit, 'till now;
That where I do so much Devotion vow,
Brightest Astrea, to your honored Name,
Find my Endeavor will become my Shame.
It Is you alone, who have the Art, and Wit
T'involve those Praises in the Lines you have writ,
That we should give you, could we have the Sp'rite,
Vigor, and Force, wherewith your self do write.
Too mean are all th'Applauses we can give:
You in your self, and by your self, shall live;
When all we write will only serve to show,
How much, in vain Attempt, we flag below.
Some Hands write some things well; are elsewhere lame:
But on all Theams, your Power is the same.
Of Buskin, and of Sock, you know the Pace;
And tread in both, with equal Skill and Grace.
But when you write of Love, Astrea, then
Love dips his Arrows, where you wet your Pen.
Such charming Lines did never Paper grace;
Soft, as your Sex; and smooth, as Beauty's Face.
And it is your Province, that belongs to you:
Men are so rude, they fright when they would sue.
You teach us gentler Methods; such as are
The fit and due Proceedings with the Fair.
But why should you, who can so well create,
So stoop, as but pretend, you do translate?
Could you, who have such a luxuriant Vein,
As naught but your own Judgment could restrain;
Who are, your self, of Poesy the Soul,
And whose brave Fancy knocks at either Pole;
Descend so low, as poor Translation,
To make an Author, that before was none?
Oh! Give us, henceforth, what is all your own!
Yet we can trace you here, in every Line;
The Texture's good, but some Threads are too fine:
We see where you let in your Silver Springs;
And know the Plumes, with which you imp his Wings.
But I Am too bold to question what you do,
And yet it is my Zeal that makes me so.
Which, in a Lover, you will not disapprove:
I am too dull to write, but I can love.
Charles Cotton.
To the Incomparable Author.
WHile this poor Homage of our Verse we give,
We own, at least, your just Prerogative:
And though the Tribute's needless, which we pay;
It serves to show, you reign, and we obey.
Which, adding nothing to your perfect Store,
Yet makes your polisht Numbers shine the more:
As Gems in Foils, are with Advantage shown;
No Luster take from them, but more exert their own.
Male Wits, from Authors of a former Date,
Copy Applause; and but at best, translate:
While you, like the immortal Powers, Create.
Horace and Pindar (though attempted long
In vain) at last, have learnt the British Tongue;
Not so the Grecian Female Poet's Song.
The Pride of Greece we now out-rival'd see:
Greece boasts one Sappho; two Orinda's, we.
But what unheard Applause shall we impart
To this most new, and happy piece of Art?
That renders our Apollo more sublime
In numerous Prose, but yet more numerous Rhyme;
And makes the God of Love, the God of Time.
Love's wandering Planet, you have made a Star:
'Twas bright before, but now it is Regular.
While Love shall last, this Engine needs must vend:
Each Nymph, this Watch shall to her Lover send,
That points him out his Hours, and how those Hours to spend.
N. Tate.
To the most Ingenious Astrea, upon her Book entitled, La Montre, or the
Lover's Watch.
To celebrate your Praise, no Muse can crown
You with that Glory, as this Piece has done.
This Lover's Watch, though it was made in France,
By the famed Bonnecorse; yet you advance
The Value of its curious Work so far,
That as it shined there like a glittering Star,
Yet here a Constellation it appears;
And in Love's Orb, with more Applause, it wears
Astrea's Name. Your Prose so delicate,
Your Verse so smooth and sweet, that they create
A lovely Wonder in each Lover's Mind:
The envious Critic dares not be unkind.
La Montre cannot err, it is set so well:
The Rules for Lovers Hours are like a Spell
To charm a Mistress with: The God of Love
Is highly pleased; and smiling, does approve
Of this rare Master piece: His Amorous Game
Will more improve: This will support his Fame.
May your luxuriant Fancy ever flow
Like a Spring tide; no Bounds, or Limits know.
May you, in Story, for your Wit, live high:
And summoned hence, to blessed Eternity,
Aged with Nestor's Years, resign to Fate;
May your famed Works receive an endless Date.
Rich. Foerrar.
To the Divine Astrea, on her Montre.
Thou Wonder of thy Sex! Thou greatest Good!
The Ages Glory, if but understood.
How are the Britains bound to bless the Name
Of great Astrea! Whose Eternal Fame,
To Foreign Clymes, is most deserv'dly spread;
Where Thou, in thy great Works, shall live, though dead.
And mighty France, with Envy shall look on,
To see her greatest Wit by thee outdone:
And all their boasted Trophies are in vain,
Whilst thou, spite of their Salick Law, shall reign.
Witness La Montre, from their Rubbish raised:
A Piece, for which, thou shall be ever praised.
The beauteous Work is with such Order laid,
And all the Movement so divinely made,
As cannot of dull Critics be afraid.
Such Nature in the Truths of Love thou'st showed,
As the All-loving Ovid never could.
Thy Rules so soft, so modest, and so right,
The listening Youths will follow with Delight:
To thy blessed Name will all their Homage pay,
Who taught 'em how to love the noblest Way.
G. J.
To his admired Friend, the most ingenious Author.
ONce more my Muse is blessed; her humble Voice
Does in thy wondrous Works, once more, rejoice.
Not the bright Mount, where every sacred Tongue,
In skilful Choirs, immortal Numbers sung.
Not great Apollo's own inspiring Beams,
Nor sweet Castalia's consecrated Streams,
To thy learned Sitters could so charming be,
As are thy Songs, and thou thy self, to me.
Ethereal Air, soft Springs, and verdant Fields
Cool Shades, and Sunny Banks, thy Presence yields.
Never were Soul and Body better joined:
A Mansion, worthy so divine a Mind!
No wonder every Swain adores thy Name,
And every Tongue proclaims thy Deathless Fame:
For who can such refistless Power control,
Where Wit and Beauty both invade the Soul?
Beauty, that still does her fresh Conquests find;
And Sacred Wit, that ever charms the Mind:
Through all its Forms, that lovely Proteus chase;
And every Shape has its peculiar Grace.
Hail, Thou Heaven-born! Thou most transcendent Good!
If Mortals their chief Blessings understood!
Thou that, while Kingdoms, Thrones, and Powers decay,
Have, with Eternity, one constant Stay:
Liv'st, and will live, like the great God of Love;
For ever young, although as old as Jove.
While we, alas! in dark Oblivion lie,
Thou ne er wilt let thy loved Astrea dye.
No, my good Friend, Thy Works will mount, the Skies,
And see their Author's learned Ashes rise.
Much to the Fame of thy fair Sex of Old,
By skilful Writers, has been greatly told:
But'all the boasted Titles they have gained
By others Labors, weakly are sustained;
While thou look down, and scorn'st so mean a Praise:
Thy own just Hands do thy own Trophies raise.
Rich is the Soil, and vast thy Native Store;
Yet Thou (Wit's Great Columbus) seek'st out more.
Through distant Regions spread'st thy Towering Wings,
And Foreign Treasure to thy Country brings.
This Work let no Censorious Tongue despise,
And judge thee wealthy with unlawful Prize.
We owe to thee, our best Refiner, more
Than him, who first dig'd up the rugged Ore.
Tho this vast Frame were from a Chaos raised,
The great Creator should not less be praised:
By its bright Form, his Pow'r's as much displayed,
As if the World had been from Nothing made.
And if we may compare great Things with Small,
Thou therefore can not by just Censure fall;
While the rude Heap, which lay before unformed,
To Life and Sense, is by thy Spirit warmed.
Geo. Jenkins.
Hours of the Day


La Monstre.
THE ARGUMENT.
It Is in the most Happy and August Court of the best and greatest Monarch of
the World, that Damon, a young Nobleman, whom we will ^ender under that Name,
languishes ^or a Maid of Quality, who will give us leave to call her Iris.

Their Births are equally Illustrious: They are both Rich, and both Young:
Their Beauty such, as I dare not too nicely particularize, lest I should
discover (which I am not permitted to do) who these charming Lovers are. Let it
suffice, that Iris is the most fair and accomplished Person that ever adorned a
Court; and that Damon is only worthy of the Glory of her Favor; for he has all
that can render him Lovely, in the fair Eyes of the Amiable Iris. Nor is he
Master of those Superficial Beauties alone, that please at first Sight: He can
charm the Soul with a thousand Arts of Wit and Gallantry. And, in a word, I may
say, without flattering either, that there is no one Beauty, no one Grace, no
Perfection of Mind and Body, that wants to complete a Victory on both sides.

The Agreement of Age, Fortunes; Quality and Humors in the two fair Lovers,
made the impatient Damon hope, that nothing would oppose his Passion; and if he
saw himself every Hour, languishing for the Adorable Maid, he did not however
despair: And if Iris sighed, it was not for fear of being one day more happy.

In the midst of the Tranquillity of these two Lovers, Iris was obliged to go
into the Country for some Months, whither 'twas impossible for Damon to wait on
her, he being obliged to attend the King, his Master; and being the most
Amorous of his Sex, suffered with extreme Impatienco the Absence of his
Mistress. Nevertheless, he failed not to send to her every day, and gave up all
his melancholy Hours to Thinking, Sighing, and Writing to her the softest
Letters that Love could inspire. So that Iris even blessed that Absence, that
gave her so tender and convincing Proofs of his Passion; and found this dear
way of Conversing, even recompensed all her Sighs for his Absence.

After a little Intercourse of this kind, Damon bethought himself to ask Iris a
Discretion, which he had won of her, before she lest the Town; and in a
Billet-doux to that purpose, pressed her very earnestly for it. Iris being
infinitely pleased with his Importunity, suffered him to ask it often; and he
never failed of doing so.

But as I do not here design to relate the Adventures of these two Amiable
Persons, nor give you all the Billet-douxes that past between them: You shall
here find nothing but the Watch, this charming Maid sent her impatient Lover.

Iris to Damon.
IT must be confessed, Damon, that you are the most importuning Man in the World.
Your Billets have an hundred times demanded a Discretion, which you won of me;
and tell me, you will not wait my Return, to be paid. You are either a very
faithless Creditor, or believe me very unjust, that you dun with such
Impatience. But, to let you see I am a Maid of Honor, and value my Word, I
will acquit my self of this Obligation I have to you, and send you a Watch of
my fashion; perhaps you never saw any so good. It is not one of those, that
have always something to be mended in it; but one that is without Fault, very
just and good, and will remain so, as long as you continue to love me. But
Damon, know, that the very Minute you cease to do so, the String will break,
and it will go no more. It Is only useful in my Absence, and when I return,
'twill change its Motion: And though I have set it but for the Springtime,
'twill serve you the whole Year round; and 'twill be necessary only, that you
alter the business of the Hours (which my Cupid, in the middle of my Watch,
points you out) according to the length of the Days and Nights. Nor is the Dart
of that little God directed to those Hours, so much to inform you how they
pass, as how you ought to pass them, how you ought to employ those of your
Absence from Iris. It Is there you shall find the whole Business of a Lover,
from his Mistress; sor I have designed it a Rule to all your Actions. The
Consideration of the Workman, ought to make you set a Value upon the Work: And
though it be not an accomplished, and perfect Piece; yet Damon, you ought to be
grateful, and esteem it, since I have made it for you alone. But however I may
boast of the Design, I know, as well as I believe, you love me; that you will
not suffer me to have the Glory of it wholly, but will say in your heart, That
Love, the great Instructor of the Mind,
That forms anew, and fashions every Soul,
Refines the gross Defects of Humane kind;
Humbles the Proud and Vain, inspires the Dull:
Gives Cowards noble Heat in Fight,
And teaches feeble Woman how to write.
That does the Universe command;
Does from my Iris Heart direct her Hand.


I give you the liberty to say this to your Heart, if you please: And that you
may know, with what Justice you do so, I will confess in my turn, The
Confession.
That Love's my Conduct where I go,
And Love instructs me all I do.
Prudence no longer is my Guide,
Nor take I Counsel of my Pride.
In vain does Honor now invade,
In vain does Reason take my part;
If against Love it do persuade,
If it rebel against my heart.
If the soft Evening do invite,
And I incline to take the Air,
The Birds, the Spring, the Flowers no more delight;
It Is Love makes all the Pleasure there;
Love, which about me still I bear.
I Am charmed with what I thither bring,
And add a Softness to the Spring.
If for Devotion I design,
Love meets me, even at the Shrine:
In all my Worships, claims a part;
And robs even Heaven of my Heart.
All day does counsel and control,
And all the night, employs my Soul.
No wonder then, if all you think be true,
That Love's concerned in all I do for you,


And Damon, you know, that Love is no ill Master; and I must say, with a Blush,
that he has found me no unapt Scholar; and he instructs too agreeably, not to
succeed in all he undertakes.

Who can resist his soft Commands?
When he resolves, What God withstands?
But I ought to explain to you my Watch.

The naked Love which you will find in the middle of it, with his Wings clipped,
to show you, he is fixed and constant, and will not fly away, points you out,
with his Arrow, the four and twenty Hours, that compose the Day and the Night:
Over every Hour, you will find written, what you ought to do, during its
Course; and every Half-hour is marked with a Sigh, since the quality of a Lover
is, to sigh day and night: Sighs are the Children of Lovers, that are born
every hour. And that my Watch may always be just, Love himself ought to conduct
it; and your Heart should keep Time with the Movement.

My Present's delicate, and new,
If by your Heart the Motion's set;
According as that is false, or true,
Tou'l find, my Watch will answer it.
Every hour is tedious to a Lover, separated from his Mistress; and, to show
you how good I am, I will have my Watch instruct you, to pass some of them
without Inquietude; that the force of your Imagination, may sometimes charm the
Trouble you have for my Absence.

Perhaps I am mistaken here,
My Heart may too much Credit give;
But Damon, you can charm my Fear,
And soon my Error undeceive.
But I will not disturb my Repose at this time, with a Jealousy, which, I
hope, is altogether frivolous and vain; but begin to instruct you in the
Mysteries of my Watch. Cast then your Eyes upon the Eighth Hour in the Morning,
which is the Hour I would have you begin to wake: You will find there written,

8 A-Clock.
Agreeable Reverie.
DO not rise yet; you may find Thoughts agreeable enough, when you awake, to
entertain you longer in Bed. And it is in that hour you ought to recollect all
the Dreams you have had in the Night. If you have dreamed any thing to my
Advantage, confirm your self in that thought; but if to my Disadvantage,
renounce it, and dis-own the injurious Dream. It Is in this Hour also, that I
give you leave to reflect on all that I have ever said and done, that has been
most obliging to you, and that gives you the most tender Sentiments.

The Reflection.
Remember Damon, while your Mind
Reflect on things that charm and please,
Tou give me Proofs that you are kind,
And set my doubting Soul at ease:
For when your Heart receives with Joy
The thoughts of Favors which I give,
My Smiles in vain I not employ,
And on the Square we love and live.
Think then on all I ever did,
That ever was charming, e're was dear.
Let nothing from that Soul be hid,
Whose Griefs and Joys I feel and share.
All that your Love and Faith have sought,
All that your Vows and Sighs have bought,
Now render present to your Thought.
And for what is to come, I give you leave, Damon, to flatter your self, and to
expect, I shall still pursue those Methods, whose remembrance charms so well:
But, if it be possible, conceive these kind Thoughts between Sleeping and
Waking, that all my too forward Complaisance, my Goodness, and my Tenderness,
which I consess to have for you, may pass for Half-Dreams; for it is most
certain, That, though the Favors of the Fair
Are ever to the Lover dear;
Yet, lest he should reproach that easy Flame,
That buys its Satisfaction with its Shame
She ought but rarely to confess,
How much she finds of Tenderness;
Nicely to guard the yielding part,
And hide the hard-kept Secret in her Heart.
For, let me tell you, Damon, though the Passion of a Woman of Honor be never
so innocent, and the Lover never so discreet and honest; her Heart feels I know
not what of Reproach within, at the Reflection of any Favors she has allowed
him. For my part, I never call to mind the least soft, or kind Word I have
spoken to Damon, without finding, at the same Instant, my Face covered over
with Blushes, and my Heart with sensible Pain. I sigh at the Remembrance of
every Touch I have stolen from his Hand, and have upbraided my Soul, which
confesses so much guilty Love, as that secret desire of Touching him made
appear. I am angry at the Discovery, though I am pleased at the same time, with
the Satisfaction I take in doing so; and ever disordered at the remembrance of
such Arguments of too much Love. And these unquiet Sentiments alone, are
sufficient to persuade me, that our Sex cannot be reserved too much. And I have
often, on these occasions, said to my self, The Reserve.
Though Damon every Virtue have,
With all that pleases in his Form,
That can adorn the Just and Brave,
That can the coldest Bosom warm;
Though Wit and Honor there abound;
Yet the Pursuer's never pursued,
And when my Weakness he has found,
His Love will sink to Gratitude:
While on the Asking Part he lives,
It Is she th'Obliger is, who gives.
And he that, at one throw, the Stake has won,
Gives over Play, since all the Stock is gone.
And what dull Gamester ventures certain Store
With Losers, who can set no more.


9 A-Clock.
Design to please no body.
I Should continue to accuse you of that Vice I have often done, that of
Laziness, if you remained past this Hour in Bed; it is time for you to rise; my
Watch tells you it is Nine a-Clock. Remember that I am absent, therefore do not
take too much pains in dressing your self, and setting your Person off.

The Question.
Tell me! What can he design,
Who in his Mistress absence will be fine?
Why does he cock, and comb, and dress?
Why is the Cravat-string in print?
What does th'Embroyder'd Coat confess?
Why to the Glass this long Address,
If there be nothing in it?
If no new Conquest is designed,
If no new Beauty fill his Mind?
Let Fools and Fops, whose Talents lie
In being neat, in being spruce,
Be dressed, be vain, and tawdery;
With Men of Sense, it is out of use:
The only Folly that Distinction sets
Between the noisy fluttering Fools and Wits.
Remember, Iris is away;
And sighing, to your Valet cry,
Spare your Perfumes and Care, to day
I have no business to be gay,
Since Iris is not by.
I Will be all negligent in Dress,
And scarce set off for Complaisance.
Put me on nothing that may please,
But only such as may give no Offense.
Say to your self, as you are dressing, Would it please Heaven, that I might
see Iris to day! But Oh! it is impossible: Therefore all that I shall see, will
be but indifferent Objects, since it is Iris only that I wish to see. And
sighing, whisper to your self, The Sigh.
Ah! Charming Object of my wishing Thought!
Ah! Soft Idea of a distant Bliss!
That only art in Dreams and Fancy brought,
To give short Intervals of Happiness.
But when I waking, find thou absent art;
And with thee, all that I adore,
What Pains, what Anguish fills my Heart!
What Sadness seizes me all over!
All Entertainments I neglect,
Since Iris is no longer there:
Beauty scarce claims my bare Respect,
Since in the Throng I sind not her.
Ah then! How vain it were to dress, and show,
Since all I wish to please, is absent now!


It Is with these Thoughts, Damon, that your Mind ought to be employed, during
your time of Dressing: And you are too knowing in Love, to be ignorant, That
when a Lover ceases to be blessed
With the dear Object he desires,
Ah! How indifferent are the rest!
How soon their Conversationtires!
Though they a thousand Arts to please invent,
Their Charms are dull, their Wit impertinent.


10 A-Clock.
Reading of Letters.
MY Cupid points you now to the Hour, in which you ought to retire into your
Cabinet, having already past an Hour in Dressing; and for a Lover, who is sure
not to appear before his Mistress, even that Hour is too much to be so
employed. But I will think, you thought of nothing less than Dressing, while
you were about it. Lose then no more Minutes, but open your Scrutore, and read
over some of those Billets you have received from me. Oh! What Pleasures a
Lover feels about his Heart, in reading those from a Mistress he entirely loves!

The Joy.
Who, but a Lover, can express
The Joys, the Pants, the Tenderness,
That the soft Amorous Soul invades,
While the dear Billet-doux he reads?
Raptures Divine the Heart o'er-flow;
Which he that loves not, cannot know.
A thousand Tremblings, thousand Fears,
The short-breathed Sighs, the joyful Tears;
The Transport, where the Love's confessed,
The Change, where Coldness is expressed;
The diffring Flames the Lover burns,
As those are shy, or kind, by Turns.
However you find 'em, Damon, construe 'em all to my Advantage: Possibly, some
of 'em have an Air of Coldness, something different from that Softness they are
usually too amply filled with; but where you find they have, believe there,
that Sense of Honor, and my Sexes Modesty, guided my Hand a little, against
the Inclinations of my Heart; and that it was a kind of an Atonement, I
believed, I ought to make, for something I feared, I had said too kind, and too
obliging before: But wherever you find that, stop that Check in my Carriere
of Love; you will be sure to find something that follows it to favor you, and
deny that unwilling Imposition upon my Heart; which, lest you should mistake,
Love shows himself in Smiles again, and flatters more agreeably, disdaining the
Tyranny of Honor, and Rigid Custom, that Imposition on our Sex; and will, in
spite of me, let you see, he Reigns absolutely in my Soul.

The Reading my Billet-doux may detain you an Hour; I have had Goodness enough
to write you enough to entertain you so long, at least, and sometimes reproach
my self for it; but, contrary to all my Scruples, I find my self disposed to
give you those frequent Marks of my Tenderness. If yours be so great as you
express it, you ought to kiss my Letters a Thousand times, you ought to read
them with Attention, and weigh every Word, and value every Line. A Lover may
receive a Thousand indearing Words from a Mistress, more easily than a Billet.
One says a great many kind Things of Course to a Lover, which one is not
willing to write, or to give testified under one's Hand, Signed and Sealed. But
when once a Lover has brought his Mistress to that degree of Love, he ought to
assure himself, she loves not at the common Rate.

Love's Witness.
Slight, unpremeditated Words are born,
By every common Wind, into the Air;
Carelessly uttered, dye as soon as born,
And in one Instant, give both Hope and Fear:
Breathing all Contraries with the same Wind,
According to the Caprice of the Mind.
But Billets-doux are constant Witnesses,
Substantial Records to Eternity;
Just Evidences, who the Truth confess;
On which, the Lover safely may rely:
They Are serious Thoughts, digested and resolved;
And last, when Words are into Clouds devolved.
I will not doubt, but you give Credit to all that is Kind in my Letters; and I
will believe, you find a Satisfaction in the Entertainment they give you, and
that the Hour of Reading 'em is not dis-agreeable to you. I could wish, your
Pleasure might be Extreme, even to the Degree of suffering the Thought of my
Absence not to diminish any Part of it. And I could wish too, at the End of
your Reading, you would sigh with Pleasure, and say to your self, -- The
Transport.
O Iris! While you thus can charm,
While at this Distance, you can wound and warm;
My absent Torments I will bless and bear,
That give me such dear Proofs, how kind you are.
Present, the valued Store was only seen:
Now I am rifling the bright Mass within.
Every dear past, and happy Day,
When Languishing at Iris Feet, I lay;
When all my Prayers, and all my Tears could move
No more than her Permission, I should love:
Vain with my Glorious Destiny,
I thought, beyond, scarce any Heaven could be.
But, Charming Maid, now I am taught,
That Absence has a thousand Joys to give,
On which, the Lover, present, never thought,
That recompense the Hours we grieve.
Rather by Absence let me be undone,
Than forfeit all the Pleasures that has won.


With this little Rapture, I wish you would finish the Reading my Letters, shut
your Scrutore, and quit your Cabinet; for my Love leads to Eleven A-Clock.

11 A-Clock.
The Hour to Write in.
IF my Watch did not inform you, it is now time to Write: I believe, Damon, your
Heart would; and tell you also, that I should take it kindly, if you would
employ a whole Hour that way; and that you should never lose an Occasion of
Writing to me, since you are assured of the Welcome I give your Letters.
Perhaps you will say, an Hour is too much, and that it is not the Mode to write
long Letters. I grant you, Damon, when we write those indifferent ones, of
Gallantry in Course, or necessary Compliment; the handsome Comprising of which,
in the fewest Words, renders 'em the most agreeable: But in Love, we have a
Thousand foolish things to say, that, of themselves, bear no great Sound, but
have a mighty Sense in Love; for there is a peculiar Eloquence, natural alone
to a Lover, and to be understood by no other Creature: To those, Words have a
thousand Graces, and Sweetnesses; which, to the Unconcerned, appears Meanness,
and Easy Sense, at the best. But, Damon, you and I are none of those ill
Judges of the Beauties of Love; we can penetrate beyond the Vulgar, and
perceive the fine Soul in every Line, through all the humble Dress of Phrase;
when possibly, they who think they discern it best in Florid Language, do not
see it at all. Love was not born, or bred in Courts, but Cottages; and nursed
in Groves and Shades, smiles on the Plains, and wantons in the Streams; all
Unador'd, and Harmless. Therefore, Damon, do not consult your Wit in this
Affair, but Love alone; and speak all that He and Nature taught you, and let
the fine Things you learn in Schools alone: Make use of those Flowers you have
gathered there, when you converse with Statesmen, and the Gown. Let Iris
possess your Heart in all its simple Innocence, that is the best Eloquence to
her that loves; and this is my Instruction to a Lover, that would succeed in
his Amors; for I have a Heart very difficult to please, and this is the
nearest Way to it.

Advice to Lovers.
Lovers, if you would gain a Heart,
Of Damon learn to win the Prize:
He Will show you all its tend' rest Part,
And where its greatest Danger lies.
The Magazin of its Disdain;
Where Honor, feebly guarded, does remain.
If Present, do but little say;
Enough the silent Lover speaks:
But wait, and sigh, and gaze all day:
Such Rhet'rick, more than Language takes.
For Words the dullest way do move;
And uttered more to show your Wit, than Love.
Let your Eyes tell her of your Heart:
Its Story is, for Words, too delicate.
Souls thus exchange, and thus impart,
And all their Secrets can relate.
A Tear, a broken Sigh, She Will understand;
Or the soft trembling Pressings of the Hand.
Or if your Pain must be in Words expressed,
Let Them fall gently, unassur'd, and slow;
And where they fail, your Looks may tell the rest:
Thus Damon spoke, and I was conquered so.
The witty Talker has mistook his Art:
The modest Lover only charms the Heart.
Thus while all day you gazing sit,
And fear to speak, and fear your Fate,
Tou more Advantages by Silence get,
Than the gay forward Touth, with all his Prate.
Let him be silent here; but when away,
Whatever Love can dictate, let him say.
There let the Bashful Soul unvail,
And give a Loose to Love and Truth:
Let him improve the Amorous Tale,
With all the Force of Words, and Fire of Touth.
There all, and any thing, let him express;
Too long he cannot write, too much confess.
O Damon! How well have you made me understand this soft Pleasure! You know my
Tenderness too well, not to be sensible, how I am charmed with your agreeable
long Letters.

The Invention.
Ah! He who first found out the Way,
Souls to each other to convey,
Without dull Speaking, sure must be
Something above Humanity.
Let the fond World in vain dispute,
And the first Sacred Mystery impute
Of Letters, to the Learned Brood;
And of the Glory, cheat a God:
'Twas Love alone, that first the Art essayed;
And Psyche was the first fair yielding Maid,
That was by the dear Billet-doux setray'd.
It is an Art too ingenious, to have been found out by Man; and too necessary
to Lovers, not to have been invented by the God of Love himself. But, Damon, I
do not pretend to exact from you those Letters of Gallantry, which, I have told
you, are filled with nothing but fine Thoughts, and writ with all the Arts of
Wit and Subtilty: I would have yours still, all Tender, unaffected Love, Words
unchosen, Thoughts unstudied, and Love unfeigned. I had rather find more
Softness, than Wit, in your Passion; more of Nature, than of Art; more of the
Lover, than the Poet. Nor would I have you write any of those little short
Letters, that are read over in a Minute: In Love, long Letters bring a long
Pleasure. Do not trouble your self to make 'em fine, or writea great deal of
Wit and Sense in a few Lines; that is the Notion of a witty Billet, in any
Affair, but that of Love: And have a Care, rather to avoid these Graces to a
Mistress; and assure your self, dear Damon, that what pleases the Soul, pleases
the Eye; and the Largeness, or Bulk of your Letter, shall never offend me; and
that I only am displeased, when I find them small. A Letter is ever the best,
and most powerful Agent to a Mistress: It almost always persuades; it is always
renewing little Impressions, that possibly, otherwise, Absence would deface.
Make use then, Damon, of your Time, while it is given you; and thank me, that I
permit you to write to me: Perhaps, I shall not always continue in the Humor
of suffering you to do so; and it may so happen, by some Turn of Chance and
Fortune, that you may be deprived, at the same time, both of my Presence, and
of the Means of Sending to me. I will believe, that such an Accident would be a
great Misfortune to you; for I have often heard you say, that, To make the most
happy Lover suffer Martyrdom, one need only forbid him Seeing, Speaking, and
Writing to the Object he loves. Take all the Advantages then you can, you
cannot give me too often, Marks too powerful of your Passion: Write therefore,
during this Hour, every Day. I give you leave to believe, that while you do so,
you are Serving me the most Obligingly, and Agreeably you can, while Absent;
and that you are giving me a Remedy against all Grief, Uneasiness, Melancholy,
and Despair. Nay, if you exceed your Hour, you need not be ashamed: The Time
you employ in this kind Devoir, is the Time that I shall be grateful for, and,
no doubt, will recompense it. You ought not, however, to neglect Heaven for me;
I will give you time for your Devotion, for my Watch tells you, it is time to go
to the Temple.

12 A-Clock.
Indispensible Duty.
THere are certain Duties, which one ought never to neglect: That of Adoring
the Gods, is of this nature; and which we ought to pay, from the bottom of our
Hearts: And that, Damon, is the only Time, I will dispense with your not
Thinking on me. But I would not have you go to one of those Temples, where the
Celebrated Beauties, and those that make a Profession of Gallantry, go; and
which come thither, only to see, and be seen; and whither they repair, more to
show their Beauty and Dress, than to honor the Gods. If you will take my
Advice, and oblige my Wish, you shall go to those that are least frequented;
and you shall appear there, like a Man, that has a perfect Veneration for all
things Sacred.

The Instruction.
Damon, if your Heart, and Flame,
Tou wish, should always be the same,
Do not give it leave to Rove,
Nor expose it to new Harms:
Eer you think on it, you may Love,
If you gaze on Beauty's Charms.
If with me, you would not part,
Turn your Eyes into your Heart.
If you find a new Desire,
In your Easy Soul, take Fire,
From the Tempting Ruin fly;
Think it Faithless, think it Base:
Fancy soon will fade, and dye,
If you wisely cease to gaze.
Lovers should have Honor too,
Or they pay but half Love's Due.
Do not to the Temple go,
With design to Gaze, or Show:
What ever Thoughts you have abroad,
Though you can deceive elsewhere,
There Is no Feigning with your God;
Souls should be all Perfect there.
The Heart that is to the Altar brought,
Only Heaven should fill its Thought.
Do not your sober Thoughts perplex,
By gazing on the Ogling Sex.
Or if Beauty call your Eyes,
Do not on the Object dwell:
Guard your Heart from the Surprise,
By thinking, Iris does excel.
Above all Earthly Things, I Would be,
Damon, most Beloved by Thee:
And only Heaven must Rival me.
1 A-Clock.
Forced Entertainment.
I Perceive, it will be very difficult for you to quit the Temple, without
being surrounded with Complements, from People of Ceremony, Friends, and
News-Mongers, and several of those sorts of Persons, who afflict and busy
themselves, and rejoice at a Hundred things, they have no Interest in: Coquets,
and Politicians; who make it the Business of their whole Lives, to gather all
the News of the Town: adding, or diminishing, according to the Stock of their
Wit and Invention, and spreading it all abroad, to the believing Fools and
Gossips; and perplexing every Body with a Hundred ridiculous Novels, which they
pass off, for Wit, and Entertainment: Or else, some of those Re-counters of
Adventures, that are always telling of Intrigues, and that make a Secret, to a
Hundred People, of a Thousand foolish things they have heard. Like a certain
Pert, and Impertinent Lady of the Town, whose Youth and Beauty being past, sets
up for Wit, to uphold a feeble Empire over idle Hearts: And whose Character is
this, -- The Coquet.
Milinda, who had never been
Esteemed a Beauty at Fifteen,
Always Amorous was, and Kind:
To every Swain, she lent an Ear.
Free as Air, but False as Wind;
Tet none complained, She was Severe.
She eased more than she made complain:
Was always Singing, Pert, and Vain.
Where ever the Throng was, she was seen,
And swept the Youths along the Green.
With equal Grace, she flattered all;
And fondly Proud of all Address:
Her Smiles invite, her Eyes do call;
And her vain Heart, her Looks confess.
She Raillies this, to that she Bowed;
Was Talking ever, Laughing loud.
On every Side, she makes Advance;
And every where, a Confidance.
She tells, for Secrets, all she knows;
And all to know, she does pretend,
Beauty in Maids, she treats as Foes;
But every handsome Youth, as Friend.
Scandal still passes off for Truth;
And Noise and Nonsense, Wit, and Youth.
Coquet all over, and every Part,
Yet wanting Beauty, even of Art.
Herds with the Ugly, and the Old;
And plays the Critic on the rest
Of Men, the Bashful, and the Bold;
Either, and All, by Turns, likes best.
Even now, though Youth be languisht, she
Sets up for Love, and Gallantry.


This sort of Creature, Damon, is very dangerous; not that I fear, you will
squander away a Heart upon her, but your Hours; for, in spite of you, she will
detain you with a Thousand Impertinencies, and Eternal Tattle. She passes for a
Judging Wit; and there is nothing so troublesome, as such a Pretender. She,
perhaps, may get some Knowledge of our Correspondence; and then, no doubt, will
improve it, to my Disadvantage. P^ssibly, she may rail at me; that is her
fashion, by the way of Friendly Speaking; and an Awkward Commendation, the most
effectual Way of Desaming, and Traducing. Perhaps she tells you, in a cold
Tone, that you are a Happy Man, to be Beloved by me: That Iris, indeed, is
handsome; and she wonders, she has no more Lovers; but the Men are not of her
Mind; if they were, you should have more Rivals. She commends my Face, but that
I have Blue Eyes, and it is pity my Complexion is no better: My Shape, but too
much inclining to Fat. Cries -- She would charm infinitely with her Wit, but
that she knows too well, she is Mistress of it. And concludes, -- But All
together, she is well enough. -- Thus she runs on, without giving you leave to
edge in a Word, in my Defense; and ever, and anon, Crying up her own Conduct,
and Management: Tell you, how she is oppressed with Lovers, and fatigued with
Addresses; and recommending her self, at every Turn, with a perceivable
Cunning: And all the while, is Jilting you of your good Opinion; which she
would buy, at the Price of any Body's Repose, or her own Fame, though but for
the Vanity of Adding to the number of her Lovers. When she sees a new Spark,
the first thing she does, she enquires into his Estate: If she find it such, as
may (if the Coxcomb be well managed) supply her Vanity, she makes Advances to
him, and applies her self to all those little Arts, she usually makes use of,
to gain her Fools; and, according to his Humor, dresses and affects her own.
But, Damon, since I point to no particular Person, in this Character, I will
not name, who you shall avoid; but all of this sort, I conjure you, wheresoever
you find 'em. But if unlucky Chance throw you in their Way, hear all they say,
without Credit, or Regard, as far as Decency will suffer you: Hear 'em, without
approving their Foppery; and hear 'em, without giving 'em Cause to censure you.
But it is so much Time lost, to listen to all the Novels, this sort of People
will perplex you with; whose Business is, to be idle; and who, even tire
themselves with their own Impertinencies. And be assured, after all, there is
nothing they can tell you, that is worth your Knowing. And, Damon, A perfect
Lover never asks any News, but of the Maid he loves.

The Enquiry.
Damon, If your Love be True,
To the Heart that you possess,
Tell me; What have you to do,
Where you have no Tenderness?
Her Affairs, who cares to learn,
For whom he has not some Concern?
If a Lover fain would know,
If the Object loved be true,
Let her but industrious be,
To watch his Curiosity.
Though never so cold his Questions seem,
They come from warmer Thoughts within.
When I hear a Swain enquire
What Gay Melinda does to live,
I conclude, there is some Fire
In a Heart Inquisitive:
Or it is, at least, the Bill, that is set,
To show, The Heart is to be Let.
2 A-Clock.
Dinnertime.
LEave all those fond Entertainments, or you will dis-oblige me, and make
Dinner wait for you; for my Cupid tells you, it is that Hour. Love does not
pretend to make you lose that; nor is it my Province, to order you your Diet.
Here I give you a perfect Liberty, to do what you please: And possibly, it is
the only Hour in the whole Four and twenty, that I will absolutely resign you,
or dispense with your, even so much as Thinking on me. It Is true, in Seating
your self at Table, I would not have you placed over against a very Beautiful
Object; for in such an one, there are a Thousand little Graces, in Speaking,
Looking, and Laughing, that fail not to Charm, if one gives way to the Eyes, to
gaze and wander that Way; in which, perhaps, in spite of you, you will find a
Pleasure: And while you do so, though without Design, or Concern, you give the
fair Charmer a sort of Vanity, in believing, you have placed your self there,
only for the Advantage of Looking on her; and assumes a Hundred little Graces,
and Affectations, which are not Natural to her, to complete a Conquest, which
she believes so well begun already. She softens her Eyes, and sweetens her
Mouth; and, in fine, puts on another Air, than when she had no Design; and when
you did not, by your continual Looking on her, rouse her Vanity, and increase
her easy Opinion of her own Charms. Perhaps she knows, I have some Interest in
your Heart; and Prides her self, at least, with believing, she has attracted
the Eyes of my Lover, if not his Heart; and thinks it easy to vanquish the
Whole, if she pleases; and triumphs over me in her secret Imaginations.
Remember, Damon, that while you act thus in the Company, and Conversation of
other Beauties, that every Look, or Word, you give, in favor of 'em, is an
Indignity to my Reputation; and, which you cannot suffer, if you love me truly,
and with Honor: And, assure your self, so much Vanity as you inspire in her,
so much Fame you rob me of; for whatever Praises you give another Beauty, so
much you take away from mine. Therefore, if you dine in Company, do as others
do: Be generally Civil, not applying your self, by Words, or Looks, to any
particular Person: Be as gay as you please: Talk and laugh with all, for this
is not the Hour for Chagrin.

The Permission.
My Damon, though I stint your Love,
I will not stint your Appetite:
That I would have you still improve,
By every new, and fresh Delight.
Feast, till Apollo hides his Head;
Or drink the Amorous God to Thetis Bed.
Be like your self: All Witty, Gay!
And over the Bottle bless the Board,
The Listening round will, all the Day,
Be charmed, and pleased with every ibord.
Though Venus Son inspire your Wit,
It Is the Selenian God best utters it.
Here talk of every thing, but me,
Since every Thing you say with Grace.
If not disposed your Humor be,
And you would this Hour in Silence pass;
Since something must the Subject prove
Of Damon's Thoughts; let it be Me, and Love.
But, Damon, this ensranchis'd Hour,
No Bounds, or Laws, will I impose;
But leave it wholly in your Power,
What Humor to refuse, or choose.
I Rules prescribe but to your Flame;
For I, your Mistress, not Physician, am.
3 A-Clock.
Visits to Friends.
DAmon, my Watch is juster than you imagine; it would not have you live Retired
and Solitary, but permits you to go, and make Visits. I am not one of those
that believe, Love and Friendship cannot find a Place in one and the same
Heart: And that Man would be very unhappy, who, as soon as he had a Mistress,
should be obliged to renounce the Society of his Friends. I must confess, I
would not, that you should have so much Concern for them, as you have for me;
for I have heard a sort of a Proverb, that says, He cannot be very fervent in
Love, who is not a little cold in Friendship. You are not ignorant, that when
Love establishes himself in a Heart, he Reigns a Tyrant there; and will not
suffer, even Friendship, if it pretend to share his Empire there.

Cupid.
Love is a God, whose charming Sway,
Both Heaven, and Earth, and Seas obey.
A Power that will not mingled be
With any dull Equality.
Since first from Heaven, which gave him Birth,
He ruled the Empire of the Earth,
Jealous of Sovereign Power, he rules,
And will be Absolute in Souls.
I should be very angry, if you had any of those Friendships, which one ought
to desire in a Mistress only; for many times it happens, that you have
Sentiments a little too tender for those Amiable Persons; and many times, Love
and Friendship are so confounded together, that one cannot easily discern one
from the other. I have seen a Man flatter himself with an Opinion, that he had
but an Esteem for a Woman, when, by some Turn of Fortune in her Life, as
Marrying, or Receiving the Addresses of Men, he has found, by Spite and
Jealousies within, that that was Love, which he before took for Complaisance,
or Friendship. Therefore have a Care; for such Amities are dangerous. Not but
that a Lover may have Fair and Generous Female Friends, whom he ought to visit;
and perhaps, I should esteem you less, if I did not believe, you were valued by
such, if I were perfectly assured, they were Friends, and not Lovers. But have
a care, you hide not a Mistress under this Veil, or that you gain not a Lover
by this Pretense; for you may begin with Friendship, and end with Love; and I
should be equally afflicted, should you give it, or receive it. And though you
charge our Sex with all the Vanity; yet I often find Nature to have given you
as large a Portion of that common Crime, which you would shuffle off, as
ashamed to own; and are as fond and vain of the Imagination of a Conquest, as
any Coquet of us all; though, at the same time, you despise the Victim, you
think it adds a Trophy to your Fame. And I have seen a Man dress, and trick,
and adjust his Looks and Mien, to make a Visit to a Woman he loved not, nor
ever could love, as for those he made to his Mistress; and only for the Vanity
of making a Conquest upon a Heart, even unworthy of the little Pains he has
taken about it. And what is this, but buying Vanity at the Expense of Sense and
Ease; and with Fatigue, purchase the Name of a Conceited Fop, besides that of a
dishonest Man? For he who takes pains to make himself Beloved, only to please
his curious Humor, though he should say nothing that tends to it, more than by
his Looks, his Sighs, and now and then breaking into Praises and Commendations
of the Object, by the Care he takes, to appear well dressed before her, and in
good Order; he lies in his Looks, he deceives with his Mien and Fashion, and
cheats with every Motion, and every Grace he puts on: He cozens when he sings,
or dances, he dissembles when he sighs; and every thing he does, that wilfully
gains upon her, is Malice propense, Baseness, and Art below a Man of Sense, or
Virtue: And yet these Arts, these Coz'nages, are the common Practices of the
Town. What Is this, but that Damnable Vice, of which they so reproach our Sex;
that of Jilting for Hearts? And it is in vain, that my Lover, after such foul
Play, shall think to appease me, with saying, He did it, to try how easily he
could conquer, and of how great Force his Charms were: And why should I be
angry, if all the Town loved him, since he loved none but Iris? Oh Foolish
Pleasure! How little Sense goes to the making of such a Happiness? And how
little Love must he have for one particular Person, who would wish to inspire
it into all the World, and yet himself pretend to be insensible? But this,
Damon, is rather, what is but too much practiced by your Sex, than any Guilt I
charge on you; though Vanity be an Ingredient, that Nature very seldom omits,
in the Composition of either Sex; and you may be allowed a Tincture of it, at
least. And perhaps, I am not wholly exempt from this Leaven in my Nature, but
accuse my self sometimes, of finding a secret Joy of being Adored, though I
even hate my Worshipper. But if any such Pleasure touch my Heart, I find it, at
the same time, blushing in my Cheeks, with a guilty Shame; which soon checks
the petty Triumph, and I have a Virtue at soberer Thoughts, that I find
surmounts my Weakness, and Indiscretion; and I hope, Damon finds the same; for,
should he have any of those Attachments, I should have no Pity for him.

The Example.
Damon, if you would have me True,
Be you my President, and Guide:
Example sooner we pursue,
Than the dull Dictates of our Pride.
Precepts of Virtue are too weak an Aim:
It Is Demonstration, that can best reclaim.
Show me the Path you would have me go;
With such a Guide, I cannot stray:
What you approve, what ever you do,
It is but just, I bend that Way.
If true, my Honor favors your Design:
If false, Revenge is the Result of mine.
A Lover True, a Maid Sincere,
Are to be prized, as Things Divine:
It Is Justice makes the Blessing dear;
Justice of Love, without Design.
And She that Reigns not in a Heart alone,
Is never Safe, or Easy, on her Throne.
4 A-Clock.
General Conversation.
IN this Visiting Hour, many People will happen to meet, at one and the same
time together, in a Place: And, as you make not Visits to Friends, to be
silent, you ought to enter into Conversation with 'em; but those Conversations
ought to be General, and of General Things; for there is no necessity of making
your Friend the Confident of your Amors: 'Twould infinitely displease me, to
hear, you have revealed to them, all that I have reposed in you: Though Secrets
never so trivial, yet, since uttered between Lovers, they deserve to be prized
at a higher Rate. For what can show a Heart more indifferent, and indiscreet,
than to declare, in any Fashion, or with Mirth, or Joy, the Tender Things a
Mistress says to a Lover; and which possibly, related at Second Hand, bear not
the same Sense, because they have not the same Sound and Air, they had
Originally, when they came from the soft Heart of her, who sighed 'em first, to
her lavish Lover. Perhaps they are told again with Mirth, or Joy, unbecoming
their Character, and Business; and then they lose their Graces; (for Love is
the most Solemn Thing in Nature, and the most unsuiting with Gayety.) Perhaps
the soft Expressions suit not so well the harsher Voice of the Masculine Lover,
whose Accents were not formed for so much Tenderness; at least, not of that
sort; for Words that have the same Meaning, are altered from their Sense, by
the least Tone, or Accent of the Voice; and those proper, and fitted to my
Soul, are not, possibly, so to yours, though both have the same Efficacy upon
us; yours upon my Heart, as mine upon yours; and both will be mis-understood by
the unjudging World. Besides this, there is a Holiness in Love, that is true,
that ought not to be profaned: And as the Poet truly says, at the latter End
of an Ode; of which, I will recite the Whole.

The Invitation.
Aminta, fear not to confess
The charming Secret of thy Tenderness:
That which a Lover cannot conceal,
That which, to me, thou should reveal;
And is but what thy Lovely Eyes express.
Come, whisper to my panting Heart,
That heaves, and meets thy Voice half way:
That guesses what thou would impart,
And languishes for what thou have to say.
Confirm my trembling Doubt, and make me know,
Whence all these Blushings, and these Sighings flow.
Why do thou scruple to unfold
A Mystery that does my Life concern?
If thoune'er speak, it will be told;
For Lovers all things can discern.
From every Look, from every bashful Grace,
That still succeed each other, in thy Face,
I shall the dear Transporting Secret learn:
But it is a Pleasure, not to be expressed,
To hear it by thy Voice confessed,
When soft Sighs breath it on my panting Breast.
All calm and silent is the Grove,
Whose shading Boughs resist the Day:
Here thou may blush, and talk of Love,
While only Winds, unheeding, stay,
That will not bear the Sound away:
While I, with solemn Awful Joy,
All my Attentive Faculties employ;
Listening to every valued Word;
And in my Soul, the Sacred Treasure hoard.
There, like some Mystery Divine,
The Wondrous Knowledge I Will enshrine.
Love can his Joys, no longer call his own,
Than the dear Secret's kept unknown.
There is nothing more true, than those two last Lines; and that Love ceases to
be a Pleasure, when it ceases to be a Secret, and one you ought to keep Sacred.
For the World, who never makes a right Judgment of Things, will mis-interpret
Love, as they do Religion; every one judging it, according to the Notion he has
of if, or the Talent of his Sense. Love, as a great Duke said, is like
Apparitions; every one talks of 'em, but few have seen 'em: Every body thinks
himself capable of understanding Love, and that he is a Master in the Art of
it; when there is nothing so nice, or difficult to be rightly comprehended; and
indeed, cannot be, but to a Soul very delicate. Nor will he make himself known
to the Vulgar: There must be an uncommon Fineness in the Mind, that contains
him; the rest, he only visits in as many Disguises, as there are Dispositions,
and Natures; where he makes but a short Stay, and is gone. He can fit himself
to all Hearts, being the greatest Flatterer in the World: And he possesses
every one with a Considence, that they are in the Number of his Elect; and they
think, they know him perfectly, when nothing but the Spirits refined, possess
him in his Excellency. From this Difference of Love in different Souls,
proceeds those odd Fantastic Maxims, which so many hold of so different Kinds:
And this makes the most innocent Pleasures pass oftentimes for Crimes, with the
unjudging Crowd, who call themselves Lovers: And you will have your Passion
censured, by as many as you shall discover it to, and as many several Ways. I
advise you therefore, Damon, to make no Confifidents of your Amors; and
believe, that Silence has, with me, the most powerful Charm.

It Is also in these Conversations, that those indiscreetly civil Persons often
are, who think to oblige a good Man, by letting him know, he is Beloved by some
one, or other; and making him understand, how many good Qualities he is Master
of, to render him agreeable to the fair Sex, if he would but advance, where
Love and good Fortune calls; and that a too constant Lover loses a great part
of his Time, which might be managed to more Advantage, since Youth has so
short a Race to run: By this, and a Thousand the like indecent Complaisances,
give him a Vanity, that suits not with that Discretion, which has hitherto
acquired him so good a Reputation. I would not have you, Damon, act on these
Occasions, as many of the Easy Sparks have done before you, who receive such
Weakness and Flattery for Truth; and passing it off with a Smile, suffer 'em to
advance in Folly, 'till they have gained a Credit with 'em, and they believe
all they hear; telling 'em they do so, by consenting Gestures, Silence, or open
Approbation. For my part, I should not condemn a Lover, that should answer such
a sort of civil Brokers for Love somewhat briskly, and by giving 'em to
understand, they are already engaged; or directing 'em to Fools, that will
possibly hearken to 'em, and credit such Stuff, shame 'em out of a Folly so
insamous, and disingenious. In such a Case only, I am willing you should own
your Passion; not that you need tell the Object, which has charmed you: And you
may say, you are already a Lover, without saying, you are Beloved. For so long
as you appear to have a Heart unengag'd, you are exposed to all the little Arts
and Addresses of this sort of obliging Procurers of Love, and give way to the
Hope they have, of making you their Proselyte. For your own Reputation then,
and my Ease and Honor, shun such Conversations; for they are neither credible
to you, nor pleasing to me: And believe me, Damon, a true Lover has no
Curiosity, but what concerns his Mistress.

5 A-Clock.
Dangerous Visits.
I Foresee, or fear, that these busy, impertinent Friends will oblige you, to
visit some Ladies of their Acquaintance, or yours: My Watch does not forbid
you. Yet I must tell you, I apprehend Danger in such Visits; and I fear, you
will have need of all your Care and Precaution, in these Encounters. That you
may give me no Cause to suspect you, perhaps you will argue, that Civility
obliges you to it: If I were assured, there would no other Design be carried on,
I should believe, it were to advance an Amorous Prudence too far, to forbid
you. Only keep your self upon your Guard; for the Business of most part of the
fair Sex is, to seek only the Conquest of Hearts: All their Civilities, are but
so many Interests; and they do nothing without Design. And in such
Conversations, there is always a Je ne scay quoy, that is to be feared;
especially, when Beauty is accompanied with Youth and Gayety; and which they
assume, upon all Occasions that may serve their Turn. And I consess, it is not
an easy matter to be just in these Hours and Conversations: The most certain
Way of being so, is to imagine, I read all your Thoughts, observe all your
Looks, and hear all your Words.

The Caution.
My Damon, if your Heart be kind,
Do not too long with Beauty stay;
For there are certain Moments, when the Mind
Is hurried, by the Force of Charms, away.
In Fate, a Minute Critical there lics,
That waits on Love, and takes you by Surprise.
A Lover pleased with Constancy,
Lives still as if the Maid he loved were by:
As if his Actions were in View:
As if his Steps she did pursue;
Or that his very Soul she knew.
Take heed; for though I am not present there,
My Love, my Genius, waits you every where.
I am very much pleased with the Remedy, you say, you make use of, to defend
your self from the Attacks that Beauty gives your Heart; which, in one of your
Billets, you said, was this, or to this purpose.

The Charm for Constancy.
Iris, to keep my Soul entire, and true,
It thinks, each Moment of the Day, on you.
And when a charming Face I see,
That does all other Eyes incline,
It has no Influence on me:
I think it even deformed to thine.
My Eyes, my Soul, and Sense, regardless move
To all, but the dear Object of my Love.
But, Damon, I know, all Lovers are naturally Flatterers, though they do not
think so themselves; because every one makes a Sense of Beauty, according to
his own Fancy. But perhaps, you will say, in your own Defense, That it is not
Flattery to say, an Unbeautiful Woman is Beautiful, if he that says so,
believes she is so. I should be content to acquit you of the first, provided
you allow me the last: And if I appear Charming in Damon's Eyes, I am not fond
of the Approbation of any other. It Is enough, the World thinks me not
altogether disagreeable, to justify his Choice; but let your good Opinion give
what Increase it pleases, to my Beauty; though your Approbation give me a
Pleasure, it shall not a Vanity; and I am contented, that Damon should think me
a Beauty, without my believing I am one. It Is not to draw new Assurances, and
new Vows from you, that I speak this; though Tales of Love are the only ones we
desire to hear often told, and which never tire the Hearers, if addressed to
themselves: But it is not to this End, I now seem to doubt what you say to my
Advantage: No, my Heart knows no Disguise, nor can dissemble one Thought of it
to Damon; it is all Sincere, and Honest, as his Wish: It Is therefore it tells
you, it does not credit every Thing you say; though I believe, you say
abundance of Truths, in a great Part of my Character. But when you advance to
that, which my own Sense, my Judgment, or my Glass cannot persuade me to
believe; you must give me leave, either to believe, you think me vain enough to
credit you, or pleased, that your Sentiments and mine are differing in this
Point. But I doubt, I may rather reply in some Verses, a Friend of yours and
mine, sent to a Person, she thought, had but indifferent Sentiments for her;
yet, who, nevertheless, flattered her, because he imagined, she had a very
great Esteem for him. She is a Woman that, you know, naturally hates Flattery:
On the other side, she was extremely dis-satisfy'd, and uneasy, at his
Opinion, of his being more in her Favor, than she desired he should believe.
So that, one Night, having left her full of Pride and Anger, she, next Morning,
sent him these Verses, instead of a Billet-doux.

The Defyance.
By Heaven, it is false: I am not vain;
And rather would the Subject be
Of your Indifference, or Disdain,
Than Wit, or Raillery.
Take back the trifling Praise you give,
And pass it on same Easier Fool,
Who may th'Injuring Wit believe,
That turns her into Ridicule.
Tell her, she is Witty, Fair, and Gay;
With all the Charms that can subdue:
Perhaps she will credit what you say:
But Curse me, if I do.
If your Diversion you design,
On my Good Nature you have pressed:
Or if you do intend it mine,
You have mistook the Jest.
Philander, fly that guilty Art:
Your Charming Facil Wit will find,
It cannot play long on a Heart,
That is Sincere and Kind.
For Wit with Softness does reside,
Good Nature is with Pity stored;
But Flatt'ry's the Result of Pride,
And fawns to be Adored.
Nay, even when you smile and bow,
It Is to be rendered more complete.
Your Wit, with every Grace you show,
Is but a Popular Cheat.
Laugh on, and call me Coxcomb -- do;
And, your Opinion to improve,
Think, all you think of me, is true;
And, to confirm it, swear, I love.
Then, while you wreck my Soul with Pain,
And of a Cruel Conquest boast,
It Is you, Philander, that are Vain,
And Witty, at my Cost.
Possibly, the angry Aminta, when she writ these Verses, was more offended,
that he believed himself beloved, than that he flattered; though she would seem
to make that a great Part of the Quarrel, and Cause of her Resentment: For we
are often in an Humor, to seem more Modest in that Point, than naturally we
are; being too apt to have a favorable Opinion of our selves: And it is rather,
the Effects of a Fear that we are flattered, than our own ill Opinion of the
Beauty flattered; and that the Praiser does not think so well of it, as we do
our selves, or as, at least, we wish he should. Not but there are Grains of
Allowance, for the Temper of him that speaks: One Man's Humor is, to talk
much; and he may be permitted to enlarge upon the Praise he gives the Person he
pretends to, without being accused of much Guilt. Another hates to be Wordy;
from such an one, I have known, one soft Expression, one tender Thing, go as
far, as whole Days everlasting Protestations, urged with Vows, and mighty
Eloquence: And both the One, and the Other, indeed, must be allowed, in good
Manners, to stretch the Complement beyond the Bounds of nice Truth; and we must
not wonder, to hear a Man call a Woman, a Beauty, when she is not Ugly; or
another, a Great Wit, if she have but Common Sense, above the Vulgar; well
Bred, when well Dressed; and Good-natured, when Civil. And as I should be very
Ridiculous, if I took all you said, for Absolute Truth; so I should be very
Unjust, not to allow you very Sincere, in almost all you said besides; and
those Things, the most Material to Love, Honor, and Friendship. And for the
rest, Damon, be it true, or false, this believe; You speak with such a Grace,
that I cannot choose but Credit you; and find an infinite Pleasure in that
Faith, because I love you: And if I cannot find the Cheat, I am contented, you
should deceive me on, because you do it so agreeably.

6 A-Clock.
Walk without Design.
YOu yet have Time to Walk; and my Watch foresaw, you could not refuse your
Friends. You must to the Park, or the Mall; for the Season is fair, and
inviting; and all the Young Beauties love those Places too well, not to be
there. It Is there, that a Thousand Intrigues are carried on, and as many more
designed. It Is there, that every one is set out for Conquest; and who aim at
nothing, less than Hearts. Guard yours well, my Damon; and be not always
Admiring what you see. Do not, in passing by sigh 'em silent Praises. Suffer
not so much as a guilty Wish to approach your Thoughts, nor a heedful Glance to
steal from your fine Eyes: Those are Regards, you ought only to have for her
you Love. But Oh! Above all, have a Care of what you say. You are not
reproachable, if you should remain silent, all the Time of your Walk; nor would
those that know you, believe it the Effects of Dullness, but Melancholy. And if
any of your Friends ask you, Why you are so? I will give you leave to sigh, and
say -- The Mal-Content.
Ah! Wonder not, if I appear
Regardless of the Pleasures here;
Or that my Thoughts are thus confined
To the Just Limits of my Mind.
My Eyes take no Delight to rove
Over all the Smiling Charmers of the Grove,
Since She is absent, whom they Love.
Ask me not, Why the flowery Spring,
Or the Gay Little Birds, that sing,
Or the Young Streams, no more delight,
Or Shades and Arbours cannot invite?
Why the soft Murmurs of the Wind,
Within the Thick-grown Groves confined,
No more my Soul transport, or cheer?
Since all that is Charming, -- Iris is not here;
Nothing seems Glorious, nothing Fair.
Then suffer me to Wander thus,
With Down-cast Eyes, and Arms across.
Let Beauty, unregarded go;
The Trees and Flowers; unheeded grow.
Let purling Streams, neglected glide;
With all the Spring's adorning-Pride.
It Is Iris only Soul can give
To the Dull Shades, and Plains, and make 'em Thrive;
Nature, and my lost Joys, retrieve.


I do not, for all this, wholly confine your Eyes: You may look indifferently,
on all; but with a particular Regard, on none. You may praise all the Beauties,
in General; but no single One, too much. I will not exact from you, neither, an
entire Silence: There are a Thousand Civilities, you ought to pay to all your
Friends and Acquaintance; and while I caution you of Actions, that may get you
the Reputation of a Lover, of some of the Fair, that haunt those Places; I
would not have you, by an unnecessary, and uncomplainsant Sullenness, gain that
of a Person too Negligent, or Morose. I would have you remiss in no one
Punctilio of Good Manners. I would have you very Just, and pay all you Owe. But
in these Affairs, be not Over-generous, and give away too much. In fine, You
may Look, Speak, and Walk; but, Damon, do it all without Design: And while you
do so, remember, that Iris sent you this Advice.

The Warning.
Take heed, my Damon, in the Grove,
Where Beauties, with Design, do walk:
Take heed, my Damon, how you look, and talk;
For there are Ambuscades of Love.
The very Winds, that softly blow,
Will help betray your Easy Heart;
And all the Flowers, that blushing grow;
The Shades above, and Rivulets below,
Will take the Victor's Part.
Remember, Damon, all my Safety lies
In the Just Conduct of your Eyes.
The Heart, by Nature, Good and Brave,
Is, to those Treacherous Guards, a Slave.
If they let in the Fair destructive Foe,
Scarce Honor can defend her Noble Seat:
Even She will be corrupted too,
Or driven to a Retreat.
The Soul is but the Cully to the Sight,
And must be pleased, in what that takes Delight.
Therefore, examine your self well; and conduct your Eyes, during this Walk,
like a Lover, that seeks nothing: And do not stay too long in these Places.

7 A-Clock.
Voluntary Retreat.
It Is Time to be weary; it is Night: Take Leave of your Friends, and retire
Home. It Is in this Retreat, that you ought to recollect, in your Thoughts, all
the Actions of the Day; and all those Things, that you ought to give me an
Account of, in your Letter: You cannot hide the least Secret from me, without
Treason against Sacred Love. For all the World agrees, that Confidence is one
of the greatest Proofs of the Passion of Love; and that Lover, who refuses this
Confidence to the Person he loves, is to be suspected, to love but very
indifferently, and to think very poorly of the Sense and Generosity of his
Mistress. But, that you may acquit your self like a Man, and a Lover of Honor,
and leave me no Doubt upon my Soul; think of all you have done this Day, that I
may have all the Story of it, in your next Letter to me: But deal faithfully;
and neither add, nor diminish, in your Relation; the Truth and Sincerity of
your Confession will atone, even for little Faults, that you shall commit
against me, in some of those Things you shall tell me. For if you have failed
in any Point, or Circumstance of Love, I had much rather hear it from you, than
another: For it is a sort of Repentance, to accuse your self; and would be a
Crime unpardonable, if you suffer me to hear it from any other: And be assured,
while you confess it, I shall be indulgent enough to forgive you. The noblest
Quality of Man, is Sincerity; and, Damon, one ought to have as much of it in
Love, as in any other Business of one's Life, notwithstanding the most Part of
Men make no Account of it there; but will believe, there ought to be double
Dealing, and an Art, practiced in Love, as well as in War. But, Oh! beware of
that Notion:

Sincerity.
Sincerity! Thou greatest Good!
Thou Virtue, which so many boast!
And art so nicely understood!
And often, in the Searching, lost.
For when we do approach thee near,
The fine Idea, framed of thee,
Appears not now, so charming fair,
As the more useful Flattery.
Thou have no Glist'ring, to invite;
Nor take the Lover, at first Sight,
The Modest Virtue shuns the Crowd,
And lives, like Vestals, in a Cell;
In Cities, 'twill not be allowed;
Nor takes Delight, in Courts to dwell.
It Is Nonsense with the Man of Wit;
And even a Scandal to the Great:
For all the Tongue, and Fair, unfit;
And scorned bywiser Fops of State.
A Virtue, yet was never known
To the false Trader, or the falser Gown.
And, Damon, though thy Noble Blood
Be most Illustr'ous, and Refined;
Though every Grace; and every Good
Adorn thy Person, and thy Mind;
Yet, if this Virtue shine not there;
(This God-like Virtue, which alone,
Were thou less Witty, Brave, or Fair,
Would for all these, less prized, atone:)
My tender Folly I Would control,
And scorn the Conquest of thy Soul.
8 A-Clock.
Impatient Demands.
AFter you have sufficiently recollected your self, of all the past Actions of
the Day, call your Page into your Cabinet, or him, whom you trusted with your
last Letter to me; where you ought to enquire of him, a Thousand Things; and
all, of me. Ask impatiently; and be angry, if he answers not your Curiosity
soon enough: Think that he has a Dreaming in his Voice, in these Moments, more
than at other Times; and reproach him with Dullness. For it is most certain, that
when one loves tenderly, we would know in a Minute, what cannot be related in
an Hour. Ask him, How I did? How I received his Letter? And if he examined the
Air of my Face, when I took it? If I Blushed, or looked Pale? If my Hand
trembled, or I spoke to him, with short, interrupting Sighs? If I asked him any
Questions about you, while I was opening the Seal? or if I could not well
speak, and was silent? If I read it Attentively, and with Joy? And all this,
before you open the Answer, I have sent you by him: Which, because you are
impatient to read, you, with the more Haste and Earnestness, demand all you
expect from him; and that you may the better know, what Humor I was in, when I
writ that to you. For, Oh! a Lover has a Thousand little Fears, and Dreads; he
knows not why. In fine, make him recount to you, all that past, while he was
with me: And then you ought to read that which I have sent, that you may inform
your self of all that passes in my Heart; for you may assure your self, all
that I say to you that way, proceeds from thence.

The Assurance.
How shall a Lover come to know,
Whether he is Beloved, or no?
What dear Things must she impart,
To assure him of her Heart?
Is it, when her Blushes rise;
And she languish in her Eyes:
Tremble, when he does approach:
Look Pale, and faint at every Touch?
Is it when, a Thousand Ways,
She does his Wit and Beauty praise?
Or she venture to explain,
In less moving Words, a Pain;
Though so indiscreet she grows,
To confirm it with her Vows.
These some short-lived Passion moves;
While the Object's by, she loves;
While the gay, and sudden Fire
Kindles by some fond Desire:
And a Coldness will ensue,
When the Lover's out of View.
Then she reflects, with Scandal, over
The easy Scene, that past before.
Then, with Blushes, would recall
The unconsid' ring Criminal;
In which, a Thousand Faults she will find,
And chide the Errors of her Mind.
Such fickle Weight is found in Words,
As no substantial Faith affords:
Deceived and baffled all may be,
Who trust that frail Security.
But a well-digested Flame,
That will always be the same;
And that does, from Merit, grow
Established by our Reason too;
By a better Way, will prove,
It Is the unerring Fire of Love.
Lasting Records it will give:
And, that all she says, may live,
Sacred and Authentic stand,
Her Heart confirms it by her Hand.
If this, a Maid, well born, allow;
Damon, believe her Just and True.
9 A-Clock.
Melancholy Reflections.
YOu will not have much trouble to explain what my Watch designs here. There
can be no Thought more afficting, than that of the Absence of a Mistress; and
which, the Sighings of the Heart will soon make you find. Ten Thousand Fears
oppress him; he is jealous of every Body, and envies those Eyes and Ears, that
are charmed, by being near the Object adored. He grows impatient, and makes a
Thousand Resolutions, and as soon abandons 'em all. He gives himself wholly up
to the Torment of Incertainty; and by degrees, from one cruel Thought, to
another, winds himself up to insupportable Chagrin. Take this Hour then, to
think on your Misfortunes; which cannot be small, to a Soul that is wholly
sensible of Love. And every one knows, that a Lover, deprived of the Object of
his Heart, is deprived of all the World, and Inconsolable. For though one
wishes, without ceasing, for the dear Charmer one loves, and though you speak
of her every Minute; though you are writing to her every Day, and though you
are infinitely pleased with the dear, and tender Answers; yet, to speak
sincerely, it must be confessed, that the Felicity of a true Lover, is to be
always near his Mistress. And you may tell me, O Damon! what you please; and
say, that Absence inspires the Flame, which perpetual Presence would satiate; I
love too well, to be of that Mind; and when I am, I shall believe, my Passion
is declining. I know not whether it advances your Love; but surely, it must
ruin your Repose: And is it impossible to be, at once, an absent Lover, and
Happy too? For my part, I can meet with nothing, that can please, in the
Absence of Damon; but, on the contrary, I see all Things with Disgust. I will
flatter my self, that it is so with you; and that the least Evils appear great
Misfortunes; and that all those, who speak to you of any thing, but of what you
love, increase your Pain, by a new Remembrance of her Absence. I will believe,
that these are your Sentiments, you are assured, not to see me in some Weeks;
and, if your Heart do not betray your Words, all those Days will be tedious to
you. I would not, however, have your Melancholy too extreme; and to lessen it,
you may persuade your self, that I partake it with you; for, I remember, in
your Last, you told me, you would wish, we should be both grieved at the same
Time, and both, at the same Time, pleased; and I believe, I love too well, not
to obey you.

Love Secured.
Love, of all Joys, the sweetest is;
The most substantial Happiness:
The softest Blessing, Life can crave:
The noblest Passion, Souls can have.
Yet, if no Interruptions were,
No Difficulties came between,
I would not be rendered half so dear.
The Sky is gayest, when small Clouds are seen.
The sweetest Flower, the blushing Rose,
Amidst the Thorns, securest grows.
If Love were one continued Joy,
How soon the Happiness would cloy!
The wiser Gods did this foresee;
And, to preserve the Bliss entire,
Mixed it with Doubt and Jealousy,
Those necessary Fuels to the Fire.
Sustained the sleeting Pleasures, with new Fears;
With little Quarrels, Sighs, and Tears;
With Absence, that tormenting Smart,
That makes a Minute seem a Day;
A Day, a Year, to the impatient Heart,
That languishes in the Delay,
But cannot sigh the tender Pain away;
That still returns, and with a greater Force,
Through every Vein, it takes its grateful Course.
But whatsoever the Lover does sustain,
Tho'he still sigh, complain, and fear,
It cannot be a Mortal Pain,
When two do the Affiction bear.
10 A-Clock.
Reflections.
After the afflicting Thoughts of my Absence, make some Reflections on your
Happiness. Think it a Blessing, to be permitted to love me: Think it so,
because I permit it to you alone; and never could be drawn, to allow it any
other. The first Thing you ought to consider is, that, at length, I have
suffered my self to be overcome, to quit that Nicety, that is natural to me,
and receive your Addresses; nay, thought 'em agreeable; and that I have, at
last, confessed, the Present of your Heart is very dear to me. It Is true, I did
not accept of it the first Time it was offered me, nor before you had told me a
Thousand times, that you could not escape Expiring, if I did not give you leave
to sigh for me, and gaze upon me; and that there was an absolute Necessity for
me, either to give you leave to love, or dye. And all those Rigours, my
Severity has made you suffer, ought now to be re-counted to your Memory, as
Subjects of Pleasure; and you ought to esteem, and judge of the Price of my
Affections, by the Difficulties you found, in being able to touch my Heart: Not
but you have Charms, that can conquer at first Sight; and you ought not to have
valued me less, if I had been more easily gained: But it is enough to please
you, to think, and know, I am gained; no matter when, or how. When, after a
Thousand Cares and Inquietudes, that which we wish for, succeeds to our
Desires, the Remembrance of those Pains and Pleasures we encountered, in
arriving at it, gives us a new Joy.

Remember also, Damon, that I have preferred you, before all those, that have
been thought worthy of my Esteem; and that I have shut my Eyes to all their
pleading Merits, and could survey none, but yours.

Consider then, that you had, not only the Happiness to please me; but that you
only found out the Way of doing it; and I had the Goodness, at last, to tell
you so, contrary to all the Delicacy, and Niceness of my Soul; contrary to my
Prudence, and all those Scruples, you know, are natural to my Humor.

My Tenderness proceeded further, and I gave you innocent Marks of my newborn
Passion, on all Occasions, that presented themselves: For after that, from my
Eyes and Tongue, you knew the Sentiments of my Heart, I confirmed that Truth to
you, by my Letters. Confess, Damon, that if you make these Reflections, you
will not pass this Hour very disagreeably.

Beginning Love.
As free as wanton Winds, I lived,
That unconcerned, do play:
No broken Faith, no Fate I grieved;
No Fortune gave me Joy.
A dull Content crowned all my Hours;
My Heart no Sighs oppressed:
I called in vain on no deas Powers,
To ease a tortured Breast.
The sighing Swains regardless pined,
And strove in vain, to please:
With Pain, I civilly was kind;
But could afford no Ease.
Though Wit and Beauty did abound,
The Charm was wanting still,
That could inspire the tender Wound,
Or bend my careless Will.
Till in my Heart, a kindling Flame,
Tour softer Sighs had blown;
Which I, with striving, Love and Shame,
Too senfibly did own.
What ever the God, before could plead;
What ever the Touth's Desert;
The feeble Siege in vain was laid,
Against my stubborn Heart.
At first, my Sighs and Blushes spoke,
Just when your Sighs would rise:
And when you gazed, I wished to look;
But durst not meet your Eyes.
I trembled, when my Hand you pressed,
Nor could my Guilt control;
But Love prevailed, and I confessed
The Secrets of my Soul.
And when, upon the giving Part,
My Present to avow,
By all the Ways, confirmed my Heart,
That Honor would allow;
Too mean was all that I could say,
Too poorly understood:
I gave my Soul the noblest Way,
My Letters made it good.
You may believe, I did not easily, nor suddenly, bring my Heart to this
Condescension; but I loved, and all Things in Damon, were capable of making me
resolve so to do. I could not think it a Crime, where every Grace, and every
Virtue justified my Choice: And when once one is assured of this, we find not
much Difficulty in owning that Passion, which will so well commend one's
Judgment; and there is no Obstacle, that Love does not surmount. I confessed my
Weakness a Thousand Ways, before I told it you, and I remember all those Things
with Pleasure; but yet I remember 'em also with Shame.

11 A-Clock.
Supper.
I Will believe, Damon, that you have been so well entertained, during this
Hour, and have found so much much in these Thoughts, that if one did not tell
you, that Supper waits, you would lose your self in Reflections so pleasing,
many more Minutes. But you must go, where you are expected; perhaps among the
Fair, the Young, the Gay; but do not abandon your Heant to too much Joy, though
you have so much Reason to be contented: But the greatest Pleasures are always
imperfect. If the Object be loved, do not partake of it: For this Reason, be
cheerful; and merry, with Reserve. Do not talk too much; I know, you do not
love it; and if you do it, 'twill be the Effect of too much Complaisance, or
with some Design of Pleasing too well; for you know your own charming Power,
and how agreeable your Wit and Conversation is to all the World. Remember, I am
covetous of every Word you speak, that is not addressed to me; and envy the happy
Listner, if I am not by: And I may reply to you, as Aminta did to Philander,
when he charged her of loving a Talker: And because, perhaps, you have not
heard it, I will, to divert you; send it you; and at the same time assure you,
Damon, that your more noble Quality, of Speaking little, has reduced me to a
perfect Abhorrence of those Wordy Sparks, that value themselves, upon their
Ready, and Much Talking upon every trivial Subject; and who have so good an
Opinion of their Talent that Way, they will let no body edge in a Word, or a
Reply; but will make all the Conversation themselves, that they may pass for
very Entertaining Persons, and pure Company. But the Verses -- The Reformation.
Philander, since you will have it so;
I grant, I was impertinent;
And, till this Moment, did not know,
Through all my Life, what 'twas I meant.
Your kind Opinion was the flattering Glass,
In which my Mind, found how deformed it was.
In your clear Sense, which knows no Art,
I saw the Errors of my Soul:
And all the Foibless of my Heart,
With one Reflection, you control.
Kind as a God! and gently you chastise:
By what you hate, you teach me to be wise.
Impertinence, my Sex's Shame,
That has so long my Life pursued,
You with such Modesty reclaim,
As all the Women has subdued.
To so Divine a Power, what must I owe,
That renders me so like the Perfect You?
That Conversable Thing I hate
Already, with a just Disdain,
That prides himself upon his Prate,
And is, of words, that Nonsense vain.
When in your few, appears such Excellence,
As have reproacht, and charmed me into Sense.
For ever may I list' ning sit,
Though but each Hour, a Word be born;
I would attend the Coming Wit,
And bless what can so well inform.
Let the dull World, henceforth, to Words be damned;
I Am into nobler Sense, than Talking, shamed.


I believe you are so good a Lover, as to be of my Opinion; and that you will
neither force your self against Nature, nor find much Occasion to lavish out
those excellent Things, that must proceed from you, whenever you speak. If all
Women were like me, I should have more Reason to fear your Silence, than your
Talk; for you have a Thousand Ways to charm, without Speaking; and those which,
to me, show a great deal more Concern. But, Damon, you know, the greatest Part
of my Sex, judge the fine Gentleman, by the Volubility of his Tongue, by his
Dexterity in Repartee; and cry -- "Oh! He never wants fine Things to say: He Is
eternally Talking the most surprising Things." But, Damon, you are well
assured, I hope, that Iris is none of these Coquets; at least, if she had any
Spark of it once in her Nature, she is, by the Excellency of your contrary
Temper, taught to know, and scorn the Folly: And take heed, your Conduct never
give me Cause to suspect, you have deceived me in your Temper.

12 A-Clock.
Complaisance.
NEvertheless, Damon, Civility requires a little Complaisance, after Supper;
and I am assured, you can never want that, though, I confess, you are not
accused of too general a Complaisance; and do not often make use of it, to
those Persons, you have an Indifference for; though one is not the less
Esteemable, for having more of this, than one ought; and though an Excess of it
be a Fault, it is a very excusable one: Have therefore some for those, with whom
you are: You may laugh with 'em, drink with 'em, dance or sing with 'em; yet
think of me. You may discourse of a Thousand indifferent Things with 'em, and
at the same time, still think of me. If the Subject be any beautiful Lady, whom
they praise, either for her Person, Wit, or Virtue; you may apply it to me: And
if you dare not say it aloud, at least, let your Heart answer in this Language:
Yes, the fair Object, whom you praise,
Can give us Love a Thousand Ways.
Her Wit and Beauty charming are;
But still, my Iris is more fair.


No Body ever spoke before me, of a faithful Lover, but I still sighed, and
thought of Damon: And ever, when they tell me Tales of Love, any soft pleasing
Intercourses of an Amor; Oh! with what Pleasure do I listen; and with Pleasure
answer 'em, either with my Eyes, or Tongue -- That Lover may his Silvia warm;
But cannot, like my Damon, charm.


If I have not all those excellent Qualities, you meet with in those beautiful
People, I am, however, very glad, that Love prepossesses your Heart to my
Advantage: And I need not tell you, Damon, that a true Lover ought to persuade
himself, that all other Objects ought to give place to her, for whom his Heart
sighs -- But see, my Cupid tells you, it is One a-clock, and that you ought not
to be longer from your Apartment: Where, while you are Undressing, I will give
you leave to say to your self -- The Regret.
Alas! And must the Sun decline,
Before it have informed my Eyes
Of all that is Glorious, all that is Fine;
Of all I sigh for, all I prize?
How joyful were those happy Days,
When Iris spread her charming Rays,
Did my unwearied Heart inspire,
With never-ceasing awful Fire:
And every Minute gave me new Desire!
But now, alas! All dead and pale,
Like Flowers, that wither in the Shade;
Where no kind Sunbeams can prevail,
To raise its cold, and fading Head;
I sink into my useless Bed.
I grasp the senseless Pillow, as I lie;
A Thousand times, in vain, I sighing, cry;
"Ah! Would to Heaven, my Iris were as nigh!


1 A-Clock.
Impossibility to Sleep.
YOu have been up long enough; and Cupid, who takes Care of your Health, tells
you, it is time for you to go to Bed. Perhaps you may not sleep as soon as you
are laid; and possibly, you may pass an Hour in Bed, before you shut your Eyes.
In this Impossibility of Sleeping, I think it very proper for you to imagine,
what I am doing; where I am. Let your Fancy take a little Journey then,
invisible, to observe my Actions, and my Conduct. You will find me, sitting
alone in my Cabinet (for I am one that do not love to go to Bed early) and will
find me very uneasy, and pensive; pleased with none of those Things, that so
well entertain others. I shun all Conversation, as far as Civility will allow;
and find no Satisfaction, like being alone; where my Soul may, without
Interruption, converse with Damon. I sigh; and sometimes, you will see my
Cheeks wet with Tears, that insensibly glide down, at a Thousand Thoughts, that
present themselves soft, and afflicting. I partake of all your Inquietude. On
other Things, I think with Indifference, if ever my Thoughts do stray from the
more agreeable Object. I find, however, a little Sweetness in this Thought,
that, during my Absence, your Heart thinks of me, when mine sighs for you.
Perhaps, I am mistaken; and that, at the same Time, that you are the
Entertainment of all my Thoughts, I am no more in yours: And perhaps, you are
thinking of those Things, that immortalize the Young, and Brave; either by
those Glories, the Muses flatter you with; or that of Belloua, and the God of
War; and Serving now a Monarch, whose Glorious Acts in Arms, has out-gone all
the seign'd, and real Heroes of any Age; who has, himself, outdone whatever
History can produce, of Greatand Brave; and set so Illustrious an Example to
the Under-World, that it is not impossible, as much a Lover as you are, but you
are thinking now, how to render your self worthy the Glory of such a God-like
Master, by projecting a Thousand Things of projecting, and Danger. And though,
I confess, such Thoughts are proper for your Youth, your Quality, and the Place
you have the Honor to hold, under our Sovereign; yet, let me tell you, Damon,
you will not be without Inquietude, if you think of either being a delicate
Poet, or a brave Warrior; for Love will still interrupt your Glory, however you
may think to divert him; either by Writing, or Fighting. And you ought to
remember these Verses, Love and Glory.
Beneath the kind protecting Lawrel's Shade,
For sighing Lovers, and for Warriors made,
The soft Adonis, and rough Mars were laid.
Both were designed to take their Rest;
But Love, the Gentle Boy, oppressed,
And false Alarms shook the slern Hero's Breast.
This, thinks to soften all his Toyls of War,
In the dear Arms of the obliging Fair:
And That, by Hunting, to divert his Care.
All Day, over Hills and Plains, Wild Beasts he chac't;
Swift, as the flying Winds, his eager Haste,
In vain! The God of Love pursues as fast.
But Oh! No Sports, no Toyls divertive prove:
The Evening still returns him to the Grove,
To sigh, and languish for the Queen of Love.
Where Elogies, and Sonnets, he does frame;
And to the listening Echoes sighs her Name;
And on the Trees carves Records of his Flame.
The Warrior, in the Dusty Camp all Day;
With rattling Drums, and Trumpets, does essay,
To fright the Tender Flattering God away.
But still, alas, in vain! What ere Delight,
What Care he takes the wanton Boy to fright;
Love still revenges it at Night.
It Is then, he baunts the Royal Tent;
The sleeping Hours, in Sighs are spent;
And all his Resolutions does prevent.
In all his Pains, Love mixed his Smart:
In every Wound, he feels a Dart;
And the soft God is trembling in his Heart.
Then he retires to shady Groves;
And there, in vain, he seeks Repose;
And strives to fly from what he cannot lose.
While thus he lay, Bellona, came;
And with a generous fierce Disdain,
Upbraids him with his feeble Flame.
Arise! The World's great Terror, and their Care!
Behold the glittering Host from far,
That waits the Conduct of the God of War.
Beneath these Glorious Laurels, which were made,
To crown the noble Victor's Head;
Why thus Supinely art thou laid?
Why on that Face, where Awful Terror grew,
Thy Sun-parcht Cheeks; why do I view
The shining Tracts of falling Tears bedew?
What God has wrought these universal Harms?
What fatal Nymph; What fatal Charms
Has made the Hero deaf to War's Alarms?
Now let the Conquering Ensigns up be furled:
Learn to be gay, be soft, and curled;
And Idle, lose the Empire of the World.
In fond Effeminate Delights go on:
Lose all the Glories, you have won:
Bravely resolve to love, and be undone.
It Is thus the Martial Virgin pleads:
Thus she the Amorous God persuades,
To fly from Venus, and the flowery Meads.


You see here, that Poets and Warriors are oftentimes in Affliction, even under
the Shades of their Protecting-Lawrels; and let the Nymphs and Virgins sing
what they please to their Memory, under the Mirtles, and on Flowery Beds; much
better Days, than in the Campaign. Nor do the Crowns of Glory surpass those of
Love: The First is but an empty Name, which is won, kept, and lost with Hazard;
but Love more nobly employs a brave Soul, and all his Pleasures are solid and
lasting; and when one has a worthy Object of one's Flame, Glory accompanies
Love too. But go to sleep, the Hour is come; and it is now, that your Soul ought
to be entertained in Dreams.

2 A-Clock.
Conversation in Dreams.
I Doubt not, but you will think it very bold and arbitrary, that my Watch
should pretend to rule even your sleeping Hours, and that my Cupid should
govern your very Dreams; which are but Thoughts disordered, in which Reason has
no Part; Chimera's of the Imagination, and no more: But though my Watch does
not pretend to counsel unreasonably, yet you must allow it here; if not to pass
the Bounds, at least, to advance to the utmost Limits of it. I am assured, that
after having thought so much of me in the Day, you will think of me also in the
Night. And the first Dream my Watch permits you to make, is to think you are in
Conversation with me.

Imagine, Damon, that you are talking to me of your Passion, with all the
Transport of a Lover; and that I hear you with Satisfaction: That all my Looks
and Blushes, while you are speaking, gives you new Hopes, and Assurances, that
you are not indifferent to me; and that I give you a Thousand Testimonies of my
Tenderness, all Innocent, and Obliging.

While you are saying all that Love can dictate, all that Wit and good Manners
can invent, and all that I wish to hear from Damon, believe, in this Dream, all
flattering and dear; that after having showed me the Ardour of your Flame, that
I confess to you the Bottom of my Heart, and all the loving Secrets there; that
I give you Sigh for Sigh, Tenderness for Tenderness, Heart for Heart, and
Pleasure for Pleasure. And I would have your Sense of this Dream so perfect,
and your Joy fo entire, that if it happen you should awake, with the
Satisfaction from this Dream, you should find your Heart still panting with the
foft Pleasure of the dear deceiving Transport, and you should be ready to cry
out -- Ah! How sweet it is to dream,
When charming Iris is the Theme!
For such, I wish, my Damon, your sleeping, and your waking Thoughts should
render me to your Heart.

3 A-Clock.
Capricious Suffering in Dreams.
IT is but just, to mix a little Chagrin with these Pleasures, a little Bitter
with your Sweet; you may be cloyed with too long an Imagination of my Favors:
And I will have your Fancy in Dreams, represent me to it, as the most
capricious Maid in the World. I know, here you will accuse my Watch, and blame
me with unnecessary Cruelty, as you will call it; but Lovers have their little
Ends, their little Advantages, to pursue by Methods wholly unaccountable to
all, but that Heart that contrives 'em: And, as good a Lover as I believe you,
you will not enter into my Design at first Sight; and though, on reasonable
Thoughts, you will be satisfied with this Conduct of mine, at its first
Approach, you will be ready to cry out! -- The Request.
Oh Iris! Let my sleeping Hours be fraught
With Joys, which you deny my waking Thought.
Is It not enough, you absent are?
Is It not enough, I sigh all Day;
And languish out my Life in Care:
To every Passion made a Prey?
I burn with Love, and soft Desire;
I rave with Jealousy and Fear:
All Day, for Ease, my Soul I tire;
In vain I search it every where:
It dwells not with the Witty, or the Fair.
It is not in the Camp, or Court;
In Business, Music, or in Sport:
The Plays, the Park, and Mall afford
No more than the dull Basset-board.
The Beauties in the Drawing Room,
With all their Sweetness, all their Bloom,
No more my faithful Eyes invite,
Nor rob my Iris of a Sigh, or Glance;
Unless soft Thoughts of her incite
A Smile, or trivial Complaisance.
Then since my Days so anxious prove,
Ah, cruel Tyrant! Give
A little Loose to Joys in Love;
And let your Damon live.
Let him in Dreams be happy made;
And let his Sleep some Bliss provide:
The nicest Maid may yield, in Night's dark Shade,
What she so long, by Daylight, had denied.
There let me think, you present are;
And court my Pillow, for my Fair.
There let me find you kind, and that you give
All that a Man of Honor dares receive.
And may my Eyes eternal Watches keep,
Rather than want that Pleasure, when I sleep.


Some such Complaint as this, I know you will make; but, Damon, if the little
Quarrels of Lovers render the reconciling Moments so infinitely Charming, you
must needs allow, that these little Chagrins in capricious Dreams, must awaken
you to more Joy, to find 'em but Dreams, than if you had met with no Disorder
there. It Is for this Reason, that I would have you suffer a little Pain, for a
coming Pleasure; nor, indeed, is it possible for you to escape the Dreams, my
Cupid points you out. You shall dream, that I have a Thousand Foiblesses,
something of the Lightness of my Sex; that my Soul is employed in a Thousand
Vanities; that, (proud and fond of Lovers) I make Advances for the Glory of a
Slave, without any other Interest, or Design, than that of being adored. I will
give you leave to think my Heart fickle; and that, far from resigning it to any
one, I lend it only for a Day, or an Hour, and take it back at Pleasure; that I
am a very Co^^^t, even to Impertinence.

All this I give you leave to think, and to offend me; but it is in Sleep only,
that I permit it; for I would never pardon you the least Offense of this
Nature, if in any other Kind, than in a Dream. Nor is it enough Affliction to
you, to imagine me thus idly vain; but you are to pass on, to a Hundred more
capricious Humors; as that I exact of you a Hundred unjust Things; that I
pretend, you should break off with all your Friends, and, for the future, have
none at all; that I will, my self, do those Things, which I violently condemn
in you; and that I will have for others, as well as you, that tender Friendship
that resembles Love; or rather, that Love, which People call Friendship; and
that I will not, after all, have you dare complain on me.

In fine, be as ingenious as you please, to torment your self; and believe,
that I am become unjust, ungrateful, and insensible: But were I so indeed, O
Damon! consider your awaking Heart, and tell me; Would your Love stand the
Proof of all these Faults in me? But know, that I would have you believe, I
have none of these Weaknesses, though I am not wholly without Faults, but those
will be excusable to a Lover; and this Notion I have of a perfect one; What
ever fantastic Humors rule the Fair,
She Is still the Lover's Dote-age, and his Care.


4 A-Clock.
Jealousy in Dreams.
DO not think, Damon, to wake yet; for I design you shall yet suffer a little
more: Jealousy must now possess you; that Tyrant over the Heart, that compels
your very Reason, and seduces all your good Nature. And in this Dream, you must
believe That in Sleeping, which you could not do me the Injustice to do, when
awake. And here you must explain all my Actions to the utmost Disadvantage:
Nay, I will wish, that the Force of this Jealousy may be so extreme, that it
may make you languish in Grief, and be overcome with Anger.

You shall now imagine, that one of your Rivals is with me, interrupting all
you say, or hindering all you would say; that I have no Attention to what you
say aloud to me, but that I incline my Ear, to hearken to all that he whispers
to me. You shall repine, that he pursues me every where; and is eternally at
your Heels, if you approach me: That I caress him with Sweetness in my Eyes,
and that Vanity in my Heart, that possesses the Humors of almost all the Fair;
that is, to believe it greatly for my Glory, to have abundance of Rivals, for
my Lovers. I know, you love too well, not to be extremely uneasy in the
Company of a Rival, and to have one perpetually near me; for let him be
beloved, or not, by the Mistress, it must be confessed, a Rival is a very
troublesome Person: But, to afflict you to the utmost, I will have you imagine,
that my Eyes approve of all his Thoughts; that they flatter him with Hopes, and
that I have taken away my Heart from you, to make a Present of it to this more
lucky Man. You shall suffer, while possessed with this Dream, all that a cruel
Jealousy can make a tender Soul suffer.

The Torment.
O Jealousy! Thou Passion most ingrate!
Tormenting as Despair, envious as Hate!
Spightful as Witchcraft, which the Invoker harms:
Worse than the Wretch that suffers by its Charms.
Thou subtle Poison in the Fancy bred;
Diffused through every Vein, the Heart, and Head;
And over all, like wild Contagion, spread.
Thou, whose sole Property is to destroy;
Thou Opposite to Good, Antipathy to Joy;
Whose Attributes are cruel, Rage, and Fire;
Reason debaucht, false Sense, and mad Desire.
In sine, It is a Passion, that ruffles all the Senses, and disorders the whole
Frame of Nature. It makes one hear and see, what was never spoke, and what
never was in view. It Is the Bane of Health and Beauty, an unmannerly Intruder;
and an Evil of Life, worse than Death. She is a very cruel Tyrant in the Heart;
she possesses, and pierces it with infinite Unquiets: And we may lay it down,
as a certain Maxim, -- She that would wreck a Lover's Heart
To the Extent of Cruelty,
Must his Tranquillity subvert
To torturing Jealousy.


I speak too sensibly of this Passion, not to have loved well enough, to have
been touched with it: And you shall be this unhappy Lover, Damon, during this
Dream; in which, nothing shall present it self to your tumultuous Thoughts,
that shall not bring its Pain. You shall here pass and re-pass a Hundred
Designs, that shall confound one another. In fine, Damon, Anger, Hatred, and
Revenge shall surround your Heart.

There they shall, all together reign
With mighty Force, with mighty Pain;
In Spite of Reason, in Contempt of Love:
Sometimes by Turns, sometimes united move.
5 A-Clock.
Quarrels in Dreams.
I Perceive you are not able to suffer all this Injustice, nor can I permit it
any longer; and though you commit no Crime your self, yet you believe, in this
Dream, that I complain of Injuries you do my Fame; and that I am extremely
angry with a Jealousy so prejudicial to my Honor. Upon this Belief, you
accuse me of Weakness; you resolve to see me no more, and are making a Thousand
feeble Vows against Love! You esteem me as a false One, and resolve to cease
loving the vain Coquet; and will say to me, as a certain Friend of yours said
to his false Mistress, The Inconstant.
Though Silvia, you are very fair,
Yet disagreeable to me:
And since you so inconstant are,
Your Beauty's damned with Levity.
Your Wit, your most offensive Arms,
For want of Judgment, wants its Charms.
To every Lover, that is new,
All new and charming you surprise;
But when your fickle Mind they view,
They shun the Danger of your Eyes.
Should you a Miracle of Beauty show;
Yet you're inconstant, and will still be so.


It Is thus you will think of me: And in fine, Damon, during this Dream, we are
in a perpetual State of War.

Thus both resolve to break their Chain,
And think to do it without much Pain:
But Oh! Alas! We strive in vain.
For Lovers, of themselves, can nothing do:
There must be the Consent of two:
You give it me, and I must give it you.
And if we shall never be free, till we acquit one another, this Tie between
you and I, Damon, is likely to last as long as we live: Therefore in vain you
endeavor, but can never attain your End: And in Conclusion, you will say, in
thinking of me; Oh! How at Ease my Heart would live,
Could I renounce this Fugitive;
This dear, (but false) attracting Maid,
That has her Vows and Faith betrayed!
Reason would have it so; but Love
Dares not the dangerous Trial prove.


Do not be angry then, for this afflicting Hour is drawing to an End, and you
ought not to despair of coming into my absolute Favor again.

Then do not let your murmuring Heart,
Against my Interest, take your Part.
The Feud was raised by Dreams, all false and vain,
And the next Sleep shall reconcile again.
6 A-Clock.
Accommodation in Dreams.
THough the angry Lovers force themselves, all they can, to chase away the
troublesome Tenderness of the Heart, in the height of their Quarrels, Love sees
all their Sufferings, pities and redresses 'em: And when we begin to cool, and
a soft Repentance follows the Chagrin of the Love-Quarrel, it is then, that Love
takes the Advantage of both Hearts, and renews the charming Friendship more
forcibly than ever, puts a stop to all our Feuds, and renders the Peacemaking
Minutes, the most dear and tender part of our Life. How pleasing it is to see
your Rage dissolve! How sweet, how soft is every Word, that pleads for Pardon
at my Feet! It Is there, that you tell me, your very Sufferings are over-paid,
when I but assure you from my Eyes, that I will forget your Crime: And your
Imagination shall here present me, the most sensible of your past Pain, that
you can wish; and that, all my Anger being vanished, I give you a Thousand Marks
of my Faith and Gratitude; and lastly, to crown all, that we again make new
Vows to one another, of inviolable Peace.

After these Debates of Love,
Lovers Thousand Pleasures prove;
Which they ever think to taste,
Though oftentimes they do not last.
Enjoy then all the Pleasures, that a Heart that is very amorous, and very
tender, can enjoy. Think no more on those Inquietudes that you have suffered,
bless Love for his Favors, and thank me for my Graces; and resolve to endure
any thing, rather than enter upon any new Quarrels. And however dear the
reconciling Moments are, there proceeds a great deal of Evil from these little
frequent Quarrels; and I think, the best counsel we can follow, is to avoid
'em, as near as we can: And if we cannot, but that, in spite of Love, and good
Understanding, they should break out, we ought to make as speedy a Peace as
possible; for it is not good to grate the Heart too long, lest it grow hardened
insensibly, and lose its native Temper. A few Quarrels there must be in Love;
Love cannot support it self without 'em; and besides the Joy of an
Accommodation, Love becomes by it more strongly united, and more charming.
Therefore let the Lover receive this, as a certain Receipt against declining
Love.

Love reconciled.
He that would have the Passion be
Entire between the Amorous Pair,
Let not the little Feuds of Jealousy
Be carried on to a Despair:
That paul's the Pleasure he would raise;
The Fire that he would blow, allays.
When Understandings false arise,
When misinterpreted your Thought;
If false Conjectures of your Smiles and Eyes
Be up to baneful Quarrel wrought;
Let Love the kind Occasion take,
And strait Accommodation make.
The sullen Lover, long unkind,
Ill-natured, hard to reconcile,
Loses the Heart he had inclined;
Love cannot undergo long Toil:
He Is soft and sweet, not born to bear
The rough Fatigues of painful War.
7 A-Clock.
Diverse Dreams.
BEhold, Damon, the last Hour of your Sleep, and of my Watch. She leaves you at
liberty now, and you may choose your Dreams: Trust 'em to your Imaginations,
give a Loose to Fancy, and let it rove at Will; provided, Damon, it be always
guided by a respectful Love. For thus far I pretend to give Bounds to your
Imagination, and will not have it pass beyond'em: Take heed, in Sleeping, you
give no Ear to a flattering Cupid, that will favor your slumbring Minutes,
with Lies too pleasing and vain: You are discreet enough, when you are awake;
Will you not be so in Dreams?

Damon, awake: My Watch's Course is done. After this, you cannot be ignorant of
what you ought to do, during my Absence. I did not believe it necessary to
caution you about Balls and Comedies: You know, a Lover, deprived of his
Mistress, goes seldom there. But if you cannot handsomely avoid these
Diversions, I am not so unjust a Mistress, to be angry with you for it. Go, if
Civility, or other Duties, oblige you: I will only forbid you, in Consideration
of me, not to be too much satisfied with those Pleasures; but see 'em so, as
the World may have Reason to say, you do not seek 'em; you do not make a
Business, or a Pleasure of 'em; and that it is Complaisance, and not
Inclination, that carries you thither. Seem rather negligent, than concerned at
any Thing there; and let every Part of you say, Iris is not here.

I say nothing to you neither, of your Duty elsewhere; I am satisfied, you know
it too well, and have too great a Veneration for your Glorious Master, to
neglect any part of that, for even Love it self! And I very well know, how much
you love to be eternally near his Illustrious Person; and that you scarce
prefer your Mistress before him, in point of Love: In all things else, I give
him leave to take place of Iris, in the noble Heart of Damon.

I am satisfied, you pass your Time well now at Windsor, for you adore that
Place; and it is not, indeed, without great Reason; for it is, most certainly,
now rendered, the most glorious Palace in the Christian World. And had our late
Gracious Sovereign of blessed Memory had no other Miracles and Wonders of his
Life and Reign, to have immortalized his Fame, (of which there shall remain a
Thousand to Posterity:) This noble Structure alone, this Building (almost
Divine) would have Eternized the great Name of Glorious Charles the Second,
till the World moulder again to its old Confusion, its first Chaos. And the
Paintings of the famous Vario, and noble Carvings of the unimitable Gibon,
shall never dye; but remain, to tell succeeding Ages, that all Arts and
Learning were not confined to ancient Rome, and Greece; but that England too
could boast its mightiest Share. Nor is the Inside of this magnificent
Structure, immortalized with so many eternal Images of the Illustrious Charles
and Katherine, more to be admired, than the wondrous Prospects without. The
stupendous Height, on which the famous Pile is built, renders the Fields, and
Flowery Meads below, the Woods, the Thickets, and the winding Streams, the most
delightful Object, that ever Nature produced. Beyond all these, and far below,
in an inviting Vale, the venerable College, an old, but noble Building, raises
it self, in the midst of all the Beauties of Nature; high-grown Trees, fruitful
Plains, purling Rivulets, and spacious Gardens; adorned with all Variety of
Sweets, that can delight the Senses.

At farther distance yet, on an Ascent, almost as high as that to the Royal
Structure, you may behold that famous and noble Clifdon rise; a Palace erected
by the Illustrious Duke of Buckingham: Who will leave this wondrous Piece of
Architecture, to inform the future World, of the Greatness and Delicacy of his
Mind; it being, for its Situation, its Prospects, and its mavelous
Contrivances, one of the finest Villa's of the World; at least, were it
finished, as begun; and would sufficiently declare the Magnifick Soul of the
Hero, that caused it to be built, and contrived all its Fineness. And this
makes up not the least Part of the beautiful Prospect from the Palace-Royal,
while on the other side, lies spread a fruitful, and delightful Park and
Forest, well stored with Deer, and all that make the Prospect charming; fine
Walks, Groves, distant Valleys, Downs, and Hills, and all that Nature could
invent, to furnish out a quiet, soft Retreat, for the most Fair, and most
Charming of Queens, and the most Heroic, Good, and Just of Kings: And these
Groves alone, are fit and worthy to divert such Earthly Gods.

Nor can Heaven, Nature, or Humane Art contrive an Addition to this Earthly
Paradise, unless those great Inventors of the Age, Sir Samuel Morland, or Sir
Robert Gorden, could, by the power of Engines, convey the Water so into the
Park and Castle, as to furnish it with delightful Fountains, both useful and
beautiful. These are only wanting, to render the Place All Perfection, without
Exception.

This, Damon, is a long Digression from the Business of my Heart; but you know,
I am so in Love with that charming Court, that when you gave me an Occasion, by
your being there now, but to name the Place, I could not forbear transgressing
a little, in favor of its wondrous Beauty; and the rather, because I would,
in recounting it, give you to understand, how many fine Objects there are,
besides the Ladies that adorn it, to employ your vacant Moments in; and hope
you will, without my Instructions, pass a great part of your idle Time, in
surveying these Prospects; and give that Admiration you should pay to living
Beauty, to those more venerable Monuments of everlasting Fame.

Neither need I, Damon, assign you your waiting Times; your Honor, Duty, Love,
and Obedience will instruct you, when to be near the Person of the King; and I
believe, you will omit no part of that Devoir. You ought to establish your
Fortune, and your Glory: For I am not of the Mind of those Critical Lovers, who
believe it a very hard Matter to reconcile Love and Interest; to adore a
Mistress, and serve a Master at the same time. And I have heard those, who, on
this Subject, say, Let a Man be never so careful in these double Duties, it is
Ten to One, but he loses his Fortune, or his Mistress. These are Errors that I
condemn: And I know, that Love and Ambition are not incompatible; but that a
brave Man may preserve all his Duties to his Sovereign, and his Passion, and
his Respect for his Mistress. And this is my Notion of it.

Love and Ambition.
The Noble Lover, who would prove
Uncommon in Address;
Let him Ambition join with Love;
With Glory, Tenderness:
But let the Virtues so be mixed,
That when to Love he goes,
Ambition may not come betwixt,
Nor Love his Power oppose.
The vacant Hours from softer Sport,
Let him give up to Interest, and the Court.
It Is Honor shall his Business be,
And Love, his noblest Play:
Those two should never disagree;
For both make either Gay.
Love without Honor, were too mean
For any gallant Heart;
And Honor singly, but a Dream,
Where Love must have no Part.
A Flame like this, you cannot fear,
Where Glory claims an equal Share.
Such a Passion, Damon, can never make you quit any Part of your Duty to your
Prince. And the Monarch, you serve, is so gallant a Master, that the
Inclination you have to his Person, obliges you to serve him, as much as your
Duty; for Damon's Loyal Soul loves the Man, and adores the Monarch; for he is
certainly, all that compels both, by a charming Force and Goodness from all
Mankind.

The King.
Darling of Mars! Bellona's Care!
The second Deity of War!
Delight of Heaven, and Joy of Earth!
Born for great and wondrous Things!
Destined, at his Auspicious Birth,
T'out-do the numerous Race of long-past Kings.
Best Representative of Heaven;
To whom its chiefest Attributes are given!
Great, Pious, Steadfast, Just, and Brave!
To Vengeance slow, but swift to save!
Dispencing Mercy all abroad!
Soft and Forgiving, as a God!
Thou Saving Angel, who preserv'st the Land
From the Just Rage of the Avenging Hand:
Stopped the dire Plague, that over the Earth was hurled!
And sheathing thy Almighty Sword,
Calmed the wild Fears of a distracted World,
(As Heaven first made it) with a Sacred Word!
But I will stop the low Flight of my humble Muse; who, when she is upon the
Wing, on this Glorious Subject, knows no Bounds. And all the World has agreed
to say so much of the Virtues and Wonders of this great Monarch, that they have
left me nothing new to say; though indeed, he every day gives us new Theams of
his growing Greatness; and we see nothing that equals him, in our Age. Oh! How
happy are we, to obey his Laws; for he is the greatest of Kings, and the best
of Men!

You will be very unjust, Damon, if you do not confess, I have acquitted my
self like a Maid of Honor, of all the Obligations I owe you, upon the Account
of the Discretion I lost to you. If it be not valuable enough, I am generous
enough to make it good: And since I am so willing to be just, you ought to
esteem me, and to make it your chiefest Care to preserve me yours; for I
believe, I shall deserve it, and wish you should believe so too. Remember me,
write to me, and observe punctually all the Motions of my Watch: The more you
regard it, the better you will like it; and whatever you think of it at first
sight, it is no ill Present. The Invention is soft and gallant; and Germany, so
celebrated for rare Watches, can produce nothing to equal this.

Damon, my Watch is just, and new:
And all a Lover ought to do,
My Cupid faithfully will show.
And every Hour he renders there,
Except L'heure du Bergere.
The End of the Watch.
THE CASE FOR THE WATCH.
Damon to Iris.
EXpect not, O charming Iris! that I should choose Words to thank you in;
(Words, that least Part of Love, and least the Business of the Lover;) but will
say all, and every thing, that a tender Heart can dictate, to make an
Acknowledgment for so dear and precious a Present, as this of your charming
Watch; while all I can say, will but too dully express my Sense of Gratitude,
my Joy, and the Pleasure I receive in the mighty Favor. I consess the Present
too rich, too gay, and too magnificent for my Expectation; and though my Love
and Faith deserve it, yet my humbler Hope never durst carry me to a Wish of so
great a Bliss, so great an Acknowledgment from the Maid I adore! The Materials
are glorious, the Work delicate, and the Movement just; and even gives Rules to
my Heart, who shall observe very exactly, all that the Cupid remarks to me,
even to the Minutes, which I will point with Sighs, though I am obliged to 'em
there, but every Half-hour. --

You tell me, sair Iris, that I ought to preserve it tenderly, and yet you have
sent it me without a Case. But that I may obey you justly, and keep it dear to
me, as long as I live, I will give it a Case of my Fashion: It shall be
delicate, and suitable to the fine Present; of such Materials too. But because I
would have it perfect, I will consult your admirable Wit, and Invention, in an
Affair of so curious a Consequence.

The Figure of the Case.
I Design to give it the Figure of a Heart. Does not your Watch, Iris, rule the
Heart? It was your Heart that contrived it, and 'twas your Heart you consulted,
in all the Management of it; and 'twas your Heart that brought it to so fine a
Conclusion. The Heart never acts without Reason, and all the Heart projects, it
performs with Pleasure.

Your Watch, my lovely Maid, has explained to me a World of rich Secrets of
Love: And where should Thoughts so sacred be stored, but in the Heart, where
all the Secrets of the Soul are treasured up; and of which, only Love alone can
take a View? It Is thence he takes his Sighs and Tears, and all his little
Flatteries, and Arts to please. All his fine Thoughts, and all his mighty
Raptures, nothing is so proper as the Heart, to preserve it; nothing so worthy
as the Heart, to contain it; and it concerns my Interest too much, not to be
infinitely careful of so dear a Treasure: And, believe me, charming Iris, I
will never part with it.

The Votary.
Fair Goddess of my just Desire,
Inspirer of my softest Fire!
Since you, from out the numerous Throng,
That to your Altars do belong,
To me the sacred Mystery have revealed,
From all my Rival Worshippers concealed;
And touched my Soul with Heavenly Fire:
Refined it from its grosser Sense,
And wrought it to a higher Excellence;
It can no more return to Earth,
Like Things that thence receive their Birth:
But still aspiring, upward move,
And teach the World, new Flights of Love.
New Arts of Secrecy shall learn,
And render Youth discreet in Love's Concern.
In his soft Heart, to hide the charming Things,
A Mistress whispers to his Ear;
And every tender Sigh she brings,
Mix with his Soul, and hide it there.
To bear himself so well in Company,
That if his Mistress present be,
It may be thought by all the Fair,
Each in his Heart does claim a Share,
And all are more beloved than She.
But when with the dear Maid apart,
Then at her Feet the Lover lies;
Opens his Soul, shows all his Heart,
While Joy is dancing in his Eyes.
Then all that Honor may, or take, or give,
They both distribute, both receive.
A Looker on would spoil a Lover's Joy;
For Love's a Game, where only Two can play.
And it is the hardest of Love's Mysteries,
To feign Love where it is not, hide it where it is.
After having told you, my lovely Iris, that I design to put your Watch into a
Heart, I ought to show you the Ornaments of the Case. I do intend to have 'em
Crowned Ciphers. I do not mean those Crowns of Vanity, which are put
indifferently on all sorts of Ciphers: No, I must have such, as may distinguish
mine from the rest; and may be true Emblems of what I would represent. My four
Ciphers, therefore, shall be crowned with these four Wreaths; of Olive, Laurel,
Myrtle, and Roses: And the Letters that begin the Names of Iris and Damon,
shall compose the Ciphers; though I must intermix some other Letters, that bear
another Sense, and have another Signification.

The first Cipher.
THe first Cipher is composed of an I, and a D, which are joined by an L, and
an E: Which signifies, Love Extreme. And it is but just, O adorable Iris! that
Love should be mixed with our Ciphers, and that Love alone should be the Union
of 'em.

Love ought alone the Mystic Knot to tie;
Love, that great Master of all Arts;
And this dear Cipher, is to let you see,
Love unites Names, as well as Hearts.
Without this charming Union, our Souls could not communicate those invisible
Sweetnesses, which complete the Felicity of Lovers; and which, the most tender,
and passionate Expressions are too feeble to make us comprehend. But, my
adorable Iris, I am contented with the vast Pleasure I feel, in Loving well,
without the Care of Expressing it well; if you will imagine my Pleasure,
without expressing it. For I confess, 'twou'd be no Joy to me, to adore you, if
you did not perfectly believe, I did adore you. Nay, though you loved me, if
you had no Faith in me, I should languish, and love in as much Pain, as if you
scorned, and at the same time believed I died for you. For surely, Iris, it is a
greater Pleasure to please, than to be pleased; and the Glorious Power of
Giving, is infinitely a greater Satisfaction, than that of Receiving; there is
so great and God-like a Quality in it. I would have your Belief therefore,
equal to my Passion, extreme; as indeed, all Love should be, or it cannot bear
that Divine Name: It can pass but for an indifferent Assection. And these
Ciphers ought to make the World find all the noble Force of delicate Passion.
For, O my Iris! what would Love signify, if we did not love fervently. Sisters
and Brothers love; Friends and Relations have Affections; but where the Souls
are joined, which are filled with Eternal soft Wishes, Oh there is some Excess
of Pleasure, which cannot be expressed!

Your Looks, your dear obliging Words, and your charming Letters have
sufficiently persuaded me of your Tenderness; and you might surely see the
Excess of my Passion, by my Cares, my Sighs, and entire Resignation to your
Will. I never think of Iris, but my Heart feels double Flames, and pants and
heaves with double Sighs; and whose Force makes its Ardours known, by a
Thousand Transports: And they are very much too blame, to give the Name of Love
to feeble, easy Passions: Such Transitory Tranquil Inclinations are, at best,
but Wellwishers to Love; and a Heart that has such Heats as those, ought not to
put it self into the Rank of those nobler Victims, that are offered at the
Shrine of Love. But our Souls, Iris, burn with a more glorious Flame, that
lights and conducts us beyond a Possibility of losing one another. It Is this
that flatters all my Hopes: It Is this alone makes me believe my self worthy of
Iris: And let her judge of its Violence, by the Greatness of its Splendor.

Does not a Passion of this Nature, so true, so ardent, deserve to be crowned?
And will you wonder to see, over this Cipher, a Wreath of Mirtles, those
Boughs, so sacred to the Queen of Love, and so worshipped by Lovers? It Is with
these soft Wreaths, that those are crowned, who understand how to love well,
and faithfully.

The Smiles, the Graces, and the Sports,
That in the sacred Groves maintain their Courts,
Are with these Myrtles crowned.
Thither the Nymphs, their Garlands bring;
Their Beauties, and their Praises sing,
While Echoes do the Songs resound.
Love, though a God, with Myrtle Wreaths,
Does his soft Temples bind.
More valued are those consecrated Leaves,
Than the bright Wealth, in Eastern Rocks confined:
And Crowns of Glory less Ambition move,
Than those more sacred Diadems of Love.
The second Cipher
IS crowned with Olives; and I add to the two Letters of our Names, an R and an
L, for Reciprocal Love. Every time that I have given you, O lovely Iris!
Testimonies of my Passion, I have been so blessed, as to receive some from your
Bounty; and you have been pleased to flatter me with a Belief, that I was not
indifferent to you. I dare therefore say, that being honored with the Glory of
your Tenderness and Care, Iought, as a Trophy of my illustrious Conquest, to
adorn the Watch with a Cipher, that is so advantageous to me. Ought I not to
esteem my self the most fortunate and happy of Mankind, to have exchanged my
Heart with so charming and admirable a Person as Iris? Ah! how sweet, how
precious is the Change; and how vast a Glory arrives to me from it! Oh! you
must not wonder, if my Soul abandon it self to a Thousand Ecstasies! In the
Merchandise of Hearts, Oh! how dear it is, to receive as much as one gives; and
barter Heart for Heart! Oh! I would not receive mine again, for all the Crowns
the Universe contains! Nor ought you, my Adorable, make any Vows, or Wishes,
ever to retrieve yours; or show the least Repentance for the Blessing you have
given me. The Exchange we made, was confirmed by a noble Faith; and you ought
to believe, you have bestowed it well, since you are paid for it, a Heart that
is so conformable to yours, so true, so just, and so full of Adoration: And
nothing can be the just Recompense of Love, but Love; and to enjoy the true
Felicity of it, our Hearts ought to keep an equal Motion; and, like the Scales
of Justice, always hang even.

It Is the Property of Reciprocal Love, to make the Heart feel the Delicacy of
Love, and to give the Lover all the Ease and Softness he can reasonably hope.
Such a Love renders all Things advantageous and prosperous: Such a Love
triumphs over all other Pleasures. And I put a Crown of Olives over the Cipher
of Reciprocal Love, to make known, that two Hearts, where Love is justly equal,
enjoy a Peace, that nothing can disturb.

Olives are never fading seen;
But always flourishing, and green.
The Emblem it is of Love and Peace;
For Love that is true, will never cease:
And Peace does Pleasure still increase.
Joy to the World, the Peace of Kings imparts;
And Peace in Love distributes it to Hearts.
The third Cipher.
THe C, and the L, which are joined to the Letters of our Names in this Cipher,
crowned with Laurel, explains a Constant Love. It will not, my fair Iris,
suffice, that my Love is extreme, my Passion violent, and my Wishes fervent, or
that our Loves are reciprocal: But it ought also to be constant; for in Love,
the Imagination is oftener carried to those things that may arrive, and which we
wish for, than to things that Time has robbed us of: And in those agreeable
Thoughts of Joys to come, the Heart takes more delight to wander, than in all
those that are past; though the Remembrance of 'em are very dear, and very
charming. We should be both unjust, if we were not persuaded we are possessed
with a Virtue, the Use of which is so admirable; as that of Constancy. Our
Loves are not of that sort, that can finish, or have End; but such a Passion,
so perfect, and so constant, that it will be a President for future Ages, to
love perfectly; and when they would express an extreme Passion, they will say,
They loved, as Damon did the charming Iris. And he that knows the Glory of
Constant Love, will despise those fading Passions, those little Amusements,
that serve for a Day. What Pleasure, or Dependence can one have in a Love of
that sort? What Concern, What Raptures can such an Amor produce in a Soul? And
what Satisfaction can one promise one's self, in playing with a false Gamester;
who, though you are aware of him, in spite of all your Precaution, puts the
false Dice upon you, and wins all.

Those Eyes, that can no better Conquest make,
Let 'em never look abroad:
Such, but the empty Name of Lovers take,
And so profane the God.
Better they never should pretend,
Than ever begun to make an End.
Of that fond Flame, what shall we say,
That Is born and languisht in a Day?
Such short-lived Blessings cannot bring
The Pleasure of an Envying.
Who is it will celebrate that Flame,
That Is damned to such a scanty Fame?
While constant Love, the Nymphs and Swains
Still sacred make, in lasting Strains,
And cheerful Lays, throughout the Plains.
A constant Love knows no Decay;
But still advancing every Day,
Will last as long as Life can stay.
With every Look and Smile improves,
With the same Ardour always moves,
With such, as Damon, charming Iris loves!
Constant Love finds it self impossible to be shaken; it resists the Attacks of
Envy, and a Thousand Accidents that endeavor to change it: Nothing can
disoblige it, but a known Falseness, or Contempt: Nothing can remove it, though
for a short Moment it may lie sullen and resenting, it recovers, and returns
with greater Force and Joy. I therefore, with very good Reason, crown this
Cipher of Constant Love with a Wreath of Laurel; since such Love always
triumphs over Time and Fortune, though it be not her Property to besiege; for
she cannot overcome, but in defending her self; but the Victories she gains,
are never the less glorious.

For far less Conquest, we have known
The Victor wear the Laurel Crown.
The Triumph with more Pride let him receive;
While those of Love, at least, more Pleasures give.
The fourth Cipher.
PErhaps, my lovely Maid, you will not find out what I mean by the S, and the
L, in this last Cipher, that is crowned with Roses. I will therefore tell you,
I mean Secret Love. There are very few People, who know the Nature of that
Pleasure, which so divine a Love creates: And let me say what I will of it,
they must feel it themselves, who would rightly understand it, and all its
ravishing Sweets. But this there is a great deal of Reason to believe, the
Secrecy in Love doubles the Pleasures of it. And I am so absolutely persuaded
of this, that I believe all those Favors that are not kept secret, are dull
and paul'd, very insipid and tasteless Pleasures: And let the Favors be never
so innocent, that a Lover receives from a Mistress, she ought to value 'em, set
a Price upon 'em, and make the Lover pay dear; while he receives 'em with
Difficulty, and sometimes with Hazard. A Lover that is not secret, but suffers
every one to count his Sighs, has, at most, but a feeble Passion, such as
produces sudden and transitory Desires, which dye as soon as born: A true Love
has not this Character; for whenever it is made public, it ceases to be a
Pleasure, and is only the Result of Vanity. Not that I expect, our Loves should
always remain a Secret: No, I should never, at that Rate, arrive to a Blessing,
which, above all the Glories of the Earth, I aspire to; but even then, there
are a Thousand Joys, a Thousand Pleasures, that I shall be as careful to
conceal from the foolish World, as if the whole Preservation of that Pleasure
depended on my Silence; as indeed it does in a great Measure.

To this Cipher I put a Crown of Roses, which are not Flowers of a very lasting
Date. And it is to let you see, that it is impossible Love can be long hid. We
see every Day, with what fine Dissimulation and Pains, People conceal a
Thousand Hates and Malices, Disgusts, Disobligations, and Resentments, without
being able to conceal the least part of their Love; but Reputation has an
Ardour, as well as Roses; and a Lover ought to esteem that, as the dearest, and
tenderest Thing; not only that of his own, which is, indeed, the least part;
but that of his Mistress, more valuable to him than Life. He ought to endeavor
to give People no Occasion to make false Judgments of his Actions, or to give
their Censures; which, most certainly, are never in the Favor of the fair
Person; for likely, those false Censures are of the busy Female Sex, the
Coquets of that number; whose little Spights and Railleries, joined to that
fancied Wit they boast of, sets 'em at Odds with all the Beautiful, and
Innocent: And how very little of that kind serves, to give the World a Faith,
when a Thousand Virtues, told of the same Persons, by more credible Witnesses
and Judges, shall pass unregarded; so willing and inclined is all the World to
credit the Ill, and condemn the Good. And yet, Oh! what pity it is, we are
compelled to live in Pain, to oblige this foolish scandalous World! And though
we know each others Virtue and Honor, we are obliged to observe that Caution
(to humor the Talking Town) which takes away so great a part of the Pleasure
of Life! It Is therefore that, among these Roses, you will find some Thorns; by
which you may imagine, that in Love, Precaution is necessary to its Secrecy:
And we must restrain our selves, upon a Thousand Occasions, with so much Care,
that, O Iris! it is impossible to be discreet, without Pain; but it is a Pain,
that creates a Thousand Pleasures.

Where should a Lover hide his Joys,
Free from Malice, free from Noise?
Where no Envy can intrude:
Where no busy Rival's Spy,
Made, by Disappointment, rude,
May inform his Jealousy.
The Heart will their best Refuge prove;
Which Nature meant the Cabinet of Love.
What would a Lover not endure,
His Mistress Fame and Honor to secure.
Iris, the Care we take to be discreet,
Is the dear Toil, that makes the Pleasure sweet.
The Thorn that does the Wealth enclose,
That with less saucy Freedom we may touch the Rose.
The Clasp of the Watch.
AH, charming Iris! Ah, my lovely Maid! It Is now in a more peculiar manner,
that I require your Aid, in the Finishing of my Design, and Completing the
whole Piece, to the utmost Perfection; and without your Aid, it cannot be
performed. It is about the Clasp of the Watch; a Material, in all Appearance,
the most trivial of any Part of it. But that it may be safe for ever, I design
it the Image, or Figure of Two Hands; that fair One of the adorable Iris,
joined to mine; with this Motto, Inviolable Faith: For this Case, this Heart
ought to be shut up by this Eternal Clasp. Oh, there is nothing so necessary as
this! Nothing can secure Love, but Faith.

That Virtue ought to be a Guard to all the Heart thinks, and all the Mouth
utters: Nor can Love say, he triumphs without it. And when that remains not in
the Heart, all the rest deserves no Regard. Oh! I have not loved so ill, to
leave one Doubt upon your Soul. Why then, will you want that Faith? O unkind
Charmer, that my Passion, and my Services so justly merit!

When two Hearts entirely love,
And in one Sphere of Honor move,
Each maintains the other's Fire,
With a Faith that is entire.
For what heedless Touth bestows
On a faithless Maid, his Vows.
Faith without Love, bears Virtue's Price;
But Love, without her Mixture, is a Vice.
Love, like Religion, still should be,
In the Foundation, firm and true:
In Points of Faith, should still agree:
Though Innovations vain and new
(Love's little Quarrels) may arise;
In Fundamentals still they are just and wise.
Then, charming Maid, be sure of this:
Allow me Faith as well as Love;
Since that alone affords no Bliss,
Unless your Faith your Love improve.
Either resolve to let me dye
By fairer Play, your Cruelty;
Than not your Love, with Faith impart,
And with your Vows, to give your Heart.
In mad Despair I Would rather fall,
Than lose my glorious Hopes of Conquering all.
So certain it is, that Love, without Faith, is of no value.

In fine, my adorable Iris, this Case shall be, as near as I can, like those
delicate Ones of Filligrin-Work, which do not hinder the Sight from taking a
View of all within: You may therefore see, through this Heart, all your Watch.
Nor is my Desire of Preserving this inestimable Piece more, than to make it the
whole Rule of my Life and Actions. And my chiefest Design in these Ciphers, is,
to comprehend in 'em, the principal Virtues that are most necessary to Love. Do
not we know, that Reciprocal Love is Justice; Constant Love, Fortitude; Secret
Love, Prudence? Though it is true, that Extreme Love, that is, Excess of Love,
in one Sense, appears not to be Temperance; yet you must know, my Iris, that in
Matters of Love, Excess is a Virtue, and that all other Degrees of Love are
worthy Scorn alone. It Is this alone, that can make good the glorious Title:
It Is this alone, that can bear the true Name of Love; and this alone, that
renders the Lovers truly happy, in spite of all the Storms of Fate, and Shocks
of Fortune. This is an Antidote against all other Griefs: This bears up the
Soul in all Calamity; and is the very Heaven of Life, the last Refuge of all
Worldly Pain and Care, and may well bear the Title of Divine.

The Art of Loving well.
That Love may all Perfection be;
Sweet, Charming to the last Degree,
The Heart, where the bright Flame does dwell,
In Faith and Softness should excel:
Excess of Love should fill each Vein,
And all its sacred Rites maintain.
The tenderest Thoughts Heaven can inspire,
Should be the Fuel to its Fire:
And that, like Incense, burn as pure;
Or that, in Vrns, should still endure.
No fond Desire should fill the Soul,
But such as Honor may control.
Jealousy I will allow:
Not the Amorous Winds that blow
Should wanton in my Iris Hair,
Or ravish Kisses from my Fair.
Not the Flowers, that grow beneath,
Should borrow Sweetness of her Breath.
If her Bird she do caress,
How I grudge its Happiness,
When upon her Snowy Hand,
The Wanton does triumphing stand!
Or upon her Breast she skips,
And lays her Beak to Iris Lips!
Fainting at my ravished Joy,
I could the Innocent destroy.
If I can no Bliss afford,
To a little harmless Bird,
Tell me, O thou dear loved Maid!
What Reason could my Rage persuade,
If a Rival should invade?
If thy charming Eyes should dart
Looks that sally from the Heart;
If you sent a Smile, or Glance
To another, though by Chance;
Still thou giv'st what is not thy own:
They belong to me alone.
All Submission I would pay.
Man was born, the Fair to obey.
Your very Look I Would understand,
And thence receive your least Command:
Never your Justice will dispute;
But, like a Lover, execute.
I would no Usurper be,
But in claiming sacred Thee.
I would have all, and every Part:
No Thought should hide within thy Heart.
Mine a Cabinet was made,
Where Iris Secrets should be laid.
In the rest, without Control,
She should triumph over the Soul:
Prostrate at her Feet I Would lie,
Despising Power and Liberty;
Glorying more by Love to fall,
Than rule the Universal Ball.
Hear me, O you Saucy Youth!
And from my Maxims, learn this Truth.
Would you Great and Powerful prove?
Be an humble Slave to Love,
It Is nobler far, a Joy to give,
Than any Blessing to receive.
THE LOOKING-GLASS, Sent from DAMON to IRIS.
HOw long, O charming Iris! shall I speak in vain of your adorable Beauty? You
have been just, and believe I love you with a Passion perfectly tender and
extreme; and yet you will not allow your Charms to be infinite. You must either
accuse my Flames to be unreasonable, and that my Eyes and Heart are false
Judges of Wit and Beauty; or allow, that you are the most perfect of your Sex.
But instead of that, you always accuse me of Flattery, when I speak of your
infinite Merit; and when I refer you to your Glass, you tell me, that flatters,
as well as Damon; though one would imagine, that should be a good Witness for
the Truth of what I say, and undeceive you of the Opinion of my Injustice. Look
-- and confirm your self, that nothing can equal your Perfections. All the
World says it, and you must doubt it no longer. O Iris! Will you dispute
against the whole World?

But since you have so long distrusted your own Glass, I have here presented
you with One, which I know is very true; and having been made for you only, can
serve only you. All other Glasses present all Objects, but this reflects only
Iris; whenever you consult it, it will convince you; and tell you, how much
Right I have done you, when I told you, you were the fairest Person that ever
Nature made. When other Beauties look into it, it will speak to all the fair
Ones; but let 'em do what they will, 'twill say nothing to their Advantage.

Iris, to spare what you call Flattery,
Consult your Glass each Hour of the Day.
'Twill tell you where your Charms and Beauties lie,
And where your little wanton Graces play:
Where Love does revel in your Face and Eyes;
What Look invites your Slaves, and what denies.
Where all the Loves adorn you with such Care,
Where dress your Smiles, where arm your lovely Eyes;
Where deck the flowing Tresses of your Hair:
How cause your Snowy Breasts to fall and rise:
How this severe Glance makes the Lover dye;
How that, more soft, gives Immortality.
Where you shall see, what it is enslaves the Soul;
Where every Feature, every Look combines:
When the adorning Air, over all the Whole,
To so much Wit, and so nice Virtue joins.
Where the Belle Taille and Motion still afford
Graces to be eternally adored.
But I will be silent now, and let your Glass speak.

Iris's Looking-Glass.
DAmon (O charming Iris!) has given me to you, that you may sometimes give your
self the Trouble, and me the Honor of Consulting me in the great and weighty
Affairs of Beauty. I am, my adorable Mistress! a faithful Glass; and you ought
to believe all I say to you.

The Shape of Iris.
I Must begin with your Shape, and tell you, without Flattery, it is the finest
in the World, and gives Love and Admiration to all that see you. Pray observe
how free and easy it is, without Constraint, Stiffness, or Affectation, those
mistaken Graces of the Fantastic, and the Formal; who give themselves Pain, to
show their Will to please; and whose Dressing makes the greatest Part of its
Fineness, when they are more obliged to the Tailor, than to Nature; who add or
diminish, as Occasion serves, to form a Grace, where Heaven never gave it: And
while they remain on this Wreck of Pride, they are eternally uneasy, without
pleasing any Body. Iris, I have seen a Woman of your Acquaintance, who, having
a greater Opinion of her own Person, than any Body else, has screwed her Body
into so fine a Form (as she calls it) that she dares no more stir a Hand, lift
up an Arm, or turn her Head aside, than if, for the Sin of such a Disorder, she
were to be turned into a Pillar of Salt; the less stiff and fixed Statue of the
two. Nay, she dares not speak or smile, lest she should put her Face out of
that Order she had set it in her Glass, when she last looked on her self: And is
all over such a Lady Nice (excepting in her Conversation) that ever made a
ridiculous Figure. And there are many Ladies more, but too much tainted with
that nauceous Formality, that old-fashioned Vice: But Iris, the charming, the
all-perfect Iris, has nothing in her whole Form, that is not free, natural, and
easy; and whose every Motion cannot please extremely, and which has not given
Damon a Thousand Rivals.

Damon, the Young, the Amorous, and the True;
Who sighs incessantly for you:
Whose whole Delight, now you are gone,
Is to retire to Shades alone,
And to the Echoes make his Moan.
By purling Streams the wishing Youth is laid,
Still sighing Iris! Lovely charming Maid!
See, in thy Absence, how thy Lover dies;
While to his Sighs, the Echo still replies.
Then with the Stream he holds Discourse:
O thou that bendst thy liquid Force
To lovely Thames! upon whose Shore
The Maid resides, whom I adore!
My Tears of Love upon thy Surface bear:
And if upon thy Banks thou see my Fair,
In all thy softest Murmurs sing,
"From Damon, I this Present bring;
"My every Curl contains a Tear!
Then at her Feet thy Tribute pay:
But haste, O happy Stream! away;
Lest, charmed too much, thou should for ever stay.
And thou, O gentle, murmuring Breeze!
That plays in Air, and wantons with the Trees;
On thy young Wings, where gilded Sunbeams play,
To Iris my soft Sighs convey,
Still as they rise, each Minute of the Day:
But whisper gently in her Ear;
Let not the ruder Winds thy Message hear,
Nor ruffle one dear Curl of her bright Hair.
Oh! touch her Cheeks with sacred Reverence,
And stay not gazing on her lovely Eye!
But if thou bear her Rosy Breath from thence,
It Is Incense of that Excellence,
That as thou mount'st, 'twill perfume all the Skies.
Iris's Complexion.
SAy what you will, I am confident, if you will confess your Heart, you are,
every time you view your self in me, surpised at the Beauty of your
Complexion; and will secretly own, you never saw any thing so fair. I am not
the first Glass, by a Thousand, that has assured you of this. If you will not
believe me, ask Damon: He tells it you every Day, but that Truth from him
offends you; and because he loves too much, you think his Judgment too little;
and since this is so perfect, that must be defective. But it is most certain,
your Complexion is infinitely fine, your Skin soft and smooth, as polisht Wax,
or Ivory, extremely white and clear; though if any Body speaks but of your
Beauty, an agreeable Blush casts it self all over your Face, and gives you a
Thousand new Graces.

And then two Flowers, newly born,
Shine in your Heavenly Face:
The Rose, that blushes in the Morn,
Vsurps the Lilly's Place:
Sometimes the Lilly does prevail,
And makes the generous Crimson pale.
Iris's Hair.
OH, the beautiful Hair of Iris! It seems, as if Nature had crowned you with a
great Quantity of lovely fair brown Hair, to make us know, that you were born
to rule; and to repair the Faults of Fortune, that has not given you a Diadem:
And do not bewail the Want of that (so much your Merit's Due) since Heaven has
so gloriously recompensed you, with what gains more admiring Slaves.

Heaven for Sovereignty, has made your Form:
And you were more than for dull Empire born.
Over Hearts your Kingdom shall extend,
Your vast Dominion know no End.
Thither the Loves and Graces shall resort;
To Iris make their Homage, and their Court.
No envious Star, no common Fate,
Did on my Iris Birthday wait;
But all was happy, all was delicate.
Here Fortune would inconstant be in vain:
Iris and Love, eternally shall reign.
Love does not make less use of your Hair for new Conquests, than of all the
rest of your Beauties that adorn you. If he takes our Hearts with your fine
Eyes, it ties 'em fast with your Hair; and of it weaves a Chain, not easily
broken. It is not of those sorts of Hair, whose Harshness discovers ill Nature;
nor of those, whose Softness shows us the Weakness of the Mind: Not that either
of these are Arguments without Exception; but it is such as bears the Character
of a perfect Mind, and a delicate Wit; and for its Color, the most faithful,
discreet, and beautiful in the World; such as shows a Complexion and
Constitution, neither so cold, to be insensible; nor so hot, to have too much
Fire; that is, neither too white, nor too black; but such a Mixture of the two
Colors, as makes it the most agreeable in the World.

It Is that which leads those captived Hearts,
That bleeding at your Feet do lie.
It Is that the Obstinate converts,
That dare the Power of Love deny.
It Is that which Damon so admires;
Damon, who often tells you so.
If from your Eyes Love takes his Fires,
It Is with your Hair he strings his Bow:
Which touching but the feathered Dart,
It never mist the destined Heart.
Iris's Eyes.
I Believe, my fair Mistress, I shall dazzle you with the Luster of your own
Eyes. They are the finest Blue in the World: They have all the Sweetness, that
ever charmed the Heart; with a certain Languishment, that is irresistible; and
never any looked on 'em, that did not sigh after 'em. Believe me, Iris, they
carry unavoidable Darts and Fires; and whoever expose themselves to their
Dangers, pay for their Imprudence.

Cold as my solid Crystal is,
Hard and impenetrable too
Yet I am sensible of Bliss,
When your charming Eyes I view:
Even by me, their Flames are felt;
And at each Glance, I fear to melt.
Ah, how pleasant are my Days!
How my glorious Fate I bless!
Mortals never knew my Joys,
Nor Monarchs guest my Happiness.
Every Look that is soft and gay,
Iris gives me every Day.
Spite of her Virtue, and her Pride,
Every Morning I am blessed
With what to Damon is denied;
To view her when she is undrest.
All her Heaven of Beauty's shown
To triumphing Me -- alone.
Scarce the prying Beams of Light,
Or the impatient God of Day,
Are allowed so dear a Sight,
Or dare profane her with a Ray;
When she has appeared to me,
Like Venus rising from the Sea.
But Oh! I must those Charms conceal,
All too Divine for vulgar Eyes:
Should I my secret Joys reveal,
Of Sacred Trust I break the Ties;
And Damon would with Envy dye,
Who hopes, one Day, to be as blessed as I.
Extravagant with my Joys, I have strayed beyond my Limits; for I was telling
you of the wondrous Fineness of your Eyes, which no Mortal can resist, nor any
Heart stand the Force of their Charms; and the most difficult Conquests they
gain, scarce cost 'em the Expense of a Look. They are modest and tender, chaste
and languishing. There you may take a View of the whole Soul, and see Wit and
good Nature (those two inseparable Virtues of the Mind) in an extraordinary
Measure. In fine, you see all that fair Eyes can produce, to make themselves
adored. And when they are angry, they strike an unresistable Awe upon the Soul:
And those Severities, Damon wishes, may perpetually accompany them, during
their Absence from him; for it is with such Eyes, he would have you receive all
his Rivals.

Keep, lovely Maid, the Softness in your Eyes,
To flatter Damon with another Day:
When at your Feet the ravished Lover lies,
Then put on all that is tender, all that is gay:
And for the Griefs your Absence makes him prove,
Give him the softest, dearest Looks of Love.
His trembling Heart with sweetest Smiles caress,
And in your Eyes, soft Wishes let him find;
That your Regret of Absence may confess,
In which, no Sense of Pleasure you could find:
And to restore him, let your faithful Eyes
Declare, that all his Rivals you despise.
The Mouth of Iris.
I Perceive, your Modesty would impose Silence on me: But, O fair Iris! Do not
think to present your self before a Glass, if you would not have it tell you
all your Beauties: Content your self, that I only speak of 'em, En Passant; for
should I speak what I would, I should dwell all Day upon each Particular, and
still say something new. Give me Liberty then to speak of your fine Mouth: You
need only open it a little, and you will see the most delicate Teeth, that ever
you beheld; the whitest, and the best set. Your Lips are the finest in the
World; so round, so soft, so plump, so dimpled, and of the lovliest Color. And
when you smile, Oh! What Imagination can conceive how sweet it is, that has not
seen you Smiling? I cannot describe what I so admire; and it is in vain to
those, who have not seen Iris.

O Iris! boast that one peculiar Charm,
That has so many Conquests made;
So innocent, yet capable of Harm;
So just it self, yet has so often betrayed
Where a Thousand Graces dwell,
And wanton round in every Smile.
A Thousand Loves do listen when you speak,
And catch each Accent as it flies:
Rich flowing Wit, when ever you Silence break,
Flows from your Tongue, and sparkles in your Eyes.
Whether you talk, or silent are;
Your Lips Immortal Beauties were.
The Neck of Iris.
ALl your Modesty, all your nice Care, cannot hide the ravishing Beauties of
your Neck; we must see it, coy as you are; and see it the whitest, and
finest-shap't, that ever was formed. Oh! Why will you cover it? You know, all
handsome things would be seen. And Oh! How often have you made your Lovers envy
your Scarf, or any thing that hides so fine an Object from their Sight. Damon
himself complains of your too nice Severity. Pray do not hide it so carefully.
See how perfectly turned it is; with small blue Veins, wandering and ranging
here and there, like little Rivulets, that wanton over the flowery Meads. See
how the round white rising Breasts heave with every Breath, as if they
disdained to be confined to a Covering; and repel the malicious Cloud, that
would obscure their Brightness.

Fain I would have leave to tell
The Charms that on your Bosom dwell;
Describe it like some flowery Field,
That does Ten Thousand Pleasures yield;
A Thousand gliding Springs and Groves;
All Receptacles for Loves.
But Oh! What Iris hides, must be
Ever sacred kept by me.
The Arms and Hands of Iris.
I Shall not be put to much Trouble to show you your Hands and Arms, because
you may view them without my Help; and you are very unjust, if you have not
admired 'em a Thousand times. The beautiful Color and Proportion of your Arm
is unimitable, and your Hand is dazzling fine, small, and plump; long-pointed
Fingers, delicately turned; dimpl'd on the Snowy Outside, but adorned within
with Rose, all over the soft Palm. O Iris! Nothing equals your fair Hand; that
Hand, of which Love so often makes such use, to draw his Bow, when he would
send the Arrow home, with more Success; and which irresistibly wounds those,
who possibly, have not yet seen your Eyes: And when you have been veiled, that
lovely Hand has gained you a Thousand Adorers. And I have heard Damon say,
Without the Aid of more Beauties, that alone had been sufficient to have made
an absolute Conquest over his Soul. And he has often vowed, It never touched
him, but it made his Blood run with little irregular Motions in his Veins; his
Breath beat short and double; his Blushes rise, and his very Soul dance.

Oh! How the Hand the Lover ought to prize,
'Bove any one peculiar Grace,
While he is dying for the Eyes,
And doting on the lovely Face.
The Vnconsid'ring little knows,
How much he to this Beauty owes.
That, when the Lover absent is,
Informs him of his Mistress Heart.
It Is that, which gives him all his Bliss,
When dear Love-Secrets 'twill impart.
That plights the Faith, the Maid bestows:
And that confirms the timorous Vows.
It Is that betrays the Tenderness,
Which the too bashful Tongue denies.
It Is that, that does the Heart confess,
And spares the Language of the Eyes.
It Is that, which Treasures gives so vast:
Even Iris 'twill to Damon give at last.
The Grace and Air of Iris.
It Is I alone, O charming Maid! that can show you that noble Part of your
Beauty: That generous Air, that adorns all your lovely Person, and renders
every Motion and Action perfectly adorable. With what a Grace you walk! -- How
free, how easy, and how unaffected! See how you move; -- for only here you can
see it. Damon has told you a Thousand times, that never any Mortal had so
glorious an Air; but he could not half describe it, nor would you credit even
what he said; but with a careless Smile, pass it off for the Flattery of a
Lover. But here behold, and be convinced; and know, no part of your Beauty can
charm more than this. O Iris, confess, Love has adorned you with all his Art
and Care. Your Beauties are the Themes of all the Muses; who tell you in daily
Songs, that the Graces themselves have not more than Iris. And one may truly
say, that you alone know how to join the Ornaments and Dress, with Beauty; and
you are still adorned, as if that Shape and Air had a peculiar. Art to make all
things appear gay and fine. Oh, how well dressed you are! How every thing becomes
you! Never singular, never gaudy; but always suting with your Quality.

Oh, how that Negligence becomes your Air!
That careless flowing of your Hair,
That plays about, with wanton Grace,
With every Motion of your Face:
Disdaining all that dull Formality,
That dares not move the Lip, or Eye;
But at some fancied Grace's cost;
And think, with it, at least, a Lover lost.
But the unlucky Minute to reclaim,
And ease the Coquet of her Pain,
The Pocket-Glass adjusts the Face again:
Re-sets the Mouth, and languishes the Eyes;
And thinks, the Spark that ogles that Way -- dies.
Of Iris learn, O ye mistaken Fair!
To dress your Face, your Smiles, your Air.
Let easy Nature all the business do:
She can the softest Graces show:
Which Art but turns to Ridicule;
And where there is none, serves but to show the Fool.
In Iris you all Graces find;
Charms without Art, a Motion unconfined:
Without Constraint, she smiles, she looks, she talks;
And without Affectation, moves and walks.
Beauties so perfect never were seen.
O ye mistaken Fair! Dress ye by Iris Miene.
The Discretion of Iris.
BUt O Iris! The Beauties of the Body are imperfect, if the Beauties of the
Soul do not advance themselves to an equal Height. But, O Iris! What Mortal is
there so damned to Malice, that does not, with Adoration, confess, that you (O
charming Maid!) have an equal Portion of all the Braveries and Virtues of the
Mind? And who is it, that confesses your Beauty, that does not, at the same
time acknowledge, and bow to your Wisdom? The whole World admires both in you?
And all, with Impatience, ask, Which of the Two is most surprising? Your
Beauty, or your Discretion? But we dispute in vain on that excellent Subject;
for after all, it is determined, that the two Charms are equal. It Is none of
those idle Discretions, that consists in Words alone, and ever takes the Shadow
of Reason for the Substance; and that makes use of all the little Artifices of
Subtilty, and florid Talking, to make the Outside of the Argument appear fine,
and leave the Inside wholly mis-understood: Who runs away with Words, and
never thinks of Sense. But you, O lovely Maid! never make use of these affected
Arts; but without being too brisk, or too severe; too silent, or too talkative,
you inspire in all your Hearers, a Joy, and a Respect. Your Soul is an Enemy to
that usual Vice of your Sex, of using little Arguments against the Fair; or by
a Word, or Jest, make your self, and Hearers pleasant, at the Expense of the
Fame of others.

Your Heart is an Enemy to all Passions, but that of Love. And this is one of
your noble Maxims; That every One ought to love, in some Part of his Life: And
that, in a Heart truly brave, Love is without Folly: That Wisdom is a Friend to
Love, and Love to perfect Wisdom. Since these Maxims are your own, do not, O
charming Iris! resist that noble Passion: And since Damon is the most tender of
all your Lovers, answer his Passion with a noble Ardour: Your Prudence never
falls in the Choice of your Friends; and in choosing so well your Lover, you
will stand an eternal President to all unreasonable fair Ones.

O thou, that do excel in Wit and Youth!
Be still a President for Love and Truth.
Let the dull World say what it will,
A noble Flame's unblameable.
Where a fine Sent'ment, and soft Passion rules,
They scorn the Censure of the Fools.
Yield, Iris, then; Oh, yield to Love!
Redeem your dying Slave from Pain:
The World your Conduct must approve:
Your Prudence never acts in vain.
The Goodness and Complaisance of Iris.
WHo but your Lovers, fair Iris! doubts, but you are the most complaisant
Person in the World: And that with so much Sweetness you oblige all, that you
command in Yielding; and as you gain the Heart of both Sexes, with the
Affability of your noble Temper; so all are proud and vain of obliging you. And
Iris, you may live assured, that your Empire is eternally established, by your
Beauty, and your Goodness: Your Power is confirmed, and you grow in Strength
every Minute: Your Goodness gets you Friends, and your Beauty Lovers.

This Goodness is not one of those, whose Folly renders it easy to every
Desirer; but a pure Effect of the Generosity of your Soul: such as Prudence
alone manages, according to the Merit of the Person, to whom it is extended;
and those whom you esteem, receive the sweet Marks of it; and only your Lovers
complain: Yet even then you charm. And though sometimes you can be a little
disturbed, yet, through your Anger, your Goodness shines; and you are but too
much afraid, that that may bear a false Interpretation: For oftentimes, Scandal
makes that pass for an Effect of Love, which is purely, that of Complaisance.

Never had any Body more Tenderness sor their Friends, than Iris: Their
Presence gives her Joy; their Absence, Trouble; and when she cannot see 'em,
she finds no Pleasure, like Speaking of 'em obligingly. Friendship reigns in
your Heart, and Sincerity on your Tongue Your Friendship is so strong, so
constant, and so tender, that it charms, pleases, and satisfies. All, that are
not your Adorers. It Is therefore, Damon is excusable, if he be not contented
with your Noble Friendship alone; for he is the most tender of that Number.

No! Give me all, the impatient Lover cries;
Without your Soul, I cannot live:
Dull Friendship cannot mine suffice,
That dies for all you have to give.
The Smiles, the Vows, the Heart must all be mine:
I cannot spare one Thought, or Wish of thine.
I sigh, I languish all the Day;
Each Minute ushers in my Groans:
To every God in vain I pray;
In every Grove repeat my Moans.
Still Iris Charms are all my Sorrows Theams:
They pain me Waking, and they wrack in Dreams.
Return, fair Iris! Oh, return!
Lest Sighing long, your Slave destroys.
I wish, I rave, I faint, I burn;
Restore me quickly all my Joys:
Your Mercy else, will come too late.
Distance in Love more cruel is, than Hate.
The Wit of Iris.
YOu are deceived in me, fair Iris, if you take me for one of those ordinary
Glasses, that represent the Beauty only of the Body; I remark to you also, the
Beauties of the Soul: And all about you declares yours, the finest that ever
was formed; that you have a Wit that surprises, and is always new: It Is none of
those, that loses its Luster, when one considers it; the more we examine yours,
the more adorable we find it. You say nothing, that is not, at once, agreeable
and solid; it is always quick and ready, without Impertinence, that little
Vanity of the Fair; who, when they know they have Wit, rarely manage it so, as
not to abound in Talking; and think, that all they say must please, because,
luckily, they sometimes chance to do so. But Iris never speaks, but it is of
use; and gives a Pleasure to all that hears her. She has the perfect Art of
Penetrating, even the most secret Thoughts. How often have you known, without
being told, all that has past in Damon's Heart? For all great Wits are Prophets
too.

Tell me; Oh, tell me! Charming Prophetess;
For you alone can tell my Love's Success.
The Lines in my dejected Face,
I fear, will lead you to no kind Result:
It is your own, that you must trace;
Those of your Heart you must consult.
It Is there, my Fortune I must learn,
And all that Damon does concern.
I tell you, that I love a Maid,
As bright as Heaven, of Angel-hue:
The softest, Nature ever made:
Whom I, with Sighs and Vows, pursue.
Oh, tell me, charming Prophetess!
Shall I this lovely Maid possess?
A Thousand Rivals do obstruct my Way;
A Thousand Fears they do create:
They throng about her all the Day,
Whilst I at awful Distance wait.
Say, Will the lovely Maid so fickle prove,
To give my Rivals Hope, as well as Love?
She has a Thousand Charms of Wit,
With all the Beauty Heaven ever gave:
Oh! Let her not make use of it,
To flatter me into the Slave.
Oh! Tell me Truth, to ease my Pain:
Say rather, I shall dye by her Disdain.
The Modesty of Iris.
I Perceive, fair Iris, you have a Mind to tell me, I have entertained you too
long, with a Discourse on your self. I know, your Modesty makes this
Declaration an Offense; and you suffer me, with Pain, to unvail those Treasures
you would hide. Your Modesty, that so commendable a Virtue in the Fair, and so
peculiar to you, is here a little too severe: Did I flatter you, you should
blush: Did I seek, by praising you, to show an Art of Speaking finely, you
might chide. But, O Iris! I say nothing, but such plain Truths, as all the
World can witness, are so. And so far I am from Flattery, that I seek no
Ornament of Words. Why do you take such Care to conceal your Virtues? They have
too much Luster, not to be seen, in spite of all your Modesty: Your Wit, your
Youth, and Reason oppose themselves, against this dull Obstructer of our
Happiness. Abate, O Iris, a little of this Virtue, since you have so many
other, to defend your self against the Attacks of your Adorers.

You your self have the least Opinion of your own Charms: And being the only
Person in the World, that is not in love with 'em, you hate to pass whole Hours
before your Looking-glass; and to pass your Time, like most of the idle Fair,
in dressing, and setting off those Beauties, which need so little Art. You,
more wise, disdain to give those Hours to the Fatigue of Dressing, which you
know so well how to employ a Thousand Ways. The Muses have blessed you, above
your Sex; and you know how to gain a Conquest with your Pen, more absolutely,
than all the industrious Fair, who trust to Dress and Equipage.

I have a Thousand things to tell you more, but willingly resign my Place to
Damon, that faithful Lover; he will speak more ardently than I: For, let a
Glass use all its Force, yet, when it speaks its Best, it speaks but coldly.

If my Glass, O charming Iris! have the good Fortune (which I could never
entirely boast) to be believed, 'twill serve, at least, to convince you, I have
not been so guilty of Flattery, as I have a Thousand times been charged. Since
then my Passion is equal to your Beauty (without Comparison, or End) believe, O
lovely Maid! how I sigh in your Absence: And be persuaded to lessen my Pain,
and restore me to my Joys; for there is no Torment so great, as the Absence of
a Lover from his Mistress; of which, this is the Idea.

The Effects of Absence from what we love.
Thou one continued Sigh! all over Pain!
Eternal Wish! but Wish, alas in vain!
Thou languishing, impatient Hoper on;
A busy Toyler, and yet still undone!
A breaking Glimpse of distant Day,
Enticing on, and leading more astray.
Thou Joy in Prospect, future Bliss extreme;
But never to be possessed, but in a Dream.
Thou fab'lous Goddess, which the ravished Boy,
In happy Slumbers proudly did enjoy:
But waking found an Airy Cloud he pressed;
His Arms came empty to his panting Breast.
Thou Shade, that only haunts the Soul by Night;
And when thou should inform, thou fly'st the Sight.
Thou false Idea of the Thinking Brain,
That labors for the charming Form in vain;
Which if by Chance it catch, you are lost again.
FINIS.

