ANIMADVERTIONS ON THE Papists Most Wicked AND Bloody Oath of Secrecy Given to
Robert Bolron by William Ruston a Jesuit, For the Murdering of Kings, Princes
and their People, and carrying on their Devilish and Hellish Designs for
Subverting the Protestant Religion in England and Ireland.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Amen.
I Robert Bolron, being in the Presence of Almighty God, the blessed Mary ever
Virgin, the blessed Michael the Archangel, the blessed St. John Baptist, the
holy Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, and all the Saints in Heaven, and to you
my Ghostly Father, do declare, and in my Heart believe the Pope, Christ's Vicar
General, to be the true and only Head of Christ's Church here on Earth, and
that by virtue of the Keys of Binding and Loosing, given his Holiness by our
Savior Christ, he has Power to depose all Heretical Kings and Princes, and
cause them to be Killed. Therefore, to the utmost of my Power, I will defend
this Doctrine, and his Holinesses Rights, against all Usurpers whatever;
especially against the now pretended King of England, in regard that he has
broke his Vows with his Holinesses Agents beyond Seas, and not performed his
Promises in bringing into England the holy Roman Catholic Religion. I do
renounce and disown any Allegiance as due to the said pretended King of
England, or Obedience to any of his inferior Officers and Magistrates; but do
believe the Protestant Doctrine to be Heretical and Damnable, and that all are
Damned which do not forsake the same; and to the best of my Power will help his
Holinesses Agents here in England, to extirpate and root out the said
Protestant Doctrine, and to destroy the said pretended King of England, and all
such of his Subjects as will not adhere to the holy See of Rome, and the
Religion there professed. I further do promise and declare, That I will keep
Secret and Private, and not Divulge directly or indirectly, by Word, Writing or
Circumstance, whatever shall be proposed, given in Charge, or discovered to me
by you my Ghostly Father, or any other engaged in the promoting of this pious
and holy Design; and that I will be Active, and not Desist from the carrying of
it on: and that no hopes of Rewards, Thrcats or Punishments, shall make me
Discover the rest concerned in so pious a Work; and if Discovered, shall never
confess any Accessaries, with my self concerned in this Design. All which I do
Swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Blessed Sacrament, which I now purpose
to receive, to perform, and on my part, to keep inviolable; And do call all the
Angels, and Saints in Heaven to witness my real Intention to keep this Oath. In
Testimony whereof, I do Receive this most Holy and Blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist.

A few Words to the Papists of England.
O Ye Papists! your own Reason cannot but tell you, That every Word in this
Oath is Hypocrisy, Perjury, Murder, Rebellion and Treason, both against God,
the King and his People, and your own Souls, thus to call your damnable Plot a
Holy and Pious design, to call Evil Good, and Good Evil, to put Darkness for
Light, and Light for Darkness; and all this for nothing but to satisfy a
filthy Humor in you, in a blind Hope of a blind Reward, ye know not what your
selves, a little Worldly preferment, a release out of Purgatory, or a Pardon
from the Pope, (a sinful Wretch that cannot get Pardon of Christ for himself) a
false Vicar, and a Judas Traitor to Christ in selling him for Money, in hiding
his Commandments from People to maintain Mammon, and to gull the People by a
few gaudy Shrines, Buildings and Pictures, just like the Heathenish Religion of
Apollo at Delphos, or like Diana at Ephesus. The Lord lighten your Darkness and
open your Eyes, that ye may see the Truth and be saved, in turning from these
Ways of Hell, and from being thus blinded in Religion and misled by those
Agents of the Devil, and his Vicar the Pope; for surely the Pope is the Devil's
Vicar, (rather then Christ's Vicar) because the Pope deludeth Souls, which is
the Devil's business; consider it well, and ye will find it so.

Why are ye so bewitched as not to read the Bible, but to believe Errors and
Lies?

Why do ye pin your Belief upon the Sleeves of your Priests, as to think all is
true whatsoever they tell you, never looking into the Scriptures to see whether
they speak true or no?

If ye be Subjects to the Roman Emperor, then indeed the Pope of Rome is your
Archbishop, otherwise not; for if ye be loyal Subjects to the King of England,
then the chief Bishop of England is your Archbishop, and not the Roman Pope.
How can ye imagine that the Roman Emperors Archbishop (or Pope of Rome) ever
had any right in England since the Departure of the Roman Emperors from the
Government of England; or that Austin the Monk was not sent on purpose to
seduce the Saxon Kings then in England?

How can ye prove that Images, Crosses, Altars, or any work of men's Hands may
lawfully be adored, worshipped, or bowed toward?

How can ye prove there is a Purgatory after this Life, where Souls may be
prayed out for Money?

And how can ye prove that either the Roman Pope, or any of his Priests are the
true Ministers of Christ, or have the Keys of binding and loosing, in regard
they obtained their Offices by Sinister means, only for Lucre of Preferment in
this World? And how dare ye trust that they or any of them can pardon your Sins?

How can ye prove that the words of Consecration spoken by them, or any of
them, can turn Bread and Wine, or Wafers, into the very Body and Blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, or that our Savior did not speak those words in a
Parable or Similtude, seeing it is written, Without a Parable spoke he nothing?

Do ye not know that your Priests have left out God's second Commandment, both
in your Mass-Books and in your Catechisms, and made two of the tenth to make up
the number of the Ten Commandments? And is it not on purpose to delude you, and
to make you Worship Images? And is not the Bible kept from you on purpose to
delude your Souls from knowing the Truth?

How can ye prove that the Souls of St Peter, St Paul, or any of the Saints in
Heaven can hear Peoples Prayers on Earth? or that there is any Intercessor
betwixt God and a Sinner but our Savior himself?

How dare ye say that all People on Earth are Heretics, but Papists? or that
it is Meritorious to kill a Heretic?

O Repent, and be Converted, for we do assure you, that ye do Err greatly, not
knowing the Scriptures nor the Precepts of God.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for J.B. 1681.


