A TOSSED SHIP Making to safe Harbor, OR, A Word in Season to a sinking
Kingdom.

Wherein Englands Case, and Cure; Her Burdens, and Comforts; Her Pressures,
and Duties;


Are opened, and applied, in diverse Sermons, preached upon the Public Days
of HVMILIATION, Out of that Prophetical History, Maith. 14.22 to 28.

By SAMUEL BOLTON, preacher to the Congregation of Saviors Southwark.

Chrysostom. Hom. in Act. 8. (...).

Joel. 2.21. Fear not, O Land, be glad and rejoice, for the Lord will do
great things for thee.

Psalm. 65.5. By terrible things will thou answer us, O God, of our salvation,
who art the confidence of all the ends of the Earth.

Vtinam qui nos modo exercent, convertantur and nobiscum exerceantur. Aug.

LONDON, Printed by L. N. for Philemon Stephens, and are to be sold at the
golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Warwick, Baron of Leez 'Le Rich, Lord
High Admiral of England, etc.
Right Honorable,
A Public spirit is a rare and excellent spirit, honored of GOD, esteemed of
Man; its a piece of GOD in Man, or Man seeking himself in GOD. Its a spirit
above the world, because above it self. We read of many of the Heathens, who
were renowned for their publicknesse of spirit. And certainly it was an
excellent spirit which was in them, but it was short of the true spirit: it
held forth a god, though it fell below the true God; Publicknesse of spirit
speaks a god, when privatenesse of spirit makes it self a god. Its proper
alone to God to work from himself, and to himself, to be the spring whence,
and the sea whither all his actions tend; but it is not for man. He that makes
himself the principle of working, and the end of working; that (like a
circular line) begins from himself, and ends in himself, does pull down God,
and sets himself in Gods stead. Like the spark in the fire, or the drop in
the sea; so our good does more consist in God then in our selves. He that seeks
to be something out of God, begins to be nothing; but he that can be nothing
for God, finds himself all in God, and God all to him.

Right honorable, among those who have excelled in this publicknesse of spirit
in our days. And have sought God and the good of these bleeding kingdoms, in
separation, nay in opposition to themselves; we find your Honor in the front,
uncorruptedly upright -- And it is but a manifest of your ancient spirit in
former times, when not many durst; and few would appear, to own religon under
contempt, we have had bad days before, then days of sin, now days of
trouble; and these days of trouble, they are but the births of those days of
sin. Then you were a patron to the good, now a patriot to the whole. In the
former you were a shelter in these a Savior; before a succor to religion, now
an assertor of it. In which work, your honor has had a part burdensome
enough, but suitable to the greatness of your spirit, fitted to encounter with
difficulties: you have lain at the breaches; seen the wonders of God in the
deep, been the terror of the sea, the comfort of the land: and we have
therefore been so secure at land, because our hearts have securely reposed in
you at sea: Your work is great, but your rewards are glorious; the hardest
services shall have the best rewards: nay, is there not something of a reward
in this? that God will own us, that God will honor us to work for him. My
Lord I know your head and hands are full, yet give me leave in this press of
employments, to present to your honor the state of our Church under the notion
of A tossed ship upon a stormy sea making to safe harbor: under that notion
these poor thoughts may find access to you, and come under your honors
protection. The Ship is the Church of God, the Sea the world, the the contrary
winds, men of contrary spirits, the storm, our present troubles, the lading
precious, religion, property, liberty, and what ever is dear; the passengers,
our selves, the harbor which we make toward, is nothing but peace with
reformation. The winds have been and do continue high, the sea stormy, our
dangers great, and we have been forced to cast much of our lading overboard to
preserve the rest, and save the ship. In these our straits many distrusting the
safety of the ship, have let down a Cockboat, and sought to shift for
themselves; Some sinfully, all shamefully; others who see their good folded up
in the whole, and desire not to outlive their precious lading, do still abide
in the ship: some laboring at the stern, others at the oar; every one their
hands full. -- But though our work is hard, our dangers great, yet is it not
with us, as with the Apostle, past all hopes of saving, Acts 27.20. There is
yet hope if we look downward, we are not yet so low as to hope against hope,
Romans 4.18. If we were, yet there is hope in the God of hope. And indeed there
is our stay, we have anchord too much downward, we have rested upon that which
by very resting upon has proved uncomfortable and unprofitable to us:
disappointment and shame are the deserved ends of creature trusts: oh that we
could now anchor upwards! upon that GOD who is the Rock of Ages, an
everlasting rock; a rock so deep that no floods can undermine, and so high that
no waves can reach. This is our comfort in our straits and troubles here below,
that there is yet sea-roome enough in the infinite goodness of God for faith
to be carried full sail upon. Nothing should pose our faith, but what poseth
God: Nothing is too big for God to do; and why should any thing be too big for
us to believe? Things mavelous to us, are yet easy with God; things
wonderful to us are yet familiar with him, as he tells us Zach. 8.6. -- It is
our hope that God is risen, nay, gone forth, and is now traveling in the
greatness of his strength to bring redemption to his Churches, to work
deliverances for his people. Let us stand and admire him in his going forth:
Lo this is our God! we have waited for him and he will save us: this is the
Lord, Isay 25:9.
we have waited for him, and we will be glad in his salvation: Let us put our
selves into a posture fit to receive mercy, and then stand still and see the
salvation of our God: stand still in believing, yet endeavor in working; we
are to fix our eyes, but use our hands. Through God we shall do valiantly, --
for he shall tread down all our enemies for us. We, but we through God -- It
is the speech of one, Use means as if there were not a God to help, look up to
God as if not a man to help. Certainly not to use means is to tempt God, and
to trust in means is to provoke God. It is a lesson worth learning, not to
swell in the enjoyment, nor to sink in the want of creature reliefes, to be
nothing in our selves in the presence of means, and to be all in God in the
absence of them. But let me not be a burden to your honor in the entrance. --
My Lord, I have only this to say; you have done much for God, and God has now
put advantages into your hands of doing more; it will be your honor here,
^^ies brevis opus multum, merces magna, pater familias urget operarii ne sint
pigri.
and your happiness for ever, if God do please to make you isntrumental for
the spreading of the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, into those
dark Western parts of the world; pity it is that the Garden of the World
should want the Sun of the World; that those places which abound in all
things, should want that which should be the crown and comfort of their
abundance. It is my earnest prayers, that God of his mercy would give you a
single heart and an industrious hand to work for him, and himself eye your
labouts, write a book of remembrance of them: be your counfell in straits,
your protection in dangers, your comfort in life, your Savior in death, and
after death, the God of your posterity also, that mercy may be intailed to your
house for ever. And this is the earnest and hearty prayers of him, who is

Your Honors in all humble and due observances, S. BOLTON

READER,
ARt thou a friend, or an enemy? Art thou active or passive in the injuries of
Sion? If active, know, thou will be found to strive against God, Injuria quae
piis offertur, fit ipsi deo. 1 Nahum. 9.11.
and he will be too hard for thee; what can the potsheard do against the rock?
whether thou Sive percutiat, sive percutiatur, frangi necesse est.
Smite or be Smitten, thou must needs be Broken in pieces; who ever thou art,
yet Read, thou may find something here, if not to make thee, yet to mend thee,
if not to convert thee, yet to convince thee, and at least restrain thee in
thy former way. Ideo scribuntur omnes libri, ut emendetur unus.
All Books are written to mend one, the Book of the heart, and who knows but
this may do it. Art thou Passive? art thou a fellow sufferer? Come then, let
us sit down, and mourn together, Cum deflentibus defleo, cum jacentibus,
jaceo, jaculis grassantis inimici membra meae percussa sunt, cum prostratis
fratribus, and me prostravit affectus meus. Cypr. (...) Hom. Iliad.
let us help to weep the tears, and sigh the sighs of a bleeding State! Have
thou considered Ireland? have thou been there in thy sad thoughts? have thou
observed the murders, cruelties, ruins, and devastations of that place? have
thou heard the sighings of the Prisoners, the scrichings of the Slain, the
groanings of the dying --? have thou taken notice of those thousands of the
Saints, (e) whose dead bodies they have given to be meat unto the fowls of the
heaven, and whose flesh they have given to the beasts of the earth, and whose
blood they have shed like water upon the ground, and there was none to bury
them? Tell me, have thou been at Irelands Funerals? Is it not yet dead? we
fear it is; yet we hope it is capable of a resurrection, though with Lazarus it
lie some days in the Grave, before Christ come and raise it. Have thou seen
all this, and can thou not weep? come, let us mourn together! God has made
the same Organ both for Seeing, and for weeping; he that sees, must needs Weep.
Have thou observed the miseries of England? That lies a bleeding, though not a
Dying: Ezra. 10.2. There is yet hope in Israel concerning this, Though we have
too many Symptoms of a dying State, yet there may be a recovery, possible,
this Issue of Blood may be stopped. Indeed we have spent all upon Physicians,
and they have done what they can, they have used the uttermost of their
endeavors and skill, but our Cure is not wrought. England has sinned, now
england suffers; our present sufferings, are but the fruits of our former
sinnings. Rods of Correction come in, where words of instruction take no place,
Men that will not learn by Faith, must be taught by sense, Prove. 26.3.
A Rod is for the back of the Fool. -- Long it was before God would be drawn to
Strike, what deferres? what delays? what waytings? nay what conflicts within
him? who has not heard the soundings of his Bowels? Hosea 11.8.
how shall I give thee up oh England? how shall I make thee as Ireland? how
shall I set thee as Germany? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together, -- All this while Englands tears, might have kept back a
deluge of wrath; But no man repented, Deus noluit punire, ipsi extorquent, ut
pereant. Salv. de provid l. 1.
no man smote upon his thigh, saying, what have I done? And when there was 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
no Remedy, but God must begin to ride his Circuit of judgment; yet, oh yet!
what mercies has he expressed in the midst of Judgment? what Compassions in
the actings of Displeasures, as if he himself, as it was said of Augustus, did
suffer in all our scourges, Paenas dat, dum paenam Exigit. Sen. de Clem. cap.
10.
and himself feel all our stripes. To pass over others. viz. Oppression,
Injustice, Sabbath-breaking, -- etc. There have been three special sins, which
have had a great Influence into our present Troubles. 1. The Contempt of the
Gospel. 2. Corrupting of Worship. 3. Profanation of Sacraments. 1. The contempt
of the Gospel, we have had the precious Gospel of Christ, the streams whereof
has brought so many Ships laden with blessings, to our shore; But how have we
despised it? what tenders of Mercy have we refused? What bleeding offers of
Christ have we rejected? what bowels of Compassion have we spurned against?
There is the sin, will you see the punishment? Read them both together. *
Matthew. 22.4, 5, 6, 7. God sent his servants to invite men to the marriage;
Behold my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, all is ready, -- But they made light
of it, -- etc. therefore the King was wroth, And he sent forth his Armies, and
destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their Cities. 2. The corrupting of
worship, how the Worship of God has been corrupted and abused by wicked men,
you all know? -- And look but into the Scriptures, you shall find, that most
of the Calamities that did befall the Jewish Nation, they took their rise from
hence, the corrupting of the Worship of God. Judge. 2.12, 13, 14. 2 Kings 17.6,
7. 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15. Deuteronomy. 29.14.15, 16, 17.
they chose new gods, then was war in the gate, they served Baal and
Ashtaroth, they corrupted the Worship of God, therefore was the wrath of God
against them. No doubt but if we had a Book of the Jewish Politye, we should
find that the wise. Men of their State (as one does well observe) were ready
to lay it upon other Causes; if the Philistines and Canaanites, and other
Borderers did spoil them, and overrun their Country: no doubt they were
ready to say this in an old grudge which these Nations had against them,
because they had dispossessed them of their Land, if the Kingdom were divided,
as it was in Rehoboams time, Alas this was nothing, but the oversight of their
Prince, or the weakness of his Counsel; if Israel make war with Judah, that is
but Policy to keep down one another, lest either should be too great; if there
were Civil Wars; that is only through the Faction of Potent and ambitious
Statesmen, etc. -- But what ever reason States may give, yet God sets down
this for the Reason and ground of all, the Corruption of his Worship^

3. Profanation of Sacraments. And how have the Sacraments (in particular the
supper of the Lord) been profaned? how has the Body of Christ been torn in
pieces, and his blood trampled under foot by profane and wicked men; Insomuch
that it has been the whole work of the Ministry (in stead of entertaining
those who were the friends of the Bridegroom, and were invited to this Supper)
to keep fast the door, and hold out those who would press in, and yet were Ad
Ecclesiam non pertinent qui sunt intus, Sed qui sunt in ea pie viventes. Aug.
Sicut Arca de lignis quadratis, ita Ecclesia de Sanctis construitur. Aug.
unbidden Ghests; which of us have not found this the greatest burden upon the
shoulders of our Ministry? who of us have not sighed and groned under the
weight of it? And can we think that God will make any account of our Blood, who
have undervalued the Blood of his Son? Shall we trample the Blood of Christ
under foot; and will God esteem our blood precious? will he regard our bodies,
that have had no regard to the Body of his Son? will he esteem our lives, who
have not regarded the death of his Son? Certainly no -- Thus I have showed thee
the many Springs and Sources of Englands sorrows; And now, in what readiness
we are for the removing of them, I dare not think! possibly, something may be
done; nay probably, much may be done, but the hearts of the people, not being
yet prepared, does give occasion to suspect (though the endeavors of
Reformation be never so sincere, so full) yet our plaster will not be large
enough to our soar; These are our sad thoughts; But Gods thoughts are not as
our thoughts; It is easy with him to Purge his Worship, to fence his
Ordinances, to bring his Gospel into esteem. And if this be Gods floor, he
will purge away the Chaff, if this be his field, he will weed out the tares,
if this be his house, he will sweep away the dust, If the Lord have any delight
in us, he will bring us into the good land, -- etc.

But while we speak this, our sad thoughts return, -- Prove. 18, 19. The
dissentions of Brethren, are as the bars of a Castle; This is the Blazing
Comet that hangs over our times, and portends more evil then all our enemies
can bring upon us, even the Dissentions of our Brethren. Differences there will
be, we know but in part, Illud usitatum fuit in primis diebus Evangelii ecce ut
see in vicem dilligunt.
-- But why Dissentions? why do we not rather seek to compose those
Differences, then increase them? why not rather heal them, then heighten them?
Shall we pride it in the making and enlarging rents and divisions? will any
seek to make themselves Great, by making others of their Brethren Little? and
to difference themselves from them in esteem by differencing themselves from
them in judgment? Will any seek to raise themselves upon the ruins of others?
Milites dicuntur Pompeii Superbiam his verbis reprimere, Nostra miseria magnus
es? Tacit.
make themselves rich, by endeavoring to make others poor? These are like
Highway Robbers, who have no more credit, nor esteem, then what they have
unjustly robbed, and spoiled others of. These are the worst of Spirits, God
forbid there should be such a Root of bitterness in the hearts of Christians,
-- I dare not think it, And if not, methinks your distances are not so great,
but either the tears of friends, or the terror of enemies might bring you
together. Though a fair day might divide and scatter you (like Sheep) all
abroad the field, yet one would think a storm should bring you together
again: The very Savage people, though they were continually jarring, and at
dissension among themselves, yet when Alexander the Great came among them, the
equality of the danger, wherein they all were, caused them to join their
hearts and hands together against the common enemy. Do you not see, that
notwithstanding all their Differences, your enemies are united to your
destruction? Oh why are not you yet united for your Preservation? But may be
you will say, It is my Part rather to cover, then to repeat Differences; The
repeating of Differences, is oftentimes a renewing of them, He that covers a
Transgression, procures love, but he that repeateth a matter, separateth very
friends; Prove. 17.9. There is a deviding, and there is an uniting repetition,
my desire is not to divide, but to unite, in repetition of them; Not to fuel
our flames, but to quench them, not to increase our Differences, but to remove
them. And to be serviceable to these with other ends, these poor following
thoughts were composed, and are now entreated out; the miscries of the Kingdom
brought them to the Pulpit, and the entreaties of Friends persuaded them to the
Press; The Story whereon I treat, does suggest matter suiting with the Times?
Our troubles lead me by the hand, to these Texts, and these Texts did carry me
back to our Times. Qui obscure loquitur, crux auditorum, non doctor. Broug. in
Daniel.
The Discourse is plain; the groundwork is too dark for light Painting; It
is like the Times, unrigged, tossed Ships upon tempestuous Seas, regard not
their ornaments, if they can but keep the Main together, though they loose
much of their tacklings and deckings, they think it well, and are content. The
Observations are many, and for the most part short. It is not my usual way,
but now so of choice: They are Fast Day Sermons, wherein the great Work of the
Day is Prayer: Preaching is (but of the nature of a Bayting in the journey) to
quicken us in the further progress of the work of the day in Prayer.

And I have found by Experience, to be large upon a Point, upon such days,
has rather tired then quickened their Affections to the succeeding work: to
conclude, if thou finds them to contribute any thing to thy inward man, if thou
find any thing for Counsel, for Comfort, for stay, for encouragement, in
these sad and sinking Times; Bless GOD; And when thou speed'st best with him
for thy self, speak a word for the Author. Who is,

Thine in the Service of the Gospel, S. Bolton.

The Approbation.
I do allow these Sermons on Mat. 14.22, etc. to be printed, as pious,
profitable, and seasonable for these times.

John Downame.

A Table of the most material things in this following Treatise.
THE inducement to, and Introduction into this history with the Analysis of it.
1, 2, 3, 4. Doct. Gods refreshments must quicken us to Gods employments. 5 D.
Men that have once tasted the sweetness of Christ, are hardly drawn away from
Christ. 6, 7. D. Where God has a will to command, man must have a will to
obey. 8 D. It is good to get a warrant from Heaven in all our undertaking. 89
D. When God has a work to do, he will provide necessaries. 11 D. Christ's care
to preserve his Disciples above himself, suggests to us, our care to preserve
his glory above our own safety. 14 D: God does often condescend to give a
reason of his commands. 18 D. None come to Christ, and have to do with him, but
he sends them better away. 18 Use. This speaks encouragement, to have much to
do with Christ. 19 D. Christ will not put us to exercises above our strength.
21, 22 D. It is our duty to add meditation to hearing of the word. 23 D. The
duties of our general, are to help us in those of our particu-Calling. 24 D.
Helps to duty, must be sought and embraced. 26, 27 but these must be such as
are instituted or countenanced of God, not devised of men. 27, 28 D. A good
heart will seek occasions and means of converses with God. 30 D. It is good
when you converse with God, to get into Christ. 31 D. When wicked men stretch
forth their hands against the Church, it is high time to betake our selves to
Prayer. 33 D. In all our difficulties, Christ is praying for us. 36 D. Gods
Providence should furnish us with matter of Prayer. 37 In what respects, Christ
was said to be alone. 39, 40 D. Christians are to seek and take occasions to be
alone. 41 D. A man may have Gods warrant for the doing of a work, and go on in
Gods way, and yet meet with oppressing difficulties. 45. 47 Use. Judge not of
any cause, either by difficulties, or present succestes. 48 V. Let not
difficulties slacken our endeavors, or weaken faith. 49 U. I^ those who walk
in just ways meet with storms, what may those expect, who walk in ways of
sin. 51 D. That comfortable and promising beginnings, may yet afterward meet
with sad and sorrowful Proceedings. 52 V. It is our Case. What must be the
Cure. 53, 54 1. Something must not be done. First we must not be discouraged.
Second, we must not forgo the Cause. Thirdly, we must not flack our
endeavors. 55, 56 2. Something must be done. These four. First, Search out the
cause. Secondly, be humbled for it. Thirdly, Reform of it. 4. Supplicate Fifth,
Covenant. 58. to 61 D. God spares to exercise young beginners with
difficulties. 62 V. To comfort the Saints, your exercises shall not be above
strength. 63 d. That when Christ intends to exercise the graces of his people,
he brings them into the deep. 65 Reas. 1. To declare his wonders. 2 To try your
graces. 3 To exercise them. V. Think it not much to go down into the deep. 76,
77 The Disciples sad condition at Sea, employed in that word Tossed. 79 d.
There is not so much evil in the greatest trouble, as there is good in the
least exercise of grace. 79, 80 d. God puts his people to a lesser trouble for
their greater good. 80 V. It speaks patience under afflictions. 82, 83 d. The
Church may be tossed, not swallowed up of waves. 84 V. Let wicked men cease to
attempt against the Church, etc. 85. 86 d. Contrary spirits, cause tempests.
87, 88, 89 d. God may be working our preservation, when we think he is working
our destruction. 92, 93 d. Storms are to be expected, where Christ is not in
the ship. 94 V. As ever you desire Peace, get Christ into the ship. 95 V.
Christ absence in trouble, makes sufferings insufferable. 96 V. Get Christ's
presence in all your sad conditions. 96, 97 d. Christ is present to faith, when
absent to sense. 97 V: Learn to see him by Faith, when you cannot by sense: 98,
99 d. Gods heighten the troubles of his people, before he does deliver them.
Five Reasons of it. 99, 100 Reas. 1. To heighten our graces. 2 Or Duties. 3 Or
Deliverance. 4 His Glory. 5 Or Praises. 101. to the 109 Use. Not to be cast
down, though God heighten our troubles. 110 d. Christ takes notice of us in our
greatest afflictions. 111 V To comfort: and 2. to counsel us how to behave our
selves. 112 d. When Christ sees our trouble on the shore, he will come to us on
the sea. 112 V. Be speak God to look down and see our trouble. 113 d. Means
cannot be wanting, if God purpose help. 114 V. It speaks encouragement in our
lowest condition. 114 d. Nothing shall part Christ and us in trouble, etc. 115,
to 117 d. What ever Christ purposes to do for his people, is as good as done.
119 V. It speaks comfort in respect of promises to the Saints. 120 And terror
in respect of threatenings toward the wicked. 121 Christ in his lowest
abasements, did ever discover something of his D^itie. 123 d. To know or
deliver ours, is the best part of deliverance. 126 d. God sometimes goes
strange ways to deliver his people. 127 V. Let us not distrust in this wisdom
and power, never to be posed. never non-plust. 129 1. What is meant by the
fourth Watch. 130 d. God takes a fullness of time for the accomplishment of his
Promise. 132 V. It speaks, Patient waiting, 1. In Deferrs. 2. Denyalls. 3. In
the incomes, and receipts of mercy. 134 But yet so wait, as to do our duty.
Some Promises God will effect by his own immediate hand, some by means. 135
Three things to be done for the downfall of Antichrist 1. Clear Preaching, 2
Spiritual walking. 3 Joint Praying. 136, 137 d. When the fullness of time is
come, then will God perform his Promise. 198 u. Blame us, we cannot wait. 3.
Grounds of it. 139, 140, 141 1 Pride. 2 Ignorance. 3 Impatience. d. Man's
extremity is Gods opportunity. 142 1. Why God suffers us to be brought to
extremities before he help. 2. Why he helps in extremities. 1. God suffers it
for Four Reasons. 145 1. That Mercy might be more conspicuous. 2. That Mercy
might be more advanced. 3 To quicken to Prayer. 4 To enlarge us in Praises. 2.
God does help us in our Extremities. Three Reasons of it. 146 First, Because
God is engaged. Four Engagements. 146, to 149 2. That both we our selves, and
the generations to come might trust. 3. For the torture and disappointment of
wicked men. 151 u. Not to be too much cast cown, though God bring us into
extremities before he help. 152 There are Five times when God will help. 153.
to the 155 1. When we know not what to do. 153 2. When we know not what God
will do. 3. When we shall sin foully, or suffer sadly. 4. When the enemy is at
the top of his rage. 155 5. When God holds up a mighty Spirit of Prayer.
d. Christ may come to save his people, and they not discern him. 159 d. Men
may sometimes look upon their deliverers as destroyers. 162 Three times Christ
appears as a Ghost to his people In times 1. Of Humiliation. 163 2. Of
Temptation. 165 3. Of Desertion. 165, 166
Four times Christ appears as a Ghost to wicked men. 168 the 171 1 When he
comes to Reform his Church. 2 When he comes to reform their Persons. 3 At the
hour of death, 4 At the day of Judgment.
u. As you desire Cerist should not be as a Ghost to you hereafter, terrible at
death, etc. Let him not be a Ghost to you now. 172 d. Christ may come to help
his people in such a way, as yet the means of help may be a terror to them.
173 u. Not to be dsscouraged, though the means of help carry the face of
destruction. 176 u. Yet to be humbled, that God takes such sad ways to do us
good. 177 u. Though the means be terrible, let not the salvation be a terror.
178 d. God does often increase, when he comes to remove our trouble. 179 Reas.
1. To discover our hearts. 183 2. To lessen our sins. 183 3. To increase our
Duties. 195 4. To increase our deliverance. 197 5. To increase our
thankfulness. 199
u Judge not of Gods purpose, by his proceedings of Providence. 201 u. Lift up
your heads under the greatest pressures. 202 Some Rules to know when troubles
are at the height. 207 1. When we are at the height of our graces. 207 2. When
we are brought to the lowest. First in Passive, Second in active Humiliation.
208
d. Men's fears may be increased, when deliverance is nearest. 210 Fear is not
the way to drive away a Ghost, etc. 210 d. Men cry out, because they cry not
up, act fear, because not faith. 212 d. Christians to be careful of bringing
ill reports upon Religion. 214 u. Take heed the sins of Professors breed
dislike of Profession. 215 d. The same Word spoken to the hearing of all, the
comfort of a few. 222 d. It is good to be in the ship with the Disciples,
though on a stormy Sea. 222 d. God has mercy upon many for the sake of a few.
223 d. A Word from Christ can raise a Spirit sunk in trouble. 224 u. To direct
us whither to sly for comfort in our times of trouble. 227 1. Obj. Did Christ
speak to us as to them, we might be comforted. Ans. Christ says as much to us
now, as he did to them. 228 2. Ob. But we want a particular word for Englands,
Deliverance. Ans. We have as much word for Englands, Deliverance, as they had
for the preservation of the ship. 229. 1. There may be a resting on Gods Neme,
though you want a particular Promise. 229 Unto this Five other encouragements
in the General are laid down. 1. From our relations to God. 2. His general
Promises. 3. Certain experiences, to others, To our selves. 4. From the Cause.
5. From those who are our enemies. 232, 233 3. Ob. But these afford only
probable conjectures, where is the particular word. 223 Ans. We have something
comes near a particular word. Two Rules 1. What God has done to others of his
people, is equivalent to Promise to us, if we be in the same condition. 222 2.
What God promises to any, he promises to all his people 14 equal state. Two
things God will not disappoint, 1. Faith. 2. Prayer. 239, 246
3. We have a particular word for the destruction of Antichristo 239, 241 4. We
have a particular word, that before the end of all things, God will make his
Churches glorious, 240, 242 u. Let us upon these considerations be raised up to
believe and expect mercy. d. The reliefes of Christ are proportionable to the
necessities of his Saines. 245 Reas. 1. Because they are the helps of God. 2.
The fruits of his mercy. 246, etc. u. To direct us whither to turn our eyes in
trouble, 247 to 249 u. To exhort us to rest in Gods help alo e. 251 d. The
spirits of Christians may even sink under their troubles, 253 Reas. It arises
from the lowness of their spirits, not greatness of trouble. 254 d. All
comfort in God in troubles, at seth from confidence in God in troubles. 255
Some reasons why Christ allaid the storm in their hearts, before the storm in
the sea. 256, 257 d. God would not have our hearts sink under the greatest
trouble, 260 Reas. 1. Because this is offensive to God, 2 It is unsuitable to
Christians, 3 It discovers weakness of spirit, 1 To your calling, 262 2 To
your cause, 263 3 To your relations, 266 4 To your expectations, 266
4 It discourageth others of our brethren, 5 It betrays all the succors God
tenders, 268 6 t^ does gratify the enemy. Its our weakening, 271 their
strengthening, 272
7 It does expose the heart to dangerous snares, 273 There are four snares
these sinking fears expose us too. 1 They will make a man shie to acknowledge
the cause of God, 273 2 They will make a man bauk and decline the cause of God,
274 3 They will blind the understanding, it shall not discern truth 274 4 They
will make us to deny and forsake the cause of God, 275 Four sorts of men will
not hold to any cause 1 Ignorant, 2 Unsound hearted 3 Worldly, 4 Fearful men,
276
u. Banish these sinful fears, 278, 279 d. Christians should learn to know
Christ by voice, 281 d. The same word may be a terror to some, a comfort to
others, 284 d. The presence and appearance of Christ to the soul in trouble,
is to the soul as a resurrection from the dead, 284 Instanced in four sad
conditions. 1 In times of humiliation for sin, 285 2 In times of temptation,
285 3 In times of desertion, 287 4 In times of outward trouble, 288
u. Encouragement to Christians in their saddest condition, Christ is present,
289 u. Beg his presence now, etc. 290 d. So full of bowels is Christ to his
Church, that he cannot long brook them in trouble when they cry. 291 Reas. 1
Because he loves us. 2 He intends our exercise, not our ruin. 3 He intends our
praises. God may stay long for many reasons, 293 u. To rejoice the Church in
her saddest conditions, 293 u. To encourage her to wait upon God, 294
READER,
I am here drawn forth to acknowledge those faults, which all my care could not
prevent; I have distinguished those in the Margin from those in the Leaf, and
must beg either thy patience in reading, or thy pains in correcting of them.

THE ERRATA.
Page 2. lin. 6. r. followers. p. 5. l. 28. r. external. p. 6. l. 4. r.
persuasion. p. 13. l. 28. r. yet in his glory we. 26. p. l. 18. r. this. p. 39.
l. 12. r. never. p. 67. l. penult. r. 43. Isay. p. 84. l. 17. r. Elijah. p.
107. l. 3. Let our eye look on Ston. p. 120. l. 6. (...). 206. p. l. 21.
rooting. p. 227. l. 5. r. An. 230. l. 5. r. a. 240. p. l. penult. ^e. 241. p.
l. 10. r. it. 243. p. l. 2. to. 251. p. 1. 5. r. helped his. 263. p. l. 14.
himself. 288. p. l. 10. r. 42. Job. 279. p. l. 8. Sup. more.

Marginall Faults.
P. 6. l. 8. compulit. l. 17. r. refructarios. 14. p. l. penult. r. quam. 27 p.
l. 3. r. ardentiores. 31. p. r. (...). 38. p. l. 20. r. horam. 48. p. r. (...)
49. p. l. 13. r. aciem. l. 29. r. cogantur. l. 32. r. Wormatiae. 55. p. l. 1.
r. perge. l. 8. r. Christum l. 16. r. vincit. 65. p. l. 3. r. hoc est. 78. p.
l. 31. r. securitatem. 79. p, r: (...) 83. p. l. 17. r. malleus. 85. p. 1. 5.
r. cruore: 95. p. l. ult. Ames. 100. p. l. 3. 1. salus l. 5. sinet. ^01. p. l.
12. agimus. 111. p. l. 1. penitus. 117. p. l. 2. mecum. 122. p. r prosunt. 142.
p. l. 1. ^. extremam: 153. p. l. 3. r. vehementiores. 155. p. l. 5. conjunctis.
158. p. l. 2. meserendi. 162. p. (...) 165. (...) 186. p. l. 6. r, fulgentius.
187, p, l, 1, r, mos. 189, p, aeternitati, 196, p, l, 5, r, Christ, 200, p, r,
merces, 223, p, l. 1, credit. l. 4, Sacra, l. 23, averteba^, 225. p, l, 1, r,
vis, 236, l, 8, pollicebuntur, 245, l, 9, Salutis. 252, l, 10, r, relic, 265,
l, 11, r, hominem, 271, p, l, 2, r, debemus, 277, p, l, 9, sup: te.

The Scripture discoursed on, in the following Treatise on Matthew. 14.
Verse 22. And straightway Jesus. constrained his Disciples to get into a ship,
and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.

23. And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a Mountain apart
to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there alone.

24. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the
wind was contrary.

25. And in the fourth watch of the night: Jesus went unto them, walking on the
sea.

26. And when the Disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying, It is a spirit, and they cried out sor fear.

27. But straightway Jesus spoke unto them, saying, Be ^f good cheer: it is I,
be not afraid.

A Word in Season, to a sinking Kingdom.
Matthew. 14.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. 22. And straightway Jesus constrained his
Disciples to get into a ship, and to go before him unto the other side, while
he sent the multitudes away.

23. And when he had sent the multitude away he went up into a mountain a part
to pray; and when the evening was come he was there alone, etc.


THis story which you here read of the Disciples going to Sea, etc. S. August.
de verbis Dom. Sermon. 14.
S. Angustin makes a kind of prophetical history of the state of GODS Church
from the ascension of Christ into Heaven, till his coming again, the end of
all things. His going into the Mountain to pray, is his going into heaven to
make intercession for us: his sending the Disciples to sea, was the commission
he gave them to go preach the Gospel: the sea is the world, the ship is the
Church: the contrary winds and storms they met withal, are the troubles and
persecutions, the errors and heresies the Disciples had, and their fellows
have, to conflict withal in the carrying on of the Gospel. The fourth watch
when Christ came to them, is a little before the end of all things, as that was
a little before the morning. At which time, in regard of the troubles,
persecutions, heresies, that shall be in the world. Men shall look upon
Religion, as the Disciples upon Christ; Res Christiana phantasma] ^sse
videbitur. Aug.
either as a ghost fearful to own it, in respect of the many troubles and
persecutions which may attend it; or as a fancy in respect of the multitude
of opinions that shall arise. -- I will follow him no further.

The resemblance that this story did hold forth with the Church of God, both in
this kingdom, and other parts of the Christian world, was the great inducement
to me to enter upon it.

The Ship of our Church and State, in which is imbarqued so much of our comfort
and happiness, was set forth by Gods warrant, and had with the Disciples here,
a prosperous and fair gale for a time, the prayers, desires, well-wishes, of
all. But being now come into the midst of the sea, even the midst of their
work, they meet with contrary winds. A storm is risen, the winds blow, the
waves arise, the floods of ungodliness do lift up their voice, and threaten
to swallow them up.

In this tempestuous storm, we may look upon them, who still abide in the
ship, as upon the Disciples toyling and rowing; fo they conflicting and
laboring with oppressing difficulties in their endeavors to bring this tossed
ship of the Church and State to safe harbor.

It is all our comfort, that whilst we are conflicting upon the Sea; Dum
Discipuli in mari Christus in monte. Isti remigando laborant, ille intrecedendo
implorat.
Christ is praying upon the mountain: And in the fourth watch his appointed
time, will come down, take a view of our troubles upon the shore, and then
come forth to help us, enter the ship, cease the winds, calm the seas, and at
last bring this torn and tossed ship of the Church to safe and quiet harbor.

The whole story does branch it self ^n these particulars.

1. The dismission of the Disciples to sea, verse 22. after which. 1. The
discharge of the multitudes to their hemes. 2. Christ's withdrawing of himself
into a mountain to pray, 23. verse.
2. The danger the Disciples were in at sea: they were 1. In the midst of the
Sea. 2. Tossed with waves. 3. The Winds were contrary. 24. verse.
3. Christ's addresses to help and relieve them, in which 1. The time: the
fourth watch. 2. The manner: walking on the sea, 25. verse.
4. The Disciples apprehension of him, together with the effect of it. 1. It is
a ghost. 2. They cried out for fear.
5. The way Christ went to settle them and save them. 1. He speaks to them, it
is I. 2. He incourageth them, Be of good cheer, etc.
6. We have Peter's interposing trial, wherein 1. His request, Bid me to come to
thee upon the waters. 2. Christ's grant, Come, 29. 3. His fear and sinking, 30.
4. Christ's succouring and helping of him, 31.
7. We have the fruit of Christ's coming to them, two great miracles. 1.
Cessation of the storm. 2. The ship at the shore, 32. v.
8. We have the effect of these miracles. 2. Wonder. 2. Worship, 33. v.

This I thought good to premise, before we came to the particular handling of
the words.

We will now fall upon the words themselves: where first you see we have to
deal with the dismission of the Disciciples to Sea.

22. And straightway Jesas constrained his Disciples to get into a ship, etc.

[And straightway.]

That is immediately after Christ had fed them, and refreshed them: after
refreshment he pnts them upon employment, from meat he sends them to work; we
must not eat to be idle, but eat to labor: labor that we may eat, and eat
that we may labor.

Doct. Gods refreshments must quicken us to Gods employments: whether you eat
or drink, or what ever you do, do all to the glory of God: make all your
refreshments serviceable to the advancements of Gods work, of Gods glory.

[Jesus Non libenter patiebantur discipuli se a Magistro suo divelli. Chem.
Cogere enim opportuit, quia se ab illo divelli invite patiebantur.
constrained his Disciples.]

What Is that? sure he did not use any extreme violence upon their bodies, nor
any extraordinary workings upon their spirits: sometimes constraint is opposed
to freedom, and willingness, and then is as much as forced, used violence on
them.

Hoc vocabulo ostenditur invitos eos a domino recessisse. Hier. Sic accipio
(...) Coegit. Computit. Non quod inviti avellerentur a Christo ut aliquibus
videtur, neque enim credibile est eos volu isse esse refractaros vel invitos
Christo paruisse; coegit inquam pro justit, sine mora redire in navim; eo quod
nox ingrueret, etc. Pareus in loc.
Sometimes to un-perswasion: and then it is as much as moved and persuaded, as 2
Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constraines, that is, effectually moves, and
strongly persuades.

And so it may be taken here, he persuaded them.

And yet there seems to be something thing more in it, his Authoritic came in,
as well as his Arguments, they went out of obedience to the command, they
denied their own will, which no doubt was either to abide with Christ, or to
have him with them, and subjected themselves to the will of Christ.

Nead punctum temporis voluerunt ab eo seperari Nolebant discipuli a Christo
divelli, sed vi seperabantur. Theoph. Cum dicet Evangelista, Compulit, declarat
quod magno suoe a more presentiae discipuli tenebantur. Chris.
No doubt but they were loath to leave Christ, they were unwilling to part with
him, both in respect of Christ, out of the love they bare him, loath to leave
him alone, and out of love to themselves they were unwilling to go without
him: Compulit, hoc est jussit e vestigio redire in navigium, atque precede^ re
in ripam ulteriorem. Pareus in loc.
But Christ commanded them, and out of obedience to Christ's commands they went.
As it was said of Joab, 2 Samuel 24. when he was so unwilling to number the
people; It is said that notwithstanding the Kings word prevailed against Joab.
So here the command of Christ prevailed against them, and therefore they went
out of obedience.

There are many things might be observed. 1. From their unwillingnesse to go
from Christ, which is employed:

Doct. Qui semel Christi dulcedinem gustave ri^ desicile ab illo seperari
sustiner. Barz.
Men that have once tasted the sweetness of Christ, are hardly drawn away
from Christ. The Disciples had here tasted the sweetness of Christ, and no
marvel if they were unwilling to part with him.

But this was their mistake; they had parted with Christ, if they had not gone,
the way to keep Christ is to follow the counsels, and be obedient to the
commands of Christ. What had it been for them to have enjoyed the fleshy, and
have lost the spiritual presence of Christ.

Men that will not follow the commands, shall want the comforts of Christ; if
you will not follow the light of direction, you shall want the light of
consolation; works of darkness, and walking in darkness go together. See David,
51. Psalm.

But yet more, from their obedience in going, though they were so desirous
still to stay with him. We learn,

Doct. Where God has a will to command, man must have a will to obey.

Discamus itaque nos simplici obedientia Dei mandatis parere.
That is the best obedience, which has most self-denial in it. You see in
Abraham, in Moses, etc. Peter went without gainsaying, if you read there that
act of obedience was done upon a great conquest of himself. If you read the
Scriptures you shall see, that has been esteemed an act of greatest obedience,
wherein was an act of greatest selfdenyall. Abraham.

But further, though they went, yet they went not without a warrant, they had a
parent and Commission from heaven to carry them out.

Doct. It is good in all our undertakings to get a Warrant from heaven, a
Commission from Christ for the doing of it.

The Disciples went, but they had their warrant, they had the word of Christ to
provoke them to it, and encourage them in it. The like had Moses, Aaron,
Jeremie, etc.

In the 4. Col. 20. we have this phrase, Be filled with all the will of God. 4.
Col. 20.
It is a Metaphor taken from a Sail filled with wind: if the Sail have no
wind, the Ship stands still and is becalmed: but if the wind once come, and
fill the Sails, then is it carried amain. Gods command to the soul, should
be like the wind to the sails: if no command from above, a Christian should
stand still, as a ship becalmed; but if a command come, we should be carried
amain. Go with courage, be the difficulties what they will; Have not I
commanded thee? will bear us out in all.

Use. Labor then for a word of Direction from Christ in all your undertakings:
you may follow the guidance of flesh and blood, the direction of your own
reason, and miscarry at last, and there is no surer way to miscarry than to
follow the guidance of your own spirits: you see it in Balaam, in Saul,
concerning the Amalakites, in the Jews, 42. Ier. But he that shuts his own
eyes, and goes by Gods light, he that denies his own wisdom, and follows
the guidance of God shall be sure to go aright: 91. Psalm. He will keep us in
all our ways.
he shall go safe in the midst of dangers. You see it in Moses, in Hester,
etc.

Gods warrant is enough to put us on a work, Quando viae nostrae, sunt viae
domini, tune sumus sub condition divinae protectionis. Rei.
and will be our security in our undertaking. Where our obedience lies, there
our safety lies. He runs into the greatest danger that runs out of Gods way of
obedience. No safety but in Gods way. Art thou in Gods way? and do storms
arise? do tempests threaten? Yet assure thy self, God will never be wanting
to thee while thou art in a way of obedience to him. The Disciples met with
storms, but Christ leaves them not in the storm; their obedience to Christ,
brought the presence of Christ to them. Never man wanted comfort long, that
went in a way of obedience. The Martyr went far upon mere obedience, but before
he came to the journies end, before he came to the stake, God gave him Coelum
extra Caelum.
in a piece of his reward before his work was done. But should thou dye without
comfort, thou dyest in the ship, and not in the sea, thou dyest in Gods way,
and there is safety, though thou never reach the apprehension of it.

Jesus constrained his Disciples (to go into the Ship).

Christ had a journey for them to go, and here he provides them a ship.

Doct. If God have a work for us to do, he will provide us with necessaries to
the doing of it. Necessary counsel, necessary strength, necessary comfort and
assistance, and all this proportionable to the work. Moses was troubled at
first for want of elocution, and Jeremy for want of courage, but he that set
them on work provided them necessaries. Exodus 3.11, 12 Exodus 4.10, 12 Jer. 1.6,
7, 8.
Moses did not want a tongue, nor Jeremy courage.

We are sometimes troubled at the want of means for the bringing of a work
about, how shall this thing be? but if the work be Cods, he will want no
instruments for the effecting of it: Nay in the want of all he can work alone.
Infinite wisdom, and infinite power was never at a stand.

But further. (To get into a ship.)

When we are to do Gods work, we are not to have our tools to seek; the ship
was ready when they had a command to go to sea. All creatures stand like them
in the market place, ready to be hired into Gods Vineyard. All creatures they
are ready to execute Gods will. Let not man alone rebel.

[And to go before him unto the other side.]

Here is a plain proof against the Vbiquitarians, who hold Christ's body, his
humane nature to be in all places. And here is also the error of
Transubstantiation confuted, who take away the dimensions of a body, making the
body of Christ in so many places as bits of bread at the same time: if Christ's
humane nature had been in every place, Christ could not have said, Go before
him to the other side.

There is something more in it. [Goe before him.]

If you read before, you shall see the occasion of Christ's withdrawing of
himself with his Disciples was the news of John's beheading. They had told him
that Herod had beheaded John Secessir Christus, non praepostero metu, sed
prudenti consilio, 10. ne manedo tentaret Deum. 2. ut exemplo doceret,
temeritatem vitandam and pericula non necessaria declinanda, juxta illud. Mat.
10.23.
, whereupon Christ withdrew himself, and here to preserve his Disciples, he
sends them first away.

It suits well with Christ's love to his Church, and his end of coming into the
world, to take more care to preserve them, then to save himself, to look to
their safety more then his own. You know what he said, John 18.8. If you seek
me let these go free.

He came to interpose himself between God and us, he came to bear our
scourges to undergo our stripes. As Rebecca to said Jacob: on thee my son be
the blessing, on me be the curse. So Christ to us, like Jonah, he was content
to be cast into the sea, even the sea of wrath, that there might be a calm, a
peace between God and man: he came not to save himself, but to be our Savior,
and therefore was content to lose himself that he might save us; to undergo
all, that we might be free.

We are more dear to Christ, then he was to himself; and therefore he does
here, as we do when things are in danger, seek to preserve that which we
esteem most, which is most precious to us; to save us was more desirable to
Christ, then to preserve himself. He sees himself in us, oh that we could see
our selves in God, and that the preservation of the glory of Christ might be
more in our eyes, then the saving of our selves. As Christ was more tender of
us then he was of himself; so let us be more tender of his glory, then of our
own safety: if we can but hold up his glory, though we suffer in his glory, yet
we shall be glorified.

He that seeks himself in opposition to God, does lose himself and God: but
he that seeks himself in subordination to him, finds both; even himself in
God.

Here is that Riddle expounded, He that will save his life shall lose his
life, but he that will lose his life for my sake and the Gospel, shall find
it.

Dignus plane enim morte qui tibi domine recusat vivere, and qui curat esse
nisi propter te pro nihilo est, and nil est. Bern. in Cant. Propter temet ipsum
domine fecisti omnia, and qui esse vult sibi, and non tibi nihil incipit esse
inter omnia. Bern. 2. Ser. in Cant.
It is lowness of spirit to seek how we may preserve our selves, and not how
we may hold up Christ.

That life is forfeited and lost, which is either gained, or kept with the
declining or loss of Christ.

Vix quaeritur Jesus propter Iesum. Aug. Principes viri regionem quaerunt,
potius quem religionem. Chem.
I have read it was the speech of a Henry of France, who when he was persuaded
to do something for the advancement of the Protestant Religion; he answered, He
would lanch no further into the deep, then he might return safe again to
shore. Such spirits have most men: They look upon the ways of God as we do
upon an Ignis Fatuus, which we dare not follow, for fear it lead us into bogs
and pits. I shall say no more to such but this, that life, that honor is
forfeited and lost, which is either gained or kept, by declining or renouncing
the cause of Christ.

We proceed.

[While he sent the multitude away.]

This seems to be another reason why he sent his Disciples before him;
Aliquantisper detinuit, donec precibus, and benedictione redire jussit. Pareus
in loc.
here was a multitude with him, he had newly refreshed them, and would not
suffer them to go, till he had dismissed them, blessed them, etc. or the like.
And the day was far spent, the night was coming on, the ship was going, for
its probable it was a passengers ship; should they have stayed till Christ had
dismissed them, the ship might have been gone.

And therefore while Christ was sending the multitude away, he constrained his
Disciples to take the opportunity and go before him. The words may be
considered as a reason of Christ's stay behind, and of sending the Disciples
before.

But yet that which is expressed was the least of the reasons wherefore Christ
dismissed them. You may see greater reasons than that in the history. 1.
Because he would go to pray: 2. Because he would now exercise the graces of
his Disciples alone: 3. Because he had a purpose to discover his divine power
in their deliverance.

But this may be one: while he sent the multitude away:

Doct. That though a bare command of God be sufficient to challenge our
obedience to it, yet so graciously does God often condescend to our weakness,
as to give us a reason of imposing of it.

It was so here, he does not only command his Disciples to go before him,
but gives them a reason why he does.

Indeed when God commands, it is the reason of reasons to obey, because God
commands. The commands of God, though they may be above reason, yet they are
not contrary to right reason. The obedience of faith, is far above reason,
but it is not against reason, because it is all reason to believe what God
says, and to obey what God commands.

In obedience to man, we are to look for a reason of obedience, or a rule of
obedience, which is according to right reason.

It is to put off man, and to divest our selves of reason, to obey against
reason. As the Pope who commanded the Monk to go and water a dry stake for
three years together morning and evening. Abrahamus a patria egredi justus,
paret, licet, quonam iturus esset ignoraret. Chem.
Caeca obedientia, is proper to God alone, not that our obedience is a blind
obedience: but sometimes we are to follow him blindfold: It is said of
Abraham, Genesis 12.1. that he went and knew not whither; God calls, he comes, and
shuts his eyes, and goes by Gods light, he follows God as the blind man does
his guide: men's commands are subject to be scanned, whether they be according
to the supreme rule, the Law of God, or in Commonwealths governed by Laws,
whether they be according to Laws.

Mandata Dei non adrationis nostrae examen revecanda. Chem. Discamus nos
simply; obedientia Dei mandatis parere: absque nostrae rationis examine.
But Gods commands must not be scanned, here we must obey because God commands,
2. Ioh. 7. What ever he bids you to do, do. If Abraham had examined that act
of obedience, viz. The sacrificing of his son, either by rule, the Law, or by
reason, or by the principles of nature, they would all have cried down that
act of Abraham's. It is true, the case was extrordinary, and it was alone for
trial too: God does not command such things as are contrary to his Law, his
revealed will, or right reason; yet he commands such things as are contrary to
corrupt reason, and above right reason, and therefore his commands are not to
be scanned: it is our reason, and the reason of reasons to obey Pareamus itaque
mandatis Dei, licet illorum ratio nobis non constet, sufficit enim ea ipsi
c^nstare; nos commendat obedientia, quae in oculis Dei, melior quamvictimae. 1 Samuel 15.22.
because God has commanded.

But there is something more observeable, from these words, while he sent the
multitude away.

Mark the order, first Christ refreshes them, and after dismisseth them. First
he feeds them, and then he sends them away. And the word seems to import
something of consequence. Marcus verbo ut tur in dimissione populi quod
usurpatur de iis qui valedicunt alicui, (...) them, (...) valdico. 18 Acts 21.
2 Cor. 2.13.
Mark uses a word which signifies valediction, or taking leave with one.

It may be he did pray with them, bless them, Illos dimittit blandis verbis,
eo contentus, quod in. praesenti little illicitum conatum represhslet. Chem.
or exhort them, or instruct them in the nature of his Kingdom; for these
would have made him a King, as John has it, 6. Ioh. Something extraordinary
there was. Whence this,

Doctr. None come to Christ, or have to do with him, but he ever sends them
better away.

He refreshed their bodies here, and that was the least any had, they did all
eat, and were filled, 20 v. Nay he refreshed their souls, that was the
benefit many had.

When Moses had been communing with God, his face shone: God stamps a glory
upon those who do converse with him: The Jews said of Peter, he looks like
one of those who had bin with Jesus. The blood loses nothing by coming to the
heart, it sends it away with spirits. God makes every one better who have to
do with him. To whom coming, as to a living stone, you also as living stones
are built up, 1 Pet. 2.4.

Use It speaks encouragement to us, to have much to do with God, to love,
converse with him, you shall have something left upon your spirits worth your
labor. Indeed there is reward in the work, there is fruit in the labor. The
Rabbis say, Every good work is meat in the mouth, Praemmium ante praemium.
there is reward in the labor.

But that is not all the fruit you shall find, you shall not only find fruit
in the work, but fruit of the work; either you shall be dismissed, more
humbled, more quickened, or more comforted: some impressions of glory God does
use to stamp upon the spirits of them who have been conversing with him,
something he leaves upon their souls worth owning. 2 Cor. 3. etc. 2 Cor. 3.18.
While looking upon him, and beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we
are changed into the same image from glory to glory.

It may be you may see little, you may discern of little in the time, there
may be the acting of many corruptions, much deadness, coldness, formality may
discover it self, yet some impressions will be left upon our spirits
afterward, which perhaps you were not aware of in the time.

If God do not discover himself to you, yet if God do further discover your
selves to your selves; it is worth the while of waiting upon God.

It is good to be in Gods way: the blind man found this to be true, who lying
in the way where Christ came, was cured of his blindness, and recovered his
sight. It is good to lie at the poole side, though thou stay thirty eight
years, and receives no benefit as thou think, yet a Christ will come at last
and work thy cure.

Though the Miller is not able to command a wind, yet he will set his Mill,
and spread his Sails, that if a wind come he may have the benefit of it.
Though you are not able to command the Spirit, which like the wind blows
where and when it lists, yet set your selves in his presence, spread your
Sails, that if a wind come you may have the benefit of it. -- But this all of
God. --

Here is a multitude here this day, if your hearts be right, know this, Christ
will not send you away without some refreshment.

Had he respect to the bodies of men, when a multitude were come together, that
he would not send them away after their long continuance with him in his
Ordinances, without some refreshment, lest they fainted in the way; certainly
he will have more regard to the souls of men: What are the faintings of the
body, to the faintings of the soul?

But further -- [While he sent the multitude away.]

It may be here demanded, why Christ should send them away? had it not been
better for them to have continued with Christ, to have followed him in his
temptations, to havn attended upon him in the work of his Ministry; why does
he send them away?

There is good reason:

1. He would not over-drive them, he would not continue their exercises above
their strength, he would lay no more wood on than there was fire able to
kindle, hold them no longer in duties than there was strength to carry them on.
Jacob slacked his pace, because of the weakness of his little ones, Christ
proportions the exercises of duty, to the strength of the people.

2. Or secondly, Christ sends them away, would not suffer them to continue and
go with him, because he would not put them to difficulties, above their
strength to go through: he knew, if they were to follow him, they might
quickly be weary: 8 Matthew. 20.
for the foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, but the son of
man has no place where to lay his head.

When the children of Israel came out of Egypt, God would not lead them by the
way of the hills, which was the nearest way, but by the way of the plains,
which was much about. And upon this ground, because of the Philistims, lest the
difficulties they met withal in their first setting out, might discourage
them, and make them think of their returns again to Egypt.

And upon the same ground God does spare men for a time in the ways of grace,
and does not exercise vong beginners, as he does those who are grown
Christians. Till the Disciples were got from the shore, till they were got to
the midst of the sea, they met with no storms. As I shall show, etc.

3 Or else Christ would have them now go home, having fed their bodies, and
refreshed their souls, to meditate upon those things which they had heard.

One Sermon wrought down to the Spirit, is worth many heard: too many who are
great feeders, (...) dicuntur qui exalimento quod assumunt, non augescunt, nec
nutriuntur.
but little nourishers, they want digestion. This is not to feed upon Sermons,
but to devour Sermons, when they are not digested into nourishment: our
nourishment does not so much lie in feeding, as in digesting. You may by that
increase the bigness of your heads, your knowledge; but not nourish the
leanness of your hearts, your affections. It is monstrous in nature, to have
the head bigger then the body; so in grace, to increase knowledge only, and not
practice. If all time were spent in feeding, where were the time for working?
you feed, to work.

Your present affections that are exercised and raised in hearing, will vanish
and fall again, if you do not work all down in meditation, and digest them
into your nature, or your nature into them, the good word; whereby the stock
changed into the nature of it. Too many that neglect the hearing of the word at
all, and some that think that this is all that is required, when this is but a
preparatory service, a service subservient to another; hearing to obeying,
preaching to practice. I will not cast water upon your affections, quench any
spark of Gods kindling: Folia haec sunt non fructus. Aug.
you do well to hear, you do well to hear often: oh, but add meditation to
hearing, practice to preaching: when you have heard a Sermon, then go live a
Sermon.

4. There may be another reason yet, why Christ sent them away; that they
should now go about their lawful occasions, take care of their families, and
benefit their relations, make their households better for that they had
received. Two things hence observable.

1 The duties of our general calling; though they are far to be preferred, yet
they must not altogether justle out the duties of our particular. Christ sends
them away to their homes after he had refreshed them.

2 Absolute duties toward God, must quicken us to, and in our relative duties
toward man.

It is said of Jacob when he had been conversing with God, that he plucked up
his feet, and went cheerfully on in his way.

The duties of godliness are no hinderance, but a furtherance to us, and an
inablement of us in our particular duties toward man. When we have been with
Christ in a day, we must labor to return home better husbands, better wives,
better parents, better children, etc. Absolute duties toward God, must quicken
us to, and enable us in our relative duties toward man.

After Christ had been in the Temple, says the Text, he went home, and became
obedient to his parents; the being in the Temple was no cause why Christ was
obedient: it is said after, not by way of causality, but in order of time. But
our being with God, and converses with him, do enable us to perform these
duties to man which God requires. So much for the 22 Verses.

We come to the next.

23. Verse. And when he had sent the multitude away, he went into a Mountain
to pray, and when the evening was come, he was then alone.

And here now appears one great reason why Christ dismissed his Disciples, and
the multitude, concealed before, he went to pray. You have three things
considerable.

1 The order, when he had sent the multitude away.

2 The place, he went into a Mountain.

3 The end, to pray.

1 We begin with the first, viz. The Order.

[When he had sent the multitude away.]

First Christ dismisseth the multitude, and then goes to be alone, Christ had
no need of his help: Ipse Christus non laboravit illo vitio, ut avocamentis
vel impediretur, vel languesceret illius oration sicutnos, and tamen nobis in
exemplum secessum quaerit. Chem. in. loc.
he could be alone when he was in company, he could converse with God without
distractions, either sinful or natural. But this Christ did to teach us,

Doct. That when we are to have to do with God, to dismiss the multitude, you
are to discharge your selves of the multitude of your affairs, the multitude
of your employments, cares, thoughts, etc.

If you dismiss not these before you enter the duty, you will find they will
be like the birds to Abraham, that will eat up and devour your spiritual
sacrifice.

Men cannot do their own work in a crowd of people, nor Gods, in a crowd of
thoughts.

Discharge your thoughts. It is unseemly to have your tongues conversing with
God, and your spirits conversing with the world. But we come to the second. The
place,

[He went into a Mountain.]

A Mountain. That Is high above these cumbrances here below; and its solitary;
Christ chose it, he desired to be alone, and chose a Mountain for the fittest
place. Preces in solitudine ardentiones, quando men's curis and objectis minus
d^strahitur.
It speaks thus much to us.

Doct. That helps and advantages for duty, are to be sought and embraced by
Christians. Adminicula quibus mentes ad precandum expeditae redduntur, non sunt
negligenda Chem. in loc.


Christ when he went to pray, he got into a Mountain; not so much for his own
need, as to teach us when we go upon duty, to take all the furtherances and
advantages we can for the doing of it. But yet remember: Media naturalia,
instituta Haec adeo vel abhomini^us.
though natural helps are good, and to be sought; yet instituted helps, such
as are of men's devising, are to be avoided. We must not go to the Philistims to
sharpen our tools, nor to the inventions of men, to sharpen and quicken our
devotions. Those cannot be good affections, which are either kindled or blown
up by the means of our devising, and not of Gods commanding.

Of these kinds are our significant ceremonies as themselves call them; the
whiteness of the Surplice was to put you in mind of the purity of the Church,
and to stir up our affections after the desire of purity. The decking of
Altars, the coping of Ministers, the pargelling of walls, the painting of the
windows with Mosaical devises, the use of Organs, etc. were all set up and
instituted of men, for this end, as they say, to quicken the dull affections of
man. But being without warrant from God, they are no better then the
superstitions of men; and being flesh, too short to beget, kindle, or fuel,
any spiritual and holy affections.

Upon the same ground the Papists have the use of Images, Crucfixes in prayer,
to stir up and quicken their Devotions, to be incentives of worship: these
are condemned, and how can the other be allowed, when both plead the same ends,
and are set up on the same grounds.

Assure your selves, will worship, in regard of prescription, will never enable
you to render the worship of the will in respect of performance. If the will be
an instrument of devising worship, it will never be an instrument of performing
worship: The Propet tells us so, 29 Isay. 13. This people draw near with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me. And why so? he gives the reason;
their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men.

We say the greater the body, the less is the spirit of a man: So the greater
the body and bulk of humane ceremonies, the less is the life and spirit of
true devotion.

The Spirit of God will only blow with his own bellows, work with his own
tools, and not by instruments, and ways of our devising. And though our
adversaries have cast us out with scorn, as those in 66. Isay. 5. Isay 5.66.
Saying let God be glorified, by these additaments of ours, these incentives
of devotion, adornments of outward service: yet we hope God will appear to
our joy, and they at last shall be ashamed.

There is yet something more offers it self in these words:

[He went into the mountain.]

Doct. A good heart seek occasions and means of conversing with God. Christ
had a mind to pray, and he finds a mountain.

The mountain did not put him to prayer, to seek prayer, but prayer sought the
mountain.

It is the complaint of many: Oh, they want time, they want a convenient place,
and therefore they are hindered in their converses with God, they cannot pray.

I tell thee, if thou have a praying heart thou will find a praying place, Non
inopes temporis sumus, sed prodigi.
and a praying time.

I hope thou art not superstitious, that thou think prayers more acceptable
in one place than in another. Si quis locum ad orandum eligat, quasi gratiam
orationi concilietis errat. Chem. in loc.
Indeed this would discover a great deal of blindness and ignorance in thee.
Prayer makes the place, not the place prayer acceptable.

Time was, that God had appointed one place for prayer, which was then called
the house of prayer: The Temple. But now that is laid low: the use of that
being done, Christ the true Temple being come, and now the Apostle bids us, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore, that men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands
without wrath or doubting.

The Apostle does not say, I desire you, or it is good to do so, But I will,
and in every place, id est, in all kind of places, house and Church, Closet, In
cubiculum Christus nos secedere jubet, ut ardentiore zelo preces peragete
queamus, nec ostentationem querere videamur, etc. Chem. i n loc.
Chamber, and as Christ says, 6 Mat. 6. when you pray go into your closet,
etc.

I have seen men sometimes in the passages through a Church, to fall down upon
their knees, (...) etc. Aristip. apud Laertium.
where often a stone upon a stone, here prayer does not find the mountain, but
the mountain finds prayer, the place surpriseth prayer: prayer does not seek
the place. I hope you are not thus superstitious, to think one place better
than another, one place to make prayer more acceptable than another.

And if not, thou needs not to want a mountain, thou needst not to want a
place, if thou do not want a heart. A good heart cannot want a place to
converse with God.

There is yet something more observeable. Look upon the place in an
Allegorical sense: and see thus much.

Doct. It is good when you converse with God in duty, to get upon a mountain.

I speak not of a natural mountain (if any have such vain thoughts, that the
higher they get, the nearer to God; I must tell them the way for them to draw
near to God, is to get into the valley, be humbled for your folly, seek to
get low in heart, rather than high in place) I speak not of a natural
mountain, but of a mountain in an allegory. When you go to converse with God
in duty, get upon the mountain.

1 Get above the world, above men, above employments.

2 Get into Christ. Christ is the Mountain whereon you must stand when you go
to pray. Set me on the Rock which is higher then I. Get into Christ. The Temple
it was the place of prayer, it is called the house of prayer; from thence would
God hear them. The Temple was a type of Christ, and speaks thus much, that if
ever you would have your prayers acceptable, if ever you would have God hear
your prayers, get into Christ. We come to the third, the end: He went into the
Mountain to pray.

[To pray.]

It is the speech of one upon this place. Maxim optarem novisse argumentum
precum. Chem.
It were very desirable to know the argument of Christ's prayer here: what he
prayed for. Though we cannot infallibly conclude, yet we may give some probable
conjectures what was here the argument of Christ's prayer: and that 1, if you
look backwards, and 2, forwards.

1 Look backward, 10, 11, 12. Verses, and there you shall read the story of
John Baptists beheading, which was the next occasion of Christ's Non prepostero
metu sed prudenti ^^nsilio secessit. Pareus in loc.
withdrawing himself with his Disciples.

And this may give us some insight. Hic orat Christus ut pater pusillum suum
gregem tueatar, neque cum tyrannide mundi, aut malitia Satanae opprimi
patiatur. Chem. Isay 59.15.
Christ might be now praying that God would preserve his little flock from the
malice and cruelty of bloody men. Whence this.

Doct. That when wicked men stretch forth their hand against the Church of God,
it is high time to get into a Mountain to pray.

When the Enemy comes in like a flood, strongly, swiftly, etc. then should the
Spirit of the Lord lift up a Standard against them, that is, say some, power
out their souls in prayer; to repel their violence and put them to flight.

Then should we say, We lift up our eyes to the hills, whence comes our help;
our help stands in the name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. You know
this has ever been the Churches practice, and should be ours.

And the reason why we get no more into the Mountain, it is because we have,
and make Mountain of our own: we rest in the arm of flesh. We have been ready
to say with David, Psalm. 30.6, 7. I shall never be moved, thou have made my
mountain so strong. Mark you there; David had a Mountain, and it was strong;
and though he acknowledged it was all from God, for he says, Thou have made my
Mountain so strong; yet he trusted in it, as appears after by Gods punishing
of him; thou hidst thy face, and I was troubled: and now his Mountain was
nothing. We have had means, and those means of Gods gracious bestowing. We
acknowledge that God has made our mountain strong, it is all from God, that
strength and concurrence we have: but yet for all this we rest upon our
mountain, and not upon God.

And this is our way to turn our Mountain into a Molehill, this is the way to
turn our strength into weakness, and to make those things which otherwise would
be useful to us, to be unusefull and unprofitable.

This is one ground, why we go no more into the Mountain, why we are no more
in prayer; because our Mountain is so strong, because we rest upon the means
afforded to us. David's Mountain might have strengthened his faith, but his
mountain becomes his faith and confidence.

It is a sad thing, when that means which should quicken our hearts to seek,
does dead our hearts in seeking: and that which should encourage us to trust in
him, does take off our hearts from dependence on him. This is the cause, why
God does often lessen our mountain, that he might increase our faith, and
deprive us of other comforts, that he might be all our confidence: weaken the
ar^e of flesh that he might strengthen the arm of faith.

God often makes us fatherless in respect of creature reliefes, that we might
be fatherless in respect of creature reliance. God blasts that means whereon
we do rely, that he might be the alone relyance of his people; he makes us
nothing, that we might be all in him, and strengthen our selves in God.

2 The argument of Christ's prayer may be ghessed at, if you look forward upon
what follows.

The Disciples were sent to sea, Christ foresees the storm, he would not
hinder it, Tempestas haec non fortuito exorta, sed divinitus immissa, ut fides
navigantium exerceretur. Pareus.
but suffers it for the exercise of their graces. Yet he gets into a Mountain
to pray, and no doubt for them, that in this exercise of their faith, their
faith might not fail them. As he prayed for Peter, when Satan desired to
winnow him, that his faith might not fail him: if not, Satan had not only
winnowed him like wheat, but blown him away like chafe. So Christ does here
pray for his Disciples, that in this great exercise, in this great storm,
their faith might not fail them.

Doct. That in all our difficulties and troubles, Praevidit Christus futuram
tempestatem eam non praevenit sua omnipotentia, sed se convertit ad praeces, ne
in tempestuoso mari pereant, neve ipforum fides, quae tempestate illa probanda
erat, deficiat. Chem.
Christ is praying and interceding for us, when we are on the sea conflicting
with troubles and evils, Christ is then upon the mountain praying and
interceding for us.

He is gone to Heaven for this end, and this is his work in Heaven. If Christ
had not sent succors from the Mountain to the sea, they had not only been
tossed, but drowned; not only exercised, but destroyed. So, if Christ did not
pray for us in our troubles, temptations, no affliction but would be too big
for our little hearts.

Another thing is suggested to us.

Doct. That the outward providence of God toward his Church in the world,
should furnish his people with matter of Prayer unto God. So here it did
Christ, Herod's beheading John, the Disciples going to Sea.

Let us not only enquire for news, how it fares with the Church of God, but
when you know it, with Ezekiah, Hoc Christi exemplo nos moveamur, ut oculos in
mundo circumferentes, ex iis angustis, quas undequaque videmus, ansam capiamus
and materiam desumamus piis precibus cum Deo Col. loquendi. Chem.
spread the Letter before the Lord, unbosome your hearts to him in complaint
and mourning, if things go not well, in praises and thankfulness if things
succeed well. We now come to the last clause in the verse.

[And when the evening was come he was there alone.

There seems to appear some difficulty in the word [Evening] John says, when
the evening was come, his Disciples entered the ship, 6. Ioh. 16.

Mark says, when the evening was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea,
6 Matthew. 46.

And here our Evangelist says, when the evening was come, Christ was in the
mountain alone, so that there seems some ambiguity. But this difficulty is
easily cleared, if we do consider the Jews had two evenings. Notum est Ex.
loco 12. Exo. 6. v. Hebraeos duas vesperas numerare, unam quando fell jam
occidit alteram quando absorbetur Sub terram quod cunque ergo est intra istud
tempus illud ab ipsis vespera dicitur. Chem.


1. The first was from three till the Sunsetting; and whatever was done in
that time was said to be done in the evening.

2. The second was immediately after the Sun was set, while there remained yet
any brightness in the air.

And thus we then reconcile this seeming difference. The Disciples went to Sea
in the first evening, which was about 3. a clock. Discipuli inclinante sole,
circa horum tertiam nostri Horologii, Christo impellente, descendissent, ad
mare, postea vero post occasum folis, dum ad huc aliqua ejus irradiatio erat in
nubibus, in medium maris pervenissent. Chem. in loc.


And in the second evening Christ was in the mountain, and they in the midst
of the Sea: in the very nick of time, when they were in their danger, Christ
was in the mountain interceding for them. From this appearing difference we
are taught to compare Scriptures, and to acquaint our selves with the custom
of the Jewish nation.

Ignorant men look upon many places of Scripture, perhaps to them at the first
view they do appear like Ptlates servants accusing Christ, none of them in the
same tale, one contradicting another: but if we look thoroughly on them, we
shall see them like Nathen and Bathsheba, both speaking the same things. A
sweet agreement between them. We will now come to the last words.

[He was there alone.]

Indeed it might be said the Disciples were alone, they were now in the midst
of the Sea, a storm is risen, they are tosed with waves, in the dark of the
night, and Christ was absent too. Here was an alone indeed. Those must need
be alone who have not Christ with them, though they enjoy ever so many
creature comforts. But what were they that were separated from all, and Christ
absent too? It may be said they were alone.

But how can Christ be said to be alone? can he whose absence makes us alone,
though we have all the comforts and succors in the world, and whose presence
makes all, in the want of all, can he be said to be alone?

We are to consider Christ, 1. In respect of his divine nature. 2. In respect
of his humane nature.


1. In respect of his divine nature, and so he could not be alone any way, he
was in heaven with the Father, with the Disciples on the sea; his presence
fills heaven and earth. 2. In respect of his humane nature, Christ in some
respects might be said to be alone. 1. There is an alone in respect of comfort.
2. There is an alone in respect of assistance. 3. There is an alone in respect
of company.



In the two former respects, Christ could not be said to be alone, he was never
so alone in the saddest hour, he never wanted comfort, never assistance. As he
himself says, 16. Joh. 22. The hour will come, and now is, when you shall be
scattered, every one to his own house, and shall leave me alone, and yet I am
not alone, because the Father is with me. He was with him to comfort him, to
support him in the darkest hour. Indeed he trod the Wine Press of his Fathers
wrath alone, 63. Isaiah 3. Alone if you look downward, he had no comfort, no
assistance from man, no not their company, all left him. But not alone, if you
look upward; He had the supports of the Father, and was heard in that thing he
feared. And what ever he had in that dismal black hour, that hour of
darkness, as he himself calls it, when he was to conflict with the wrath of
God, to wrestle with the terrors of Death, the the powers of Darkness, yet
afterward heaven ministered to him.

3. But alone in respect of company, so Christ might be, and so Christ was
here: And so he said he was in that 16. John 32. When yet in another respect
he said he was not alone.

So Christ was here alone. He that is all was now alone. The Disciples were
gone to sea, the multitude were dismissed to their homes, and Christ was here
alone. It tells us this,

Doctr. That Christians are to seek and take occasions to be alone: if you
would not be alone in respect of comfort, you must seek to be alone in respect
of company. The way not to be alone, 1 Matthew. 39.
is to be alone. Nunquam minus solus quam tum solus.
Christians are never less alone, than when they are alone. It a sad thing to
be alone in respect of comfort, and so Gods people have bin by neglecting to be
alone, in respect of company; Gods withdrawing from us, are oftentimes the
chastisements of our withdrawing from God. Gods people have been alone in
respect of comfort, but never alone in respect of assistance. His grace shall
be sufficient for you. Wicked men they are alone indeed, alone in the abundance
of all things, they are without God in the world, without Christ, without the
Spirit; and woe be to them who are so alone; though these things may do
something to bear up their Spirits, and hold them up by the Chin here for a
time, yet they will leave them, or they shall them, and then they shall know
what it is to be alone. But we must leave them, either to seek God to be their
God, their company here, or to know the misery of the want of him hereafter.

We proceed: for as yet we are but about the shore: Let us lance forth into the
deep, and now hasten to the Disciples who were alone indeed.

1. Alone in respect of comfort, for they were at their wits end for fear. 2.
Alone in respect of assistance, for ought they saw, either from God or man. 3.
Alone in respect of company, for all were in the same condition with them, they
may be said to be alone in the midst of company, when there is none that is
able to reach forth a hand to keep them, when those that are with them, are
involved in the same misery, and instead of being a comfort, are a trouble and
burden to them.


Let us therefore hasten to the Disciples; poor men! they were alone indeed,
the next verse tells us so.

But the ship was now in the midst of the Sea, tossed with waves, for the
wind was contrary.

The end of the first Sermon.
Matthew 14.
Verse 24. But the Ship was now in the midst of the Sea tossed with waves, for
the wind was contarary.


IN this Verse we have three things observable.

1 The danger the Disciples were in. 2 The time when they were in this danger:
Now. 3 The unexpectedness of this danger: But.


We shall begin with this last; it is first in the Text, the unexpectedness of
their danger: [But.]

And indeed, here may well be a But: Is it not strange that the Disciples should
go in Gods way, nay, by Gods direction upon Christ's errand, and yet that they
should meet with storms, such difficulties; yea, oppressing difficulties? Here
may well be a But.

Descendunt ad mare non ex curiositate aliqua, aut recitationis ergo, sed jussi
a Christo domino, sicque expressum verbum vocationis habent. Chem. in loc.
Had it been said that they went forth upon their own inclination, or out of
curiosity, or for recreation. Or had they done as Jonah did, overrun their
masters? Vbi peccatum ibi procella.
Then no wonder if a storm had been sent after them, if he had fetched them
back with a tempest. Men that go in ways of sin, must expect storms. But when
they went on Christ's errand, had Christ's commission, went by his direction, and
out of obedience to him, and yet meet with storms: this was strange. Here may
well be a But.

Doct. A man may have Gods warrant for the doing of a work, and go on in Gods
way, and yet meet with oppressing difficulties in the prosecution and carrying
of it on.

You see this true here; the Disciples they went in Gods way, Exodus 3.9, 10.
Exodus 4.10, 11.
they had Christ's warrant, and yet meet with difficulties: Moses went into
Egypt by Gods commission to bring Israel out of bondage: God sent him, yet you
see what difficulties he had to conflict withal, in the carrying on the work,
their burdens were increased, the tale of brick was doubled. Sometimes Pharaoh
would let them go; sometimes he repented, and recalled them, their cruel usage
was increased, etc.

Insomuch that the beginnings of their deliverance, Exodus 5.5. Exodus 5.20, 21,
etc. Exodus 12.31, etc. Exodus 14, etc.
did appear worse then the lowest of their sufferings.

At last, when God by a strong hand brought them out of Egypt, you see what
difficulties they met withal at the Red Sea, and after in the wilderness,
hunger, thirst, drought, fiery Serpents, etc. And when they were to enter into
Canaan, what opposition did they meet withal, Josh. 9.1, 2. Josh. 10.3, 4,
5.6, etc.
five Kings combind together to destroy them. So that men may go on in Gods
ways, and yet meet with oppressing difficulties in them. The like you have in
the building of the Temple, which was Gods work too, and they had Gods command;
yet see what abundance of oppositions they met withal in the carrying of it
on, what threatening, plotting, scoffing enemies: Nehem. 4.1, 2. etc. 7.8. verses
their Nobles were wrought off from the work, and proved treacherous to them,
Nehem. 6.17. Neh. 3.5.

Sometimes it went forward, and then cast aside again for many years, Ezra
4.19, 20, etc.
they were accused for a seditious, factious people, treason, and rebellion:
and difficulty upon difficulty they met withal, in the carrying on the work;
which protracted it a far longer time then they had endured in their captivity.

Take but another instance among many; Judahs war against Benjamin, Judge.
20.85.25.
Judges 20.18. Judah went out against Benjamin, and they went out, not only by
Gods permission, but by his approbation too, by his special lisence and
commission: they took council of God, and God bid them go; yet you see, the
first battle they lost two and twenty thousand of their men: they went to take
council again, God bids them go forth, at that time they lost eighteen
thousand more, went to the worst far, Verse 25. though at last, upon their
humiliation and reformation, God appeared for them. So that you see, a man may
go in Gods way, undertake a work by warrant and commission from Heaven, and
yet meet with oppressing difficulties in the carrying of it on.

And this for diverse reasons, to exercise our graces: our Faith. Courage.
Patience. Perseverance.
to purge out corruptions, etc. to magnify his own glory and grace, etc.

Use. Let us not then judge of the warrantablenesse or unwarrantablenesse of
any action, either by the difficulties, or by the present successes in the
carrying of it on.

It is our common fault, to judge of things according to the present successes
of providence.

1 If things go on well, and successes be according to our hearts, we then
judge the cause is just: here may be an undoing mistake. A man may do wickedly
and yet prosper, as it was said of Nebucadnezzar, Dan. 8. Read Ier. 12.1. Job
21.7, 8.

I have read of one, that having a fair gale of wind after he returned from
robbing of a Temple, he concludes, surely God loved sacrilege. Lege Titullum,
(...),
You have an excellent Story suitable to this in the Greek Anthologie, by
Titullus: One having committed murder, and being preserved from a present
death, in which he was in danger, went the next morning to sacrifice, thinking
God favored his murder, when alas he was preserved from that death, to be
taken away by a worse, etc.

Of this spirit they seem to be in the Psalm. 50.21. These things have thou
done, and I kept silent, and thou though^st I was altogether Scelerum patronum
and approbatorem tollerantia vos me existimetis moler. in loc.
such an one as thy self: they thought, because of Gods patience, because they
met with no evil in their evil ways, that they had done well, God was of
their mind: therefore it follows, But I will reprove thee, and set thy deeds
(...) Iti s a military word, signifies, to set a battle in array. Aliem
disponere hinc, Musculus reads it. ex radice (...) ordinavit disposuit, aptavit
significat quasi distincto ordine catalogum omnium scelerum proponere, ut
velint nolint, legere and agnoscere ea cogatur. Moler. Et resistam tibi in
faciam. Musc.
in order before thee. Senties quando in judicium vocave to an ista mihi
placuerint nee n^. Musc. in loc. 1 Hab. 13.14.15.
God would make them to know that they did evil, he would punish them: seeing
they would not learn by the word, they should be taught by works.

2 Another mistake there is, if things go cross to their thoughts, if
successes be not answerable to their expectations, then they judge that all is
naught.

This may be false reasoning; the Disciples met with difficulties, yet were
they in Gods work: so Judah, etc. Judge. 20.18.

The best ways, may for a season be strewed with the greatest difficulties.
God would have his people judge of the lawfulness of their undertakings, not
by works, but by word, not by providence, but by precepts: and this, that we
might learn to live by faith and not by sense. Thus Habakkuck, when things
went ill, he gets into the watch-towre, etc. Hab. 2.

Use. Let not this weaken our faith, or slacken our endeavors in any work,
because we meet with difficulties in it: clear the work to be Gods, and then
if his, assure your selves he will carry it on, though there be never so many
appearing difficulties in the way.

It was said to Luther, when he attempted that great work against the Man of
Sin, which was the greatest that ever man had to do since the Apostles days:
Abi in cellam, and dic miserere mei Deus.
Go into thy Cell, poor man, and say, Lord have mercy upon me.

But yet, though were never so many difficulties in the carrying of it on, and
though never so many attempts against him, yet he effected the one: and which
is the wonder of the World, having a world of enemies, dies in his bed.
Majestas non fracta
And therefore be not discouraged, if difficulties rise, let your spirits rise
with them: you are above all things, whilst you are above your selves. Audere
ad nomen Christi periculum vitae, and fortunarum adire, spiritus principalis
est. Luther.
It is a magnanimous spirit to dare to meet all dangers, to undergo all
difficulties in the cause and work of Christ. You know what Luther said when he
went to Worms. Bucer endeavored to dissuade him: he replies, Verbum dei in
juriam patitur, and ego qui literis eo vocatus sum, me conferam. Haec est dies
quem fecit dominus, vocatus ego venio, vocatus ingredior in nomine domini
nostri lesu Christi etiamsi scirem tot esse diabolos Wormaliae quot sunt
tegulae in aedium tectis.
The word of God does suffer, and I being called thither by Letters, will go,
being called, I come, being called I will thither, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, although I should know there were as many Devils at Worms, as
there are Tyles upon the houses. Here was a Prinee-like spirit, that was above
the world, and therefore could not be daunted with all the evils of it, etc.

He who says, there is a Lion in the way, that fears to go in a good way
because of difficulties, he is not fit to be a soldier of Christ. Fear is
both unworthy religion which is the cause of Christ, Malus miles qui
imperatorem gemens sequitur. Scnec.
and a Christian who is the soldier of Christ.

Use. If those who walk in just ways, that have Gods warrant for their
undertakings, may yet meet with storms; then tell me, what may they expect,
who go on in the ways of sin? if the ways of Saints be strewn with crosses,
with difficulties, what shall be the end of swearers, of wicked and profane
men? if thus it fare with the green tree, what shall become of the dry tree; if
thus with the wheat, what with the chafe? if judgment begin at the house of
God, where shall the sinners and wicked appear? it is a question beyond your
answer.

And so much for the first, The unexpectedness of their danger.

2 We now come to the second, and that is the time of their danger, which is
expressed in this word, Now.

[The ship was now, etc.]

This points at the time of their danger, [now,] that is, in the evening, when
Christ was on the Mountain Initio satis feliciter procedit navigatio, ita ut
trium vel quatuor horarum spatio medium maris attigerint. Chem.
. So that it seems hitherto, they had had a prosperous voyage, who in three or
four hours were gotten into the midst of the Sea, at the first evening they
went to sea, that was about three of the clock; in the second evening they
were in the midst of the sea, and that was something after six of the clock;
so that in three or four hours space they were gotten into the midst of
the sea: but now arises a storm. Whence this.

Doct. That comfortable and promising beginnings, may yet afterward find sad
and sorrow full proceedings.

It was so here, the Disciples had a prosperous and promising setting forth,
but afterward they met with storms.

The stories of Moses in the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and of the
Jews second building of the Temple, tell us this plainly, they had promising
beginnings; insomuch, that they thought the work would have been done out of
hand: but the stories tell you what obstructions, whar interruptions they met
withal, before the work was finished, etc. Though the clauses and conclusions
of Gods people are good, as the Psalmist says, Mark the upright man, observe
the just, for the end of that man is peace; yet the beginnings and the
proceedings may be sad and troublesome. Though God will bring the ship of his
Church to safe harbor at the last, yet they may meet with storms and tempests
on the sea. Vt maresic mundus semper forvet, nunquam quiescit.
So long as there be contrary winds, men of contrary spirits look for
tempests, expect storms.

Use This does admonish us to beware of vain and fleshy confidence, because of
promising beginnings; Nescis qusd serus vesper vehit.
The fairest morning may be over-cast, the clearest day may be over-clouded,
the most promising beginnings, may meet with sad and sorrow full proceedings.

It was the best speech that ever Ahab had, 1 King. 20.11. Let not him that
girds on his Armor, boast himself as he that puts it off.

It is a great argument of lightness and vanity of spirit, yea and of carnal
fleshy confidence, to be puffed up upon promising beginnings; a thing the
world is apt to: but when God sees his own people in the same way, they must
then expect that God should hedge up their way with thorns, and lay unpassible
mountains of difficulty in their way.

The case seems to be ours, it looks like it.

Had not our ship, in which was embarked so much of our good and happiness, a
prosperous gale at their first setting forth? had they not a prosperous
beginning? did they not a long time go without any contrary wind, without any
opposition? had they not the Prayers, the desires, the countenance, and
well-wishes of all to carry them on? were not the beginnings very comfortable,
and very promising? you all know. But how have they met with contrary winds?
sad proceedings! what difficulties, what mountains of difficulties have they
met withal in the carrying on of this work? you all know.

The case is ours: what must be the cure? what is our work now in rhis case?

1. There is something that we must not do.

2. There is something that must be done.

1. We must not be discouraged. God is able to make these troubles that are
arisen in the way, to help forward his own end. Do the billows rise, let the
Ark, let the ship rise with them: do the winds blow, let them but kindle and
inflame your zeal and courage.

Assure your selves, God will both be your Pilot in the ship, and your defense
on the Sea; That which you carry shall never miscarry; nay it shall be your
safety too: Perga contra tempestatem forti animo Caesarem vehis, and fortunam
Caesaris. So I, Christ. vehis, and gloriam, and benedictionem Christi. Nemo nos
laedit, nisi qui Deum vincet.
you carry Christ and all his glory, that can never miscarry, nor you whose
safety is imbarqued with it.

And therefore be not discouraged, though storms arise, though the floods of
ungodliness do lift up their voice, he that sits in heaven shall laugh them
to scorn; and he that sits at the stern will bring all safe to harbor at
last.

2. We are not to forgo the cause. This were to forsake the Arc because the
waves and billows rise, to jump into the Sea, because the wind blows, the Sea
is, stormy.

You see the Disciples they did not forsake the ship because of the storm.

Nor did any of them let down a Cockboat, and labor to secure themselves.

In personal persecutions there God permits us to seek our preservation by
flight: if we be persecuted in one City, we may fly to another. But when
persecution is general and national, we are to seek our preservation in the
whole.

3. We are not to slacken our endeavors; tempests arising in our way, should
quicken us more to working: in a shipwreck that Iu naufragio iste rector
laudandus quem obruit mare, clavum tenentem. Senec. ad peli. cap. 6.
Pilot is to be commended, who is swallowed up of the sea with his Rudder in
his hand.

Non navem deserunt sed remigando laborant.
The disciples here fell to rowing, they forsook their Cabins, but not the ship;
they forgot their particulars, and every man to the general work. They did not
look every man to secure himself, but every man to secure the whole, every man
to secure the ship, in which their safety lay. They saw their personal
security to lie, in the securing of the whole, their Cabins could not be safe,
if their ship were in danger.

qui amissa republica piscinas suas fore salvas sperare videntur. Epist. ad
Attic. 15. lib. 1. Necesse est ut eam non ut vivam. Omnes omnium charitates
patria comple ctitur. Cicer. Offic. l. 1. qui curat esse nisi propterte, pro
nihilo est. Bern.
Tully laughs at the solly of those men which in his time had such thoughts,
that their fish ponds should be safe, though the Commonwealth were lost. Such
windy conceits have too many with us, and therefore seek not their preservation
in, but from the whole; with, but in separation; nay in opposition to the whole.

How far are such from a noble spirit? Valet maximus l. 5. c. 553
I have read of one Publius Decius, that when the Roman Army was reduced to
great straits, he courageously (forgetting himself for the public good) ran
into the midst of his enemies, demanding safety for his country, death for
himself, and by that means occasioned an unexpected victory: the publikenesse
of his spirit did carry him above the thoughts of private safety. Every man
should be nearer to Religion, nearer to common interests than to himself.
Dicitur de Alvanio ille propior publicae religioni, quam privatae charitati.
Valor. Maxim. li. 1. c. 11.
So Alvanius was.

It is a shame that Heathens should do that which Christians can not do. Non
prestet fides, quod praestitit infidelitas. Jerome.
As Hierome in another case complains, oh that infidelity should be able to
do that which faith cannot do. It was used to be said by Christians to
Heathens, Non magna loquimur, sed magna vivimus,
we do not speak great things, but we live and do great things, but we speak
much, and do little, happy were we and the Kingdom too, if the practice of
our lives, did come up to the professions, and protestation of our mouths, etc.

That is the first, what we must not do: Now,

Secondly, what we must do.

1. Search out the cause, why God has obstructed our promising, and hopeful
beginnings. Is there not some Jonah that lies under Deck as yet asleep, some
sin unseen, unhumbled for? Is there not some old sins, that God comes now to
reckon for? old sins raise new storms; former sins a present tempest. See what
sin is the cause, the Jews in every judgment that was inflicted on them, did
use to say that God weighed out an ounce of the golden Calfe to them. Though an
old sin, yet they saw God might reckon with them for it. And there seems
something to be employed that speaks for these thoughts, he is said to
forgive, yet he would remember them at the time of visitation, 31 Exodus 34.

Is there not some Achan, some wedge of Gold, some Babalonish garment, that
has thus disturbed our prosperous beginnings? Have not some fresh issues of
lust and corruption broken forth now in the expectation of healing?

Have we not been unthankful for, unfruitful under all the incomes and
receipts of mercy?

Did we not grow secure, proud, selfe-confident upon the hopes of mercy and
deliverance?

What is that has caused God to strew our ways with difficulty? to hedge up
our way with thorns, to increase our throws, to multiply our pangs, when the
children were brought to the birth, when in our thoughts deliverance was so
near?

Secondly, when you have found it out be humbled for it.

You have an advantage this day unto these duties, such a one as our fathers
never enjoyed. An ordinance for the solemn humbling of our souls for natinall
sins.
You have here sent you a list of the sins the nation is guilty of; and there
is nothing required of you, but that you should lay them to heart this day,
that God may never lay them to your charge.

This seems to be the day star, the harbinger of mercy to us: As the Apostle
says of another duty, it is the first Commandment with promise. So this, it
is one of the first duties that speaks deliverance, not to persons only, but
to the whole nation. Oh that we could in earnest this day draw water as out of
a well and pour it forth before the Lord.

A flood of tears would now prevent a deluge of wrath: National repentance
might yet procure a national pardon, if we have once made our peace with God,
then will not God only be at peace with us, but cause our very enemies to be
at peace with us also.

This is a soul-humbling, a soul-afflicting day. Other days are humbling
days, this is a heartbreaking day; other days are afflicting days; this
should be a soulmelting day; oh that Englands tears might prevent Englands
blood!

3. When you have found out the cause, and humbled your selves for it, your
next work is to reform it.

What is it to lament sin, Non nocent praeterita peccata, si non placent
prefentia, Aug.
if you do not leave sin? what were it to weep our eyes out of our heads, if
we do not weep our sins out of our heaats?

It is not humiliation is enough, nor humiliation and supplication, unless to
these you join reformation, 2 Chronicles. 7 14. If my people shall humble
themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their evell ways, then
will I hear from heaven, he merciful to their sins, and heal their land.
Mark you, it is not one of these, but all of them: the words are not to be
read disjunctively, as if one would serve the turn, but copulatively, all or
nothing.

You read this in 10. Judge. 10. etc. that Israel humbled themselves and prayed
too, yea and prayed earnestly, but for all this, God was giving them up into
the hand of their enemies, till they set upon the work of reformation too, as
you see 15, 16 verses, and then the Lord was grieved for the misery of Israel.

4. Be mighty in prayer with God this day. Mighty necessities do call for
mighty strivings and wreslings with God. These are special times of seeking.

And special times of seeking, should be times of special seeking of God: But
seek him humbly, seek him fervently, seek him cordially, etc. And God will be
better to us than our prayers; he will do for us above what we ask, or think.

5. Enter into solemn Covenant with God against them. This is the great duty
of the day, and proper for it, when you have bin humbled for them, then
covenant against them. But be sure you covenant with God, as he does with you,
that is, covenant with him in Christ, desire him to be surety for thee,
otherwise thy bond is nothing worth.

There is yet another thing observable from the time of their danger. It is not
presently upon their setting forth, they had for some time a prosperous voyage,
but now the storm arises.

Doct. That God does not use to exercise such as are but young beginners with
difficulties.

I told you in the beginning: it is said of the children of Israel when they
came out of Egypt, that God would not lead them by the way of the hills, though
the nearest way, but by the way of the plains, though much about; and he
himself gives this reason. Because of the Philistims: that is, lest the
difficulties they met withal at their first setting out, might have
discouraged and disheartened them in the way.

It is said of Jacob, that he slackned his pace because of his little ones: God
will not over-drive his people, and put them to exercises above the strength of
grace received. Upon this ground is that speech of Christ, Old bottles will not
bear new wine, etc. That is, he would not exercise young beginners with
austerities of religion, but would forbear them till they had gotten more
strength: the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken away, and
then they should fast, when the bridegroom was taken away: he will then give
them in those days a more plentiful and abundant measure of his spirit, and
then they should be able for these works.

Use. And what a comfort is this to the Saints, though God do exercise you, yet
he will not put you to exercises above the measure of grace received.

You doubt now, how you shall be able to undergo difficulties for Christ, how
you shall lie in prison, how dye for Christ, and you perplex your hearts with
this from day to day; you sear if you should be called upon difficulties, you
would recoyle and fall back, you are never able to go through such conditions.

And indeed those of Gods soldiers which have been most fearful in
garrison, have been most valiant in the field; those who have suspected their
hearts most, who have been most humble, fearful, and jealous of themselves,
have proved most resolute and valiant when God has called them upon service.
Where others who have been self confident before, have shrunk in the days of
trial. As the story of Dr. Pendleton will tell you, who when Saunders a
Minister came to him and told him his fears, the jealousies of his own heart
to undergo Martyrdom, to burn for Christ, he answered, that he would rather
lose every drop of grease he had, being fat, then deny Christ, but yet the poor
man stood to it, when he renounced it, etc.

But besides, take this for thy comfort, in the midst of thy jealous and
mis-giving thoughts, that either God will not bring thee upon trials, upon
sufferings, or if he do, he will give thee strength to go through them.

And therefore, though I would have thee to maintain an humble jealous fear,
such a fear as makes thee go out of thy self, yet beware of sinking
discouraging fears, such as dis-inable for service: seeing God has
undertaken, if he call thee forth upon difficulties, to give thee a spirit and
strength to walk through them.

And so much for the second particular, the time of their danger. We now come
to the third. The danger it self. And that is set out in four particulars.

1 They were in the midst of the sea. 2 They were tossed with waves. 3 The
wind was contrary. 4 Christ was absent.
We will begin with the first. They were in the midst of the sea.

[But the ship was now in the Navis in medio mari jam erat hoc enim, in altum
jam conscenderat pro fundissimum, fluctibus and ventis gravioribus obnoxium.
Pareus.
midst of the sea.]

There were two great ends for which Christ sent his Disciples to sea.

1 To exetcise their graces. 2 To declare his power. And the midst of the sea
was the fittest place for these: Christ chose the midst of the sea, as the
fittest place to exercise their graces and to declare his own power.

Doct. That when Christ does intend to exercise the graces of his people, he
plucks them from the shore, he brings them into the deep. You see here, Nihil
nisi pontus and ether.
Christ suffered them to be pulled from the land on one side, and a contrary
wind to blow on the other side: In medio mari significat periculi magnitudinem.
Brugen^.
so that they were now in the midst of the sea: and here he exercises them,
when faith has nothing to do but look upwards, when none but God to rely
upon, then it looks fully and rests firmly upon him. Faith cannot act till it
act alone.

When men are in the deep, there is no way but to cast anchor upwards, there
is no bottom, but in heaven, which is the best bottom, when it is the only
bottom.

We say the Loadstone will not draw while the Adamant is near it, nor faith
rest fully on him, while it has dependancies here below. Optimi sumus cum
infirmi sumus.
Its hard to make that man all in God, who is something in any thing here below.

The reliefes of creatures do often hinder us in our relyance upon God: and
therefore God is forced to weaken the arm of flesh, that he might strengthen
the arm of faith. 2 Cor. 1.9. 1 Timothy 5.5. Zeph. 3.12.
You know what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1.9. We had the sentence of death in
our selves, that we might learn not to trust in our selves, but in God that
raises the dead. 1 Timothy 5.5. The widow that is left alone trusts in God.

It was that which God said, Zeph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee a
poor distressed people, and they shall trust. -- Therefore does God break in
pieces the reeds whereon we lean, that we might rest our selves upon the rock,
himself, who is the rock of ages: a rock so deep, that no floods can
undermine, and so high that no waves can reach.

And there are three main reasons why God when he does intend to exercise the
graces of his people; does pluck them from the shore, bring them into the deep.

Reas. 1. That he may the better declare his own wonders, Deus angustias
suorum auget, ut eorum fidem probaret, and suam vertutem declaret, Jansen.
we read in the 107 Psalm. 23, 24. That those who go down to thesea in ships,
that do business in great waters, these see the works of the Lord, his wonders
in the deep. It is true in a spiritual sense. The deep is a fit place for God
to do wonders in, and that he might declare his wonders he brings us into the
deep.

There are the wonders of four Attributes which God declares to them whom he
brings into the deep.

1 He does declare the wonders of his power: in rebuking the storms, laying
the tumultuous rage of the proud waves.

2 He declares the wonder of his wisdom, in finding a way to help his people
in such straights, the Lord knows how to deliver his.

3 He declares the wonders of his truth and faithfulness in supporting of us,
in relieving of us, that we are not swallowed up of the waves: as he promises,
Psalm. 45. When you pass through the water, I will be with you, that the floods
shall not drown you, etc.

4 He declares the wonders of his mercy in delivering of us, who when we are at
the end of our thoughts, and know not what to do, yet he knows how to deliver
his people.

None know how powerful, how wise, how faithful, how merciful God is, so
well as those who are brought into deeps, these have experience of all God.

And that God might declare his wonders, therefore does he bring his people
into the deep.

Reas. 2. Because this is the fittest place for the trial and discovery of
what is in our hearts, both for matter of sin and grace.

As God led his people forty years through the barren wilderness, to prove
them, Deuteronomy. 8.16.17.
and discover what was in their hearts: as he tells us, Deuteronomy. 8.16, 17.

So God does still lead his people through a sea, through a wilderness,
through many straits, and great difficulties for the same end, to discover what
is in their hearts; both for matter of sin and grace.

First; For matter of sin. The deep will try us, will discover the depth of
our hearts, such corruptions as our false glozing hearts will not discover,
while we are on the shore, will be now discovered when we are brought into the
deep.

Then will your pride, your infidelity, your impatiency, etc. discover it
self: while nature is pleased, while all things go well with us, corruptions
lie hid: Natura vexata, prodit se ipsam.
but when nature is provoked, when God brings us into the deep, these tossings
will discover our hearts.

You know when God brought Job and David into the deep, upon those sad trials
and exercises; it put them to the utmost of their faith and patience to believe
and be quiet, though the one was a mirour of faith, and the other of patience.

Secondly, to discover, what is in our hearts for matter of grace.

A counterfeit piece will show as well as the best, till it come to the
touchstone, but the touchstone quickly discovers.

There are three great graces which are tried to the back in difficulties; for
the trial of which, God does often bring us into the deep.

1 Faith, 1 Pet. 1.7. You are in heaviness through many temptations, that the
trial of your faith might be found to the gloay of God. Deus aliquando suos in
periculo relinquit, ut suas vires experiantur.
It is no trial of faith when all things smile upon us, when God, when
conscience, when the world, when friends and all smile, that there is not so
much as the least wrinkle upon the face of the waters. Permittit Christus suos
quandoque adversis tempestatibus jactari, ut fides eorum exploretur, infirmitas
diffidentiae nostrae se probet, etc. Parous.
But now when God frowns when the world frowns. When a man shall be brought
into the deep; 1 either the depths of desertion, or 2 the depths of
temptation, or 3 the depths of outward trouble; here is the trial of faith
indeed.

When a man is clean plucked from the shore, and has nothing to lean upon
but God, but a promise, nay, and God seems to frown too; if he look above him,
there is a stormy sky, within him, there is a stormy conscience, without him
there a stormy world.

And yet in all this, faith can venture it self upon God, run into his
bosom, when he seems to be armed against him, hang the weight of its soul
upon God, upon a promise, when nothing to sense appears, here is faith indeed;
faith in its glory under a cloud; faith in its strength, under this appearing
weakness: here is faith tried to the back.

2 The 2d grace here tried, is our love. Virtutes quaedam ut Stellae, quae
inter diu latent, noctu lucent. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 27. Apparet virtus, argui
turque malis. Ovid.


There is no trial of love, while we have such dispensations from God as are
fuel and attractives of love.

While God smiles on us, our estate is prosperous, all things speak love and
good will from God; these are attractives to beget, and fuel to increase
love. But now when God shall bring a man into the deep, exercise him with
difficulties, seem to overwhelme him with all his waves, as Job complains;
and yet for all this the soul can cleave to him, love a frovvning God as well
as a smiling God; a correcting, as well as a comforting God, as Job says,
Though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee. Or as the Church, Psalm 44.9 to
the 19. All this is come upon us, and it was a great all, as you may see,
19.10.11.12.13, etc. thou give us as sheep to the slaughter, etc. Yet have
we not forsaken thee, nor turned our back from thy covenant.

3. The 3 grace he tries is our patience.

Patience is such a grace as is not tried but by difficulties: where there is
nothing to provoke or occasion impatience, there is no trial of patience.
While Jonah had the Goard he was calm enough: but when the Goard was gone,
he grew as hot as the Sun which shone upon him.

It was the Devils argument concerning Job, Job 1.
and it was true in the maine. God said that Job was a holy man, a patient man:
Why but says Satan, What thanks to him for that? he must needs be patient,
who has nothing to disturb his patience.

As he is the patientest, so he is the happiest man of all the children of the
East; have not thou laden him with blessings, given him what his heart can wish
or desire, Children, riches, possessions, etc. Nay, and have not thou made a
hedge about him too, and fenced in all happiness by thy providence, so that
nothing can break in, to annoy and disturb him in his happiness.

Alas what trial of patience is here, where there is nothing to disturb, or
annoy him?

Do but let me deal with him a little, and I will quickly sound him, give me
but commission to take away his Children, his goods, and to smite his body, and
then we shall quickly see his patience. This man who now seems so patient,
will curse thee to thy face.

The main of his argument was this, and it was true in the main: That while
all things which are fuel to patience are enjoined, while a man is in
ptosperitie, and has what his heart can wish, here is no trial of patience.
But when a man is brought into the deep, plucked from the shore of his
enjoyments. When a man is brought into straits and difficulties here will be
the trial. And therefore does God often carry his people into the deep as he
did him, and raise storms and troubles there, that he might discover his
peoples patience. And when a man can now lie down in the dust, kiss the rod,
justify God, clear him in all his dealings, and sweetly accept of the
punishment of his iniquity, when a man can by the power of Faith lay all the
insurrections in his soul, silence all murmurings, 26. Lev. 41.3. Lum. 32.
and give God the glory of his own proceedings with him. Here is patience
indeed, patience in strength. That is the second.

3. Reas. God does bring us into the the deep, as to discover, so to exercise
our graces. The deep is the fittest place for exercise: the exercise of our
faith, love, hope, patience, the grace of prayer, etc.

Men will never cast themselves upon God, so long as they have any bottom to
stand upon here below.

Therefore he brings us into the deep, that when we have no other bottom, he
might be our only bottom.

The exercise of faith is called a standding still, 14 Exodus 13.2 Jer. l. 30
Ifai. 1.
to beheld the salvation of the Lord. But a man will never stand still, so long
as he has any friend to gadde unto. You see that in the Jews, 2 Jer. ult.
Isai. 30.1. etc.

And therefore God does bring us into the deep, into such difficulties, wherein
we can neither go to others for succor, nor others come to us, that now in
this time our souls might find the way to heaven alone. So the exercise of
faith is called a resting upon God: but we will not rest fully on him, so long
as we have any thing else to rest upon here below.

And therefore God does break in pieces the Reeds on which we rest, or makes
them helpless, and comfortless to us, that we might depend alone on him.

Again, the exercise of faith is called a retiring our selves to him, a
sheltering of our selves in God, flying under his shadow, running to him as our
Tower. But this we shall never do, so long as we have any Bulwarks of our own:
The tower is the last refuge: and therefore God does beat us out of our own
Bulwarks, out of our own means of provision, that we might alone fly to him
for security: So the exercise of faith is called an Anchoring of our selves on
God: But so long as we find a bortome here below, we will never cast Anchor
upwards.

And therefore God does bring us into the deep, the midst of the Sea, where
the soul can find no bottom to anchor on, that so the soul might cast anchor
upwards, and rest alone on God, who never failed them that trust in him. Psalm
9.10.

Thus you see Jehosaphat, 2 Chro. 20.12
We know not what to do; here was no bottom for him to anchor on below, a
great enemy, and small strength to withstand, and therefore he anchors
upwards: But our eyes are upon thee --.

To conclude, the midst of the Sea, it is the fittest place for God to try
and exercise his people, and for God to succor and help his people, we shall
be most thankful, God will get himself most glory, and the deliverance of his
people will be most conspicuous. If God should help us on the shore, while we
are among our other succors and helps, these perhaps would either obscure, or
take away the glory which belongs to God in a deliverance.

But when God does pluck us from the shore, bring us into the deep, above the
reach of creatures to relieve us, then if God help us, he does inherit his
own glory: we will then say the finger of the Lord is here.

None but a God could have disappoynted such plots, none but a God could have
laid such storms, none but he could have wrought such deliverance for us.

1. Use Think it not much to go down into the deep; It is a place God
chooses for the demonstration of thy graces, and declaration of his own mercy.

We had never known Abraham's faith and love, David's piety, Jobs patience,
Paul's courage and constancy, if they had been ever upon the shore, if God had
not sometime brought them into the the deep.

Nor should we know either our sins or our graces, if God did not sometimes
bring us upon exercises.

Have thou been in the midst of the Sea? have thou been in the deep. 1. The
depth of temptarions. 2. Of desertions. 3. Of outward trouble? And have thou
cleaved noto God? have thou justified him? have thou loved him? have thou had
experience of thy graces? have they abidden trial? Here is something to
evidence the truth of thy graces to thee. Difficulties are exercises, and
abiding difficulties are experiences to us of the truth of our graces. That's
surely ours which has abiden temptation. There is no judging while you are on
the shore, the trial is when you come into the deep, one experience fetched out
of the deep, will tend more to thy establishment, than many promising evidences
never put to the trial: The deep demonstrates, the truth of thy graces.

And it declares the riches of Gods mercy. God takes delight to put forth
himself in desperate cases. In such cases his mercy will be most visible, his
people most thankful, and deliverance most welcome.

We should never have the experince what God can do, if we did not see what
man cannot do: you should never know the mercy of God, if you had not
experience of necessities above man.

Faelix culpa quae talem meruit redemptorem. Bern.
And as Bernard says of sin, I may better say of our necessities, happy
necessities that occasions the relief of such a God, who takes occasion, not
only by trouble to help us, but by the enlarging of our trouble, to enlarge
our deliverance. If greatness of sin might be used as an argument for mercy,
25 Psalm 11. Pardon my iniquities, for they are great, much more greatness of
trouble.

But we come to the second particular, wherein their danger is expressed, as
yet this is the least. The second is in these words.

[Tossed with waves.]

Vita nostra, (...) 91 Pslm. 10. Christianus Crucianus.
A perfect Emblem of the Church of God. A ship upon a troublesome sea tossed
with waves. Vt Mare sic mundus semper fervet Chem. Ut Discipuli, sic Christiani
habent sua turbida and Lucida intervalla. 2 Cor. 7.5.
The world is fitly compared to the Sea, for the most part stormy, (n) though
sometimes it is more quiet and calm, as the Apostles for some hours sailed on
a calm sea, yet alas these are but respits, some Lucida intervalla, Interdum
breves induciae piis conceduntur, sicut Apostol. hic ad pauculas horas tuto
mari navigant sed brevis temporis seculitatem, mox ingentes adversitates
excipiunt, Chem.
Some few hours breathings; their constant sailing is on a troublesome sea,
tossed with waves.

[Tossed with waves.]

Their condition set down in brief here, is more largely set down in the 107
Psalm 26. verse. When he raises stormy winds, and lifts up the waves, they
mount up to heaven, they go down again to the depth, their soul is melted
because of trouble, they reele too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and
are at their wits end: here is the comment upon these words; tossed with waves.

But yet the (...)
word here, is a word of large expression; some read it Syrus interp. vexata
cruciata. Arab. agitata respondet Hebraeo (...)
vexed and afflicted with waves, (...), huc illue raptatum, metaphora ab ^is
sumpta, a quibus per tormenta aliquid extorquetur; qua etiam ratione Gailice
tempestas maris tormente dicitur. Beza. Annot. in loc.
some racked, and tormented with waves, (s) some as we render it tossed with
waves.

It is a word used for the most exquisite torments and pains.

12 Revel. 2. (...).
Sometime for the throws and pangs in travail.

He aeas delivered up, (...)
For the torments inflicted on the wicked servant.

(...). 16 Luke 23. 14 Rev. 10.20 Rev. 10.
Nay, for the torments of hell, and hell it self.

All which sets out the greatness of the trouble and danger they were in,
which speaks thus much to us.

Doctr. That there is not so much evil in the greatest trouble and affliction,
as there is good in the least trial, and exercise of our graces.

The Disciples underwent a great deal of trouble upon the sea: but had all
this been a greater evil, then the exercise of their graces a good, Christ
would never have fuffered the one for the other.

We wonder sometime that God should bring his people, such as he loves, into
straits and difficulties: But you see God may do it for the exercise of your
graces, the least exercise of which will weigh down all your trouble, 1 Pet.
1.7.

If God did not exercise our graces, we should suffer them to rust; and grace
is then most lovely, when it is most in motion and exercise; God suffers us
often to be tossed, because we do not toss our selves; he suffers others to
ransack and rifle us, because we do not rifle our own hearts; he suffers
Satan to winnow us, because we neglect to sift our selves.

Therefore does God exercise us with variety of difficulties, that we might
exercise our selves. Again it says thus much to us:

2. Doct. God does sometimes put his people to a lesser trouble for their
grearer good.

The Physician makes his Patient a little sick for his greater healh: The
Surgeon puts us to a little pain for a greater ease. God takes liberty with
the outward man, to do good to the inward man. 1 Cor. 11.22. You are chastised
of the Lord, that you might not be condemned with the world.

That you might not love the world, he suffers the world to hate you: that you
might be crucified to the world, he suffers you to be crucified in the world:
therefore do you meet with many afflictions in the world that you might not be
condemned with the world. As there is a curse hid in the best things to wicked
men, a curse in their health, their gold, silver, etc. so there is a blessing
hid in the worst things to Gods people; a blessing in poverty, sickness, death
it self. 25 Psalm 16 32 Jer. 40.
He has said, All his ways are ways of mercy; and he will never depart
from us from doing us good.

As God makes one evil the punishment of another to wicked men, so he makes
one evil the cure of another to his own people. The Physician orders poisons
to useful purposes: So God those things which are evil in themselves, to the
good of his own people.

The Leprosy on Naamans body, was was an occasion of the cure of his Leprous
soul: if his body had not been Leprous, his soul had not been washed. How
many that can say, I had not been so rich in grace, if I had not been so poor
in gold? I had not been so sound in soul, if I had not been so infirm in body?
If I had not lost so much of the Creature, I had not got so much of Christ.

Use. And this should teach us a lesson of patience under all Gods exercises,
it is but the putting of thee to a little pain for thy greater ease; a little
trouble for thy greater comfort; a little sorrow for thy greater joy. All Gods
sad passages of providence to you In medelam non in ruinam, in salutem non in
mortem. Aug. Unde plangis castigatio non damnatio, etc. Nihil in faelicius
faelicitate peccantum qua paenalis nutritur impunitas. Aug.
they are for medicine, not for ruin; they are for health, not for death.
Happy that sickness which occasions health, that sorrow which brings joy,
those crosses that end in comforts, etc. for our light afflictions which are
but for a moment, we have an eternal weight of glory.

Thus is there an expedite in all Gods sad passages of providence to his own
people: as he said to his Disciples, It is expedient for yet that I go away.
It was strange that the best of Creatures should stand between man, and the
best of comforts: So it did there, the humanity of Christ was the best Creature
that ever God made; yet this was the veil, the Cloud, that hindered the better
comforts: If I go not, the comforter will not come.

Miserecordia puniens justitia parcens.
There is a chastising mercy, and a sparing Justice. God does exercise one to
wicked men, when they go on in sin and he does Deus irrascitur cum peccantem
non punit.
not punish them for it, as you see in the 4. Hos. 14. Vae iilis quorum ultio
reponitur infuturum ubi non est virga, ibivenit maleus.
And by this they are hardened, they are blinded, they grow desperate in sin:
Because sentence against an evil work, is not executed presently; therefore
the hearts of the sons of men, are fully set to do evil, 8 Eccles. 11.

Unus filius sine peecato, nullus sine flagello.
But the other, viz. his chastising mercy, he does exercise toward his own
People: They are chastized of the Lord, that they may not be condemned with
the world.

quamvis non bonum, tamen in bonum, and in majus benum.
This is our comfort, when God puts us to a lesser trouble, it is for our
greater good.

There is yet something more does offer it self to us.

[Tossed with waves]

He does not say the ship was drowned with waves; but it was rossed with waves:
It was tossed, but it was not drowned: whence, in an Allegory,

Doct. Ecclesia quam vis potest turbari, tamen non potest mergi. premi non
supremi, etc.
Though the Church of God may be tossed with waves, yet it shall never be
swallowed up of the waves.

Christ may suffer the ship of his Church to be tossed upon a troublesome and
tempestuous sea, yet has he care of its safety, it shall never be swallowed
up of the waves: Tossed it is often, never drowned; It was in danger, tossed if
you will in Ahabs days, when they dug down the Altars, slew the Prophets,
set up the worship of the Sidonians; insomuch, that Elisha though he had been
alone. But yet though tossed, it was not drowned, God had then seven hundred in
Israel that had never bowed the knee to Baal. I might instance in the times of
Antiochus, who entered the Temple at Jerusalem, burned up the Books of moses and
the Prophets, proclaimed feasting aad riot in the Temple of God, and put to
death all that would not renounce their Religion.

It was tossed in the times of the ten bloody Persecutions, began under Nero,
when Peter and Paul were beheaded; and continued under Dometian, when John was
banished into Patmos, and so carried on for diverse Emperors more. Quo tempore
universus orbis sacro martyrum eruore infectus.
When the whole world did swim with the blood of innocent Martyrs: yet at that
time God did not only preserve, but Sanguis Marty rum semen Ecclesiae.
increase his Church; insomuch, that Julian lest off to persecute Christians as
his predecessors had done, Non ex miscricordia sed ex invidia.
not out of mercy, but out of envy; because he saw the more they were
afflicted, the more they grew.

And from him we might go down, and see the Church still upon a troublesome
stormy sea, but tossed, not drowned. It was but like Noah's Ark on the waters;
or Moses Bush on fire, not consumed; like the Sun under a cloud, all its glory
vayled and hid under troubles and persecutions. But our hope is, that God is
making his Churches glorious in the earth, that he will give inlargements for
our straits, comforts for our troubles, and that he will make the inlargements
of his people, as visible as their straits have been.

Use. If so? Let wicked men cease to attempt any thing against the Church and
People of God: Impellere possunt, sed in totnm prosternere non possunt,
crudeliter me tractare possunt, sed non extirpare, dentes nudare sed non
devorare, occidere me possunt, sed in totum me perdere non possuut. Luther.
It is but labor in vain, they shall never attain what what they seem to aim
at, the ruin of the Church of God. He has said 12 Zach. 3. That he will
make his Church a a burdensome stone, they that lift at it shall be crushed by
it, though all the Nations of the world should be gathered together against
it. St. Jerome on this place says, that in Jerusalem they had at the gates of
the City a great stone, which men, to try their strengths, did lift at; and if
they attempted it, and were not able to lift it, they hurt themselves thereby.
Such a stone will God make his Church. We know the Piece overcharged, strikes
not down that a man ayms at, but rather he himself is stricken down with its
own recoyle: He that shoots against the Church, shoots in a Piece
o're-charged, and shall be sure to be struck down with its own recoyle.

Pharaoh followed the children of Israel so long, till at last he was
overwhelmed in the waters.

Jnlian lifted so long at this stone, till at last it fell upon him, and
crushed him to powder. Assure your selves you shall but make rods for your own
back, you shall but pave a way to your own destruction; you shall but dig pits
to bury your selves in, twist cords to bind your selves wituall. No weapon
formed against thee shall prosper; and whoever rises up against thee shall
fall for thy sake. Again, they shall be covered with shame that war agasnst
Sion, etc. Read 4. Mic. 11, 12, 13. 4 Mic. 11, 12, 13. 43 Is. 3, 4. etc.
And 43. Isa. 3, 4. I will give men for thee, and people for thy life.

And therefore as Pilates wife said to her husband, Have nothing to do with
that just man; so I to thee, have nothing to do, by way of injury, with the
Church of God, etc. But we will now come to the third particular of this danger.

[The wind was contrary.]

Here is the next cause of their troubles; The wind was contrary.

Doct. Contrariety is the ground of all storms. Contrary spirits will ever
cause tempest.

That which raises storms between God and man, between man and himself,
between one creature and another, it is contrariety. Take away contrariety and
take away storms. The way to have a calm sea is to cease the winds: so the
way to have calmnesse in the Church, in the state, is to take away contrariety.
The Decisions of the hand, are but the fruits of the differences in the heart.
The differences of men's judgments, do ever raise differences and troubles
without.

If men were all of one mind, they might be all of one heart, and all would row
the same way: but this is a happiness not to be expected, though prayed for,
till the fourth watch when Christ shall enter the ship; but yet allowance for
differences, may prevent storms. A fair Latitude for differences may procure
love, prevent troubles, where the contrary indangers te^pests, etc. But why
should this cause storms? me thinks if wicked men will not go to heaven
themselves, yet they should let them alone that would go. Indeed they say they
would go to heaven too, but they would not go your pace: they will not
overgoe the world, their pleasures, profits, this is too fast: what needs such
haste: and therefore rather than mend their own pace, they would take them
away that go before them.

When they see others to walk in a more spiritual and holy way than
themselves, they are cast and condemned in their own thoughts, that their way
is not good, and having no desire to come up to them, and to the rule,
thereupon they hate and persecute those that go before them.

And if I mistake not this was the cause of the first Murder that ever was, 1
John 3.12. Caine was of that wicked one who slew his Brother, 1. John 3.
and wherefore slew he him? Why says the Apostle, Because his own Works
were evil, and his Brothers good. It was not because God respected one, and
not the other: for God tells him, 4. Genesis 7. That if he would do well, he
should be accepted too: but it was because his own works were bad, and his
Brothers good. But could this be a good reason? were his Works bad? Why did
he not mend them? was this any cause to kill his Brother? This was the cause:
His Works were bad, and he was convinced of that, both by Abels proctise, and
Gods different acceptance: And because he had no mind to mend them, therefore
he would kill Abel, he would murder him that went before him, that his
Conscience might not be continually condemning and tormenting of him, for that
which he had no mind to mend.

And you have the like in the Scribes and Pharasees, set out in the Parable of
the Vineyard and Husbandman, they had Gods Vineyard, were the husbandmen in the
Church, but they would yield no fruit: Luke 10.16, 11, 12.
God sends to them over and over, they beat and mis-used the Messengers. At
last God sends his Son, with this sweet expectation; Sure they will reverence
my Son, though they have persecuted and killed the Prophets, 13. verse.
yet my son shall find other acceptance of them; sure they will receive my
Son. 14 verse.
But mark now their Spirits, This is the Son, say they, come let us kill
him, that the Inheritance may be ours.

You know it is a Parable, the Vineyard is the Church, the ordinances and the
fruit which God expected, was holiness, and suitable obedient walking: The
messengers that God sent to call to them for it; were the Prophets, who called
them to obedience and holiness. But because they desturbed them in their way,
and would not suffer them to live as they list, therefore they misused them,
persecuted, killed them: Last of all, God sends his son, and then they say,
This is the heir, let us kill him, and the Inheritance is ours: Then the day
was theirs, they might sin without check, control, they should be
disturbed no more, they should do their will and none should check them, here
was the reasoning of their heart.

To these heights in sinning does a sinful heart carry men at last.

Sin will never rest, till it has turned a man all into sin, devilished men;
you see how many there are that sin away, not only a form of godliness, but
their moralities, nay even their natural Consciences; sin will spend at last
upon the main stock, and eat out the very natural principles of men.

There is yet another thing which offers it self to us from this.

The end of the second Sermon.
[The wind was contrary.]


HAd Si maturius ventus contrarius exortus fuisset mox se ad portum recipere
pomissent, etc. Chem.
the wind been contrary before, either they would not have set out to sea, or
if they had, yet they might have returned back: but it is not contrary till
they come into the midst of the Sea. And indeed there seems to be a mercy in
it.

Hic lacus juxta Plin. l. 5. latitude. 6. mil. longitud. 16. mill. juxta
Joseph. l. 3. 100 stadia in longitud. 40. stad. in latitud. stadium est ^ctava
pars miliarii, etc.
These seas were narrow and strait, being but a few miles over, and the night
was dark, and had they had a wind for them, it might have hazarded them, and
dashed them against the rocks: and therefore it was less for their danger,
that the winds were contrary, though it was more for their exercise.

It is better to be in a tempest upon the midst of the sea, then to have too
strong a gale for us to drive us on the shore. A man's harbor may sometimes be
more dangerous then the sea. A man may as well come too soon into his harbor,
as be kept too long upon the sea; many have been lost at harbor, who have been
safe at sea. A tempestuous sea is not so dangerous, as an unsafe harbor. It
speaks thus much.

Doct. God may be working our preservation, when we think he is working our
destruction: or that which we sometimes think to be in judgment, may yet be in
greatest mercy. It was so here --

The Whale that swallowed up Jonah, was a means to bring him to shore; and
that trouble which we think oftentimes will swallow us up, may be a means to
bring us to our harbor.

There is no judging of Gods heart and purposes, by his outward proceeding of
providence in the world. By thus judging, wicked men undo themselves, and
Gods people afflict themselves.

Gods outward proceedings may be good, when the purposes of his heart are evil
to a man; again, they may be sad, when his purpose is good, Jer. 29.11.
Ier. 29.11. I know the thoughts I think to thee, they are thoughts of peace
and not of trouble, to give thee at the last an expected end, but yet at this
time they were in captivity, his present proceedings were sad to them.

It is our wisdom to shut our eyes to works, and look to the word, to look
upon promises and not upon providence, this is to live by faith, and not by
sense. But of this more afterward --

We are now come to the fourth particular, wherein their danger is expressed,
and their trouble heightened.

Christ was absent.

We read in Matthew. 8.24. Mat. 8.24, 25.
that the Disciples were on the sea, a tempest arose, and they were in great
danger; but then Christ was in the ship, who presently rebuked the storm: but
here Christ was absent: well might they think had Christ been here, he would
not have suffered this storm to have risen; if he had suffered it, yet he
would quickly have laid it. But what shall we do now Christ is absent? Give me
leave to commend two or three instructions from this. One is Zuinglius.

Doct. There is nothing but storms to be expected, where Christ is not in the
ship. Absente Christo, nil nisi turbatio, Christo present omnis motus sedatur.
Zuing. in loc.


If Christ be not in a Family, in a City, in a Kingdom, Christ in his grace,
Christ in his truth, in his worship, in his ordinances, you must look for
storms.

It is said in Judges 5.8. They chose new godi, and then was war in the gates.
Where there is sin you may look for a storm. Sin like vapors, sent up into
the middle Region of the Air, which though you hear nething of it for a time,
all is quiet; Vbi non est gratia, ibi non est pax.
yet at last it comes down in a storm.

Where on the contrary, The fruit of righteousness shall be peace, and the
effect of righteousness shall be quietness and assurance for ever, Isay
32.17. Isay 32.17.
As many as walk according to this rule, Peace be upon them, and upon all the
Israel of God, Gal. 6.16.

Christ is a Prince of peace, but he is a Conqueror first: Pax non habitat ubi
Christus non regnat. Ber.
where Christ does not conquer and reign, there look for no peace; no peace
with God, no peace with man, no peace with conscience; Conscientia quadruplex.

1 Conscientia bona, non quieta.

2 Conscientia bona and quieta.

3 Conscientia neque bona, neque quieta.

4 Conscientia quieta, non bona, etc.


unless such a peace as wicked men enjoy, which is the peace of the devil,
not the peace of God; the strong man keeps the house, and all is at peace, but
it is the peace of the devil; not the peace of God.

Use. Let it teach us then as ever we desire peace, peace in conscience, peace
in the Church, etc. to get Christ into the ship, and he will allay all storms.
Assure your selves these storms will never be laid, till Christ be admitted
into the ship, till Christ reign; till Christ in his truth, worship, grace,
do reign among us. Fluctibus agitantur conscientiarum, and ventis contrariis
tentationum vexari necesse est, qui Christum innavi secum non vehant. Pareus.


A second thing which is observable.

Doct. That the absence of Christ from the soul in trouble, makes sufferings
unsufferable, and troubles intolerable.

As the presence of Christ in his grace, in his comforts, does enable the soul
to undergo the greatest calamities, Malim present Christ esse in inferno,
quam absente Christo in caelo. Luther. in Genesis cap. 30.
even to smile upon the face of dangers, and check the terrors of death: Beati
foli sunt cum illo, qui beati esse non possunt nisi in illo. Sern.
It gives enlargement to the soul in straits, comfort in trouble, liberty in
prison, ease in bonds, life in death. You see in Daniel, the three Children.
Paul and Silas, Stephen. So the absence of Christ will be intolerable in any
sad-condition. Oh what a misery is it for a poor soul to be in sickness,
danger, death, and for Christ to be absent from the soul!

Use. Let us then in all our sad conditions get Christ present with us; get him
but present with you in his grace, and he will never be absent from you in his
comforts in the time of need. Who is able to comfort us in the midst of all
discomforts; Quid si sine domo, and non sine domino, sinc vest, si non sine
fide, sine cibo, and non sine Christo. Fulgent.
Christ is more able to give comforts without creatures, nay, in the opposition
of all created comforts, then the Sun to give light without Stars. Can the Sun
give light without Stars? and cannot Christ give us comfort without creatures,
nay in opposition of all created comforts.

Again, Christ was absent; yea, but Christ was with them in Spirit, though he
was absent from them according to the flesh: had they had faith enough, they
had seen Christ present, even in his absence.

Doct. When Christ is absent to the eye of sense, yet a believer may conclude
him present, and see him by the eye of faith.

He has promised never to leave us nor forsake us, (...)
13 Heb. 5. There are five negatives to make it firm to us; I will not, I will
not leave thee, neither not, not, forsake thee; or, neither will I by any
means forsake thee. He has said, when we pass through the waters, he will be
with us, that the floods shall not drown us; when we pass through the fire he
will be with us, that the fire shall not burn us.

He will be with us, 1 To counsel us in our straits; 2 To support us in our
sorrows; 3 To comfort us under crosses; 4 To sanctify all our troubles to us;
5 And at the last to deliver us out of all. Vidimus Chrisium in promisso lumine
spirituali, quando non in presentia lumine sensibili.
and thus we may conclude him by faith, when we are not able to discern him by
sense.

If the Sun were here below, we should be deprived of the benefit of it; every
mountain, every hill, every house, would deprive us of the light and comfort
of it. But being now above all these, we enjoy the comfort of it.

While Christ was here in the flesh, he was as the Sun here below, every thing
did hinder us of his presence and comfort, if he were present in one place, he
was absent from another; but now being in heaven, he can display the rays and
beams of his gracious presence into all places.

Use. Christians learn to see Christ by the eye of faith, when you cannot
behold him with the eye of sense; labor to see him in a promise, when you
cannot behold him in his presence; when the eye of sense is put out, go to a
promise and behold him there.

Thou art in temptations, in desertions, and thou can not see Christ by the
eye of sense, but thou may conclude him present by faith, present I say in
his grace, though thou want the presence of his comforts.

The cloud may hinder the light of the Sun from our eyes, but it cannot take
the Sun from the sky, it is there though it do not appear. Christ may
seemingly be gone, when yet he is really there; and it must be your wisdom to
live by faith, when you cannot live by sense, to see him with you by his grace,
when you cannot behold him in his comforts.

But we will pass this. -- There is one thing more that I would present to you
from the whole trial, which you see is heightened by several gradations; they
were in the midst of the sea, and in the dark of the night, nay and tossed
with waves, the wind was contrary, and Christ himself was absent: here is
wave upon wave, trouble upon trouble. It tells us thus much.

Doct. That God does not only suffer his people to be brought into straights,
but he does heighten their straights, and raise up their difficulties higher
and higher, before he do deliver them.

It is plain here, and also in the stories of Isreal's troubles in Egypt: their
troubles were great before, Quo proprior est salui, eo magis pericula crescere
sinaet. Chem.
but they were heightened before God delivered them. Insomuch, as they looked
upon the beginnings of their deliverance as bad as the worst of their
sufferings; and were rather content to be in their former slavery, then to
endure the pains of a deliverance. But yet though they were higher, they were
not at the height, till they came to the Red Sea, when a sea before them not to
be passed, an enraged enemy behind them, not to be resisted and mountains on
each side them that they could not tell what to do, whither to betake
themselves, which was the rise of their deliverance. Quando ad (...) perventum
est, tum Christus salvator adest. Chem.
God uses to take a rise of deliverance from the lowest step of his peoples
sufferings.

Read but the stories of David, of the Jews in re-building the Temple, and you
shall see the truth of this; that God does heighten the troubles of his people
before he do deliver them. And this God does,

Reas. 1. To heighten our graces: your faith, not your fear, your hope, not
your discouragements. In veris Christianis crescit amor fidei, quantum ipsa
pericula crescunt. Chem.
As difficulties do arise, so should the faith of Gods people rise too. As it
was with Noah's ark, the waters rose higher and higher, and still as the waters
arose, the Ark arose; the waters never arose above the Arc. Non cogitan lum
quantum sit periculum in quo agimque aut quid vire^s nostrae possint sed quid
is cui fidemus potest. Cartw.
So should it be with a Christians faith, as troubles arise, so our trust
should arise, no difficulties should arise above our faith: if God have weakened
the arm of flesh, we should strengthen the arm of faith; if he have shortened
us in the relief of creatures, we should strengthen our selves in our relyance
and rest upon God.

It is our sin, we are too high in successes, and too low in losses; we are too
big when things go well, and too little when things go ill; and it must needs
be so; men that are proud in successes, will be as base in losses.

This is the nature of faith; it makes us nothing in our selves when things go
well, and it makes us all in God when things go ill. Nothing should pose our
faith, but what poseth God; if there be any thing too great for God to do,
then there might be something too big for us to believe: but so long as there
is nothing above his power and love to do for his people, why should there be
any thing above our faith, to believe God will do for them? It is better to
dye over-hoping, then over-fearing; though we had no encouragements from below,
yet we have enough from above.

We have encouragements, 1 From Gods name, (...) nomen magnum, gloriosum
appropriatum, existentiam o^nibus promissis suis adhibens (...) ex (...) fortis
and pronom (...) qui, and (...) sufficiens hinc (...) Deus omnipotens,
sufficiens ad omnia praestanda, in se, and a se, sufficientiam, and abundantiam
omni modum habens, Sufficiens absque alicujus open, Ad opem conferendum, ad suos
protegendum* ad promissa servanda and explendos defectus omuium.
every name of GOD speaks encouragement. 2 We have encouragements from Gods
Attributes, his Power, Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, etc. Every thing in God speaks
encouragement to faith, because every thing in God is for the good of his
people. 3 We have encouragements from his covenant, his promises to us: where
can you look and not find something to speak encouragement to you. 4 You have
encouragement from the experience of Gods dealings with others of his people,
nay from the experience of his dealing toward our selves. Enough, enough, to
hold up our hearts. Though there be weakness below, yet there is strength
above, though a famine on Earth, yet there is no dearth in Heaven, as the
Nobleman thought. Infinite power and infinite love cannot be posed. It is a
kind of limiting Gods power, and taking away the Almighty, not to rest upon
God in the greatest of difficulties.

He is not only the God of the Valleys, but of the Hills also. He is not only
able to help in the lesser, but in the greatest difficulties. You can never
swell a difficulty above the power of God; you can never be so low, Deuteronomy. 33.2^
but everlasting arms are able to relieve you.

You read in Zach. 8.6. God had promised them deliverance, but it was almost
above their faith to believe it; they thought it almost impossible, that ever
those dead bones should live. But says God, Because this is mavelous in your
eyes, is it mavelous to me, oh house of Israel: things wonderful to you, are
familiar to me; things mavelous to you, are yet easy to me: My thoughts are
not as your thoughts.

God would not that any difficulty should rise above our faith; this were to
raise a difficulty above God himself: he would have our faith rise as the
trouble rises. And therefore he does heighten our troubles, that he might
highten our faith; which indeed if it once work and bottom on God, there is
no difficulty can rise above it, etc.

Reas. 2. God does heighten our difficulties before he does deliver us, to
heighten our duties; he heightens our troubles to heighten our prayers.

Quo profundiores angustiae, eo profundiora suspiria. Mol. in 130. Psalm.
The greater our straights, the greater should be our inlargements; the greater
our difficulties, the more earnest and fervent should be our prayers.

Difficulties do mightily quicken the soul to duties; God says so, Hosea
5.1. In the time of their affliction, then they will seek me early, me
diligently. Then will the soul wrestle with God, by the strength of faith, of
Christ, of promises, etc. Jacobs prayer in his great straight, is called a
wrestling with God.

See the stories of David, of Hezekiah, of the Church in Hesters time,
Jehosophat, etc. they were in great straits, and their prayers were wrestling
prayers.

Difficulties are to grace as the bellows to the fire, to intend it, and make
it burn more vehemently; then will the foul pray more fervently, with more
extension and intention of spirit; and will join tears with prayers,
humiliation with supplication, as you see in Hesters time, Nehemiah, Ezra. And
now does the soul gather up arguments from God, from his pr^nises, attributes,
from the miseries of the Church, etc. and the strength, insolency, and pride of
the enemy to wrestle with God, etc. Therefore does God heighten our
difficulties, that he might heighten out duties.

Reas. 3. God does heighten our difficulties, that he might heighten our
deliverances. So much as comes into a trouble to heighten that, so much shall
again come into a deliverance to increase that. Aqua ^in quantum descendit, in
tantum ascendit.
The water arises as high as it does fall low: we say, The lower the ebb, the
higher is the tide. God will make the rises of his people proportionable to
their castings down. The lower the foundation, the more high and eminent will
be the structure; a shallow foundation will serve the turn for an ordinary
structure; but he that goes about to raise an eminent structure, lays his
foundation low. The same proportion God observes in difficulties before, the
same will he observe in deliverances afterward. The darker the morning, the
cleerer will be the day; the sadder the Week, the more joyful the Sabbath.
When the Children of Israel came out of Egypt, you see how their difficulties
were enlarged; but if you read the story, you shall find, what ever came in for
an addition to their trouble, came in also as an addition to their deliverance.
The power, greatness, rage and malice of the Adversary in pursuing them unto
the Red Sea, was a great heightning of their difficulty, and you see it was a
great enlargement of their deliverance, by this means they were rid of all
their enemies at once. If their straits had not bin so great, their
inlargements had not been so glorious. God delights to make the inlargements of
his people as visible as their straits have bin. The like you have in the story
of the five Kings, Josh. 9.1.2. Josh. 10.3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
whose hearts God hardened, says the Text, to come out against Joshuah: it must
needs be a great heightning of their difficulty, when five potent Kings of
Canaan united all their power and forces together against them; but you know,
it was as great a heightning of their deliverance, for by that means they had
all their enemies slain at once, struck off at one blow. (...) 4.11.12, ^^.


You may read the like in Micha 6.12, 13. And now many Nations are gathered
together against thee, O Sion, that say, Let her be defiled, let our eye see
her glory, but they know not the thoughts of the Lord, for he shall gather them
together as sheaves unto the floor: Arise and thrash oh Daughter of Sion, etc.
Where you see Nations, and many Nations, and all these gathered together
against one Sion. Here was a difficulty heightened: but you see, though their
thoughts were the ruin of Sion, Gods thoughts were the ruin of themselves.
And God enlarged the difficulty, for the enlargement of their deliverance.

Reas. 4. God does heighten the difficulty of his psople, to heighten his own
glory, the glory of his wisdom, power, mercy, faithfulness.

As Christ answered concerning the blind man in John 9.9. When they asked,
whether it was for his sins or his parents, that he was borne blind, Christ
answers, For neither, but that the works of God might be made manifest in
him, that is, that the power, mercy, and glory of God might be made conspicuous
in the healing of him. And for the same reason does he raise the difficulties
of his Church.

You read an excellent passage to this purpose in the John 11.4, etc. Lazarus
sisters sent to Christ, to tell him, that their brother was sick, and entreat
him to come down and heal him: Christ answers, This sickness is not unto
death, but that the glory of God might be revealed, and manifested. And mark
now the way that Christ takes to advance his glory, Verse 6. When he had
heard, says the Text, that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same
place where he was. One would think this a strange passage; he should rather
have gone presently, and have recovered him. But this was now the way Christ
took to advance his glory; he does not only suffer him to be sick, but to dye
of his sickness, nay, to be buried, and to lie in the grave four days: and
thus lets the difficulty go beyond the power of man, that the power and glory
of God might be more visible and manifest: as he tells us in the 15. and 40.
Verses.

You have the like also in Luke 8. from the 41. to the 49. Verse.

Special cures wins more glory to the Physician, then many ordinary cures: so
special deliverances brings God more glory, -- etc.

God is lost in smaller Deliverances, when yet he is visible and conspicuous in
greater. In such men will be forced to say, none but a God could have done these
things for us.

Thus does God heighten our difficulties, to heighten his own glory.

5. Reas. God does heighten our difficulties before deliverance, that he might
heighten our praises, our thankfulness for a deliverance.

God is very desirous of the praises of his Saints: as he does bathe himself
in their tears, so he does delight himself in their joys: he loves to hear
their praises as well as their prayers.

And therefore does God bring us into straits, and heighten our straights, that
being delivered, we might be more enlarged with thankfulness.

Moses difficulty at the Red Sea, did furnish him with matter of praises, when
he was come to the shore, 15 Exodus Who is a God like to thee? glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, 11 verse.

Nothing does so much swell a mercy, as our necessity of it: God is forced to
make us the more misertble in pressures, that we might be more thankful in
deliverances.

These with many other might be nanamed. To conclude this: Let us not be cast
down, nor discouraged, Quando urgentia mala expulsurus sit, tum graviora
inducat. Chris.
though God do bring us into straits, yea and heighten our difficulties too:
It is the usual way which God goes in the deliverance of his people.

All these are but the buddings and presages of future deliverances. Gravissima
certamina and pericula, sunt certissima nuncia liberationis, sunt veluti
indices vicinae liberationis.


Let but the heightning of our difficulties, heighten our faith, our graces,
our duties, and you shall see they shall be all the heightning, and enlargement
of our deliverance. But we will reserve our selves for the further application
of this till afterward, etc.

We will now come to the next verse, which is the dawnings of the morning of
comfort after a dark and stormy night.

25. And in the fourth Watch of the night, Jesus went unto them, walking on the
Sea.

In the former verse you had the danger and distresses the Disciples were in.
In this we have Christ's addresses to relieve and help them.

And this is set down in four particulars.

1. He takes a veiw of their danger and trouble. 2. He goes out to help them:
He went unto them. 3. We have the manner: Walking on the Sea. 4. The time, and
that is, In the fourth Watch.


We will begin with the first, though not expressed in the Text, yet you shall
find it in the 6 Mark. 48. He saw them on the sea toyling and rowing, he takes
a view of their danger before he went out to deliver them.

Doct. Christ does see and take notice of us in our greatest afflictions.

Christ here saw the Disciples in their great danger: had they known that
Christ saw them, that he took notice of them, it would have comforted their
heart under their great affliction, this we know, though it was hid from their
eyes, that Christ takes notice of us in our great afflictions. 5. Exodus 7. And
the Lord said Penitas perspexi.
I have seen, I have seen: that is I have Deus bonos non negligit cum
negligit.
thoroughly seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and have heard their cry.

David had many afflictions on him, 56. Psalm. 9. Fugas numeras. Illustre
argumentum singuleris curae and provedentiae Dei erga suos. Musc. Singulos
passus exilii sui numerat deus. Mol.
Thou tellest my wanderings, and put my tears into thy bottle. God takes
notice of every step which David trod in the wilderness. 31. Genesis 42. God has
seen my affliction, and the labor of my hands,, said Jacob. 34. Psalm 15. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry,
etc.

Use This may comfort us in all our troubles, that Christ takes notice of them,
and therefore will not suffer them to be too big for our strength, nor Quenquam
ad tempus dominus viderur suos relinquere nequaquam tamen avertir oculos. sed
eorum labores considerat. etiamsi illis non apparet.
too long for our patience; he does not defer, because he knows not our
Troubles, but because he will take the fittest time and season to relieve us.

Use If so? then let us behave our selves Christianly under all Gods
corrections: God sees you, therefore do not you murmr, quarrel, be not
impatient, nor turn aside to unjust ways, to get out of your troubles: God
sees you, and he will come to you in his due time: and that is the next thing.

2. Chrsts addresses to help them.

[Iesus went unto them.]

Doct. That when Christ sees the afflictions of his people upon the shore, he
will not long be off the Sea: when he once takes a view of his peoples
troubles, he stays not long, but goes forth to help them.

You see this in the 3. Exodus 7, 8. I have surely seen the affliction of my
people in Egypt, by reason of their Taske-Masters, for I know their sorrows.
And thereupon it follows: And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand
of the Egiptians. When God once sees, he presently helps. As he is said to come
down to see sin, before he punish it; as of Sodom: and when he comes down
to see, he does assuredly come out to punish. So he is said to come down, to
see the troubles of his people, before he do deliver them; and if once he come
to see, he will assuredly come to help.

Use Let us then bespeak God to look down upon our afflictions: say with the
Church. Look down, O Lord, from heaven, 80 Psalm. 14, 15, 16,
and visit thy vine; it is burnt with fire, it is cut down, etc. --

God has bowels of mercy, if once he look down he will visit: our eye
affects our heart, and moves our hand. Gods heart moves his eye, and when his
eye is once moved to see, his hand and heart will be upward to help.

[Jesus went unto them.]

Why but how did Christ go to them, he had no ship, they were now upon the
Sea. Very simile est peraeramo mento temporis, permeasse donec prope adesset
eis. Brugens. in loc.


Doct. There cannot be want of means, if Christ have a purpose to relieve his
people. I say the want of means can be no obstacle if Christ have a purpose to
deliver: he that can help with means can help without, if it pleases him.
What though men and means be wanting, what though no boats nor ships, yet he
can walk upon the Seas.

Infinite wisdom, and infinite power can never be at a stand.

Use And therefore this speaks encouragement to trust in God in our lowest
conditions: 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
It is all one with thee to help with many or with few, etc. etc. says Asa.
God has made no promise to strength, but he has to weakness, not to policy,
but to simplicity.

You never knew self-confident strength to prosper, nor never read, that
trusting weakness does miscrrry.

God loves to join with weakness, ^ Judge. 2.
when not with strength; with few, when not with many; Gideon. And where God
joins, there will neither be want of power, nor of policy, of number, nor of
skill: he can supply all defects himself. Yet further:

[Jesus went unto them.]

It was not a stormy Sea that should be able to separate between Christ and
his Disciples in trouble: though there was a Sea, and a stormy tempestuous Sea
between Christ and them, yet this shall not part him and his Disciples.

Doct. Nothing shall be able to separate Christ and his people in trouble. 8.
Romans 35. 8. Romans 35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? not persons, not things: Shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness? -- No, all
these shall not be able to separate. You read in the 8 Cant. 7. Many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. It is true hear: Here was
many waters; a Sea which is the gathering togethar of many waters; yet all this
could not quench the love of Christ to his Disciples, nor hinder him from going
to them in their trouble.

He that would go through a Sea of wrath to succor his people, that would
drink up the Sea of Gods wrath, Psalm. 110. ult. He shall drink of the brook
in the way; which is taken for to be meant of his passion, where he drunk up
that Sea of wrath was between God and us. He that would go through a Sea of
wrath to his people, will not suffer any Sea of trouble to separate between him
and his people.

Nothing shall hinder Christ from going to his people in trouble; no Sea, no
sickness, no prison, nor any thing shall separate between him and us.

Use This might be a mighty consolationu to the people of God, you can never be
in such a condition, as that Christ cannot come to you.

If our reliefes lay in men, many things might interrupt and hinder our
succor. In many afflictions, or friends can but stand on the shore, see us,
and pity us at the most, but they cannot come to us, they cannot help us.

A Sea, a storm, a sickness, a prison, may part us and our friends, us and
the best of our friends and succors: but nothing can part us and our God. It
is said when Joseph was in prison God was with him. 39. Genesis 20, 21. He that
was with Joseph in prison, with David in the wilderness, with Jeremiah in the
Dungeon, with Jonah in the belly of the Whale, with Daniel in the Den of Lions,
with the three Children in the fiery furnace, with Paul and Silas in the
stocks; that God will be with his people in their greatest straits and
difficulties; Etiam hic meum eris bone Jesu, Christ tibi patiendum erit mihi.
which made Dionysius say when he was going to the fire, Even here also thou will be with me oh sweet Christ. This is the promise 43. Is. 2. When you pass
through the Waters I will be with you, so that the floods shall not drown you;
and when you pass through f^re I will be with you, that the fire shall not
devour you, etc. And what a comfort is this to the godly.

Many things parts us and friends here. It is said, afflictions parts friends:
they part the affections of friends, where there are any who with Ruth will
hold close to a Sun burnd Naomi: many with Orpah will fall off. Nay and many
things parts the assistance of friends, though not the affections of friends,
5. Jud. 15. For the devisions of Ruben there were great thoughts of heart:
There was a Jordan between Ruben and their brethren, that though they had the
affections of brethren, yet they were not able to afford the assistance of
brethren.

But now nothing can part Christ and the soul in trouble.

Though there be mountains between Christ and us, yet these shall not part.

1. He can melt the mountains, even mountains shall fall down at his
presence; mountains of Iron shall dissolve like mountains of Snow. Isaiah
94.3.

2. Or he can level the mountains, and lay unpassible difficulties into
plains. Zach. 4.7.

3. Or he can skip over the mountains; as he is described when he comes to
redeem his Church from sin, Cant. 2.8. So when he comes to deliver his Church
from trouble, he can skip over the heads of all rising opposition. Nay, though
not only mountains, but a Sea be between Christ and his people, yet this shall
not part them.

1. He can dry up the Sea, as the River Euphrates. 16. Rev. 12. 2. Or he can
devide the sea, as he did the red sea for his people. 3. Or he can walk on the
sea, and make the oppositions of his enemies to be the path to the deliverance
of his people.


Nothing shall part Christ and his Church in trouble; much water cannot quench
love. Yet further.

[Jesus weut unto them.]

It is not said that he went toward them, but he went to them: men may only
go toward us in trouble, but cannot go to us; but Christ, if he go
toward, he goes to them. Christ reliefes are full and perfect. Again it is
said he went to them, when yet he was but going toward them: Indeed he is as
good as there already, as soon as he sets out to go.

Doct. What Christ does purpose to do, it is as good as done already; though
not in effectu operis, in regard of execution it be yet to do, yet respectu
decreti, in respect of his purpose it is as good as done already.

Hence you read in the 8. Romans 30. Whom he has justified he has glorified.
Though glorification be to come in respect of the full possession of it; yet it
is as sure as come already in respect of the stability of the decree.

So those places: Blessed are you when men persecute you, for great is your
reward in the Kingdom of heaven: He does not say, great shall be your reward:
but great is: Here Christ takes a future medium to prove a present
blessedness, 6. Luke 22.32. (...) ye are blessed, for great is your reward in
the Kingdom of heaven: which inference could not be sound; if that future
medium were not certain, in respect of the firmness of the decree, to faith,
which gives to the promises of God a kind of presubsisting, and present being,
though future in accomplishment.

Use. And this is a comfort to us, what ever God purposes to do for us, or to
do against our enemies its as sure as done already.

1. What ever God has purposed to do for us, it is as sure as done: blessed
are they who are persecuted for righteousness sake, for great is their reward
in the Kingdsme of heaven.

He has made many glorious promises to his Church: and though in respect of
execution of them, they are yet to come, yet in respect of the stability of the
purpose, they are as good as performed. Jehosaphat when he had a promise, sets
the singers to praise the Lord in the beauty of holiness, he was as sure of
it, as if already done: It was his work rather to believe than fight, and to
shout a victory rather than to strike a stroke, 2 Chro. 20.21.22. He appointed
Singers to praise the Lord in the beauty of his holiness.

2. What ever God has purposed against the enemies of the Church it is as good
as done already.

He has said that Antichrist shall down: and though all the world should
contribute their power, and put to their shoulders to hold him up, yet they
shall never be able.

Nay, God has said, she is fallen already, 14. Rev. 8. Babylon is fallen, is
fallen: The word is doubled, to show the certainty of her ruin. Let all the
world cry it up, if God cry it down, it shall fall. The Piece has struck dead,
before the noise be heard: So Antichrist is dead struck in the threatening,
although the report of his fall be not yet come unto us.

Again it is said that [Christ went to them:] he does not say delivered them,
rebuked the storm, but Christ went to them.

It is a happy thing when Christ does not only help us, but come to us, Christ
helps many whom yet he comes not to: God out of his royal bounty does many
things for those, whom yet he will not own.

Christ gives bread to many, and maintains many a family, that yet he will not
live in: many that partake of his mercy, that do not partake of himself: many
that he gives other things to, but he does not give himself. Mea non prosuns
sine me nec tua prosunt sine te. Bern.
But happy and blessed are the people who enjoy mercy, and the God of mercy
with it, that partake of deliverrnce, and the comfort of it too, who have not
only the help of Christ, but the presence of Christ; Christ comes to them as
well as delivers them. Better to be in trouble than to be delivered, and
Christ not come to thee: better to have the presence of Christ in trouble, than
deliverance, and want Christ. That man has small comfort in a deliverance, who
enjoyes not Christ with it. It is but a reprievall, not a dischrrge. It is a
deliverance in judgment, rather than mercy.

There are preservasions, that may be called reservations to worser evils.
Such are these.

Thus much for Christ's addresses to help them: we now come to the manner.

3. Of his coming to them.

[Walking on the Sea.]

To let pass the several disputes about this, Hieronimus sentit a quas
solidatas fuisse corpus leve factum contra manichaeos.
whether Christ did consolidate the water, or attenuate his body; whether he
made the water more earthy, and his body more ayry; we will pass these
niceties. Christ here walks on the sea, the Text says, and this as upon
Tanquam insolido pavimento, Amb.
solid ground: (...). Just. Mart. Sine ulla mutatione corporis Christus
ambulavit Super mare
And this he did without any change of his body; By his own Almighty and
divine power, by which he made Peter do the like, without any alteration
either in his body, or the sea. Christ ever in his lowest abasements showed
something of his deity. When he suffered upon the Cross, which was his lowest
abasement, then like the Sun he lets out the greatest luster and brightest
beams of the deity, when setting, even then he rent the rocks, opened the
gravs, sealed up the beams of the Sun, etc. Which were all visible
demonstrations of his deity. You read in the beginning of this Chapter; that
Christ upon the hearing of John Baptists beheading, did withdraw himself and
the Disciples, 13. verse. Now this might have occasioned a temptation, that
Christ being God, should fly from the wrath of man.

And therefore it is observeable, that Christ does here do four great
miracles, to stablish their hearts against such a temptation.

1. He fed five thousand, besides one women and children with 5. loaves and two
fishes. 2. He comes now walking to them on the Sea. 3. He makes Peter to walk
on the Sea also. 4. He rebuked the storms, calmed the Sea, and brought them to
harbor.


By these declaring, that though he went from Herod, yet it was not for fear,
not that he thought he was not able to preserve himself and Disciples; he
that could do all this, might have done the other.

It is Gods great mercy that he has been pleased in his lowest abasements to
give us withal some demonstrances of his deity.

When he hungered, he declared himself to be a man, but when he fed thousands
with a few loaves, he demonstrated himself to be God.

When he fled from Herod, he showed himself to be man, but when he walked on
the sea, he declared himself to be God.

In his life he seemed to be man and not God, he was subject to our
infirmities: but in his miracles, raising the dead, giving eyes to the blind,
healing the sick, casting out Devils, he declared himself to be God as well as
man.

When he hung upon the cross he seemed to be man, but when he rent the veil
of the Temple, darkened the Sun, shook the Earth, rent the Rocks, converted
the Thief, he declared himself God as well as man, etc.

But we will come to the words. Jesus went unto them,

[Walking on the Sea.]

Why, but Christ could as well have helped them on the shore, as to have come
and walked to them on the sea. But then they had nor so clearly known Christ
helped them: either they might have attributed their safety to their own
endeavors in rowing, or they might have thought the storm ceased by accident,
etc. And therefore Christ comes to them before he helps them, that they might
see and acknowledge it was his doing.

Doct. It is the best part of a deliverance to see and acknowledge the
deliverer.

As it is the worst part of an affliction not to see the hand which inflicteth
it: so it is the best part of a mercy to see the author of it. There are too
many, who like Swine do feed under the Tree, and never look up to the Tree;
that drink at the stream, and never regard the Fountain. Many whose bellies
are filled with hid blessings, Psalm. 16. Not because they do not see the
mercies, but because they see not the God of mercy.

Christians desire God in the bestowing of his gifts, that he would not
conceal the giver, that all your mercies might be as clear glasses, and not
as thick clouds which hinder you from beholding God in them. It is the blessing
of mercy to see and taste God in it.

Yet further, and that which is the maine.

[Walking on the Sea.]

It was a strange way that Christ went in the deliverance of his Disciples, to
walk on the sea, never was this heard of before, God has delivered his people
by deviding the sea, but never before by walking on the sea.

Doct. That God will go unheard of untracted ways, strange ways to deliver
his people, rather then his people shall not be delivered.

God is not tied to any way, his paths are in the great waters, and his
footsteps are not known. God walls in the ways of the deliverance of his
Churches, as a man that walks in the snow, who because he would not be tracted;
he often changes his shoe.

Whole Volumes might be writ of the many strange ways that God has gone in
the deliverance of his Church and people. Sometimes he has done it immediately
by himself: as you see in the stories of Herod, Acts 12.23, 24. Julian, who
when he went to war against the Persians, he vowed to his Idol Gods, that he
would give them a sacrifice of all the Christians in the Empire when he turned
back: but he was prevented by death, being smitten with an unknown blow from
Heaven. So God delivered the Church in Maximinus his time:

sometime he has done it mediately:

1. Either by making themselves as instruments to destroy themselves; as you
see in the Assyrians, the Midianites, Judge. 7.22. And thus was Paul delivered,
Acts 23.6, 7.

2. Or by arming second causes, putting strength into weak and contemptible
instruments, for the deliverance of his Church. As Jeremy was drawn out of the
dungeon with old rotten rags, thrown aside and good for nothing, Ier. 38.11. So
the Lord does deliver his Church often by such instruments as the enemies
thereof would before have looked upon with scorn, as despised and contemptible
instruments. You see this in Cyrus, in Deborah.

3 Sometimes arming natural causes, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, Hail,
Wind: the Stars in their course are said to fight against Sisera: the Lord
slew Isreal's enemies with hail, the Moabites with the Sun shining on the
water. And we read in Ecclesiastical History, that the Christians being to
fight against the Barbarians, and being in great distress for water, upon
their prayers, God sent abundance of rain, but incounter'd their enemies with
thunder and fire from heaven; in remembrance of which, the Romans called the
Christian Legion (...) legio fulminatrix.
the thundering Legion. These we may take for a taste of those innumerable
examples that might be alleged, of the strange ways GOD has gone to deliver
his Church. He walks still upon the sea, goes untracted ways in deliverance
of his Church: how ordinary is it with him, to make those things which in
themselves are distructive, to be helpefull to the deliverance of his Church
and people. He that can find a passage on the seas, Mill mali species, mill
saiutis erant.
wants no ways to deliver and help his people.

Use. And therefore let us never distrust in our God, whose arm cannot be
shortened that he cannot save, who can never be brought to a non plus, never
posed in the ways of deliverance. He is not only able to raise deliverance out
of the dust, but out of nothing he can create deliverances; nay, he can not
only out of nothing, but out of contraries, he can make contraries serve his
ends. Even his enemies serviceable to the purposes of his mercy and deliverance.

When God has a purpose to deliver his Church, he can make those things which
are in themselves distructive, to be subserviently furthering the deliverance
of his people; he can walk on the sea, he can make a way to his people in
trouble, and in that a furtherance to a deliverance, which was in its self the
greatest hindrance. As the Physician can order poisonous and distructive
ingredients, to physical and healthful purposes; so can God make those things
for us which are used as engines against us, and make our enemies do his work
with their own hands.

God has ways enough, he cannot be brought to the utmost of his thoughts; and
therefore when you are at an end in your thoughts: Learn to shut your eyes to
things below, and turn your eyes upward to him that is above. Say with
Iehoshaphat. We know not what to do, but our eyes they are upon thee, who has
ever an eye to them, whose eyes are fixed upon him, and will in his own due
time work deliverance for them. And that is the next thing.

The time when Christ came to help them. In the fourth watch.

[And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went.]

Where first we must inquire,

1 What is meant by the fourth watch.

2 Why Christ came no sooner to help them.

3 Why he stayed no longer.

1 What is meant by the fourth watch?

For the better understanding of this, you must know that the (...) Rab. Sol.
Hebrews divided their night, which consisted of twelve hours, into three
watches, each of them containing four hours a piece.

(...) principium vi giliarium.
The first watch you read of in the 2 Lam. 19. and this was called the
beginning of the watches.

The second watch you read of in Judge. 7.19. (...)
And this was called the middle watch, etc.

The third watch you read of in the (...) Vigilia matutina.
14 Exodus 24. And this was called the morning watch, etc.

Afterward, when the Jews came to be under the dominion of the Romans, they
left their own custom, and followed the custom of the Romans, Nox in quatuor
parts dirisa, and vigiliae a latinis, custodiae a Grae. dictae. Bruge. in loc.

1 Conticinium.

2 In tempestu^

3 Gallicinium

4 Ante lucanum.


who divided their night which consisted also of 12 hours into 4 watches,
every one containing three hours a piece. Soliti sunt veteres noctem in quatuor
vigilias partiri, and singulis tres horas attribuere Chem.


And they were called watches, because they used once in three hours to change
their several watches, and put in new men to watch.

So that this fourth watch was the last warch of the night, Quarta vigilia
paululum antequam aurora illuscescit. Chem.
a little before the morning, Ad octo, -- plus minusve, horas in ista
colluctatione, laborarint. Chem.
they had been full eight hours in this tempest, conflicting with their fears
and dangers.

Doct. God does not only exercise his people with troubles, but he does
lengthen and continue their troubles also, before he do deliver them.

And therefore this does preach patience and Christian fortitude to undergo
pressures and calamities, and to wait with patience Gods time of deliverance,
Lament. 3.26. It is good for a man to hope and quietly to wait for the
salvation of God. But this will fall in the other questions.

2 Why Christ came no sooner to help them.

It was for diverse reasons, for the trial and for the exercise of their
graces, as also for the advancement of his own mercy in deliverance. It was the
time which he chose for their deliverance.

Doct. God has a fullness of time to accomplish all his purposes, and to
perform all his promises to his people. God has a fourth watch.

Gods mercy moves him to come in bond, and his wisdom pitcheth upon the day
of payment. God promised Abraham a child, but there was a time appointed for
the performance of it. He promised to deliver Israel out of Egypt, and to bring
them into Canaan, but he had an appointed time for the doing of it: he
promised to set David on the throne, to bring his people out of Babylon, to
send Christ into the world, but he took a fullness of time to accomplish all
this in.

God has a fullness of time to accomplish all his thoughts of mercy to his
people: and therefore does he take time to quicken us to seek, to prepare us
for the mercy, to ripen our enemies for destruction.

Use. And therefore this speaks patient waiting upon God. God has had ever
some great promises on foot, upon purpose to exercise the graces of his people,
their faith, patience, etc.

The great promises which God kept on foot in the Old Testament, was the
promise of Christ, which was promised in Adams time, renewed in Abraham's, and
every age after; and this he kept on foot to exercise their graces, their
faith, their hope, expectation, Heb. 11.13. Luke 2.25.26.

And the great promise he keeps on foot now, is the downfall of Antichrist;
and this to exercise our graces too; our faith to believe it, our hope to
expect, and patience to wait for it. How many Worthies of whom we may say, as
of them in Heb. 11.13. that have dyed in faith, Saw the promise afar off
(...) Osculantes, salutantes complexi fuissent: verbi promissi existentiam
notat.
and embraced it: that did something in their days to prepare for her ruin,
and left the rest to us to accomplish and hasten. It is our work then to do
our duty and wait upon God for the issue.

1 Wait upon God in deferres, though it tarry, wait for it, Hab. 2.3. Though
God do seem to defer Non est judicandum de operibus dei ante quintum actum.
the accomplishment of his promise, yet wait upon God for the performance of it.

2 Wait upon God in seeming denials; when all things seem to walk contrary to
the performance of the promise, yet hold up your hearts to believe and wait the
performance of it.

But 3 especially hang upon God when he seems to come in and speak the
performance of promises: slacknesse in duty, does ill befit either the incomes
or expectations of mercy.

But so wayt as to do your duty. There are some promises which God does bring
about by his own immediate hand. Some which he will accomplish by means. In
the former, our waiting does extend no further than to supplication, and
expectation, as you see the promise of Christ, to the performance of which, we
could do nothing, it was to be wrought by God only; and there all our work
was to pray and wait, as they did, 2 Luke 25.36. Where you shall read of Simeon
and Anna, and others who continued in the Temple night and day praying to God,
and waiting for the consolation of Israel, that was all they could do, pray
and wait. But now in the latter, viz. such promises as God will effect by
means, here we must not only pray, and wayt, but use our utmost endeavors to
bring about the thing promised.

The great promise which God has made to us of the downfall of Antichrist, it
is a promise that shall be effected by means, 2. These. 2.8. and the 17. Rev.
16. It is said, The Kings of the earth shall join together, and hate the whore,
and make her desolate, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, etc. Here
means is to be used.

And if but three things were done thoroughly, it would greatly speed his ruin.

First, Clear preaching, Secondly, Spiritual walking, Thirdly, joint praying.

1. Clear preaching: He was borne in the dark, in the darkest times. and he
lives in the dark, the darkest places. He is a Brat begotten between the
devil and ignorance, the devil the father, and ignorance the mother, and
Idolatry and superstition his eldest daughters. Now clear preaching would
discover this man of sin, the light of truth would discover the darkness of
error. This is one way set down, 2 These. 2.8. The Lord shall consume him with
the spirit of his mouth, and destroy him by the brightness of his coming.

2. Spiritual and holy walking. All his religion lies in fleshy and carnal
devotion, he is said to be the beast that comes out of the earth, 13. Revel.
21. Indeed the Romish Religion is out of the earth, it is an earthy worship,
has earthly grounds, earthly aims, earthly ends. All the considerations that
feed Popery are out of the earth, from such things as please the senses, and
the outward man, etc.

Now if we were more spiritual in our worship, more holy in our lives, we
should blast al his painted pomp, it could not stand up under it: for it is not
the strength of his cause, but the coldness and luke-warmnesse of our hearts
which holds him up.

3. Joint praying. When God delivered his people from Babylon, he stirred up
their hearts mightily to seek him. So when he delivers his people from
mystical Bahilon. Non tam ferro quam fide and votis. Aug.


I never read that ever God bestowed any extraordinary mercy and deliverance
upon his people, but before he bestowed it, he mightily stirred up the hearts
of his People to seek him. And I never read that ever God did mightily stir
up the hearts of his people to seek him, but some great mercy and deliverance
was coming: prayer uses to be the harbinger of mercy. He does not say to the
seed of Jacob, seek my face in vain. When trouble sends us to prayer,
deliverance shall send us to praises: 45. Is. 29.
God will make his people as thankful, as prayerful, as thankful enjoyers, as
earnest seekers.

And so much for the second, why Christ came no sooner: we come now to the
third, why he stays no longer.

And that may be because he would not overthrow the graces of his people; God
loves to evercise grace, Deus per adversitates suos tentat, sed non
derelinquit. Cart.
but he will not destroy grace.

The Musician he will wind up his strings to the height, it makes then the
sweetest music, but he will not overwind them, lest he break them: So God
loves to exercise the graces of his people, to wind them up to the height, Ubi
plus periculi, ibi plus auxilii. Chem. Christus procujusque modulo tentationem
nuget. Musc.
but he will have a care of destroying their graces. As God has a fullness of
time to accomplish all the purposes of his mercy.

D. So Quamvis nusquam se dominus ostendit, tamen curam illorum habet, in
tempore oportuno salvabit. Jans. in loc.
when that fullness of time is come, he will make good what ever he has
purposed. You see this in Abraham, in the Children of Isreal's bondage in Egypt,
he had a fullness of time; but when that fullness of time was come, then God
delivered them. You read Exo. 12.42. It came to pass at the end of the 430
years, eveu the self same day, God brought Israel out of Egypt: the like of
Isreal's deliverance from Babylon, God took a fullness of time, 70 years were
determined to finish transgressions: But when that fullness of time was
accomplished, God delivered them. Derelinquit Deus fuos aliquando ad tempus,
sed non usque valde, non omnino, opportuno tempore fert opem. Greg.


The like of the promise of Christ, God took a fullness of time, and it was a
long time between the first promise of Christ, and his coming into the world,
but when fullness of time was come, then God sent his son made of a woman. 4.
Gal. 4.

Celeritatem non nostro judicio definiendam, sed Dei, qui novit non tantum
oneris gravitatem, sed quam diu id feramus, Cartwr.
We are in trouble, and we wonder that God does not help and deliver us, why
but we must wait till the fullness of time, stay till the fourth watch.

The time between the promise and the performance of the promise, is cut out
for our waiting upon God.

It is our fault, we are too short-breathed, we cannot wait: if deliverance
come not in our time, we are ready to give up and faint.

It was the fault of Moses and Aaron, 5. Evod. 22, 23. they were impatient,
they could not wait.

It was David's fault too, when he saw Gods outward proceedings of providence to
seem to walk so opposite to the performance of his promise, he breaks out
into impatience, All men are liars. -- I shall one day perish by the hand of
Saul.

And this does arise from a secret root of pride and unbelief: either pride,
that we will not submit to Gods wisdom, Gods will, Gods time, Gods means,
but will propound God away, and limit God to time and means: or else it arises
from unbelief: as you see it plain in the case of David, his failing in waiting
for the performance of the promise, did arise from a secret distrust of the
truth of the promise, first he said, All men are liars, and then he says, I
shall one day perish by the hand of Saul.

And yet it may arise from ignorance too: we are unacquainted with the ways
that God takes for the performance of his Promises. God may walk with his
promises, when to sense he seems to walk against them: as you see in Joseph,
God seemed in all to walk against his Promise; but if you do examine the
story, you shall find in ail this, God walked with his Promise, and Joseph's
Prison was the way for Joseph's advancement, the like of David, etc. And the
Promise is oftentimes nearest to fulfilling, when to sense and reason it seems
furthest off. Look but on she story of Scripture, and you shall see this
truth, that when man has had least hopes, and probabilities that the Promise
should be fulfilled, than has been the time which God has taken to
accomplish his Promise.

You see in Abraham, there was never more improbobility that the Promise should
be fulfilled, than at that time when it was fulfilled, 4. Romans 18, 19.
Sarah's womb was dead, and Ahraham was old, his body dead too: they had
outlived the strength and hopes of nature, if he had but looked upon himself
who was now dead, and upon Sarah, whose womb was dead also, every thought would
have given a lie to the Promise, he could not but see an utter impossibility in
the course of nature, that ever this Promise should be effected, if he had
consulted with flesh and blood. And yet you see that then when the Promise
seemed most unlikely to be fulfilled, was the time God choose for the
fulfilling of it. The like of David, of Israel, Daniel, etc.

I will give you one instance more, 14. Zac. 6, 7. At evening time it shall be
light: they expected it in the day, that was the most likely, the evening was
most improbable, then is nothing but darkness to be expected, but at evening it
shall be light, the most improbable time.

But the maine thing that this speaks to us is this: you see here the
Disciples had been in great danger, and they had been long conflicting with
these dangers, and were now ready to commit themselves to the mercy of the Sea,
much longer it was not possible for them to hold out. As Job says, 6. Job 12.
Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh of Brass. Certainly they
could not much longer endure, they were now ready to give up. And when it was
come to the Ad extremum (...).
last pinch, even to the utmost, Christ he comes in. Tritum hoc, tum Dei
auxilium incipit, quando humanum definit.
Whence this old truth,

Doctr. Man's extremity, is Gods opportunity.

Neque presentior est usquam Christus, quam cum omni huma, na spe sumus
destituti. Zuin. in 6 John
It is the observation of Zuinglius upon this place: God is never more present,
than when all humane help seems to be absent. Thou art a present help in
trouble, says the Psalmist.

Quando adversitas summa fuerit, tunc sciamus salutam adesse proximam. quando
ad (...) per ventum est, tum Ceristus salvator adest Chem. 3 Exo. 7, 8.
When trouble is at the highest, then is salvation the nearest. The depths of
man's misery, calls in for the depths of Gods mercy: when the burdens of Israel
were increased, when they cried under their anguish, then did God send moses to
deliver them. I have seen the afflictions of my people, and have heard their
cry by reason of their taskmasters, for I know their sorrows: as if he had
said, I know they will not cry for nothing; I have heard, and I know, and then
it follows, I am come down to deliver them out of their hands. It is that
which was promised in Deuteronomy. 32.35, 66. To me belongs vengeance and
recompense, the foot of your enemy shall slide in due time. For the day of
their calamity is at hand, etc. For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent
himself for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and there is
none shut up and left.

It is observed in all Ecclesiastical Histories, then was deliverance the
nearest, Quo citius finienda sunt mala eo ma. gis in gravescunt. Ba^.
when the persecution of the enemy was the hottest: the Scribes and Pharisees
blasphemed most, when nearest their ruin: the Devil rages most when his time
is shortest: this is that Saint John says, Rev. 12.12. Woe to the inhabitants
of the earth, for the Devil is come down with great wrath, Populus dei tunc
maxim affligitur, cum propinqua est salus. Auget certamina quando liberabit.
Chris.
because his time is but short. The greatest darkness is said to be before the
morning watch, and the greatest troubles before deliverance.

The ancient Tragaedians, when things were brought to that pass, that there
could be no possibility of humane help imagined they used to bring down some
of their gods out of the clouds: (...). Eras. Adag.
thence was a phrase they had like to that the Jews also used when they were
brought into great straits beyond all hope of humane help. In the Mount of the
Lord it shall be seen: which is the same with our English. Man's exrremity, is
Gods opportunity: when the enemies are at the height of their rage and cruelty,
when the people of God are brought to the lowest, when the arm of flesh is
withered up; when the stream of second causes does not run, when the
channel of creature reliefes is dry, Ne dubitemus nos servari, etiamsi
Christus ab est aut tardius venire nobis videatur. Nam in^rescente formidine
and periculo, aderit dominus repent. Zuing.
then is the time for God to arise and have mercy upon Sion. But here may be
demanded two things.

1 Why God suffers us to be brought into extremities before he help us.

2 Why God does help us in extremities.

I will be brief on them, being things frequently pressed, you are able to
enlarge them in your own thoughts.

1 God suffers us to be brought into extremities before he help us, that his
mercy might be more conspicuous.

If Christ had helped the Disciples before they had used all means to help
themselves, they might perhaps have thought that their own industry would have
helped; they could by their own wisdom and strength have relieved themselves.
And therefore Christ stays Deus quos in aeternum diligit, aliquando ad tempus
relinquit. Greg. in cap. 30. Job.
till they were brought to extremities, lets them go to the utmost of their
own endeavors, that the help of God might be more visible to them, John 2.3,
4. Christ's hour of help, is, when our glass is out.

2 God suffers it, as to make his mercy conspicuous, so to make his mercy great
in their eyes. The great design that God does drive, is the advancement of his
own glory; and therefore he suffers us to be brought into troubles, and to
extremities in those troubles, that his glory, the glory of his mercy, of his
truth, wisdom, might be advanced by men.

3 To quicken us to prayer, necessities do mightily stir up to duties, and
makes the soul earnest in it. You see the Church in Hesters time, etc. Hos.
5.50.

4 To enlarge his peoples hearts with Quia ex Dei beneficiis non satis
agnoscimus. illius bonitatem, ideo deus salutis causa immittere adversa soler.
thankfulness; things easily got, are as soon forgot, where a mercy in
necessity will be set up as a living remembrance of praises, etc.

These, with many others might be named, why God does suffer his people to be
brought to extremities before he help.

2 Why God does help us in extremities.

Reas. 1. Because God is engaged to relieve us in straits.

There are four merciful engagements of God, which moves him to relieve us in
our straits.

1 because we are his people he is our God, we are his Spouse, he our husband;
we are his children, he our father; we are his members, he our head: what will
not a loving father do for his child, etc. We are his by choice, his by
purchase, his by covenant; and there is nothing he does in the world with more
delight, then those things he does for his people. Indeed there is nothing to
engage him to make us his people before he did make us his people, as Moses
says, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. He loved us, because he loved us, etc. but there is
something to engage him to do for us now he has made us his people, because
we are his people. This is excellently set down in the 2 Samuel 12.21. The
Lord will not cast off his people for his great names sake: and why? what is
the engagement? nothing but this; Seeing it has pleased the Lord to make you
his people.

2 Because he has made many precious promises to us. Promises of preservation:
take that in Isay 33.16. A place speaks fully, He shall dwell on high; out of
the reach of all his enemies, nay higher many heights: but is it not possible
to reach him? if you did, yet not hurt him, he is in a place of defense, but
that is not so strong but we may come to him? yea, his place of defense is the
munition of Rocks: yea, but we shall starve him out; there is no plowing and
sowing on rocks, but bread shall be given him. Yea, but what shall he do for
water? there is no getting of water out of the rock; but he shall have waters
too: but though he have they will fail: no, his waters shall be sure, never
failing waters. And look down in the twenty one Verse, there another; and Isay
43.3, 4. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee: the Church
of God was in bondage and captivity in Egypt, and he gave Egypt for her
ransom: how? That is, because they could not be delivered without the loss of
Egypt; God would rather part with the whole land of Egypt, then his people
should not be ransomed, he would sink the whole land of Egypt if it stood
between his people and deliverance. So in the fourth Verse, I will give men for
thee, and people for thy life. I will not stick to give the lives of thousands
to uphold thine, multitudes shall be destroyed, rather then that thou should
not be preserved.

3 A third engagement is, because his people trust in him.

Trust is a kind of engagement upon a man although he had made never a
promise. But what is it when it is upon a promise. No man will deceive another
that trusts on him; we use to say, I cannot fail him, he trusts upon me: and
do you think God will. Assure your selves there was never any who trusted upon
God, who devolved his soul on him, but he found God to be that to him that he
expected: faith ingageth all the power, wisdom, mercy of God, to releeve you;
and if all these can help, you shall not want succor in your extremities.

4 A fourth engagement, because his people seek him. He does not say to the
seed of Jacob, Seek my face in vain, Isay 45.19. Faith and prayer will remove
Mountains: nothing shall be too hard for that people to do; whose hearts and
spirits he holds up to believe and pray. There is a kind of omnipotency in
faith and prayer, because these two set the great God, yea, the greatness of
the power of the great God to work for us. Luther used to pray, Let our will be
done, Fiat voluntas nostra. I have read of a story of him, that having been in
his study earnest with God about the business of the Church, and having
received a gracious answer, he comes down and cries, Vicimus, Vicimus, We have
overcome, the day is ours: and so it fell out, says the story, the Church
prevailed.

Reas. 2. God does help his people in extremities, that both we our selves,
and the generations to come might be encouraged to trust in him.

1. We our selves. We read this, the fruit of Gods helping Israel in extremity
at the red sea, Exodus 14.31. They saw the great work God had done, and they
believed God. David thus reasons, The God who delivered me from the Lion and
Bear, etc. will. Psalm. 63.7. Because thou have been my helper, therefore under
the shadow of thy wings I will roioyce. I have had experience of thy goodness,
therefore will I depend on thee: where experience is the promise, assurance may
be the conclusion. David was a man of many choice experiences of Gods
goodness, and he was choice of them, he laid them up, and made use of them at
every need. It is a passage not to be neglected, when he was forced to fly
from Saul; coming to Abimelech the Priest, he desired him to lend him a weapon
for his defense, he told him he had none, save only the sword of Goliath, whom
he had slain; There is none to that, says David, give it me. 1 Samuel, 21.9.
This was a Trophie of Gods former goodness; it was both an experience and a
weapon; in carrying this, he took an experience with him, which might comfort
him in straits. So 1 Cor. 1.10. etc.

2. That the generations to come might be encouraged to trust in him, Psalm.
22.5. Isa. 51.9. Psalm. 9.10. Thou have not forsaken nor thou will not forsake
them that trust in thee.

Reas. 3. God will help his people in extremity for the disappointment and
torture of wicked men.

When Haman had prevailed so far as to get a bloody decree against the Church
of God, no doubt he joyed exceedingly, as one that promised to himself the
utter ruin of them: and he brought it up very high: there was man's extremity.
But you see how God crosses it; and who is able to express the vexation and
torture of Haman for his disappointment: He goes home, and vexes himself, he
could not eat, nor drink, nor sleep, for very vexation that his design did
not take. The like of Achitophel, he hangs himself for very pride and
madness. God has ways enough to make wicked men to gnash their teeth before
they come to hell: and this is one way to bring his people into straits, and
put the wicked in a kind of hope of having their will on the godly: and then
relieving his people and disappointing them, no man knows what vexation and
torture this is to their spirits.

These, with many other reasons might be named, as because now deliverance will
be most welcome, his people most thankful, help most glorious.

Use. But to conclude this. Let us not be cast down and too much troubled,
though God do bring us into extremities before he help us, you see it is Gods
time of help. When the extremities of a people are above the reliefes of
creatures, it is not only our time to seek, but it is Gods time to help us:
You see it, Psalm. 108.12. Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of
man.

There are five special times when God will help his people.

1 When we know not what to do; when we are brought to the utmost of our
thoughts and know not what to do: Such a strait was Israel in at the red Sea;
they knew not what to do; the sea before them, the Egyptians behind them. But
this was the time of Gods help. Deuteronomy. 32.35. It is there said concerning the
enemies of Gods people, Their feet shall slide in due time: but when is that?
he shows in the 36 Verse, when he sees that his peoples power is gone, etc.
when they know not what to do. Such a strait was Iehosaphat in 2 Chronicl.
20.12. We have no might against this great multitude that comes against us,
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. This was Gods time of
help.

Gods time of help is usually when man's time of help is gone. 31. Jerem. 36,
37. There is hope in thy end, when there was in a manner an end of all hope,
when they had spent up all their stock of hopes, then does God say, there is
hope in thine end. You read in the 33. Isai. 7, 8, 9. verses, of a strange
introduction to mercy and deliverance. Behold their valiant ones shall cry
without, the Ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly, the high ways lie
waste, and the wayfering man cease, -- the earth mourns and languisheth,
Lebanon is ashamed, and hewn down, Sharon is like a wilderness. -- Here is a
sad Preface: what can be expected to follow, but as sad a story, Sic consuevit
dominus vehementiones labores immittere, veluti indices vicinae liberationis.
Et gravirsima certamiua sunt certissime nuncia liberationis.
But God makes the pressures of his People to be Prefaces to his mercy: and
therefore it follows, verse 10. Now will I rise, says the Lord, now will I be
exalted; now will I lift up my self. Indeed now God should get most glory, and
for that end he stayed till now. As you see the like 30. Isa. 17.18.

2. When we know not what God will do, when God seems to forget his People,
and in his outward Providence to walk contrary to his own promises. When we
are brought to a stand, and know not what to think, then is there a time for
God to step forth.

David when he was brought to that stand by present providence to him, that
he begins to question, the truth of Gods promises: All men are liars. He was
now wound up to the height, it was time for God to come, lest all break
assunder.

A third time when God will help: when we are brought to such straits, as

1. We must either sin foully: Or,

2. We must suffer sadly.

In this strait was Daniel and the three Children, either they must sin
foully, or suffer sadly: if they bowed down to the Image they sinned foully;
if not, they were to be cast into the fiery Furnace, and so were to suffer
sadly. And now was the time that God took to deliver them.

4. When the enemies are carried on with most rage, and promise to themselves
most success, against the Church and People of God, then is the time for God
to step into relieve us, when they are on the highest Pinnacle once, then they
are nearest their ruin, 14. Is. 13, 14; 15, 16. When men show themselves
malicious, then will God show himself gracious. You see this in the 15. Exodus
9, 10. when the enemy said in his heart, I will pursue, J will over-take, I
will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my
sword, my hand shall destroy them: then it follows: Thou did blow with thy
wind, the sea covered them, they sunk as lead in the mighty waters.

5. When God does give and hold up a mighty spirit of prayer in his People to
seek him: A cloud of Incense is a presage of a shoure of mercy: 16. chapt.
Levit. 13. ver. You see this in the deliverance of Israel from Babylon: at that
time God stirred up a mighty spirit of Prayer in them, 9. Dan. 23, Praecibus
nostris Deus saepe se id tribuere testatur, quod alioqui sponte and ex
promissione facturus est. Mol. in loc.
And this was Promised in the 102 Psalm 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Argumentum
redemptionis a piorum conjuncte votis. Molerus. Populi restitutionem praecibus,
fidelium adscribit Deus.
Thou shall return, and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, the
set time is come.

But how shall we know that? he tells us in the fourteenth verse, for thy
servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. That is,
they mourn, (t) they pray, Tempus miserandi ejus, etc. hinc. Musc. Tempus
supplicandi, est tempus miserendi, quando corda contrita sunt, tunc tempus
miserendi.
and it is thy time to help and deliver. As you see in the seventeenth ver.
Thou shall regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their cry.

As when the Lord has an intent to destroy a People, he does either expressly
charge them not to pray for them, as he did Jeremiah, 14. Ier. 11. Or he does
secretly dead, and strayten their hearts, that they cannot Pray. So when he
does stir up the hearts of his People to seek him, it is an evident
demonstration that God will do great things for a People.

Prayer is the Harbinger of mercy; When God purposes to give, he stirs up us
to beg: and this begging puts us into a frame for receiving. You read in the
third Chap. of Jeremiah, 19. verse, God had promised to do great things for
his People; but at last says, How shall I put thee among the children, and
give thee a pleasant land? As if he had said, I have purposes of mercy to
thee, I have thoughts of deliverance, etc. But what way shall I take to bring
about this? How shall I do with thee that I may bring about this purpose? Mark
what follows; and I said thou shall call me me Father: As if he had said, I
have now bethought me of a way, I will pour a spirit of Prayer upon thee, thou
shall call me Father, and so I will put thee among my Children, I will give
thee a pleasant Land.

Thus much for the 25. Verse Christ's addresses to help them: the manner, the
time: we shall now come to the 26. Ver. which contains the Disciples
apprehension of him.

The end of the third Sermon.
WE are now come to the 26. Verse. Hitherto our times have been so unhappy as
to suit with this History: and I fear they will carry too great resemblance
with what follows.

We will come now from Christ's addresses to help them, to the Disciples
apprehension of him; they took their Deliverer to be a destroyer.

26. VERSE. And when the Disciples saw him walking on the Sea, they were
troubled, saying it was a Spirit, and they cried out for fear.

In which Verse you have,

1. The Disciples discovery of Christ, They saw him.

2. Their thoughts and apprehensions on hjm, It is a spirit.

3. The effect and fruit of these apprehensions, How they worked.

1. Ad intra, They were troubled.

2. Ad extra, They cried out for fear. Here was Terror, Clamor.


We begin with the first, The Disciples discovery of him:

[And when the Disciples saw him.]

And yet I cannot say, it was the discovery of Christ; it is said they all saw
him, but it is not said they saw Christ, they saw him, but they knew not who it
was: if so, they could not have been troubled: As for Christ they knew they
left him on the shore, and therefore could not conjecture that it was he that
was now upon the Sea.

Doctr. Christ may be coming to save his People, and yet they not able to
discern him.

Sometimes men's eyes are blinded with ignorance, and sometimes bleered with
Passion. Hagar cries for water, and yet the Well was near her; her eyes were
so bleered with present Passion, that she could not see the waters, though they
were at hand.

So the Disciples were so clouded with present passion of fear, and trouble,
that they could not discern a deliverer, from a destroyer.

Here was their mistake: and that is the second thing.

2. The Disciples thoughts and apprehensions of Christ.

It is a spirit. Or, It is a ghost.
Spectrum and terriculamentum aliquod, quale in nocte apparrere solet daemonis
illusione. Jans. (...) Sy r. interp. visio mendax, visio fallax, illusio
diabolica terriculum diabolicum. (...) Visio vel res aliqua perambulans in
tenebris, homines terrens Chem.
It is a ghost; a lying vision, a Diabolical illusion, etc.

We read in the 20. Job 8. (x) Of a vision of the night, something walking in
the night which terrifies men.

So they looked upon Christ as a ghost, Ad navim evertendam veniens. Chem.
which came rather to overwhelme the ship, than to help them on the Sea.

And the Mariners they thought these kind of sights did Hujusmodi visa
presentis naufragii presagia. Chem.
presage their present wrack, Hujusmodi visa, presens exitium portendere
navigantibus. Brugen.
that they did portend immediate ruin and destruction.

Dicuntur (...) Etiam (...) in aere, and ^a quae somniantibus occursant, etc.
Artius in loc.
It is a spirit, or it is a ghost, etc.

Do. That men may sometimes think their deliverers to be their destroyers. I
say they may sometimes look upon those who come to deliver them, as such who
come to destroy them.

Christ comes here to help his People. he comes to deliver them, but they think
him to be a ghost, one that comes to destroy them.

Thus you see the Israelites looked upon Moses, God sent him to be their
deliverer, but when their task of brick was doubled, when their burdens were
increased, Moses then appears to them as a ghost, as a destroyer, rather than
a deliverer. 5 Ex. 19, 20, 21.
Such false apprehensions they had of him. You may read their own expression in
the 5. Exodus 19, 20, 21. And the Officers of the Children of Israel did see
themselves that they were in an evil case, and they met Moses and Aaron, who
stood in the way as they came forth from Pharaoh; and they said unto them, The
Lord look upon you, and judge, because you have made our savor to be abhorred
in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hand to slay us. Here they looked upon their deliverers, as their
destroyers.

How did Non tantum Herodes turbatur quan tum diabolus in Herod.
Herod and all Jerusalem look upon Christus non erat per se cuiquam
formidabilis sed si fuisset agnitus, sum amabilis. Musc.
Christ as a ghost as soon as borne? who yet came so to reign, as not to
unthrone any, but the Prince of Quid metuis talem regem qui sic venit regnare,
ut te nolit excludere. Christi nativitas spectrum formidabile. Musc.
darkness. Ex ea re quae ad summam consolationem instituta erat, summae
excitantur angustiae.
And the Scribes and Pharasees, how did they look upon him as a ghost; if we
let him alone, all men will believe on him: and what then; why then the Romans
will come and take away our place and nation: Christ came to be their
deliverer, but he appears as a ghost, as one that came to Non solum inaniter
metuamns quae nocere non possunt, sed perverse etiam horreamus ea quae ad
salutem faciunt. Musc. in loc.
destroy them. And thus men look upon Christ, and the ways of Christ to this
day: if they admit of Christ in his Kingdom, worship, Discipline, oh then this
will be the issue, or that will be the sad consequence of it, we shall be all
undone; in the seeking of of our spiritual, we shall hazard, we shall lose
our temporal Privileges. And thus men's hearts do act.

A sad thing it is when Christ shall appear as a ghost any way, Christ in his
Person, Christ in his Ordinances, Christ in his Laws; Worship, Government,
Amant. impii veritatem lucentem, oderunt veritatem redarguentem. Aug. confess.
lib. 4. cap. 26.
Truth. And thus he does to wicked men, he is as a ghost to them in his
Ordinances, they cannot away with him, they fly from them, and cannot endure
the faithful dispensation of them: he is a ghost to them in his Laws, and
therefore they cry depart from us, we will have none of his ways. Evangelium
Christimundo semper spectrum fuit, sed inculpa sunt nocturnae tenebrae. Musc.


He is a ghost to them in his worship, they cannot brook with, and endure the
simple single plainness of his government, etc.

There are three times Christ appears as a ghost to his own People.

1. In time of humiliation for sin; when he writes bitter things against us,
and makes us to possess the iniquities of our youth, as Job complains.
Adversarium tuum in sinu gestis, and tamen amicum, Cypr.
Now the soul is filled with the sad apprehension of his displeasure, and
looks upon God as a severe Judge, his bench set, a Jury impannelled, evidence
clear, and his sword drawn, ready to do execution on a sinful soul: It was
the speech of one who was in this condition, his conscience opened, and his
sins set in order before him, and his soul bleeding under the sad
apprehensions of a wrathful displeased God: he said that he never looked up
toward Heaven, but he thought he saw every Cloud lined with thunder, and
ready to do execution on him for sin.

It would be endless to tell you the ghostly apprehensions that poor souls
have had of God, and of all his dealings, even the best of his mercies to them
in this condition. Conscience now arming all the faculties against it self.
Faelix conscientia in qua luctamen hujusmodi, etc. Bern in vig. not. dom. Ser.
This is the day of Jacobs trouble, but God will deliver them out of it.

Therefore does he wound thee, that he might heal thee, kill thee that he
might cure thee; Et si timet a judice, sperat a salvtaore. Bern. 29 Ierem. 11.
Cast thee down, that he might raise thee up; terrify thee, that he might
comfort thee in his due time. It is sweetly expressed by Christ, It is not the
will of your heavenly Father, that one of these little ones should perish.
Ludit suavissime, cum nos putamus omnia esse perditissima Luther in loc.
I know the thoughts I think to thee, they are thoughts of peace, thoughts of
good and not of evil, to give thee at the last an unexpected end, answerable
to thy expectations: nay an end above all thy expectations. Assure thy self
God will make thy comforts proportionable to thy conflicts, thy joys to thy
troubles, thy raising up, to thy casting down: The same proportion that Gods
spirit does observe in the Law in humbling of thee, believe and wayt for the
same proportion, in raising and comforting of thee.

God is skillful at all diseases, he heals all our infirmities. 103. Psalm 3.
But he is most sovereign at the binding up a broken heart. He has fitted
Christ for this work, It is his charge, 67. Esaias, the Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, Isay 61.1.
because the Lord has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the meek, to bind
up the broken hearted.

A second time, when he appears as a Ghost to the Saints, and that is in times
of temptation.

In temptation (says Luther) we look upon God otherwise then in truth he is,
we do not think him to be God, In tentationibus singimus Deum, alium quam
revera est, putamus Deum tunc non esse Deum, sed phantasma, hoc est horribile
spectrum quod nos velit devorare. Luth. in loc.
but a Ghost, one who will destroy us, and slay us.

The Devil does now suggest false notions of God to you, he presents you with
false Ideas, erroneous apprehensions of GOD, suitable to the darkness of the
condition, and the blackness of the temper the soul is now in. None know the
Non promotus sed expertus Doctor est. Luth. (...). 2 Cor. 2.14. (...) Rev.
2.24. profunditates Satanae (...) machinationes. 2. Cor. 3.2.14.
methods, Non promotus sed expertus Doctor est. Luth. (...). 2 Cor. 2.14. (...)
Rev. 2.24. profunditates Satanae (...) machinationes. 2. Cor. 3.2.14.
the depths of Satan, but those who have been in depths, those know the wiles
of this prince of darkness, the methods, machinations, devices of undoing souls.

A third time, when he appears as a Ghost to his own people, and that is in
times of desertion, when God has withdrawn himself, and seems to be an enemy
to the soul, fighting against it with all his terrors, as Job complains. And
Heman at large, 88. Psalm. 7.15.16. Verses. Psalm. 77.3.
Nay thus David looked upon him in the 77. Psalm. where you read him in a
deserted condition, and professing in the 3. Verse, that when he remembered God
he was troubled; A strange Expression! the thought of whom did erst-while fill
his heart with a confluence of comfort, far above all created Comforts, that
now thoughts of God should be a terror, a trouble to him. And why was he now
troubled at the remembrance of God, but because he had false apprehensions,
Deum inspectum transformant and tunc timent. Musc. in loc.
he had erroneous conceits of God now, either Satan does present him falsely to
him, as he does in these conditions; he represents God in a terrible manner to
the soul, or else he looked upon him with a disturbed eye, Satan has
disturbed the eye, he has raised up corruption, and that cannot look upon him,
but be disturbed. As those who have the Jaundisse, all they look upon is yellow.

Or if the Organ whereby we should see God be not disturbed, yet the medium
whereby he is represented, is a false medium, and that presents things like to
it self, as if a man look through a red glass, all he beholds is red.

And therefore it is well said of Luther on this place, Quando in Augustiis
sumus, non est Credendum nostris cogitationibus de Deo. Luth. in loc.
) when we are in troubles, we are not to give credit to our own thoughts and
apprehensions of God, we are not to look upon God as our disturbed imaginations
do represent him, but as he is represented in his Word.

We see Reason does correct sense; if we put a straight stick into the Water,
sense will give it to be crooked, the eye does represent it crooked, but now
reason corrects it, and concluds it straight, and if reason correct sense, why
should not Faith correct Reason?

It will be your wisdom in these conditions, when sense and reason give in
false apprehensions of God, To shut the eyes of sense, and look upon God only
by Faith, not to think on God, as you for the present see him, and apprehend
him, but as he has revealed himself in his Word.

And though you are not able at present to evidence him such a God to you, as
he has manifested himself in his Word, yet by faith conclude him so, when you
cannot clear him so. Thus Job did; so Job. 13. These things have thou hid in
thy heart, Job 10.13.
yet J know that this is with thee, though I cannot see it; yet I do believe
it, though I cannot clear it, yet I do conclude it. And thus the Church, 36.
Esaias, 16. Doubtless thou art our Father; Isa. 63.16.
She will not be reasoned out of her faith, she will hold the conclusion of
faith against all the evidence that sense and reason can bring to the contrary:
This is with Ulysses, to bind our selves fast to the mast, and not suffer our
selves to be charmed away, to the destruction and undoing of our own souls.

And these are the three times that Christ seems to appear as a Ghost to his
own people.

Now there are four times Christ appears as a Ghost to wicked men.

1. When he comes with his Fan in his hand, to purge and reform his Church; men
look upon Reformation as their destruction, And think Christ comes to destroy
them, when he comes to reform them, men may sometimes look upon that as the
greatest evil, which yet is intended for their greatest good. It is the Speech
of Augustine upon this place, That there shall be such troubles shall arise
about the fourth watch, a little beiore the end of all things, that men shall
look upon Religion, shall I say, because of the troubles that it raises, when
it comes to be settled in its Power and Glory, Res Christiana phantasma videtur.
they shall look upon Religion as a Ghost: Not because Religion will hurt them,
but hurt their sins.

How justly may that be applied to us now, which was spoken of Israel, When I
would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Israel did appear. So it is
with us, when the Lord would heal us, and reform us, then does the iniquity
of men, the malice, the pride, the hatred of the purity of Ordinances, then do
all these ^ppeare. What is the ground of all this trouble among us now? why are
so many up in Arms, Vitia nostra quia amamus, defendimus.
but to keep out Christ, in the Power and purity of his Ordinances. Reformation
is now the Ghost, that has frighted them into Arms, men that are afraid, they
run unto their weapons; so they, frighted with the Ghost of Reformation, get up
weapons, put themselves in arms to oppose it. So long as Reformation is looked
upon as an enemy, it shall find enemies enough, though indeed it is an enemy to
nothing but their sins.

A second time when he appears as a Ghost to them Haec in est nobis
perversitas, ut quae vere mala sunt non timeamus, and ea quae nocere ne possunt
formidemus. Musc. in loc.
when he comes to reform their Persons, then they cannot away withal, they
fear holiness, love sin, that which should be object of hatred, is object of
love, and that which should be object of love, is object of fear, they cannot
brook holy ways, they will not subject to the Laws of God, they cannot part
with their sins, take away their sins, and take away their best friends, they
have been wicked, and will be wicked. They thank God, they are no Changlings,
Indeed not to change in a good way is commendable, but to be unchangeable in a
bad way, is damnable. To be unchangably evil, is to be as Devils are, for
ever sinful, and for ever miserable. First clear your way to be good, and then
glory in our unchangeablenesse.

A third time, when Christ appears as a ghost to them, and that is, when they
lie upon the bed of sickness, the bed of death, Oh then Christ is terrible,
when a man shall lie upon his death bed, Vadeo nescio quo, ens entium miserere
mei. Animula vagula biandula quae nunc Abibis in loca. de Adriau. dicitur.
and connot tell what shall become of his soul to all eternity; when a man
shall say, as once a great person did in the same condition. I cannot live, I
dare not dye, he knows not what shall become of him to all eternity, when he
shall behold his friends weeping over him, but cannot help him, his relations
and comforts leaving him, his riches not able to relieve him, his sins
presented and set in order before him, and a displeased and wrathful God ready
to destroy him. Oh here God appears as a Ghost indeed. You made bug-beares,
There shall come in the last days scoffers, (...). Such as shall make childrens
play of all the terrors of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3 3.
childrens play, and scoffed at all the terrors of the Lord before, but now
they appear reallities to you. The precepts of the Law were a ghost to you in
your life, and the terrors of the Law are now a ghost to you at death: the
comforts of the Lord were a ghost to you before, and just it is, the terrors of
the Lord should be a ghost to you now.

4 A fourth time, and that is at the day of judgment, when Heaven and Earth
and all the world is on fire; then shall Christ appear as a Ghost indeed full
of terror to every wicked and ungodly person. We read, that the wicked at that
day, 6 Rev. 16.17.
shall call upon the mountains to fall upon them, to hide them from the face
of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the day
of wrath is come, and who shall be able to bear it? In their thoughts, they
were better able to bear the weight of Rocks, of Mountains on them, then the
sight of Christ: so terrible will Christ appear to ungodly men at that great
day.

Use. Oh then, knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade you; Christians! as
you would not have Christ to appear as a Ghost to you, terrible at the day of
death, terrible at the day of judgment: let him not appear as a Ghost to you
now. Optima securitas (...).
Let him not appear terrible to you in his word, in his worship, in his laws,
in his truth. If Christ be a terror to you now in these ways, assure your
selves he will be a terror to you hereafter. Be willing then to receive Christ
in his truth, in his worship, ways, etc. Bid him welcome in your houses, your
hearts: if Christ be not a terror to you now, if you can brook with strict and
exact walking, if you can brook the power and purity of his ordinances, he will
never be a terror to you hereafter.

This is all I shall say of the second: the Disciples thoughts and
apprehensions of Christ.

We come to the third; and that is the effects of these apprehensions.

Which were two fold. 1 Ad intra. They were troubled. 2 Ad extra. They cried
out for fear.


We begin with the first, The effect of this apprehension in themselves.

[They were troubled.]

But this was far from Christ's end, he came to help them, and not to
terrify them, to relieve them, not to disquiet them; how came it to pass that
they were troubled? Certainly they were not afraid of deliverance, that was
that which they desired; but they were terrified at the manner of Christ's
coming to deliver them.

Doct. Christ may come to help his people in such a way, as yet the very means
of help may be a terror to them. I say, Christ may come in such a way to
deliver his people, as yet the appearance of Christ may be a terror to them. It
is the speech of one upon this, Adest Christus ut eos juvet, and t^men ipsi
horrent venientem.
Christ is coming here to help them, and yet they fear his approach.

Thus it was with the children of Israel in Egypt, Moses came to help them,
and yet they were afraid of his coming, they saw things went worse with them
then before, and therefore they desired him to be gone and let them alone; they
would rather continue in their former bondage, then endure the pains of a
deliverance, Exodus 5.21.

God delivered Paul and Silas out of prison, but it was by an earthquake: a
terrible way. So God does sometimes come to deliver his Church, but yet by
earthquakes, by land-quakes, by great commotions, as is prophesied, Rev. 11.13.
and thought to be now in fulfilling.

This is a terrible way, though a way of deliverance.

We read in Joel 2.21. Fear not O land, be glad and rejoice, for the Lord
will do great things for you. It was a time of joy in respect of the
deliverance God purposed to work for them, but yet a time of fear, in respect
of the manner and way which God might take to deliver them.

You have an excellent Scripture for this, Psalm. 65.5. By terrtble things in
righteousness will thou answer us, oh God of our salvation, who art the
confidence of all the ends of the earth.

The Saints had been praying, and here they had some answer in their spirits,
an assured confidence that God would answer them, yea, and answer them in
righteousness, but yet by terrible things. By terrible things in
righteousness will thou answer us, O God of our salvation.

If you look into the word, you shall find the ways of Gods deliverance of
his Churches, have yet for the most part been terrible ways. Israel was
delivered from their bondage in Egypt, but yet the way was terrible, the
enemies pursued them, and they were to pass through the sea for their
deliverance.

Daniel was delivered out of the hands of his enemies, but the way was
terrible, he must be given into the paws of hungry Lions, to be delivered from
the hands of cruel men.

The Three Children were delivered, but the way was terrible, by fire, from
fire.

Jonah was delivered, but the way was terrible, by a Whale which swallowed him
up; his devourer, is his deliverer.

When Christ shall come to deliver his Church at the end of all things, you
read how terrible the way is; Luke 21.25, etc. There shall be signs in the
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the Earth distress of
Nations; the Sea and waters roaring, men's hearts failing them for fear, and
for looking after the things that shall come upon the Earth, for the powers of
heaven shall be shaken. A very terrible way; yet the way of deliverance, as
follows: And when you see these things to come to pass, then lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws nigh. Here was deliverance you see to the
godly, but yet the way of deliverance was a terrible way.

So that you see the Doctrine is plain. Christ may come to help his people in
such a way, that the very means of help may be a terror to them.

Use. I shall make the application which one does upon this place. Non
despondeamus animum, tametsi quae nobis auxilio fore promittitur, quandoque
speciem quandam interitus afferant, etc. Cartw. in loc.
Let us not be discouraged, or too much cast down; though those things which
are used for our deliverance, may carry the face of destruction with them. Who
will reject a Potion because it is bitter, an Antidote, because there is poison
in it. As Physicians can order poisonous and distructive ingredients, to
physical and useful purposes; so God can make those things, which in
themselves are evil, for the good of his people.

The man-child of deliverance is not brought forth without pangs: ill humors
long in growing, are not removed without pain. Sometimes the fiering of the
prison, has been a deliverance of the prisoner. A blow with a sword has
broken an Impostume in the head. Those things which in themselves seem
hurtful and distructive, God is able to use them as helpefull, and turn them
to our comfort.

And therefore we are not to be too much cast down. God would have us to see
deliverance even through destruction, and comfort through confusion. God does
often put his people to suck honey out of the Rock, and oil out of the flinty
Rock, Dout. 32.13. Gloria habitat in rupibus Ciem. Alex.
Glory dwells in the Rocks, and deliverance in difficulties. And therefore let
not your spirits sink under the sad appearance of things.

But yet we have great cause to be humbled: though you are not to be cast down
to desperation, yet are we to be cast down to humiliation: that God must take
such sad ways to do us good, that God should work us good by such terrible
means, we have cause to be humbled.

Had it not been for our sins, the deliverance of his Church might have been
brought about in a more comfortable way, reformation might have been settled in
a peaceable way, without blood. But our sins have caused God to lay the
foundation of Englands future good, in Englands present misery.

And therefore we have cause to be humbled for it this day. We hope God is
traveling in the greatest of his strength, to deliver his poor bleeding and
languishing Church. But the way is terrible to flesh and blood. For this let us
be humbled.

But yet, though the means of salvation and deliverance be so terrible, let us
take heed that salvation it self become not a terror to us, though the physic
be terrible, let health be desirable: though the way God takes to reform us be
terrible, yet let not reformation it self become a terror to us.

And so much for that doctrine, and for this time.

The end of the fourth Sermon.
I Shall not carry you back to to the review of what I have spoken, Unto all
that I have said, Give me leave to add this more. It calls in for as good a
share of our pains, and of your attention, as any thing which has yet been
delivered --

[They were troubled.]

Quid hoe est Domine? venis ut metus tollas; and illis occasionem praebes, qua
vehcmentius timent! Baez.
What is this LORD? Thou come to take away their fears; and give occasion
of more fear! Timent Apostoli, and, ut solvat timorem vehementius auget. Baez.
The Apostles feared; and that he might deliver them from fear, he augments
their fear. was it not terror enough to be in the midds of the Sea; tossed with
waves, the wind contrary; and in the dark of the night? But that CHRIST
should add fear to fear? It speaks thus much.

Quanda urgentia mala expulsurus sit tum graviora and teribiliora inducat.
Chrysostom.
Doct. GOD does oftentimes increase our troubles, when he comes to remove our
troubles.

The Phifitian does often cast his Patient into a Fever to cure a Lethargy: He
makes him a Little Sick, for his Greater Health. We often make the Patient
more sick for the present, to Cure him of his sickness. The Surgeon does
Cut and Lance, which is increasing of the pain for the present: But yet it is
for the removing of the Pain for the future: Plagam sanaturus, aliam graviorem
priori infliget. Cartwr.
So God does usually Increase the troubles of his People, When he comes to
Remove the troubles of his People.

You see this in the Israelites: GOD had taken notice of the afflictions of his
People in Egypt; and he came down to remove them; and for this end, he sent
Moses and Aaron to deliver them. But if you observe the story, you shall find,
That their troubles were far more increased, before God did Deliver them. Their
Bondage was made more heavy: The Task of Brick was Doubled: Insomuch that they
were rather content to be in their former slavery, then to endure the pains of
a Deliverance. And therefore the quarrel with Moses and Aaron: Exodus 5.19, 20,
2^.
they grow weary of their Deliverers: any of their deliverance too; and desired
rather to be as they were, even in their former bondage, then to be at the
pains and costs of a Deliverance.

A story which runs parallel with our Times, and (which is worse) our Spirits
too: Which of us, with them, do not look upon the Beginnings of our
Deliverance (because of the pains and costs of it) to be as bad as the Bottom
of our sufferings? And do not many of us, wish, There never had been a
Parliament? do we not wish; That they had never sought to Deliver us? Are we
not weary of our Deliverers? Nay, are we not weary of our Deliverance? Rather
content to be As we were, nay worse; then to endure the Pains, to be at the
Costs, to run the hazard of a Deliverance? Thus God increases our Troubles,
Signum est in propinquo adesle consolationem a Domino, si quando tentatio ad
supremum usque crevisse deprehenditur. Muse.
when yet he comes to Remove our Troubles.

Thus you see in Jacob; God intended to Deliver him; and yet you see, before
God did deliver him, he Increased both in his Fears and his Dangers; as you
may see in the Story both of Lahan and Esau. Genesis 25, 26.
Lahan followed him, and would be avenged on him, for taking away his gods.
Genesis 32.6, 7.8.
And Esau, he came out against him, for to be revenged for the taking away his
Birth-wright. An Hard Father, And a Cruel Brother! And God was in the way now
of Jacobs Deliverance.

So you see in David. God had a Purpose to Deliver him, as he had promised: But
yet you i Sam. 23.26, 27, 28. 1 Samuel 24.3, 4 1 Samuel 26.2, 3.
see how God did Increase his Troubles, before he did deliver him; Insomuch
that he says, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. 1. Sam. 27.1. To
such a height were his troubles raised, that now they had overswelled his
Faith, and in regard of the strange proceedings of Gods Providence to him, he
begins to doubt of the truth of the promises made to him. I shall one day
perish, -- I cannot ever hold out, I have escaped this time miraculously out of
his hands, as you see in the former Chapter, 1 Samuel 26. But I shall one day be
a prey to his cruelty, certainly I cannot ever hold out, I shall one day perish
-- To this height did God raise histroubles, before he delivered him.

So Job. God intended to Deliver him. But yet you see, Quo magis salus
appropinquit, eo magis acuit dolores. Baez.
The nearer he grew to Deliverance out of Trouble, the more was his Trouble
increased on him.

And if you should ask me, Why God does increase our Troubles, when he comes
to Remove our Troubles; I would tell you: God does it to make the Increase of
our Troubles.

1. The discovery of our hearts. So you see in the Eighth of Deutr. 16.17.
where Moses tells them the reason, why God led them Forty years through the
Wilderness: It was Timorem auget ut nostram fidem probaret, and suam vertutem
declarat.
To try them, and to Prove them, and Discover what was in their hearts. Not but
that God knew it: But God would have them to know it. And this was one reason
here, why he did send his Disciples to Sea, and suffered them to be tossed, To
discover their Spirit, their Faith, their fear, their Patience, their
Impatience, etc.

Hence Troubles and Afflictions are called Gods Fan, that will discover Wheat
from Chafe; and Gods Fining Pot, and Fire, that will distinguish between
dross and Gold, Gods Touchstone, that will discover Counterfeit and True
Coin.

We had never known Abraham's Faith and Love; David's Piety; Jobs Patience;
Paul's Courage and Constancy; If they had not been brought upon exercises. Nor
should we so well discern either our sins or our graces, our strength, or
our weakness, if God did not exercise us with troubles and difficulties.

If Gods children should ever lie in Garrison, neither their strength, nor
their weakness; their sins, nor their graces would be known. And therefore God
does bring them out into the field, does exercise them with many difficulties
and troubles, that so they might be discovered both to themselves, and to
others. Hence you read in 1 Pet. 1.7. You are in heaviness, through many
temptations, that the trial of your faith might be found to the glory of God.

And it was upon this ground, GOD brought Job into so many difficulties, that
his Faith and Patience might be discovered, and Satan for ever confuted and
confounded. You know it was the Devils argument concerning Job, (and it was
true in the main) God said, that Job was an holy and patient man. Why but
(says Satan) what thanks is there to him for that? he must needs be patient,
who has nothing to disturb his patience, or provoke impatience.

And the Argument was true in the main, when all things which are fewll for
patience are enjoyed, when a man has what his heart can wish: what trial of
Patience?

Therefore does God bring Job into the Field, exercise him with an hard
Battle; wherein he had not only to deal with Satan, but his friends too, as
enemies. Nay God himself seems also to join with Satan; not only by
withdrawing of himself from him, but by possitive inflicting of displeasure
upon his spirit. Thou fightest against me with all thy terrors, and
overwhelmest me with all thy waves. Job 13.

And all this while God increased his troubles to discover his heart.

When God brings judgments and calamities on a nation, he is said to sift a
nation, Amos. 9.9. Troubles are Gods sieve. The greater the troubles, the
smaller and finer is Gods sieve: small troubles, they are but a course sieve;
they will not be able to discover the flower from the bran; much bran,
notwithstanding this sifting will pass through. Orpha may go far with Ruth,
but will not go throughout. The Scribe came to Christ, and would have gone
far, if you will believe him upon his solemn protestations, Master, 8.
Matthew. 19, 20, 21.
I will follow thee withersoever thou go: but when he heard it was a matter
of pains and hardship, he must be content to lie with Christ in the fields,
-- The Foxes have holes, and the Fowls of the air have nests, but the Son of
man has not whereon to lay his head, then he returns home to his warm bed,
Quid fine domo si non sine domino sine lecto, and non sine Christo fulgens.
rather contenting himself to have his bed without Christ, than Christ without
a bed.

And as big professions the young man made also: 19 Matthew. 16.
he would follow him too, but when it came to the discovery, that it was a
matter of cost to follow Christ, he was to go sell all and give to the poor,
then he leaves him, though sorrowing. While Peace and Plenty, Religion and
enjoyments go hand in hand together; so long many will be religious: but if
once godliness comes to be a matter of cost, if once Religion and riches
shake hands and must part,; if the world go one way, and Christ another, then
with the young man they leave him, and follow that Master they love better.

The Stony ground went far too; 13. Matt. 20, 21.
It received the seed as well as the best; It sprang up, promised as much as the
best. But the Sun scortcheth; in the times of persecution, when troubles and
persecutions arise because of the Word: by and by he is offended.

Many that are good, for want of temptation, like the Weathercock, they stand
this way, for want of a stronger wind. It is a strange thing to see upon what
slight and easy grounds many do adhere, and more do fall off from the cause
of God.

Some there are that adhere to it as the Beare-bind to the Wheat, Hic est nos
vulgi quod magno ex par te religionem ventris causa, and emolumenti colit hoc
corruptum vulgi ingenium notat Propheta. Chem. 2 Micac. 11.
or as the Ivy to the tree, not because they love it, but because it
nourishes them, they can suck leaves and berries from it: these hold to it for
matter of gain: others again, because it is matter of cost, therefore they
fall off from it; the more costly things, the lesss lovely.

Some again that hold to it out of private and personal engagements, Quicunque
occupati sunt negotiis reipublicae, debent hoc ipsum facere propter Deum. Rab.
Ga^
friendship, love, relations; and others upon the same ground, or else upon
some personal grudges to some that appear in it, fall off from it: what
dis-service we have had by such private spirits we all know to our cost. --

It was the behavior of Themistocles and Aristides, when ever they were
employed in the public service of the state, they left all their private
enmities in the borders of their own Country, and did not resume them, till
they returned and became private men: It had been well for us, if the public
affections to the cause, (in those who have appeared in it) might have
swallowed up all personal, and private grudges and discontents. --

Thus you see the many slender grounds and ends that weak and deceitful
spirits have, and do propound to themselves in their adhering to, and falling
off from the cause of God: pity it were that Religion, so precious a thing,
should have such assertors! to whose defense I know nothing so mean, but is
too good to be entrusted. Woe be to us if Religion stands in need of such
defenders. --

Men whose Morives are from without, are like unto clocks, carried about with
waights, and have no principle of motion within and therefore Nullum violentum
est perpetuum, Simulata non diu durant.
can never hold long to any cause: he that will serve God for outward respects,
may be drawn to serve the Devil for the same, if he may mend his wages: he
is unfit for a soldier of Christ who has an eve to things visible, 11 Heb. 27.
but wants an eye to see him that is invisible, 11. Heb. 27.

That which enabled the Apostles to go through all those difficulties as true
soldiers of Christ, which you may read at large in the 2 Cor. 4, 8, 9. etc. 2
Cor. 4.8, 9, 10.17.18.
It was this, they looked not at the things that were seen, but to those
things which are Eternita^^ pingo, better aeternitate pugno.
not seen, verse 18. Christians, these times will uncase you; they will
discover the bottom of your hearts: they will not make them that are good bad,
but only discover men's badnesse. It is true what one says, A hypocrite is but
an Apostate vayled; and an Apostate is but an hypocrite revealed. Had we not
had these times of trial, we had not had so many hearts discovered; As the
Apostle says, ^ Tim. 5.2^.
Some men's sins go before them to judgment, some follow after: So here,
though many had been discovered, yet some men had passed this life for Saints;
whereas, now their sins go before them, to judgment; their hearts are laid
open, before those books are opened. How many that in former times would have
said, Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts, with Iehu, who would have sided
against the corruptions of the times, who now with Iehu, do march furiously
against the Reformation of them? And as it was said of the Spaniards of Aldens
Company in Germany: they fired the Castle of Lippa, which before they pretended
to defend. So now they set themselves against that, which before they pretended
to advance. Ficta Cito ad naturam redierint suam. Luke 2.34, 35
And therefore to discover the bottom of men's hearts, and spirits, as it was
said of Christ, Luke 2.34, 35. That he was set up for the fall and rising of
many in Israel, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. So it may be
said of our present troubles. -- And we have seen enough, Treacheries and
Apostasies enough, falenes enough. Oh! that God would now stablish the hearts
of those, whose hands have undertaken the work! that he would sift us no
longer, but now make us up in one Loaf: At least thus far, To be of one
undivided spirit for the public good! And this is the first reason.

God does often increase our troubles, when he comes to remove our troubles;
to discouver our hearts; that the thoughts of many hearts might be revealed:
that, as the Apostle says of Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. 1 Cor. 11.18, 19.
I hear there are devisions among you, Schisms, Sects; and I partly believe
it: For says he, There must be Heresies among you, that they that are approved
might be made manifest among you. That is, that those who are sound, whose
hearts are upright might be discovered: What the Apostle says of Heresies, I
may say of these troubles: There must be troubles among you, and necessary that
these troubles should be increased, that they who are approved might be made
manifest. That the dross might be known from the gold. the counterfeit from
the true, the corrupt from the sincere, the Chaste from the Corn, the precious
from the vile, the Tares from the Wheat.

Which though it be not yet fully manifested; yet I fear God will heighten our
troubles, and increase our difficulties, till he has made further
discoveries. Our desire is rather, that God would use natural Spirits for
Spiritual purposes; stablish them we have, than to lessen the number of them.
However, it shall be my admonition to you all, which Christ gave the Churches
in that day, when they are to fight the great battle against Antichrist:
(which some think has been begun these many years in Germany, and now in
Ireland, whatever it is in England. You shall find it in Rev. 16.15. Blessed is
he that watches and keeps his garments clean, lest he walk naked, and they
they see his shame.

You have (many of you) had a good esteem in your places; you have run well,
as the Apostle says; Gal. 5.7.
you have been such as have sometimes appeared for God; you have had a gatment
of Profession; frequented Sermons; holy exercises; given in some testimony
against the corruptions of the times formerly. Why this is my admonition; Keep
fast your garments, lose not the things you have wrought, 2 Ep. Joh. 8.
lose not that esteem you have had, keep fast your garments, lest you walk
naked, and your shame be discovered. That is, lest all your former professions
be discovered nothing else but hypocrisy, lest all your former esteem be
lost, your nakedness and your shame, the unsoundnesse and rottenness of your
hearts be discovered. And so much for the first reason. I have been too large.
--

2. Reason. God does increase our troubles, when he comes to remove our
troubles; to make the increase of our troubles, the lessening of our sins.
God does bring Troubles on us, and by them does lessen our estates, our
treasure, our comforts, it may be our relations: And all this, that he might
lessen our sins. He troubles us for sin, because we troubled him by sin.
He makes us bear a little for sin, because we make him to bear much: He
complains under them, that he is pressed as a Cart is pressed with sheaves. 2
Amos 13.


Christ has shed his blood for sin, and he desires not our blood for
satisfaction, he would rather have our tears than our blood. But because we
will not give him tears, therefore he requires blood. Because we will not be
humbled and reformed, therefore he threatens to humble us, to destroy us. Does
God afflict us, it is because we have sinned: Does God increase our troubles?
it is because we have increased our sins: And if you would have God to remove
them, you must lessen your sins. Are your troubles grievous? let your sins
be grievous. Would you have God to ease you? do you ease him. There is no
reason you should expect, God shall ease you, when you burden him every day.
Would you not have God to put more Cords into your whip, more Twigs into your
Rod? would you not have God to increase your troubles? do you lessen your
sins, lessen your pride; let some plume fall off, or God will humble you,
lessen your covetousness, or God will lessen your store: Lessen your
drunkenness, or God will pull the cup from your nose, and make you thirst for
a drop: Lessen your abuse of creatures, or God will destroy the creatures. 2
Hos. 8.
He will call for the corn, wine, and oil, in the day thereof. Hos. 2.8.
Lessen your Blasphemies, profanation of the Sabbath: Let it never be said of
us, as of that wicked Ahaz, that in the time of his affliction he yet
trespassed more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
2 Chr. 22.22. He is marked in that Chapter, and with this brand, This is that
wicked Ahaz; Plectimur a Deo, nec flectimur tamen, corripimur fed non
corrigimur. Salvian.
as if God would note him our for the vilest wretch in the world, who would
grow worse by corrections, who would sin under all Gods lashings.

It is good when God humbles us, to humble our selves: Erudiri cupio flagellis
non erui. Bern. in Cant. 33.
when God lessens our Comforts, that we should lessen our pride.

I will say thus much to you: God will make the increase of your trouble to be
serviceable to the increase of your Deliverances; if you make the increase of
your troubles to serve for the lessening of your sins.

3. Reason. God does increase our troubles, when he comes to remove them, that
we might increase our duties.

The louder God speaks to us, the louder should we speak to God. Ordinary
duties will not serve for extraordinary times. When God doubles his strokes, we
should double our strength to wrestle with God; when he multiplies troubles,
we should multiply prayers. The greater out straites, the greater, should be
our inlargements. The greater our Difficulties, the more earnest and fervent
our Prayers. Christians, ordinary Prayers will not serve for extraordinary
pressures. Our present troubles are Gods Spurs and Goads in our sides to
quicken our pace in our way to Heaven. God drives us from our homes to drive us
from our sins: God fires us out of our houses, that he might fire us out of
our Formalities. He threatens to lay our outward condition low, that he might
raise our Spirits high, Difficulties should much quicken us to duties: God
says so, Hos. 5. ult. In the time of their affliction they will seek me early.
i.e. Diligently. 5 Hos. ult.
Then will they wrestle with God in prayer. You read, when Jacobs troubles
were increased, Genesis 32.24.
he went to Prayer: he first wrestled with God, before he went to encounter
with his Brother; not doubting, but if he could overcome God, he should
overcome his brother. When Hezekiahs troubles were increased, then were his
prayers also. The like of David, 2 Kings 19.14
Hester, etc. and should be so with us. The troubles below should send us to
seek for comfort above. Difficulties are to grace as Bellows to the fire, to
intend it and make it burn more vehemently. It is said of Christ himself,
That being in an Agony he prayed more (...). Ardentius orabat extensius,
intensius orabat. Luke 22.44.
fervently: not that he did not pray fervently at all times; not that there
could be any coldness in that breast, where heaven burnt so hotly: But he
expressed himself with more fervency: or the expressions of Christ were
according to the present condition he was then in. And so it teaches us when
we are in Agonies, (as now we are) even in an Agony of blood, not wrestling
with the wrath of God indeed, but with the wrath of men, the powers of
darkness Qua front te audiria deo postulas, cum te ipse non audias? Cypr. de
orat. dom.
:) Then should we pray with all fervency; yea, Vult Deus rogari vult cogi, vult
quadam importunitate vinci, bona haec violentia est qua Deus non offenditur,
sed placatur. Greg. in Psalm. 6. Poeni.
and wrestle with God by faith and promises, Esaias 27.5. by his own might, and
join tears with prayers, humiliation with supplication. Therefore does God
increase our troubles, that we might increase our duties; both the number, and
the weight of them, the length and the strength of them. Mighty necessities
call in for mighty wrestlings: engage that God who is stronger then the
strongest, wiser then the wisest: interest that Christ, who can both over-plot
and overpower all his adversaries; who is fuller of mercy, then they can be of
wrath against us --

Reas. 4. God does increase our troubles, when he comes to remove them, that
he might increase our deliverances. So much as comes into a trouble to increase
that, so much shall come into a deliverance to heighten that. The same
proportion God observes in difficulties, the same he also observes in
deliverances. God will make the rises of his people proportionable to their
castings down: where he lays the foundation low, there he intends a
proportionable structure of mercy, to raise the building high. They who sow in
tears, shall reap in joy; and their harvest shall be as glorious as their
seed time has been uncomfortable.

You see the difficulties of the Children of Israel, (which were so much
enlarged in Egypt, and at the Red Sea) did all come into the enlargement of
their deliverance. If the strait had not been so great, the enlargement had not
been so glorious: if the trouble had not been so sad, the deliverance had not
been so joyful. Read the story, and you shall find that those things which
were additions to their troubles, were also made additions to their
deliverance. By this means they had a fuller and compleater deliverance, as I
have showed before. --

When so many potent nations joined together against Iehosaphat, it did much
increase the difficulty: when so many potent Kings united all their strength
and power together. But yet look, and you shall find this also increased
their deliverance. By that means they were delivered of all their enemies at
once, they struck them off at one blow, as you read 2 Chr. 20.1, 2, 3.22, 23,
24, etc. If God had ruined them in the rise, broken in pieces their counsels,
etc. neither had their destruction been so grievous, nor his peoples
deliverance so glorious. But now suffering them to bundle themselves together,
and God delivering; as he shows his mercy toward his own, so he gets glory
out of the other. Read also Josh. 9.1, 2, 3. and Josh. 10.4, 5, 6, 7, etc.

Reas. 5. God does increase our troubles, when he comes to remove them, that he
might increase our thankfulness: therefore does God bring us into troubles,
Quo miserior in Angustiis, eo gratior in liberationibus. ^anto jucundior
confolatio, quanto amarior tentatio. Mus^.
that being delivered, our hearts might be more enlarged with praises.

Moses troubles were heightened at the Red Sea, that Gods praises might be also
raised, when he came to the shore. And so they were. Nothing does more swell a
mercy and deliverance, then our necessity of it. The greater the necessity the
greater the mercy. And proportionably as our thoughts are raised with the
esteem of the mercy; so are our hearts raised in the returns of praises. Men
sensible of their wants to pray for mercy, will be sensible of their enjoyments,
in praises to God for them.

It is a sad thing, when God must be forced to make us miserable, that he
might make us thankful. If we could be more thankful under deliverances, God
would not make us so miserable under pressures. If our hearts could be but more
weighty in praises, Gods hand would not be so heavy in pressures. This is a
sad thing, when God is enforced to increase our stripes, double our blows,
add to our troubles when we are under them; that he might add to our praises
when we are got out of them.

Christians! You have had experience of many mercies, of a late mercy; the
deliverance from that treacherous plot, and bloody design upon this City. God
blasted it. -- Are you thankful? What are days of praises, without hearts of
thankfulness? Do not your hearts dye underthe enjoyment of this mercy? --

Well: take heed, lest our unthankfulness for this, occasion God to bring us
into greater straits, that we might be wrought up to greater thankfulness:
why should not preservation from trouble be as great a mercy as deliverance out
of trouble? Had any of you been delivered, Vita mercee
though you had lost your estates, you would have thought your life a
sufficient gain. And has God preserved you and all yours, not one hair of
your head touched, and are you unthankful? --

Beware, lest your unthankfulness for this, do not cause God to make the next
greater. God increases our troubles, to increase our thankfulness.

Use 1. If so, then let us not judge of Gods purposes by his present
proceedings of providence with us. God may increase the troubles of his people,
when yet he intends to remove the troubles of his people: as God may seem to
heal, when he means to destroy; to speak peace and good in his works, when he
intends evil and wrath in his word: so God may seem to kill, when he intends
to cure; to destroy, when he means to save; to wound, when he intends to heal.

You know what God said to his people, when they were in great troubles, under
the cruel and unmercifull hands of their enemies: their troubles increased.
Yet says he, Ierem. 29.11. I know the thoughts I think to thee: they are
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give thee at the last an expected end;
an end answerable to thy expectation? What a strange thing was this? His ways
were war, yet his thoughts were peace: his proceedings were evil, yet his
purposes were good.

I have showed you at large, that Gods outward proceedings of providence
toward his people, are oftentimes contrary to the Inward purposes of his Heart
to them.

Let us not then reason, much less conclude according to Gods outward
appearance to his people, Suffer not your selves to be reasoned out of your
Faith and confidence, by any outward proceeding toward you. When you see Evil
in works, see good in the Word; when Death in the outward proceeding of God
toward you, see Life in the Inward purposes of his heart to you.

If you put a straight stick into the water, sense renders it crooked, but
reason tells you, is is straight. As Reason prevails against Sense: So let
Faith prevail against Sense and Reason: and let Faith conclude God for you,
when yet Sense and Reason tells you, he is against you. This is the life of
Faith.

Use 2. Does God Increase our Troubles, when yet he intends to Remove our
Troubles? Then this should encourage us to Lift up our heads under the greatest
pressures. Si graves, breves.
-- When they are the Sharpest, then they are the shortest.

In all the Stories of the Church, when Deliverance was nearest, then was
Persecution the hottest. The Devil is said to come down with great wrath,
because his time is but short. The shorter his Time, The greater his wrath.

Here then take a rise for Faith, from the lowest Condition you are in. When
the Morning is darkest, Then comes the Day: when Trouble is Greatest, Then is
Deliverance the Nearest.

You know who has turned the saddest and sorest Perplexities, that ever the
world shall see, into a Doctrine of Comfort and Consolation to his Church and
People: And upon this ground; Because Then is their Redemption nearest when
their troubles are highest. Luke 21.25, 26, etc.
Luke 21.25. There shall be signs in the Sun, the Moon, and upon earth
distress of Nations, with perplexity; the Sea and waters roaring; men's hearts
failing them for fear: the Powers of heaven shall be shaken. And, when these
things begin to come to pass. Then lift up your heads: For your Redemption
Draws Nigh. See how near the day of Redemption is, to the day of destruction;
Christ takes here a Rise of Comfort, from the lowest Condition that can be.

My Brethren; You see it is Gods way to increase our troubles, when he comes to
remove them. Let us not be Too much troubled at our Troubles. I must confess
we have sad and gloomy Days; and yet we fear they are not at the Darkest. The
floods of ungodliness are risen high; and we fear, they are not yet at the
highest: But remember this still. God does Increase our Troubles, when he comes
to Remove our Troubles. The greatest Darkness is before the Morning watch.

It is the speech of one upon my Text, Quod autem Dominus suos magis terruit,
priusquam liberaret; monemur; Cum adversitas summa fuerit, tum proximam adesse
solutem.
That the Lord did more terrify his Disciples, before he would deliver them,
we are admonished, That when Adversity is greatest, then deliverance is
nearest. Sic consuevit dominus vehementiores labores mittere, veluti indices
vicinae liberationis. Beza.
Another, God is used to send greater Troubles, as the Harbengers of
approaching deliverance. Tunc magis acuit dolores, quando salus jam stat. in
foribus: and graviora certamina and pericula sunt certissima nuntia
liberationis, quo citius sinienda sunt mala, eo magis ingravescunt, etc.
Another. Great troubles do ever usher in great Deliverances. -- It is our
hope, that as God has increased our Troubles: so he will make all our Troubles
subservient to our Deliverances.

Deliverance is the Birth of Mercy. As never was there birth without Pangs: So
Deliverance without Opposition and Trouble. Satan opposes, wicked men oppose:
But as Throws and Pangs are subservient to the Birth: so will God make our
Present Troubles to Deliverance. The sharpest pangs and throws of the Church,
have ever been the immediate forerunners of some Child of Promise.

As it was in the Waters of Bethesda. The waters were troubled, before they
healed. The trouble of the water was subservient to the Cure in them: so that
Opposition and trouble, which does arise in the time and expectations of our
healing; will God turn to our further healing; what the Apostle says of his
Bonds, I may say of all the troubles that arise; the things that have happened
to me, Phil. 1.12.
have fallen out to the furtherance of the Gospel, his Prison was the Gospels
liberty, his bonds the Gospels enlargement, his abasements, the Gospels
advancement. So here, all our troubles are subservient to the fuller
deliverance: were you either well read in the Book of Providence, or in the
book of Scriptures, either in the word or works of God, you would find that
the increase of your troubles would be a rise of hope, in stead of a ground of
fear, of comfort, in stead of discouragement.

It is Gods usual way in the deliverance of his Church and People, Auget
certamina quando liberabit. Chrysostom. Faestinente laetitia, acuitur dolor. Baez.
to heighten their difficulties and troubles before he does deliver them. It
has been so, as I have showed you in many examples, And when indeed did God
do any notable things for his Church in the world, But there has been great
tumults and commotions. Look upon the Stories of Scripture. --

And do you think it will not be so? Is not the Devil as bad, wicked men as
malicious as ever they were? and certainly, what power and policy can do to
interrupt God in his ways of mercy to his Church, shall be done, Gaudeo quod
Cristus Dominus est, alioqui desperassem. Micon. in jepist. ad Calvin.
insomuch that we may say with him, If Christ did not reign, we should quickly
come to ruin. There are some great Promises, which God has made, and will
perform now at the end of all things. But none of these shall be accomplished
without great difficulties; He has said that Antichrist shall down, Rev.
11.13.
But we must look for earthquakes before, Such noting he has in the Kingdoms
of the earth, in States and Nations, as nothing but an earthquake will loosen
him, and throw him down. Revel. 16.17, 18. Esaias. 11. Esaias. 62.
See the commotions foretold. Revel. 17.18.

He has promised to make his Church glorious in the world, And these Promises,
He that is faithful and true will perform; But when God does this, you must
look for Commotions, Joel. 3.16.
look for shakings. You read, Dan. 12.1. Dan. 12.1.
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince that stands for
the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since there was a nation, And at that time thy people shall be Delivered,
-- Tunc maxim populus dei affligitur, cum propinqua est salus. Baez.
It is a time of Deliverance, but a time of shaking: And therefore this is that
we must expect, that God should increase our troubles, when he comes to remove
our troubles.

Object. Yea, but you will say, were our troubles at the height, then we could
with more comfort bear them; but we fear, though high, they are not yet at the
height, how should we therefore be satisfied in that?

Ans. 1. When you are at the height of your graces, of your faith, hope,
patience, when you can believe no further, and hope no further; It is said in
respect of the great trouble. Luke 8. Luke. 18.8.
when he comes he shall not find faith in the earth, these were at the height
indeed, if they had been wound any higher, they had cracked, the Musician will
wind his strings to the height, but not overwinde them, so God, he will
exercise, but not destroy our graces.

2. When our enemies are at the height of their sins, and at the height of
their rage and cruelty. Exodus 15.9, 10. when wicked men are at the top of their
pride, they are nearest ruin, when the iniquity of a man is full, when sin is
finished, it brings forth death, when the Epha is full, when the harvest is
ripe, then will God put in his sickle, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.35.

3. When we are brought to the lowest. 1. In Passive, Humiliation. 2. Active,
Humiliation.
when men's eyes are big with tears, their hearts with sorrow, then is Gods
mercy big with deliverance; God does use to bring in a full tide of Comfort,
when we are at the lowest ebb of trouble, when the stream is dry, when the
channel of second Causes does not run, then will God arise, and have mercy on
Sion, there is hope in thine end. Jere. 31.16, 17. when we would have thought
there was an end of hope, when the stock of hopes was spent, etc. yet then a
time of hope, Esaias. 33.7, 8, 9. In the mean time, it is rather our work to do
our present duties, then to busy our selves, and indeed increase our present
troubles, by seeking to take the elevation of them, our troubles are high, but
how high God will raise them before he does deliver us, it is not in man to
tell; It is our comfort, he will either lessen the burden, or strengthen the
back, either lessen our troubles, or increase our strength to bear, he will
not suffer us to be rempted above measure, and he knows our measure, what we
are able to bear. For the present, let it be our work to lessen our sins, as
God increases our troubles, to heighten our duties, as God does heighten our
difficulties, to be healed by our troubles, healed of our pride,
unthankfulness, etc. And you shall then quickly see, that God will turn all
your troubles into healing. So much for that doctrine.

There is yet something more observeable.

[When they saw him, they were troubled.]

Timorem timori addit non periculum periculo.
Christ adds fear to fear, but not danger to danger, They were in no less
danger before, though now in more fear; Quanquam opinione, and errore
deteriores fuerint, tamen non reipsa. Cartw.
There was now more fear, but before more danger, their dangers were lessened,
though their fears were increased.

D. Men's fears may be increased, when yet deliverance is nearest. Opinio mali
affligit, ubi nihil est mali. Musc. in loc.


Again, D. God may be in a way of deliverance, when yet he seems to be in a way
of destruction.

But we have done with the first, the effect of their apprehension of Christ,
ad intra, they were troubled.

We will speak a word to the second, the effect, ad extra, Tantus terror illos
invasit ut velut impotentes facti. Exclamant. Brugens.
they cried out for fear, here was terror, and clamor.

(They cried out for fear.)

For fear of what? why, 'twas for fear of Christ, Christus in spectrum
transformant and tunc timent. Musc.
they thought him to be a Ghost, and therefore cry out for fear.

But admit it had been a Ghost, yet why should they fear, why should they cry,
had it not been easier to have driven him away by prayers, then by fears, by
believing, then by crying. Praecibus potius diabo^um pellemus, quam terroribus
in dulgeamus. Isay. 29.16.
It is more easy to drive away Satan by prayers, then by fears, It is said in
the 26. Esaias, 16. they powered forth a prayer, when their chastisement was on
them, (...) In cantatio, mussitatio Submissa oration Buxtorf.
the word does signify a charm, as well as a Prayer: prayer is the best
charm to conjure down the devil.

It is our weakness to be afraid of Satan, and our wickedness too. Satan
could not do thee so much hurt, if he killed thee in the place, (though
indeed he cannot touch a hair without permission) as he does if he prevail
with thee to be afraid of him.

Many are afraid of Satan when they are praying, who yet are never afraid of
him when they are sinning: Indeed when they sin they serve the devil, and
therefore think he will not hurt them. But when they pray, they serve God, and
then they fear him, because now they know they do displease him. Nay, too
many weak and timorous spirits of Gods people, who are too much afraid of him,
if they be alone in their Chambers, Closets; and if it be dark, they dare not
stay, though they be in duty; if they do, yet they stay with fear and
trembling. And indeed thou had better to fear and tremble in duty, than to
suffer thy fear to cause thee to leave off a duty. The best way to conquer the
devil is to stand to it. He is the greatest coward, because the greatest
sinner, resistance conquers him, he dares not stand out one charge; thou Romans
7.37. (...) Super superamus. We over -- overcome.
over-over-comes, if thou do but hold up weapons against him.

Art thou in duty, does Satan trouble thee? art thou afraid? yet hold on
prayer. Satan is more afraid of thy prayers, than thou can be of his fears:
Thou tormenst him more by prayers, than he can do thee by fears: And therefore
hold up thy heart, thou runst into danger, if once thou go out of duty;
better thou had to dye in the place in believing and praying, than to
preserve thy self (if this thou could do) by flying and withdrawing. Certainly
he comes into Satan's power, who seeks to escape it by flying, and not by
believing, by fearing, and not by praying.

Let us then take heed of this -- We are too apt to it, with the Apostles here,
to act our fear, when we are called forth to act our faith.

There is yet something more from this second effect of their fear.

(They cried out for fear.)

Passion you see will have a vent, Terror argumentum diffidentiae clamor
despera^ionis. Aret.
They cried out: -- It had been well if they had cried up, but they cried out:
Fear does the one, but it must be faith which must do the other. -- But what
a shame was this. It was a sin they should be afraid, but what a shame they
should cry out for fear; -- They who were the Disciples of Christ were in Gods
way, went out upon Christ's warrant, do they fear? nay, do they cry out for
fear? what may the Mariners say? Shall such a man as I fly, Mchem. 6.11.
says Nehemiah? what one under such protections? one under so many promises?
one who had such a cause, and such encouragements from above, shall I fly?
This he thought both Gods dishonor, his shame, religions scandal. So shall
such men as these fear, nay cry out too? Such as were the friends and Disciples
of Christ? such as were sent on Christ's Errand? such who were under such
protections? do they fear? -- What, I say, might the poor Mariners say? Ecce
quales: sunt qui Christum coluut? Sibona discerent boni essent. Salv.
What a dishonor was this to Christ? what a scandal to Religion, what a shame
to themselves? You have an excellent expression in the 8. Ezra 22. Read it. See
how tender Gods people are of Gods honor, they will rather venture themselves,
then hazard Gods glory; he would rather go in danger, than give occasion to
wicked men to think dishonourably of God.

Doct. Certainly Christians should be careful, they should take heed of
bringing an ill report upon the ways of God, they should take heed of bringing
a scandal upon religion. It is a great sin with the bad spies to bring an
ill report on the good land; to cause the ways of God to be evil spoken of.
Beware of fearing: Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil? says David,
the righteous should be as bold as a Lion: A good cause and a good courage
should go together. But though you should fe^re, yet fight against your fears,
pray against the^.

Beware of crying out -- He that cries up will never cry out; he whose heart has
found a vent to God, he will never complain to man: he who is once open to
God, is shut up to man, the more God hears of thee, less man shall hear; men
cry downwards so much; because they cry no more upwards: if your hearts could
once find a passage to God in your troubles, you would find so much comfort in
it, as you would never complain to man.

Christians! you are all public persons, there is an universality in every one
of you, one of you stands for many, a few for all: and that not only for all
Professors, but profession too. You had need therefore to be wary, to walk
exactly, suffer not the Cross of Christ, the ways of God to be ill spoken of
for your sake, 3. Phil. 18. Christum legunt and impii sunt, Christum audiunt
and inebriantur Christum sequuntur and rapiunt. Salv. de Gub. i. 4, 5. 1 Samuel
12.24. Matthew. 18.7.
Give not you occasion to wicked men to blaspheme Religion, to cast dirt in the
pure face of Profession. It was David's sin, let it not be yours. -- It lies
upon us to justify the ways of God by our unblameable walking; Woe be to
them by whom offenses come; woe be to them who give just occasion of Scandal
to wicked men, that put a stumbling block in the ways of others, to hinder
them from entering the way of life.

But yet you that are without, suffer not the infirmities and sins of those
that walk in the way of profession to be a rock of offense, a stone of
stumbling to you, to keep you from entering the way of life. The ways are good,
though all that walk in the ways should be naught, you are to walk by
precepts, not by the practices of others, by rule not example: their failings
are not to be stars to sail by; but rocks to shun: That which they should do
is thy Law, that which they do (if they fail) is not thy pattern. It grieves
me to see the unanswerable walking of professiors to profession; and it is an
addition to our sorrow, to see how Satan makes use of our failings, and sins to
be as stumbling blocks to hinder others from entering the way of life. But men
whose hearts are set against the ways of God, shall be furnished with matter
enough to bring them into further dislike.

If you be willing to be offended, you shall have offenses enough to your
further blinding and hardening: if the Word do not teach you, works shall blind
you, if the word do not soften you, works will harden you: if you stumble at
the Word, and at profession, you are sure to fall at works.

Men first take offense at the duties the Word commands, and then they
strengthen that offense by the failings of those who walk in those ways: This
the Apostle shows in the 1 Pet. 2.8. Christ was a stone of stumbling; but you
see to whom, even to those who stumbled at the Word first; first the stumble at
the word, then at Christ. Beware lest this be your condition, if it be; all the
faylings of Professors shall serve for no other end to you, then for your
further hardening, and strengthenning your dislike against Profession it self,
to your utter undoing. --

But we shall shut up this. -- And will now come to the next Verse.

The end of the fifth Sermon.
Matthew. 14.27. But straightway Jesus spoke unto them, saying: be of good
cheer, It is I, be not afraid.


HItherto, you have had a black, a stormy and tempestuous night; and now the
morning begins to appear. Hitherto you have had nothing but troubles, fears,
outcries; but now comfort begins to dawne. The beginnings of Gods people may be
very sad and troublesome, but the end is ever comfortable and joyful. Hence
David, Mark the upright man, observe the just, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37. The end, he says, not the beginnings. The beginnings may be
stormy: but the end is calmy.

Noah's Ark was a long time tossed with waves; but at last it came to Mount
Ararat, a place of rest. So the Church of God may be Tossed upon the stormy sea
of this world for a time: but at last God will allay all storms, quiet all
troubles, and bring his poor tossed ship of the Church unto safe harbor. --
There is a rest for the people of God, Heb. 4.9, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.

You have an Emblem of all this in this story of the ship on the sea; which
Augustine makes to resemble the state of the Church from Christ's Ascension,
till his coming again. As I have showed you before.

You have seen their Commission and setting forth to sea: you have seen their
danger, and the fears they were in. You have heard of Christ's addresses to
relieve them: and (upon a mistake) the increase of their fears, though not of
danger.

And thus far has Christ exercised their graces, discovered their
corruptions: now begins the rise of their comfort and deliverance.

Christ can neither defer their deliverance, nor conceal himself any
longer. And therefore it follows, [But straitway Jesus spoke unto them,
saying; Be of good comfort, it is I, be not afraid.]

Quomodo solemus trepidos compellara, qui nos ex voce agnoscere possunt, ego
sum, Jansen.
As the mother sometimes speaks to her child in the dark of the night, when
it is afraid; Peace child, do not cry, (...) it is I, thy mother. be not
afraid. So does Christ here speak to his Disciples, when they were in their
childish fear of a ghost; Alloeutus statim cos, and voce illis non ignota
fignificat quis sit. Chem.
Peace, be of good comfort, It is I, your Savior; be not afraid. They deserved
reproof, but he pitties their weakness.

In this Text, Christ does apply himself to the cure of three several
distempers, under which they labored.

1 They were in fear of a Ghost.

2 They were in fear of their danger; of being swallowed up of the waves.

3 They were even out of hopes of preservation and deliverance.

See here how Christ does apply himself to the cure of these three distempers.

1 To settle them aright in their misapprehension, that he was a ghost, he tells
them, -- It is I.

2 To quiet their hearts in the fear of the danger of the waves: He says, It
is I, be not afraid.

3 To comfort and strengthen their hearts, in assurance of deliverance; he
says, (...) Idem est consolamiui and fiduciam habere.
-- Be of good cheer, or believe, be of good confidence, It is I.

This in a more general way is observable in the Text. In particular; cast
your eye upon these four things.

1 Look upon the way, which Christ takes to settle, comfort, and encourage his
Disciples, in their fears, dangers, and misapprehensions. [He spoke unto them.]

2 Look upon the encouragement it self, which is double. 1 Be of good cheer.
2 Be not afraid.


3 Look upon the ground of this encouragement, [It is I:] Be of good comfort,
It is I, be not afraid.

4 Observe the time when: and that is in the first words: straightway. -- But
straightway Jesus spoke unto them, etc.

We will begin with the first: The way Christ takes to settle, comfort, and
incourages them. [Iesus spoke to them.]

But to what Them? does he mean to all in the ship? or only to his Disciples?
If to all, that might have been as bad as a ghost to some, to tell them it was
Christ. Guilty consciences, wicked men are ready to say with their father, Art
thou come to torment us before the time? At the best, it could be little
comfort to those who had not an interest in Christ, who had not Christ their
friend. Well might they think as Ahab sometimes said to Eliah, -- Have thou
found me, oh my enemy.

1 It was spoken to the hearing of all.

2 But to the comfort chiefly of his own.

Doct. The same word of God may be spoken to the hearing of all; but to the
comfort of a few. Christ spoke to the hearing of all in the ship, but yet to
the comfort of his Disciples.

And yet we cannot but think, the rest of the Passengers and Mariners might
receive some comfort by it: so far as they understood who it was that spoke.
The news of a Savior to a man in misery is some comfort; though as yet the
man is not able to clear his interest in him. And it might be the more to them
now, because they were in the same ship with the Disciples, and therefore like
to be shaters with them in their deliverance.

Doct. It is good to be in the ship with the people of God, though it be on a
stormy and troublesome sea.

The Mariners found this to be true. They were in the ship with them, and
therefore did partake of the common salvation. It is good to be in good company
in a good cause, though you meet with many difficulties in it. If any salvation
come, you shall be sure to hear of it there.

It is better to be on a stormy sea with the people of God, then to be without
them upon the shore: you see that here; They had not only their bodies, but
their souls saved too, as you may conjecture charitably by the sequel of the
story, Verse 33.

Again, in that the whole ship was saved for a few Disciples in it, we learn,

Doct. That God may have mercy upon many for the sake of a few.

God would have spared Sodom for ten righteous persons; Jerusalem for one,
Ier. 5.1. -- Credit mihi. Pii homines sunt civitatum sacre fulcra, and columna,
quibus se motis and subrutis, nihil nisi perditio. Aug.
Believe me, (says Augustine) holy men are the pillars of a Common wealth,
which being taken away, we can look for nothing but ruin. Eliah was called
Quia praecibus suis populum non aliter ac curru ab inimicis liberavit. Aug.
The Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. Luther dum in vivis esset,
multas precibus suis calamitates a patria sua advert^bat, and semovit.
Luther is said to be the pillar of Germany, who by his prayers did keep back
and help off many miseries upon them. It is said, Numb. 14.9. Fear not the
people of the land, for they are bread for you: their defense is departed from
them. The Lord is with us; fear them not; [their defense is departed from
them] It is in the Margin, [Their Shadow.] The Rabbis say, That this was Job;
and as long as he lived, he was a shadow and defense to Canaan, that they could
not enter: but now being dead, they might go in, and enter, they were all
bread for them, for their defense is departed from them.

Wicked men look upon Gods People as the Troublers of a Kingdom, of a City, of
a Parish: when yet God says, they are the Defense the Shelter of them.

The whole Ship was saved for a few Disciples in it; nay, a whole Ship for one
Paul. Acts 27. God has oftentimes Mercy upon many, for the sake of a few, But
we proceed.

[JESUS spoke unto them.]

This is the way that Christ took here, to encourage and comfort the hearts of
his people. [He spoke unto them.] They were in a sad condition, before Christ
spoke: but now their souls revive.

Doct. A word from Christ is able to raise up and encourage the drooping
spirits of Gods people in trouble. I say, Though the hearts of Gods People lie
low in trouble and sorrow: yet one word of Christ is able to raise them, and
revive them.

You see here, The Disciples were in a sad condition before; even at their wits
end, for fear, Quantaris vocis Christi and verbi divini. Musc. Plus uni cum
verbum animos. coroborat, quam eximium miraculum. Musc.
but one Word from Christ settles, them.

Are we in troubles of Conscience; laboring under the apprehensions of Gods
wrath for sin! It Is but One Word speaking, and thy soul shall be comforted.
It Is but one word from Christ, -- Thy sins be forgiven thee.] And Conscience is
at peace: all troubles are gone.

Are we in Desertions? Does Christ withdraw himself from us? It is but one word
from Christ, -- It is I, and the soul is again Tranquillus Deus tranquillat
omnia, and eum quietum aspicere quiescere est. Bern.
revived. As it was with Mary in the loss of his Bodily presence, She wept,
and would not be comforted: Nay, though Angels did labor to comfort her, yet
they could not. It is not all the Angels of heaven, that are able to confort a
drooping soul, Christ but speaks a word to her, -- Mary. And her heart leaps.
-- Rabboni. My Lord: So is it with a soul that has lost the spiritual
presence of Christ. It is not all the comforts in heaven and earth, can comfort
the soul in the absence of Christ; what is Gold in the absence of God! What is
the creature in the absence of the Creator! All the world is but like a Feast
without an Appetite, a Paradise without a Tree of Life. Nothing can fill up
Christ's room in the soul; The Presence of no comfort can make up the absence of
Christ; yet one word from Christ, one smile from heaven, And the soul is
revived. Speak but the word, and thy servant shall be whole, says the man in
the Gospel: So, Speak but the word, and this dead heart shall be raised: this
dejected heart shall be comforted, this broken heart shall be bound up, this
sad heart shall be cheered, etc.

Are we in outward troubles and Calamities? why, it is the Word of Christ, that
does stay us, that does cheer us, that does support us, that does comfort us.
Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my perplexed thoughts within me, Thy comforts
delight my soul. Certainly the comforts from his Word. Yea says he: -- I had
perished in mine affliction, but that thy Word did support me. Psalm. 119.50.92.

The Word is full of Counsel, full of Comfort, full of Support, full of Help
to a soul, in all his Troubles. Therefore has God left us a Word, that, it
might be as a School to instruct us; a Star, or Sun, to guide us; a Rock to
support us; a Cordial to comfort us; a Tower to secure us; and Armory to
defend us in the evil day. The Word is as full of comfort, as the times are
full of terror; the days are full of trouble: but the Promise is full of
comfort. And it never speaks more comfort to the Saints, then when the times
speak most trouble.

Use. Let this then direct us, whither to fly for comfort now, in these times
of Trouble: Even to the Word of Christ. Enquire what Word of comfort, Christ
speaks now to his Church, in this day of Trouble; and listen to it, live upon
it.

It is our fault, that the Noise of our Troubles and fears do hinder us from
hearing what Christ says in his Word to comfort us.

It is said of the children of Israel, Exodus 6.9. that when Moses came to speak
Deliverance and Comfort to them, and told them, that God sent him to that
purpose, to deliver them: yet says the Text, The children of Israel hearkened
not to Moses for Anguish of Spirit, and for cruel Bondage: So it is with us,
Our Fears, and our Troubles, and Vnbeleevings, carnal reasonings cry so loud
in our ears, that we cannot hear the Comfort that God does now speak to us,
out of his Word.

Object. But you will say, Did Christ speak to us, as he did to his Disciples
here, then we might be comforted in our troubles.

Ans. Christ does speak to us, as he did to them: What did he say to them, but
he says to us also now, All we read was but this, -- Be of good cheer; It is
I? Be not afraid. He did not say, He would save them, He would help them, nor
that he would preserve their ship, cease the storm, deliver them out of
Trouble and Danger; only he says, Be of good cheer (It is I) I, that am
your Savior, your Lord, your Master. I, that sent you out. All the rest was
the work of their Faith. Their Faith made out the rest: even their Confidence
in him. Now I say. This, and more then this does Christ say to us now in our
Trouble.

How many words of Christ have we, for this [Bee of good cheer? Joh 14.1. Luke
12.32. Isay. 41.13. Isay. 43.5.
Let not your hearts be troubled.] Fear not little flock. [Fear not thou worm
Jacob,] I. I, that am your God, your Savior, your Deliverer, in times of
Trouble; your Rock, Refuge, Shield. It is I, whose cause you undertake; whose
glory is concerned. And therefore we may reason out the rest, as well as they:
and where is now our Faith! That man is deaf, that hears not Christ say thus
much now. And does Christ say this? where then is our Faith, to rest upon him,
oh that this word might beget faith, and this Faith might again strengthen it
self in this Word!

Object. But you will say, Had we a particular Word of Christ, that God would
now deliver England: we could then find a Bottom of Comfort, though our
conditions lay far lower then they are. But we want that. Therefore are we
oppressed with fears.

Ans. You have as much Word for the deliverance of the Church now, as the
Disciples had for the Preservation of the Ship. Yet they believed the one,
resting only upon the Nature of a Savior, without a word: and why should we
doubt of the other, though we had no word.

There may be a Resting upon Gods Name for a mercy, Though you have never a
Promise for it. Isa. 50.10. He that walks in darkness, and sees no light:
no light of any Promise, to tell him how things shall be: Yet let him trust
upon the Name of the LORD, and stay himself upon his GOD. There is Trust
without Promise. He that Rests upon the Name of the Lord; that is, his Mercy,
Goodness, Truth, Love, Rests upon that which is the spring of all the
Promises: the ground, and foundation, whereon the Promise stands, and that into
which all the Promises are resolved, viz. The Name of God. Psalm. 62.8. The
Prophet exhorts to trust in God. And upon what Ground? He alleges no
Particular Promise; but tells you of Gods General Nature, Ver. 11. God has
spoken, that Power belongs unto God. And Ver. 12. -- And unto thee belongs
Mercy. And thereupon he trusts. God was Powerful, and able to Deliver. And
God was Merciful, and ready to help, and thereupon he trusted.

And have not we as much for a Ground of our Faith, as This? You read, Psalm.
33.18.19. -- The Eye of the Lord is on them that fear him. and upon them that
Hope in his Mercy: to Deliver their soul from death. Here is Hope; and that not
exercised upon any Promise in Particular, but upon Gods Nature in the General.
(Hope in his Mercy.) And yet says the Psalmist, The eye of the Lord is upon
such; to Deliver them from death. Psalm. 147.11. -- The Lord delights in them,
that fear him; in them that Hope in his Mercy. Mark you: There is the same
again, though a Promise be wanting; yet God delights in those, that hope in his
Mercy, in the General.

So; Though we had not a Promise, yet we have a Word to discover God to us: we
have the Name of God; his Nature; his Properties, to rest upon for Deliverance.
And this is as good a Foundation, as the Disciples had now for their Faith upon
the Sea.

What Promises had the woman of Canaan? What particular Word had she for her?
Indeed she seemed to have one against her; I am not sent, but unto the lost
sheep of the House of Israel, Verrse 26. Nay, Matthew. 15.22.23, 24.
It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs. Verse 26.
Triplex tentatio, 1. Taciturnitatis.

2. Particularitatis.

3. Indignitatis.


here was a great trial, here was not only silence, Verse 2.3. no word, but
here was a word against her, yet her faith rested upon his Nature, he had
Power, and he had mercy, and therefore she rested on him.

2. But we have yet more encouragement. Indeed, if we had nothing but Gods
nature, his Goodness, Mercy, compassion to his people, to draw out our faith
and Dependence upon him now, yet this would go far with us. God is merciful
and gracious, we are his people, First, we are his by choice, he has chosen
us out of the world, nay we are his, 2. By purchase, he has (...) Christus nos
redemit, proprie emercacatus est, seu emendo exemit passor.
bought us. So Gal. 4.5. Nay, we are his, 3. By donation. God the Father has
bestowed us on Christ, he has given us to him. Joh. 17.6.7. And we are his 4.
by Covenant, we have given our selves to him. And being his in bonds, nay his
in such near bonds, choice relations, As we have encouragement to depend upon
him; Christus non tam manu potenti, quam praetio dato nos redemit.
So also in our dependence, to expect deliverance and Mercy from him. --

1. Besides all this, we have a Book of Promises, wherein in the General, God
has made many gracious engagements to us.

2. Nay, and we have a book of experiences that may be annexed to the Book of
Promises, both of Gods dealings: 1. To other of his people. 2. To our selves.
which might Speak some encouragement, and afford some bottom for faith to
rest upon.

3. And we have encouragement from the Cause which is undertaken, which as it
speaks encouragement to us to undertake it; So it does no less to us in our
undertaking of it.

4. Yea, and we have encouragement from the Consideration of our enemies. I
say no more, but that it will be an unparralell'd case, an untracted piece of
Providence, if God do not deliver us.

Object. But you will say all these may seem but to afford us probable
conjectures: They may be, and may not be. How shall we know whether God will
do to us, as to others? succor his own Cause, and not give us up to our
enemies? except we had a particular word for it.

Ans. For the answer of this, therefore let us look, and we shall see that we
have something that comes near to a particulat word, that God will deliver us.
Let our Enemies but show as much for their confidence, as we may do for ours;
and we will give up the Bucklers.

We will first lay down two grand Rules, which Divines lay down, in the
interpretation of Scripture.

1. Rule. What God has done to others of his people in distress, is
equivalent to a Promise to us, in the same condition.

Now God has supported, Delivered others of his people in former times.

And this is Equivalent to a Promise to us, that God will support and deliver
us.

He has helped his Church in their straits, in Egypt, in Babylon, in Esthers
time. And that, which God did to others of his People in distress, is
equivalent to a Promise to us; as our Divines say in their interpretation of
Scriptures.

And this seems to have a foundation in Scripture too. Jobs Deliverance out of
Trouble is made the Ground of our waiting upon God for Deliverance out of
Trouble also. You shall see it. Jam. 5.7. to 11. In the seventh Verse, the
Apostle exhorts them unto patience, under all their afflictions, and Crosses,
upon this Ground, because God will deliver them, if they wait on him. Why, But
how shall we know that? Why says the Apostle: He has delivered others of his
people, in the same Cases: And so will he you. You have heard (says he) of the
patience of Job, and what end God made with him. (i. e.) How God delivered him
out Trouble: And therefore be you patient, and wait for the same Deliverance.

And hereupon the Psalmist reasons. Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our Father j trusted in
thee, and thou deliveredst them: they cried unto thee, and were not confounded.
And what is the meaning of that; but that the Church does take up an Argument
from Gods dealing with his Church in former times, To trust God for the like
Mercy for themselves, being in the like condition.

Romans 15.4. What ever things are written, (says the Apostle) they are written
for our learning; that we, through Patience, and comfort in the Scripture,
might have hope. Mark there (what things are written) not only Promises, but
Histories of Gods dealings to his Church, were therefore written, that we might
have hope. (i. e.) That we might depend on God, in the like condition.

He relieved Jacob, David, Iehoshaphat, Job, the Churches of God, etc. That all
these might be in stead of promises to us, to enable us to depend on God, in
the like distresses.

So Psalm. 9.10. -- They that know thy name will trust in thee. And why? He does
not say, because thou have made them ptomises; though this be true. But he
says, Because thou Lord (...) Adverbum non derelinquis. Graec. (...)
sperabant, i.e. pollicebantur fibide te quod non sis ipsos deserturus, quoniam
alios non dereliquisti. Musc.
have not forsaken them that seek thee. Where he urges the experience of Gods
dealings with others, to be in stead of a promise to them, to trust in God.
Otherwise the argument were not of force. He never yet forsook any that sought
him: (m) And therefore we may trust in him, he will not forsake us.

And this is the first rule: what ever God has done to others of his people in
distress, is equivalent to a promise to us, in the same condition.

2. Rule. What God promises to any of his people, he promises to all his
people in an equal estate. What God promises to his Church in other ages, he
promises to his Church in all ages, in equal estate. This is another rule
that Divines lay down. And this seems to have a foundation in the word of God
also. I will give you two places.

God, you know, had made a promise to Solomon at the building of the Temple;
that if the enemy besieged their Cities, if he brought a famine, pestilence, or
sword upon the land: if his people did humble themselves, and pray, and seek
his face, he would hear from heaven and forgive their sins, and heal their
land. As you see at large, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. 1 Kings 8.37. to 40.

Here was a promise made to Solomon. Now if you look into 2 Chronicles. 20.8, 10.
You shall see how Iehosaphat makes use of this promise, and sues it out. --

Art not thou our God, who have said: If the sword, judgment, or pestilence
come upon thy people, and thy people cry unto thee in their affliction, then
thou will hear from heaven, and help, and deliver them. Why says he, Behold
now the enemies which are come against us, and judge them, Lord our God: for we
have no might against this great company; neither know we what to do: but our
eyes are up to thee.

Where you see the rule confirmed; that what ever God promises to any of his
people in any age of the world; he promises to all his people in all ages in
an equal state, i. e. in the like condition. Upon this ground Iehoshaphat made
use of this promise which was made to Solomon; being in the like distress he
goes to sue out the promise, and looks for the performance of it.

I will give you another place, Joshua 5.6. I will be with thee, I will not
fail thee nor forsake thee. This you know was a particular promise made to
Joshua. Yet the Apostle, (who best knew the mind of the giver,) he brings this
promise into the common stock, that seemed to be impropriated; and shows that
this is part of the Saints riches, Hebr. 13.5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, for he has said, He will never leave thee nor forsake thee.
Yea, you may say: he has said so to Ioshuah: but where to me? And indeed this
could not be answered, unless you grant this rule to be true; that whatever
God has promised to his Church, or any of his people, in other ages of the
world; he has promised to his Church, and all his people to the end of the
world, provided they be in like state, in equal condition, whence we say, That
general promises may be particularly applied: and particular, generally. That
is, what ever promise you find to one godly man, as godly: or to his Church, as
to his Church. It is applyable to all. God carrying himself to all alike, all
of you being under the same covenant, and to deal with the same God, who is
impartial in the dispensations of his love and mercy.

And now then bring down this Rule, and see if it be not something to us. He
has promised to save the oppressed people, Psalm. 12.5. He has promised to
deliver his people out of trouble. The Scripture is full. He promised, that no
Weapon formed against the Church should prosper: a promise to the Church of the
Gentiles: He said, He would make Jerusalem a burdensome stone, that who ever
lifts at it shall be crushed to pieces, though all the Nations of the earth
should be gathered together against it, Zach. 12.3. Read Isay 43. v. 3, 4. I
will give men for thee. -- And Micah 4.11, 12. --

What shall we say of these places? are they useful to us? Or of no use. Of no
use we cannot say, for the Apostle tells us, that All Scripture is written for
our instruction; that we through patience and consolation thereof might have
hope. And if useful, then they are to encourage us, to trust upon the same
God, that God will be the same to us, that he has been to others. Psalm. 78.7.
The children of Israel were commanded to tell the wonders, which God had done
to his people in Egypt, at the Red Sea, in the Wilderness; to their children,
and they to their children, etc. And for what reason? -- That they might set
their hope in God, V. 7. Why what is that to them? Why, they were to learn to
trust in God and hope in God for the like, if they were brought to the same
straights. And certainly God would not have us hope, if he had not a purpose to
do the like.

Two things there be that God will never disappoint.

1 Prayer. 2 Faith.
First Prayer. For so he says, -- When said I to the seed of Jacob at any
time: seek my face in vain? Isay 45.19. And therefore, when he has no purpose
to give, he will not have his people to beg. You see he gives Jeremy a
discharge, Pray not thou for this people, neither lift cry or prayer for them,
for I will not hear thee., Jer. 7.16. And Samuel for Saul, Pray no more,
mourn no more for Saul. Psalm. 66. ult. Blessed be God, that has not turned
away my prayer, nor his mercy from m. If God turn not away prayer, he will
never turn away his mercy from us.

Secondly, Faith or Hope, Psalm. 69.6. They shall not be ashamed that hope in
thee: which they must if they fail of the thing hoped for, Prove. 10.28. The
hope of the righteous shall be gladness. So the Apostle, Romans 5.5. Hope makes
not ashamed.

So much for the second Rule. So that you see we have something comes near a
particular word for our deliverance. Give me leave to add two more instances
to these Rules.

3 Encouragement. We have a particular word for the destruction of Antichrist:
and I am sure that speaks no terror to us now. This does no way weaken our
faith for Englands deliverance at this time. He who believes and prays for the
destruction of Antichrist, shall not any way hurt or hinder Englands
deliverance now.

Well, we have a particular word that Antichrist shall down, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
Rev. 18.2. Babylon the great, is fallen, is fallen. Indeed he is not yet down,
but he is deadstrook in the threatening, and he has begun to fall: he is
weakened in the pillars whereupon he stood, Germany, Spain, which is a great
earnest to us, his end is coming. And now, he that rests upon a word for the
destruction of Antichrist, shall not find it any hinderance to his faith, in
the believing the deliverance of England. --

4 Encouragement. We have a particular word, that God will, before the end of
all things make his Churches glorious, Isay 5.4. throughout: read 11, 12, 13,
14. Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempests, and not comforted! I will lay
thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundations of Saphir. -- And all thy
children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy
children. Isay 62.1, 2. etc. For Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for
Jerusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns; and the
Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all Kings thy glory. And thou shall
be called by a new name, -- Thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of
the Lord -- Of which places I may say as the Eunuch to Philip, -- Speaks the
Prophet this of himself, or of some other? So speaks the Prophet, these
glorious things of the Church past, or the Church to come. Of the Church past
it cannot be; for hitherto it has been (like Noah's Ark on the waters, like the
ship on a stormy sea) conflicting with insupportable troubles and difficulties.

Though she has had her respites and breathings, yet she has still been held
down and humbled, tossed, and afflicted, under bondage and persecution. And
therefore it cannot be meant of the Church past, and if not must be meant of
the Church to come.

And is it to come, that God will make his Church thus glorious, That her
enemies shall fall before her. -- Will God do this yet before the end. --

And is the end of all things at hand? Are we now fallen into the last sands?
why this is something to speak encouragement to us. And this is from a word.

And thus you see, Christ speaks encouragement to us, as well as he did to his
Disciples here. He speaks encouragement by his word, by his works, by his
promises, his proceedings: Every way he speaks encouragement: and if you die,
die with this confidence; That God has laid the foundation of the Churches
deliverance, though the oppositions swell never so high. God takes it well at
our hands, when we do entertain and maintain good thoughts of him toward his
people. -- He delights in them, that hope in his mercy. -- Though you have
never a promise, yet to hope upon Gods nature, his love to his Church. And
there is ground enough of hope from that, even his love to his Church.

If you look but upon what he has done to compass a Church, nay, what has
suffered, how he has shed his blood for her; All this would afford us
something for our hope. Will he do so much to purchase her, and will he now
lose her.

It is most suitable to the Gospel, and most suitable to our relations to God,
yea, and expectations from God; nay, and most suitable to a Christian spirit,
rather to dye over-hoping then over-fearing.

We can never over-hope Gods thoughts of love and mercy to his Church and
people, nor his purposes and promises to them. And therefore let it be said of
us, as it was of them, Heb. 11.13. -- All these died in faith, not having
received the promises: but having seen them afar off, were persuaded of them,
and embraced them. Let us do our work in our generation, and leave our hopes,
and the remainder of the work (if any remain) them that follow.

And thus much for the first thing. viz. The way that Christ took to comfort
and Encourage his Disciples, against fears and dangers. -- [He spoke to them.]
A word from Christ is able to raise up up the drooping spirits of his people in
trouble.

The end of the sixth Sermon.
WE now come to the Second. Scil. The encouragement it it self; which is
double.

1. Be of good cheer. 2. Be not afraid.
The Encouragement you see is doubled, because their fears were doubled.

1. They were in danger of drowning.

2. They were in fear of a ghost.

Against this double Fear Christ gives a double encouragement.

Against the first: Their danger in respect of the Tempest, he bids them, Be
of good cheer, be of good courage; believe. Against the second, their fear of
the Ghost, he bids them -- Be not afraid, it is I: one that comes not to
destroy you, but to save you; It is I, be not afraid.

In the general: from the double Encouragement observe: That

D. Christ's help, and reliefs are not only suitable, but they are
proportionable to the necessities of his people.

Their fears and troubles were doubled, and so were his encouragements also:
Single encouragement is too little for double fear: as the one is doubled, so
is the other.

In the 68. Psalm verse 20. he is said to be (...) Deus salvationum, non
frustra pluraliter loquitur, non uno tantum modo Deus, Saluiis est Deus sed and
inu meris modis. Musc. Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt. Read the 80.
Psalm. 3. (...)
The God of salvations; many troubles; and many salvations: as our troubles
cannot over-swell his power, and be too great for him to help: neither can they
be too many in number for him to help.

As the evils of his people are many, so the Salvations of his people are
many. if we have a thousand troubles, he has a thousand salvations. As he
has more blessings than one, so has he more salvations than one. He saves our
souls from sin; and there is mercy more than enough for the greatest of
sins, 1 Timothy 1.14.
and sinners. He saves our bodies from Troubles; and there can be no Troubles
above the safeties of God. He is not a Savior only, but an All-sufficient, an
Almighty Savior. Not only a Redeemer, but a perfect Redeemer; yea a plenteous
Redeemer. -- With him is plenteous Redemption, Psalm. 130.7. Full troubles,
full redemption; Overflowing evils, over flowing redemption. The necessities
of the Creatures can never be above the salvations of God. Nor men, nor devils
can make us more miserable, than God is merciful: nor lay us so low, but
everlasting arms can raise us up.

Are men full of malice? God is fuller of mercy. Are they mighty to destroy?
God is more mighty to save. Do they multiply our troubles? God can multiply our
supports, our comforts, our deliverances. You can never be in such a
distress; but God is able to proportion your deliverance to your distress.
With him is power, Psalm. 62.

Gods reliefes are not only suitable, but they are proportionable to the
necessities of his people. And the grounds hereof are.

R. 1. First, Because they are the Reliefes of God, the Helps of God: That
which God does he does thoroughly, he does to purpose. Men may do things
overtly, slightly, but so does not God: what he does, he does thoroughly. Gods
Helps are through-helps, full-helps. Men may be too weak to relieve us; their
helps may be too short: But so are not the helps of God.

2. The helps of Gods people do arise from Gods Mercy; Bowels of Mercy. Now
you know, what a man does out of Love, he does Thoroughly, he does Fully. All
that God does to his people, is out of Love. Power and Love can do all. Those
two Attributes, which God does chiefly exercise in the relieving of his people,
do speak the Reliefs of God Proportionable to their Necessities. What cannot
Infinite Power, and Infinite love do? Mercy alone would afford suitable help:
But it must be Power with Mercy, that must afford Proportionable help. Gods
Mercy suits help to our Necessities; and his Power proportions it. His Mercy
is an Almighty-Mercy. We cannot separate them in God, though they are
separated in Men. Therefore all his helps are proportionable, because they come
from infinite Power, and are the Issues of Infinite Love.

Use. Then, when ever you are in trouble, look toward God alone for help in
your distresses, lift up your eyes to the hills.

It Is our sin, and our folly too, to forsake the Fountain, and run to the
stream: to forsake God, and go to the creature. A sin which God never failed
to punish: And the punishment has been suitable to the sin. In stead of
succor, they have gotten shame; in stead of comfort, nothing but confusion.
You may read it. Ier. 2. ult. Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way,
thou shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria, yea thou shall
go forth from him, with thine hands upon thy head, for the Lord has rejected
thy confidences, and thou shall not prosper in them.

God loves to Blast men, in their Carnal Confidences, we have had the sad
experience of it. Disappointment and shame, are the Deserved ends of
creaturetrusts: It should now be our wisdom (out of conviction of the
emptiness of all Creature-Reliefs, and experience of the vanity of them) to
go alone to him, who can alone relieve us: And to say with them, Hos. 14.3.
who never found succor till then -- Ashur shall not save us: we will not ride
upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands: Ye are our
gods: for in thee the fatherless sindeth mercy. Or with the Psalmist, Psalm.
108.12. -- Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man. Men may
undertake to help us: But they,

1. Either want wisdom to contrive and bring about what they purpose, what
you desire.

2. Or they want faithfulness to perform what they undertake. Men are
deceitful.

3. Or they want Power, and so are not able to accomplish what they desired, or
you expected.

But now, if God undertake to help, he will go through with it.

He wants no Wisdom: he is the Novit dominus and in promptu habet varias,
vias, and ration es quibus suos ex periculis educat. etiam cum humano judicio
nulla spes aut ratio apparet. Moles. in 68. Ps. 20.
Alwise God.

Nor does he want Faithfulness: he is true of his Promise.

Nor wants he Power, to make good what he purposes to his people. If our
reliefs did lie in man, many things might come, to intercept and hinder, what
you expected, and they desired.

Help cannot come so soon as we expected. Or there may be mountains of
difficulties, that lie between us and them. Or their trouble may be too big
for us to help. But it is not so with God. No distance of place; for he is in
all places. Hence the Psalmist says, -- Thou art a present help in trouble;
because he is ever present. No Jordan can hinder him. There was a Sea betwixt
Christ and his Disciples here; yet this could not hinder, or keep him from
saving them. It must have hindered the reliefs of men: They could but have stood
upon the shore, and wept over them, pitied them, prayed for them: but it could
not hinder Christ. Though there be a Sea betwixt Christ and his people, yet he
can either dry up, or divide the Sea; as he did the Red Sea and Jordan: Or he
can walk upon the Sea: a Sea cannot hinder him; as I have showed. Nor can
Mountains neither: for he can (though there be Mountains of Oppositions)
mighty Mountains, lay them into plains. Zach. 4.7.

Though you be begirt and surrounded with enemies, yet can God give you
succors over the heads of your enemies.

Simson on the Church.
Simson on the Church.
It was the blasphemous speech of Martiques, a governor in France, (something
of the spirit of our Cavaliers) when he had strongly besieged a Protestant Town
in France, and had thought all was sure, there could not be expected any relief
from below, He scoffingly bade them, Now sing, Help Lord; for it is time. And
so God did, says the Story. Though they were shut up from the reliefs of men,
yet God sent succors from above: he helped them, and at the same time ruined
them.

Well then, let it be our wisdom, in all our straits and necessities. 1. To
turn our selves alone to God for help. 2. To Rest in Gods help alone. Use the
helps of creatures, but rest in the helps of God. So did David. Psalm. 108.12.
He had provided help, as if there had not been a God in heaven: and yet so
rested on God, as though he had not a man in the field. Vain are Powers,
preparations of Armies. -- Vain is the help of man, (says he) Through God
shall we do valiantly: for he shall tread down our enemies for us. Verse. 13.
-- The like you read of Jehoshaphat, though his army was big enough, yet says
he, We knew not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
Christians! let us learn the same lesson, God has weakened our arm of flesh,
that we might strengthen the arm of faith. He has blasted us in our
expectations from men, that our eyes and hopes might be altogether fastened on
himself. And I hope, this has been the fruit of it, in Gods people. The more
we have been we akned in creatures, the more we have strengthened our selves
in God. I am sure, we have seen more of God in our weakness, then ever we did
in our strength.

What a wonder was it, that when our Armies were lost; Bristoll taken; none in
the field to oppose them; they were in the top of their strength; and might in
all probability, have come even to the Gates of this City. 1 Samuel 23.14. Et
Jehovae sunt mortis ^gressus. Psalm. 68.21. Hoc est, in ipsa morte cum nulla
spes relic est, atque adeo actum videtur de salute piorum, ad est Deus and ex
ipsis quasi faucibus mortis suos eripit. Moler. in loc.
That then God should find them work in another place, and make that place
(weak enough in it self, and far from relief) as a Rock, against which they
should spend and split themselves, and bring down their pride, and their glory?
This was Gods doing, and it was wonderful in our eyes. Psalm. 118. 1 Samuel 23.14.

Oh! how should these things encourage us, to Rest more fully, more steadily,
more solely on the helps, and reliefs of our good God! who has remembered us in
our low estates; and will at last proportion all our helps to our desires, to
our expectations, to our Straits.

And this you shall be able to do, If you will learn to know God more: If you
will acquaint your selves with his wisdom, power, mercy faithfulness, truth.
Ignorance of the power of God, of the mercy and truth of God, is the ground of
all our unsteadinesse in depending on him, Psalm 9.10. They that know thy
Name, will trust in thee --

If you will eye God more, men less, converse more with Heaven, less with
earth. If you will have to do more with his word, less with works; if you
will shut the eye of sense, and open the eye of faith? You shall be more able
to depend on him.

Thus we come from the general view to the encouragement it self in
particular, which you see is doubled.

[Be of good cheer; be not afraid.]

Be of good cheer,] That's the first.

It seems their spirits were much sunk, their hearts cast down. And there was
great ground, if any thing below might be a ground to cast down men's spirits.

They were first in the midst of the sea. 2 Tossed with waves. 3 The winds
contrary. 4 In the dark of the night, and 5 Christ was absent.

God may exercise his people with such oppressing difficulties, may fail, and
their hearts may even be ready to sink under them.

It was so here with the Disciples. It was so with David. -- I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul. --

And this arises, not so much from the greatness of our straits, as from the
lowness of our spirits under them. We are too big in our successes, and too
little in our losses: we are too high when things go well, and too low when
things go ill. Men that are proud in successes, are sure to be as base in
losses. We are apt to extremes. Hard it is to be nothing in our selves when
things go well; and all in God, when things go ill: but this lessen we must
learn; otherwise we shall be as unstable as the times themselves; and live and
dye according to successes of things. Labor for steadiness of spirit, get to
be settled in unsettled times; get to be fixed on God, be as a Rock in the Sea;
Though the waves move, the sea rises and falls, yet the rock abides, that stands
firm where it was. So let us --

It is said of a believing man: He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his
heart is fixed trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7. But we shail pass this.
There is something more offers it self from the words.

Be of good cheer.] The word is (...) which signifies three things.

1 Courage. 2 Forti animo estote.
Be of good courage.

2 Comfort, 2 Consolamini.
Be of good comfort.

3 Confidence, 3 Fiduciam habete. Juxta vulgarem versic. (...), etc.
Be of good confidence, Firmam animi fiduciam requirit. Musc
Believe.

Have faith in God. The same word, that signifies comfort, signifies
confidence. To show us, that all comfort in God in times of trouble, does arise
from confidence in God in the time of trouble. No more confidence then you
have, no more comfort you have. We have so little comfort in our trouble,
because we have so little confidence. We want comfort, the reason is, because
we have misplaced our confidence. God has blasted our carnal confidences,
that he might be our only stay now in times of trouble. While we have others to
go to, we will not go to God: whiles we have Bulwarks of our own, we will not
take Tower in God: Whiles we have any thing else to rest on, we will never
anchor on the Rock. Would you have comfort from the Name, from the Attributes
of God? Would you have comfort from the Promises, from the Covenant of God? Let
God have confidence from you, and you shall have comfort from him. Assure your
selves, so much confidence as you lay upon God, so much comfort you shall have
from God.

But yet there is something more observable from the word. [Be of good cheer,
be of good courage, be of good confidence.] You see before Christ would allay
the tempest without, he applies himself first to quiet the tempest within.
There was as great a tempest in the ship, in the hearts of the Disciples, as
there was in the sea, Isay 57.20. Their hearts were like the sea, casting up
nothing but mire and dirt; doubtings, fears, and unbelief. Here was the
greatest tempest. Non primum res adversas tollit, ut postea suos quietos
reddit, sed contra. Musc.
Christ applies himself to lay this; to quiet their spirits before he did
quiet the sea. And this for three reasons.

1 Because that this was the root of their troubles, even their lowness of
spirit; their diffidence and distrust in God. All the troubles without had not
troubled them, if they had not had an unbelieving, distrusting heart within.
Hence Musculus upon this place. Timor non habet causam ex rebus adverfis sed ex
diffidentia, and animi imbecilitate. Musc.
Fear does not arise so much from troubles without, as distrusts and weakness
within.

2 Because the greatest trouble was that within. The other did but in danger
the body, this the soul. The mind was most oppressed: Mentes afflictorum
solumodo fiducia pacificantur. Musc.
and therefore Christ applies himself, that the mind might be first relieved.
Bono animo estote, Be of good comfort. Christ applies himself first to succor
that part, that does chiefly labor under any trouble: and that is the mind.
If once the mind be set right, the heart cheered, and strengthened: troubles
will easily be borne.

3 Because, till their hearts were raised up to believe they were not fitted to
receive mercy. God loves to put his people into a posture for mercy, before he
bestow mercy on them.

They were not in fit posture for God to work, till he had raised up their
hearts to believe and expect.

Its an observation, that Nunc vero, etsi opportur number erat ferendi auxilii
tempus, quando Christus apparuit, tamen in illoru^ exercitationem, salutem
distert quae in manu habuit. Calvin.
Calvin has upon this Verse. -- Although it was now a fit time for Christ to
help: yet the tempest is not laid, because his Disciples were not yet awakened
to pray and believe in his mercy. Therefore (faith he) we must know, it is not
without cause, that God does often times defer that help which he is ready
to bestow. God loves to have his people in a posture of mercy, before he do
bestow it. He would lay the tempest within, the storm in their souls: he
would lay their fearful unbelieving thoughts, and put them on, to believe, to
hope, to expect, to pray for mercy, before they had it. The mercies God
bestows upon his people, he is willing should come, in a believing, praying
way: therefore does God shut his hand sometimes, and withold his help, that
we might believe: And here is work for faith. And therefore does he make
obstructions in the breast of the promise, that we should suck, that we should
pray.

He bestows mercy on wicked men without asking, he feeds and clothes them;
causes the Sun to shine on the bad as well as good; but these are the
mercies of a general providence: not distinguishing mercies: of general
bounty, not of special love. But the mercies he bestows on his own, God is
willing they should come in as fruits of prayer, and as performance of
promises: And then are they mercies indeed. The way of coming in is a greater
mercy then the mercy it self.

My brethren, we are in a sad condition: We expect mercy, we look for
deliverance. But do you pray? Do you believe? Do you wait? Remember this.
God will put his people in a posture fit to receive, before he will bestow
mercy: in a frame fit for deliverance, before he will deliver them.

Mercy is never fit for you, till you be fit for mercy. Let the work of God go
better on within, in your spirits, and Gods work will go better on without,
abroad in the land. Interruptions, obstructions, delays abroad, are from
hence, because that there are all these within. Let us not only expect, but
prepare, 2 Pet. 3.12. -- Looking for, and hastening the coming of the day of
the Lord. Many will look for a thing which they will not hasten. Why, what is
hastening? The day is determined; How can we hasten it? The meaning is not, That
we should hasten the day, but that we should hasten or prepare our selves for
the day. Therefore let us not only wait for mercy, but hasten to it, prepare
for it. Now that we may thus hasten the day, four things are requisite. 1.
That we humble. 2. That we believe. 3. That we be mighty in prayer. 4. That we
be sincere in our reformings.

And so much for the first part of the encouragement: we now come to the second.

[Be not afraid.]

Doct. God would not have the hearts of his people sink under any affliction or
trouble.

They were in a great trouble: yet he incourages them; Be not afraid. Hence we
hear it ordinarily, Fear not thou worm Jacob, Isay 41.14. Isay 7.4.8.12 Isay
43.1.5. Rev. 2.10. Luke 2.32.
Isay 41.14. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, Rev. 2.10.
Fear not little flock, Luke 12.32. Thus GOD would steel the hearts of his
people against base fears, though their troubles be great, yet he would not
have their hearts to sink under them. And that first, Because this is offensive
to God. It Is a great wrong we do to God, to suffer our hearts to be cast down
in times of trouble. You have a God who is able to relieve you, be you never so
low; Nay, a God that is willing to help you: for he is a God of mercy; and all
this mercy is for you; all this power is for you; you have a God who has
purposed to help you, he had purposes of good from all eternity to you. You
have a God who has promised to help you: how many promises has God made to
you. --

Nay; And you have had Experience of his Goodness, both toward others, and
toward your selves; It has been a Tried Goodness, an Experienced goodness.

And therefore how do we wrong God, when we suffer our hearts to sink, in
the days of Evil? Christians should be tender of Gods glory: you have need to
take heed of bringing an ill Report upon God, as if he should not have regard
to to help his own People. This gives occasion of hard thoughts to the men of
the World.

You have a tender expression in Ezra. 8.22. -- I was ashamed to require of the
King a band of Soldiers and horsemen to help me against the enmy; Because we
had spoken to the King, saying, The hand of our God is upon all them for good,
that seek him: But his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake him.

Mark you here. He was in a Great strait; There was great danger; He feared
the enemy, yet he was ashamed to ask any help: Why? Because he had said to
the King, -- Certainly God will preserve his own. And the King thought so. And
therefore, lest he should any way Dishonor God, and give the King occasion to
suspect that God would not Preserve them: he would rather venture all upon God
in danger, then give the King such occasion of suspicion. Christians should be
tender of Gods honor, --

2. It Is unsuitable to Christians. Christians should be courageous.

1. It is unsuitable to your calling, you are Christians; who should be more
valiant then they that are most holy, Quis tam fortis quam qui Sanctus. Ber.
ad, mil. Temp. c. ^.
The righteous should be as bold as a Lion; greatness of Spirit, befits those
who are Christians: your Cause is good, your encouragements good, your succors
good, your comforts good, your rewards are good; and why should not your
courage, your hearts come up to all these. You read in the 51 Isay. 12, 13. God
said to his people, Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of man? -- fear
not Worm Jacob.

Indeed one would think he should have said, who art thou, that thou should
not be afraid of a man? what is a worm under men's feet? thou art but a worm,
Yet God says, Who art thou? -- as if he had said, Consider but thy self, and
what relations thou stands in to the great God, under what mighty protections
thou art, under what Promises, -- And thou will think it a thing very unworthy,
very unbeseeming thy self to fear.

Wherefore should I fear (says David) in the days of evil? Wherefore should
I? I that stand in such relations, I that have such dependances, such
encouragements, such succors, such promises, such expectations, wherefore
should I fear? this were unworthy me. As Themistocles said to a Soldier, when
he passed by the spoil of his enemies, Thou may gather up the spoil, for
thou (...). Plut.
art not Themistocles. Esteeming it unworthy for him to do those things which
others did. Christians! God has stamped a great deal of honor upon you in
making you Christians, the Soldiers of Christ, and you are to be as far
above others of the world in courage, as they are below you in condition. See
David. Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. Fears are their portion, not yours. Isay. 8.12. Fear
not their fears. --

2. They are unsuitable to your Cause; They are unsuitable to a Christian, who is
the Soldier of Christ, and to Religion, which is the Cause of Christ. Pity a
good Cause should have low spirits, the Cause is sufficient bottom to bear up
the Spirit, and put courage into the heart of a coward; None can defend it, but
it will defend them, As your danger lies in deserting of it, so your security
lies in defending of it.

The Grecian women commanded their sons, Either to bring back their Shields, or
dye upon them. Epaminondas was so devoted to his Buckler, that he took up a
resolution, either to defend it, or to dye for it; and being wounded to death,
he cries out, Number salvus est clypius?
Is my Buckler safe? esteeming all well, if that were safe. It was their honor
and safety too, to defend that which should defend them.

Religion is our great defense, it makes the great God the defense of any
people, as you see, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto
thee, O people! saved by the Lord. the Shield of thy help, and who is the sword
of thy Excellency, -- That man runs into the greatest hazard, that for any
hazard, shall desert the Cause of God; It is a fearful thing to procure God a
just enemy, by making man an unjust friend, He that maintains the best Cause,
shall be maintained by best God, Though thou suffer with it, yet thou
conquerest by it, Duo in cruce affixi intelliguntur, Christus visibiliter
sponte sua, ad tempus; diabolus invilibiliter, invitus in perpetuum. Origin.
Christ conquered, when he seemed to be overcome; so a Christian. It was that
which Cyprian said unto Cornelius, Scias hoinem Christo deditum mori posse,
vinci non posse. Cypr.
thou may die, but thou shall never be overcome, Quam gloriosi revertuntur
victores de praelio, quam beati moriuntur martyrs in praelio. Ber. Sermon. ad
mil. temp. c. 1.
It is the same Christ says to his Disciples. Luke 21.18. Though they kill
you; you see, Verse. 16. yet a hair of your head shall not perish. --

Are wicked men courageous, or rather desperate in a bad Cause? what a shame
then is it, that we should Quid vel vivens vel moriens metuat, cui vivere
Christus est, and mori lucrum. Bern.
be fearful in a good? What have they to hold up their hearts, and what have
we not to hold up ours? ah! what a sin, to have a low Spirit, under mighty
encouragements?

Ego miserimas curas, quibus te consumi scribis, vehementer odi, quod fic
regnant in cord tuo, non est magnitudo causae, etc. Luth.
Luther, when he saw Melanchtons Spirits to sink under the sad aspects of the
Church of God in his days, he falls to down right chiding of him; I vehemently
hate, says he, those miserable cares wherewith thou writest thou art spent,
It is not from the greatness of the danger, but the greatness of our fears
and distrust, if our Cause be false, let us revoke it, if true, why do we
make God in his rich Promises a Liar; Strive against thy self, the greatest
enemy, why should we fear the conquered World, that have the Conqueror on
our side: Fearfulness is unbefitting a Christian, who is the Soldier of
Christ, and Religion, which is the cause of Christ.

3. It is unsuitable to our relations; we stand related to the great God of
heaven and earth; and a shame it is that such should fear: he is our God, our
Father, our Shepherd, our Husband, our Head, we his People, his Children, his
Sheep, his Spouse, his members, -- Every one of these speak encouragement to
our fearful and unbeleeving hearts; what may not the Child expect from his
Father, the Spouse from her Husband, etc.

4. Nay, It is unsuitable to our expectations from God, and to Gods engagements
to us; God has passed over himself to us in many precious and gracious
Promises, as I have showed, and we do justly expect God to be that to us that
he has Promised, and what a sin and shame that we should so far betray all
these succors, which God has tendered, make void all these Promises he has
made, by giving way to distrustful fears.

To sum up all: Christians! you have encouragements enough (if your hearts be
not fallen below. Men to fortify your Spirits against any evil, and to bear
up your spirits under the sense and burden of any.

1. Every name of God. 2. Every Attribute of God. 3. Every relation of God. 4.
Every Word of God. 5. Every dealing of God with his Church and People, Speaks
abundance of encouragement to You, against these sinful sinking Fears; And so
much for the Second; these Fears are unsuitable.

3. It discovers Weakness and Lowness of Spirit. Prove. 24.10. -- If thou
faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. It argues weakness of
grace, weakness of faith, of hope, of patience; and declares much unbelief.

4. It discourageth and disheartneth those that are weak, Nehem. 6.11.
-- Shall such a Man as I fly! Nehemiah was One stood for Many; He knew his
Actions either of fear, or courage would have an Influence upon Many: And
therefore would rather die, then fly: such a one, if he fear, is like the dead
Body of Amasa, that makes all stand still. -- 2 Samuel 20.12. It came to pass,
that as they came to the dead body, they stood still: and left off to pursue
their enemies. You know what a sin it is, to discourage the hearts of your
brethren: you may see it by the punishment of the bad Spies. --

5 Fear it betrays the succors which God offers; it is a
soule-infeebling-sin, a heart-disabling-sin: as it is said of natural fears,
Fear betrayeth the succors which reason offers; so I may say of spiritual
fears, they betray the succors which God, which the promise offers. God, and
all God, are too little to secure a fearful unbelieving man. I will but give
you two eminent places for it, which I had thought to have passed over, Isay
30.15. You shall see there the people were in some danger, and they let fear
work, when indeed faith, should have worked. And as it is the nature of fear,
it turns a man from God, and from the promise, so it did them, and they betook
themselves to their own forecasts and provisions: they would go down to Egypt
for help, as you see in the first Ver. They trusted in the shadow of Egypt,
Egypt was a well spread tree, the boughs were great and large, and they
promised to themselves much security under the shadow of her boughs, they
thought it would have kept out the storm. And though God now told them, that
in quietness, and confidence, should be their strength, and that in returning
and rest they should be saved: though God engaged himself to be their
security, and set the security in himself, against all they feared, yet
notwithstanding; all this was no security for them, their fears still worked
above their faith, and all that God said, or was, was too little to be their
security. Nay, though he tells them in the seventh Verse, your strength is to
sit still, and it is worthy taking notice of; the word which God uses there
for strength, (...)
is used in Scripture to signify Egypt; Your Egypt shall be to sit still: As
if God had said, What ever you expect in Egypt you shall find in me: if you
will quietly rest your spirits on me, what ever you looked for there, you shall
find me to be unto you. -- But yet all this was too little to answer their
fears, to satisfy their unbelieving hearts, their fears were above all the
security God tendered, as you see in the sixteenth verse; and you see how God
meets with them. --

Take another place in Isay 7. You may read, of a confederacy between the King
of Assyria and the King of Israel, to come up against Judah and Jerusalem. And
in the second Verse you read, how the hearts of the men of Judah were moved,
even as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. Now in this their fear
and danger God sends a Prophet to them, to tell them he would be their
security if they would trust on him, the third and fourth Verses, Be quiet,
fear not, neither be fainthearted, -- I will help you, -- Verse 7. But
notwithstanding all this, their fear prevailed against their faith, whereupon
God sends the Prophet again in the tenth Verse, and bids the King Ask a sign,
either in the depths below, or height above, -- That is, if he desired to have
his faith confirmed by any visible sign, either in Heaven or Earth, God would
condescend so far to the weakness of his faith to afford it to him; but yet
his fears prevailed against his faith, and against all the security God
offered, and he puts all this off very cunningly, Verse 12. I will not ask a
sign, neither will I tempt God. One would think he spoke well, he would not
tempt God in asking a sign, he would believe on his bare word: does not Christ
blame the Scribes and Pharisees for asking a sign? but it is one thing to ask
a sign when God does not offer it, and merely out of temptation too; as the
Scribes and Pharisees did: another thing, to refuse a sign when God tenders it,
and that for the confirming of their faith. That he spoke wickedly: The 13.
verse tells you, Is it a small thing to weary men, but yor will weary God also;
Indeed the meaning is, he will not tempt God; That is, he will not trust God,
he would not trust on Gods promise, Gods security; he would run to the arm of
flesh, provide the best means for his own safety; for he would not trust on
Gods security, he would rather trust to the provision fear could make, then
to the provisions faith could find in God. In periculis non bebemus otiose
pendere a divino auxilio, sed omnia facere quae sunt in nostra potestate. --
Quamvis credamus in Deum, faciamus tamen quae facienda sunt ne praetermittentes
ea Deum tentare videamur. Aug.
Sometimes we tempt God in trusting upon God in the neglect of means, and
sometimes we tempt God in the trusting upon means in the neglect of God, so did
he: See 2 King. 16.5. to the 10. verse.

And so you see fear is a heart infeebling sin, it betrays the succors which
God tenders; God, and all God is too little to secure an unbelieving man.

6. It does gratify the enemy, our fears are our weaknings, the enemies
strengthnings, 1. Our weaknings I say, fear is an army in battalia against it
self; the heart does arm the head, and the head uses all its enginery to
batter the heart, the heart makes use of the head to heighten a danger, and
that again lays battery against the heart to lessen that.

He needs no enemies without, who has a fearful heart within; how can he
stand out against enemies from without, that is not able to stand against it
self. This is the nature of fear, (where courage lessens difficulties, and
makes great things conquerable; such a spirit looks through a lessening glass,
and sees great dangers to be small; the heart still rises above the
difficulty.) This is the nature of fear it looks through a multiplying glass,
and makes small dangers great, and unresistable. Assure your selves, fear will
make a man weak amidst all the provisions of strength, your forts are nothing,
if you retain your fears, you will be naked in the midst of arms, weak in
the midst of strength; fear is an armory of weapons against it self. It is our
weaknings: 2. And it is the enemies strengthening; your fears are their
courage, and your courage their fears: It is said in Judges 2. That Isreal's
sin was Eglons strength: so our sin of fear, is the courage and strength of
our adversaries; you weaken your selves and strengthen them, you disarme your
selves, and arm them, you unweapon your selves, and put weapons into their
hands to destroy you: It is a dangerous sin, and therefore God would not suffer
such to go to war, they were unfit for wars; Deuteronomy. 20.8.
there were two qualities that were to be casheered, malitia, molities,
wickedness of life, and fearfulness of heart, the one makes our enemies
weapons successful, and the other makes our own useless. --

7. It is a sin that indangers our forsaking of the Cause of God. Solomon
says, 29 Prove. 25. Prove. 29.25.
The fear of man works a snare; if once base fear get the possession of the
heart, what snares will they not expose a man unto, I will name some to you:

1. They will make a man shie to acknowledge the Cause of God; You see
Nicodemus, and many of the Jews, of whom it is said, They believed, but durst
not confess him, for fear of the Scribes and Pharisees.

2. Fear will make a man-decline and bawk the Cause of God; the Rulers were
afaid to acknowledge Christ, because of the Romans, if they had done so, the
Romans would have come and taken away their place and nation.

3. Fear will blind the understaning, and hinder us from decerning good from
evil, and evil from good: It is a Maxim, Sin in the affection will breed Error
in the understanding, a corrupt heart will cause a corrupt head; fear in the
heart will cause darkness in the mind; It is a hard thing for a man under the
power of any sinful passion, either by-assed with corrupt affections, or
blinded with corrupt passions, to judge of the truth and justness of any
cause, though it be never so evident; Men in fear are apt to judge those
things good, which yet are evil, and they themselves would so acknowledge, if
they stood upon even ground, if the fears and dangers had not got the hill of
them. --

And I believe this is a great ground of men's judgings in these times; They
think, if they should acknowledge things as they are, they should be at great
costs for the present, and run great hazards for future, and therefore they
will rather smother the Light and Evidences they have, then let in more, to
their danger and cost. Thus our enemies make us drive their mills with our own
breath, and do their work with our own hands -- a fair policy -- Pyrrhus
used to say of Cyneas, That he had gained more Cities with his eloquence, then
he himself had done with his sword: It is wisdom to expect most venom where
there is most Art; the Spider has much Art -- but -- yet a great deal of
poison.

4. The fourth snare that this fear brings on us, it does not only blind our
eyes, that we cannot see the Cause of God, and when we see it make us shie to
acknowledge it, nay, prevail with a man to bawk and decline it. But it will
make us deny and forsake the cause of God too; and here might be examples
enough: many there are, who have forsaken Christ, denied his truth, truth
professed, truth preached, truth in some measure contended for, and all for
fear of men. You know the sad stories of Peter, Spira, of Cranmer -- It is an
easy matter to make him who is under the power of sinful fears, any thing to
preserve himself from danger, and any thing to recover himself out. --

There are four sorts of men, who will never hold to any cause.

1. Ignorant persons, we must know and prove before we can hold fast, the
Apostle bids us, Prove all things, and then hold fast to that which is good; 1
These. 5.21.
That which was never proved is easily deserted. --

2. Unsound hearted persons; It is an easy matter to make him any thing, who
inded is nothing: men that are carried in away only by a byasse, and not by a
principle, it is an easy matter if you either unbyass, or counter-byass them,
to make them move as fast the other way, Qualitates Symbolicae facilime
transmutuntur.
we say Symbolicall Elements do quickly slide one into another; A Hypocrite and
an Apostate are so near, that it is easy to make him an Apostate who was before
an Hypocrite; hypocrisy is that vertually, which Apostasy is actually, there
is Apostasy in causis in hypocrisy, and there is hypocrisy in effectis in
Apostasy, and as times vary, look for more discoveries. --

3. 1 Timothy 6.10.
Wordly minded men: The love of Money will cause men to err from the Faith; as
the Apostle says, When men are lovers of themselves more then lovers of God,
when they are lovers of honor more then lovers of God, (...). 2 Timothy 2.3, 4.
lovers of pleasure, of profit, more then Non amat te Domine, qui aliquid amat
praeter qui non propter amat. Ang.
lovers of God, there need no great baits, it will be a matter of no great
difficulty to draw them from God. Such men will, if occasion serve, raise
themselves upon the ruins of others, make themselves great, by making others
little; such men, they are for any service that may advance their corrupt
desires. It is said of Demas, that he forsook Christ, and embraced this present
world; he forsook the faith of Christ, and for gain he became an Idol Priest,
at Thessalonica, as Dorotheus reports of him: So easy it is to take them from
God, whose hearts are once taken with the world. There is no cause can be sure
of those, whom honor or money can buy out. Such men are only this way till
they can mend their wages, and then they are gone, it is easy to entice him,
who is led away by his own lusts. --

4. Fearful hearted persons: Fearful men will be unfaithful men; It Is all
one to trust a coward, and a traitor; he that is one, will quickly be made the
other; where there is ground to suspect any man's fear, there is no ground to
trust his faith, his fear will make him unfaithful, Terribilior cervorum
excercitus Leone duce, quam Leonum Agmen ducente cervo. Plutar. Apoth.
and infeeble the hearts of them who follow him: such dangerous snares, then
you see, will base fears bring upon men, and therefore far unworthy those who
are Christians.

Use. Oh, let us learn to banish these sinful sinking fears, as unworthy
men, much more unworthy Christians: It is a wonder to read and peruse that
daring courage, that the very Heathens have had. I might here give you
innumerable examples of their courage and valor, all which might be a shame to
us, what though our troubles be great, our God is great, what can over-swell,
either his power, or his love, there is nothing can be too big for God; and why
should any thing be too big for faith, upon whom it depends? for shame, let
faith work more, and sense less, hear the reasonings of faith as well as the
reasonings of sense; when you see no help below, cast your eyes upwards as
Iehosaphat did, 2 Cor. 20.12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are up to
thee, what though there be a famine on earth, there is no dearth in heaven, as
the noble man thought; what though there be weakness below, there is strength
above, -- Well then, shut your eyes to things below, and open your eyes to God
above, Converse less with Sense and Reason, and converse with faith and the
promise. Look upward more, when a man has been looking downward from the top
of some high place, his eyes grow dim; the head grows weak. But when he looks
upward he recovers himself again. So it is with us, while we look only
downward our spirits fail, we are at the end of our faith and hope, but lift
your eyes upward, look upon God and the promise and your spirits shall be
encouraged.

What though the waves rise? The storm be great? Yet you have a Skillful Pilot,
a safe Bottom, a strong God, who is able to allay all storms, to hush all
winds; or to make all commotions serve to bring you to Harbor, which is gods
usual way -- Ita Solet Deus cum suis agere, ut prius eos inmortem mergat,
atque omnem spem liberationis, quantum humano consilio prospici potest, adimat,
and praecidat, deinde vero gloriose liberat, ut apareat non humana industria
aut prudentia, sed Solius Dei potentia hanc salutem partem essc. Moler. Psalm.
68.20.
Gods delights (...) CHRIST: I am JESUS, whom thou persecutest. Haec formula
loquendi (ego sum) duplicem habet effectum unum plenum consolationis apud
credentes alterum plenum terroris apud in credulos, Chem.
The same words were spoken to the Jews, and they Fell down backward, as if
they had been stricken with a Thunderbolt, John 18.5. The same words are spoken
to the Goats, Matthew. 25.44.

But though these words be Full of Terror to the wicked and unbeleevers: yet
are they full of Comfort to Gods people. The same words were spoken to Moses,
when he went to deliver Israel out of Egypt. (...)
ehjeh has sent me to you, I Am has sent me, -- Exodus 3.14.

Haebraei testantur, hoc verbum trium temporum differencias inse continere,
preteriti prepresentis and futuri, fui, sum, ero, lege, Chem. (...).
A word of all Tenses, Past, Present, and to Come, Rev. 1.4. Peace from him,
that Is, and that Was, and that Is-to-Come. It is a word CHRIST frequently
used. -- I am the bread of lise, John 6.35. And it could not choose but be a
great deal of Comfort to them. It is I. I, ipsum esse reputant quem locutum
fuisse ad moysen noverant.
that Divided the Red Sea: I that made the World: I, that took your nature: I,
that came down from heaven for you: I, that am your Savior. It is the Voice
one, who is

1. Your Savior; Able to save in the greatest troubles and pressures, no
trouble can be above my power or my skill.

2. Who not only can: But Rejoices to bring Salvation to his people; It is my
proper work, and my heart is in it; nay,

3. Who came on purpose, to save and deliver you. And therefore this must needs
be Incouragemet to them. They knew his Power; they knew his Love, they knew his
Nature: they knew him to be Toll meum and Toll Deum.
their Savior, and that was Comfort, And that they went out upon his errand,
by his Commission: and therefore there was comfort enough, Though he said no
more, It is I,

CHRIST opposes this against their fear of the Tempest, and against the
thoughts they had of a Ghost, It is I) you think me a Ghost; i. e. One, who
comes to destroy you: But, It is I, That is enough to settle you.

There are Three Doctrines, this holds out to us.

Doct. 1. Vnum idem. que verbum Christi, and credentibus est salutiferum, and
incredulis vergit ad damnationem, aliis odor vitae aliis mortis. Chem.
The same word of God may be a Terror to some, and a Comfort to Others, A
Savior of Life to some, and of Death to another, 2. Cor. 2.16. To the one we
are a Savor of life to life, to the other the Savor of death unto death.

Doct. 2. The appearance of Christ to the Soul, in any sad Condition is a
Resurrection from the dead.

Doct. 3. The presence of CHRIST in any trouble, calamity, or distress, is
Comfort and encouragement to the Soul. We cannot insist upon all these which we
have named, we will therefore contract our selves, and give you these two in one.

Doct. The presence and appearance of CHRIST to the Soul, in any sad condition,
is to the Soul as a Resurrection from the dead.

We will show the truth of this in four sad conditions, the Saints are
exercised with. And then give you some short application.

1. In times of Humiliation for sin: When the Soul has lien Bedrid in sorrow,
been overwhelmed in the depths of Humilation for sin, and has been even broken
and shattered in pieces with fear and consternation of Spirit for sin: An
appearance of Christ to the Soul now, is full of comfort. When CHRIST shall
come Riding upon the wings of a Promise into the Soul: When he shall come,
displaying all his Glory; the Riches of his Grace; And shall say to the Soul;
as he did to Moses, Exodus 34.6.
-- The LORD, The LORD GOD Merciful, and Gracious, pardoning iniquity,
transgessions and sins, etc. Exodus 34.6. Oh! It is beyond my power to express,
or of us All to conceive, How much the Soul is now Enamored on him: How much
the Soul is now Revived.

As before in this condition he appeared as a Ghost to terrify: so now he
appears as a Savior to comfort them. And Luther makes this appearance of
Christ to answer to their former apprehension of him. The truth of this that I
have said, you may read in Job 33.10. To the 27. ver. Where the Soul is in a
sad condition for sin, in the 19.20.21.22. And upon the discovery of Christ,
how is the Soul raised? 24.25. --

2. In Times of Temptation. When a poor soul has been long buffetted with
Satan, and Held down with his bloody Carnal reasonings. When the Soul has
been long on the stormy troublesome sea of temptations: And CHRIST shall at
last apear Conquering the strong-man, Rebuking the storm, overcoming Satan:
Oh! who can express how welcome such a sight of CHRIST: Such an Appearance of
CHRIST is to the Soul! This is a Resurrection from the dead, you have it
typyfied in Abraham who after the battle with the four Kings, Melchizedeck
comes to meet him with Bread and wine, strength and comfort, which shows us,
that our Melchizedeck after all our spiritual battles are over will meet us
with the choycest of his comforts. This is that he promises, Rev. 2.17. To him
that overcomes I will give the hidden Manna and the white Stone and a name in
it which no man knows but he that has it. As after Christ's temptations were
over, the Angels came to minister to him, so will Christ after all our
conflicts, meet us with refreshments, and proportion our Comforts to our
Conflicts.

In times of desertion: when a man has been upon the black seas of desertion,
and has long labored under the sad sense of Gods withdrawments: and at last
Christ comes in, walking upon the sea, breaking the dark and thick cloud, and
shining into the soul: who can now express the heats, warmths, revivings,
that this appearance yields to the soul! Oh, the claspings! the imbracings!
the loves! that pass betwixt the soul and Christ. Will you see this set
down, Cant. 3.4. Christ had withdrawn himself for a season. And ah! then
what sadness! All the world was like a feast without an appetite: a Paradise
without a Tree of Life. She makes inquisition; Hears not of him; Runs to
Ordinances, and would be glad to have the least star of direction to carry
her to him, in this sad condition while she is in the pursuit of Christ.

At last Christ appears to her soul. And read there, how her heart was
revived, -- I have found him whom my soul loves; I held him, and would not
let him go, until I had brought him into my mothers house. -- The like you
have of Job, he had been a long time in a dark and deserted condition, you may
read his complaints: every Chapter, Verse, etc. is but the sad pauses and
pathyes, the afflicted breathings of his soul. At last God appears, and who
can tell his joy? who is able to express the ravishments of his heart? I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes see thee. -- And
certainly his heart was filled with as much soule-advancements as
self-abhorrence, Job 45.5.

4. In the time of outward trouble: when we are in some sad, heavy, and close
affliction, when we are upon beds of sickness, when in prison, when in
dangers: Oh! then a visit of Christ in prison, a discovery of Christ in danger,
a manifestation of Christ upon the bed of sickness; it is worth a world to the
soul.

So it was to the Three Children in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.24, 25. When the
fourth appeared, the presence of whom was like the Son of God. So it was here
to the Disciples, when they were in this danger on the sea, and Christ appeared
to them: none can express how their hearts leaped for joy; what heights of
rejoycings after those depths of trouble.

Thus you see the appearance of Christ in any sad condition is such a comfort
to the soul.

It is true also of the presence of Christ, though there be not the appearance
of Christ. The presence of Christ in grace, though not in comfort. His presence
does support, strengthen, quicken, encourage. 1. Because he is a Savior. 2. A
powerful Savior. 3. A merciful and loving Savior.

Use. What encouragement should this be to Gods people? in the midst of the
saddest calamities Christ is present with you, Isay 41.10. -- Fear not, I am
with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I
will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the righthand of my
righteousness. So again, Isay 43.2, 3, 4. when thou pssest through the fire,
I will be with thee that the fire shall not devour thee; and when thou passest
through the water, I will be with thee, that the water shall not drown thee.
-- This was Moses encouragement, Jeremiahs, Joseph's; of who^ it is said, Joseph
was cast into prison, but God was with him, Genesis 39.21. Who would not be in
Joseph's prison for Joseph's companion?

He that was with Joseph in prison, with David in the wilderness, with Paul
and Silas in the stocks, with Daniel in the den, with the Three Children in
the fire, Jonah in the sea; he will be with us, by his grace, by his comforts,
by his supports, by his Spirit; He will be with thee to bear thee up, and
deliver thee out of thy saddest conditions. Oh! Let us then beg the presence of
God. Oh beg! Never more cause to beg. Say with Jeremy, -- Why art thou like to
a way fairing man that turns aside to tarry for a night. Say with the two
Disciples going to Emmaus, Abide with us, abide with us, the day is gone, and
the night is approaching, the night of trouble, the night of afflictions.

Our conditions are very sad. We may cry with the Psalmist, Psalm. 79. Oh God,
the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they desiled,
they have laid Jerusalem on heaps. And Psalm. 74.9. Which speaks our times to
the full. And therefore now beg the presence of Christ in our Councels, in our
Armies, in our Preparations, in our goings out. We have a promise Matthew. 28.
That Christ will be with us always to the worlds end. Turn this promise into a
prayer.

And as you desire Christ to Present himself to you: so do you present your
selves for Christ, as you desire he should appear for you; so do you appear
for him.

Thus we have briefly passed over three things.

1. The way Christ takes to encourage them.

2. The encouragement it self.

3. The ground of it.

We come to the fourth and last thing.

4. The Time, and that is expressed in the first word, [Straitway.]

[But Straitway.]

Doct. So full of Bowels is Christ to his Church, that he cannot long brook
his people in trouble, when Dominus non deest clamantibus. Guide.
they cry.

Joseph exercised his Brethren for a time: but he could not hold out long. His
Bowels yearned. I am Joseph. Non diu Sinet suos Christus per errorem in
animetu vexari sed statim voce and verbo suo sese illis revelat, and anxios
consulatur. Musc.
So here Christ, -- Though he had exercised, them yet now he can hold no
longer, It is I. I that am your Savior.

The Mother may hide her self for a time from the child: But when the child
cries, she can stay no longer. God has more Bowels to his People, then a
Mother to the Child. Can a Mother forget her child, -- Though she should, yet
I will not forget thee. Indeed he sometimes appears long to them in trouble. --
How long will thou forget me, O Lord? for ever! How long will thou hide thy
face from me! says David, so the souls under the Altar, How long Lord, holy,
and true? But yet though it seem long to us, it is not long. It is called but
a day of trouble, an hour of Temptation, nay a moment, yea and a small moment,
Nubeculae cito transiturae.
Nubeculae cito transiturae.
For a small moment have I forfaken thee. It seems long, because we are in
trouble; Sad hours are long hours, or it seems long to us, because we mistake
the day, God has promised, but we Antedate the Promises, as we post-date
duties. We do as the man in the Gospel, when the promise is to be performed a
100 days hence, we take our pen and write down fifty, this Spirit it seems
Israel had, they thought God deferred, when he did not deferr; it was they
which did hasten. And therefore says Habakuck, Though it tarry, wait for it;
that is, though it tarry to us; for it follows, in respect of the certainty of
Gods decree, it shall come, and not tarry. Hab. 2.3.

Thus you see, though God exercises us, yet full of Bowels he is, that he
will not stay long. And this

1. Because he loves us.

2. He intends to Exercise, not to destroy us.

3. He intends our Praises. Gods end is deliverance in all.

Indeed he may seem to stay, for many Reasons.

1. To exercise our Graces. First, Our Faith, in depending, believing. 2. Our
Hope, in expectation of him. 3. Our Patience, in waiting on him. 4. The Grace
of Prayer.

2. To discover Corruption: To discover what is in our hearts.

3. To fit us for Mercy.

4. To ripen the Enemies for destruction.

The Rod of the wicked shall not always lie on the back of the Righteous.

It is as well Gods desire to come in with Mercy, as yours to expect it. Isa.
30.18. The Lord waits, that he may be gracious to you, -- You wait when God
will, and God waits when he may; when Mercy may be most welcome, and
deliverance most glorious.

Use. 1. This may rejoice the Church in her saddest condition; When we are in
Trouble, and the Enemies vaunt themselves, say with the Church. Micah. 7.7, 8,
9. Rejoyc not over me, o my enemy, when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me: he will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall behold his Righteousness.

2. Let this encourage us to wait on God: wait in Defers; wait in Delays; wait
in want of Means; weakness of means; opposition of means. Lam. 3.26. -- It
is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of the
Lord. --

Musc. ad finem hujus historiae.
Promis^^m Pacem tua nunc Ecclesia Christ,
Insano mundi turbine pressa petit.
Evigila tandem, fluctus compesce furentes,
Fac tibi non pereant, quos pater ipse dedit.
FINIS.

