A Hertochs fecit



The French GARDENER: INSTRUCTING How to Cultivate all sorts of FRUIT TREES,
AND HERBS for the GARDEN: TOGETHER With directions to dry and conserve them in
their Natural; Three times printed in France, and once in Holland.

An accomplished Piece, First written by R. D. C. D. W. B. D. N. And now
Transplanted into English by PHILOCEPOS.

LONDON, Printed by I. C. for John Crook at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1658.

TO My most Honored and Worthy Friend THOMAS HENSHAW, Esquire.
Sir,
I Have at length obeyed your Commands, only I wish the Instance had bin more
considerable: though I cannot but much approve of the design and of your
election in this particular work, which is certainly the best that is exstant
upon this Subject, notwithstanding the plenty which these late years have
furnished us withal. I shall forbear to publish the accident which made you
engage me upon this Traduction; because I have long since had inclinations, and
a design of communicating some other things of this nature from my own
experience: and especially, concerning the Ornaments of Gardens, etc. Because,
what respects the Soil, the Situation and the planting is here performed to my
hand with so much ingenuity, as that I conceive there can very little be added,
to render it a piece absolute and without reproach. In order to this, my
purpose was to introduce the least known (though not the least delicious)
appendices to Gardens; and such as are not the Names only, but the
Descriptions, Plots, Materials, and ways of contriving the Ground for
Parterrs, Grotts, Fountains; the propor^ions of Walks, Perspectives, Rocks,
Aviaries, Vivaries, Apiaries, Pots, Conservatories, Piscina's, Groves,
Crypta's, Cabinets, Eccho's, Statues, and other ornaments of a Vigna, etc.
without which the best Garden is without life, and very defective. Together
with a Treatise of Flowers, and Ever-greens; especially the Palisades and
Contr-Espaliers of Alaternus, which most incomparable Verdure, together with
the right culture of it, for beauty and fence, I might glory to have been the
first propagator in England. This, I say, I intended to have published for the
benefit or divertisement of our Country, had not some other things unexpectedly
intervened, which as yet hinder the birth and maturity of that Embryo.

Be pleased, Sir, to accept the productions of your own Commands; as a Lover of
Gardens you did promote it, as a Lover of you I have translated it. And in the
mean time that the Great ones are busied about Governing the World (which is
but a Wilderness) let us call to mind the Rescript of Dioclesian to those who
would persuade him to reassume the Empire. For it is impossible that he who is
a true Virtuoso, and has attained to the felicity of being a good Gardener,
should give jealousy to the State where he lives. This is not Advice to you
who know so well how to cultivate both your self and your Garden: But because
it is the only way to enjoy a Garden, and to preserve its Reputation. Sir, I am

Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant J. E.

TO THE READER.
I Advertise the Reader that what I have couched in four Sections at the end of
this Volume, under the Name of an Appendix, is but a part of the third Treatise
in the Original: there remaining three Chapters more concerning Preserving of
fruits with Sugar; which I have therefore expressly omitted, because it is a
Mystery that I am little acquainted withal; and that I am assured by a Lady
(who is a person of quality, and curious in that Art) that there is nothing of
extraordinary amongst them, but what the fair Sex do infinitely exceed,
whenever they please to divertise themselves in that sweet employment.

There is also another Book of the same Author entitled Les delices de la
Campaign, (or the Delights of the Country) being as a second Part of this:
wherein you are taught to prepare and dress whatsoever either the Earth or the
Water do produce, Dedicated to the good Housewives: There you are instructed to
make all sorts of French Bread, and the whole Mystery of the Pastry, Wines,
and all sorts of drinks. To accommodate all manner of roots good to eat;
cocking of Flesh and Fish, together with precepts how the Major Domo is to
order the services, and treat persons of quality at a Feast, a la mode de
France, which such as affect more then I, and do not understand in the
Original, may procure to be interpreted, but by some better hand then he that
did the French Cook, which (being as I am informed an excellent Book of its
kind) is miserably abused for want of Skill in the Kitchen.

If any man think it an employment fit for the Translator of this former part;
it will become him to know, that though I have some experience in the Garden,
and more divertisement, yet I have none in the Shambles; and that what I here
present him was to gratify a noble Friend, who had only that empire over me,
as to make me quit some more serious Employments for a few days in obedinc^ to
his command.

Farewell.

THE French Gardener.
The first Treatise.
SECTION I.
Of the Place, of the Earth and mould of the Garden, together with the means to
recover and meliorate ill ground.

Site. ALL those who have written concerning the husbandry of the Country,
have accompanied it with so many insupportable difficulties about the
disposition of the Edifices, and other parts appertaining to the Demesnes, that
it were altogether impossible to accommodate a place suitable to their
prescription: forasmuch as the Situations never perfectly correspond to their
desires: and therefore I shall by no means oblige you to the particular Site of
your Garden,; you shall make use of the places as you find them, if already
they are laid out: or else you shall (with good advice) prepare a new one in
some part that lies most convenient to your Mansion.

Soil. Touching the Ground, if you meet with that which is good, it will be to
your great advantage, and much lessen your expense: but it is very rarely to be
found where the land does not require a great deal of labor: for many times
the surface of the ground shall be good, which (being opened the depth of a
spadebit only) will be found all clay underneath which is a more pernicious
mould for Trees then the very Gravel it self: since in Gravel, the roots may
yet encounter some small veins for their passage in searching the moisture
beneath from whence to draw nourishment: but the Clayie which is a sort of
earth (wherewithal the Bakers of Paris do make the hearths of their Ovens) is
like a board, so thick, and hard, that the roots cannot Pierce it: and in the
extraordinary heats of Summer it hinders the moisture which is below, that it
can by no means penetrate; in so much as the Trees and other plants become so
extremely dry, that instead of advancing their growth they altogether
languish, and in conc^usion perish.

Dressing For redress of this defect, there is only one expedient; and that
is by hollowing and breaking up the ground 3 or 4 foot deep, beginning with a
trench 4 or 5 foot large, the whole length of the place that you will thus
open, casting the several moulds all upon one side; and thus when your trench
is voyded and emptied to the depth which you desire, you shall cast in long
dung, of the Marc, or husks of the wine press, or Cider, and fearne (which if
you can commodiously procure is of all other composts the best) leaves of
trees, even to the rotten sticks and mungy stuff to be found under old wood
piles, moss, and such like Trash; in fine whatever you can procure with the
most ease and least charge: for all the design in this stirring the ground is
only to keep it hollow, that so the moisture beneath may invigorate the Trees,
and plants during the excessive drouths.

You shall therefore lay it half a foot thick at the bottom of your Trench;
and afterward dig a second of the same proportion, casting the mould which
lies uppermost (and which is ever the best) upon the dung, and so making this
Second trench as deep as the former, you shall fill your first trench; and the
mould which you found undermost, shall now lie on the top, thus continuing your
Trenches, till you have finished the whole piece.

Peradventure you may object, that the earth which you take from beneath, will
be barren? I confess with you, that for the first year, the goodness of it
will not appear, but when (with that little amendment which you bestow upon it)
it shall be mellow'd by the rains, and frosts of one Winter, it shall produce
abundantly more then what before lay above, which being exhausted and worn out
through the long usage, has certainly lost a great part of its virtue.

Neither are all Seasons proper for this Labor; because during the great
heats, This earth is so extremely hard and bound, that neither Crow, nor
Pick-axe can enter it. The Winter is then the most convenient season of all
other; for as much as the Autumn raines, having well moystned the earth, it is
dug with the more facility; and besides, the rain, the snow, and the frosts,
which are frequent in that season, contribute much to the work; nor are
Laborers (being at that time less employed) so chargable, as when they work
in the Vineyards, and during August, when they are hardly to be procured for
money.

As concerning the bottom, where you encounter with Gravel, you shall husband
it as we have already described, by breaking it, and the stones that are
mingled in the ground shall be carried out of the Garden. But in case the
gravel lie not very thick and that when it is broken up you arrive at sand, or
to another smaller loose gravel, it shall suffice that it be broken up without
flinging out of the trench: since the Trees will shoot sufficient roots
amongst this smaller gra^vell, by reason of the moisture which the duug lying
above them will coutribute.

You must remember to lay excellent dung half consumed at the bottom of such
Trenches out of which you have cast the gravel, to the end that the rain and
all other refreshings may the more easily pass through it; especially if it be
of the husks of the press, fearne and the like, such as we have already
mentioned.

You will object (I suppose) that to trench and dress a whole Garden in this
manner is to engage one into an extraordinary expense? I grant it indeed, but
it is once for all, and the emolument which will result from one such Labor,
will recompense the charge an hundred fold: since the Trees will be more
beautiful, without moss, or galls, and without comparison produce their
Fruits abundantly more fair then those which are planted in a ground which is
not thus dressed.

Artichocks, Leekes, and other roots grow there to a monstrous bigness:
briefly you will find your self so extremely satisfied perceiving the
difference, to what your Garden produced before it was thus loosened, that you
will have no cause to regret your expenses.

However if you would be yet more thrifty, I shall instruct you how by another
expedient you may amend your Garden with less charge, but withal, as the
expense will not be so great, so neither will the product be so fair. Of this
I purpose to treat hereafter, in the planting of pole-hedges and the
Kitchen-garden.

Many that are curious do extremely exceed all this: for they pass all their
Earth through a Hurdle to clear it from the stones, which is done by placing
the Hurdle or Cive upon the margent of the Trench, and so shoveling the mould
to the top of the Cive, the earth passes, and the stones roll to the foot of
the Cive, which are afterward carried forth of the Garden.

The form of this Cive is a frame joined together, two Inches thick, six-foot
high, and five foot in breadth which shall have two cross quarters within the
height, of the same bigness of the frame, and all the four cross pieces shall
be equally b^ared about the bigness of those sticks which the Chandlers use to
make their Candles on; these holes must be a fingers thickness distant one
from another, and in them you shall fit sticks of Dog-wood because it is tough
and very hard when it is dry, and which will endure longer without breaking
then any other. Note, that both the top, and the bottom of your frame must be
pierced quite through, that when any of the sticks are broken, you may put new
ones in their places, fastening them with small wedges at the extremes.

SECT. II.
Of Espaliers, or Wal-fruit and of single pole-hedges and shruls.

Wall-fruit* ^edges. WAl-fruits being the principal ornament of Gardens it is
most reasonable that we should assign them the most eminent place and give a
full description of them, as being indeed the subject upon which I determine
chiefly to discourse in this first Treatise.

By Espalier, we mean those Trees with which the Walls of Gardens be adorned and
furnished: To bring this to perfection you must make a Large trench, as I have
described it before. If the ground be of Clay, you are to husband it as has
bin spoken of Clay, and if of a rocky nature, as of rocky: But you shall leave
one foot of Earth unbroken, next to the wall, for fear least you endanger the
foundation; and after having laid a bed of Dung, of half a foot thick at the
bottom of your trench, you shall cast thereupon, of the very best mould which
came forth of the Trench to the thickness of a foot; This done, you shall
mark out the places where you design to plant your Trees, which shall be at a
reasonable distance. That of twelve foot to me seems the most convenient; but
this at your own discretion, I shall oblige you to no Law, every man has his
particular fancy, but my opinion is, that if they are planted nearer, they will
much incommode one another in few years, if farther remote, and that a tree
chance to die, or that you graft an other, whose fruit may peradventure not
pleas^ you it will extremely vex you to see your wall so long disfurnished, and
naked in that place.

Distance. Having thus marked the place for your trees, according to the
proportion of 12 feet, you shall cause the pits where you plant them to be
filled (at three foot distance from either side of your mark) with the best
mould, which must be mingled with short dung of an old Melon bed, or else with
some other, which before had bin employed in your Garden for plants; and thus
there will remain a space of six foot, in which intervall you shall cast a
second Layer of Cow, hogs, or sheeps dung very fat and well rotten, after this
you shall fling thereupon the mould which you had out of the trench, and
dressing your border, make it very even.

Planting. You shall make the holes for your trees, at the places before marked
out, and plant them handsomely, making a small heap in the center of the pit,
to set your tree upon, whilst you extend the roots all about it, drawing them
downward, and then the hole being filled, and the mould cast in, you may tread
it about the Tree the better to fix it, and fill up the hollow places.

You may if you please, before you plant, break away the ledge of earth to the
very Wall a foot on either side of the place where you intend to plant your
trees, without the least prejudice to your wall.

You shall set your tree a foot distant from the wall, the branches somewhat
inclining toward it, for the more ornament in their growth, this will also
bring the roots better to the middle of your Trench, by which they will more
easily find nourishment.

Have a special care that you put no other dung near the roots of your Trees,
then that short stuff of the old bed (which it will be good to mingle also with
store of excellent mould) least the summer burn it all; for as much as new
dung keeps the earth hollow and loose till it be totally consumed; but if
otherwise you cast it into the intervalls, when your Trees are once taken, and
that their roots within 2 or 3 years have found this excellent dung (which will
by that time be quite rotten) they will shoot wonderfully, produce a clean
bark, and most incomparable fruit.

Concerning Esphaliers (which I will English Palisades) I will show you
several forms of accommodating then according to the age of your trees.
Pole-hedge set up against a wall, much used in France.


The first is, To fix small Stakes into the ground half a foot distant from
your Wall, to begin to conduct the tender sprouts of your trees, and if need
require, you may add some cross poles or Lathes, as many as are necessary,
binding to them your tender shoots with the gentlest osiers, or rushes, without
knitting them too fast, but only to guide them for the pr^sent.

The second manner shall be to make a hedge of Poles, and la^hes equally
cancelled and well bound, which, being of greater strength then the former,
will oblige the trees to what flexure and form you please.

The third is a Lattice fashioned to the Wall, and supported with the bones of
horses legs or by iron hooks, fixed in the wall, least otherwise the tree,
rising and forceing it to come at the fresh air, bend it forwards, and break
or overturne the hedge, whose Stakes are only fixed in the loose and newly
broken up earth, and besides, with length of time they become rotten.

See the figure or first plate. The fourth, which is the most substantial of
all the rest, and more easily maintained, is to place in the wall the ends of
wooden blocks, about the bigness of a strong rafter, which are to be placed
at eight equidistant squares, projecting only six inches from the wall, in
which you shall boar holes with an Auger an inch and an half deep, and some two
inches from the ends: be sure to place them at equal distance, for height, and
breadth; and in the midst of every square, there shall be also one block,
resembling the figure of a quincunce.

Then you shall provide Lathes, or poles, which you shall cause to be made
exactly of the length, that your blocks-ends are placed, which Lathes or poles
you shall shave and fit at both ends, to enter into the holes made in the
extremes of the blocks, and to fix them well you shall bend them alittle like
a bow, putting the two ends into the opposite holes and letting the bow go,
they will force in themselves so strongly as that they shall need no other
fastening. The figure which is at the beginning of the treatise, will
sufficiently inform you.

When your Trees are now a little strong, they will not need to be spread with
so much wood, as when they are young; it shall suffice in these kinds of
Espaliers to stop the strongest branches only. And when any of these poles
shall chance to be rotten, another may easily be supplied, reserving always
provision of them in your house.

The fifth is, to take quarters of wood, a little bigger then your poles, and
to accommodate them to your Iron hooks, or horses bones (as we have said above)
and bind them with copper or brass wyre which will continue a very long time.

As they are frequently in France, with a kind of rough-cast if the wall be
built of unhewen Stone. The sixth and last fashion, to plie or palisade your
trees (and which is the handsomest and most ageeable, but cannot easily be
made, save where the walls are plastred over) is to take shreads of Leather, or
Lists, of Cloth with which you shall stay the tender branches, fixing the list
of the cloth to the wall with a nail, and so the boughs will take their plie
as they grow bigger, without either casting forwards, or loosning the nails,
which will rust within the wall.

These three last manners of Espaliers are in greatest practice, to defend the
trees from snailes, Earewigs, Stotes, and other noxious infects which creep
into the withy twigs, and betwixt the rinds of round poles, which are not
quarter wood.

Be careful not to plant any Tree in the coins or Angles of your Walls; since
they can there come but to half their nourishment; and besides in so doing it
will mar the figure of your Garden, the Tree shooting forth all his branches
forward, to come at the air.

Pole-Hedges. The Counter Espalier is a hedge which forms all the walks and
Allies of the Garden, it is planted in the same manner as the former, excepting
only that the trench shall be at the least four foot broad, causing the moulds
to be cast, the good upon one side, and the worse upon the other, that so you
may fling the best into the bottom of your trench, and the rest upon it.

Then you shall plant your trees in lines very even, perpendicular and not
inclining as in wall-fruit.

The wood which supports these trees must of necessity be fixed in the Earth,
and bound athwart with poles: all the curiosity which can be expressed in this
manner of hedge, is to make it with quarter wood and bind them with Iron or
brass wyre.

There are some, to spare the charge of maintaining these palisads, satisfy
themselves with b^nding and joining the trees together when they are strong
enough, but then they ought to be planted nine foot asunder; and the mischief
is, that they are extremely subject to be shaken by high winds.

Shrubs. (...) Kitchin-garden by the path sides; which one may cut in what
figure he please, round, square, flat at top, or let grow in the shape of a
Cypress; in clipping whereof men are rather satisfied with their form, then
their fruit, which the walls and Contr' Espaliers abundantly afford.

You shall therefore plant them in the most commodious places of your borders,
and at equal distances one from another, observing what I have already taught
concerning planting.

The description which I have given you of planting your trees, will exempt you
of the expense of trenching your whole Garden; the Allies and walks not so
much needing it, for before the trees shall come to shoot their roots as far as
the walks, they will have sufficient strength to pierce them and search out the
best ground. Howbeit you shall not leave your Allies neglected, but shall cause
them to be diligently weeded, and especially be careful to cleanse them of
Couch or dog-grasse to the very least string, though you dig after it a
spadebit deep, continually shaking it from the earth; and if after all this you
perceive any of it remaining, be sure to eradicate it how deep soever it lie,
that so you may utterly exterminate a weed so extremely noxious to your Garden.

SECTION. III.
Of Trees, and of the choice which ought to be made of them.

Trees their choice. IT is to no purpose to have well prepared your ground,
unless you also plant it with the best and choycest fruit, which you may find
in the Nurseries of such Gardiners as have the reputation of honest and trusty
men; for the greater part of those which ^ell, usually cheat those who deal
with them. Therefore of such, I shall not advise you to buy any, unless you
first see the fruit on them, and so you may retain them from that time,
sealing them with little Labels or bonds of Parchment, with your own seal,
that thereby when you take them up, you may be sure of your purchase. With
those whom you may confide in, for their faithful delivery, you may be less
exact; however it shall not be amiss to seal them, though it were only to
give other customers notice, that you have already bargained for them.

If you desire to mark the species, you may effect it two manner of ways; One
by writing the name of the tree upon small pieces of slate, and the other, by
binding to them locks of wool died with several Colors, whereof you shall
make a memorandum, and this shall serve you to difcerne your trees in planting,
them, that so distinguishing your summer fruit from the winter, your walls,
Espaliers, Contr' Espaliers and Bushes may afford an object more agreeable,
since they will never be entirely naked, but will here and there be still
furnished with fruits, and also that you may the better sever them, that two of
the same sort be not contiguous to one another.

Pears. The Fruits which you shall make particular choice of, as for Pears (if
you desire to make profit of them in the Market) shall be the summer and winter
Bon-Chrestien, The Muscat, the great and lesser rath-ripe pear, the Portail,
the summer and winter Bergamotte, St. Lezin, Amadotte, Bezidairy, Double
Flower, the great Russeting of Rheims, the perfume pear, and p^ire Boeure of
both sorts, the Messire John, Cir^, Cadilla^, and what ever other you find to
sell dearest.

Apples. For Apples, the Renettings of several sorts, Cour-pendu, Red pipin,
Chestnut, Apis gros and petit, Pigeonnet the Judea and others,

Peaches. Abricots. As for Peaches and Abricots, they allwaies sell well; but
these two sorts of fruits, are not so proper in Espaliers, because their boughs
frequently dye, sometimes upon one branch sometimes on the other, and very
often quite perish, which is very illfavored to behold, by reason of the breach
which it causes in your Espaliers. Those which are chiefly in reputation are
the Rath peaches or Peaches of Troy, Alberges, Pavies, Cherry-peaches, Violette
de Pau, Brignons, and others.

Cherrie^ For Cherries and Bigarreaux, for as much as there are particular
Orchards of them, I will discourse no further of them, then only to tell you
that those which have the shortest, stalk, and least stone, resembling those
of the valley of Montmorency are the most excellent.

There are likewise Precoce and rath-ripe Cherries, which are to be planted
where they may stand warm, and exposed to the southern aspect, or else set in
Cases, to be removed into the stove during the winter, together with the
Orange-tree: but these serve rather for Curiosity then for profit.

Return we therefore to the election of our Trees, and let us not suffer this
digression to hinder us from saying all that can be spoken upon this Argument,
and in particular, concerning Pear trees which are the bearers of the most
delicious and best fruit of your Garden.

That tree which is Grafted upon a Quince is to be preferred before all other,
because it is not only an early bearer, but produces large and lovely fruit
ruddy and blushing where it regards the son, and yellow on the other part which
is more shaded by its thickness.

Those which are on the freestock are esteemed to bear better relished fruit
but they are nothing so large, nor so rarely colored, as are those which be
grafted upon the quince, and that is it we principally look after for sale,
other pears being allwaies of a green and less tempting Color: and besides,
they are long in bearing, and frequently fail of blossoming, spending much in
superfluous wood; if plied in form of wall-fruit, you prune them till they are
shot up very tall, and past their utmost effort.

Age. Concerning the Age you shall best choose your trees when they are about
four years growth or thereabout, as being then of a very fair size; for if they
be younger, it will be a long while 'ere they will have garnished your walls;
and if they be elder, they will have shot their great roots, which one shall
endanger the breaking or splitting in transplanting them, to the exceeding
prejudice of the Tree, which are wounds that are a long time recovering, and it
must have shot a good quantity of new strings, before it will any thing prosper.

It is the opinion of very many, that one should plant a great and full grown
tree once for all, forasmuch as they are so long arriving to their perfection:
(...) I am quite of another sentiment; for I conceave that a well chosen tree,
and that is of a thriving kind, of the age I have spoken, shall make a fairer
root then one that is elder, and which can send out but very small twigs,
though in greater quantity.

Shape. As to the shape and form of the trees, be careful that they be clean
from moss, not stubbed, sightly and thriving; the body clean and large, that
the Escuchion or ^left be well recovered at the stock, and that the tree be
plentifully furnished beneath, handsomely spread and agreeable at the wall.

Taking up. I would have you present your self at the taking up of your trees
that they break off as few of the string roots as is possible, nor split or cut
any of the greater roots.

Transporting and transplanting. Choose a fair day, about St. Martines, for as
soon as ever you shall perceive the leaf to fall you may securelty ^ake up
your trees, and then transport them as gently as may be, either on the backs of
men or beasts, and plant them again with all expedition, least otherwise they
languish, and the hairy-roots grow dry: but as you plant, remember to cut off
the small points of the roots, to quicken them, and take away that which may be
withered.

But you must not prune them till the season, for the reasons, which I shall
hereafter prescribe.

From Peare-trees grafted upon the freestock you should cut off the down right
root, that so the other roots may fortify and extend themselves all about to
suck the best mould.

All sorts of other trees may be drawn, transplanted, and cultivated in the
same manner, without any difference or distinction.

Pruning. Touching the pruneing of Trees, the just season for those which are
old planted, is in the decrease of the Moon in January, at which time Grafts
for the cleft, and crown are to be gatherd and provided: and for such as are
newly planted, they must not be disbranched till the sap begins to rise, that
the wound may the sooner be cured, for if you cut them in winter, the wood will
be dried by the frost in place of the scar and make a stubb of dead wood to the
very bud, which should else shoot near to the cut.

I could scarcely resolve with my self how to teach this art of pruning: since
it would merit an express Discourse to instruct you perfectly: but having in my
Preface resolved to conceal nothing from you as a Secret, I had rather hazard
the censure of captious persons, then hide the art from you, how you may attain
the most excellent and fairest Fruit: in description whereof I shall
nevertheless be as succinct and brief as I can; teaching in a very few lines
(by way of Maxims) what would employ more then two sheets, if I should give a
contexture to my Period. Therefore

You shall begin to prune, by cutting off all the shoot of August where ever
you encounter it, unless the place be naked, and that you suspect the next old
branch will not suffice to cover it, without cutting it off, which would
exceedingly spoil and deform your tree.

Those young branches which proceed from the old, and shoot lustily, must be
stopped at the second or third knot; for they would attract all the Sap which
ought to nourish the branch: and in case the Tree be plentifully garnished, you
may cut them off at their first peeping; and such as you would spare are to be
conducted where you would have them continue.

Every Branch which sprouts as well before as behind the Tree must be cut off,
because they deforme it.

All Buds that will be Fruit shall be spared; yet if there be any at the top of
a branch which you desire should fortify and spread, cut off that branch near
a Sprig-bud, rubbing off the Fruit-buds which are on the new shoot.

Every branch which is to spread and fortify, must be pruned, be it never so
little: but on the stronger you may leave more buds, then on the weak and
feeble.

Every branch forceably plied to garnish any void place, does never bear the
fruit fair: but in case it be guided thither from its prrimary shooting, it
will do well enough.

Every Bud which has but a single leaf produces only wood: that of fruit has
many, and the more, the sooner it will bear, and the greater its fruit.

The Fruit-bud which grows on the body of the Tree produces fairer fruit, then
such as break out of the collateral twigges, and tops of branches.

You shall rub off all twig-bu^s, which sprout before or behind your trees.

If you desire to have your tree soon furnished on both sides, hinder it from
shooting in the middle.

The more you prune a Tree, the more it will shoot.

You should prune but little wood from trees that are graffed on the
free-stock, and which do not yet produce fruit-buds: but afterward having
passed their effort, they will bear but too plentifully.

Make as few wounds in a tree as possibly you can, and rather exterminate a
deformed branch, then haggle it in several places.

Cut your branches always slanting, behind a Leaf-bud, to the end they may the
sooner heal their wounds without leaving any stubs, which you shall afterward
cut off to the very quick, to avoid a second skar, and a great eyesore.

When your Trees form into crowns or bunches, the tops of your branches that
have been too much pruned, or that have cast their fruit, leaving the knots of
the stalks, they are to be discharged of it, to beautify the Tree.

You shall also disburthen your trees that are too fertile, commencing with the
smaller, by cutting the stalks in the middle without unknotting them: the fewer
the tree does nourish, the fairer will be your fruit.

Nailing and Pruning. The best season to bind, plash, nail and dress your
trees is in the month February, for the greatest frosts being then past, one
may cut off what is superfluous without difficulty, and besides, the sap not as
yet risen, there will be no danger of breaking off the buds, knotted into fruit.

But the greatest dificulty in this work, is to spread the trees handsomely
like a Fan when it is displayed, that is, that as the sticks or ribs of a fan,
never thwart one another, so nor should the branches of your trees.

Spreading And this is a vulgar error amongst the greatest part of Gardiners,
which proceeds from their ignorance, and that they will undertake, the ordering
of trees, which is a peculiar science, not to be attained amongst the
Cabbage-planters.

Error. They do extrtamly ill, when they faggot and bundle together a great many
small twigs, in one tack, which is a fault altogether unsufferable; for indeed
one should never leave above the breadth of a single branch, about all the
tree; In fine they are so stupid, that they pass, and repass the branches, and
wind them about the poles which (in Palissade hedges) are erected for their
support; or else they thrust and draw the tree behind, and the poles before,
which are so gross mistakes, that they may not be past over without due
reproach. I shall counsel these men in charity, to put themselves into the
service of some skillful Gardener for a year or two, where they may learn to
order Trees as they ought, and profit by his instructions.

And yet notwithstanding all this, if you spy a place about your tree which is
very naked and unfurnished, you may in such a case thwart some small branch to
cover that eie-sore and void, but let this be rarely, and so disposed as not
easily to be discovered.

Dressing. It is requisite that you give four diggings or dressings to your
trees every year, and you may employ that ground by sowing it with the seeds of
such herbs, as will be in season and ready to be spent at the renewing of
every dressing, such as are Lettuce, Purslaine, Cherile, Cichorie, nay even
young Cabbages to transplant; in fine, what ever is not to abide long in a
place; and there you may also replant, Lettnce to pome and head, Cichory to
blanch it, Purslain to pickle, and for seed, and thus your labor will redouble
the profit, for by this means your trees will (besides the dressing, stirring
and opening of the uld) be often watered by the Gardener, whose care must be
continual about these youngherbs and plants.

The season for the first is before Winter, when you should well dung such as
have need, and the digging ought to be very deep: at expiration of winter give
it a second labor, mingling it with the soil which you first bestowed upon it;
the other which follow need only suffice to preserve it from weeds; but never
dig it in rainy or scorching weather; for the one will make mortar of the
ground, and the other will chap and and parch it: If you give it a stirring
when the vine begins to soften the verjuice-grape, and tinge the black
clusters, you shall find your Pears in the space of a week to swell and
improve exceedingly.

But you shall by no means sow any seeds which produce any large roots, not so
much for that they require a longer sojourn in the ground to arrive to their
full growth, as because they will suck, emaciate, and dry much of the mould
about them. For this reason likewise let the greater Cabbages, and leeks of the
second year be sedulously banished.

Old trees. It will be necessary at every three or four years period, to
cherish and warm your aged trees, and such as were old planted, and this is
done by uncovering the mould within a little of the roots, and applying of
excellent dung thereon. The best season for this work is at the commencement
of Winter, that so the dung may be half consumed before the heat and drouth of
Summer invade it.

SECTION. IV.
Of the Seminary, and Nursery.

Seminary. THe Seminary being the mother and the nurse for the elevation and
raising of Trees, it will be highly requisite to give you perfect instructions,
after what manner it is to be governed; and therefore begin we with seeds.

All sorts of seeds affect a fresh place cleansed from bushes, trees, and
roots, and would be sheltred from the darts of the Meridian sun by some high
wall or other fence: and this is a convenience which you may easily find in
some quarter of your Garden, where the wall is toward the south: One year will
amply furnish you with all sorts of Plants, and indeed with more then you can
tell how well to employ.

Seeds. Kernels. Stones. Having therefore provided store of kernells and stones
the year before, and as you eat the fruits, and the winter well spent; You
shall toward the end of February, sow your kernells, etc. in lines upon beds,
sow every species apart, and in like manner set the stones in even files about
4 Inches asunder. I presuppose, that the ground where you design them, has
been well dressed and prepared at the beginning of the Winter, and that it shall
receive a second e'^e you begin to sow. Your kernells and stones will spring up
the first year, some stronger, some more fe^ble then others, but that's nothing,
they will all serve to transplant. Notwithstanding, if you did sow them in a
bed or quarter behind your Pole-hedges: at the same south side, that they
might be visited a little by the rising and declining of the sun) they would be
better to be planted forth at two years growth then at one, but with such as
they are omit not to store your Seminary.

Set your Peach stones at such time as the fruit is in maturity, interring them
with the peach about them as they are gatherd from the tree but you must not
forget to mark the place with a little stick, least in dressing the seed plot,
you break off their sprouts.

Seed-plot To begin therefore your seminary, having made choice of some fit
place in your Garden, you shall dress, labor and dig it very well and then
tread it very even all over to settle the Earth; afterward you shall cut out
small trenches about a spade-bit deep, and two foot distant each from other,
casting the mould on one side upon the margent of your furrow: this done, set
your plants (having first a little topped them) about half a foot distant, and
supporting them with your hand cover their roots with the mould which you cast
out of the trench, and so tread them in to fix them, least, being loose they
vent and spend themselves. You must observe to plant every species by
themselves, Pears with pears, Apples with Apples, etc. and be careful that the
weeds do not suffocate the plants, and therefore they must be dressed and
weeded upon all occasions.

Cutting. But you shall not cut your plants till the sap begins to rise, and
then you may nip them within half a foot of the ground: and where they shoot
leave only one cutting, the remainder of the following winter, still rubbing
the foremost Buds for a foot space, to secure the bark from knots, which would
be a great impediment, when you are to Graft upon them.

Cra^^ing. If in the same year that you planted you find any of them strong
enough to Inoculate, and that they have plenty of sap, graft on them without
farther difficulty. My opinion is that a man cannot Inoculate either on wild
or free-stock too young; provided they be large enough to receive the
Scutcheon; and my reason is, that the stock and the Scutcheon taking their
growth proportionably the incision of the stock will the sooner be healed, and
they will shoot with a great deal more vigor, then those which you shall bud
upon stronger sets, which are 2 or 3 years recovering the place from whence you
took the dead part, and of which at the other side of the Scutcheon, the bark
of the wild stock does frequently die three or four Inches below the Scutcheon,
so that it will require three or four years to heal the defect: Add to this:
that the Bark of an old stock, will not unite so well with that of of the
Scutcheon; but is apt to make a great wreath, subject to peel and unglue; a
thing which never arrives when the Rinds are both of them young and tender.

Some observe yet, that tall Stocks are to be graffed together, affirming that
they grow equally: but chosing my Plant at half a foot, it were impossible that
all should prosper, and be taken up together separated, but with difficulty,
and without violating the Roots: and therefore it is better doubtless to graff
young, for the causes already specified, since the stronger must needs master
the weaker: and those likewise which are most vigorous will surmount the other;
and a small compass will furnish you with a sufficient quantity of good trees,
provided you suffer them not to grow there too long.

Quince-stocks. You shall likewise Provide you a Seminary of Quince-stocks like
to the other, and order them in the same manner.

There are three sorts of Quinces: That which is poynted before; The Pear or
Female Quince, which has the fruit like a Callebasse; The great Portugal
Quince pointed at both extremes. The first is the least, the ordinary is next,
that of Portugal much more excellent, and abounding in Sap.

The right Quinces (which is that which I name the wild-stock) are such as have
their fruit resembling a Gourd or Callebasse, and not such as be great behind
and pointed before.

Peaches. For the Peaches which proceed from the stones that you set, I advise
you to prepare a quarter in your garden a part, for the reasons already
alleged: because that if you range them in hedges or walls some of the
branches perishing every year, will prove a very great eyesore: And therefore
my counsel is that in one of the quarters most distant from your house (toward
the north where they will not impeach the prospect of your garden) Plant the
Peach-trees which you shall take out of your Seminary, Placing them six foot
from one another equidistant on every side in the quincunx, and thus they will
produce you a world of fruit, by reason of their multitude.

Dressing. You must be careful to give them four dressings or diggings, prune
off the dead wood, and to cut off at the second or third joint the young
shoots, which growing too exuberant will draw all the sap of the tree to
themselves, and starve the old branches, which in defect of nourishment will
shortly perish; for observe this as a Maxim, that the sap does allways apend
to the most tender shoots) You may also intermix some Abricots in the same
place, which are to be governed after the same manner of the Peaches.

Nursery. You shall Plant your Nursery, in some large bed or quarter of your
garden, which lies most remote from your dwelling, least when it shall appear
like a grove or Copsewood, it hinders your prospect.

Plot. The Plott designed, and the ground exquisitely piched and voyded of all
manner of weeds and roots, you shall mark out with a line, and make holes
every way, 2 foot large and 2 deep, distant 4 foot asunder, and the ranges also
as wide from each other. Then taking your grafted trees out of the Seminary,
you shall transplant them into this Nursery; Nor is it material though the
shoot be but of the first year they will serve well enough to replant; and in
that you shall punctually observe the rules which I have prescribed in planting
of Esphaliers and hedges, which is, to mingle some fine dung of the old bed
with good mould, and making a little mark at the center of the holes, there
you shall place your tree, extending the roots of it on every side, and
allwaies drawing them downwards; then fill the hole up to the very Graft, and
tread the mould about it to establish the tree.

Planting. Note that the graft be almost level with the ground for the greater
ornament of the Tree; since it would be a very great eyesore to see the knott
or swelling where it was grafted, and especially in some whose graff is bigger
then the stock which bears it, and so it makes an ilfavoured wreath at the
closing which is very ugly and disagreeable.

However you shall remember to plant somewhat hig^er when it has not bin long
since the ground was trenc^ed, for as much as the dung underneath, when it
begins to consume will make the tree to sink.

Trees. As for trees in Hedges and counterhedges exposed to the south, one may
set them four fingers lower then the Soil, the better to refresh them; and
without any peril of striking out small roots, by reason of the drouth; yet in
case there should sprout any, the Gardener searching with his Spade may cut
them away, and give the knot a little air to stop their growth for the future.

You shall likewise remember that (if during the extreme Heats you will benefit
your Trees) you put some mungy Fearn, or half rotten Dung about all their feet;
yet so as it do not touch the Stem: and thus you may spread it for a yard
compass, and about four fingers thick; This will both shade the Roots, and
exceedingly refresh the Mould about them, preserving the earth from gaping in
extremity of weather, by which oftentimes the Tree languishes, and the small
roots become dry: but if you a little stir the ground before you apply this
dung, you will render a double advantage to your trees, for the earth will by
this means maintain it self supple, and put forth no weeds through the dung.

It will be requisite to have a Nursery for three main considerations. The
first is, that you may always have provision of trees, fit to supply the places
of such as accidentally dye, or languishing do not thrive. The second is, to
dis-incumber your Seminary which will otherwise be too full and thick of young
trees. And thirdly that you may spare some for the market, to recompense the
expense of your first Plantation; and besides, they may yield you some fruit
where they stand, which will extremely please you; add to this, that a tree
which has been frequently transplanted, becomes a great deal more generous and
kind then if it had bin immediately drawn from the seminary only, and Planted in
his station to continue.

Disbranching. It is also convenient to have a Nursery for those trees which
are grafted upon the Such as are pr^duced of Kernels.
free-stock (as Pears, Apples, and others) which you design for trees of six
foot stem, you cut off the top, or master root, and as the tree grows, to prune
those branches near the trunk, which suck too much of the moisture, or fork and
deforms the tree; but spare the smaller ones, that the stem may fortify by
stopping the sap in its course. There are very many which extremely mistake
themselves in this particular taking off all the branches upon the body of the
tree to the place where they would have it head and so are constrained to set a
prop or a stake to redress and secure it from the violence of impetuous winds,
which bends and wrests the trunck, by reason of its weighty head which renders
its top heavy, and hinders the body of the tree of its growth because the sap
speedily Passing upwards to the new shoots makes no halt by the way, as it
would do if some of the young branches were left.

Nipping. There is a season when to nip the bud and stop the trees whilst the
sap is up: and the buds which may in this case be taken away, are such as most
deforme the tree; but you must ever spare those which will be fruit.

And to distinguish them one from the other, such as have but one leaf
apendant produce wood only, whereas those which are fruitful are plentifully
furnished with leaves.

Pruning. You may also prune off those young shoots which are too exuberant, and
that may draw too much sap from the tree to the prejudice of the rest of the
branches: where therefore you observe this, you shall stop them at the third or
fourth knot, and after it has put forth its Sap.

They use also to prune in Augustspring, as well to impeach its unhandsome
spreading, as that it may ripen before Winter and not starve the branches
below, which must of necessity be cut off in February.

If you desire to make a plantation of great trees in an Orchard by themselves,
you must of necessity Graft them upon Freestocks, and not upon the quince, that
is to say, Pears, and the Apples upon the Apples of Paradise, A wild appl^
produced of kernels, on which they graff the Dwarf
for otherwise they will never become of any stature, but will be low and
shrubbie.

Distance. You may Plant your Apple trees 30 foot distant, and your Pears,
Plumtrees and other fruits 24: Form. and be careful that you plant them in
the quincunx, that is, in lines which mutually cut at right angles.

In such a plot of ground you may safely sow some seeds, and pulse, which will
occasion you to open and stir the ground; for I advise you above all things
not to permit any wild herbs or weeds in your Orchard, rather restrain your
self to a smaller circuit of ground, which you may manage well, then to
undertake a larger, and neglect it for want of dressing. Great Orchards are
admired, but the smaller better cultivated, and you shall receive more profit
from a small spot well husbanded then from a large plantation which is
neglected.

SECTION. V.
Concerning Graffs, and the best directions how to choose them.

Graffing. THere is a great deal of dificulty in the well choosing of Grafts;
for upon that does depend their early bearing, there being some which produce
no fruit in ten or twelve years.

The best Grafts are those which grow upon the strongest and master branch of a
tree, which is wont to be a good bearer and such a one as does promise a
plentiful burden that year, and is thick of buds; for hence it is that your
young grafted trees, have fruit from the second or third year, and sometimes
from the very first.

Whereas on the contrary, if you take a graft from a young tree which has not
as yet borne fruit, that which you shall propagate from such a tree will not
bear a long time after.

^noculating. The graffe or bud for the Scutcheon, ought to be gathered in the
month of August, at the decrease, and immediately grafted or for a more certain
rule, without such notice of the Moon, observe when your wild-stock, and Free
are in the Prime of their sap: for the Escutcheon is allwaies fit enough, but
the wild-stock does frequently fail of being disposed to receive it, for want
of sap: as it commonly happens in an extreme dry Summer where they shoot not
at all, or very little in the Agust-spring: And therefore if you have many trees
to graft, loose no time, and be sure to begin early.

Season. You shall know whether your wilde-stock be in the vigor of his Sap by
two indications. The one is, by making incision, and lancing the bark with a
Penknife, and lifting it up; if it quit the wood, there is Sap sufficent; but
if it will not move readily, you must attend, till it ascend; for it will else
be but labor in vain, and prejudice your Tree. The other is, when at the
extremities of the branches of the wild stock, you see the leaves of the new
Sap appear white and pallid, it is a Symptom that the tree is in case, and fit
to graffe.

Choice. A Graffe for the Scutcheon shall be chosen from a Shoot or Syen of
that year, mature and very fair; for there are many which are thin and meagre
at the points, and upon such you shall hardly find one or two buds that are
good: gather it near to the Shoot of the precedent year, cutting the upmost
point in case you may not take off the Scutcheons, and cut away also all the
leaves to a Moiety of the stalk.

And the reason why I oblige you to cut off the top of the Graffe, and its
leaves so far, is, because if you spare them they will wither, and so dry all
the graffe, that it will not be possible to separate the Escutcheon from the
wood, and besides all the leaves are worth nothing.

Time. If you defer your graffing till the morrow, or some days after they are
gathered, you shall dip their ends in some vessel, the water not above two
inches deep, till such time as you intend to graffe them, but if you will graff
them on the same day, you need only keep them fresh in some Cabbage leaves, or
moist linen clout.

Cleft. Graffs for the Cleft are to be gathered in the wain of the Moon in
January, to the increase of it in February, and so continuing from Moon to
Moon, till you perceive that the Sap being too strong in the Stock, separates
the Rind from the wood.

Choice. To choose a Graff well for the Cleft, my opinion is, that it should
have of the wood of the Viz. that which rises in Spring and August.
two saps of the precedent year, whereof the oldest will best accommodate with
the Cleft, and the other will shoot and bud best; though I do not utterly
reprove the graffing of the wood though but of one year; but the tree will not
bear fruit so soon.

You shall gather your Graffs at the top of the fairest branches, as I have
formerly said, and you shall leave three fingers length of the first Sap, or
old wood, that you may cut your graffe with the greater case.

To conserve them till you graffe, it is sufficient to cover them by bundles
half ways in the earth, their kinds distinguished, least if you should mingle
them, and should graffe of two sorts upon the same same tree, you be
constrained to cut one of them off; since two several kinds of fruit do never
agree well upon the same Stem, the one hindering the other from arriving to its
perfection by robbing it of the Sap.

SECT. VI.
The manner how to graffe.

I Have never observed above four several necessary manners of graffing, and
from which you may hope for an assured success, the rest being more curious
then profitable, seeing that by these four a man may graffe all sorts of Trees
and Shrubs whatsoever. Of these

The Escutcheon holds the preheminency; for as much as it is applicable upon
all sorts of trees, the most easy to do, and the soonest that bears fruit.

The Cleft or Stock follows, and that as practicable upon the greater trees,
and also upon the smaller, even to those of one inch diameter.

The Crown is not much in use, save upon trees of the largest size.

The Approach is not ordinarily practiced, except it be upon Orange, Limmon
trees, and other rare Plants, such as we conserve in Cases, and are therefore
joined with the more facility.

Inoculating To begin therefore with the Escutcheon. Your Stock being stripped
of all its small twigs the height of half a foot, or a little more, from the
season that they use to cut trees; or else deferred till graffing time, you
shall choose out the fairest part of the Bark of your Stock, and if it be
possible upon the quarter which is exposed to the most impetuous winds;
because they come sometimes so furiously, that they loosen the Shield, being
yet tender, and charged with branches and leaves; which accident does not
happen so frequently, when they are thus placed, as when they are graffed on
the other side, though you should set supporters to uphold them.

Cut your Escutcheon long enough, an inch or thereabout, and reasonably large,
that it may derive sufficient nourishment; be sure to take it off dexterously,
and look within it, whether the sprout of the Bud hold to it; for if that stay
behind with the wood from whence you took it, it is worth nothing: You shall
hold this in your mouth by the end of the stalk of the leaf, which I ordered
you to reserve expressly when you gather your graffs; then make incision upon
your stock, and gently loosen the bark with the pointed handle of your Knife,
without rubbing it against the wood, for fear of scraping the Sap which is
underneath; this done, place your Scutcheon between the wood and the bark,
thrusting it down till the head of the Shield join with the incision at the top
of your Stock, and that it be even and flat upon the wood, which being
performed, you shall bind it about with Hemp, beginning to tie it very close
above, near the Bud, then turning it below, leave the Eye but a very small
compass, and thus you shall finish your binding with a knot.

Season. Be careful when you graffe, that it be neither during the excessive
heat of the Sun, nor in a rainy season, for the Scutcheon will not endure to be
wet, and it will be in great danger of not taking, if it rain the first four or
five days immediately after your inoculating.

There are some who take off part of the wood with the Shield, which they do
with one cut of the knife, which manner of inoculating I do not disapprove: I
have succeeded well in it my self, and besides in so doing, there is no danger
of impeaching the Bud of your Scutcheon, that is, of leaving the Eye of the Bud
behind you. Those which have many trees to inoculate use this way because it
is more prompt and expedite.

Three weeks after you have inoculated (or thereabout) you may cut the knot of
the Ligature, that the sap may enjoy the freer intercourse. Winter past, and
the Bud beginning to open, cut your Stock three or four fingers above the
Scutcheon, and cut likewise the binding behind it, and the Rind it self to
the very wood; this must be done at one gash of the knife, from the bottom to
the top.

Howbeit you shall not take off the Tow from about the Scutcheon, but let it
fall of it self; for there is danger in quitting it, lest you press the Bud,
which is then extremely tender: You shall not cut off the Stub which remains
beneath the Scutcheon, till you prune the Tree, which must be in February the
year following.

After your Scutcheon has put forth its first Sap, you may prune it at top,
that it may shoot out branches about the Eyes below, otherwise it will mount
without forking, and so your Dwarf will have no grace or beauty.

The just season to stop them is in the decrease of the Moon, when the Sap of
August shoots out; you may then also, if you please, ^ut the wood of your Stock
which you left above the Scutcheon, and cover the wound with good earth thinly
mixed with Hay, and making it a little hood, or more curiously, with a plaster
of wax, mixed with a composition which I shall describe hereafter.

If you will attend the issue of the Winter following to cut the heel of your
tree, you need not be obliged to wrap it up, and secure it thus, because the
ascending sap will immediately cure it.

I have observed, that a Scutcheon set on a wild or free-stock of about an
inch Diameter or more, does not prosper and shoot so well, as upon one that is
younger, and besides, it is more subject to unglue. Some there be that
inoculate from the very first rise of the Sap, but they do not much advance;
for the Scutcheon not shooting till August, the sprout is nothing so fair as
that of the close Eye or shut Bud, since it is frequently found that the wood
of the new shoot never ripens, and the Winter approaching kills it; and
therefore I counsel you not to inoculate so early, unless the necessity be
very urgent.

In the Cleft. In the Cleft or Stock, all sorts of trees from one inch bigness
to the greatest that are may be graffed: The most proper Season for it, is from
the beginning of the new moon in February, till the Sap (becoming too lustly in
the tree) separates the wood from the bark; for then you shall leave off
graffing.

When you graffe in the Cleft, if it be to make Dwarfs, you must first saw your
Stock four inches, or thereabout, above ground, and then with your
Pruning-Knife pare off the surface of the wood, where the saw has passed, about
the thickness of a Sixpence, because the Track of the Saw leaving it rugged
will hinder the Sap from healing the grated wood; nor can the graffe join to
its trunk unless the rind be refreshed, and cut to the quick with the knife.
When this is done, you shall cleave the Stock where the Bark appears most even,
and least knotty; and observe, that you never place your knife exactly in the
middle of the tree, where the Pith and Heart of the wood is, but a little
toward the side. Then cut and fit your Graff, sharpning all the old wood, as
far as the new in fashion of a wedg, equal on both sides, yet leaving the two
rindes fast to the wood in the narrowest parts; for if once they be separated,
your Graff is good for nothing: Then top your Graffe three or four inches, more
or less, according as it will bear it; for as much as upon a small stock one
would not leave them so long, as upon a great tree. Thus prepared, you shall
open the Stock with a small wedge made of some tough wood, such as Box, Ebony
or the like, striking it in gently, and then lodge your graffe at the edge of
your Stock, sinking it down as far as the new wood, and place it so that the
parts through which the Sap has intercourse (which is mutual 'twixt the wood
and the bark) do exactly correspond.

Having thus lodged your Graffe, you may place a second on the other end of the
Cleft, always remembering to put two Graffs into every Cleft, provided that you
can so place them that they be not contiguous; for by this means they will
sooner recover their stock, then if there were but one, because the Sap ascends
equally on both sides, and preserves the back side of the rind from withering,
as we have already said: After this you shall cover what remains of the Cleft,
'twixt the two Graffs, with a little of the thinnest and most tender Bark,
joining it accurately to keep the water from entering in: then you shall make
the Hood with fine earth and Hay; some cover the hood with mosses, and with two
short Willow-rinds laid 'thwart one another, bind them on with an Ozyer to the
foot of the Stock, to maintain them the more fresh, and preserve them from the
water.

When you graffe upon great Trees, you shall choose the smoothest and most even
branches to place your Graffs upon, if they be very big you may lodge four upon
it, making the Cleft in form of a Cross, yet without touching the Pith of the
tree, the remanent branches which you do not graffe, must be sawed off within
half an inch of the Stem, and then paring away the wood which the saw may have
grated, you shall swathe it about with Loam till the Bark have healed the
wound, to guard it from the scorching of the Summer, and the frost of the
winter, which would exceedingly prejudice it, by penetrating to the very heart
of the tree. It will be good to apply some stays to the branches which are
graffed, to strengthen the young shoots, and secure them from the winds, till
the second year be past, and that they are well established; and if you find
any that grows disorderly, you shall cut it off, as also if they come too
thick, and choke one another, by this means giving free Air to the tree.

Upon your small wild stocks, which will support but a single graffe, you
shall cut the hinder part where you might place a second, to the very heart of
the stock, slanting it in, like that part of a Pipe which is applied to the
nether Lip, this will greatly contribute to its recovery. And

When you graffe small stocks, which have not strength enough to fasten their
graffs, you shall assist them, by binding them about with some tender twig of
an Ozier.

Now, albeit I did oblige you to choose a graffe with the old wood, yet I would
not have you to cast away that which is but of one Sap, nor the cuttings of
those where you took the graffes of the two Saps, because they are excellent,
however they produce their fruit something later then the oher, nor do they
bear so great a burden; and therefore unless it be in case of necessity, I
would only use those which are of two saps.

Crown. Graffing in the Crown or 'twixt the wood and the bark is never
practiced, save upon old trees, whose rind being very tough can endure the
wedg without splitting, and which will not suffer the cleaving (by reason of
the thickness of the bark) but with much difficulty, and besides it is a great
hazard if it takes.

To graffe in the Crown, having sawed your tree at the place where you would
graffe it, and pared away the raggedness which the saw has left to the quick,
especially about the Bark, you shall cut and sharpen your graffe but on one
side, then str^ke in a small Iron wedge 'twixt the wood and the rind, and so
taking out the wedge, set in your graffe, rind to rind, and wood to wood, to
the full depth that it is sharpened.

Thus you may place as many as you please about the Trunk, provided that their
number do not split off, and cleave the Bark.

Approach. To graffe by Approach it is very easy; For you have only to take two
young branches, one of the free and graffed, and the other of the wild stock,
without separating them from their Stems, and then paring away about four
fingers breadth of bark, and wood till you approach near to the pith, and so
marry them together as dexterously as it is possible, tying them about with raw
Hemp, from one end of the Cut to the other, and so let them remain for two
Saps: then after a month or six weeks are expired, if you perceive the wood to
swell, and that the Ligature incommode them, you shall cut it upon the wild
stock, with one gash of your Knife, as we taught you before on the Scutcheon.

At the beginning of Winter, you may cut and sever the natural tree from its
stock, and cut away the head of the stock within two inches of its graffe, and
thus these two twigs concorporating, it will receive the nourishment of the
wild stock. R^member to cover the wounds of them both, with the Wax, which I
shall hereafter instruct you how to make.

You shall not cast those twigs into the fire which you cut off from the
Quince, which you graffed in the Cleft, for you may reserve the cuttings, which
will strike root the first year, and must be set in your Nursery to be graffed
when they are ready, and what you prune off from the Q^ince trees during
Winter, will be very good for this purpose.

The Prunings of the Pomme de Parradis, which they call the Scion, will also
take in Layers.

Cuttings Layers. All sorts of Cuttings are to be planted in a small Trench,
such as we described in the Nursery, which may be about the breadth and depth
of a s^ade-bit: but first strip off the leaves, and cut them slan^ing at the
great ends, in form of a Does foot, and so you shall lay them at the bottom of
your Trench very thick, one by another, because there will many of them die;
and let their small ends appear above ground, and so cover them, and fill the
Trench, pressing it well down upon the Cutting, that the Air do not enter, and
when you dress them, cleanse them only with a haw, that the weeds do not choke
them, and it will suffice.

Then cut off the tops of your Layers all of an evennesse, within three fingers
of the ground, and that especially when you perceive the Sap to be rising,
which you shall find by the verdure of their Buds, which never shoot when the
Scion begins to take root.

You may not cut, or stop the first years Shoots, fearing lest they put forth
their Buds beneath at August, which will hardly come to maturity: it were
better stay till February, and then leave them as the tree will best support
it, and in such places as you des^re they should shoot, rubbing off such as
pe^p before, behind, and in other unprofitable places. This opposes the
opinion of many, but experience makes me persist in my own.

SECT. VII.
Of Trees and Shrubs in particular, how they are to be governed, and their
Maladies cured.

Trees. I Thought it requisite to make a Chapter apart, to comprehend in
particular, all that we have spoken in general, in the several precedent
Sections, and that for the avoiding of confusion, and to the end, that in case
there were any thing which might seem difficult to you (though I have much
endeavored to render my self intelligible in the simplest terms, and the most
vulgar that our Language will bear, that I might be understood of all, and
profit them by it) I might more perspicuously explain it, in particularizing
all sorts of fruits, which we in France do usually furnish our Gardens withal.

Pears. I will therefore set Pears in the first place, as those which of all
others bear the most rarity of fruit, and are the principal ornament of the
walls, Contr' Espaliers and Bushes of a Garden, from whence we may gather fruit
in their perfection during six months of the year at least, and for that it is
a fruit which one may in great part keep till the new ones supply us again, and
that without shriveling, or any impeachment of their taste, a thing which we
find not in any other fruit besides.

Graffing. All sorts of Pear Trees may be graffed after any of the four
precedent manners, but they succeed incomparably upon the Quince, and in the
Scutcheon produce their fruit much earlier, and that fairer, ruddy, and of
greater size, then when they are graffed upon the Free-stock, excepting only
the Portail, which often misses taking upon the Quince, and will therefore hit
better upon the Free-stock: The Summer bon Chrestien and the Vallee are very
fit for it, and if they have been formerly graffed upon the Quince, it is the
better, for it will render the fruit a great deal more beautiful, and fair.

And in case that any graffed either in Scutcheon or the Cle^t upon the Quince
fortune not to take, and that you conceive it to be dead, let the stock shoot,
it will produce wood sufficient, which you may clear of all the small branches,
and at the near expiration of the winter following, you shall earth it up at
the ends in form of a great Molehill, leaving out the extremes of the
branches, without cutting them off, and they will not fail to strike root the
same year, provided that you remember to water them sometimes during the great
heats, and that you do not suffer the rain to demolish the earth about them,
which must be continnally maintained in its first height; and if in the same
year, you find any of those branches strong enough inoculate them without any
more ado, unless you will choose rather to stay till the next year and graffe
them all together; every one of these will be as so many trees to your hand,
which you may plant in your Nursery, the year after they have made their first
shoot, accurately separating them from the Mother-stock, and cutting the ends
of their great root aslant.

Remember to graffe them conveniently high, that your tree may have sufficient
Stem, and all that part which is in earth will abound with small root^*

If you have any old Quince-trees, and would raise young Suckers from them, lay
some of the branches in the ground, and in one year they will be rooted: but in
case you desire to produce a Tree at once; you may effect it as I have already
described it. The season of Laying these branches is all the Winter long, till
the Buds begin to spring, provided that the earth be qualified.

Apples. Apple Trees challenge the second place, and may be likewise graffed
after all the four ways, they succeed very well upon the Scion of the
Pear-main grafted on Layers of the tree (called by the French A kind of Codling.
Pommier de Parradis) and in particular the Queen-apple do^s wonderfully
prosper upon it, and is more red within, then those which are graffed upon the
Free-stock.

There are some curious persons who graffe the Q^een-apple upon the white
Mulbery, and hold that the fruit does surpass in redness, all others that are
graffed, either on the Free-stock, or the forementioned Scion: but my opinion
is, that it is the age of the trees only which imparts that color to them.

Plum. Plum-trees are ordinarily graffed in Scutcheon and in the Cleft, if you
have any stocks raised from the stones, or the Suckers which spring from the
Damask-Plum, they will yield very good trees, and bring abundance of fruit,
there being no Plum whatsoever which bears so full as the Damask.

The Wilde-Plum (which you shall know by the redness of the ends of the
branches) is not fit at all to graffe upon, for it rejects many kinds of
fruits, and is besides very uncertain to take.

Your old Plum-trees, whose small twigs grow in bundles and puckles, may be
recovered and made young again, by taking off the head of them at the end of
winter; they will shoot anew, and bear fruit the very year following: but you
must cloame the heads of the wounded branches, and refresh the tract of the
Saw, as I directed you before.

Abricots. Abricots are grafted either in the Stock, or in the Bud, upon plants
springing of their own stones, and also upon a Plum-stock, but the white
Pear-plum, and Moyend' oeuf make a very fair Abricot, and much larger then upon
any other sort of Plum.

Peaches. Peaches, Perses and Sort that cleaves to the Stone.
Pavies, are ordinarily graffed by inoculation upon a Peach, Plum, or Almond
tree, but I prefer the Plum, because they are of longer continuance, and do
better resist the Frosts, and the pernicious winds, which shrivel and rust the
leaves, and the young shoots. The white Plum, or Poictrons are not at all
proper, but the black Damask, A great white plum, as big as an Abricot.
Cyprus, and A black unpleasant fruit.
St. Julian. Such as are budded on the Peach do not last, upon the Almond
somewhat longer, and produce more abundance and much better fruit: but there is
so much difficulty of governing the Almond-tree in our Climate, that one had
better content himself with Plum-stocks; for the Almond is very impatient of
Transplantation, and in great danger of perishing, if you remove him not the
first, or second year at farthest, after he has made the first shoot: and
besides, you must be sure to place him where he is ever to abide, and bud him
there, without thought of stirring him afterward. The Almond-tree is of all
others the most obnoxious to Frosts, by reason of his early blossoming; all the
good in him is this, that he never sends forth any Suckers from the Root.

Cherries. Cherries, Bigarreaux and the like fruits are better propagated on
the small wild, or bitter Cherrie, then upon the Suckers which spring from the
roots of other Cherrie-trees of a better kind, though tolerable in defect of
the other: and the right season to bud them, is, when the fruit begins to
blush, and take color.

They do very well graffed in the stock, and shoot wonderfully, but the Bud is
much to be preserved.

They have of late found out an expedient to prevent the Gum which incommodes
the graffes and Clefts of Cherry-trees, to which they are wonderfully
obnoxious: and that is, by sawing and paring the part smooth with a knife,
afterward to make an incision of two inches length into the first and utmost
rind, drawing it aside, and separating it from the green some two inches long,
without peeling it quite off: Then in the middle of this length to make the
Cleft lodge the graff, and cover it with this skin, by replacing it; and then
swathe it, as the custom is.

For Stones and Almonds of all sorts, which you would sow to produce natural
fruit or graffe upon: prepare a Bed of Earth before Winter, trench it, and
tread it, then rake and water it: which done, range all your Stones on it at
three inches distance, (every species apart) then lay as many boards upon them
as will cover the Bed, and upon the boards a good quantity of weighty stones;
cover all this with new dung to prevent the Frost: the month of May following
take up your boards: you shall find your stones sprouted; which you shall
immediately take up without impeaching the Sprouts, and so place them where you
would have them remain: This is a particular which will extremely satisfy you,
as in time you will find.

Figs. Figs of all sorts are propagated by Layers, and suddenly bear fruit,
which you may facilitate by passing a fair branch through some Bushel or
Bushels, and environing it with rich earth, that it may take root. But be
careful that you fasten the Vessel very well to the side of the tree, lest the
winds and its own weight turn it over, and ruin your Labor. You may also
take the Suckers which spring out of the earth from the foot of a Fig Tree
ready rooted, or the Cuttings, which you may cultivate and govern after the
manner of Quinces; but yet without cutting off the tops of the branches which
you so lay, for this wood having a large pith, is very subject to the injury of
wind and water: and the sooner you plant these trees in the places designed
for their abode, the better they will take. Winter past, gather off all the
unripe Figs before they fall off themselves, for if they stay till they
spontaneously quit the trees, they will have exhausted them very much of their
Sap, to the great prejudice of the Figs which are to succeed them, and which by
neglecting this do oftentimes never arrive to their maturity. And forasmuch as
the Fig Tree does very much suffer by reason of the Frosts, you are obliged to
plant them in a warm place, or in Cases, which you may remove and house with
your Orange Trees in the Winter.

Mulberies take likewise of Cuttings and Layers, pricking them in a moist
place, half a ^oot profound, not permitting above three fingers of the tops to
peer out of the earth, and treading it down with your feet as you should do
Quinces.

If you would sow Mulberies, to produce a great quantity in a little ground;
take an old Well-rope, which is made of a certain wood called the Bline, easy
to be twisted, and rub it with such ripe Mulberies as you find fallen off the
tree; bury this Cord four fingers deep in a trench, cover it with earth: and
the next year you shall have Trees enough both to store your self and your
Friends.

Oranges. Limmons. Concerning Orange and Limmon-Trees, I shall only deliver the
principal and most ordinary government of them, which is to sow their Repins
in Boxes, and when they are two years old, transplant them in Cases, every one
in a Case by it self, filled with rich Mellon- bed-mould, mingled with Loam
refined and matur'd by one winter, and when they can well support it, you may
either inoculate, or graffe them by Approach in the Spring of the year: Above
all things, be diligent to secure them from cold, and commit them early to
their shelter, where, that they may entirely be preserved from the Frost, you
may give them a gentle Stove, and attemper the Air with a fire of Charcoal,
during the extreme rigor of the Winter, in case you suspect the Frost has at
all invaded them.

But so soon as the Spring appears, and that the Frosts are entirely past, you
may acquaint them with the Air by degrees, beginning first to open the doors of
the Conservatory in the heat of the day, and shutting them again at night, and
so by little and little you may set open the windows, and shut them again in
the evening, till all danger is past, and then you may bring them forth, and
expose them boldly to the Air during all the Summer following.

As these trees grow big, you may change and enlarge their Cases, but be sure
to take them out earth and all, razing the stringy and fiberous roots, a little
with a knife, before you replace them, and supplying what their new Cases may
want, with the fore-described mould: Some when they alter their Cases denude
them of all the earth, conceiving it exhausted and insipid: but it is to the
extreme prejudice of the Tree, and does set it so far back, that a year or two
will hardly recover it.

You may gather the Flowers every day, to prevent their knotting into fruit, or
(being too luxurious) their languishing; it will suffice therefore that you
spare some of the fairest, and best placed for fruit, and of them as many as
you conceive the tree can well nourish.

The Spiders do extremely affect to spread their Toils among the branches and
leaves of this Tree, because the flies so much frequent their flowers and
leaves, which attract them with their redolency and juice, and to remedy this,
use such a Brush as is made to cleanse pictures withal, from the dust, but
treat them tenderly.

Shrubs. Arbusts and all Shrubs, such as Pome-granads, Iassemins, Musk-Roses,
etc. Woodbines, Myrtles, ordinary Laurel, Cherry-Laurel, R^se-Laurel,
Althea-frutex, Lilac, Guelder-Roses, Phylirea, Alaternus, and diverse more
superfluous to repeat here; Of these we will only take the principal, and
discourse a little upon them.

Granads. Granads, as well those which bear the double Flower, are propagated
from Layers, letting them pass the year in the ground, they will be
sufficiently rooted before winter, to be transplanted: You may likewise govern
their branches and cuttings as you did the Quince. They may be either budded,
or graffed in the Cleft in the ordinary season: And some plant them in Cases to
preserve them in the house during Winter; but they will endure without doors,
planted against some well-sheltered Wall, where they will prosper very well.
The Granads which they call de Raguignan, are most beautiful, very glowing, and
of a rich taste, although something less.

If your Pome-granads run out too exuberant, and neither knot, nor preserve
their fruit; it proceeds from the drouth of the ground; and therefore being in
flower, you should water them, and their flowers will stop and knit.

Jass^mine Common white Iassemine, and yellow, are produced also by Layers, out
of which you may draw a rooted plant whereon to graffe the Spanish Iassemine,
which you must preserve in Cases, and house with your Oranges in Winter; you
shall cut it every year, (at the end of Winter) near the graft, leaving but one
Bud at a twig to produce young shoots for flowers: You may form the Plant like
the head of an Ozier, leaving it only a foot high at the Stem: You may graffe
it in Cleft, upon a shoot of the precedent year, placing the Graffe in the
middle of the Pith of its stock, and inveloping it with your Cerecloth, head it
as you do other graffes: If you will plant it abroad against some wall exposed
to the East or South, you may govern it as you do the Vine, making small heads
at each knot: but you must loosen it from the wall in Winter, and gently bend
it toward the ground, the more commodiously to cover it with Mats and long
dung till the Spring, at what time you may redress, prune and apply it to the
wall as before.

Musk-rose The Musk-Rose may be budded upon a Sweet-brier, and are easily
ordered; for you need only discharge them of the dead wood, and stop the young
shoots which are too exuberant, and draw away all the sap to the prejudice of
the rest of the branches: You may also lay them in the ground, and separate
other trees from them; or the Cuttings ordered like Quinces, and interred in
the shade.

Myrtl^s. Laurels. Myrtles, Cherry-Laurels and Rose-Laurels, are produced of
Layers. It is sufficient that it be done a little before August; but you should
cleave or wound that part of the wood a little which you plunge into the
ground, at some joint, cleaving it half the thickness of the branch, and three
or four fingers in length, according as it is in strength, and in six weeks
they will shoot a sufficient root to be severed and transplanted; Moreover they
produce Suckers ready rooted, which you may separate from their Mothers.

You may form Cherry-Laurels in Palisades and Hedges, which support the winter
abroad very well.

Common Laurels are raised of Seed in Cases like Oranges, and may be
transplanted the first or second year, and being planted under the drip (not
the gutter) of a house shaded from the Sun, they will flourish wonderfully:
some cover them with Fearn or Straw, to secure them from the frosts, to which
they are obnoxious.

Phyliriea. Alaternus Phylirea and Alaternus are sown likewise in Cases before
Winter, and set in the house, where the Berries will come up and sprout a great
deal better, then if they had been sown at the Spring.

By that time they are half a foot high you may transplant them, and (if you
please) clip and fashion them like Box without any danger, shaping them into
close walks and Cabinets, upon frames of wood, as you will.

Altheafrutex. Arbor. Judae. Lilac. Concerning the rest, as Altheafrutex, Arbor
Iudae, Lilac, etc. being Plants which are easily propagated, I shall pass them
over for fear of swelling this Book, and importuning the Reader. Let us
conclude rather with the Diseases to which our Trees and Plants are obnoxious,
and speak of those Animals which incommode them.

Diseases. Of all the Maladies to which Trees are subject, the Canker is the
most perilous, for it chaps and mortifies that part of the Bark where it
breeds, daily augmenting, unless prevented by a prompt and speedy Remedy, so
soon as it is perceived; so that if you neglect to visit your trees, you shall
often find them all dead upon one side: to remedy which you must lance and
open the living Bark round to the very quick as deep as the wood, and so the
Canker will fall of it self: or else you must scrape it well, that the bark may
the more easily recover, the sore; and secure it from the Hail, by covering it
with a little Cow Dung, and swathing it with a clout of some Moss.

Moss. The Moss which invades trees proceeds commonly from some occult and
hidden cause, which is, when the roots encounter with a gravelly, sandy or
other bad mould, so that they cannot penetrate to search for refreshment; this
burns up the Tree, and spoils it of his leaves, during the great hea^s. For
this, there is only this expedient. If it be a small tree, you must take it up
with as much mould about its root as possible, and make a Pit for it four foot
square, filling the bottom with Mellon-bed-dung, and the rest with rich earth,
and then replace the tree, observing what I have already said; and thus the
tree may be taken up without any damage, and will take again with ease,
provided that you be careful to preserve its Roots from languishing and taking
Air. But in case the tree be old, you must bare the root before Winter, and
dis-interre the greatest roots half their thickness, making a large Trench
about the foot of the Tree, and so let it remain all Winter (that the earth may
become mellow) till the Spring, when you must fill the apertures with well
consumed dung mixed with earth, and especially about the Roots*

You may take off the Moss from great Trees with a Plane, lightly paring off
the dry Surface of the Bark; and from smaller Trees with a blunt knife, or some
proper instrument of wood. The properest season for this work is after a
soaking rain, or great dew in the morning; for whilst the great heats continue,
it cleaves so obstinatly to the trees, that you cannot scrape it off without
prejudicing the Bark, if you would utterly eradicate it: Neither ought you to
neglect this cure, for the Moss undisturbed does daily augment, and is the
same inconvenience to Trees that the Itch is to Animals. If you water your
Trees during the excessive heats, and cover the roots with Fern, or other mungy
stuff, it will preserve them from this disease.

Jaundies. The Iaundies or Languor, which you may perceive by the leaves of
Trees, proceed from some hurt, which either the Mols, or Mice, may have done to
their roots; or by the stroke of some spade or peradventure by the too great
abundance of Water which corrupting suffocates them. For redress hereof you
must uncover the roots entirely, and visit them, to see if they have received
any prejudice from any of the forementioned accidents; and in case you find
any galling or hurt upon a root, you shall cut it smooth off, aslant, above,
but near the place, and then strew the bottom of the hole with some
Chimny-soote to make these creatures abandon their haunt filling up the rest
with rich mould; and if the cause proceed from corrupted Water, you must divert
it with a trench.

Moles. To take the Moles, some place a Butter-Pot cross their passage sinking
it two fingers lower then the tract, by which means they often fall in and
perish. Others use a pipe of wood of about two foot long, and the bore as big
as your wrist, In this trunk is a small tongue of tin or thin plate of Iron
within four fingers of either end, which is fastened to the trunk with a wire a
little slanting at the bottom toward the middle of the pipe; that so the Mole
entering in, and thrusting the tongue can neither get out at one end or other:
You must place this trunk exactly in the Moles passage: Some to make them quit
an obstinate haunt make a small hoop of elder, which they six half a foot into
the ground.

But the most infallible way is, to watch them in the Morning and Evening, when
they work in their Hills, and to fling them dexterously out with the spade. If
you take any alive, put them in an empty butterpott, for they report, that they
will invite others by their cry, who running through the same passage fall into
the same pot and so are caught.

They are destroyed likewise with Mole-graines, which is a set of sharp Iron
points, skrewed upon a staff, which struck upon the hill when the mole is
working, does certainly pierce him through, amaze, or kill as you shall find
if you dig immediately after it.

Mice. Field-nice are best taken by making them a small hutt of fern or straw,
like the cover or hack of a Bee-hive, placing under it some vessel full of
Water filled within 4 fingers of the brim, and cover it with some husks of Oats
to hide the water which will soon tempt them to wallow in it, and ^earch for the
grain, and so drown themselves. It is good also to put some Wheat-ears or of
oats, which may hang near the middle of the vessel, without touching it; for
the mice striving to come at the corn will fall into the water. Or you may
Poison them with Arsenick or Ratts-bane the powder of it mingled with grease;
but you may by this means endanger your Catts, which finding and eating the
dead mice will not long survive them.

Worms. The Worm getts sometimes between the bark and body of a tree: if you
can discover whereabout they lie, you may soon draw them out without making any
great incision.

There is also another kind of small worm, which they call the Nip-bud which
breeds at the very point of young shoots, and kills all their tops; but these
are easily destroyed, for cutting the branch to the quick, you shall be sure to
find them.

There is a Green-worme which devoures the young shoots as fast as they grow,
and those are very hard to un-nestle, unless you daub them with quicklime
newly quinched, which you may easily do with a small Painters brush.

Ants. Ants and Pismires will forsake their haunt, if you incompasse the stem
four fingers breadth with a circle or roll of Wool newly plucked from a
Sheeps belly, or if you anoint it with tar.

But there is an other expedient more cleanly and not so difficult, which is to
make little boxes of cards or Pastboard pierced full of holes with a bodkin,
every box having a bait of the powder of Arsenick mingled with a little honey;
these boxes must be hung upon the tree, and this will certainly destroy them;
but you must be careful that you do not make the holes so large that a Be may
enter least they poison themselves also.

A Glasse-bottle with a little honey in it, or that has had any other sweet
liquor in it fastened to the Tree, will attract all the Ants, which you may
stop, and kill them, by washing the bottle with a little hot water; then
carrying it to its place again rinced with a little sweet Syrup, you will by
this means entirely destroy them.

Snails. Shell-s^ailes you may easily gather from behind the leaves which grow
nearest to the fruit which they begun to eat the night before.

For yor shall find some fruit half devoured in one night, insomuch as one
would think it the work of some Stotes, Field-rats, or Nut-mouse, whereas
indeed they are nothing but the snailes which in great numbers devonr as much
as one of those animals.

You should never pluck off the fruit which the Snails or other Vermin have
begun, for as long as they last, they will not touch any of the rest.

The Black Snails (without shell) are easily gathered, for they cleave to the
leaves, and feed upon them.

Woodlice. Earwigs. As for Wood-lyce, Earwigs, Martinets, and the smaller
insects which likewise infest Trees, you shall place Ho^fs of Bullocks, Sheep
or Hogs, upon short stakes fixed in the Ground, or upon the Ozyers which fasten
your Palisades, and wall-fruit, and this Chase will employ two men from Morning
break, who must take them gently, but speedily off, and shake them into a
kettle of scalding water, which they are to carry with them; or the other may
bruise such as are likely to escape with some instrument of wood.

Cater-pillars. Caterpillars are easily gathered off during all the Winter,
taking away the Packets which cleave about the Branches, and burning them; but
if you neglect this, till they are disclosed, you will not be able to destroy
them without much difficulty: but in case you have not prevented it, be
diligent to take them whilst they are yet young, when either through the
coldness of the Night, or some Humidity, they are assembled together in heaps;
for otherwise; when the Sun is hot, and that it is high day, they will have
overspread your Trees.

And the destruction of these Vermin is so absolutely necessary, that you
shall quit all manner work to accomplish it; for a Garden anoy'd with this
plague but one year only, shall resent it more then three years after.

And now we will shut up this Treatise with the Receipt which I promised to
give you of the Composition to cover your Graffs.

The composition to hood your Grafs. Take then half a pound of new Wax, as much
Burgundy Pitch, two ounces of ordinary Turpentine, melt all these Ingredients
in a new earthen Pot, glazed, sufficiently stirring it; then let it cool at
least twelve hours, then break it into pieces, and hold them in warm water half
an hour, where you must work it with your hands, till it become very pliable.
Or you may dip any Clouts in this Composition, and afterward cut them out into
Plasters, fitted to the wounds of your Trees, which will less waste your
store, and not take up so much of your Composition as if you applied it in
morsels; and you may make use of this Cerecloth to cover the Clefts of your
Trees, which gape between a Stock that has two Graffs, and secure it from the
rain; and you may wind it about the Hoods, before you daub them with Loam and
Hay, and this will certainly preserve your graffs from all injuries of water
whatsoever.

To make fruit knot. There are some so curious, that to make their Fruit knot
well, and abide upon such Trees, which spend all in Blossoms, do make holes in
diverse parts of the Tree with an Auger of about a finger bore, filling the hole
again with a Pin of Oak, which they beat in quite cross the Tree. This they
conceive does stop the fruit. You may experiment it if you please, the labor
is not great, nor at all to the hazard of your Tree.

A Catalogue of the names of Fruits known about Paris.
Pears whose Fruit is in perfection at the end of June, and in July.
SMall Blanquet. Hasty Pear of several sorts. Musk-Pear, or Sept en gueule,
etc. The Musky St. John.
In July and in August.
THe great Amyret. Lesser Amyre^. Little John Amyret. Good twice a year.
Camouzines. Lady-dear Muscat. Lady-dear Green. Citron-Pear. Cocquin Rozat.
Ladies Thigh. Madera-Pear. Desgranges yellow. Two headed Pear. Sweet two sorts.
Vacher Rozatte. Espargne. Fine Gold long Stalk. Fine Gold of Orleans. Fine
Gold, great, round and Rosse. Friquet. Gloutes de Gap. Magdalene. Muscat long
tail. Pearl Muscat. Great Musky white and yellow. The great Muzette. Small
Muzette. Perdreau. The Pearl. Pernant Rozat. Province Pear. Pucell of
Xainctonge. Green Royal. Rozat of three colors. Rozat red, straked with Green.
Rozat Royal. The King of the Summer. The Superintendent, or great green Musk.
In August and September.
THe Amazon. Amors. Amydon. Armentieres. Balm. The Father in Law. Fair and
Good. Summer Bergamotte. Great Blanquet. The Butter-Pear of August, long and
round. Green Butter-Pear. Beuueriere. Bezy of Mouuilliers. Summer green
Bon-Chrestien. The good Micet of Coyeux. The Ugly-good. The younger Brother.
The Rosy Musk-flint. The Maidens flesh. The Wax-Pear. The Citron Pear. The Melt
in mouth. Rosy Daverat. Golden Pear. White Ladder Pear. Spicing. The Forest
Pear. The Ditch Pear. Musky Ant Pear. The Mangy Pears. Rosy Garbot. The Cake
Pear. Giacciole of Rome. Long Gillets. Graccioli, or Cowcumber Pear round and
red. The Greasy Pear. The Jealous Pear. Jargonelle. Jouars. The red and yellow
Balsam Pear. Milan Pears. Muscadel of Piedmont. Round and Rosy Muscat. Nancy
Muscats. Summer Novelet. Summer Onion. Musky Onionet. D' Or. The Red Orange of
Xainctonge, red and very great. Yellow Orange, pennach't with red like a Tulip.
Orange knotted. Flat green Orange. Canarie Palms. Perfume of Summer.
Passe-good of Burgogne. Pepin. White and Red Piedmont. Summer Portugal. Putes,
or Pimp-Pear. Xaintogne Rosy of three sorts. Ingranad Rosy. Round Rosy, green
mixed with red. Gray Rosy of Xaintonge. Rosy or hasty Butter-Pear. Bloody
Pear. Wild Sweeting. Sorel Pear. The Sugar Pear. White Sugar Pear. The
Treasurer. The Cheat-Liquorish. The Turkey Pear. The Valley Pear. Clown of
Anjou. Clown of Reatte.
In September and October.
AN^y, the English Pear The Goose's Bill. Long and green Butter-Pear. Caillouat
of Champagne. The Musky Calvill. The Cinnamon Pear. Cappon. The long Clairvils.
Summer Certeau. The Toad-Pear. The Deans Pear, white, or St. Michaels Pear. The
Thorn Pear. Fontarabie. Galore. The Clove Pear. The round Clove. Grain. Rozatte
Guamont. High Relish. Jargonell of Autumn. Rosy Kerville. The Saucy Pears. The
Lombardy Pear. The Meilleraye Pear. The Flies Pear, or Soft Butter. Monsieurs
Pear. Small Melt in Mouth. The Muscat. Mont Dieu. The Moutieres of Daulphine.
Oignon of Xaintonge. The Poictiers. The Rebet. The Roland* The great Russet of
Rheims. Small Russet. Long Rosy poud'red with red. Rosy green two sorts. St.
Michael. St. Samson, or Ditch Pear. Champagne without name. Sausedge Pear.
Rozatte of September. Supreams. The Pear of three tastes. The Found-Pear.
Vintage Pears. Ysambert. Pear Evelyn.
In October and November.
AMadotte. The Silver Pear. The Bag Pipe Pear. The Ice Pear. The great stalked
Pear. Ugly-Good. The Lady Pear. The great Mary of Amiens. Messire John, green.
The gray Messire John. My Lords Pear. The Autumn Marrow in mouth. The
Peach-Pear. The Noiron. The Virgin of Flanders. The double Virgins. Robine.
King of Saulcay. King Musky Pear, all yellow. Autumnal Saffran Pear. The
Seigneur. The Sun-Pear. The So-good. The Vine-Pear. The Virgoulette: great and
small.
In November and December.
ALeaume. The Musk Long Bergamo^s. The Round Betgamots. Bezy D' Hery. Carisy.
The double Cartelle, The Burnt Cat. The Charity Pear. Stopple-Pear. The
Squib-Pear. Spindle-Pear. Girogille, or Venus Nipple. Our Lady-Pear. The Autumn
Pear. Winter Virgins. King of Autumn. The peerlesse Pear. White Sucrin. Black
Sucrin.
In December and January.
THe Namelesse Pear. Gascogne Bergamotte. Musk-Bon-Chrestien. Bonne Foy. The
Ugly Morma. Cadillac-Pear. Certeau Madam. Pear of the other world. The Pound
Pear. The Scarlet Pear. The Fig Pear. The Winter flower. Free Royal. The great
Mesnil. Keville. The dry Martins. Winter Messire John. The white Milan Pear.
The Onionet with a short stalk. The Orient Pear. The Leaden Pear. The Red King
Pear. The Rosy Saffran. The Rozat of St. Denis. The Healthy Pear. The
Saulsig-Pear. The wreathed Pear of two sorts. The Cheat Knave or Ugly good. The
Priests Load.
In January and February.
THe Alencon Pear. The Amber Pear. The Lovers Pear. Bezy of Privillier. Bezy of
Quassoy. The Winter Butter P. of Xaintonge The Butter Pear of Yveteaux. The
Bouvart Pear. The Musk Caillotet, or Curdled P. The Caillouat of Varennes. The
Winter Rosy Flint. The Carcassonne. The great Certeau. The Carmelite. The
small hooked Certeau. The Castle Gontier. The Condon. The Little Dagobert. The
Dagobert of Miossan. Dame Houdette. The red Ladder Pear. Winter Fine Gold. Rosy
Florentine. The Fremont, or St. Franceis. The Winter Spindle. The Garay of
Auxois. The Gourmandine. The huge Hongrie. The Incognito of Persia. The Winter
Legate. The sweet Limon. The long green Pear of Berny. The Micet. Winter melt in
mouth. The Fleshy stalk Muscat. The Mazeray Muscat. The Winter Bag-pipe.
Nanterre. The O^gnon of St. John of Angely. The Winter Orenge-Pear. The Rose
Perigord. The petit Oing. Plotot, or Squat Pear. Portail-Pear. The Prince or
Bourbon. The Prince of Sillery. The white Rabu. The great and little Ratot. The
Pear Royal. Rozatte of Xaintonge. Rozatte of Mazuere. St. Anthony-Pear. The
Suisse with red, green, and yellow Cheeks. The Greening. The Valladolid. The
Winter Clown.
In February and the other following Months till new ones.
BEzy. The latter Bon-Chrestien. The great Chrestien. Calo Rozat. The Gallon
Oak-Pear of several sorts. The double Blossom Pear. Gastelier. The great
Kairville. Liquet. The long-lived Pear. The Long green pear. The Musk pear. The
Parmein. The Winter Virgin. Rille. The Winter Saffran pear. The peerlesse pear.
The Thoul pear. The great Found pear. The little Found pear. The Vignolettes.
Rath-ripe Apples.
DAnquelles. The White Calvil. The Clear Calvil. The red Calvil. Queen Apple.
White Camoise. Carmagnolles. The tender Chestnut. The Clicquet, or Rattle
Apple. The single Short-Start. Red Short-start. The great Cushion Apple. Round
Cushion Apple. Long Cushion Apple. The Apple of Hell, or black Apple. The
Scarlet Apple. The Spicing. The May-Flower. The Raspis Apple. Giradottes. The
Frozen Apple. The great-ey'd Apple. The Jacob Apple. Lugelles. Magdalene. The
Minion. The Snow Apple. Our Ladies Apple. The Oblong Lissee. Orgeran.
Passepommes or Honey meal of several kinds. Pommasses. The white Rambourg. Red
Rambourg. The hasty Reinette or Pippni. The Royal. The Dewy Apple. The large
red of September. The soft red. The St. John of two sorts. The clustred Apple.
The Vignan Court. The March Violet.
Keeping Apples.
THe great, and small Apis, or Appius Claudius. The Apioles. The Parsley Apple.
Babichet. The great white Apple. The lcy white Apple. The Little-Good. The
white Apple of Bretagne. The red Apple of Bretagne. The Cardinal. Camuese, or
Flat Snout. Winter-Chesnut. The Citron-Apple. The Coqueret of several sorts.
Hard Short-Start. Red Short-Start. Russet Short-Start. Douettes. The Bretagne
Cloth of Gold. The Stranger. White Fenouill. Red Fenouill. The Iron Apple. The
great bellied Woman. The High-good. Horluva. Jayet. The Judea Apple. Malingres,
or Maligar Apple. Mattranges. Winter Passe-Pommes, or Hony-Meal. The Pigeonnet.
Pear-Apple. The Raeslee. The Reinet of Auv^rgne. Pippin of Mascons. The Gray
Reinet. The Flat Reinet. Robillard. The Winter Reed. The Rose Apple. The Apple
without Blossom. Health. The Seigneur. The Vermillion.
Plums early and late:
ABricots. Abricotines. Amber. The great Appetite. Bessonne or Twin-plum. All
Saints, white. Blosses. Good at Christmas. Prunella of Provence. Citron
Prunellas. White Cherry-plum. Red little Cherry-plum. Round Citrons. Pointed
Citron. Pigeons Heart. Cypres. Almond. The White Damask. Great double Damask.
The latter Gray Damask. The hasty black Damask. Musky Black Damask. The Violet
Damask. White Date. Red Date. Great Dattille. Datilles. Black Diapred. White
Diapred. The Escarcelle. The double Flower. High Good. Great Imperial. Round
Imperial. Joinville. Jorases. Green Peascod. Maximilian. Merveille, or Balsam
plum. Mirabolans. Mirabelles. The Looking-glass. The Egg Yolk. Yolk of
Bourgogne. Monsieurs Plum. Montmiret. Musk The Pass for Velvet of Valency.
White Black Red Perdrigon.
Late Green Great Violet. Poictron. Small Grape Plum. Queen Claudia. Cocles
Kidney. Roche Corbon. Roman. Latter Round. King of Bresse. Little St. Anthony.
St. Catharine. St. Cir. The White St. Julien. Black St. Julien. Huge Saluces of
two sorts. The Plum without Stone. Simiennes. Black Trudennes. Red Trudennes.
The Vacation Plum. The black Vintage. Verdach.
Peaches.
GReat Alberges. Small Alberges. Alberges of Province. Aubicons. Almond Peach.
Amber Peach. Angelicks. White forward Peach. Yellow forward Peach. Great
Brignons of Bearn. Musky Brignons. Cherry Peach. Corbeil Peaches. Winter hard
Peach. Double-Flower Peach. Gallion Peach very fair. Yellow Pavie. Magdalen
Pavie. Magdalene Peach. White Mircoton. Yellow Mircoton. Mircoton of Jarnac.
Nutmeg Peach. Parcouppes, or Gashed Peach. Pau-Peach. Prune-Peach.
Pavies-Raves. Peach-Rave. Persiques. Persilles, or Parsley Peach. Rossan peach.
White Scandalis. Black Scandalis. Yellow peach. Troy peach. The Fromentee
peach. The Violet peach.
Cherries, Heart-Cherries, etc.
BIgarreaux. Red Cherrie. White Cherrie. Double Blossom Cherrie. Heart-Cherrie.
Preserving Cherry, great. Sweet Guin Cherries. White Guin Cherries. Black Guin
Cherries. Merizettes. Double Blossom Merizier. Mountmorency Cherry, Short
stalk. Rath-ripe: or May. Trochets clustred, or Flanders Cherrie. The All
Saints Cherrie.
Figs,
WHite Figs. Bourjassotes. Bourno-Saintes. Flower-Fig. Gourravaund of
Languedoc. Marseilles Fig. White Dwarf. Violet Dwarf. Violet Fig.
Oranges.
BIgarrades. China-Orange. Spanish Genoa Orange.
Portugal Province
Limons and Citrons.
LImonchali. Limoni Cedri. Limoni Dorsi. Limoni of Grarita. Sweet Limons.
Pommes D' Adam. Poncilles. Spada Fora with Laurel leaves.
Other curious Trees.
ARbutus. Azarollier, or Neapolitan Medlar. Carob-tree. Cornelian. Jujuba.
Mirabolans of Africa. Medlars without Stone. Pistachia. Berberies without
Stone.
READER,
IF in this Catalogue of Fruits, I have either mistaken or omitted many of the
true English names, it is because it was a Subjection too insupportable: and
besides the French Gardiners themselves are not perfectly accorded concerning
them; nor have our Orchards, as yet, attained to so ample a Choice and
universal, as to supply the deficiency of the Dictionary.



THE SECOND TREATISE.
SECTION 1.
Of Melons, Cucumbers, Gourds, and their Kinds.

Melons. SINCE Melons are the most precious Fruits that your Kitchen Garden
affords, I think it most proper to discourse of them in the Front of this
Chapter, and instruct you how you ought to govern them in this our Climate, for
which alone, I have calculated all these observations passing by those which
(differing from ours) may possibly fill you with doubt, should I confound you
with the manner how they order them in the hotter Countries, different from
ours, more temperate, and cold in respect to these delicate fruits.

Seeds. In order to this intention of ours, which is, that we may have them
excellent: You must diligently enquire after the best seeds, such as you may
procure out of Italy, from Lions, Tours, Anjou, Champagne, and other places,
where men emulate one another who shall have the best Melons. Also to have of
all the kinds, Sucrin, Morin, Melonnes, Grenots, white, wraught, or
Embrod'red, Ribb'd, and others, even to the locking up of those seeds whose
fruit has pleased you; for some affect them of one taste, which another will
reject, and hold worth nothing. One loves to eat them a little green, another
would have them very ripe. And therefore you shall furnish your self with such
kinds as are most agreeable to your taste, and as thrive and ripen best in your
ground, which is the thing you must chiefly respect; for oftentimes there comes
such raines from August as uterly spoil them; depriving them both of odor,
savor, and color, filling them so with water that they are not to be eaten,
and ^ipening them so altogether, that they are only ^it to be given to horses,
who extremely affect them; In brief, these rains spoil, and utterly destroy
your Meloniere, where you have bestowed so much care, and the pains of five or
six months are lost, without gratifying you with the least of your hopes; and
therefore you should endeavor to have them early that you may prevent these
inconveniences.

In those Countries where they raise great store with little trouble; but plant
them in the open ground, as we do Cabbages, as soon as the rains come, they
give over eating them, and think them as bad as poison.

Plo^. To begin then your Meloniere, or Melon Plot, you shall choose a place in
your garden the most secured from pernicious winds, which you shall close in
with a Reede-hedge handsomely bound in Pannells, which you shall set up with
sufficient stakes or posts fixed in the ground, and sustained, lest the winds
overturne them: To this Enclosure you must make a door, which you shall keep
under lock and key, that none molest your Plantation; and particularly to keep
out Women-kinde at certain times, for reasons you may imagine.

F^gure The Figure at the Frontispiece of this treatise, will easily instruct
you in what manner you should enclose your Melon ground.

In this Park, which may be of what extent you think good, you shall make beds
of horse-dung, such as you have provided the winter before and heaped up
together in some place near your Meloniere, as fast as it is thrown forth of
the stable.

Season. About midd-February you shall begin to prepare a bed for the seeds,
taking dung hot from the stable, and of that of your foresaid heap, mingling
them together, that the heat of the fresh may communicate it self to the other.

Beds. Make your Bed the whole length of your Melon ground, four foot large
leaving a path about it of three foot wide, that you may have place to put hot
dung when you perceive the bed to languish, and that it begins to cool
overmuch.

This bed handsomely made, and trodden with the feet to excite the heat, you
must cover the ^op of it with (near four inches thick) of excellent mould, or
rather with that rich stuff, which comes from a last years bed mingled with a
little of the purest mould you can procure: This composition you must spread,
keeping a board to the side and margent of the bed, and clapping the earth down
with your hand against the board, to render it the more firm and even.

Your Bed thus prepared, of about a yard high you shall suffer to repose till
it has passed its greatest heats; which may continue two or three days, more,
or less, according to the temper of the season.

The extremity of heat past (which you shall discover by the sinking of the
bed and by examining it with your finger) you will easily judge if it be well
qualified for your seed: For if you cannot suffer your finger in it, it is yet
too hot, and it ought to be but tepid, but not qui^e cold, in which case, you
mast heat it again by applying new made dung immediately to the sides of your
bed in the passage about it, as I before have described.

The bed in perfect temper, and your seeds steeped in good Wine-Vinagre, or
Cow-milk eight and forty hours, every species apart by themselves: You shall
sow them at one end of your bed, reserving the rest, for the other seeds
whereof I shall speak hereafter.

Sowing. Draw then upon your Terras, narrow furrows with the point of your
finger quite cross your bed; But let the lines be six inches asunder, and as
even as you can, which you may facilitate with the help of a Rule.

Upon every of these lines make three holes in the earth or Terras, joining
your fingers together in fashion of a hens-rump, and in each of these holes put
three or four Melon-seeds, all of a sort.

Upon the Intervalls 'twixt the lines, which I advised you to leave, you may
sow Lettice-seeds for early sallets, in other Chervill; And you may fringe the
whole bed about with purslaine; for these herbs will be very forward, and are
to be taken up very young, least they suffocate your Melon-plants, but this
will spare you a weeding, and will be a kind of dressing to them also.

Covering. Be careful to cover your Bed every night, and when the weather is
bad, with hurdles made of straw, or close matts, which are to be supported with
ribs, and arches of poles or small rafters laid cross into forkes fixed in the
ground, at the sides of the Bed.

You shall not approach these Coverings nearer then four inches to your bed; if
it happen to freez or snow, you shall then fill the whole vacuum with fresh and
newly drawn dung, till the weather be more kind.

But if your seeds burn, by reason of the too great heat of your bed, (which
you shall soon perceive, for they ought not to be long in the ground) you shall
sow them all over again, and heat the Bed a new by the sides, with hot dung, as
you have been taught.

Season. The perfect season to sow Melon-seeds, is in the full of February.

When your plants begin to peep you shall cover them with pretty large
Drinking-Glasses, leaving a little passage for the Air 'twixt the Glass and
the Earth, least otherwise, they suffocate and tarnish.

Thus you shall let them grow to the fourth or sixth leaf before you remove
them.

Transplanting. They are Transplanted after four several fashions. First upon
the Beds, which you must prepare at the side (...) this Genial bed, and all
together: Make holes in the middle of these beds four foot asunder, and in each
of these holes put in half a bushel of excellent rich mould without making your
whole ^ed of it, and in this, you shall Transplant your Melons, taking them
dexterously from the Nursing-bed with a good clod of earth about the noots. In
the Evening about sunset will be the most covenient time for this purpose, and
if it may, let it be after a fair day, for it will much improve your plants.

This done, shelter the beds from the sun for three or four days following,
but you must water them from the first day of their planting that they may take
hold and spring the sooner.

Then you shall cover them with wider glass Bells till the fruit be big, and
indeed, as long as the plant may be contained under it, leaving it a little air
'twixt the Bell and the bed for fear of choking the Plant, unless the bell
have a hole at the top, which you may stop at night.

From ten in the Morning till four in the Afternoon, you may take off the
Bells, to accquaint them with the air and fortify your Melons against
unseasonable weather, but you must cover them again in the Evening.

Storms. There sometimes happen such storms of hail as crack all the Bells,
and to prevent this, some are provided with covers made of straw of the same
shape, to clap over the glasses at night, to prevent this accident.

Bells. Others make Bells of Earth, but I do no way approve of this invention,
for it is not possible that the sun should sufficiently penetrate this earth,
as it does the Glass: They may pretend them for the night only and to
pervent hayl, and that indeed with better reason.

If you perceive your plant to languish, and not improve, water it within half
a foot of its root, with water where in Pigeons dung has been steeped.

^runing Your Melons now reasonable strong, choose out the prime shoots (which
will be in number equal to your seeds) the rest you must gueld and prune off,
and when you perceive three or four Melons knotted upon one shoot, you shall
stop that vine pinching a knott above that of the fruit, then extend all the
other shoots of your plants, spreading them upon every part of your Bed, that
they may nourish the fruit with more ease, which when it is grown as big as
your fist you shall forbear to water any longer, unless it be in some
excessive dry season, when you perceive the leaves burn, and that the plant it
self scorches; in such case, you may refresh every languishing foot with a
little water.

You must place a Tyle under every Melon, the better to fashion them, and
advance their maturity by the reflection of the sun from it, and this is a
thing which cannot be so well upon a dung-bed, (in which some Transplant and
force them) besides they will be much Dryer, and less participate of the
loathsome quality of the dung.

You shall never suffer any small new shoot or string to draw away the Sap from
your leading plant, but nip it off immediately, unless it be that your fruit
lies naked, and too much exposed, and that it stand in need of any leaves to
accelerate its growth and preserve it in temper.

Transplanting. The second Method of Transplanting Melons, is to make, near the
end of summer, trenches of about 2 foot deep, and four foot large, (as they do
in Anjou) leaving a square of three foot between each of them, to cast the
mould upon, which you must form into a ridge somewhat round, in form of an
Asses-back, by which name the French call them. Then you shall fill the trench
with good dung, and very rotten earth, scoarings of ditches, which has lain
two or three years mellowing in the raines and frosts.

Season. Then in March when the Winter has sufficiently ripened the foresaid
earth, you shall stir and mingle that which lies in the ridge with the
ditch-scouring adding to it new dung well consumed, and so fill up your
trenches with this mixture, and let it be kept well weeded till the season that
you transplant your Melons on it, as I have before instructed you.

Transpla^ting. There is yet a third fashion a great deal more easy then this,
and which I have found as succesfull, as any of the former two, and which has
afforded me store of excellent and high tasted Melons every year, (but
attribute the principal cause of it, to the goodness of my soil which is
Sandy, but richly improved by a long cultivation.) There is no more difficulty
in the business, then to give the ground three or four dressings before and
after Winter, and at the time of Transplanting to make pits in the middle of
the beds, which you must fill with a bushel of the mould, and half dung, of
an old hot-bed, and in this to set your plants after the manner I have taught
you.

Wa^ring. There are a world of curiosities in transplanting of Melons, some
place them in vessels of earth, pierced full of holes, and filled with
excellent mould, and so change their beds when they are over chilled, others in
baskets of the same shape, and some again, are so nice about them as would
weary the most laborious Gardener.

Ga^hering If during the excessive heats you perceive that your Melons suffer
for want of refr^shment, and scald (as they term it) it will be good to to
afford a watring to exery root, but this only in case of extreme necessity, and
very rarely.

To k^ow when your Melon is fit to be gathered, you shall perceive him to be
ripe when the stalk seem^ as if it would part from the fruit, when they begin
to gild and grow Yellow underneath, when the small shoot which is at the same
knot withers, and when approaching to the fruit, you be saluted with an agreeable
odor. But such as are accustomed, and frequent the Melonieres judge it by the
eye, observing only the change of their color and the intercostal yellowness,
which is a sufficient index of their maturity.

Those Melons which are full of Embrodery and Characters are commonly twelve or
fifteen days a fashioning, e're they be perfectly ripe. The Morins grow yellow
some days before they be fit to gather.

For their gathering, let it be according as they turn; If to be conveyed far
off you shall gather him instantly upon his first change of color, for they
will finish their ripening by the way. But if he be spent immediately, gather
them thrrough-ripe, putting them into a bucket of Water drawn new out of the
well, and let them refresh themselves there, as you would treat bottles of
Wine, since coming newly from the Melonieres, they are sun-heated, and nothing
so quick and agreeable to be eaten.

Others which you must gather as fast as they ripen may be laid upon a board in
some cool place, and spent according to their maturity.

You shall remember to leave the joint which holds to the stalk of every Melon,
with two or three leaves for ornaments, and be careful not to break off the
stalk, least the Melon languish, (as a cask of Wine unbunged) and loose the
richness of its gust.

Visi^i^d and (...). You must not think it much to visit your Meloniere at the
least four times a day when your Melons begin to ripen, lest they pass their
prime, and lose of their tempting, becoming lank and flashy.

Choice. To choose a perfect good Melon it must neither be too green nor
overripe; let him be well nourished, and have a thick and short stalk, that he
proceed of a Vigorous plant, not forced with too great heat, Weighty in the
hand, firm to the touch, dry, and of a Vermilion hue within. Lastly that it
have the flavor of that pitchy mixture wherewith seamen dress their cordage.

Seeds. Remember to reserve the seeds of all such Mellons as you found to be
excellent and the most early, (as before I advertised you) preserve them
carefully, taking those which lodged at the sunny side, they are better at two
or three years old then at one.

Cowcumbers. Cowcumbers are sown and raised upon the same bed, and at the same
time with Melons; having before imbibed the seeds in either cow or breast milk.
There are of white and green, which they call Parroquets: You shall forbear to
gather some of your fairest, whitest, longest and earliest fruit, but leave
them for seed, letting them ripen upon their own Stalks as long as the plant
continues, which will be till the first frosts: As for the Parroquets, they may
all be spent, since the seeds of the white Cowcumbers do sufficiently
degenerate into them.

They are transplanted also as Melons are both in beds and in open ground, but
they must be exceedingly watered, to make them produce abundantly; The vines
and superfluous shoots must be guelded, the false flowers which will never knot
into fruit are to be nipped off.

The first colds bring the Mildew upon them, which is when the leaves become
white and mealy, a sign that they are near their destruction.

Gather them according to your spending, for they will grow bigger every day,
but withal, harder, and the seeds more compacted renders the fruit less
agreeable to the taste: They are then in perfection a little before they begin
to grow yellow.

Pumpeons. Pumpeons are raised also upon the hot-bed, and are removed like the
former, but for the most part upon plain ground: being placed in some spacious
part of your Garden because their shoots and tendrells straggle a great way
before they knot into fruit.

Transplanting. When you transplant them make their pits wide enough asunder,
twelve foot or there about, and lay two bushells of rich soil to every plant;
because of the strength of the plant; Water them abundantly.

Ga^hering. The time of gathering them is in their perfect maturity, which is
about August, nor do they spoil at all by lying upon the earth, but become
daily riper by it.

When the first cold begins to come, gather them in a Morning and heap them
one upon another, that they may dry in the sun, and afterward carry them into
some temperate Room upon boards, where let them ly without touching one
another: above all, preserve them from the frost, for that will immediately
perish them.

If you have plenty, and abound, you may put it into your ordinary Household
bread or that of your own table. But first you must boil it after the same
manner as you prepare it to Fry, only a little more tender, then drain the
water from it, and wet your flower with this mash and so make your bread. It
will be of better color, and better relish being a little Dow, and is very
wholesome for those who stand in need of refreshment.

There is a small kind of Pumpeon which knots into fruit near the foot without
trailing, and bears abundantly: they must be guelded leaving none but the
fairest.

Poitirons a kind of round Pumpeon or Citrovill.
Potirons white and colored, Priest-capps, Spanish trumpets, Gourds and the
like, are to be ordered as you do Pumpeons, with this only difference, that
some of them would be stalked, and not suffered to ramp upon the ground.

Seed. The seeds of these, as also of pumpeons are to be saved, as you spend
their fruit, but it must be carefully cleansed and dried in the air, and
secured from mice which devour these seeds as well as those of Melons and
cowcumbers.

SECT. II.
Of Artichocks, Chardons, and Asparagus.

Artichokes THe Artichock is one of the most excellent Fruits of the Kitchen
Garden, and recommended not only for its goodness, and the diverse manners of
cooking it: but also for that the fruit contiuues in Season a long time.

Of these there are two sorts, the Violet and the Green. The Slips which grow
by the sides of the old Stubs, serve for Plants, which you must set in very
good ground, deep dunged, and dressed with two or three manures.

Planting. When the Frosts are entirely past, in April you shall plant the
Slips, having separated them from the Stem with as much root as you can, that
they may take the more easily, and if they be strong enough, they will bear
Heads the Autumn following.

You shall plant them four or five foot distant one from another, according to
the goodness of the Soil; for if it be light and sandy, you may plant them
closer; if it be a strong ground, at a greater distance to give scope to the
leaves, which with the fruit will come fairer and bring forth more double ones.

They shall need no other Culture before Winter, then to be dressed and weeded
sometimes.

You shall cover them in Winter to preserve them from the Frost; and to do
this, they order them after diverse manners; some cutting all the Plants within
a foot of the ground, and gathering up the rest of the leaves, (as they do to
blanch Succory) think it sufficient to make it up in form of a Molehill,
leaving out at the top, the extremes of the leaves, about two fingers deep to
keep the Plant from suffocating; and then covering them with long dung preserve
them thus from the Frosts, and hinder the rain from rotting them.

Others make trenches 'twixt two ranges, and cast the earth in long banks upon
the plants, covering them within two fingers of the topps, as I showed you
above: And there be some which only put long dung about the plants, and so
they pass the winter very well: All these several fashions are good, and
every man a bounds with his particular reason.

Ear^h^ng. Only be not over ea^ly in earthing them, least they grow rotten,
but be sure that the great frosts do not prevent and surprise you, if you have
many to govern. If you desire to have fruit in Autumn you need only cut the
Stemm of such as have borne fruit in the spring, to hinder them from a second
shoot. And in Autumn these lusty Stocks will not fail of bearing very fair
heads, provided that you dress and dig about them well, and water them in
their necessity, taking away the Slips which grow to their sides, and which
draw all the substance from the plants.

The Winter spent, you shall uncover your Artichockes, by little and little,
not at once, least the cold air spoil them, being yet tender, and but newly out
of their warm beds: and therefore let it be done at three times, with a four
days interval each time, at the last whereof, you shall dress, dig about and
^rim them very well, discharging them from most of their small slips, not
leaving above three of the strongest to each foot for bearers.

Chard. To procure the Chard of the Artichocks (which is that which grows from
the roots of old plants) you shall make use of the old stemmes which you do
not account of. For it will be fit to renew your whole plantation of Artichocks
every five-year, because the plant impoverishes the earth, and produces but
small fruit.

Slips. The first fruits gathered, you shall pare the plant within half a
foot of the ground, and cut off the Stemm as low as you can possible; and thus
you will have lusty slips; which grown about a yard high, you shall bind up
with a wreath of long straw, but not too close, and then inviron them with
dung, to blanch them.

Thus you may leave them till the great frosts before you gather them, and then
reserve them for your use in some Cellar or other place less cold.

Gathe^ing But it is best to gather them from time to time as you spend them,
beginning with the largest, and sparing the rest, which will soon be ready,
having now all the nourishment of the plant.

Spanish Chardon. The Spanish Chardons are not so dilicate to govern, as those
of the Artichocke, nor produce they chards so sweet and tender: they are to be
tied up after the same manner to make them white.

They spring of seeds, and are transplanted in slips. The flowers of these
chardons which are little violet colored beards, being dried in the Air, will
serve to turn milk withal, and make it curdle like rennett: The Spanyard and
Languedociens use it for that purpose.

Asparagus Asparagus are to be raised of seeds in a bed a part, the ground
prepared before with diverse diggings, and well dunged: at the end of two years
you may take up the roots and transplant them.

To lodge them well, you must make trenches four foot large, and two in depth
(leaving an intervall of four foot wide 'twixt the trenches to cast the mould
on which you take out of them) and make them very level at bottom, the earth
cast in round banks on both sides, bestow a good dressing upon the bottoms of
your trenches mixing the mould with fine rich dung, which you must lay very
even in all places. This done, plant your Asparagus by line at three foot
distance, placeing two roots together: You may range the first at the very edg
of the trench, for that when you dig up the Allies, you may in time reduce them
to a foot and a half wide, casting the earth upon the quarters, and then
cutting above a foot large on either side of your aspargus, where the earth was
heaped up, your plants will shoot innumerable roots at the sides of the Alleys.

You shall plant a third range in the midst between the two which we have
named. It will be expedient to place them in Cross squares, that the roots
being at a convenient distance they may extend themselves through all the bed.

Some curious persons put rammshorns at the bottom of the trench, and hold for
certain, that they have a kind of Sympathy with Asparagus, which makes them
prosper the better, but I refer it to the experienced.

Dressing. They will need dressing but three times a year. The first, when the
Arsparagus have done growing: The second at the beginning of Winter; and the
last, a little before they begin to peep: At every one of these dressings, you
shall something fill, and advance your beds about four fingers high with the
earth of your Allies, and over all this spread about two fingers thick of old
dung.

Three years you must forbear to cut, that the plant may be strong, not
stubbed, for otherwise they will prove but small. And if you spare them yet
four or five years longer, you will have them come as big as leeks, after which
time, you may cut uncessantly, leaving the least to bear seed, and that the
plant may fortify.

During these four-years, observing to give them the several dressings, as I
have declared, your bed will fill, and your paths discharged of their mould,
you may dig them up, and lay some rich dung underneath.

You know that the plants of Asparagus spring up and grow perpetually, and
therefore when the mould of your Alleyes is all spent upon the beds you must of
necessity bring earth to supply them, laying it upon the bed in shape like the
lid of a truncke otherwise they will remain naked, and perish.

Cutting. When you cut your Asparagus, remove a little of the earth from about
them, lest you wound the others which are ready to peep, and then cut them as
low as you can conveniently, but take heed that you do not offend those that
lie hid, for so much will your detriment be, and it will stump your plant.

Such as you perceive to produce only small ones, you shall spare that they
may grow bigger, permitting those which spring up about the end of the season
in every bed, to run to seed, and this will exceedingly repayr the hurt which
you may have done to your plants in reaping their fruit.

SECT. III.
Of Cabbages and Lettuce of all sorts.

Cabbage. THere are so many several sorts of Cabbages, that you shall hardly
resolve to have them all in your Garden, for they would employ too great a part
of your ground, and therefore it will be best to make choice of such as are
most agreeable to your taste, and that are the most delicate and easiest to
boil, since the ground which produces them, and the water which boyles them,
renders them either more or less excellent.

Seed. We have seed brought us out of Italy, and we have some in France, those
of Italy are the Coleflower, those of Rome, Verona, and Milan, The Bosse, the
long Cabbage, of Genoa, the curled and others.

In France we have the ordinary headed Cabbage of several sorts, and some that
do not head at all, and therefore I think it necessary to treat here
particularly of them all, as briefly as I can.

Coleflowers. I will begin with Coleflowers as as the most precious: Seed. They
bring the seed to us out of Italy, and the Italians receive it from Candia and
other Levantine parts, not but that we gather as good in Italy and France also;
but it dos not produce so large a head, and is subject to degenerate into the
bosse cabbages, and Na^ets and therefore it were better to furnish one self out
of the levant either by some friend, or other correspondent at Rome: The Linen
Drapers and Millaners of Paris can give you the best directions in this affair
which traffic in those places, Linen, Lace, and Gloves.

To discover the goodness of the seed (which is the newest) it ought to be of
a lively color, full of oil, exactly round neither shrivled, small or dried,
which are all indications of its age, but of a broun hue, not of a bright red
which shows that it never ripened kindly upon the stalk.

Sowing. Being thus provided with good seed, sow it as they do in Italy or
France. The Italians sow it in cases and shallow tubes in the full moon of
August; It comes speedily up, and will be very strong before Winter: when the
Frosts come remove them into your Cellar, or Garden-house, till the Spring, and
that the Frosts are gone, and then transplant them into good mould; thus you
shall have white, very fair heads, and well conditioned before the great heats
of Summer surprise them.

The Italians stay not so long, as till their heads have attained their utmost
growth, but pull them up before, and lay them in the Cellar, interring all
their roots and stalks to the very head; ranging them side by side and
shelving, where they finish their heads, and will keep a long time; whereas if
they left them abroad in the ground, the heats would cause them run to seed.

The French are satisfied to have them by the end of Autumn keeping them to eat
in the Winter: not but that (being early raised) they have some which head
about July; but the rest grow hard and tough by reason of the extreme heat, and
improve nothing for want of moisture, producing but small and trifling Heads,
and most commonly none at all. And therefore I counsel you to sow but a few
upon your first Bed in the Meloniere thinly, sowing them thinly in li^es, four
fingers asunder, and covering them with the mould. Two or three ridges shall
abundantly suffice your store.

Toward the end of April, when your Melons are off from their beds and
transplanted, you may renew your sowing of Coleflowers, (as you were taught
before) these will head in Autumn, and must be preserved from the Frosts, to be
spent during the Winter.

Removing. You must stay before you remove them till the leaves are as large as
the Ralme of your hand, that they may be strong. Pare away the tops of them,
and earth them up to the very necks, that is, so deep that the top leaves
appear not above three fingers out of the ground, or to be more intelligible,
you shall interre them to the last and upmost knot; Moreover you must hollow
little Basins of about half a foot Diameter, and four fingers deep at the foot
of each stalk, that the moisture may pass directly to the Root when you water
them, it being unprofitably employed elsewhere.

Transplanting. The just distance in transplanting is three foot asunder; two
ranges are sufficient for each Bed: But be careful to keep them weeded and dug
as often as they require it, till the leaves cover the ground, and are able to
choke the weeds that grow under them.

If you make Pits in the places where you remove them, and bestow some good
Soil (as I described in Melons and Cucumbers) they will the better answer your
expectations, for they will produce much fairer heads.

Cabbage. Watring. All sorts of Cabbages whatever they be, must be carefully
watered at first, for a few days after their planting that they may take the
better root, which you shall then perceive, when their leaves begin to erect,
and flag no longer upon the ground.

Sowing. All kinds of Cabbages are to be sown upon the Melon bed, whilst the
heat remains, that they may cheq and spring the sooner, sow them therefore
very thin in travers lines cross your Melon bed.

In April you shall sow fresh upon the same bed and place where your Melons
and Cucumbers stood.

Birds. Now forasmuch as the Birds are extremely greedy to devour their seeds
as soon as they peep, because they bear the husk of it upon the tops of their
leaves; I will teach you how you may preserve them. Some spread a Net over the
Beds, sustaining it half a foot above the surface: others stick little Mills
made of Cards, (such as Children in play run against the wind with) and some
make them with thin Chips of Fur, such as the Comfit makers boxes are made
withal, tying to the tree or Pole which bears it some Feathers, or thing that
continually trembles; this will extremely affright the Birds in the day time,
and the Mice in the night; for the least breath of wind will set them a
whirling, and prevent the mischief.

Worms. There breeds besides in these beds a winged Insect, and Palmer worms,
which gnaw your seeds and sprouts: To destroy these Enemies, you should place
some small vessels, as be^r glasses, and the like, sinking them about three
fingers deeper then the surface of the bed, and filling them with water within
two fingers of the brim, and in these they will fall and drown themselves as
they make their subterranean passages.

Large sided cabbages. The large sided Cabbages, shall not be sown till May,
because they are so tender, and if they be strong enough to be removed by the
beginning of July they will head in Autumn: To my Gusto there is no sort of
Cabbage comparable to them, for they are speedily boiled, and are so delicate,
that the very grossest part of them melts in ones mouth: If you eat broth made
of them, Fasting, with but a little bread in it, they will gently loosen the
belly, and besides, what ever quantity of them you eat, they will never offend
you; Briefly, it is a sort of Cabbage, that I can never sufficiently commend,
that I may encourage you to furnish your Garden with them rather then with many
of the rest.

White cabbage. Of the White headed Cabbage, those which come out of Flanders
are the fairest and of these one of the heads produced in a rich mould has
weighed above forty pounds.

Those of Aubervilliers are very free, and a delicate meat.

There is another sort of Cabbage streaked with red veins, the stalk whereof
is of a purple color when you plant it, and they seem to me, the most natural
of all the rest, for they pome, close to the ground and shoot but few leaves
before they are headed, growing so extremely close, that they are almost flat
at top.

Red cabbage. The red Cabbage should likewise have a little place in your
Garden, for its use in certain diseases.

Pefumed cabbage. There is yet another sort of Cabbage, that cast a strong
musky Perfume, but bear small heads, yet are to be prized for their excellent
odor.

The pale tender Cabbages are not to be sown till August, that they may be
removed a little before the Winter, where they may grow and furnish you all the
winter long, and especially during the greater Frosts, which do but soften,
mellow, and render them excellent meat.

They plant also all those Italian kinds, of which the A long excellentt
cabbage.
Pancaliers are most in esteem, by reason of their perfumed relish.

Planting. To plant all these sorts of Cabbages, the ground deeply trenched and
well dunged beneath; you shall tread it out into beds of four foot large; and
within a foot of the margent, you shall make a small trench, four fingers in
depth, and of half a foot large, angular at the bottom, like a Plough-Furrow
new turned up: In this Trench (toward the Evening of a fair day) you shall
make holes with a Setting stick, and so plant your Cabbages, sinking them to
the neck of the very tenderest leaves; having before pared off their Tops.
Place them at a convenient distance, according to their bigness and spreading;
then give them diligent Waterings, which you shall pour into these furrows
only; since it would be but superfluous to water the whole bed.

A man may transplant them confusedly in whole quarters, especially the paler
sort, for the frosts; but it is neither so commodious as in beds for the ease
of watring them, nor for the distinction of their species: Be careful to take
away all the dead leaves of your Cabbages, as well that they may look
handsomely, as to avoid the ill sents which proceed from their corruption,
which breeds and invites the Vermin, Snaile, Frogs and Toads, and the like
which greatly endamage the Plants.

Seed. When their heads and pomes are formed, if you perceive any of them ready
to run to seed, draw the plant half out of the ground, or tread down the Stem,
till the cabbage inclines to one side, this will much impead its seeding, and
you may mark those Cabbages to be first spent.

For the seeds, reserve of your best Cabbages, transplanting them in some warm
place, free from the Winter winds, during the greater frosts, and covering them
with Earthen Pots, and warm soil over the pots: But when the weather is mild,
you may sometimes show them the air, and reinvigorate them with the sun, being
careful to cover them again in the evening, least the frost surprise them.

Others you shall preserve in the house, hanging them up by their roots about
a fourtnight, that so all the water that lurks amongst the leaves may drop out,
which would otherwise rot them. That season past bury them in ground half way
the stalk, ranging them so near as they may touch each other.

For those which arive to no head you need only remove them, or leave them in
the places where they stand, they will endure the Winter well enough, and run
to seed betimes.

When the seed is ripe (which you will know by the dryness of the swads which
will then open of themselves) you shall gently pull up the Plant, drawing it by
the stalks, and lay them aslope at the foot of your Hedges or Walls to dry, and
perfect their maturity: but it w^ll not be amiss to fasten them with some
small twig of an Ozyer, for fear the Wind fling them down, and disperse a
great deal of the Seeds.

Season of sowing. In August you shall sow Cabbages to head, upon some bed by
it self, there to pass the Winter, as in a Nursery, till the Spring, when you
must plant them forth in the manner I have already taught: and by this means
you will have headed Cabbages betimes, especially provided that you be careful
in well ordering them.

Insects. There are several little Animals which gnaw and indammage Cabbages,
as well whilst they are yet young and tender, as when they be arrived to bigger
growth; as a certain green hopping Fly, Snails, Ants, the great Flea, etc. The
best expedient I find to destroy these Insects, is, the frequent watering,
which chaces them away, or kills them: For during the great heats, you shall
see your Cabbages dwindle and pine away, every day importuned by these Animals.

At the full of the moon every Month, if the weather be fair, it is good to
sow your Cabbages, that you may prevent the disorders, which these Devourers
bring upon them: and you may do it without expense, by sowing them upon the
borders under your Fruit Trees, which you must frequently dig, and besides the
waterings which you must bestow upon your young Plants, will wonderfully
improve your Trees.

There are a curious sort of Cabbages, which bear many heads upon the same
stalk, but they are not so delicate as the other.

When yo^ have cut off the heads of your Cabbages, if you will not extirpate
the Trunk, they will produce small small sets, which the Italians call
Broccoli, the French des Broques, and are ordinarily eaten in Lent in
Pease-Pottage, and Small dishes of several things which stand twixt the
greater to garnish the table.
Intermesses at the best Tables.

Letice. There are almost as many sorts of Lettuce as there be of Cabbages and
therefore I have ranged them together in the same chapter.

For such as harden and grow into heads we have the Cabbage-Lettuce and a sort
that bears diverse heads upon the same stalk.

The Cockle Lettuce, the Genoa, Roman and the curled lettuce, which pome like
Succory.

Others that grow not so close, as a sort of curled lettuce and several other
species: Others which must be bound to render them white, such as the
Oake-leafed, the Royal and Roman.

Sowing. Lettuce may be sown all the year long, Winter excepted: for from the
time that you begin to sow them upon your first Bed (as I have described it in
the Article of Melons) to the very end of October, you may raise them.

Transplanting. To make them pome and head like a Cabbage, you shall need only
to transplant them, half a foot or little more distant, and this you may do
upon the borders, under your Hedges, Trees, and Palisades, without employing
any other quarter of your Garden.

During the excessive heat of the year, it will be difficult to make them head,
unless you water them plentifully, because the Season prompts them to run to
seed.

Those of Genoa are to be preferred before all others, by reason of their
bigness, and for that they will endure the Winter above ground, being
transplanted; or you may make use of them in Pottage, and for that they furnish
you with heads from the very end of April.

For such as do not come to head at all you need only sow them, and as they
spring, to thin them (that is extirpate the supperfluous) that those which
remain may have sufficient soope to spread: some transplant them, but it is
lost labor, the Plant being so easily raised.

Roman lettuce. Heading. The Lettice-Royall would be removed at a foot or more
distance, and when you perceive that the plants have covered all the ground
then in some fair day, and when the morning dew is vanished you shall tie them
in two or three several places one above another, which you may do with any
long straw, or raw-hemp, and this at several times, viz. not promiseuously, as
they stand, but choosing the fairest plants first to give room and air to the
more feeble, and by this means they will last you the longer: The first being
blanched, and ready, before the other are fit to bind.

Blanching. If you would blanch them with more expedition, you shall cover
every plant with a small earthen Pot fashioned like a Goldsmiths Crusible, and
then lay some hot soil upon them; and thus they will quickly become white.

Seed. Lettuce-seed is very easily gathered, because the great heats cause it
to spring sooner up then one would have it, especially the earliest sown. Pull
them therefore up as soon as you perceive that above half of their flowers
are past, and lay them a ripening against your hedges, and in ten or twelve
days they will be dry enough to rub out their seed betwixt your hands, which
being cleansed from the husks and ordure, preserve, each kind by it self.

SECT. IV.
Of Roots.

Roots. Parsenp. THe Red Beet, or Roman Parsnep, as the greatest, shall have
the pre-eminence in this Chapter. They should be placed in excellent ground,
well soyl'd and trenched, that they may produce long and fair roots, not
forked; for if they do not encounter a bottom to their liking, they spread
indeed at head, but have always a hole in the middle, which being very
profound, renders them tough and full of Fibers to the great detriment of their
color, which makes them despised. And therefore, if, to avoid the expense, you
do not trench your Garden, you must of necessity bestow two diggings one upon
another, as I shall here teach you, a diminutive only of trenching.

You must dig a Furrow all the length of your Bed, a full foot deep, and two
foot large, casting the earth all at one side, then dig another course in the
same trench, as deep as possible you can, without casting out the mould:
afterward fling in excellent Dung, fat and rich, which must lie about four
fingers thick; and for this the Soil of Cows and Sheep, newly made after
fothering time is past, is the best. When this is done, dig a second trench,
casting the first mould upon this Compost, and lay dung upon that likewise;
then dig the next, and cast Soil upon that, as you did upon the first, and so
continue this till you have trenched the whole Bed. Your last Furrow will be
but a single depth, for which you may consider of three expedients, and take
that which best pleases you, and which will cost you least to fill; or else you
may fetch the earth which you took out of the first trench, and fill it up
even, setting your Level on, or leaving it void to cast your weeds into, where
they will consume and become good soil reserving so much earth as will serve to
make the Area of the bed even, at every dressing which you give it.

This manner of good husbandry is what I would have described before in the
first section of the former Treatise, when I spoke of trenching the ground,
when I promised to show how you should better and improve your Garden at less
charge, and this I esteem sufficient for the raising of all sorts of pot herbs
and pulse.

^owing. The winter entirely past you shall sow your Red Beets either upon
Beds, making holes with the setting stick fourteen or fifteen inches asunder,
and dropping 3 seeds into every hole, or confusedly, to be transplanted, those
which are not transplanted be subject to grow forked, but those which you thus
remove, grow ordinarily longer and fairer, because you will be sure to choose
the likeliest plants.

Removing. In removing the plants you shall practice the same rule that I
showed in Cabbages, excepting only, that you cut not off the tops.

Housing. A little before the frosts you shall draw them out of the ground, and
lay them in the house, burying their Roots in the Sand to the neck of the
Plant, and ranging them one by another somewhat shelving and thus another bed
of sand, and another of Beets, continuing this order to the last. After this
manner they will keep very fresh, spending them as you have occasion, and as
they stand, and not drawing any of them out of the middle or sides for choice.

Seed. For the Seed you shall reserve of the best and fairest Roots, which you
shall bury as you did the rest, to replant in the Spring, in some void place
near the borders of your fruit-hedges; because there you may stop its growth,
which the winds would overthrow by reason of its overlopping, and poize;
unless it be sustained: except that you had rather place them in some Bed,
where you must support them with strong stakes for the purpose.

The Grain ripe, pull up the Plan^s, and tie them to your Pole-hedg, that they
may dry and ripen with the more facility: then rub it out gently 'twixt your
hands, and be sure to dry it well to preserve it from becoming musty.

Carrots. Carrots and Parsneps are to be governed like Beets; but are much more
hardy, and easily endure the Winter without prejudice, till the Spring, when
they run up to seed, and are then not to be eaten: and therefore you shall draw
your provisions in the Winter, and preserve them for your spending, as you did
the Beets.

Season. There are Carrots of three colors, yellow, white, and red. The first
of these is the most delicate, for the Pot, or Inter-mess: If you would have
those that be very tender in May (as the Picards and those of Amiens have them,
who put them in their Pottage instead of herbs) you must soil the ground, and
prepare it by good dressing before Summer. In August you shall sow at the
decrease of the Moon: They will spring before Winter, and when you cleanse them
from weeds, you must thin them where you find they grow confusedly, since you
need not transplant them as you do your Beets.

Seed. For the Seed, choose the very prime and longest Roots; lay them all
Winter in the Cellar, and set them in the ground again at the Spring as you do
Beets, that they may run to seed: and in case you leave any in the ground, they
will easily pass the winter without rotting, and come to seed in their season:
but it is best to draw them out, as I said, that you may cull the best for
propagation; a Rule to be well observed in all sorts of Plants, if you be
ambitious to have the best.

Salsifix. Garden Salsifix is of two sorts, the common is of a Violet color,
the other is yellow: This is the Salsifix of Spain which they call Scorsonera,
they are different as well in leaf, as in flower: For the Violet have their
leaf like the small five rib'd Plantine, and those of the Yellow are much
larger.

It is but very lately that we have had this Scorsonera in France; and I think
my self to be one of the first: It Is a Plant abundantly more delicious then
the common Salsifix, and has pre-eminence above all other. Roots, that it does
not lie in the ground as other roots which become stringy and endure but a
year: Leave these as long as you please in the Earth, they will daily grow
bigger, and are fit to eat at all seasons; though it yearly run up to Seed.

Dressing. It Is good to scrape off the brown crusty part of the Rind (from
whence they derive their name Scorfonera) and to let them soak a while in fair
water before you boil them; because they cast forth a little Bitterness, which
they will else retain, and that the common Salsifix is free of; which being
simply washed, are boiled, and the Skin peeled off afterward.

Season. There are two seasons of sowing; in the Spring, and when the Flower is
past; letting the seed fly away: for the more uniformity they are sown in
Lines upon Beds; four ranks on a bed: When they blow you must Rail about
your bed with stakes and poles like a pole hedge, for fear the wind break their
stalks and fling them down, to the great prejudice of your seed. But the
common salsifix does flower before the Spanish.

Seed. To gather the seed, you must be sure to visit your salsifix four or five
times a day, for it will vanish and fly away like the down or Gossemeere, of
Dandelyon, and therefore you must be watchful, to gather all the beards, and
taking them with the tops of your fingers, pluck out the seed (as soon as ever
you perceive their heads to grow downy) which you shall put into some earthen
pot (which must stand ready, near the bed, that you may not be troubled to
carry it in and out so often) covering it with a tyle, to keep out the rain,
etc.

Radishes. There are three sorts of Radishes. The Horseradish, the
Black-Radish and the Small ordinary eating radish.

Horse-radishes. The Horseradish is a gross kind of food, very common in
Limoges amongst the poorer people, who diversely accommodate them, by boiling,
frying, and eating them with oil, having first cut them in slices and soaked
them in water to take away their rankness: You may sow them all Ialy even to
three lines, that in case the first crops do not prosper, the other may. They
affect a sandy ground well soyled, and turned up two or three times, and so
they will come very fair, there are some that are as big as a twopeny loaf:
You must draw them out of the ground before the frosts, and conserve them in a
warm place, as you do your Turnips.

Seed. For their seed you need only leave the fairest in the ground which will
pass the Winter well enough and produce you their seed in their season* but
the most certain way is to transplant some of the biggest as soon as the hard
Frosts are past.

The Black Radish is little worth, but they are raised as the smaller are.

Small raddish. Sowing. The Small Radish or little Rabbon, may be sown at every
decrease of the Moon, from the time you begin your hot Melon-Bed, to the very
end of October. They are several ways ordered: for if you desire them very
fair, transparent, clean and long, you must when you sow your Melons in some
part of the Bed, (whilst it yet remains warm) make holes as deep as your
finger, three inches distant from each other. In every of these holes drop in
two Radish seeds, and covering them with a little sand leave the rest of the
hole open: thus they will grow to the whole length of your finger higher then
otherwise they would have done, and not put forth any leaves till after they
are come up above the level of the Bed.

When your Melons are transplanted, you may sow them upon their bed, and in
other open ground, by even lines.

Seed. Let the first sown run to seed, and gather them when you first perceive
their Swads below to open and shead: then lay them to ripen and dry along your
Hedges, as I instructed you before. The best seed which we have comes from the
Gardens about Amiens; where amongst their low grounds they raise that which is
excellent. At their first coming up, they appear like the wild: but after the
fourth or sixth leaf they grow very lusty, provided they be well watered.

Turnips. There are several sorts of Turnips which I shall not particularize; I
shall only affirm that the lesser are the best, and most agreeable to the
taste, the other being soft, flashy, and insipid.

Season. You may sow them at two seasons; at spring, and in the beginning of
August. All the difficulty is in taking the right time, for if the weather
prove wet, the seed will burst, and not sprout at all: If too dry it will not
come up, and therefore, if you perceive your first season to fail, you shall
give them a second digging or howing, and sow anew. Vermin. So soon as they
come up and have two or four leaves, if the weather be very dry, the Ticquet,
or winged worms, and the flea, will fall upon them and devour them, and all
your pains: therefore (as I said) if you see your first to have failed, you
must begin again.

To be excellent, they must not remain above six-weekes in the ground, least
they become worm-eaten, withered, ill meat, and full of strings.

Housing. House them in Winter in your Cellar, or some other place where they
may be exempt from the frost, and without any other trouble, save laying them
in heaps, or bunches.

Seed. For the seed reserve the biggest, longest, and brightest roots, which
you shall plant in the ground at spring, and draw forth again when you perceive
the pods to open; then set them a drying, and afterward rub out the seed upon
a sheet, exposed the remainder of the day to the sun to exhaust their moisture;
then, having well cleansed it, reserve it in some temperate place.

Parsley. We will range Parsley also among the roots, though its leaf be the
most in esteem, and used in several dishes, serving oftentimes instead of
Pepper and spice.

Season. When the frosts are past, you shall sow the greater and lesser sort of
Parsley, the Pennach't, and the curled, in ground deeply dug, and well ^oyled
that it may produce long and goodly roots. Sow your seed upon your beds in each
four lines, the mould made very fine and well raked: You may sow Leeks over
them, chopping them gently in with the rake only: when all is clear, cover the
whole bed about two fingers thick with some dung of the old bed as well to amend
the ground, as to preserve the seeds from being beaten out with the rain, your
watring, and from bursting.

Dressing. Now ^ince Parsly-seed lies a month in the ground, before it comes
up, the leeks will have time enough to spring and be sufficiently strong to be
removed, and when you pull them up for this purpose, it will serve as a second
dressing and weeding to your parsley, and when by this means they are grown, you
may thin them where you perceive the plants come up too thick, which will very
much improve them.

You may cut the leaves when ever you have need, without the least detriment to
the plant.

roots. Leave the roots in the ground for your use, because they daily grow
bigger and that even all the winter long, however you will do well to take as many
up as you conceive you may need, least when the earth is hard frozen, you can
procure none in case of necessity.

Seed. For the seed, let one end of your bed stand unpulled up till it is all
ripe, which you must set a drying, as you did the others.

Skirret. The Skirret comes of seed and of plants, but the best and fairest of
plants; and of these, those which they bring from Troyes in Champagne are most
esteemed.

To plant them, you must in spring (the ground well dug, and dressed) make four
small rills on each bed, two fingers deep, then make holes with the dibber at
half inch distance setting in every hole two or three young Slips, which you
may take from the old plants, being careful to water them at the beginning.

Spending. Draw them out of the ground according as you spend them, the rest
which you leave will grow bigger and in their season produce their ^eed.

Rampions Rampions, though it be a plant very agreeable to the taste, and which
they have several ways of dressing: Yet I will not spend time in teaching you
how to order them, since they grow wild in sufficient quantity, and are not
worth the trouble ofr^aising.

Jerusalem Artichocks Jerusalem Artichocks are round roots which come all in
knots and are eaten in Lent like the bottomes of other Artichocks: they need no
great ordering, and if they be planted in good ground they will flowrish
exceedingly.

Seed. They are raised of seed, and planted in roots, bearing flowers, like a
small Heliotrope, in which there grows a world of seed. Danger. The Physicians
say that the use of them is prejudicial to the health and that they are
therefore to be banished from good Tables

SECT. V.
Of all sorts of Pot-hearbs.

Pot Herbs. Beet-leeks WE will begin with the white Beet or Leeks as being the
greatest of all the Pot-hearbs, and of which there is more spent then of any of
the rest.

The white Beet or Beet-Card (for so some will call it in imitation of the
Picards, who really merit the honor to be esteemd the best and most curious
Gardiners for herbs, before any other of all the Provinces of France: Be it
that the^r soil and climate produce more, or that they are more industrious.
Their Herbs are a great deal more fair and large, then in other places.
Season. I have seen of those amongst them that have been of eight inches
Circumference, or little less, and in length proportionable to their
thickness) is to be sown at Spring when the Frosts are quite gone.
Transplanting. You may make use of your Hedge-borders for this purpose, and
when they come to have six leaves, you shall transplant them in ground that has
been deeply trenched the Autumn before, and lain mellowing all the Winter.
Before you remove them, soil the ground very well, and then giving it another
digging, turn the dung into the bottom, then taking them out of your Nursery
beds, cut off their tops and transplant them in quarters, two ranges in a Bed;
and a yard distant, making a small Trench or Line, as I showed before,
concerning removing of Cabbages, which I forbear to repeat to avoid prolixity.

If you would have them abound in fair Cards, you must keep them well hou'd,
Weeded, and watered when you perceive they need it.

Gathering. You must not cut them when you gather, but pull them off from the
plant, drawing them a little aside, and so you shall not injure the stalk, but
rather improve those which remain: a little time will repair its loss.

Plant not those for Cards which you shall find green, for they degenerate.

Sowing. You may sow them all the Summer, that you may have for the Pot, and
to farce such as are tender: also at the end of August, which you may let stand
all the winter as a Nursery, and transplant at Spring, which will furnish you
with Leeks very early.

red Beets. There is a Red Beet if you desire to have of them, for Curiosity
rather then for use, because they produce but small Cards, which being boiled,
lose much of their tincture, becoming pale, which renders them less agreeable
to the Palate, and to the Eye, then the white.

Seed. For the Seed, leave growing of the whitest and largest, without cropping
any of their leaves, which you shall support with a good stake, lest its weight
overthrow it, to the prejudice of the Seeds which would then rot in lieu of
ripening. Two Plants are sufficient to store you amply, which you shall pull up
in fair weather (when, by the yellowness of the color you shall judge it to
be ripe) and lay a drying, afterward rub out the seeds with your hands upon
some cloth, and cleansing it from the husks, give it a second drying, lest it
become musty; for being of a spongy substance, as the Red Beets are, it will
continue a long time moist.

Orache. There is another sort of Beets, which is called Oracke, very agreeable
to the taste, it is excellent in Pottage, and carries its own Butter in it
self: it is raised as the former is, excepting only that you may plant it
nearer, and needs no transplanting, it is sufficient that it be weeded, and
houed when there is cause.

Succory. There are several kinds of Garden Succories, different in leaf and
bigness^, but resembling in taste, and which are to be ordered alike.

Season. Sow it in the Spring upon the borders, and when it has 6 leaves
replant it in rich ground about 18 inches distance, paring them at the tops.
When they are grown so large as to cover the ground, tie them up, as I
instructed you before, where I treated of Rom* Lettuce, not to bind them up by
handfuls as they grow promiscuously, but the strongest and forwardest at first,
letting the other fortify. I remit you thitherto avo^d repetition. It is in
the second Section, Art. Lettuce, where you will also find the manner of
whiting it under earthen Pots.

Blanching. There is yet another fashion of Blanching it. In the great heats,
when instead of heading you perceive it would run to seed, hollow the earth at
one side of the Plant, and couch it down without violating any of the leaves,
and so cover it, leaving out only the tops and extremity of the leaves, and
thus it will become white in a little time, and be hindered from running to seed.

Those who are very curious bind the leaves gently before they interre them, to
keep out the Grit from entering between them, which is very troublesome to wash
out, when you would dress it.

Remember to couch them all at one side, one upon another, as they grew being
planted, beginning with that which is nearest the end of the Bed, and
continuing to lay them, the second upon the first, and the third upon the
second, till you have finished all the ranges.

I find likewise two other manners of blanching them for the Wint^r; The first
is at the first frosts, That you ^ye them after the ordinary way, and then at
the end of eight or ten days, plucking them up, couch them in the bed, where
you raised them from seeds, making a small trench cross the Bed the height of
your plant, which will be about eight inches, beginning at one end. In this you
shall range your plants side by side, so as they may gently touch, and a little
shelving: this done, cover them with small rotten dung of the same bed: Then
make another Furrow for a second range, in which order lay your plants as
before, continuing this order til you have finished, and last of all cover the
whole bed four fingers thick, with hot soil fresh drawn out of the Stable; and
in a short time they will be blanched. If you will afterward cover the Bed
with some Mats placed a^lant, like the ridge of a house to preserve them from
the rain, they will last a very long time without rotting. When you would have
any of them for use, begin at the last which you buried, and, taking them as
they come, draw them out of the range, and break off what you find rotten upon
the place, or that which has contracted any blackness from the dung, before
you put it into your Basket for the Kitchen.

Housing. A second manner of preserving it, is, to interre it, as before, in
Furrows of Sand in the Cellar, placing the root upmost, lest the Sand run in
between the leaves, and you find it in the Dish when they serve it. You need
not here bestow any Dung upon them, it is sufficient that the Sand cover the
Plant four fingers high, and when you take it out for use, before you dress
it, shake it well the Root upmost, that all the Sand may fall out from the
leaves. Take them likewise as they happen to lie in the Ranges.

There is a kind of Succory, which hardens of it self without binding; which
is a small sort, but very much prized for its excellence.

Seed. For the Seed, leave of the fairest Plants growing, and particularly such
as you perceive would whiten of themselves, and head without tying. Let it well
mature, though it a little over ripen: since it is not subject to scatter and
fall out as many others are. On the contrary, when being exceedingly dried, you
shall lay it upon the Barn-floor, you shall have much ado, to fetch out the
Seeds from the heads, though you thrash it with a Flail.

Endive. Of Endive or wild Succory, some of it bears a blew Flower, others a
white, it is to be governed like the Garden, but with less difficulty; for you
need only sow it in a small Rill, weeding, houing, and thinning it in due
season.

Blanching. Housing. To blanch it, cover it only with reasonable warm dung, and
drawing it out at the first appearance of Frost, keep it under sand in your
Cellar, as you do other Roots: but first, it ought to be almost white of it
self: The root is very much esteemed, which has made me dubious whether I
should not have placed it amongst them, but I concluded it most properly
reserved with the curled Succory in respect of their conformity, as well in
growing, as in producing its seeds.

Sorre^l. Of Sorrel we have very many kinds, the Great, the Lazy, etc. for as
much as one leaf is sufficient for Pottage, being so prodigiously large, that
they have some leaves seven inches broad and fifteen or eighteen long: It is a
sort which has been transported out of the Low-Countryes, and I have had of the
first.

A second kind is another large Sorrel resembling Patience.

A third produces no seed, but is propagated from the small sideleaves, which
it shoots when it begins to spread in the ground.

A fourth is the Small Sorrel which we have had so long in use.

A fifth is the round-leaved Sorrel, large, and small, which also does not seed,
but is to be raised of the little strings with which it o'respreads the ground,
and by little tendrels which grow about the plant, and which you may take up in
tuffts to furnish your beds withal.

A sixth is the Wild sorrel, frequently found upon the up-lands and therefore
not worth the pains to plant in gardens.

Lastly, there is a seventh sort, which bears a small traingular leaf called
Alleluja, it is very delicate and agreeable by reason of its acidity, like the
other sorrel for taste, but excellent in pottage, Farces and Sallades, as being
endowed with the same qualities and relish of the other sorrels.

Soweing. You may sow all those sorts, which produce seed, after the frosts, in
narrow rills, four in a bed, but be diligent to weed it, lest it be overgrown;
when it is a little strong thin it a little, that it may the better prosper,
and if you please, you may furnish other beds with what you take away.

Transplanting But it is the best way if you would transplant it, it, to gather
of the strongest, and at the beginning of Autumn or spring make borders a part:
They do well either way, continue long in perfection, even till ten or twelve
years. But then it will be fit to remove it, because the ground will be weary
of being always burdened with the same plant, and delights in diversity:
besides the roots crowding and pressing one another, cannot find sufficient
substance to nourish and entertain them.

Dressing* They must be dug at least thrice a year, which should be at the
entry of the hard frosts, you must shake some Melon bed dung upon them: The
Soil of Poultry is excellent and makes it wonderfully flourish.

At this second digging, you shall extirpate what ever you find grow scatring
out of range by the sheading of seed, and geuld them also about, cutting off
all the leaves and stalks near the ground, before you cover them with the dung.

Seed. The seed is easily gatherd from such as bear it, for it runs up at
Midd-Summer, and when you see it ripe, cut off the stalks close to ground,
afterward being dried, it soon quits the pouches, cleanse it well and preserve
it for use.

Patience. Patience must be ordered like Sorrel: The plant is not so delicious
to the Palate, however one would have a bed of it, that your Garden may be
complete.

Borrage. The Virtues of Borrage recommends it to your Garden, though it
impair the color of your Pottage, darkning it a little The flowers of it are
a very agreeable service, to garnish the meat, pottages, Sallades, and other
dishes; since by reason of their sweetness, they may be eaten without any
disgust.

Soweing. It is to be sow^e in the spring, like other herbs, and may be left in
the ground: their hardy Ro^ts supporting the hardest frosts, sprouting a fresh
in the Spring: The Gardiners of Paris pull up the whole plant, and sow it many
times in the year, to have it always tender.

For the ordering of it, it is sufficient that it be gently houed and weeded.

Seed. For the seed, let the fairest plants run, and when they are full ripe on
the stalk, gather and save it.

Buglosse. Buglosse is to be governed like borrage, and therefore I will spend
no more time upon it.

Chervill. Chervill, besides what I told you before, that you should sow it
upon Beds to compose swaller Salades at the end of Winter; It will be good to
sow new from month to month (though it be but little) that you may still
have it fresh and more tender, then that which is old sown. The borders of
your Wall-fruit and hedges may serve for this effect, forasmuch as it cannot
prejudice your Trees, being so small, and requiring so little substance for its
growth, and the small time of its Sojourne in a place.

Seed. You shall let one end of your bed run to grain, which will amply
suffice to furnish you, let it ripen well upon the stalk then pull it up or
cut it, and dry it perfectly before you reserve it,

There is another sort of Spanish Chervill which is called Mirrhis Odorata
whose leaf much resembles Hemlock: But very agreeable to the taste, having a
perfume like the green Anis, and much pleasanter being a little chewed.

At the spring, when it makes a shoot from its old stalk, they cover it with
small dung, and then with hot soil over to choke it, that it may be fit for
Salads; It is infinitely to be preferred before Allisanders, or the Sceleri of
Italy.

Sowing. You shall sow it in spring in some place by it self, and till it be
come up do nothing to it, besides cleansing it of weeds as they spring up, it
being some times a whole year under ground.

Seed. The seed you shall gather in its season, and order it as you do the rest.

Allisanders. Allisanders are to be ordered as I now showed you in Spanish
Chervill, only the seed of it does not ly so long hid, and that it is not to be
eaten till it be buried under the dung, or covered with pots like Succory.

Sceleri. Italian Sceleri shall be treated after the same manner: the shoot or
stalk is that which is the most excellent in the plant, because it is so
delicate and tender.

Soweing. These three last plants, are not to be sown every year, but preserve
themselves in the ground during Winter without prejudice.

Purslaine. Of Purslaines I find four sorts, the green, and White, and the
Golden lately brought us from the Islands of St. Christopher, which is the most
delicate of all the rest; and lastly the small wild Purslain* which the ground
spontaneously produces and is therefore least esteemed.

Soweing. It is to be sown at spring upon the bed, and all Summer long, to
have always that which is tender, bur first you must dig the earth well, and
thoroughly dress it: sprinkle your seed as thin as you can, which is the more
difficult to do, because the grain is so exceeding small, and when it is sown,
you shall cover it no otherwise, then by clapping the bed with the back of your
spade. This done, water it immediately, that you make no holes in the bed, thus
it will come up speedily, provided that you ply it with refreshments at the
beginning.

Transplanting. To be master of excellent seed you must transplant it, and thus
you will produce goodly stalks^ to Pickle, and serve to put in your winter
Salads, and in Pottage.

Seed. You shall perceive the grain to be ripe, when it looks very black, and
then you shall pull up the plant, and lay it upon a Sheet to wither, and dry in
the sun: But at night carry it in the same sheet into the house, and the next
day expose it again, continuing so to do till it be all perfectly ripe, then
rub it 'twixt your hands, and pour it into another sheet to dry thoroughly
before you box it up. You shall set your plants a drying again for some days
after, and they will furnish you with more seed which could not be gotten out
the first time.

You shall find that new seed is nothing so good to sow as that which is two,
three, or four years old.

Spinach. Of Spinach there are three sorts: The large which has not the leaf
so pointed and prickly as the smaller, and the Pale, which makes up the third.

Soweing. Season. It would be sown in the beginning of Autumn, that it may
gather some streugth before winter. If you perceive that it springs too fast,
you may cut for pottage, and to make tarts, it will be a great deall tenderer
then in Lent when it is chiefly eaten. The manner of soweing of it is on beds
in small rills four lines in a bed. When it is up keep it neatly weeded, and
extirpate all such straggling plants as you shall find out of their files.

Seed. Reserve a corner of your Bed for the seed, cutting off all the rest as
you have occasion. At Lent pull up the plant quite for the use of the Kitchen,
cutting away only the roots.

The seed is of two sorts, the prickly, and the smooth and round which produces
the pale colored and most delicate.

SECT. VI.
Of Beans, Peace, and other* Pulse.

Beans. THere are three sorts of great Beans. Those which we call at Paris,
Marsh-Beans, which grow very large, flat, and of a pale color: Of others there
are many lesser kinds like the first but a little rounder. And some there are
less yet than these, and wholly different from the first, being almost exactly
round, of a gray, or a little reddish-coulour. And these are such as they give
to Horses, and which they grind for diverse purposes.

I shall here only treat how the great ones are to be ordered, leaving the
small as of small consequence, and shall show you how different men's opinions
are for the time and manner of soweing them,

Sowing. Some sow them about Advent, and hold that they shall have of the
first ready to eat: Others stay till Candlemasse, and some will have the frosts
first past: every man has his particular reasons, because say they, the Flea
devoures their tops when they are in Flower. For my own particular (who always
love to be sure) I stay till after the frosts are past, and I build my reason
upon this; That the season is all in all: not that I would dissuade any from
soweing in Advent, or in February, but I would advise you to be sparing, and to
reserve the greatest quantity for the spring, since it being necessary to sow
them in the best ground, and the lowest you have, it would be scarce fit to dig
at those two seasons, being more retentive of water then the lighter grounds,

Choice. Before you sow them, make choice of the most healthy and best
conditioned; then steep them a day or two in water wherein dung has been
imbibed, this will cause them to flourish exceedingly, and advance their growth
above ten or twelve days, and besides they will not remain^ so long in the earth
before they come up, will greatly prevent the danger of worms, and, being
thoroughly soaked in the foresaid liquor, will participate of its good quality,
which is to make them produce great abundance.

Ground. For their soweing, the ground ought to be dug and prepared before
winter, and cleansed of weeds, then with the houe make a furrow, upon the side
whereof, (and not at the bottom) drop your beans a little above half a foot
asunder, then open another trench, and with the earth which comes out of that,
cover your first, then a third, placing your beans as on the first and so
continuing every second furrow to drop the beans: be careful to make your
trenches as direct as you can, that you may the better houe, weed, and crop
them, without breaking their stalks, when you pass between them.

There are others, who after they have well dug and dressed their ground, tread
it out into quarters, and plant their beans with a Dibber; but I most of all
affect the first, because it makes the ground looser about them.

Houing. Whilst they are growing, and that the weeds are ready to choke them,
you shall houe and cleanse them carefully, without doing them any harm; and
when they are pretty strong, you shall observe that the Flies and Gnats will
even cover the tops of their spindles, lighting upon the tenderest part of
them, which with your knife you may crop off, and so carry away both the tops
and the insects, casting your cuttings into a Bushel, and afterward burn them,
or bury them in your dunghill pit, or in some other place distant from your
beans, lest they return back again.

Gathering. Some of these Beds you must destine to be eaten young and green,
and not gather the Pods amongst the whole Crop; and when you have quite
plundered a Plant, cut the stalk close to the ground, that it may shoot up
another, which will produce its fruit in the latter season.

Seed. For seed, let them dry upon the stalks, till both the Pods and they are
grown black; then in the heat of day pull them up, and thrash them out gently
with a Flail, fanning them out at your leisure.

Hame. Burn not the Hame which they afford, though it makes excellent ashes,
but cast it amongst your Soil, and let it rot there, for it will greatly
improve it: nay if you would make your ground exceeding rich, sow beans in it,
and when they begin to lose their blossoms, dig them in all together, earth and
beans, without minding your loss, for this sort of Soil is a wonderful
improvement of your land.

There are a great kind of Beans, which are of a red-brown color: but they
are nothing so delicious as the pale.

Haricots. The small Haricot or Kidney beans are of two sorts, white, and
colored, amongst which there are also some white, but they are less and
rounder then the great white ones.

Sowing. To commence with the great, you shall sow them in some Bed apart,
four ranges in a Bed, that you may the more commodiously stick them, then if
they were sown confusedly: some of these also you shall destine to be eaten
green, leaving the rest till they are dryer, and for Seed. When you gather them
be careful not to break their Stalks, that they may bear till it be withered to
the very root.

Painted. beans. The painted and colored Beans, which are a lesser sort, are
commonly sown in the open ground, newly dug and raked over, without any further
care then what you take of such seeds as are sown abroad in the Fields, unless
it be, that, eight or ten days after they are come up, you houe them a little,
and then touch them no more till they shoot forth their strings, (which is
about the beginning of July) which you must cut off, that the Pods may the
better prosper, which are below the stalks, and to prevent, that in catching
one to another (by over branching) they be not thrown down, and so perish those
which grow beneath, instead of ripening them.

Soil. This kind of Bean does not require so strong a mould as the Marsh
Beans do, but rather a sandy.

Sowing. They would be sown at the beginning of May, and pulled up as the
plants dry, threshing them forth as I spoke before of Marsh-beanes: for if you
gather them greener, you will be much troubled to find a convenient place to
dry them, they being so cumbersome, if you have plenty.

White. streaked. bean^s. As for the white which are riced, seeing they clime
to the very top of the boughs, and continue long bearing, you shall do well to
gather those Pods which, you find dry, since they do not ripen together, and
to prevent two inconveniences, the first whereof is, that being past their
maturity, the pod will open of it self in the heat of the day, and so lose out
their beans, and the second that in case there fall any considerable raines,
the skin of the pods being over soaked, will cleave to the beans with a
certain inseparable glue which it produces, indamaging the beans by a musty
finnow which bespots them, and makes them very ill-^avoured to the sight, and
worse to the taste: and besides you will be constrained to shail them out by
hand to the great loss of time.

You should separate and draw out all such as you find black, mixed with black
and white, forasmuch as they also become black, and in boiling darken and tinge
the liquor.

Red bean^ But the Red are to be esteemed above all the rest, because of their
delicateness, much surpassing the white, though they are most accounted of at
Paris.

Peace. Of Pease there are found several Species very much different, viz. The
Hot-spurs or Hasties, the Dwarf, the great White Pease, the Black-ey'd Pease,
great and small Green, the Crowned Pease: and those without Skins of two sorts,
the Cic^es with, and without Skins, Monthly Pease, the Gray Pease, and the
Lupines.

Of all which I think it not amiss to particularise in brief, their manner of
ordering, though there be no great difficulty in the plant, yet for your better
instruction.

Soweing. There are three manners of soweing Peace. In Beds or quarters making
four or five ranges in each. according to the kinds which you will sow: In
heaps or clusters, and in confusion.

Hot-spurrs Hot-spurrs and Hasties, would be sown from Candlemas or a little
after the great frosts.

Soil. Sandy ground is that which they most delight in to come early and if the
place be something high and lie exposed to the Southsun, it will exceedingly
advance them, of which we have the experience about Charenton and St. Maur near
Paris, from whence we have them very early, and all the secret is, in often
houing them which does wonderfully advance them.

Soweing. If you sow them in furrows and lines you will find it very
commodious when you come to dress them, because you will find room enough to
stand and come at them between the files, without indamaging the shoots, and
when they are grow to range them one upon another for the more convenient
houing them, which should be often reterated, and gather the cods with more
^ase when they are ripe without hurting the plants.

Setting. If you sow them in heaps, plant them with the Setting-stick, or
dibber, a full foot distance, and put six or eight Peace in every hole, they
will come up and grow without Cumbring the ground, if you have the leisure to
hou and dress them sufficiently.

As for those which you sow confusedly upon the ground newly dug, or in
furrows after the Plough, they will not require so much attendance, because
they spread and display themselves on both sides, and cannot be hou'd above
once, without great hazard of spoiling many of them with your feet.

Great pease. Bushing. All sorts of great Pease (as the White, Green, Crowned,
those without Skin, and the Cich^s) would be sown in quarters, and small rills,
four ranges in a Bed, for the more commodious bushing them in two ranks, every
rank serving to support two of Pease, and the greater kind your Pease are of,
the stronger and higher must your Bushes be; because they climb to the very
top, producing Cods at every joint; especially the greater kind of those
without skins, whose Cods grow eared, and are very weighty, shooting their
braches at every joint from the foot, every of which does oftentimes bear as
many Cods, as the Master stalk of the others. This is a sort of Pease which you
ought much to esteem for its deliciousness, and they may be eaten green with
as much pleasure as Radishes. These are called Holland Pease, and were not long
since a great rarity.

Mould. If you would have very fair Pease, you must sow them in rich mould,
and geld them when they are grown about four foot high: but the mischief is,
that being sown in a strong ground, they do not boil so well as those which are
produced in a light sandy, which is the only proper ground which they require
to b^rightly conditioned.

Distance. You must not set your quarter of Pease so bushed as that they may
intertwine and entangle each other; but leave a void Bed betwixt two, to give
air to your Plants, lest otherwise they suffocate, and rot at the bottom.

Beds. You may employ these interposed beds by sowing any other sort of roots
heretofore described, and which will wonderfully thrive by reason of the
refreshment which they will receive from the Shade of the higher peace.

Gray peace You shall also set a part some particular beds to be eaten green,
and cause the cods to be gatherd by some careful person, who may have the
patience to take them off handsomely, or else cut them from their stalks without
injuring them, that thus relieving the plant from all it affords they may the
longer continue.

Small peace. For the smaller sort of peace (as the White, Green, Gray, Hasties,
Dwarf; and black-ey'd) you may sow them after the Plough in open Field, for
since they do not branch much, they never choke.

Soweing. They may be sown in two fashions, either in ground newly dug and
which has one dressing before wet winter: or under furrow that is, to say by
sowing them upon the field, before you Plough, and then in making the furrows
the peace slide in, and are coverd with earth by the culter.

Pigeons. This kind of husbandry is practiced for two respects, the one to
lodge them coldly when the earth is too light, and the other to preserve them
from the Pigeons, for those which are only harrow'd in upon the superficies,
they scrape out like Poultry, and so devour the greatest part of your seed.

Houing. There is also another method of soweing peace, in use amongst those of
Picardy: They have a kind of flat ^hou, like those which the Vignerons use
about Paris, where the Vines grow in a pale moist soil, or in a sandy. This
Instrument is very like their hou's, when they have done with them being too
much worn at the sides, these they round to a point in the middle, or to make
it more intelligible, they do very much resemble the culter of a Plough, and
use it after the same fashion as they plow the furrows, that is, without ridges
or paths, save only upon the Lands where it is divided 'twixt neighbor and
neighbor.

With these, upon newly dug ground, cleansed of weeds and well dressed, they
make a rill or tr^nch, going backward and drawing the earth which separates it
self on both sides: And in these furrows they sow their Pease at a reasonable
distance and then beginning a second rill, the Houe covers that which was sown
before. And so the third the second, till they have finished the whole Plot.
This manner of Husbandry is very expedite, and commodious for their cleansing,
without danger of treading upon them when they are grown. In this manner they
sow like-wise all sorts of Beans, Radishes, Sorrel, Leeks, and diverse other
herbs, some deeper then other, according to the nature and strength of the
seed.

Mo^ethly peace. Monthly Pease (so called because they last almost the whole
Year, continually flourishing) must be sown in some place of your Garden well
defended from the cold win^les, that you may have Fruit betimes.

C^^ting. They need no other curiosity about ordering then other Pease, only
that they would be speed^ly cut being green, leaving none of them to dry; and
as you perceive that any thing springs from them of which you have no hope it
should produce Cods, to cut it off.

Wat^ing. You must have a great care to water them, especially during August,
and to shelter them with pannels of Reeds or Mattresses during the excessive
heats, to preserve them from the scorching Sun.

Lupines. Lupins or Taulpins (so called because the Mole flies the place where
they are sown) are a flat kind of Pease, round like a bruised Pistol bullet.
Slave-peas. In the Gallyes they call them Slave-peas, because they are their
chief sustenance: They are bitter of taste, and must be a long time soaked
before they be boiled. They proceed from pods fastened to the stalk like beans,
and are very full. In Spain they sow whole fields of them for their Cattle.

Soweing. They must be sown in furrows four fingers distant, and four files in
a bed and will prosper well enough in ordinary ground.

Lentills Lentils should be sown at the same season as peace in ground newly
dug, but if it were prepared the winter before, they will be a great deal
fairer. Mould. They affect Sandy mould, and are to be gathered being ripe, and
may be bound in swaths: Thus you may leave them in the barns as long as you
please unthrashed, because they are not so obnoxious to the mice not to be
worme-eaten as other peace which are continually gnawn as long as they remain in
their cods, Thrashing and therefore they must be thrashed out as soon as
possible you can, for which reason some bringing them out of the Field in a
fair day, thrash them in the very Street upon some Spacious place exposed to
the Sun, which dos much contribute to their loosning: Housing. For there is a
great deal of trouble in housing them and besides they will Sweat as many other
grains do, and Soften their Cods which makes them difficult to beat out:
Notwithstanding you may House the Gray Peace to give your Horses in the H^me,
which will whet their appetite, and much restore them if they be fallen in
their flesh.

SECT. VII.
Of Onions, Garlic, Chibols, Leeks, Odoriferous Plants, and other Conveniences
of a Garden, not comprehended in the Precedent Chapters.

Onions. ONions are of three Colors, the White, the Pale, and the Purple-Red:
I say of three Colors, for I do not conceive them to be of three different
Species, because they are so alike in taste: but I refer their qualities to
the judgment of the Botanists.

oweing. Besides your sowing of Onions with Parsley as I showed you before, you
shall sow others upon a Bed apart, and when it is grown as big as a Hens
quill, you may transplant it in lines with a Dibber, that you may have them
very fair.

If you leave any upon the Bed where you sowed it, 'twill diminish, and rise
out of the ground at the Season, sooner then that which you removed.

Seeding. During the great Heat of Summer, it would run to seed, which you must
prevent by treading upon the Spindle, which will stop its carreer, and make the
Onion the fairer.

Drying. Housing. When you find them out of the ground, and that the leaf is
become very dry, as it uses to be in August, then you shall take them quite
out of the earth, searching with your Spade for every small head, letting them
dry upon the Bed, and afterward lay them up in some temperate place, and an air
rather d^ie then moist.

Seed. For the seed, you shall choose ^he fairest and biggest that you
reserved, and when the Frosts are past plant them in Ground very well soyled,
and clear from stones, which is the mould thy best affect. For this you may
make use of the houe, rilling the bed where you would set them: not long-wayes
but a thwart, and deep enough, then lay them in the bottom of the rills, half a
foot distant and cover them by drawing the second trench and thus a third, and
a fourth continuing the order till your bed be finished.

When it is in seed it is very Subject to be overthrown by the wind by reason of
its weight, and the weakness of the spindle, which being easily bent or broken
falls with the head to the ground, which rots the seed instead of ripening it,
and therefore to remedy this, you shall rail the bed aabout (as I directed you
concerning Salsifix) or else stake them from space to space, to which you shall
tie them up, by four or five spindles together bending them gently to the props
if it be possible without breaking them.

The stalks dry, and the head discovering the seed gives testimony of its
maturity, and therefore you shall draw them up, and having cut off all their
spindles, you shall lay the heads a drying upon some cloth, seperating that
which falls out of it self upon the cloth, as the best conditioned: afterward
when it all is perfectly dry, rub the heads in your hands, and getting out as
much as you can with patience and much drying.

If you do not immediately rub it out, bind up the heads in bunches, and hang
them up in your house, because they will both keep and augment in good nesse
taking them only as you have occasion.

There is so great deceit in buying this seed, that I would advise you to use
none but which is of your own growth, unless you have some intimate friend
that will send you that which is excellent, to renew your store, for some
Merchants sell it old, and so it can never prosper, or else they scald it to
make it swell: To discover that which is good put a little into a Porrenger of
water, and let it infuse upon the hot Embers, and if it be good it will begin
to Check and speer, if it do not, its worth nothing.

Chibol. Chibolls of all sorts, from the greatest to the English-Cives, are to
be planted in Cloves, four or five together, to make a tuft, in distance
according to their bigness, they requiring no other care, then to be weeded
and cleansed, and, if you will, a little dunged before the winter. Thus you may
let them continue in their bed as long as you please, the plant continually
improving by Off-s^ts which it will produce in abundance.

Transplanting However it will be good at every three or four years end to take
it up, and plant it in another place, forasmuch as the ground is weary of
bearing perpetually but one sort, and loses that quality which is most proper
to the plant, rendering it languid and weak if it dwell on it too long.

Garlic. ^ Garlic is to be orderd like Onions, Planting. the best season is
to plant it at the end of February. The time of bruising it, to make the
spindles knot, is about St. Peter's in June, and to pull it out of the ground,
at St. Peter's in August, according to ^he old Gardiners Adage. Sow at St.
Peter's the first crop.
Your Garlic at St. Peter's stop.
And at St. Peter's take it up.


Pulling. Housing. When you have amassed them together you shall let them dry
in heaps upon the bed, and then in the cool of the morning bind them up with
their own leaves, by Dozens, and there let them pass the Day in the hot sun,
before you carry them in, hanging it to the beams of the Sieling to keep it
dry.

Eschalots, or (as the French call them) Appeties, being a species 'twixt an
oniamd Garlic, and add a rare relish to a sauce, neither so rank as the one,
nor so flat as the other) are to be orderd like Chibolls, Planting. planting
the little Cloves, to make them greater, and in the month of August, you shall
pull as many of them out of the ground as you desire to reserve, and hang them
up as you did the Garlic.

Leeks. Blanching. Leeks are to be planted like Onions, and transplanted in
files with the dibber, as deep as may be, that you may have a great deal of
White-stalke; nor should you fill the Trench till a little after, and that they
be well grown, this will augmeut their blanching. But besides this there is
another way, and that is when they have done growing, to lay them in the rill
one upon another, leaving only the very extremities of their leaves out of
ground, and thus what is covered will become white, and this does much lengthen
the plant, one such Leek being as good as two others.

Seeds. For the seed, reserve of the fairest and longest to Transplant in the
Spring: and when they are run up, environ them with supporters and Palisades as
you do Onions to preserve their heads from falling to the ground.

When they are ripe, cut them off ^rie, and reserve them in bunches, or
otherwise as you did the Onions.

Herbs Odi^^sant. Sweet and Odoriferant Herbs, and what other you ought
principaly to furnish your Garden withal as are proper for Salades, and for
the service of the Kitchen, omitting the rest at your own pleasuure, such as
are Gallingale, Basil, ^avander, Southen-wood, Hysope, Cassidonia: ^aulme,
Camomile, Rue, and others. We will here discourse of such only as you ought of
necessity be provided.

Salad. For Salads, Balm, Tarragon, Sampier, Garden-Cresses, Corne-Sallet,
Pimpinell, Trippe-Madame, are such as we do ordinarily use together with those
which I have described in the foregoing Sections* that salad being most
agreeable, which is composed with the greatest variety of Herbs.

Some of these Herbs are to be sown, and others to be planted in roots and
though they all for the most part bear seed, yet none so effectually as the
rooted plants.

Corn salad. Pimpinel. Cresse. Those which you are to sow are the
Corne-Salad, Pimpinel, and Cresses, the rest are to be planted in roots ^ all
of them pass the Winter in the ground without prejudice. And you may leave
them as long as you please in the Beds where you sowed and planted them;
without any* farther trouble then to weed them and now and then dig up and
cleanse the paths least the weeds ocome them.

The rest which you gather for the Kitchen, are Thyme, Savory, Marjoram and
Sage, of both sorts, and R^semary; all which plants are easy to be raised, and
sufficiently furnish you.

Licoris. We will not omit Licoris, to gratify such as make use of it in their
P^isans: but if you plant it in your Garden, Place it in some quarter where it
may not prejudice it, for if it like the ground, it will S^ring and go a great
deal deeper then the very Couch or Dog-Grasse, and put you to a world of
difficulty to come at it in case you should resolve to extirpa^e it entirely.

There grows as good in all places of France, as any that they transport out of
Spain.

Plantin^ To furnish your self with this take rooted plants, and lay them half
a foot in ground, it will need no other labor to make it thrive, but to
preserve it well weeded and cleansed by stirring up the earth.

Time. Thyme is both sown and planted; One Thyme tuft will afford many slips,
which you may set with the setting-stick, as you do all sorts of cuttings.

Savory. Savory is every year to be sown, and therefore be careful to reserve
the seeds, and the Herb also being dried, to serve in diverse seasonings.

Marioram Of Marjoram there is the sweet, and the Pot-Marjoram. The first sort
is very t^nder in Winter, and therefore the Seeds thereoff should be carefully
preserved, to sow of it every year: The Winter or Pot-Marjoram (which is a
bigger kind) may be perpetuated where you please.

Sage. Garden and Bastard-Sage grows well of slips or branches cleft off with
Roots from the main Stemms.

Rosemary. Rosemary is also planted of slips, and roots split from the old
stock.

Fenell. Sweet-Fenell and Anis, which are plants to be sown and governed
without much difficulty, are not to be forgotten in your Garden.

Satisfy your self therefore with these few instructions which I have given of
odiriferous plants: The apprehensions I have of swelling our Volume has caused
me to pass them so lightly over. There now only remains to conclude this
Treatise the addition of some Plants and Shrubs which bear fruit, highly
necessary to accomplish your Garden.

St^awberies. Strawberries are of four kinds. The White, the Large Red, the
Capprons, and the small red wild Strawberry.

Plan^. Concerning these last sort which are the small, you need not put your
self to the trouble of cultivateing them, if you dwell near the Woods, where
they abound; for the Children of every Village will bring them to you for a
very small reward: And in case you be far from these pretty Sweets, you may
furnish some small carpets of them on the sides of some of your Alleys without
other care or pains then to plant them, sending for such as are in little sods
from the places which naturally produce them, or else you may sow them, by
casting the water wherein you wash the strawberies before you eat them, upon
the foresaid Beds.

(...). For the great white straberies, the red, and C^aprons you shall plant
in Borders, four ranges in a border or Low-bed, which must have a path between,
of a foot and half at least: The best plants are such as you take from the
strings which they make during all the Summer, and to put three plants in every
hole which you shall make with the dibber. Season. The best season, is to plant
them in August, when their strings are lusty, and have taken roots by their
joints, forming a small plant at every knot.

Proping. To order them well you must dress, weed and loosen the mould about
them very dilligently, and to have fair and clear Fruit you shall stick a small
prop to every plant, to which you shall bind their stalks with a straw and by
this means, besides that your fruit will prove much fairer, Snails, Toads,
Frogs, and other noxious animals will forsak^^ them, for want of covertures,
which they would not do if the whole plant lay upon the ground, where they fail
not to eat ago^dpart of them, ever attayning the fairest.

(...) When your Strawberies shoot their strings, you must castrate them and
leave them none but such as you reserve to ^urnish you with plants.

Ren^wing And you shall every year renew some of your (...) such as are above
four of five years old, as beginning then to impair of their goodness and
virtue.

Dressing. It will be convenient to strew them over with some Melon-bed dung, a
little before the great frosts, which will much improve them, cutting off all
their leaves, as I taught you concerning Sorrel.

Soil. The Soil which they most affect is rather a sandy then a stiff, and
therefore you shall make choice of that part in your Garden for them which most
approaches this mixture.

Strawberries in Autumn. If you desire to have strawberries in Autumn, you
shall only cut off the first blossoms which they put forth, and hinder their
fructifying, they will not fail of blowing anew afterward, and produce their
fruit in the latter season.

Raspis. R^spis are of two Colors, the White and the Red: You must plant (...)
which you may split off into many from a good stemm: They are to be planted
four fingers distant from one another in an open trench as deep as your
spade-bit, as I have described it in my discourse of a Nursery, whither I
referr you for more brevity.

P^uning. Besides the former labors, they will only require that you free them
of their dead wood, and clear them of the suckers which they shoot up in the
paths between their ranges: But if you perceive that notwithstanding all this,
they spring too fast as to endanger their choking, you shall succor them by
pruning off the new sets, and sparing the old, as the most ingenuous and
fruitful.

Goosber^ies. Of Gooseberries there are two kinds, the great-large and the
small white ones which are thorny and full of prickles: Others Red, White, and
Perled, without Prickles, which in Normandy they call G^delles.

They are all of them to be Planted, and governed like Raspis, and therefore I
proceed no farther.

Champignon. Choice. Champignons, and all other kinds resembling them to which
the Italians give the common Apellative of Fongi, we distingush in our
language, naming some of them Mushroms of the Woods, which rests, and are very
large. And are such as grow by the borders and skirts of great For-Mushroms of
the Meadews, and sweet Pastures, which are such as grow frequently where the
Cattle feeds, and seldom flourish till after the first fogs of Autumn are
past. These last are those which I Esteem the best of all, as well because of
their beauties and whiteness above, as for their Vermillion beneath, add to
this their agreeable sent, which are wanting in the other. The Garden Mushroms
which are ordinarily grow upon the beds, and those which do not appear before
the beginning of May, hid under the moss in the woods from whence they seem to
derive their name of Moush, or Mousserons.

Bed Mushram. Dressing. Of all these species there is only the Bed-mushrums
which you can produce in your Garden, and to effect this, you must prepare a
bed of Mules or Asses soil, covering it over four fingers thick with short and
rich dung and when the great heat of the bed is qualified, you must cast upon
it all the parings and falls of such Mushrums as have been dressed in your
Kichen, together with the Water wherein they were washed as also such as are
old and wormeaten, and a bed thus prepared will produce you very good, and in
short space. The same bed may serve you two or three years and will much assist
you in making another.

Production. If you pour of this water upon your Melon beds, they may likewise
furnish you with some. But I had almost forgotten to inform you, that there are
certain stones, which being placed in the dunghill, have the virtue to produce
them in a little time, and that there are some curio^s persons which have of
these stones, to whose better experience I recommend you.

Morrille^ Concerning Morilles, and Truffs: the first whereof is a certain
delicate red Mushrum, and the other an incomparable kind of round ru^^et
excressence which grows in dry ground, without any stalk, leaf, or fibers to
it, and therefore used to be found out by a hog, kept and trained up in the
mystery: there are but very few places which do naturally produce them.

Conclusion. And thus I presume to have sufficiently instructed you, in all
things which are necessary to be cultivated in Gardens; at the least; what is
commonly eaten and in request in our Parisien France. Other Provinces have
other plants, the spoils whereof they afford us so good cheap, that it is not
worth the while to husband them: as for Instance, Capers, etc. not but that
they prosper very well in these parts; but they are troublesome and require a
large compass, for a small crop, flourishing better amongst the stones of some
ancient Ruin, then in any other place: It Is too great a subjection to gather
their blossoms, and to Pickle them in Salt, and would cost you more then you
may buy them for of the Oyl-men

Let us Conclude this discourse then, and hasten to show you how the fruits of
the Garden are to be Conserved in their Natural, according to the precedent
Sections and Articles, as your Fruit, your Herbs and your Pulses are disciplind
in the two former Treatises.


AN APPENDIX TO THE Former Treatises.
SECT. I.
Of the Manner how to conserve Fruits in their Natural.

Conserving of Fruits in their Natural. Raspis. THere is nothing which does
more lively concern the Senses then in the depth of Winter to behold the Fruits
so fair, and so good, yea better, then when you first did gather them, and that
then, when the Trees seem to be dead, and have lost all their verdure, and the
rigor of the Cold to have so despoyl'd your Garden of all that imbellished it,
that it appears rather a Desert then a Paradise of Delices: then it is (I say)
that you will taste your fruit with infinite more gust and contentment, then in
the Summer it self, when their great abundance, and rarity, rather cloy you
then become agreeable. For this reason therefore it is, that we will essay to
teach you the most expedite, and certain means how to conserve them all the
Winter, even so long, as till the New shall incite you to quit the Old. For it
is just with Fruits as it is with Wines: those which we drink first are the
more delicate and juicy; and those which we reserve for the latter part of the
year are more firm and lasting: both excellent in their Season: But so soon as
the New are made, and fit to pierce, we abandon the old, which we before
esteemed so agreeable. In like manner it is, so soon as the new Fruits approach
to their maturity, we forsake those of the year past; and one dish of
Strawberries, or Cherries, (though never so green) or forward Pears, shall be
preferred to the best, and fairest Bon-Chrestien which you can produce.

Conservatory. Fabric. Situation To pursue then our first intention. It will
be necessary to choose some place in your house the most commodious to make
your Reserva^^ry or storehouse, which should have the windows and overtures
narrow to prevent the extremity both of heat and the cold: these you shall
allways keep shut, and so secured from the air as only to afford you a moderate
light, which you shall also banish by closing the wooden shutters when you go
out: And indeed were there none at all, and that the door to it were very
straight, and low, it would be the better keeping it shut so soon as ever you
are entered.

Such a place designed for your store, you shall build shelves about, and (if
the room be capable of it) that the middle be to lay fruit in heaps, such as
are the most common and destind for the Servants, and if it be not wide enough,
it shall suffice to shelve it three parts and leave the fourth for the heaps.

Shelving. Let your shelves be laid upon brackets of wood or Iron very strong
because of their charge: two of them side by side, two foot broad: Which you
must ledg with a small Lath, to keep the fruit from rolling and falling off:
but let-none of these shelves be within a yard of the floor, that you may place
the best rare fruit under them, seperateing and distinguishing them according
to their kinds: but you may continue the shelves upward to the very Ceeling
placing them about nine or ten-inches asunder. And for the more convenien^e you
should have a small light frame of steps by which you ascend and reach to the
uppermost shelf, when you would visit your fruit: a ladder being nothing so
convenient, wearying the feet, and more subject to fall.

Season of Gathering fruit. The season of Gathering your winter-fruits being
come, which you shall discover by many indications, as when they begin to drop
off themselves, which commonly happens after the first rains of Autumn, when
the Tree being sobb'd and wet, swells the wood, and loosens, the fruit: Or when
the first frosts advertise you that it is time to lay them up: or (to be more
certain) at the decrease of the Moon in October (thus for the Pears and Apples)
beginning to gather the softest first, and finishing with the harder, that they
may have the more time to perfect their maturity.

There are some fruits that are only to be eaten ripe as the Gros^enil-pear A
kind of hip, a ^ound red berrie, Cor^^es is a fruit fashioned like a pear and
to be rotted like a Medlar.
Cor^nes, Pear.
Services, Azerolls, and the like, which you shall leave upon the Tree till you
perceive by their falling in great numbers, they admonish you to gather them.

Medlars are to be gathered about St. Lukes, according to the ^roverb.

Medlars. Baskets. When you gather your Fruits, you should be provided with
strong ozier Baskets, to be born full betwixt two men, and you shall put a
little straw at the bottom, lest the weight of the uppermost bruise the
undermost against the basket.

Fallen fruit. You shall as you gather your fruits separate the fairest and
biggest from the midling and such as are fallen off themselves, or as you have
thrown down in gathering the others, putting each sort in a b^^ket apart: I
speak not here of the smallest and the crumplings, for I suppose you discharged
your Trees of them before, so soon as you perceived that they did not thrive,
to give the more nourishment to the rest. The worm-eaten Apples should be put
also amongst those which are fallen to be spent first.

Housing. As fast as you gather your fruits, you shall carry them into your
storehouse, and range them upon your shelves so as they may not touch one
another, putting ^ little straw all under them, and in like manner
distinguishing the fairest and biggest from the lesser upon several shelves and
heaping up the worm-e ^en and fallen, as I but now directed you.

Bon-Chresten As ^ouching the Bon Chrestien Pears, they are more curiously to
be gathered then the rest, for the stalks of such as are very fair and well
colored, red at one side and yellow at the other, should be sealed with
Spanish wax to preserve their sap from evaporating: this done, wrap them up in
dry pa^ers and put them in a Bushel or a Box well covered, that they may grow
t^wny and mature being thus shut up.

You shall Practice the same upon the Double-f^owere Pear, the Cadillace, the
Thoul, and others which are graffed upon the Q^ince, and which receive their
color from the Tree: For as for those as are graffed upon the Pear-stock, they
commonly continue Green; and therefore without any farther trouble, you need
only range them upon the shelves, as you did the rest.

C^^inet. Those that are very curious have a Cupboard which shutts very close,
in which they reserve their Bonne Chrestiens: This Cupboard is furnished with
shelves, upon every of which are fastened small quarters of wood, which are laid
cross like a grate, every square near as big as the greatest Pear. Upon each of
these s^uares they lay a Pear by it self, for fear lest they should touch; and
that if any of them should be perished, it do not in^ect its neighbor. This
Cupboard they keep very close, pasting pieces of Paper about the Key-holes, to
keep out the air, and never open it, save when they would take our fruit, and
this closing them up does give them a most excellent color: but before they
thus shut them up, ^ they leave the Pears five or six days in the Baskets,
wherein they were brought out of the Orchard, that they may have time to sweat.

Ripe fruit. Those Fruits which are to be leaten ripe, should be laid in
heaps, and if they do not mellow fast enough to your desire, you shall put them
into a Wheat-Sack, and shall jumble them together betwixt two, this Concussion
one against the other will exceedingly advance their maturity.

Grapes. Your Muscat grapes of all colors, as the Chasselats, Bicane, and
Rochel Grapes, or others more ordinary, are to be preserved several ways,
either singly ranging them upon straw o^ h^nging them in Sieves up to the
Ceeling, covering them over with paper to guard them from the dust, or
barrelling them up with Oat-Chaff or in a tub of Ashes, or which is best,
hanging them by their ends (not stalks) in your forementioned Cub-board.

To keep them. I pretermit several other curious ways of keeping Grapes, as
when they are in Flower to put the Clusters into a Glasse-Violl, and when it is
Ripe cut it from the Vine, and seal up the stalk, but it must so hang as that
none of them touch the ^ide of the Glass, and then close the mouth of it with
soft wax, to keep out the Air, this will preserve the Chister till Christmas.

There are diverse other means, which I omit because they are altogether
unprofitable, troublesome, and expensive.

and though I have not before taught you how you may store your self with these
Muscat-Grapes of all Colors, it is not out of ignorance, for I am abundantly
furnished withthem; But because it is a plant which is to be governed like the
other Vines, I referr it to my Vignerous, who have from their Youth been
accostomed to the ordering of Vines, their experience instructing them in those
necessary subjections which a Gardner would never observe, with so many
precautions as they are obliged to do, especially in planting and pruning them,
which are the only things I instrust them in, and am well satisfied.

Vermin. I shall tell you upon this occasion, that all sorts of Flies, and
Bees, Wasps, etc. Dormise, and Rats, are exceedingly licorish of these grapes,
when they are ripe, to prevent which you shall place some clove of Garlic half
hid in several places upon the poles which support them, near the Clusters,
and the very Sent thereof will chase them away.

Aspect. The fullest aspect of the Meridian Sun, and shelter of some Wall, is
the only place that the Muscat and Precoce Grape affects.

Rotten fruit. Mice. Cats. To conclude this Section, I will advise you to visit
your Conservatory often, that in case you find any of the Fruits rotten, you
take them away; for they spoil all that they touch: but if you perceive any one
that the Mice have begun, stir it not from the place; for as long as any of
that single Fruit remains, they will never attaque another: In the mean time
set a Trap to catch them, for to let Cats in, they will disorder your Fruit,
and leave their Ordure amongst the heaps, and upon the Shelves.

SECT. II.
Of Dried Fruits.

Dried fruit. THere are diverse Fruits that we dry in Ovens, which in hotter
Countries they dry in the Sun, as in Provence the Prunella's, in Langvedoc
Raisins of the Sun; but since the Cold of our Climate obliges us to make use of
the Oven, I will here describe in particular, how each of them ought to be
dried.

Cherries. Beginning then with Ch^rries, White, Hearts, and the Preserving
Cherries, as with the first which the Season prescribes us. Choose such as are
very ripe, fair, fresh, and not bruised: you shall spread them upon Lattices,
or Hurdles made of wicker, ranging them one by another, as handsomely as you
can, without suffering them to lie one upon another, with their Stones and
stalks then put them into the Oven which must be of a temperate heat. Such as
it usually is after the household bread is drawn. and then leaving them as long
as any heat remains, you shall take them forth turn them, to the end they may
perfectly dry: after this you shall heat the Oven again, putting them in, and
repeating this course till they are sufficiently dried to be kept, then let
them cool in heaps a whole day, and afterward binding them up in small
bunches, reserve them in great They call them in F^ance Bush^ll. boxes, being
of that shape and containing about hal^ a Bushel.
round Boxes exquisi^ely shut.

Plum. Plums are to be dried like Cherries very ripe gathered, the best for
this purpose are such as are fallen off the Trees, for they are most fleshy,
and will be more agreeable to eat then those which you shall gather, which
retain always some verdure upon them.

The very best to dry are to be chosen, as the Imperial, Date, and St.
Catherine, Diaper, Perdrigon, Cytrout, (...) Mirabolan, Roche-Corbon, Damasks
of all sorts, and the St. Julian for ordinary spending.

Prunellas. If you desire to counterfeit Prunellas, you must make choice of the
fairest of your Plums, as the Perdrigon, the Abricotplum, Moyen d^ oeuf, a Plum
so called.
Eggyolk, Brignolles or others, which have a white skin, pee^e them without a
knife, drawing them by the skin which will easily quit the plum, if it be
thoroughly ripe, then stone them without breaking the fruit, as I shall
hereafter instruct you when I speak of Abricots. Boil the skins well with a
little water, and strain it through a cloth, and in this juice (which be in
the consistance of a Syrup infuse your plums as often as you set them into the
Oven, flatting them every time: If your Liquor be not thick enough, you shall
add to it the juice of White Corrinths, very ripe, which will render your
Syrup sufficiently thick. You may also (if you please) add some Sugar to them,
they will be excellent, and require less drying.

The Provencals instead of setting them in the Oven, stick them upon Thorn
branches, one upon each Thorn, and so leave them to dry in the Sun.

Peaches. Peaches are to be ordered after the same manner as Plums, excepting
that they must be gathered from the Tree; for those which fall, besides that
they are over-ripe, they will have such Bruises as will hinder their drying,
without great trouble, and will be very disagreeable to the taste: Before you
stone them, you shall set them once into the Oven to mortify them: afterward
you shall slit them neatly with a Knife, and take out the Stone; then open and
flat them upon some Table, that when you set them in the Oven, they may dry as
well within as without, by reason of their great thickness; and the last time
you draw them out of the Oven, whilst they are yet hot, close them again, and
flatten them, to reduce them to their natural shape.

Abricots. Abricots are also to be gathered ripe from the Tree, you need not
open them, to take out their S^ones, but thrust them out dexterously, near the
Stalk: neither in drying them need you open them like Peaches; but leave them
whole, and only flatting them, that they may dry equally in every part, and be
the more commodiously ranged in the Boxes.

If you desire to have them excellent, put a Pill of Sugar about the quantity
of a P^a, in the place of the Stone; and fill an earthen Milktray, covering it
with a lid of Paste closed thereto: then set it in the Oven, as soon as the
Bread has taken color, and there let it remain till it be cold: after which
you shall set it in the Stove upon slatse, as they dry Sweetmeats; and when
they are sufficiently dry to keep, whilst yet warm, strew some finely searced
Sugar upon them, and leave them two days before you set them up.

Pear^* Pears are to be dried pared and unpared, in the same manner as I showed
you before: but being pared they are much more delicate, and the Parings are to
be used, to infuse in the Liquor, as I taught you in Plums. You must leave
their Stalks, and the crown when you pare them, choosing such Fruit as is the
fairest, most delicate, and full of Flavor, as the Orange, Summer
Bon-Chrestien, Muscadel, Great M^scat-Pear, the Rousset, and a hundred others
as rare.

You shall put of these likewise in earthen Pans, with their Skins upon the
Fruit, before you cover them with Paste, thus dry, and strew them as you did
your Abricots.

The Pear is not to be gathered over ripe, for that will render it too flashy.

In Grape-time, you may infuse the parings in new White Wine instead of water,
or in Cyder-time in new Perry made without water.

Apples. Apples are commonly dried without paring them, and are to be slit in
the midst, taking out the Core: some of them you may boil for Liquor to s^ak
those in which you intend to dry.

Grapes. Grapes of all sorts, Muscadine and others, are to be dried in the
Oven, upon the Hurdle, without farther trouble then only to dry them in a
temperate heat, and turn them frequently, that they dr^^ equally. Those of
Languedoc pass them through a (...) preserve them from worms
Lie before they dry them in the Sun.

Beans. Amongst dry Fruits I will also range green Beans, which being well
dressed with a little Winter Savory dried (the true seasoning of Beans) may
pass for new.

To dry them, you shall take those that are tender, which have yet their In
which the beau^s are involved.
Skins green, before they are white; take off this Coat (that is, peel them)
then dry them in the Sun upon papers, often turning them daily, at Evening
bring them in, and expose them again to the Sun every day, till you find them
very dry, which will soon be, if it be not close weather: being dry, you may
keep them covered in Boxes, carefully preserving them from all moisture.

Before you boil them, you must lay them in soak for the space of half a day in
warm water.

Pease. For green Peas^ choose the youngest, which shailed out of their ^ods,
dry as you did the Beans, and infuse them likewise in warm water before you
boil them, adding to the liquor, a handful of the leaves of new Pease, if you
have any green, tying them in a Bunch, lest they mingle with your Pease.

Mushrum^ Morilles and Mushrums are to be filed on a Thread, and hung up in some
hot place, as over an O^en, where they will easily dry; or if the place be
commodious for it, before the Fire, or set into the Oven itself temperately
warm.

SECT. III.
To pickle Fruits with Salt and ^inegre.

Pickling cucumbers. CUcumbers are the biggest Garden Fruit which we use to
pickle, they are to be chosen very small, (which they call Cornets or Gerkins,
because we choose those which resemble little crooked hor^s, and that do not
improve) or else somewhat bigger, but very young, before their seeds be hard,
which are nothing so pleasant to eat: These are to be pickled pared, or whole;
but it is best to pare them before you put them in pickle then afterward;
because of the loss of your Salt and Vinegre upon the Skin, which will become
so hard, as scarcely to be eaten: But they are handsomer and whiter, being
pared at that instant when you serve them to the Table, then such as you pare
before they be pickled: so that you may do which of them you please.

The other small horned Cucumbers are to be pickled without paring, by reason
of the delicateness of their skin.

Cathering You must gather very early in a fair morning, and let them lie all
the rest of the day in the Sun to mortify them a little, that they may the
better receive in the Salt.

Put the pared, the unpared, and the Ge^kins, each of them in well glazed
earthen Pots apart (for those that are unglazed, crumble and moulder away, by
reason of the Salt which does penetrate them, and so lose their Pickle) ranging
them handsomely, and crowding them as near as you can to one another, without
bruising: then you shall strew a good quantity of Salt upon them, and the
Vinegre afterward, tilf the uppermost of all are well covered; otherwise there
will breed a mouldinesse that will spoil all that remain bare. Thus set them up
in a temperate place, and touch them not at least in six weeks, that they may
be perfectly pickled. Your Storehouse will be the most convenient place to keep
them in.

(...). Let the Purslain which you would pickle be of tha^ which you have
transplanted, that it may be the fairer. The true season to gather it is, when
it begins to flower, if you would have that which is tender: for if you omit it
till it be out of flower, that you may save the Seed, (as it is commonly sold)
it will be too hard to eat. Let it also be dried and mortified in the Sun, two
or three days, and then range it in glazed Pots with Vinegre and Salt as you
did the Cucumbers.

C^pers Broom-b^ds. Sampiere. Tarr^gon. Capers, Broom-buds, Sampier, Tarragon
and the like, are to be pickled after the same manner as above.

Artichoks. Bottoms of Artichock^ are to be pickled in Salt, but after another
Method then the former; for they must first be above half-boyl'd, and when they
are cold, and well drained of their water, which should likewise be dried with
a cloth to take out all their hu^idity, range them in Pots, and pour Brine upon
them, as strong as it can possibly be made; which is done by putting into it so
much Salt, as till it will no longer imbibe, and that the Salt precipitates to
the bottom whole and without melting. This we call Marinated water.

Upon this water (which will cover your Artichocks) you must pour Sweet Butter
melted, to the eminence of two fingers, that you may thereby exclude the Air;
then the Butter being cold, set up the Pot with your Cucumbers, or in some
other temperate place, covered and well secured from the Cats and the mice,
which else will make bold to visit your B^tter.

But I presume that before you put the Artichoks in the Pot, you did prepare
them as you would have done to serve them to the Table, that is, taken off all
the leaves and the Chocke which is within.

Time. The true season for this is in Autumn, when (practicing what I taught
you before in the second Treatise in the Chapter of Artichokes) your Plants
produce those which are young and tender, for they are these which you should
take to pickle, before they come to open and flower, but yet not till their
heads are well formed and hard.

When you would eat of them, you must extract their saltness by often shifting
the water, and boil them once again before you serve them to the Table.

Asparagus Peace. Champignons. Asparagus, Peace without Cods, Morilles,
Champignons, or Mushrums, are also to be pickled in salt, (having first
parboyl'd them, and prepared every sort in its kind) af^^r the same manner that
you did Artichoks.

V^sit your pots. You shall monthly be sure to visit your Pots, that in case
you perceive any of them Moldy, or to have lost their pickle, you may
according repayr it.

Cornelians. I have some years since invented the pickling of Cornelians, and
have frequently made them pass for Olives of Veronna, with diverse persons who
have been deceived, their color so resembling them, and their taste so little
different. To effect this, I cause the fairest and biggest to be gathered when
first then would begin to blush, and then letting them lie a while, I Pot or
Barrel them up, filling them with brine, just as I do Artichocks, and to render
them odoriferous, adding a little branch of green Fenel, and a few Bay Leaves:
then closing the vessel well, touch it not for a month after. If you find
them too salt, dilute and abate the pickle before you serve them to the Table.

SECT. IV.
To preserve fruit with Wine in the Must, in Cider, or in Honey.

To Preserve fruit with Wine Cider. Honey. ALl sorts of Fruits which may be
preserved in Sugar, may also be preserved in Must, in Cider, or in Honey. And
there is no other dfficulty in making choice of fruits to scald and preserve
this way, then in choosing such as you would preserve in Sugar.

In Must. To describe in this place the principal rules which must of
necessity be observed in preserving fruit in the Must or new Wine; You shall
take* three pails full, three pots, or 3 parts of must, according to the
quantity of fruit which you intend to preserve: set it in a Kettle or Skillet
on the fire, but with care, that if your fire be of wood, the flame being too
great do not burn some side of the vessel. Then let your must continue boiling
till it be reduced to one third part, that it may be of fitting ^onsistence to
preserve your fruit in, sufficiently, and keep it from moulding and spoiling.

The fruits being pared or unpared, according to their natures or your
curiosity, those which ought to be scalded being done, well drained, and dried
from their water, are to be put and preserved in this Must carefully scummed,
and made to ^oyl till you perceive that the Syrup is of a sufficient
consistence, which you shall know by dropping some of it on a plate, if it
appear in stiff Rubies and run not about, the plate a little inclining.

You cannot take your Must too new, and therefore, as soon as you perceive the
grapes very ripe, tread them immediately, and take of that must as much as will
serve, white or re^, according to the fruit you would preserve. Some fruits as
the Quince, the Pear, and the Blew grape, etc. require Must of blew grapes,
others of white, as Walnuts, the Muscat-grape and the like, whose candor and
whiteness you desire to preserve.

To heighten the taste of those fruits which you ought to preserve in red-Wine,
put in a little Cinnamon and Cloves tied up in a button of Lawn that they may
not be dispersed amongst the preservs, lost or consumed in the Syrup, and to
those which require white wine, a bunch of green Fenel bound up likewise in a
cloth.

Ma^malad of Grapes or Raisins* Codiniack, or Marmalad of Grapes is made of the
fairest, and ripest blew grapes, gathered in the afternoon at the heat of the
day, to the end that their moisture may be entirely dried up: Lay them in some
lost of your house, where both the ay^ and the Sun have free intercourse,
spreading them upon Tables or Hurdles, that, for at the leas^ a fortnight, they
may there sweat and shrink: In case the weather prove cloudy, or that the
season prove cold, you may set them in your O^en temperately warm, after which
press them well with your hands, cleansing them from all their seeds and
stalks, putting the husks and juice to boil in the kettle, and diligently
scumming and clearing it from the seeds: Reduce this liquor also to a third
part, diminishing the fire, according as your con^ection thickens, and stirring
it often about with your spatule or spoon to prevent its cleaving to the
vessel, Gas^be an instrument made like an Oar.
and that it may boil equally. Being thus prepared, you shall percolat it
through a Sieve or course cloth, bruising the husks with your wooden Ladle,
the better to express out the substance, and besides, you shall wring it forth,
or squeez it in a press: when this is done, set it again on the fire, and boil
it once more keeping it continually stirring till you conceive it to be
suffici^ntly boiled, then taking it off, pour it into Earthen-pans, to prevent
its contracting any ill smack from the kettle, and being half cold, put it into
Gally-pots, to keep.

Potting. You shall let your pots stand open five or six days, and then cover
them with paper so fitted as to lie upon the very preserve within the pot, and
when visiting your pots, you find that any of your paper is moldy, take it
away and apply another, this do as long as you shall see cause, which will be
until such time as all the superfluous humidity be evaporated, for then the
mouldinesse will vanish unless your confection was not sufficiently boiled, in
which case it must be boiled again, and then you may cover them for altogether.

M^stard de Dijon. To make Mustard a la mode de Dijon, you shalf only take of
this Codiniack and put to it store of Seneve or Mustard Seed well b^uised in a
mortar with water, and finely searced, and when it is exquisitely mixed
together, quench therein some live coals, to extract all the bitterness from
the se^d, then either barrel or pot it up, well closed, and reserved for use.

You may also preserve all sorts of fruit in Perry that has not been diluted,
reducing it in boiling also to a third part, as we showed you in the Must.
Lastly.

In Honey. To preserve in Honey, you shall take that which is most thick, hard
and most resembling Sugar, boiling it in a preserving Pan, scumming it exactly,
and stirring it about to prevent its burning. You shall discover if it be
enough boiled, by putting into it a Hen^ egg, if it sink, it is not yet enough,
if it float, it is of sufficient consistence to preserve your Fruits: You know
that Honey is very subject to burn, and therefore finish this preparation upon a
gentle fire, frequently stirring the bottom of your pan with the spatule to
prevent this accident.

FINIS.
Table of the principal matters contained in this Bo^k.
The First Treatise.
I. Of the Place, of the Earth, and mould of the Garden, together with the
means to recover, and meliorate ill ground.
S^te Page 1 Soil. 2 Dressing. 3 Skreening. 8
. II. Of Espaliers or wall-fruit, and of single Pole-hedges, and Shrubs.
PLanting. 12 Pole Hedges. 18 Shrubs. 19
. III. Of Trees, and of the Choice which ought to be made of them.
PEars. Apples. Peaches. Abricots. 2^* 24 Cherries. 25 Age. 26 Shape. Taking
up. 27 Transporting. Transplanting. 28 Pruning. 29 Nailing. Spreading. Error.
34 Dre^sing. 36 Old Trees. 37
. IV. Of the Seminary and Nursery.
SEminary. 38 Seeds. Kernels. Stones. 39 Seed-plot. 40 Cut^ing. 41 Graffing. 42
Quince-stocks. Peaches. 44 Dressing. 45 Nursery. Plot. 46 Planting. 47 Trees.
48 Nipping. Pruning. 51 Distance. Form. 52
. V. Concerning Graffs, and the Best directions how to choose them.
GRaffing. 54 Inoculating. Season. 55 Choice. 56 Time. Cleft. Choice. 57
. VI. The manner how to graff. p. 59
INoculating. 60 Season. 62 Cleft. 65 Crown. 70 Approach. 71 Cutting. Layers.
73
. VII. Of Trees, and Shrubs in particular, how they are to be governed, and
their Maladies cured.
TRees. 75 Pears. Graffing* 76 Apple Trees. 79 Plum. 80 Abricots. Peaches. 81
Cherries. 80 Figs. 84 Mulberies. 86 Oranges. Limmons. 87 Shrubs. 89 Granads. 9^
Jassemine. 91 Musk-Rose. Myrtles. Laurels. 92 Phylyrea. Alaternus. Althea
frutex. Arbor Judae. Lilac. Diseases. 94 Moss. 95 Jaundies. 97 Moles. 98 Mice.
100 Worms. 101 Pismires. 102 Snails. 103 Wood-lice. Earwigs. Caterpillars. 104
Composition to hood Graffs withal. 105 To make fruit knot. 106 A Catalogue of
the names of Fruits known about Paris, and when they are in Season. 108
The Second Treatise.
* I. Of Melons, C^cumbers, Gourds, and their kinds.
MElons. 135 Seeds. 136 Plot. 117 Figure. 138 Season. Beds. 139 Sowing. 140
Governing. 142 Season. Transplanting. 143 Storms. ^ells. Pruning. 145
Transplanting. 147 Season. Transplanting. 148 Watring. Gathering. 149 Visiting.
Care. 151 Choice. Seeds. Cucumbers. 152 Pumpeons. Transplanting. Gathering. 154
Seed. 156
II. Of Artichocks, Chardons, and Asparagus.
ARtichocks. Planting. 157 Earthing. 159 Chard. 160 Slips. Gathering. 161
Spanish-Chardon. Asparagus. 162 Planting. 163 Dressing. 164 Cutting. 165
. III. Of Cabbages, and Lettuce of all sorts.
CAbbage. 166 Seed. Cole-flowers. 167 Sowing. 168 Removing. 170 Transplanting.
171 Cabbage. Watring. Sowing. Birds. 172 Worms. 173 Large sided Cabbage. 174
White Cabbage. 175 Red. Perfumed. Cabbage. 176 Planting. 176 Seed. 178 Season
of sowing. Insects. 180 Lettuce. Sowing. 182 Transplanting. 183 Roman Lettuce.
Heading. 184 Blanching. Seed. 185
VI* Of Roots.
ROots. Parsneps. 186 Sowing. 188 Removing. Housing. 189 Seed. Carrots. 190
Season. Seed. 191 Salsifix. 192 Dressing. Season. 193 Seed. 194 Radishes.
Horse-Radishes. Seed. 195 Small Radish. Sowing. 196 Seed. Turnips. 197 Season.
Vermin. 198 Housing. Seed. Parsley. Season. 199 ^re^^ing. 200 Roots. Seed.
Skirret. 201 Spending. Rampions. Jerusalem Artichocks. Seed. 202 Dangers. 203
V. Of all sorts of Pot Herbs.
BEet-Leeks. 203 Season. Transplanting. 204 Gathering. Sowing. Beets Red. Seed.
206 Orache. Succory. Season. 207 Blanching. 208 Housing. 210 Seed. 211 Endive.
Blanching. Housing. Sorrel. 212 Sowing. Transplanting. 214 Dressing. Seed. 215
Patience. Borrage. Sowing. 216 Seed. Buglosse. Chervill. 217 Seed. Sowing. 218
Seed. Allisaunders. Sceleri. Sowing. P^rslain. 219 Sowing. Transplanting. 220
Seed. Spinach. 221 Sowing. Season. Seed. 222
VI. Of Beans, Peace, and other Pulse.
BEans. 223 Sowing. Choice. 224 Ground. 225 Houing. 226 Gathering. Seed. Hame.
227 Haricots. Sowing. 228 Painted Beans. Soil. Soweing. 229 White Streaked
Beans. 230 Red Beans. Peace. 231 Sowing. Hot-Spurrs. Soil. 232 Soweing. Setting.
233 Great Peace. Bushing. 234 Mould. Distance. Beds. 235 Gray-Peas. Small-peas.
Soweing. 236 Pigeons. Houing. 237 Monthly peace. Cutting. Watring. Lupines. 239
Slave-peas. Soweing. Lentils. Mould. 240 Thrashing. Housing. 24^
* VII. Of Onions, Garlic, Chibols Leeks, Odirif^r^^us Plants, and other
conveniences of a Garden, not comprehended in the precedent Chapters.
ONions. Sowing. 242 Seeding. Drying. Housing. Seed. 243 Chibols.
Transplanting. 24^ Garlic, Planting. Pulling. Housing. Eschalots. 247
Planting. Leeks. Blanching. 248 Seeds Odoriferant. 249 Salad. Corne-Salad.
Pimpinell. Cresse. 250 Licoris. Planting. 251 Time. Savory. Ma^joram. Sage. 252
Rosemary. Fenell. Strawberies. Plants. 25^ Beds. Season. 254 Propping.
Stringing. Removing. 255 Dressing. Soil. Strawberries in Autumn. Raspis. 256
Pruning. Goosberries. 257 Champignons. Choice. 258 Mushrum-bed. Dressing.
Produc^ion. 259 Morills. Truffs. Conclusion. 260
AN APPENDIX To the Former Trea^ise.
^ I. Of the Manner (...) to (...) Fruits in their Natural.
COnserving fruit^. 263 Consevatory. Fabric. Situation. 265 ^^elving. 266
Season of gathering fruit. 267 Medl^rs. B^^kets. Fallen fruit. 268 Nousing.
(...)-Chrestien. 269 Cabinet. 270 Ripe-fruit. Gr^pe^. 271 Keeping. 272 Vermin.
273 Aspect. Rotten fruit* Mic^. Cat^. 274
. II. Of Dried Fruit^
DRied-fruit^. (...). ^75 Plums. 276 (...). 277 Peaches. 278 Abric^t^. 279
Pear^. 280 Apples. Grapes. Bea^s. 281 Pea^. 282 Mushrums. 283
III. To pickle (...) with Salt and ^i^egre.
PI^kle Cucumbers. ^83 Gathering. ^84 Purslain. 285 Capers. Broom-buds.
Sampiere Tarragon. Artichocks. 286 Season. 287 Asparagus. Peace. Champigno^s.
Pickle. C^rnelians. 288
III. To preserve fruit With wine in the Must, in Cider, or Honey.
IN Mu^ ^^9 Marmalad of Grapes or (...). 291 Potting. Must^rd of Dijon. 293 In
Honey. 294
Books printed for, and to be sold by John Crook, at the Sign of the Ship in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
Annals veteris Testamenti, a prima mundi Origin deduct^; una cum rerum
Afiaticarum, and Aegyptiacarum Chronoco, a temporis Historici principio usque
ad Maccabaicarum initia producto: a viro Reverendissimo and doctissimo, Iacobo
Vsserio, Archiepiscopo Armachano. folio

Ej^sdem Annalium pars secunda, quae ad annum Christi octogesimum producitur,
^na cum harmonia Evangeliorum, ab exercitatissimo sacris Literis Doctore,
Iohanne Richard sono Epischopo Ardachadensi Conscripta. folio

Ejusdem de textus Hebraici veteri^ Testamenti variantibus lectionibus ad
Lodovicnm Capellum Epistola. quarto

Vsserii de LXX Interpretum Versione Syntagma. quarto

The Holy History; containing excellent observations, on all the remarkable
passages and Histories of the Old Testament, with a vindi^ation of the verity
thereof from the Aspersions of Atheists and Antiscripturians. Written
Originally in French, by the curious pen of Nicolas Cau^^^n* S. I. and now
elegantly rendered into English out of the seventh and last Edition by a Person
of Honor. 4^

The Bishop of Derry's Victory of truth for the peace of the Church, in answer
to Mounsieur Millitie^e. 8^

-- Of Liberty and Necessity, in answer to Mr. Hobbs. 8^

-- His replication to the Popish Bishop of Calcedon, in defense of his
vindication of the Church of England. 8^

-- His vindication of the Church of England from the aspersions of Schism cast
upon it by the Papists. 8^

Mountagues Miscellanea spiritualia, or devout Essays. The second part. 40

The History of the ^ron Age: wherein is set down the Origi^al of all the Wars
and Commotions, that have happened from the year of God 1500. with the manner of
their prosecution and Events, till the year 1656. Illustrated with the Figures
of the most renowned persons of this pressent time. folio

(...), of drinking water, against our Novelists that prescribed it in England,
by Richard Short, Doctor of Physic. Whereunto is added (...), (...) ^arm
drink, and is an answer to a Treatise of warm drink, printed at Cambridge. 8^

(...), ^ive Introductori^^ A^glo-Latino-Graecum, complect^ns colloqui^
fa^iliaria Aesopi febulas and Lu^i^^i, s^lectiores mortuorum Diologos, in usum
Scholarum, per J. Sh. 8^

The Life and Death of the most reverend and learned Father of our Church Dr.
James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primat^ of all Ireland, in a Sermon
at his Funeral, at the Abbey of Westminster, April. 17th. 1656. by Nicholas
Bernard, D. D. and Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grays Inn, London. 8^

The Judgment of the late Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland, of the
extent of Christ's death and satisfaction, etc. of the Sabbath, and observation
of the Lords day: of the Ordination in other reformed Churches, etc. by N.
Ber^ard, D. D. and Preacher to the Honorable Society of Grays Inn, London, 8^

The Holy life of Mounsieur de Re^ty, a late Noble man of France, and
Counselor to K. Le^is XIII. written in French by John Baptist S. Iure, and
faithfully translated into English by E. S. Gent. ^^

Castigations of Mr. Hobbes his last Animadversions, in the case con^erning
Liberty and universal Necessity, with an Appendix concerning the catching of
Leviathan, or the great whale, ^y (...) Bramball, D. D. and Bishop of D^^^y. 8^

The Annals of the Worl^ (...) from the Origin of time, and continued to the
beginning of the Emperor Vespasians Reign, and the total destruction and
abolition of the Temple and Commonwealth of the Jews, containing the History
of the Old and New Testament, with that of the Maccabees. As also all the most
memorable affairs of Asia and Egypt, and the rise of the Empire of the Roman
Caesar's under C. Julius and Octavianus, collected from all Histories, as well
sacred as profane, and methodically digested by the most reverend James Usher
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland. folio

Hymen's Preludia, or Loves Master piece, being the seventh part of that so much
admired Romance, Entitled Cleopatra written originally in French, and now
rendered into English by J. C. 8^

De Hibernia et Antiqui^atibus suis disquisitiones, Editio secunda emendatior
et quarta part auctitor. Accesserunt rerum hi^erni earum reguante Hencico,
VIII. Annals ^unc primum in lucem ^diti. A Iacob^ Wat^o. Autore Equ. Au^. 8^

Honoria and Mammon, with the contention of Ajax and Ulisses for the Armor of
Achilles, by James Shyrly, Gent, 8^

Certain Discourses, viz. of Babylon (Revel. 18. 4.) being he present See of
Rome, (with a Sermon of Bishop Bedels upon the same words; of laying on of
Hands ( Heb. 6. 2.) to be an ordained ministry; of the old form of words in
Ordination; of a set form of Prayer. Each being the Judgment of the late
Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of all Ireland. Published and enlarged by N.
Bernard. D. D. and Preacher to the honorable Society of Grays-Inne, unto which
is added a Character to Bishop Bedel, and an answer to Mr. Perce's fifth Letter
concerning the late Primate. 8^

Hymen's Preludia or Loves Masterpiece, being the ninth and tenth part of that
so much admired Romance Entitled Cleopatra, written originally in French, and
now rendered into English, by I. D. folio.

The Antiquitie^ of Warick shiere illustrated and beautified with Maps,
prospects and Pourtractuers, by William Dugdale. folio.

By whom also a^^ manner of Books are to be sold brought from beyond the Sea^.

FINIS.

