MANUDUCTIO ad COELUM.

A POEM. IN TWO PARTS.

I. Of Joy and Sadness. How a good Man ought to rejoice. He that looks before
him is not cast down. Several Antidotes against Sorrow. II. Of Patience: The
Occasions and Effects of it. The Signs of it. An Exhortation to it; with
Instructions how to behave our selves in Adversity. The necessity of
Perseverance.
Extracted out of the Writings of the Holy Fathers and Ancient Philosophers, by
John Bona a Cistertian Abbot:

And turned into Verse by James Chamberlayne,

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1681.

MANUDUCTIO ad COELUM. A POEM.
PART I.
Of Joy and Sadness. How a good Man ought to rejoice. He that looks before him
is not cast down. Several Antidotes against Sorrow.

I.
JOY, when it once does so excessive grow,
That it all Bounds of Reason does or'e-flow,
Draws ever after't, as we daily find,
A total Dissolution of the Mind.
We then must have a prudent care of that,
And likewise must our Joys so moderate,
That if need be from Mirth, to Grief we may
Dispose our selves, act readily each way.
Our blessed Savior, who must sure be thought
The ablest Arbiter of things, says not
Those are the Blessed that laugh, and frollick here,
But they that Mourn the truly Blessed are.
It were indeed a strange indecency
For one that does profess himself to be
Pursuant of the great Eternity,
Among so many perils that are found
Daily the All of Man to Circle round,
So many just occasions as there are
Of sadness, to be always Gigling here,
Making of antic mouths, and like a Boy
Laughing to transport for each trifling Toy.
This Worlds fugacious Pleasures, and the Joys
Of which we talk, and make so great a Noise,
Are frequently observed to be the Fate,
And Prodromus of a most anxious state:
There neither true nor solid Joy can be,
But in a Conscience just, serene and free,
He that does cherish, and take care of the one,
Shall find the other his Companion,
For in his Breast it grows, there takes delight,
And baffles all the efforts of base despite.
All other Joy, but what proceeds from this,
Wants substance, and but light and trivial is;
And there are those that Laugh, who in that while
Of their false Mirth, have little cause to smile.
True Joy a serious matter is, and there
Must be a Conscience from Pollutions clear,
Intentions honest, Actions most upright,
A great contempt of this vain Worlds delight,
And the continued Series of a fair
Unspotted Life, for to maintain it here.
There never can be perfect Joy without
Impartial Justice, Temperance, and a stout
Undaunted Courage, that is resolute.
This Virtue's Method is, at first to weep,
And ever after Halcyon days to keep.
II.
Sadness, the black'st of Passions, is defined
To be a perturbation of the Mind.
Which from some present Evil takes its rise,
That either real, or conceived is.
This fetters all our Senses, pulls down
Heavens Image, Reason, from her rightful Throne,
And in her room, by Fancies powerful Charm,
Sets up a feigned Ill to work our Harm.
By which we oft-times to our selves create,
And find more trouble in the fond Coneit
Of Things, than in the Things themselves can er'e
Be found, if strictly they examined were.
Wherefore be not too sedulous to know,
And pry into the state of things below,
How with our selves, or others, matters stand
Concerning Servants, Moneys, Business, Lands;
But rather take into regard the esteem,
And real judgment which we have of them.
It Is not within the Power of any Wight,
Of greatest Wit or Courage, clearest sight,
By one, or all together, that can free
Himself from Force, Disgrace, or Robbery.
But this is in his Power to undertake,
An upright judgment of these things to make,
And to content himself that they are not
Entirely Evil, as by him they are thought,
But oftentimes (if he but wisely knows
To manage them) prove advantageous.
He that is under present Trouble brought,
Though never so great, let him but bend his thought
To a good guarded Conscience, which a sure
And lasting Comfort is, and there is his Cure.
To a good Man nothing can come amiss,
Not that he feels not what sad Misery is,
But he does master't, and considers all
Bitter Afflictions that do him befall,
Only as matter for his Patience to
Be busi'd on, lest it should idle grow;
Or as the Instrument, and means of Grace,
And that which opens him a way to pass
Into Eternal Glory, where the Blessed
No Sorrows know, but undisturbed rest.
A good man may be thought unhappy, though,
If rightly judged, he never can be so.
III.
It does extremely much abate the keen
Edge of Misfortune, when it is foreseen;
And to our selves to state the matter thus,
Whatever may be, shall fall out to us;
For he that is thus prepared can never be
Plunged in surprises of a Misery.
All kind of Disappointments heavy fall
Upon those Men whose thoughts, and actions all
Are fixed upon Prosperity, as that
Which they account to be the happiest state.
What if a man should lose the half, or all
Of his Estate? What if his House should fall?
His Corn be blasted? and his Friends should leave
Him, when his needs does their assistance crave?
What if his Credit should endangered be?
(Than which no greater Evil he can see)
His Office taken away? his honored Gown
Turned over his Ears, for Crimes to him unknown?
And to all this let us add tormenting Pain,
Bondage, from which he never can freedom gain,
Till welcome Death knocks off the uneasy Chain.
A frightful Ruin, laying all things waste,
And Fire devouring with dispatchful haste:
All this to no more comes, than what each wise
And prudent Man's prepared for, and foresees.
There is no worldly Misery that is known,
Which he beforehand has not thought upon,
And made as easy to be born by him,
By long considering on it from time to time,
As others by long suff'rance make it, to whom
A second Nature it is almost become.
That which to any Man may come to pass,
May be (for ought we know) each Persons Case.
Where Is the Rich Man that can himself secure
From pinching Hunger, or from being Poor?
Where Is the great Man that wholly is exempt
From foul Disgrace, or Scorners base Contempt?
Where is the Kingdom (although never so great,
So rich and Pop'lous) or the Nation that
May not be overturned, and have not one
Soul left therein, its most sad Fate to moan?
Have we not lived to see, with our own Eyes,
A Great, and Glorious Prince, Religious, Wise,
Whose Equal never any Kingdom had,
Brought to the Fatal Block, there lose his head,
By his own Subjects impious command,
And this performed by the common Hang-man's hand?
A Villainy beyond Example great!
And such as of the like no Book does treat.
Yet these prodigeous Changes mentioned here,
Not Works of long and tedious Ages are,
There but a Moment's difference does lie
'Twixt flowing Plenty, and starved Beggary,
The glorious costly Court, and the most mean,
Cold-ragged Cottage of the poorest Man;
A lofty Throne, adorned with Gems of price,
And a raised Scaffold where the Prisoner dies.
This is the strangely variable state
Of Humane things, so very sickle, that
What was to day another Persons Lot,
May be to Morrow mine, as well as not;
No Man endures ill Fortune with less harm,
Than he that always does expect its Storm.
IV.
Virtue has in Prosperity but small,
Or no occasion to appear at all.
But in that dismal Melancholy Hour
Of sad Adversity, her Conquering Power
Is in our Patience manifested so,
That to her strength the stoutest Troubles bow.
We are become a Spectacle (says Paul)
To God, and Angels, Men in general.
And it is a sight in which God takes delight,
To see a brave Man with ill Fortune fight;
With headstrong Passions, and all Casualties,
(Those his confounding stubborn Enemies)
And in great Triumph leading, as he goes,
All his Domestic and his Foreign Foes.
A Pilot's skill is not discerned at all
In Governing a Ship, when under Sail
In a smooth quiet Sea, and gentle Gale.
And He that is not tried, has this mischance
To live in an unfruitful Ignorance.
And yet when tried how apt are most of us
Unwisely to complain, and cry out thus --
Most miserable Men, that ever we
Should have endured so great Calamity!
When as most happy Men (say I) we are,
That by this means have gained this profit here,
That with great Honor, and brave Constancy,
We have bore up our selves in Misery;
Where others would perchance have shrunk, or fell
Under the Burden, which we managed well.
We therefore are not to give up, and yield
Our selves, but stoutly must maintain the Field,
In Crosses and Disasters, and there stand
Firm to encounter all their dreadful Band.
For it is but bravely standing to their Front,
And breaking of their first and furious Brunt,
And we shall find the rest to be no more
But Fancy and Opinion, of no Power.
The Works of Nature in all Persons are
Found to be all alike, no Blame's in Her.
But for Discredit, Contumely, low
Despised Poverty, and what else we know
Are Evils called by the ignoble Rout,
Who seldom have a right well guided thought,
Some there are known who do endure them all
With a submissive Patience, and they fall
On others who no reckoning of them make,
Nor notice of them in the least do take.
So that it is not the force (as some Men own)
Of any Natural Impression
That we do labor under, but it is hence,
From a perverse Opinion's Influence.
Why then should Man so horridly belie
Himself, and call that a Calamity,
A Burden insupportable, which he
May order so, that it shall easy be?
Let him but his Opinion change of it,
And then 'twill easy on his Shoulders sit.
Each Man is just as miserable as
Upon himself he does a judgment pass;
And let him still complain of what he will,
Yet there is no Affliction half so ill
As his impatience, this is of the two
The greater Mischief, and most harm will do.
V.
Is there a Sickness, or a Pain so great,
So very stubborn, and so obstinate,
That in some measure Time will not allay,
Or take it from us utterly away?
If so, the Question is, Whether it is fit
That we our selves should put an end to it;
Or whether we with Patience should attend
Till it without us comes to an end?
For Time, to whom all Earthly things must bow,
Will most assuredly at last that do;
Which common Prudence at the present might
Better perform, would it assert it is right.
Nay, had we never so prone, so great a Will,
To entertain and cherish in us still
Bewitching Melancholy, 'twould depart
At length, in spite of all our Power and Art.
It Is true, that Grief when it is fresh in the mind,
May Tenderness, and much Compassion find;
But when it waxes old, it apish grows,
Than which there is nothing that is more odious.
If an unhappy Wretch advantaged were
By sobbing and lamenting, he should never
By me be hindered, but have my consent
That Is Days and Nights in Sighs and Groans be spent,
In all the Outrages that er'e was known
By a dejected Creature to be done;
But if our Howling and our Crying be
Of no advantage in our Misery,
Let Us to victorious Resolutions sly,
And fight our troubles till they vanguish'd lie.
That Pilot merits to be thrown o're-Bord
That in a Storm will not his skill afford.
But quits the Helm, and sets the Ship adrist,
In that great danger for her self to shift.
But he that stands with a Courageous heart,
Firm to his Tackle, and with all his Art
Bears briskly up against the Storm, though He
Should with the Vessel overwhelmed be,
Yet dies with Honor and the Comfort too
Of having done what he was bound to do.
MANUDUCTIO ad COELUM, A POEM.
PART II.
Of Patience, the Occasions and Effects of it. The Signs of it. An Exhortation
to it, with Instructions how to behave our selves in Adversity. The necessity
of Perseverance.

I.
PAtience a Virtue is, that makes Mankind
To bear Affliction with an even mind.
But as of Mis'ries several sorts there are,
Some more vexatious, and some less, so there
Are several Names which fitly we bestow
On humble Patience, suitable unto
The various Evils which it is to be
Practiced upon, to try its Constancy.
Patience, so called properly, is this;
An Heavenly Gift of bearing Injuries,
Without the least disturbance of the Mind,
And with a Courage not to be confined.
When it relates to the low worthless things,
(Which oft-times trouble to the Owner bring,)
The loss of Worldly Goods, and Fortune, we
Give it the Name of Equanimitie,
And that which buoys the Heart up (which the sear
And Fountain is of active Life, and Heat)
In the delays, and the defeat of some
Expected Good, which never is found to come,
We have a proper genuine Name, which we
Express this by, called Longanimitie.
But the Heroic Virtue which defends,
And fortifies us to all other ends,
Which does support and comfort us in all
The Griess, and Miseries that do us befall,
Is known by the all-glorious Name, which we
Deserv'dly give't, unshaken Constancy.
A Virtue which all others does exeed.
And which we more than all the rest do need.
It Is not for nothing that Man's Life is here
A Warfare called, consid'ring how we are
With Foes beset, what Troops of Mischiefs break
Daily into us, their Revenge to wreak.
There Is not a nimble Moment slips away
Without a fierce Assault, and furious Fray;
And if we had no spiteful Foes without,
Yet we should find it work enough to rout
Those cruel ones which in our Bosoms lie,
Struggling with us to gain a Victory.
We breed and Harbor Enemies enough.
Within our selves to work our overthrow;
That give no respite, but do all they can
To torture, and disturb the Soul of Man.
Weeping we come into the World, and so
We live in it, and so do forth often go.
It Is the first thing we learn, in our young Morn,
And Dawn of Years, so soon as we are Born;
And we can find our Eyes with Tears distill,
When we of nothing else are capable.
Diverse there are upon Record, who while
They here conversed were never known to smile,
But we never heard of any Person yet
Whose Eyes a pensive-Tear did never let.
It therefore does concern us all to be
With Patience armed, without which Virtue we
No Noble Conquest over our Foes can gain,
Nor e're Perfections glorious height attain.
No Mortal knows the Luster of this Gem,
Nor rightly how to give't its due Esteem;
Till he does read it, that is to say, till He
Is plunged into the Sea of Misery.
Never was any prudent Person known
To be impatient in Affliction.
II.
He has the more to fear, and justly too,
That never yet did Adverse Fortune know:
The learned Physicians do in this agree,
There may too good a state of Body be;
And that there nothing is more dangerous than
A Plethory unto the Health of Man.
So a dead Calm at Sea, the Seamen cry,
Is a Forerunner of a Storm that is nigh.
If we are under the unpleasant stroke
Of froward Accidents, we are not to look
Upon it as a Cruelty, or own
We undergo a Persecution;
But a Contest, which will our Temples Crown
With a Victorious Wreath, and gain Renown.
Without a Fight there can no Conquest be,
And Triumph none, without a Victory.
Now if our Captain of Salvation was
Himself to suffer, and this way to pass
Into his Glory, shall such Worms as we,
Such abject Creatures, think to go Scot-free,
And Gratis be partakers made of what
Another has at such a dear rate bought.
He that does think by any other way,
Than through Afflictions Door, to enter Joy,
Deceives himself, for Tribulation is
The Rode chalked out unto the Seat of Bliss.
A Christians Sacramental Oath is this,
To do all good, and suffer Injuries.
Lively to Paint, and the true Tokens show,
Of a most perfect Patience, come we now.
He that has reached that happy Point does bear
All adverse Fortune that befalls him here,
And in the height of all his Woes is known
To show no Signs of Reluctation:
He murmurs not under the scourging Rod,
Nor Ill for Ill returns, but always good.
He loves his Foes with an unfeigned Love,
And to the Throne of the great God above
Sends up his Prayers in the behalf of those
Who seek to Rob him of his sweet Repose.
He sees the gentle hand of the most High
In his Afflictions, and submissively
Sits down, and either nothing says at all,
Or for Relief to none but Heaven does call,
Resolved with Joy and thankfulness to bear
What God sees fit to lay upon him here.
To Sum up all, it is an high degree
Of Patience to endure contentedly
The wrong our Brother does us, though the Man
Be to us as injurious as he can.
III.
When we do lose our Worldly Goods, it is no
Small comfort to us some time to bestow
A serious thought on their uncertain state,
And how, when once increased, they do abate.
What er'e we love, or in this World possess,
A flitting Fugitive by Nature is;
It is with us indeed, but by just right
It is not ours, nor can we stay it is flight.
And we are not to fool our selves, and run
Into a vain and needless Passion,
For a fantastic thought our idle Brain,
Of their continuance here, does entertain.
For we to every thing uncertain are,
Whereas we firmly should to it adhere;
And therefore can expect that ought should be
Constant to us, for our Inconstancy.
Virtue the only thing excepted is,
This truly's that which does immortalize
Mortality it self; all else we find
Carry their Death with them, and are but Wind.
Betwixt our selves and our Possessions then,
Let Us keep a distance wide enough, for when
They come to mingle and incorporate,
He takes our Heart, that takes our Estate.
A good Man cannot properly be said,
To suffer loss of any thing he had,
For whatsoer'e of Wealth or Honor can
Be from him took, is no part of the Man;
But somewhat added to his Person, that,
Whether it stays or goes, he values not,
Esteeming not himself to be at all
Richer, or Poorer, let what will befall.
O what a deal of pudder do we make,
How loud our Outcries and our Sorrows speak,
When we our Money lose, or when from us,
Death takes a Child, or fire consumes our House!
But we can leave our Virgin Modesty,
Part with our Virtue, and our Constancy,
And not so much as in our Faces show
A conscious Blush, when any of them go.
And yet we here, without a troubled thought,
Lose a substantial Good, and more then that,
We likewise part with what is our own, whereas
In the other Case we let not either pass.
He that Laments for such a triffling loss,
Deserves to feel the Worlds severest Cross.
If 'twere not for a strange disordered Love,
(Which to our Peace the satal'st Foe does prove)
We should not then this falsity believe,
We ought had lost that this vain World can give.
For what are outward things, what profit can
Their poor enjoyments give the inward Man?
Or betwixt Wisdom and our Money, what
True Correspondence can there well be thought?
IV.
It would do well, in whatsoever we
Do go about, to show such Prudencie,
As to take in the Adjuncts that attend
The Thing on which our busy thoughts we bend.
For there are many Curcumstances that,
For want of heed and foresight, may create
Vexation to us, and such Tempests raise,
That will disturb our sweet Repose and Joys,
I call my Servant, and perchance it may
Be his misfortune to be out of the way;
Or else he idle stands, and does not go
About the Business which I Would have him do.
I am to make a Visit, who knows but
The Man will not be seen, or else may shut,
The Door against me, and refuse to me
Admittance, valuing not my Company.
Suppose but this beforehand, and we shall
Think all is well, and never vex at all.
It is the wambling of a nauseous mind,
(The chief Disease that reigns in Womankind,)
To fret and brawl, because that such a one
Admittance had, where I was bid be-gon.
I could not get so much as one poor Word
With such a Person, at his well-fill'd Board,
Down to the lower end I crowded was,
When I deserved to have the chiefest place.
He that is not moved with this, no notice takes
At all of it, into no Passion breaks.
And he that understands it not to be
Matter of Course, and mere Formality,
Without dispute must be concluded one
That to the Affairs of Humane life's unknown.
If we can mend it let us, and if not,
Like Virtue's Soldiers let us take our Lot.
We daily apt are loudly to exclaim
Against the Evils of our Age, to blame
Sly Malice, Impudence, and Wickedness,
And we do well, and prudently in this,
If we can but reform the World, and drive
Out often the Fools and Knaves that in it live.
But if this will not be, our Prudence ought
To teach our Tongues not to be finding fault;
Since it is no new device for men to go
In their own way, and what they please to do.
Why don't we rather turn the blame upon
Our selves, for hoping what can never be done?
The World was never otherwise, nor e're
Will other be, while we continue here;
As long as there are Men, there faults will be,
Should they remain unto Eternity.
V.
He that does labor under any weight
Of sad Affliction, be it small or great,
Should wisely ponder not so much upon
What are his Sufferings, as what he has done.
And what he now so highly does resent,
Esteeming it a rig'rous Punishment,
Will then be found, as it deserves to be,
A gentle Mercy, not Severitie:
And that the strokes of this reforming Rod
Are laid upon him by Almighty-God
To work his good, to make him more submiss,
To try and harden him in Miseries,
And so reclaim him, that his Reason may
Over all his Passions have a Sovereign sway.
They that enjoy their fill of Pleasure here,
Often kept for Torments in the next World are,
He that does tumble in his dearest Gold,
And smiling-Plenty in his Arms does hold,
Who knows how He Would behave himself, should He
Feel the hard state of Want and Penury?
Or with what firmness any Person would
Abide the Rage and Odium of the Crowd;
That by their favor, almost all his Days,
High marks of Honor has received, and Praise?
We Are Prompt enough our Comforts to apply,
And give advice to men in Misery;
Why don't we rather to our Discontents*
Afford these choice and healing Documents;
And turn the Advice upon our selves, when God
Gives us a taste of his reforming Rod?
We can submit unto the Chyrurgion's Art,
To save the Body, with a gladsome Heart,
Can lose a Limb, and for the smarting-Blow
Thank him, and for his pains reward him too.
Affliction is Gods Remedy, and this,
For the Souls Health, in some Distempers, is
As needful as Consuming fire can be
To Cauterize a Gangreen'd Malady:
And yet we are extremely prone to break
Into ingrate Complaints, and to mistake,
And look on that to be a mighty loss,
And Misery, which is not so to us,
But in the intention, and in the Effect,
Is a safe Cure, and does our Good respect.
If Poverty, Sickness, or whatever we
Do Evil call, might but supposed be
To take upon them this unheard of Task,
To Reason with us, and these Questions ask;
'Sirs, What Is your Quarrel to us? Very fain
'We'd know what hurt you do by us sustain?
'Have we been known at any time so rude,
'To take your Justice, Prudence, Fortitude;
'Or any thing besides that good was known,
'And you could call in proper Terms your own?
'May you not with us, as without us be
'As free from Cares, and live as Merrily?
To this we ought not, nor should dare to speak,
Silence must here the only answer make.
The Matter duly weighed, and understood,
We Good for Ill do take, and Ill for Good.
And our impatience is the most severe,
And greatest Evil that befalls us here.
VI.
In the concerns of others, it may be
We so may act Arts of Hypocrisy,
And show such Symptoms of a constant mind,
And Speech so well compact, that it would blind
The most discerning Eye; but in our own
Our cunning fails us, and the Cheat is shown.
Our Duty it is to shed a Pious Tear,
With those that Weep, and in Affliction are;
But though our Tears in common be, there is no
Reason the Cause of them must be so too.
We are as much as in us lies, to be
A Friend to those who are in Misery,
If we receive an injury, let this
Be well considered, that there nothing is
That can befall us, but there does belong
Two handles to it, a right one, and a wrong;
Take it but by the right, and then we shall
Not look upon our selves as wronged at all.
The Man's unjust. If we do take it that way,
These Furies haunt us, which our Peace destroy;
Revengful Anger, and wild Violence,
Which make a Mountain of each small Offense.
But if we take it on the other side,
He Is one for whom the Blessed Jesus died;
Redeemed with us by the same precious Blood,
To the same Glory called out, and wooed;
The turning of our thoughts this way, be sure
Will to our minds a lasting Calm procure.
We likewise may (and herein Wisdom's shown)
Upon it pass this short reflection;
In matter of reproof we sooner shall,
From a professed Foe the truth of all
Our Follies hear, than from a Bosom Friend,
For it is his study to find faults, and bend
His most malicious Powers to search into
Our weakness more, and stricter than we do;
If we commit the thing that we should not,
Or do neglect to do the thing we ought,
We shall be sure to hear on it, for he will soon
Blazon our failings over all the Town.
Let Us therefore walk so warily, that we
May make some profit of his Enmity,
And we shall be more careful when we know
That there is a Spy upon what-er'e we do.
VII.
Of all our Virtues Constaney's the Crown,
And the Perfection. The Reward alone
Is promised to beginners, yet it is never
Delivered but to those that persevere.
Wherefore above all other things let us be
Masters of a resolved Constancy.
In the ascending to the lofty Top
Of a steep Mountain, if we once but stop,
In stead of standing on its slippery side,
We down again unto the bottom slide.
First let us resolve on what we are to do,
And then with fervor let us that pursue;
For none but he that is not in his Wits,
Will trifle's business off to do it by fits.
It is a weakness of the mind to be
Roving, and seeking of fresh Company,
New sports, new places, when the fault of this
Wholly in us, not in the Climate is,
Or other Circumstances which we are
Willing to charge with all our Follies here.
The tender Plant by often removing dies,
And oftentimes the change of Remedies
Plungeth the Patient (which would else do well)
Into a Sickness that is incurable.
If the Divine Apostle at a loss
In The Contemplation of his Duty was,
What will become of us, frail Creatures here,
Whose Virtues scarcely comparable are
Even to his Imperfections, whereof he
So much complained in his Mortality.
The love of Learning endless is, nor can
Extinguished be, while there remains a Man.
The love of Riches never is to be
Sufficed, although we heaps on heaps do see.
And the fond love of fading Honor never
Will be allayed, while we Corruption bear.
So that we must this certain truth confess,
That there is no end of all our greediness
After the things, which in their Nature are
So short-lived found, and so uncertain here.
But when we come unto that all Divine
And lasting Wisdom, which would make us shine
Among the Blessed, and give us endless Joys,
Then the least touch and relish of it Cloys.
But this is not according to his known
And sacred Precept, that commands each one
To be as perfect as the God of Bliss,
Our good and Heavenly Father, perfect is.
He that looks up but with a willing Mind
To that Example, shall not fail to find
A copious place for the increase of each
Virtue of his, till he Perfection reach.
FINIS.

