A DOOR OF HOPE, ALSO HOLY AND LOYAL ACTIVITY.

Two Treatises delivered in several SERMONS, in Excester.

By John Bond, Bachelour of the Laws, and Lecturer in the same City.

JUDGES 13. VER. 23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have
received a burnt-offring and a meat-offring at our hands, neither would he have
showed us all these things, nor would at this time have told us such things as
these. JUDGES 5. VER. 23, 24. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord,)
curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help
of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Blessed above women
shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in
the tent. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bartlet, at the Sign of the
Guilt-Cup near St. Austins Gate, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS And BURGESSES of the House of COMMONS
Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
Honorable and See Mat. 5 9.
Blessed Patriots:
AS it was mere duty that first moved me to preach these Sermons, so it is
bare necessity that does now enforce me to print them; they were preached when
I saw the many blessed probabilities and first fruits of reformation, which God
and the King by your hands, did reach forth unto this Nation. For although I
did conceive my self to be one of the least, and last in the Ministry, as not
having yet attained to more years of mine age, then there are days in some
Mone^hs, yet I thought my self old enough to Mat. 21.8, 9
cry Hosanna to your proceedings, and with those Children in the Gospel, to
strew these my two Branches in the way of approaching reformation. For how
could I further that work more effectually with God, then by a sacrifice of
thankesgiving? or with men, then by the Doctrine of Activity? and these two,
are the general Contents of both my following Discourses. In the first of
them, I do but write an History (Epitomie rather) of the Lords mercy, our
Sovereigns goodness, and the prosperous pains of this happy Parliament. In the
latter, (which was first preached) I do press mine auditory to bring
Bellows, and Fuel, to the Mal. 3.2.
refiners fire, and to stand close to the particulars of our blessed Vow and
Protestation. Neither do I wade further in any point then I have a clue from
your proceedings to lead me safely back again. Thus it was mere duty that
first moved me to cry Hosanna.

But alas, as we read in that Gospel concerning Christ's riding into
Jerusalem, Mat. 21.15.
that when the Chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he
did, and the children crying in the Temple and saying Hosanna, they were sore
displeased; so I had no sooner began to deliver these notes in public, but
presently I heard, read and felt, the displeasure of a like generation of
opposites sorely kindled against me. Troubler, Pestilent, Scismaticall, nay
Faction, Sedition, Treason, these were some of the common titles that by word
and writing, were given both to the Preacher and the Sermons. But my comfort
is, that the same Epithites, so unjustly wrested, have been cast upon far
better Ministers, long ago. Thus 1 Kin. 8.17.
Ahab to Elij th, Act. 24.5, 6, etc.
Tertullus and the Jews against S. Paul, and ^he Luke 23 1, 2.
Scribes and Pharisees against Christ himself. As for the Ecclesiastical
authority which did convent me for these Sermons, (for convented I was,)
although I found them and their adherents like Jud. 16.19.
Sampson when his head was shaven, And that their might to punish Innocence was
taken away from them, yet I did plainly read so much in their frowns and
threats, as does enforce me to believe, that if ever their locks do grow
again, I may expect the ver. 2^, 29, 30
house about mine ears, for the prevention of which mischief, my self am
persuaded by friends. These my notes are thus enforced by enemies, to lie at
your feet for justice, and if I be found an offender, or have committed any
thing in these papers worthy of death or of bonds, I refuse not to suffer, but
if there be none of those things whereof these accuse me, nay if (contrariwise)
the maine cause of their malice should appear to be this, namely that my
Sermons are too true, too Parliamentary; then I do leave it to your grave
wisdoms to consider, whether or no, the Psalm. 69.9.
reproaches of them that reproached me do seem (I fear to name it) even to
fall upon your proceedings, the sum (therefore) of mine humble Epistolary
Petition is this: If your high Tribunal shall acquit me for this work, that
then you would further be graciously pleased to vouchsafe your Parliamentary
protection, that so both my self, and Treatises may go abroad without danger,
and if this Honorable House shall daigne so much as to defend these my
Blossoms from those Birds, I do here vow and devote my future fruits, yea,
stock and all to your honorable service, mean while I shall continue in
prayer that the Wonderful Counselor, the Prince of Peace, would still direct,
protect your Counsels, Persons, carrying you forward over the necks, yea (as
hitherto he has done) upon the, backs of his and your enemies, to the
accomplishment of that work which he has given you to do.

So prays your obliged spiritual servant JOHN BOND.
From my Study in Excester, Feb 5. 1641.
To the Reader.
Reader:
THE case was with me in printing these Treatises, as it is with some debtors
and defendants, which are in danger of arrests and law suites; they do suffer
themselves to be pres'd for public service, that so they may be safe from
private Creditors and Adversaries; So these notes of mine having been molested
with many slanderous enemies, when they were preached, and being afraid of
unjust after-claps and arreareages, they are now forced, yea frighted to the
Press in their own defense; And hereby I am made somewhat like that damm in
the Martials Epig.
Poet, which was -- Vulnere facta Pareus. Whatsoever errors shall be committed
in Printing, for them blame the Stationers and not me, for I may truly say,
as be -- Sine me liber ibat in urbem, I never did so much as read over that
Copy which went to the Press, but was feign to send the Epistles after it. As
for the matter contained in these Sermons, if it be too thin for public
view, thank mine enemies which forced me to make them public, if thou meetest
with any thing there that may do thee good, yet still thank those enemies;
For though the Lectures were mine, yet the book (as I said) is theirs. Only
here take notice how the divine Providence does continually beat these men with
their own hands, for by endeavoring to cry down these Sermons whilst they
were preaching, they have now cried them up in print, and so have spread their
spo^ a great deal brother by laboring too violently to rub it out. All that I
will further say unto thee shall lie in these words, vel perlege, vel neglige,
read all or none. I am thine as thou likest me,

JOHN BOND.

FEBR. 2. 1641. At a Committee of the House of Commons for Books and Printing.
It is this day Ordered that these Sermons be forthwith published in Print.

Edward Dering.

A DOOR OF HOPE, ALSO HOLY AND LOYAL ACTIVITY.
PSALM 126.1, 2. When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion; we were
like them that dream.

Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing.


THe Occasion of this Psalm is by the consent of Expositours conceived to be
the gracious Edict and Proclamation of King Cyrus the Persian, Jews from their
Babilonish Captivity, after seventy years durance. Of that Captivity, and
their Deliverance, see more fully in the book of Chronicles. The Lord stirred
up the spirit of Cyrus, King of Persia, 2 Chronicles. 36.22, 23.
that he made a Proclamation throughout all the Kingdom, and put it also in
writing, saying, Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, The Lord God of Heaven has
charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah: Who is there
among you of all his people? Ez. 1 1 etc. to 5 Jer 25.12 etc. Jer 29.10. etc.
the Lord his God be with him, and let him go up. And so in Ezra and Jeremiah.
By all which places (me thinks) we may see our state hitherto expressed in the
Jewish as in a glass, and so may whet our attentions and affections, upon the
very threshold of the Discourse with this short Parallel.

1. Were they Gods own selected people? so are we thus far, being the only
Monarchy and Kingdoms of pure Protestants, now standing upon the face of the
Earth: for all other people are either no Christians, no pure Protestants, or
no Kingdom and Monarchy.

2. Was their oppressor litterall Babylon? whence came our late Apostasyes and
distractions, but from Babylon the mystical?

3. The only means that they had left were (praeces and lachrymae) prayers and
tears, Ezr. c. 1 etc 2. Dan. c. 9. Ps. 137.1, 2.
besides a few poor despised, (but yet active) Priests, Prophets and Levites.
And were not our harps and hopes too, hung up upon the willows but a while ago.

4. The manner of their Deliverance, it was by Retortion, for the Jews were
freed, and Babylon her self became a captive: and is it not so with us
(according to the saying of the Wise man) That the righteous is delivered out
of trouble, Pro. 11.8.
and the wicked comes in his stead?

5. Finally, the end of their freedom was to build a Temple to their God; and
is it not the hope and prayer of all Saints amongst us, that our Deliverance
may end in a glorious reformed Church? 1 Kin. 1.36.
Amen: the Lord God of my Lord the King say so too. Thus the very Occasion of
this Psalm, and our Thankesgiving are Paralells. So much for a whet upon the
threshold.

But let us enter the house:

This short sweet Song does consist of three parts.

1. An Exhortation to joyful thankfulness for their Deliverance begun, and
the greatness of that Deliverance is withal extolled, v. 1, 2, 3. reading the
words in the Future tense, -- When the Lord turned, etc.

2. A Prayer for the increase and perfection of the work, v. 4. Turn again our
captivity o Lord, that is, go on in turning.

3. An Encouragement against those difficulties which they had, did, and might
yet farther meet withal. For their first return was not complete, all the
Jews came not home with Ezra, but some wanted will, and others ability to
return. This encouragement is expressed by a comparison, ver. 5, 6. They that
sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goes forth, etc. that is, ye know
the difficulties and hardships that the Husbandman does meet withal in his
calling, his seed-time ordinarily is in the Winter-season, and therefore he may
then meet with many a blustering storm and pinching frost, and so does sow in
tears; but here is his comfort, that the time of Harvest is a Sunshine season,
and then he is like to reap a full crop in fair weather with joy. So though
the beginning of our return and of this Deliverance, may, and does meet with
many opposites and oppositions, with a Sanballat, a Tobiah, Neh. 6.1. etc
and other back-friends, yet be of good cheer, hold out, the close of all will
be both a clear sky and a full crop. This for Division of the Psalm.

The Text then has in it the force; first of an Exhortation to real and
verbal thankfulness, which may not only fill the heart, but flow out at the
mouth, ver. 2. And besides that, here is secondly a Declaration of the
greatness of that (though but partial) Deliverance, for it is said, to be the
turning of a Captivity of Zion, even to the very astonishment of the captives
themselves. The substance of both these branches (namely of this Exhortation
and Declaration) and so consequently of the whole Text, may be resolved into
this short sentence.

DOCTRINE. That astonishing Deliverances do crave accurate observation and
remembrance.

To explain it a little.
1. By [astonishing] I mean, such as were besides, yea above and beyond hope,
nay, contrary to it, when men looked for nothing more then the quite contrary,
and therefore they stand amazed when the mercy comes upon them. Act 12.
Such a one was Peter's freedom out of prison upon the prayer of the Saints.
ver. 4.
He had bin apprehended by King Herod, put in prison, delivered to four
quaternions of Soldiers to be kept, ver. 6.
yea, he was now sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and
the keepers before the door kept the prison: ver. 7. ver. 10.
But see the wonder, when the Angel comes, his chains fell off from his hands,
he passes securely the first and the second watch, and at last the iron gate
which leads to the city, opened to him of his own accord: A strange
Deliverance indeed, ver. 9.
so strange that neither Peter himself could believe it when he felt it. For
he wist not it was true, but thought he saw a vision. Neither could the Church
believe it when he was cast in upon them, ver. 13, 14, 15.
as the fruit of their prayers, but told the Damsel which reported his
freedom, that she was no better then mad. This was an astonishing Deliverance.
And such an other was the present turning of the Jews Captivity.

2. By Deliverances] understand chiefly, National, because that is in the
Text; though Personal also may be taken in.

3. Do crave] that is, especially the Lord for them does expect and require.

4. Accurate] that is, exact, complete, artificial.

5. Observations and remembrances] by remembrances conceive both expositions
and repetitions, as also Records and Memorials.

For the complete handling of this Point we will show, 1. How Natural. 2. How
Firm. 3. How Useful a truth it is.

1. How Natural.
Here is an astonishing Deliverance accurately observed and remembered.

1. That it was astonishing, see in the last words, it made the receivers of it
like men in a dream, it was so sudden, so free, so great.

2. It was accurately observed and remembered.

1. Observed, see in the expressions, for here are set down, 1. The giver, the
Lord. 2. The receiver, Zion. 3. The misery, Captivity. 4. The mercy, the
turning thereof, and making them like to those that dream. I do not force
marrow out of these bones, ye see that it drops of its own accord.

2. That it was accurately remembered, see this record; for all this is
registered (for us) by the Lords own finger to all posterity. Thus the note is
most Natural.

2. And it is Firm too.
That is, we have a whole Cloud of other witnesses to testify the strength of
this Maxim, yea sufficient pillars to support it are grown upon this same
Field, even in the book of the Psalms. Ps. 111. v. 2.
The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein. [sought out] explorata, studied, aggravated, anatomized, so that all
the inner works of them are discovered and read upon. It is one thing to view
the bulk of a Watch, that is, the bigness, color and case; another to
observe the Art of Wheels, balance and spring, and this observation is
accurate. But Ps. 106. (being one of the largest in the book) begins at
Egypt, travelleth home to Canaan with Israel, and there (it seems) does come
home to its own time, Psalm. 107.
giving in a special Catalogue of the great Deliverances through those places
and times: but least any memorable particular should there be omitted, lo the
next Psalm goes it over again, and brings after the gleanings. In brief,
find me out any Psalm of praise through this whole book (as most of these
songs are such) and I will show you in the same Psalm a confirmation of this
truth, That astonishing Deliverances do crave accurate observation and
remembrance.

Ob. But yet all those are but the practices of particular persons or people
(you will say) they are no precepts?

An. But those practices are grounded both upon former precepts and presidents,
As 1. The Institution of the Passover, and the continual celebration thereof,
This day shall be unto you for a memorial. Ex. 13.3.
And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day in which ye came out from
Egypt, out of the house of bondage. So their other chief Festivals were
commemorative. 2.
2. So that Altar and Book in memorial of Amaleks malice and their
Deliverance. Ex. 17.14, 15.
And the Lord said unto Moses write this for a memorial in a book and
rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the remembrance
of Amalek from under Heaven. And Moses built an Altar and called the name of it
Jehovah-Nissi. 3. Josh 4.1, 2, 3.
3. Also those twelve stones in Jordan. And it came to pass when all the
people were clean passed over Jordan, that the Lord spoke unto Joshuah, saying,
take you twelve men out of the people, out of every Tribe a man: and command
you them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, etc. twelve
stones, and ye shall carry them over with you, etc. The application of it was.
These stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever. ver
7.
Therefore Astonishing Deliverances do crave, etc.

And it is as reasonable as true. For,

1. Pro. 16^4.
The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the day of
evil. If all things, even the wicked, then much more all mercies, and to his
own people; for himself, that is, for his own glory and honor.

Quest. But then, how may he have glory for a Deliverance?

Answ. Ps. 50.23.
Why, praise is glory in his account. Who so offers praise glorifieth me,
etc. and what greater praise for a favor then to remember and observe it
accurately. But most clearly in these words, Call upon me in the day of
trouble; ver. 15.
I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify me. That is, the end that I expect
from thee in a Deliverance (says God) is mine own glory, and therefore the
greater the Deliverance, the more glory must I have.

2. Accurate remembrance and Observation does keep the Deliverance still fresh
and alive, it gives it a continual being Recordatio est re-creatio, The
remembering is the renewing of a mercy.

3. And there is much equity in it too. Luke 12.48.
To whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more. Costly
improvements do expect a rich harvest. It Is true then, it is reasonable, that
Astonishing Deliverances do and ought to crave accurate observation and
Remembrance. And thus the point is both Natural, and Firm. And it is as
useful as either.

1. Use.
To check a sort of Anti-Deliverancers amongst us, What? how? and wherein? Tell
them, as here, that the Lord has done great things for us, and they are angry
presently and part companyes. Tell them of a captivity of Zion that is turned,
and they laugh as much at the turning as at the Zion. But are ye aware of their
reason? from what, and whom we are delivered? And the Answer to this Question
might start new queres which may reflect upon themselves, their friends, or
faction. I therefore commend the policy of the men, though neither their
Piety, nor Ingenuity.

1. Not their Piety, for had they piety either toward their Religion or
Country, they might see, and could not but be sensible of the many great
inrodes and invasions, which have bin made (of late) upon both, and those by no
mean ones too, as we see the justice of this Blessed Parliament does daily
discover more and more, foundations out of course in Church and State.

2. And their Ingenuity seems as little too, in that they deny or lessen that
which the finger of God, and the justice of the whole Kingdom (representative)
have both found and poynted out. But to stop the mouths of such detracters by
Authority (therefore) let them now know, and see to their peril, that
Thankesgiving for Deliverance is in print, commanded by the supreme Court and
Council of the Kingdom; therefore we are delivered.

Quest. From what or whom?

Answ. From Wars, which would have bin just as he said, Plusquam civilia,
betwixt Brethren, wars with those whose fidelity and loyalty we are now
commanded to proclaim to all the world. And on the other-side we may, we must,
lay open all the Zibas, Doegs and Hamans, which were Incendiaries to those
Commotions. O give me leave here to digress a little (for joy is an excursive
affection) You know how Ziba by his slander upon Mephibosheth did gain all his
Lands for a while, 2 Samuel 16.3, 4.
yea and Mephibosheth during that time is accounted by king David little less
than a Traitor: 2 Samuel 19.24. etc.
but at last, truth that is strong, does prevail; the slander is discovered,
and the poor, honest, mortified, loyal Mephibosheth, is found to have bin the
Kings constant good friend and true Subject. So though Doegs villainy did
succeed a while to the destruction of many of the Lords Priests as
conspiratours with David, Psa. 52.
yet at last, a prayer full charged with curses and heaviest imprecations is
let fly after the accuser, and doubtless did overtake him in due time, Est
3.8, 9. etc.
because it proceeded from the Spirit of the Lord. But the example of Hamans
sin and punishment is for our purpose more remarkable then both the former.
He had accused, bought and begged of King Ahashuerus the whole Nation of the
Jews; his pretense was, ver. 12.
because they were a scattered, dangerous, factious and rebellious people. The
Decree for their destruction was written by the Kings Scribes, sealed with his
ring, and the letters for dispatch were sent by Posts into all the Kings
Provinces, ver. 13.
to destroy, to kill and to cause to perish, all Jews, etc. But what is the
issue? Est. 6.
Surely on Hamans part it is twofold. First, Haman is commanded by the same
King publicly to honor Mordecai in person. ver. 10.
Then the King said to Haman, make haste and take the apparel, and the horse
as thou have said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew that sits at the
Kings gate, let nothing fail of all that thou have spoken. Then took Haman
the apparel and the horse, and arraied Mordecai, and brought him on horsback
through the street of the City, and proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be
done unto the man whom the King delights to honor. ver. 11.
Let us but imagine with our selves how scurvily did Haman look, when like a
page he did lacky along before Mordecai's horse, yea and how faintly and
unmusically did he sigh out that Proclamation, Thus shall it be done unto the
man, etc. This was the first issue. But the second (the Catastrophe of all) was
more sad: Est. 7.10. Est. 8.2.
for Haman supplieth the place of Mordecai upon his own gallows, whilst
Mordecai fills up Hamans room in the Court and favor of the King. So true is
that Proverb of the Spirit of God by the wise man, Pro. 11.8.
The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead.
But to return from this digression to my Antideliverances again, and to
expostulate the matter with them more fully, I must tell them yet farther that
they are guilty of a double transgression; for,

1. First, they are ungrateful both to the Lord, and to his choice
instruments, they do trample unparalleled National mercies under foot, and so
are unworthy to breath in these blessed times which we see. Is this your
thankfulness to the Lord, the King, and the supreme Council of the
Kingdom, all which do deserve your praises and selves, for their protection,
wisdom and watchfullnesse over us? or what else think you, are not King and
Parliament so wise, so Orthodox, so well affected to the public good, as your
selves? Shall the Lord show his special providence in an astonishing
Deliverance, shall the greatest in the Land acknowledge it, and shall public
command be given to proclaim it, and yet will (nay durst) ye still to bite the
lip, to shake the head or to grumble secretly at such proceedings? Brethren (I
speak to all true Protestants and cordial Subjects) I charge you by your
thankfulness, and by all the mercies lately received, that ye observe, mark
out and pursue (lawfully) to the uttermost, all such murmurers and repiners at
the present blessings of Deliverance and Reformation. They are Ungrateful in a
high measure.

2. Secondly, they are no friends to our greatest good neither: for who are
they which do now suffer, but Delinquents and Delinquencies? Who are they
which do pursue, but the justice of God and man? Again, what is it that is now
labored for, by those great Steers-men above, but to stablish and defend true
Religion, Sovereignty, Laws, Parliaments and Liberties? And yet we have men,
who either expressly, or about the bush, dare tell the people of a kind of
persecution, afflictions, hard times now, and I know not what. And indeed it is
common with menslayers and fellons to account the public Assizes, a time of
afflictions. Yea with all Delinquents the execution of Justice is nicknamed a
persecution: and is it imaginable then that this Tribe can give hearty thanks
for the present work of Deliverance? Note them out therefore for men of corrupt
minds, back-friends, yea back-biases to the weal-publike, and such to whom our
gladness is but their sadness, Rumpatur, quisquis, rumpitur invidia. In a
word, do but mark (my Brethren) what persons (Lay or Clergy) are most dull and
backward to the means and pieces of this Reformation, as first, To days of
public humiliation enjoined, Next, to the late Vow and Protestation, and
finally, to this last duty of public joy and thankesgiving; but on the
contrary, are very quick, free and forward to promote or favor Arminian,
Antisabbatarian, licentious papers, pamphlets or practices; mark these, and
then ye have found them (ten to one) which I call Anti-Deliverancers,
Anti-Reformists.

2. Use.
Let this press us closely, even all good Protestants and Subjects, to set our
selves seriously upon this work, namely the Accurate observation and
remembrance of our now astonishing Deliverances. Those words of Moses to
Israel, Deuteronomy 4 32.
may be mine to England, touching our present mercies. Ask now of the days
that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon
Earth, and ask from the one side of Heaven unto the other (all former times,
and all other places) whether there has been any such thing as this great
thing is, or has been heard like it? Did ever people hear the voice of God
speaking out of the midst of the fire (the late kindled fire of Civil wars)
as thou have heard and live? ver. 33.
ver 34.
Or has God assaied to go and take him a Nation from the midst of another
Nation (a Nation of Protestants out of a Nation of Papists) by temptations, by
signs and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched
out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord your God did
for you in Egypt before your eyes? As all those seven particulars of mercy (
viz. temptations, signs, wonders, war, mighty-hand, stretched-out-arme, great
terrors) were made up in Isreal's Egyptian freedom, so could we parallel them
amongst us, but the task would take up too much time. Only in short to give a
taste.

1. Were they delivered and brought out of a litterall corporal Egypt and
bondage, after four hundred and thirty years slavery? Ex. 12.40.
we were delivered from a spiritual and mystical Egypt after above some five
hundred years since the Conquest.

2. Were they carried through a Red Sea and a Jordan, Psa. 66.12.
and led by a fiery pillar? we went through fire and through water (through a
Gunpouder-treason and an Eighty-eight) but he brought us firth into a wealthy
place

3. In short, were they brought into a fruitful Land, where they had the
Oracles and Ordinances of God above all people? Let me speak freely, I
conceive that we have more in both these particulars then they, for

First, our Land in my judgment (with submission) has bin more fruitful
constantly then was theirs; for how many famines read we to have bin in
Cannaan successively? Gen: 12.10. Genesis 26.1. Genesis 42.5. Ruth 1.1. etc.
As in the times of Abraham, of Isaac, of Jacob, of Ruth. I think you can
hardly parallel that number in the like time and kind in this Isleland.

Secondly, for Oracles and Ordinances (true they had miracles, and we have
wonders, but otherwise) they did see Christ a far off, through a cloud of
painful and costly Ceremonies: but we behold him come, and, as it were, face
to face in his Evangelicall Ordinances. And let me add, no age or Nation, past
or present, under Heaven, did or does enjoy such a clear, quick, powerful,
practical Ministry, as is now in this Isleland, and has bin amongst us for
some late years. But what do I look back to times past? I need not to bring
forth cold and stale dishes, to furnish out this feast of praises, there are
enough, new, and warm ones to over-fill the Table, yea, such as have bin cook d
and dres'd in our own times. Let us but look upon the present wonders of the
last five years or therabout in this Island. I remember some rude Seamen have
styled the Summer Islands by the name of the Devils Jslelands, because, they
say, of the many tempestuous, impetuous storms, whirle-winds and earthquakes,
which are common in those places. Surely, Brethren, upon better grounds we may
call our Britan the Isleland of Jehovah (or Gods Island) because of the
manifold Protections, Preventions, Deliverances, Blessings spiritual,
politic and Ecclesiastical, so little less then miraculously conferred on
us. I may say seriously of them all, that they are more then I am able to
express, some of them I have resolved now to touch upon, such as are newest
for time, and do come nearest the Text for Nature; and in reckoning up of
these, I shall have some eye to the Copy in my Text. Here we see an exact
enumeration (or numbering) of all the ingredients of this admirable Deliverance
of the Jewish nation. As 1. The Author, God, When the Lord. 2. Their Misery, a
Captivity. 3. The Manner of the Mercy, turning, or returning. 4. The Delivered,
Zion. And 5. finally, The extent of this goodness, it was astonishing, and
made them like men in a dream. How accutately could we match and Parallel
every one of those particulars with answerable branches in our present English
Deliverance? but because that whole comparison would be too large; let us cull
out one or two particulars and compare them.

1. The Author of turning their Captivity was God, When the Lord turned, etc.

And indeed he alone it is that makes wars to cease unto the end of the
earth, Psalm. 46. v. 9.
he breaks the bow and cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the Chariot
in the fire. This God alone it was that did turn back our late streams of
blood, who but he (to speak properly) had a hand in the beginning of that
turning? For 1. Some amongst us could not. 2. Others would not stop those evils.

1. The godly and loyall-hearted inferior subjects, they could only mourn in
secret, and sometimes openly, when leave was granted, but what else had they
power to do in the depth of these commotions? Psalm. 11. v, 3.
If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Our general
public foundations are two. Religion; Laws, and both these (says the
Preamble to the Protestation) Papists and others, did endeavor to undermine
and subvert. Nay further, it was with us too well, like as with Judah in the
time of Isaiah. Says he, Isa. 59. v 14.
Judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off, truth is
fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. ver. 15.
Yea truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey (or
was accounted mad.) Therefore some could not stop the danger.

2. And others would not quench the fire (supposing that they could have done
it) but were subtle Incendiaries (as that Preamble calls them) brands and
billows: 1 King 12. v. 10, 11.
like Rehoboams young Counselors, which were all for pressures and severity.
Or else as those false Prophets to King Ahab, 1 King. 22. v. 6.
Go up, go up and prosper, was their cry. But blessed be that God which has
the hearts of Kings in his hand, and did guide the heart of our Sovereign to
hearken to that wiser Counsel of his better Senators. Thus some could not,
others would not stanch the blood; it is the Lord alone has done it originally.
If any one present be not thoroughly convinced of this, that this was the Lords
special work, let him call to mind those Marks of Gods finger in a
Deliverance, which I have formerly mentioned, and apply them. They were these
in short.

1. 1 Samuel 23. v. 26
When Deliverance comes Suddenly in time of Extremity, this is a sign of a
divine finger. So was it with David, ver. 27.
when Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about in the hill of
Hachilah. But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee and come:
for the Philistines have invaded the land. A strange providence it was, that
now when Saul had David (as it were) in a bagg, the Lord did send Philistines,
who were also David's enemies, to pluck back Saul by the stern as it were, and
so to give freedom to the man after Gods own heart.

2. When things are brought about by Contrariety. Unto the upright there
arises light in the darkness, that is the wonder [in the darknesse] for
dawning to arise out of darkness, Psalm. 112. v. 4.
and then light out of that dawning it is natural. For Spring to succeed
Winter, and Summer to come after Spring, it is also natural: But when
highnoone shall spring out of deep midnight, and Mid-sommer out of Mid-winter,
this must needs be done by a divine power: for Natura nihil agit per saltum,
Nature in all her works does proceed by degrees. In a word, when the wicked
are taken in their own pit, Psalm. 7.15, 16.
(that is) in a pit of their own digging, so that themselves do not or cannot
avoid their own works; I tell you, this is the Lords doing.

3. When there is a Concurrence of many casualties, and accidents together,
Gods special providence is cheefely seen in such a case.

4. When there is a great working upon man's spirits, Ezra 1. v. 1.
as it is said of this Jewish Deliverance, that God stirred up the spirit of
Cyrus

5. When there is a smooth harmony of helpful Circumstances, as in Hamans fall
and defeat, as 1. Esth. 6 v 1.
That the King Ahashuerus should be sleepelesse that night. 2. Next, that among
many other means of passing the time, he should make choice of hearing the
Chronicles read unto him. 3. That in reading, ver. 2. ver 3.
they should fall upon that story of Merdecaies good service. 4. That the Kings
thoughts should pitch upon such a reward for him, to break Hamans hopes and
heart. 5. ver. 6, 7.
That Haman should then come in, when the King was contriving how to honor
Mordecai. 6. Yea, ver. 4.
that he should be coming in with such an errand, to beg the hanging of the
same Mordecai. This consort of Circumstances does declare clearly a special
providence.

6. A proportion of Punishment upon the enemies of the truth. As that Haman
which would have hanged Mordecai, should be paid in his own coin, Esth 7. v.
10. Act. 23.2, 3.
and upon his own gallows. That Ananias the smiter, should also be smitten.
All these prints of a special providence are very legible in our present
Deliverance. Therefore let us all conclude concerning this first branch [the
Authour] with the words of the Psalmist. This is the Lords doing: Psalm. 118. v.
23.
it is marvelous in our eyes. So much touching the Author.

2. The Misery. Captivity.

But what is that he has done? Answ. He has turned our Captivity.

Why (you will say) we were never in bondage to any man?

So said the Jews indeed, Tributaries, Joh. 8. v. 33.
nay, vassals to Rome. But to the point. There is a twofold liberty. Religious
and Civil.

1. For the first, who is ignorant that the free preaching of pure Doctrines,
the free exercise of powerful practice, have been by some (they were neither
few nor mean ones) hated, persecuted, suppressed, Lectures destroyed, Sabbaths
trampled, Worship innovated; and what redress was there to be had? and then,
had we Religious liberty?

2. The other is Civil or Politic. The benefits of Laws, freedom from
illegal burdens upon persons and goods, liberty to oppose such impositions
legally. And I appeal to your selves, what was become of this freedom too? He
that will be ignorant let him be ignorant.

Thus have we paralleld the Author and the Misery. It would be too large a
task (as I said) to do the like with the rest of the particulars. I shall
therefore now fall off into that method by which (I conceive) the choysest
branches of our present National Deliverance may be most exactly discovered.
If you ask me then

How may we observe and remember accurately the wonderful things done of late,
and now doing for this still Beloved Isleland?

I answer, viz.

First, Evils, which of late we felt and feared, and here we gather three
sorts, or branches of Mercy. I shall call them 1. Stoppage. 2. Removal. 3.
Prevention.


1. By Stoppage,] I mean, the stanching or stopping of Mischiefs begun in
Church and State.

2. By Removal,] The taking away of that evil which actually lay upon us.

3. And by Prevention,] I do understand, the keeping or holding off (or away)
of such evils as were approaching and imminent. These particulars we gather by
looking upon our evils, etc.

Secondly, 1. Continuance. 2. Additions. And 3. Probabilities.


1. By Continuance] I mean, the Continuing (even to this time) of those
mercies, which we yielded (not long since) for lost and desperate.

2. By Additions] I would signify an increase, or a casting in of much more
then we had at best.

3. And by Probabilities] let us understand our possibilities, hopes, and
likelihoods, of future things, yet greater then those additions. These heads
will appear more clearly, as we shall treat of them severally.

The Stoppage of Mischiefs that were begun amongst us.
THe fire was kindled that had like to have devoured us all, the voines were
opened by which we had like all to have bled our selves to death, and all this
no longer since then about a year ago; Now for the Lord to quench that fire,
and to stanch that blood (Brethren) I tell you this was no ordinary mercy.

But you will ask me (perhaps) what sire,

I will instance but in two. The one Civil,

1. The Civil Mischief in State shall be, that bloody, and more then Civil
war, which was not only come home to our doors, but had one foot over the
threshold. Two Armies of Brethren were in the field, ready to sheath their
swords in the bowels of each other, as those twelve men of a side before Jeab
and Abner. 2 Samuel 2. v. 16.
They caught every one his fellow by the head, ver. 14.
and thrust his sword in his fellows side. And all this to play, or to make
sport before some Abuers our enemies. O what a dismal sight, or hearing was it
(if we were sensible to see) Subject against Subject, Protestant against
Protestant, yea Brother against Brother, ready to dig out the bowels of each
other. We have read the History of Isreal's war against Benjamin, eleven Tribes
against the twelfth, there the cause was very warrantable, and yet how sad is
the issue? Judge. 21. v. 2.
And the people came to the house of the Lord, and abode there till Even before
God, and lift up their voices, ver 3.
and wept sore, And said, O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in
Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel? But it would
have been far nearer and sadder, to have had one Kingdom lacking in three; yet
I do suppose the least (and that which some men accounted the best) but what
if that the Scot in falling should have pulled down our English Fabric too,
as Sampson did the house on the Philistines; Judge. 16.30.
so that both Kingdoms should have clashed together? where then had we been?
Let us conclude touching this Stoppage of the war, and concerning the
instruments thereof, as did David to Abigail; 1 Samuel 25.32. ver. 33.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent that meeting betwixt us at
Rippon, and blessed be that advice, and blessed be those which kept US from
shedding of innocent blood, and from avening our selves with our own hand:
ver. 34.
For in very deed as the Lord God of Israel lives, which has kept us back
from hurting each other, except God had hasted, there might not have been left
a remnant to both Kingdoms.

2. Another Stoppage (in which I shall instance) was of a mischief more
Ecclesiastical, a spiritual wickedness. Suppose those now apparently
illegal Cannons, and that sweeping oath had gone onwards, what had become of
our most tender and conscientious Ministers by this time? Ye remember the
month and day, November the second, one thousand, six hundred and forty.
Doubtless it is a Month much to be observed through our generations for a
double deliverance; One from the Popish Gunpowder treason intended against the
Parliament, November the 5e. the other from this Convocation Oath provided for
the Ministers, November the 2d. (I hope it is no schism nor pamphlating to
speak of our Deliverances) Brethren, it might be a notable whetstone to our
thanksgiving, sometimes to read over that Sixth Canon of theirs, and to
consider seriously of the heap of penalties there provided against the
refusers of the Oath. And I press the more to the consideration of this point,
because it is a common and Cannel-argument or shift of the delinquent party,
that there are but some members diseased in our Church (as they call it) and
therefore they conceive it too severe and riged a cure to alter the whole.

For your Diamond, I answer, true, Lev. 14. v. 21.
that the house be leprous, and that it has been scraped round about, and that
they have poured out the dust that they scraped off; suppose that they have
taken other stones, and have put them in the place of those stones which were
infected, ver. 42.
and yet the plague comes again, and breaks out in the house, ver. 44, 45.
then you know that the case is altered, and what must become of such a
Fabric? So much for answer to those common instances and trite similitudes.
And now to speak home to the maine bulk of the Objection, It Is pretended that
there were but few persons in our Church that were amiss, some few members
diseased, some few spots in the whole garment. For answer, I say, let us look
upon the Inactors of that Oath, and those Canons, do they not all run still in
a plural number? yea in an universal? is it not We, and Us, the holy Synod,
this sacred Assembly, etc. throughout the whole book? Well, I see some bodies
Church may err; and therefore whatsoever the opinion of many may be in that
point, yet in practice they have shown themselves so far Protestants.

But to the point in hand, are not these Stoppages (then) a great mercy? what,
when the blood, spirits, and life, yea, the very heart-bloud and soul of a
Kingdom were letting out, and that the whole was expiring, that then the good
Physician and Bishop of our souls, bodies, and estates should step in and
sear up these bleeding veins? Oh let every Parent leave this in writing for
the posterities of his unborne posterity, Psa. 102.18.
and so the children that shall be borne shall praise the Lord. So much
concerning Stoppage.

2. We called Removal, and this is more.
THe swords are not only sheathed, Isa 2. v. 4.
but beaten into plowsheares, and the spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. There
is a vaste difference betwixt a truce and a peace; the first commonly is
constrained, the latter (ordinarily) is free and from within. We read of a
truce betwixt King Ahab, 2 King. 20. v. 34
and King Benhadad: The Cities which my father took from thy father, I will
restore (says Benhadad, and thou shall make streets for thee in Damascus, as
my father made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, I will send thee away with this
Covenant: But this being a thing forced, was soon broken; for shortly after
Ahab goes against Ramoth Gilead, Chap. 22. ver 31.
and the King of Syria commands his Captains not to fight against small nor
great, save only with the King of Israel: So first we had a pacification made
near Barwicke, but how soon was that dissolved? But now our peace (Blessed be
the God of peace) is made upon mature deliberation, it is a peace petitioned by
an Army, but concluded by two mutual National Councels. It is the advice of
that wise King, By wise counsel thou shall make thy war, Pro. 24. v. 6.
and in the multitude of Counselors there is safety. When war does begin in
counsel, it is good, but when it ends in counsel it is far better. See then
what a double evil we have escaped in this point.

First, Rehoboams young Counselors had swayed the business, that we had once
imbrued our hands in Brothers blood, and broken the blessed banks of peace,
whither, whither, had that torrent of blood (in all probability) hurred us and
ours? Or what could have been the Moderator and Reconciler? Could Religion?
that was pretended to be the hinge of the controversy, the very staff about
which they wrestled. Could Laws? Inter arma silent leges, they had been too
low voiced to have drowned the neise of drums and trumpets. Or could Counsel
(as now) have made up the breach? what heart, what pause could there have been
to think of them, when blow should have followed so fast after blow, and the
newest warm blood would still have called for newer and warmer? Thus it was no
small evil removed in that we had not gone to war before that great
Counsel.

Secondly, we have escaped another evil, Exodus 14. v. 13.
here let us stand still awhile and see the salvation of God, let us even loose
our selves in an unparalled wonder. Call to mind all your readings in
Scripture, in Civil Histories, new and old, Greek, Latin, English, were all
these particulars ever read or heard to concur in one business, since the
day that God created man upon the earth? I say, all these particulars.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly (now mark the wonder) that this people so called and used as traitors
should anon bestiled and enacted Our Brethren,

4. Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah, 1 King. 22.11.
did make themselves horns to push most at these supposed Syrians, they are
caught by their own horns, Genesis 22. v. 13.
like Abraham's ram in the thicket, and are now like to be sacrificed in stead
of Isaac, I mean, in in stead of the innocent party. Let me conclude this
wonder with those words of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 64. v 3.
taken in our sense, When thou did terrible things (O Lord) which we looked
not for, thou came down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence. ver. 4.
For since the beginning of the world, men have not heard, nor perceived by the
ear, neither has the eye seen a God besides thee, which does so for him that
waits for him. And was not this a great Removal?

But I am too narrow all this while, in staying so long upon one (though a
great) particular. There are many, many, many evils removed from us. Brethren,
I have thought with my self (in this point) upon the plagues of Egypt, they
were exceeding great you know, and very many; but what if we can parallel them
all in both respects, in those evils which are already (in whole, or in a great
part) removed from us? Give me leave to enter upon a Collation or Comparison,
many of them, I am sure do fall in properly. My method in every particular of
the Collation shall be this: 1. To set down the Egyptian Plague. 2. The
English Parallel. 3. The Parliamentary Removal.


But before hand take this my just Apology concerning this Collation. In the
following enumeration of Grievances, and in all other like passages of these
Treatises, mine only end and purpose is to magnify the Lords mercy, our
Sovereigns goodness, and the Parliaments noble service, in freeing the
Kingdom from these evils. The fault and guilt does roast wholly upon the
Proiectors, Procurers, and Executioners, and that offense is so much the more
heinous in them, because they have misinformed so gracious a Sovereign, and
have abused those grants to the oppression of the Subjects, which his Majesty
did vouchsafe under the notion of public benefits, and did apprehend as
commodities to his people; and therefore I conclude mine Apology with some of
those words of King Solomon to Shimei, 1 King. 2 cap. v. 44, 45.
Therefore the Lord shall return their wickedness upon their own heads, and
King Charles shall be blessed, and the Throne of his Father shall be
established before the Lord for ever. And in this sense I proceed to the
Parallel.

1. The first plague in Egypt was the turning of their waters into blood.

Aaron did lift up his red and smote the waters that were in the river, in the
sight of Pharaoh, Exodus 7. v. 20.
and in the sight of his servants, and all the waters that were in the river
were turned into blood. And the fish that was in the river died, ver. 22.
and the river stuncke, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the
river, and there was blood throughout all the Land of Egypt.

Now what are the waters of a Kingdom?

I find in Scripture two sorts of them which are eminent.

1. Eze 47. v. 1.2, etc.
There are the waters of the Sanctuary, which are the Ministry and preaching of
the word, these are the Ecclesiastical waters. And alas, how were those turned
into blood, throughout the Land? Instead of cleansing (which is one use of
waters) they did defile and pollute. For Popery, Arminianisme,
Antisabbatarianisme, etc. they were the rising Doctrines generally vented in
your golden Pulpits. And instead of refreshing and quickening too (for that's
another use of waters) they did in many places grieve the hearts of the
righteous. How common a practice was it to preach down preaching, and to
jostle out praying with prayers? When poor souls asked or came to the Church
for bread, Mat. 7. v. 9.
lo, a stone was given unto them, nay, cast at their heads: if they asked for
fish, ver. 10.
the waters were turned into blood, the fish was dead, and instead thereof too
many Ministers gave them a Scorpion, like unnatural (spiritual) parents as
they were. Thus were the spiritual waters turned.

2. There are Civil waters of Judgment in a Kingdom too. Amos 5. v. 24.
Let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.
Amos 6. v. 12.
But alas again, how were these also turned into gall and hemlock, yea, into
blood in diverse cases and places? the potion it self became a poison unto
many: for those very waters of our Laws, which were enacted to purge away the
wicked like dross, and to refresh and releeve all loyal subjects, these
streams (like Jordan) were driven backward, Psalm. 114. v. 3.
upon the free, holy, loyal spirits of the Kingdom, and our own Ordinances
were turned upon us. This was ours Parallel to the first of Aegypts Plagues.

3. But now behold the Removeall of this already in some comfortable measure.
Pure doctrine is again let loose, yea truth instead of falling in the streets,
now lifts up her voice in the places of concourse, and equity can also enter.
Unsound doctrines are suspended, and extra-judiciall opinions are now judged
themselves, Reddita Roma sibi est. England does once more (at present) enjoy
her English protestanisme and privileges.

The second Egyptian plague was the Frogs.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, say unto Aaron, Exodus 8. v. 6.
stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and
over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the Land of Egypt. ver 7.
And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs came
up and covered the land of Egypt.

2. These Frogs I conceive may fitly (nay must) be paralleld in the multitudes
of Friars and Priests amongst us, croking and crawling up (like their Frogs)
into houses and bed-chambers. ver. 2.
They shall come up into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy
bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine
Ovens, and into thy kneeding troughs. And have not these croking crawlers (of
late especially) come up from all the four Seas or channells of this Island?
have they not (in a sense) almost covered the Land, going like the Devil in
the earth, too and fro in the Nation, Job 1. v. 7.
and walking up and down in it? Nay, have they not gone openly (for a long
time) in the streets of the Metropolis of this Kingdom, like the shameless
Harlot in the Proverbs, A woman of whorish attire, and subtle of heart, Pro.
7. v. 10, 11 12.
she is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not her house. Now is she without,
now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner. And the Reason or
ground of her boldness follows, For that the goodman is not at home, ver.
19, 20.
he is gone a long journey, etc. So Parliaments are long in coming, and when
they came they made but little stay. Yea once more, have not these Frogs walked
in those streets more securely by far, and freer from Messengers, then those
Conscientious painful Ministers which have scrupled some Ceremonies, in their
own natures indifferent? Brethren, I appeal to your own ingenuity and
knowledge, touching the multitudes of those Frogs.

3. But now (concerning their Removal,) blessed be the God of truth, there
has been already some order taken by Proclamation for their expulsion, and
they are deveted to banishment. The good Lord finish this work, that it may be
done to them that was to those Frogs in Egypt, Says Moses, The frogs shall
depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy
people, they shall remain in the river only.

The third and fourth plagues, Lice and Flies, I shall join together.

As they are joined, Psalm. 105. v. 31. He spoke and there came diverse sorts of
flies: and lice in all their coasts. Of the latter sort, the plague of Lice,
see Exodus 8. v. 16, 17. And the Lord said unto Moses, say unto Aaron, stretch
out thy rod and smite the dust of the Land, that it may become Lice throughout
all the Land of Egypt. And they did so: for Aaron stretched out his hand with
his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice, in man and in
beast, all the dust of the land throughout all the land of Egypt. Of the former
(viz.) Swarms of Flies, see Exodus 8. v. 21, 24. Behold, I will send swarms of
slies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy
houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, etc.
Calvin reads Examen, and indeed both sorts of them are baggage vermin alike.

The English Parallel of these may be all our Proiectors and Monopolists in the
secular State, Vexatious hang-byes and exacting underlings of that Court of
Commissioners suppressed by the late Statute as insufferable oppressors. All
these Civil and Spiritual wickednesses, o how did they of late plague the
souls, bodies, and goods of the whole Kingdom? The Parallel betwixt them and
these Egyptian vermin, does hold in diverse respects, as

First, in respect of their Eduction or Generation, Exo. 8. v. 16.
Stretch out thy rod and smite the dust of the land that it may become lice
throughout all the land, etc. And were not these unlawful Proiectors and
Monopolists (for the general) Animalia ex putrida materia solis calore, etc.
obscure heads, and vile persons, raised out of the dust? and this made that
opression so much the more intolerable: for there is no oppressor to a beggar,
if once he can get on horseback to oppress. Nihil deterius est imperante
servo. Nay, it is Scripture, Prove. 28. v. 3.
A poor man that oppresses the poor is like a sweeping rain which leaves
no food. What cruelty mentioned in the Gospel was like his which ought more
then he was worth? He takes his fellow by the throat, Mat. 18 v. 28, 29, 30.
would have no pity on him, but cast him into prison, etc.

Secondly, Multitudes, Exodus 8.17, 21.
It became lice in man and in beast, all the dust of the land became lice
throughout all the land of Egypt. And again, I will send swarms of flies upon
thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses, and the
houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground
whereon they are. The Margent says, A mixture of noisome beasts. Brethren, and
did not our case fall pat with theirs in this? what corner, what condition, yea
what commodity almost in the land was not pestered with those Proiectors and
their emissaryes? Oh the Alphabet of Monopolyes which we might here reckon up,
yea rather, an Alphabeticall Index, there being diverse particulars belonging
to one letter, and so in several letters of the four and twenty. What shall I
say? our meats, our drinks, our cloathings, our extraordinaryes, our
necessaryes, were all annoyed by these lice and flies. Nay, one thing more, as
in Egypt, Exodus 8. v. 21. ver. 24.
the ground also was full of them, and the land was corrupted by reason of the
swarms of flies: So it is observeable with us, that those illegal taxes
projected by some, did destroy the very Land. I mean they reached beyond
houses and shops, even to husbandry, and to the beasts of the field.

And now see the removal of all these in a very blessed degree.

1. How many Monopolies were cast down by those first Proclamations, and all
the rest (saving Justice a labor) are tottered after of their own accord.

2. Ship-mony is damned (as they call it) by one Act of Parliament.

3. And vexatious Knighthood by another.

4. Besides, that against stannery Encroachments, and for the certainty of
Forests, which (though diverse) I do put them together.

5. And finally (least the Hidras heads should spring again) for prevention of
a return or relapse, behold that great and gracious Statute of a Trienniall
Parliament, together with another for continuance of this present; of which
more hereafter. Is. 107.8.
O that men would (therefore) praise the Lord fir his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

The fifth Plague in Egypt was the Murraine of Beasts.

Behold the hand of the Lord is upon thy Cattle which is in the field, Ex.
9.3. ver. 6.
upon the Horses, upon the Asses, upon the Camels, upon the Oxen and upon the
Sheep, there shall be a very grievous Murrain. And the Lord did that thing on
the morrow, etc. This was an heavy plague, though, only upon Beasts.

But we have felt a kind of Murraine upon men, Murrain and rot of souls too,
by our late (yet too long) darkness and obscurity: but I pass over this to
another place.

The Removal of both these (blessed be God) is begun.

The fixth Plague was Boyls and Blains.

And the Lord said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Ex. 9.8. ver 9, 10, 11.
Take to you handfulls of Ashes of the furnace, etc. And it shall become small
dust in all the Land of Egypt, and shall be a Boil breaking forth with
Blains, upon man and upon beast throughout all the Land of Egypt, etc.

Let our late, Epidemicall boil of Anti-sabbatarianisme be the parallel. (to
speak as a Divine) Not only the profane sports of men, but the groans and
cries of poor beasts, traveling for the profits and pleasures of their owners
upon that day, can witness the spreading of this soar, whether it has not
bin a Boil breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast. Oh how have
their May-poles and Church-ales, their Morish-dances, and Trojan-horses, how
have they grieved the strictest, profaned the middle sort, and brutified the
looser kind of people? Well did they know that the Sabbath was the very
meale-time in which our spiritual food was served in unto us. Yea, and that
they might make a two-edged sword of it, it was not thought sufficient that the
people should hear, but the Minister, especially if conscientious, must be the
man to read the Declaration which they had gotten. These are our Boyls and
Blains indeed, and I hope that to every tender soul they are grievous.

But see now some kind of Removal of this death also.

1. First, there is an Order for the observation of the Sabbath Day.

2. And in this last Declaration of the Commons for the taking down of
Scandalous Images and Pictures, etc. there is a second Order, that the Lords
day shall be duly obscrved and sanctified. Thus these Boyles and Blains also do
begin to be cured.

The seventh Plague in Egypt was that of Hail.

Behold to morrow about this time J will cause it to rain a very grievous
Hail, Ex. 9.18. etc.
such as has not bin in Egypt since the foundation thereof, even until now,
etc. And again, Ps. 105.32.
He gave them Hail for rain and flaming fire in their Land, ver. 33.
he smote their vines also and their fig trees, and brake the trees of their
coasts.

But now what evil can we find amongst us, thundering, fiery hailstorme, so
generally mortal to man, beasts and herbs? Surely we might long since have
spoken it truly, but now (I hope) we may safely speak it too, those two
arbitrary Courts, one Civil, the other Ecclesiastical, I mean, the
Star Chamber and High Commission, they are both taken away as grievances and
abuses. You know that they were like those treasures of Hail mentioned in the
book of Job: Job 38. v. 22.
for they were armed at all times with stones of all sizes, ready to be shewred
down upon persons of all degrees to their utter breaking in pieces. An
Arbitrary government (in my young judgment) seems to include in it both
Anarchy and Tyranny in Church and Commonwealth; in the first it is no less
than a Spanish Inquisition, in the latter little better then the Muscovian
Sovereignty, in two sillables, Pope and Turk. All Isreal's bondage in Egypt,
which to them was (I conceive) as direful, as were all those forementioned
seven Plagues put together, yet, I say, all that durance was but the sufferance
under a mere Arbitrary governor. Exodus 1. v. 11.
View their case. 1. What oppression under Taske-masters, They did set over
them Taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens; ver. 13.
and they built for Pharaoh treasure Cities, Pithom and Raamses. Yea their
serving under rigor, ver. 14.
so that they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in mortar and in
brick, and in all manner of service in the field, etc. ver. 15, 16. ver. 22.
2. Nay, that bloody stratagem in working with the Mid-wives. 3. And finally
that highest degree, the public command for open drowning of all their Males.
All this, and the rest of their durance did spring from hence, that they had no
Laws, Charters, Pri^iledges of their own, but lay at the mercy of an Arbitrary
governor, this was the Plague of plagues to Israel.

But now behold the mercy of our God, Hail are utterly rifled and suppressed
by two express, distinct, full, grations Acts of the present Parliament, so
that the places of them shall know them no more. Blessing and praise be to our
God for ever.

The eighth Plague was the Locusts.

Behold, Exodus 10 4.
to morrow I will bring the Locusts into thy coast. And they shall cover the
face of the earth. ver. 5. ver. 6. ver. 13. ver. 14.
And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the
houses of all the Egyptians. And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land
of Egypt, etc. And the Locusts went up over all the land of Egypt.

The parallel of this Plague amongst us is made to our hands by Scripture it
self, Rev. 9. Rev. 9. v. 3.
There we read of Locusts upon the earth that came up out of the smoke of the
bottomless pit, ver. 4.
and unto them was given power as the scorpions of the Earth have power, that
they should hurt only those men which have not the seal of God in their
foreheads, etc. These Locusts are by Interpreters (especially Modern)
conceived to be the whole brood of Jesuits, and indeed all the marks of the
Locusts there set down, do very properly agree unto those late swarms of
hellish Proselites. For,

1. First, ver. 7.
the Locusts are said to be like unto Horses prepared unto battle: so the
Jesuits they are the Popes, yea Satan's cavellery.

2. Next, on their heads were as it were crowns like gold: ver. 7.
and we know that these Romish Locusts they are the great crowne-mongers and
Scepter-merchants, to buy, sell and barter, both Kings and Kingdoms through
all the Christian world.

3. Again, Their faces were as the faces of men, ver. 8.
they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of
Lions: All these particulars are matched by the cunning complacency,
insinuations, and (in sine) destructive conclusions and upshots of Jesuiticall
emissaries.

4. Lastly, to the same purpose we might add, ver. 9.
Their brest-plates of iron, noting their serpentine defective craft and power;
their swiftness and noise upon the wing, showing their compassing of Sea and
Land to make one Proselyte. And finally, Their tails like Scorpions, Mat. 23.
v. 15. ver. 10.
intimating what a sting they leave behind them, and what bitterness in the
latter end.

The Multitudes of these worst of Papists have bin very great amongst us of
late, yea 'twas conceived by some of judgment and conscience, that in our
Metropolis there were more of these Locusts (I mean of Jesuits) at one time,
then there were Protestant Ministers of all sorts in that City. Sure I am that
the preamble before our late made Protestation does much complain of their
present endeavors, to undermine our Religion, and to subvert the fundamental
laws of this Kingdom.

But now for the removal of these, Egyptian Locusts, Ex. 10.19.
That he would turn a mighty strong wind, and cast them into the Sea, so that
there might not remain one Locust in all the coasts of England. Amen, Amen.

The ninth Plague was palpable Darkness.

And Moses stretched forth his hand toward Heaven, Ex. 10.22.
and there was a thick darkness in all the Land of Egypt three days, they saw
not one another, ver. 23.
neither rose any from his place for three days, etc.

And Brethren, darkness.

1. First, our weekly Lectures, and all mere Lecturers were suppressing or
suppressed already, in some Dioces they were wholly put down; in others, partly,
besides that the setting up of more was either denied or supplanted. Yea in
those places where the enemies of light had not the face or power utterly to
suppress Lectures, yet there they would quarter them, yea doubly and triply
quarter them, four, eight, twelve men in some Towns were appointed for one
weekly exercise, that so it might become like that web of Penelope, that one
man might untwist that the other did spin; or at least that the multitude of
Cooks might mart the potrage. No, no, this sort of lights was too bright and
blazing for those enemies to suffer them, they were as wandering Planets or
Comets rather, and did as they thought cast a dangerous influence upon their
Tribe, and therefore they must be extinguished. Hence the very name of Lecturer
was become (to some Churchmen) both ridiculous and odious. Yea, as these many
Petitioners (against Episcopacy) from Ireland do complain in that Kingdom,
the Priests and Friars were both guests and neighbors to some of their grand
Churchmen, when a poor Lecturer could not be suffered to live, nay, durst
scarce be seen amongst them. Yea further, it was grown a maxim amongst your
great Clearks (great in Benefices I mean) that a Lecturer had no footing in
the Church of England, and this maxim perhaps shortly should have bin made a
Canon too; but a strange position (me thinks) it is, that one which has bin
called to the Ministry, ordained by themselves, and is commanded by the Lord,
yea by his Ordinary, to preach the Gospel, which he does (suppose) ably,
faithfully and fruitfully, that yet this man should have no footing in the
Church of England? This makes me to wonder farther what a Church of England
these Rabbis would make; such a Church (it seems) it must be as does exclude
and dismember those Ministers which are too very Preachers. In a word, you know
Brethren (if you know any thing) how this sect of men (as they accounted them)
were every where spoken against as the troublers of Israel. How many of them
are driven away into the wilderness of America? Others were so fast imprisoned
that they could not obtain the liberty of a banishment, and other-some
silenced, suspended, deprived by companies. And least after those undoing
censures they should shelter themselves and maintain their poor families by
some other liberal faculty, they were way laid by these Canons which did
enjoyne to the very Schoolmasters, the same subscription as to Ministers. Let
me conclude touching this sort of men and their former condition especially. We
are made (by them) as the filth of the world, and as the offscouring of all
things unto this day. 1 Cor. 4.13.
Thus this sort of light was ecclipsed. But those were accounted wandering
Planets (as I said) and such as had no footing.

2. Let us look next upon beneficed Ministers, these are acknowledged (by the
great Extinguishers) to be fixed Stars, and to have footing in their Church of
England, and yet even these (especially if painful and conscientious) could
not have footing in their own Pulpits upon the weekedayes, nor in the
afternoon of the Sabbath. Nay, they were in some whole Counties forbidden
then to catechize, save only in the bare words of that Childish Catechism;
they durst not go an inch out of their truckle. Here I might add the many
cunning inventions and cruel pressings of multitudes of Innovations,
especially in matter of worship, Tables were Altared, Crucifixes erected,
bowings introduced, and many other scandalous, ridiculous and burdensome
actions and gestures imposed, and all these were used, but as so many fanns or
rinsives, ot boult out the tenderhearted, Orthodox and active Clergy, that
they might be blown off as chafe in every Dioces. Thus both our Planets and
fixed Stars were darkened.

But now was there no other kind or means of light besides those two which the
people might procure to guide their feet into the ways of grace and peace?

3. Candlelight of Orthodox and holy Books, these might have supplied in some
measure the want of both the former. And therefore the grand Extinguishers, were
well enough aware of this also, and do take a complete course for prevention.
The springs and fountains of godly Treatises they knew to be of two sorts, some
were penned within the Kingdom, and to meet with these, an Order is procured
from Starr-chamber, that they must all come through the hands of their
Creatures. Other (such) books might be brought in from other countries, and
therefore in the same order it is provided, that all foreign books likewise
must pass under the self same Censors, and all this, least those poor
conscientious souls (which they call Mechanical and Puritanicall Vulgars)
should get so much as lamp-light to guide themselves, and to discover their
mis-leaders. Thus had these men like those Gileadites at Jordan, Jud 12.5. ver.
16.
taken all the chief passages of knowledge, so that whatsoever man or paper,
book or Minister, had not pronounced their Shibboleth aright, he should have
bin crushed, or suppressed in the birth.

4. Yea higher yet, because some Puritanicall Ministers (I speak in their
Dialect) had an art of preaching and pestring in their very prayers, before and
after Sermon; therefore a course is taken, that they must confine themselves in
the Pulpit before Sermon, to a certain Canonical Sceleton, that is laid down
in one of their illegal Canons, in which (me thinks) the Minister does profer
and promise the people fairly concerning prayer, but is hardly so good as his
word to the end, and after Sermon they concluded with certain Collects at the
Communion Table.

5. Nay once more, to show you the Superlative depth and blacknes of this
darkness, some have bin forbidden and checked (if not punished) for using of
conceived prayer in their Families, and because they did not there bind
themselves to the Common prayer book only. Judge ye Brethren, whether we were
not about to be shut up under darkness as bad as Egyptian. Did I say as bad?
nay ours was worse in a double respect,

1. First, Aegypts darkness was Corporal and Outward, but Englands was
Spiritual and Mental, which is an immediate and certain forerunner of
darkness eternal. Isa. 27.11.
It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no pity.

2. Aegypts was not Universal, for all the children of Israel had light in
their dwellings.

Ob. So we had some Goshen too among us (may some say) in the worst of those
times, some Dioces, Ex 10.23.
some Churchmen were not so bad as the rest?

An. Brethren, there is a kind of method even in the setting of the Sun, it is
dark at Norwich and London, and there awayes, before it is night at Sarum, Exon
and Launceston; because those former Counties are more Esterly; but the same
black cloud was coming apace over all the rest, though they were not wholly
and actually overwhelmed. The month, nay the very day was set, for a general
Eclipse, yea for an extirpation of all those lights in the Land which should
have stuck at that horrid Oath. November the second, last year, one thousand
six hundred and forty, then, then was the time when the great Curefue-bell
should have bin rung out for covering of fires, and putting out of Candles, in
every County, City, Town and Parish throughout the Kingdom. Thus was our
plague of Darkness, the worst indeed of all the nine.

And yet the Removal or Remedy of this also, do our eyes behold; for there is
an Order now come from the House of Commons, both for setting up of Weekly
Lectures by the Parishoners, and for afternoon preaching where there is none;
so that, if we will, light may now shine out of darkness, and that so brightly,
that the darkness may not be able to comprehend it.

The 10th and last was, Death of their Firstborn.

And it came to pass that at midnight the Lordsmote all the Firstborne in the
Land of Egypt, Exodus 12.29.
from the Firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne, ver. 30.
unto the firstborn of the Captive that was in the Dungeon, and all the
firstborn of Cattle.

This I must Parallel with our late troubles in the North, Brethren of
Scotland. True, there is a difference in this, that in Egypt there was not an
house in which there was not one dead by that plague; in England and Scotland,
not many have dyed by this war. But for that difference, blessed be the
overruling hand of our good God, no thank to those Incendiaries, for could
they have obtained their purpose, it is more then probable, that the death of
one of every house (in this Island) would not have served the turn, but rather
that there would scarcely have bin one of an house left alive in many Families
of the two Kingdoms. Therefore that's no great difference. But the Parallel does
hold in diverse respects, as,

1. Exodus 12. v. 29.
First, that Aegypts plague was at midnight; so this war was so contrived, as
to come upon us in the depth of our palpable Egyptian darkness, of which
before. First, the eye of knowledge should have bin put out amongst us, and
then Sampson-like, we had bin fit to grind in their Mill, or rather (as he) to
have pulled down the house upon our own heads.

2. In Egypt, that plague was the last of the ten, yea, it was an immediate
cause and forerunner of Isreal's freedom and Deliverance from their
intolerable task masters. He smote also all the firstborn in the land; Ps.
105.36, 37.
the chief of all their strength. And then immediately, he brought them forth
with silver and gold, and there was not one feeble person among their tribes.

3. So, it is our hope Brethren (for Removal) that the good God will make
that Northern war, the conclusion of all these our plagues, yea and an
occasion or cause of our greater strengthening and enrichment. Judge. 14.14.
We see that there is some meat come out of the eater, and out of the strong
there is come some sweetness already. Perfect thou o Lord the thing which thou
have begun amongst us. So much touching Removal.

The third branch of Deliverance (which we gather by looking upon our evils
felt or feared) it was called Prevention.

It is a great mercy to a sick man to have the pain and peril of his disease
stopped, it is a greater, to have his malady quite Removed, but for a person to
be kept and preserved safe from all touch of a disease that was near him, to
be blessed with a Prevention of the plague that was next door, this is a mercy
above many. And therefore this third branch is both higher and greater then
both the former; and yet it is less valued generally then either of those. For
those plagues which are Stopped or Removed from a Nation, they were present and
actual: but that mischief which is prevented and kept off, is at most (in
respect of our apprehension) but a possible and future evil, and therefore we
are less sensible of this (though greater) evil. In short, that bitterness
which we have felt, we know by sense to be bitter, whereas much more, being
escaped by us, because escaped may seem less. Hence it is that the Lord does
loose much praise and glory for this sort of mercy. Nabal (we know) did return
but little thanks, and less requital to David for the safe guarding of his
Shepherds in Carmel; 1 Samuel 25.10.
the reason was, because the good done to him by David, was a Prevention, he
did preserve the men, and flocks from danger, so that the chutle felt no evil,
and therefore did value the curtisie as nothing: So is it twixt us and God, we
give him little praise for great mercy, if it be bestowed upon us in a
Prevention, whereas should the Lord have suffered those evils (now prevented)
to have come upon us in part, and then had taken them off again, we should
have given him greater praise for a lesser favor.

But here you may ask me, Prevention, because mischiefs kept off did never
come within kenne?

Though those evils which have bin prevented never came in kenne of dull and
short-sighted eyes, Seer, might and did perceive them to be many and grievous.
And that I may quicken those shorter sights, give me leave to lend them some
few perspective or spectacle glasses, to quicken and strengthen their
apprehensions.

First, then see what a black Northern cloud of war and ruin did hang over
our heads of late, though it pleased the God of peace to blow it beyond us, so
that it did not break and fall upon this Island. What head can guess, what
heart can bewail sufficiently, the probable end and issue of those intestine
commotions? utter destruction of one Kingdom (who knows which?) was the best
issue that could in likelihood be hoped. But of this I have spoken before.

2d. Prevention is of Treasons, more then one, yea since the sitting of this
Parliament.

1. One in England; who can be ignorant thereof? a plot it seems it was both
against that highest Council, and the whole Kingdom, the less we do know of
it, the greater (in my judgment) and the deeper should it be thought. Sure I
am, of these two things in print, First, that some of the plotters are fled,
and pursued by Proclamation, a National Hue and Cry is gone after them.
Secondly, the Preamble, to that thrice worthy Protestation does declare how
some endeavors had bin used to bring the English Army into a misconstruction
of the present Parliament. The Prevention of this Treason, because as yet some
what unknown to us, may deserve the more of our praises and prayers.

2. And another in Scotland too, as does appear by their proceedings in that
Kingdom.

3. Prevention is of a Tyranicall Arbitrary government. That some did attempt
this is too too evident by many arguments. The Preface to the Protestation, the
late Extrajudiciall opinions, the strange Arbitrary proceedings in Courts
suppressed, and finally the just censure and execution of that traiterous
Earl; do all manifest the same thing. Brethren, these Arbitrary men are the
persons which would have made the whole body Politic, like a child sick of
the Rickets; The Rickets is a disease in Children, which causes an
extraordinary growth, or rather swelling, in the upper parts of the body toward
the head, but the lower members all the while do pine, languish, and waste
away: and therefore it is not so much a natural nutrition, as an unnatural
corruption of the whole body. Let us conclude our praises for this Prevention,
with those verses of David. Ps. 18.48.
He delivers me from mine enemies, yea thou liftest me up above those that
rise up against me: ver. 49.
thou have delivered me from the violent man. Therefore will I give thanks unto
thee (o Lord) among the heathen; and sing praises unto thy name.

4th. Prevention, is of Superstition and Popery.

No, no, says many a man, could have brought in Popery, nor so uncharitable as
to think that they would have done it?

Because this doubt or Objection is somewhat Common, Caution.

Brethren, Popery. As

First, Delinquents, that have had a finger in the pie, your guilty persons
that are the foremost parties in the case, these must not believe this, nor be
convinced.

Secondly, Dependents too, that do any way hang upon the guilty faction, or
have near relations unto them. You must also give these men leave to be hard
of belief in this point.

Thirdly, Scots (perhaps) or for the late innovations, and illegal
impositions. All these, and all the rest of the like kind, must not see Reason
or ground, why any one should think that they could or would have brought in
Popery. But for others, which are innocent, free, and ingenious, if they make
this question, now I answer them.

And first, let me speak to that part of the Objection, that they could not
have brought in Popery.

1. True it is, if we look upon our Sovereign, we have a gracious, orthodox,
fixed, protestant Majesty. As appears, not only by his constant firmness,
when he was in Spain (the Shop of Popery) but by his Royal promises, Vow,
Oath and practice ever since he swayed the Scepter. And in this respect, we
must presume and conclude that they could never have brought it in.

2. But yet when I look upon the nature of the Popish Religion, with what
wiles and violence it makes it is way where once it enters, how it marches over
Crowns and Scepters, and swimmes to it is own end, through all sorts of blood.
And when I call to mind the strange prevalency and power of some, in passing
the late Oath and Canons, to the prejudice of the King and Kingdom, then I am
far from the peremptorinesse of those which do so boldly affirm that they
could never have brought in Popery. So much for the [could not.]

2. But for that other part of the Objection, touching the will and intention
of that party, that they would not have done it; (pardon) I cannot be so
Uncharitable, Blind or Undutiful, as not to think that they would have
brought it in.

First, not so Uncharitable; namely, to those many Orthodox, which are clear
and strong of this opinion. True, it was thought by some godly and judicious ones
at first, that Arminianisme was the only aim and end of the Innovatours, but
they did soon out-shoot this mark, and so showed that that heresy was but
their stalking-horse. Next, it was guessed they did drive at Lutheranisme, but
at last it was both seen and felt, that nothing less then flat Popery (perhaps
French Popery indeed) could terminate their desires. I cannot therefore be so
Uncharitable to such considerable judgments as to think that they Would not
have brought it in. And indeed this alone (in my judgment) is true Charity, if
a man be so charitable as that withal he may keep the truth; for there is a
kind of Crudelis miscricordia, as the wise man says in another sense, The
tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, that is, when men will be so
charitable to persons, that they become cruel to Reformation and Justice. Thus
I cannot be so Uncharitable.

Nor can I be so Blind, Popery was not their maine design and desire.
Brethren, will ye, shall we believe our own eyes and ears in the business?
then consider what things we have (or might have) seen this way to confirm us?
What Popish Discourses, Pamphlets, Sermons and Practices have passed the Press
and Pulpit with license. In short, consider with your selves, but these two
particulars.

1. In Doctrine, what Innovations directly contrary to the Ancient, Venerable
Protestant Truths? Take a sip or two. First, the Pope wont to be Antichrist,
but now our new Preachers and Printers, will tell us that it is no such matter.
No, now if we will have an Antichrist we must go seek him amongst Jews and
Mahumetans. Again, the Church of Rome was wont amongst Protestants to be
accounted the Scarlet-Whore and mystical Babylon; but now marriage has made
her honest, and she is become in a sense a true Church. What shall I speak of
published Popery in points of Justification, Free Will, Merit, Sacraments, etc.
yea by some Innovatours, both the name and parts of the Mass are received.

2. So in Worship, what grossnesse of late about Altars, Priests and Sacrifice
in a sense? what Images, Pictures, Duckings, Basins, Candle-sticks and the
like? Brethren, what shall I say? I should tire your patience, my self, the
time, to follow these wilely and wicked chased Foxes; but my comfort is, that I
do speak to them which are Christians, Protestants, reasonable living
Creatures, which have eyes and ears of their own, to read and hear, and these
may inform you sufficiently of this truth. But for brevities sake, if any
desire to see more, I shall direct him to these two helps for satisfaction.

1. First, the several Petitions, Charges, Accusations, Articles put into the
Parliament against the several Innovators.

2. And next, the Censures of them, for the same, as they have bin and shall be
found guilty.

Ob. But suppose some few of the Innovators did drive at flat Popery, yet we
cannot but think that many others of them had not so gross an aim?

Sol. There was no good trusting of them, He that will lie will steal (we say)
and he that will steal a pin, will much more steal a pound. Suppose some of
the hindmost hunters did not so clearly see the game; suppose some of the lower
and lesser wheels of the frame, did not aim at the flat, full and gross
lump of Popery, perhaps that was too big for some of their consciences to
swallow it whole at first: but suppose that the lump had bin divided into bits,
morsels and pills, which should have bin sized to their several throats, then I
doubt much whither they would have stuck to take it down. Nay, we know that
they had generally let down many morsels already, and it is harder to resist the
degrees, then it was to with-stand the beginnings of Idolatry. Therefore I
cannot be so Blind, as to think they Would not.

3. Finally, neither can I be so Undutiful as to think it, Undutiful to that
High and Honorable Assembly. Does not this Blessed Parliament know as well as
we, what was the aim of that Innovating faction? and they tell us in their
Preamble to the Protestation, of late, bold, frequent designs, practiced to
undermine the true reformed, Protestant Religion. Also that diverse Innovations
and Superstitions have been brought into the Church. And in another late
Declaration, they do order, to abolish and take away Crucifixes, scandalous
Pictures, Images of the Virgin, etc. and diverse other Innovations, in, or
about the worship of God. These and the like Declarations and Orders of theirs,
I cannot but in duty believe and subscribe unto them, as arguments convincing
us of the truth of this point in hand: so that I shall now conclude this whole
Discourse with those words of the Apostle -- If any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. 1 Cor. 14.38.
So much touching Prevention, of Wars, Treasons, Tyranny, Popery. That was the
third Branch, and the last of those which we gathered by looking upon the evils
felt or feared.

The following Branches of our Deliverance did arise from the Consideration of
that Good which we now have and hope for. And so

The fourth Head of this merciful Deliverance is CONTINUANCE.
I mean, an entire Continuance of all that good which we did enjoy, but were
upon the very nick of loosing it. We say in our common Proverb, That a penny
well saved is so much gotten, and is it not so in mercies? A mercy continued is
as much as if it were new given us. We say of Gods providence, that Sustentutio
est quasi continua creatio, The Lords preservation of his creatures is as it
were a new creation of them daily.

Now Brethren, how many mercies have we yet still continued unto us which we
did give over for a few months since for lost and desperate? as to give an
instance or two.

1. First, concerning our painful and conscientious Ministers. How much money
(think we) might have bin collected in England, throughout all Congregations
about a year and quarter since, to have bought the certain Continuance of all
godly Pastors amongst their people but till now? doubtless there would much
more have bin given then has bin paid for Subsidies and Pole-mony, since the
beginning of this Parliament, and yet how whinching were many in those
payments? And how few do consider this to be so great a favor? O remember, and
go home musing upon this gracious Continuance. Think with your selves, and say
to your friends and children. O what invaluable goodness is this, that the
voice of the Turtle (instead of the shreeking of Zim Ohim) is yet heard in our
Land? the Bells of Aaron (and not the Hawksbels) do still ring in our cares?
Blessing and praise be to the Lord who alone does wondrous things. Ps. 136. v.
4.
Brethren, I would have you that are hearers to look upon all your
conscientious Ministers (those which you think, nor could, nor would have taken
that oath) as upon men raised up from the dead and come out of their graves
again; and therefore me thinks you should hearken to them with fresh and double
attention. You know what Dives said to Abraham in the Parable, Luke 16.30.
Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto my Brethren from the dead, they will
repent. Let us not be worse then Dives his Brethren: but let us look upon and
hearken to all such Ministers as Messengers twice given us, sent from the dead,
and as preaching rather out of Coffins then Pulpits.

But here is a main cause of our general insensiblenes of this mercy, because
our Shepherds were not utterly, actually and locally removed and gone from us,
therefore we can scarce believe and conceive that they were certainly going?

But to remove that deceit of heart, consider these particulars.

1. First, that some were utterly and actually already gone and driven out; and
this both East and West can too truly testify. Look Eastward into Holland,
and how many of our choice and extraordinary Teachers were driven thither, and
durst not show their heads here (until this Parliament) for fear of Prisons
and Pursevants? and all for scrupling at a few Ceremonies, confessed by the
Innovators themselves to be indifferent? Look but upon the books of those
Ministers, which they have sent over since their banishment: Look upon their
Sermons and services done for us, besides the damnage to clothing occasioned
by their departure, and then you cannot but acknowledge that many of our choice
Ministers, were driven away actually into the East to our great damnage. But
the West can tell us of a far greater number, now wandering in the Deserts of
America. One man of God is a precious Jewel in a Kingdom, and may do much
for the public safety and Reformation of a whole Land in time of need, as we
see in Elijah and Elisha; 2 Kin. 2.12.
what a loss is it then to one poor Island to have scores of such Chariots
and Horsemen, driven away at a clap?

2. Others, if not quite gone, yet were going apace. How many honest Kenites
were packing up their Fardels? 1 Samuel 15. v. 6.
how many powerful Pastors in England were just now upon the hiding point?
Some for Ceremonies, others for faithfulness in their Ministry, were fain to
fly from chamber to chamber to hide themselves. These beginnings of Ministers
banishment, may ensure and convince us sufficiently, that the Continuance of
those that remain is a mercy, yea a favor Superlative.

Secondly, Lu. 15. v. 24.
They were dying and are alive again, they were losing and are found. Have
thou an estate of Lands or houses, go home and new date thy leases, let them
all run from the year 1640. I say again, One thousand Six hundred and forty,
for then was thy term renewed; I mean, that very year might thy lands have
been Aceldama, the stage of wars, and thine houses fuel for wilde-fire. In
a word, have thou but a wife, children, yea a life of thine own to lose: I
tell thee (man) all these are new given thee too, in the same year 1640. And
therefore as the Lord by Moses said to Israel concerning the Month Abib: Exodus
12. v. ^.
This month shall be unto you the beginning of months, it shall be the first
month of the year to you. So may I say of this very year unto us all, and
especially to Ministers of the month November, in this particular, that this
deserves to be accounted the beginning of our years and months. In a word, in
them we received our second first being. Consider therefore (to close this
point) how all our old good things are now become new.

5. Head of this Deliverance, we called Addition, or Increase.
The present great work of Mercy is so full of rich particulars, that it is
like a special mess of meat, which we may turn again and again, and still
find in it another choice or delicate morsel; and therefore though we have
heard of Stoppage, Removal, Prevention, and Continuance, already; yet there is
a fifth list [of Additions] now to be spread before your eyes. In setting them
forth I may chance to touch upon some instances or particulars which have been
named before, but if I do, it shall be under another Notion, and to a
different end.

How common an objection is it (especially amongst Atheists and Delinquents)
that they see no such great things already done for us by this present
Parliament,

I answer (first) to the Persons, Perspectiveglasse, Organ is vitiated, their
judgment is corrupted, and then they put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter.

But (secondly) to the point it self I answer, that the Lord has done many
great things for us already, for which we have cause to rejoice. If any man ask
me for an exact Enumeration of them? I answer as he -- Oceani fluctus me
numerare jubes -- In Scripture phrase; they are more then J am able to
express, I must give them in by heaps.

We heard before of a Parallel to all the ten plagues of Egypt; but what if I
should now show a Catalogue of great works of this Parliament, out-stripping,
yea doubling that number? I will not over-lay your attentions before hand with
a promise of prolixity, but let us observe some famous particulars done
already, and those for the Glory of our God, the perpetual Honor of our dread
Sovereign, and the lasting praise of this Parliament.

1. The first observable Addition must be that Act for the Confirmation of the
Treaty of Pacification.

I cannot but set it in the forefront of my catalogue, as the first lincke in
this golden chain, and the basis of all the rest of our late mercies. The
whole Act is true, it is large, but to me so much the sweeter; let him that can
(for me) read it over with dry eyes, (I mean, for joy: for) I think that Act
is looked upon by diverse sorts of men, as was the foundation of the second
Temple among the Jews. It Is said that Many wept with a loud voice, and many
shouted aloud for joy. Ezr. 3.11, 12.
So, doubtless, all that wish well to our Zion and Jerusalem, to Church and
State, they cannot but rejoice in reading thereof: but as many as are
contrary-minded, (like enough) do repine and howl in secret, to see so
blessed a close of so perilous a business. Brethren, let me commend the
serious reading or hearing of that Act, to every judicious and fit Protestant
and Subject now present, and also (if they please) to all those which have bin
so loud, fierce and active heretofore, against our Brethren of Scotland, Oh
let these latter read, blush, repent, and change their minds, with shame and
sorrow: but the former, let them be confirmed and lifted up in their holy,
loyal intentions and proceedings.

The substance of the whole Act, or Statute, may be reduced to these three
heads.

First, Commissions upon which that treaty at Rippon was grounded. As often as I
read them over, and do look upon the names of the Commissioners of both
sides; so often (me thinks) there comes into my mind, the transaction and
transactors of that business, betwixt the Israelites, Josh. 22.10, 11, 12 etc.
and those other two tribes and half, beyond Jordan, it was concerning an
Altar of Testimony which these latter had builded. Great danger there was at
first of a bloody, Religious-civill war, but afterward, by the prudence of
the Commissioners on both sides, they rightly understanding each others
meaning, all is concluded in a firmer peace then before, the bone is stronger
after setting, then it was before the dislocation; and the Altar is called
[Ed.] a witness: Some thinks we may write the word [ Ed. a witnesse] upon
every ensign, gunne, spear and sword, that has bin lifted up on either side,
in those late Northern expeditions; and each weapon may be kept as a testimony
of the Lords mercy, our Sovereigns goodness, the Parliaments wisdom, and the
Commissioners noble service on both sides.

Secondly, There is the Act it self, all the Demands, Desires, Articles, with
their several Grants, Answers and Conclusions, Prove. 25. v. 11.
like apples of gold, in studds of silver; and all this is closed and crowned,
Psalm 46. v. 8.
with a day of public thankesgiving. Let us add those words of the Psalmist,
Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth.
In other Kingdoms desolations: ver. 9.
but in ours, He makes wars to cease, he breaks the bow, and cutteth the
spear in sunder, ver. 11.
he burns the Chariot in the fire. The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our refuge, Selah.

Thirdly, There is the Act of Oblivion, a dram of Lethe, to close up all,
that so all Acts and Monuments of hostility, may be buried in everlasting
forgetfullnesse.

2. Addition or mess of Deliverance (already served in unto us) is that
Declaration of the Commons in Parliament last September, containing these four
heads.

1. For removing the Communion table, taking away the Railes, levelling of
Chancells, etc. 2. For abolishing of Crucifixes, Scandalous pictures of Persons
of the Trinity, Images of the Virgin, taking away of Tapers, Candlestickes,
Basins, etc. 3. Against Corporal bowing, both at the name (Jesus) and toward
the East. 4. For Sanctification of the Sabbath, etc. I am forced by the
general neglect and contempt of this Declaration to make it my next Addition,
though it be in time one of the last. I have but two things breefely to show in
this point.

1. Gods great goodness to us, in granting such an Order.

2. Our vile and base unthankfulness showed to him, in the entertainment
thereof.

First, this Declaration was a great mercy: for some of the things there to be
removed, were a part of our late Innovations, they have bin some of the rocks
and sands, which have wracked multitudes of our conscientious and powerful
Ministers. In short, are they not (at least some of them) maine grounds of
Papists hopes, and other Protestants despaires, touching communion with us? and
yet lo, now (by this Declaration) a price is put into our hands, to remove this
rock, and to take away these sands, to cause other reformed Churches to hope,
and the Romish to despair, of our return toward them, and is not this a
precious advantage? a wonderful favor? especially if we consider how strongly
those superfluities of our Religion were backed of late. Why, they were the
rising Ceremonies, the very road to preferment from some; he that could but
fill his hands, yea his Church, with these, was by them made a Priest of the
High places: and now to have such things abolished and downed by Authority from
Parliament, yea, to have but free permission from all the Commonalty of the
Kingdom to do it, I say, it is a thing which for a while since was incredible.

2. But now how is this golden opportunity improved? Brethren, it does even
sicken my body, and sadden my spirit, to observe how dully, nay how
contemptuously this mercy of God, and goodness of that Honorable House is
entertained amongst us, amongst us I say again. Some godly forward Parishes
indeed there are in this place; but I speak only of the guilty. Has the Lord
placed this City in the midst of our County, as a Beacon upon an hill, yea, as
the Center, heart and head of the West, and shall this beacon not blaze by it is
example, in every part, when there is holy, loyal, refining fire put into it,
by so great Authority? nay, shall this heart and head of the West (in great
part) convay nothing but dullness and drowsinesse to that whole body? In a
word, are we the Redeemed people, the Maiden City, faithful for ever to our
King, and do many of us now thus requite the Lord that preserved us? Are, or
can they be thus unthankefull to the King of Kings, in this great trust and
service? Oh let all whom this concerns immediately, and all others who may
have any hand in it more remotely, let them all take home these words of a
grieved Minister, with shame and sorrow, yea let them go home and sin no
longer.

But you will say, you must first answer our doubts and Objections, before you
press thus vehemently upon our consciences and affections; and these our
Objections are many.

1. Declaration, it came not (say they) from both Houses, and therefore is no
constrayning Law?

I answer severally to both parts of the Objection.

First, Commons (which some do ignorantly or basely nickname the Lower House)
they are our selves, we in them (in this sense) and they in us: so that we may
say touching this self-nesse, as the Tribe of Judah said to David, they are (as
it were) near of kin to us, I mean, that as our Votes were in their
Elections: so it is fit that our Wills should be bound up in their Injunctions
and Declarations. 3. And where is he that durst to sow a jealous or evil
surmise of disagreement betwixt the two Houses of Parliament, concerning their
Injunctions?

To that other clause, Declaration to have any Constraining power. I answer,

First, And is it come to that now, that we do need force and constraint to
make us reform things amiss? I had thought for a year ago, that bare
permission and liberty to remove such things as these, would have been a
sufficient inducement unto us all. Little, little, did I then dream that
Protestants, would have needed compulsion to such a reforming work as this. 2.
But however, know this, ye that slight this Declaration, as an Arrow without an
head, know (I say) that ye are like to feel a penalty for your neglect. You
which are resolved (it seems) to try the power and authority of that
Honorable Assembly, and will needs see what they can do: let me warn you,
that there may be such a sting in the end of this your contempt, upon
Certificate thereof, as may pierce through your beloved estates, even in this
world, besides that other sting of Conscience which may for ever goare you in
another world, for scorning such an opportunity of Reformation.

Scruples of Conscience are pretended. Conscience (say they) concerning some of
these particulars, whether it be lawful and fit by Gods word to abolish them?

And have you more wisdom to judge of such Scruples or more Conscience to
stick at them, then has that great, Assembly, which have enjoined this
abolition? or then all the reformed Churches in the world, which have long
since abolished those remainders as Superstitious and Popish? It Is well, if
that Conscience of yours does also stick at other things which are notoriously
abominable, do you also stick at oaths, at Sabbath breaking, and at Usury?
it is well if you do. But (my Brethren) commonly these men's Consciences are
true taper-wax (as we say) that is, if they are small and straight at this end,
then ordinarily they are very broad at the other end.

But to descend to particulars.

1. Is it at removing the Communion Table, taking away the Railes, and
Levelling the Chancells, etc. All these things are but Innovations and
Superstitious attendants of tran- and consubstantiation, of which I could show
you the whole pedigree: but this in short, and to our purpose. First, forscoth,
the Chancells must be separated from the body of the Church, and so be made a
More holy place, for the seating and burialls of more sacred persons, for the
Clergy only. Next, the Table was brought up to them, as belonging most properly
to the Priests. Then, let them alone for Mounting, Altaring, Railing,
Crucifixes, Bowing, and at last there is made up a Sacrifice, to sort with the
Priest and the Altar. And do your consciences scruple to remove these things?

2. Or is it at taking away of Crucifixes, scandalous pictures, etc. Of Tapers,
Candlesticks, Basins, that you stick? These are attendants and promoters of the
Mass, they are against the Second Commandment, and are abolished in other
reformed Churches.

3. Or cannot you find in your Consciences to forbear bowing, what, toward
the East? I answer, that is Will Worship forbidden in the second Commandment,
and it is too well like unto that which is called the greater abomination by
God to Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 8.15, 16
Or what else? is it corporal bowing at the name [Jesus?] Yes, here is the
Scruple. And why? because forsooth the Scripture commands it that at the name
of (Jesus) every knee should bow, Phil 2.10.
etc. I answer the Text from the Text: for in that verse (as they read it) I
find a Mis-Englishing, a Mis-sencing, and an Absurdity. 1. A Mis-Englishing:
for how comes the word [(...)] in the Original, to be translated [at?] whereas
it does properly signify [in] and is so rendered in other places. But you will
say [in] and [at] are both one? Then it is both one to say in that place of
Matthew Lord, Mat. 7. v. 22.
Lord, have we not prophesied [at] thy name, and [at] thy name cast out Devils,
etc. 2. There is a Mis-Sencing of that word [name,] the name of Jesus: for who
knows not that in Scripture by the names of God, or of any person of the
Trinity, is commonly meant their essence. Brethren, you can all say the Lords
prayer, what is meant there by hallowing of Gods [name?] You can also say the
Ten Commandments, what is meant in the third, by taking Gods [name] in vain?
But 3. There is also an Absurdity, in their reading of that verse of S. Paul:
for what knees have Angels (good and evil?) how can Birds, Beasts and Fishes,
bow the knee corporally? And therefore some of the wisest of that tribe of
Word-worshippers, have given over this text as improper for their purpose, and
do fly to an ancient and laudible custom to hold by? To which I answer, 1.
Antiquity without verity is but an inveterate error. 2. And this being but a
humane invention, how can it be true, and pure worship? That Is enough to
satisfy your Consciences. And now the same staff is in my hand, yea, let me
press it upon your Consciences (if they are so tender) and charge you to give
over your unwarrantable, devised and partial worship of God. I call it
partial, both because it seems to give more honor to the second Person then
to the rest, and in the second Person it bestows more worship upon one name of
his then upon another. Thus (as I conceive) all colorable Objections and
Pretenses are quite blown off. But now, are these orders obeyed? is all this
done? No, but this Order, though according to the express Word of God, though
coming from so Honorable and Blessed a Court, though pressed so earnestly
with Reasons and Scripture by our faithful Pastors, yet this Order (I say
still) is neglected, in most Churches wholly, in others partially, even in
despite of God, Governors and Ministers. The Pictures in the windows, do
still outface us in our Pulpits. The Railes or Tables, stand as they did, and
the bowings are continued. Is this our requital to the Lord for late
Deliverances? Is this our forwardness to Reformation so long desired? What?
has God stopped so many bloody issues? has he remooved so many Egyptian
plagues? Has he prevented so much Treason in both Kingdoms? and is this our
fruit, our Requital for all these wonders? Cannot we yet find in our hearts
to pull down a scandalous Puppet, to break an Idol, or to give over a
superstition for his sake, yea, and that even then when we have Authority on
our side? O stubborn, ungrateful, incapable Nation, a people I had almost
said incurable! Sure I am that many amongst us do hate to be reformed. What
can I say more, but only to sly and cry to the Lord for his pardon and
assistance? O thou the just and jealous God that visitest the iniquities of
Idolatrous Parents upon their children to the third and fourth generations,
pardon this great sin unto us, and our posterity, and lay it not to our
charge in the day when thou shall visit our sins upon us, neither let it
hinder good things from us, etc. Brethren, let me speak freely, there is not
any one thing that does make me so much to fear what will be the issue of the
present good work of mercy, and to doubt least this fair weather may be
over-cast again with bloody showers, then does this Epidemicall general
backwardness, to take the opportunities and execute the Orders which are sent
down for Reformation. Turn we sadly to that place of Ezekiell. Eze 24, 12, 13,
14.
She has wearied her self with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of
her: Her scum shall be in the fire. In thy filthiness is lewdness, because J
have purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I the Lord
have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back,
neither will I spare, neither will I repent. Let me apply these words to the
present times, yea to this Kingdom, Country, City, in respect of diverse
Parishes and persons, Because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, that
is, I have offered unto thee (may the Lord say) many fair, lawful
Opportunities and Advantages of Reforming, As 1. I have given thee liberty and
encouragement to enter into a sacred Obligation and Protestation against
Popery, but thou have not accepted it in one Parish of twenty through the
Ringdom. 2. I have given thee an Order for due Observation of the Sabbath, but
generally thou have not spread nor read it. 3. I have sent to thee a
Declaration, in which I gave thee authority to take down Crucifixes, etc. but
there they stand to this day. Thus thou wast not purged. And therefore (may God
say) Now thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee. Go drink and be drunken, and spue and fall
and rise no more. Go take your bellies full of Images and Altars, and
Cringings, and Mass and all. Let your beloved nest-eggs hatch and bring forth
Cockatrises, let your darling relicts and decoi-ducks bring in the whole swarm
and flock of Idols and Idolathites after them. Farewell England, incorrigible
England. And now let me go try the naked Indians and barbarous Blackamoores,
whether or no they will prove so rebellious as thou, after so much means,
goodness and patience. So much touching the Declaration.

And thus by my largeness in these two Branches of Additions, you may guess
how much time all the rest of these, twice ten particulars might take up; but I
must therefore contract my very contractions, and am resolved to do with the
rest, as they use to do at your sumptuous overflowing Feasts and Banquets,
they put two Phesants in a dish, and do serve in double sweetmeats for every
guest: So shall I serve in the rest of these Additions, even by clusters, by
pairs and couples, and those very succinctly too. We have had one pair
already, viz. 1. The Act for confirmation of the Treaty, etc. 2. The late
Declaration.

2d. Pair let be those two Acts of Parliament concerning Parliaments.
1. One for a Trienniall Parliament. 2. The other for the Continuance of the
present Parliament. These two mercies are too good and great, to be served in,
in one dish, and yet thus I am forced to contract. Brethren, the former of
these [A Trienniall Parliament] I do look upon it as the poole of Bethesda;
There an Angel came down at a certain season, Joh. 5. v. 4.
and made the waters completely medicinal; so here is a certain season
appointed (by that Act) for the cure of all our National discases. But I may
compare the latter Act (for the Continuation of the present Parliament) to that
blessed Oil and Meal of the perishing Widow, which out-lasted all the time of
the famine. 1 Kin. 17. v. 14
Or unto the multiplied Oil of that other poor indebted widow, which
continued running till all her Vessels were filled, 2 Kin. 4.4, 5, 6.
her debts paid, and enough remaining to sustain her self and children. But
the dullest Vulgar does conceive this [Paire] to be a great mercy, Pro. 11.14.
Pro. 15.22. Pro 24.6.
yea even those which are insensible of spiritual favors: I shall therefore
conclude it with the words of the wise King, Where no counsel is the people
fall; but in the multitude of counselors there is safety. Yea again and again
he says it.

3d. Pair (of Additions) are those other two Acts, which have taken away that
Pair of Arbitrary Courts, namely
1. The Starr-Chamber, and 2. Next, the High Commission. With the taking away
of the former, another mighty Court is regulated, and with the fall of the
latter, all Consistories, like lesser neighboring trees, or shrubbs are broken
down under it, so far (it seems) as does concern their maine Coercive
power: so that this pair is a twin of twins, four in two. Brethren, this is
such a mercy, as that for some months since, we durst not for our Ears to have
wished publicly for it, and I think, some godly persons amongst us had not
the courage (at least they had not the thought) as to beg these great things
in their very prayers: but now they are freely cast in upon them, unbought,
unsought and unthought.

(Fourth Pair shall be those other Acts.)
1. Against vexatious Knighthood, and 2. Ship-mony.

A pair of Grievances, which did distress and compass us both by Sea and
Land, as well in our merchandise as husbandry. Brethren, we were generally
sensible of these pressures, and yet perhaps all our sufferings under them
hitherto, might have bin but the beginnings of sorrow in comparison of that
which did remain. O let us then be as generally sensible of their perpetual
Removals.

Fifth Pair or Mess would be two Statutes which are more special for some
particular Counties and places above the rest.
The 1. of them for Certainty and Bounds of Forests.

This is as welcome to diverse other Shires, as the 2. Next against Stannery
Encroachments and Oppressions, is well pleasing to us, and our Cornwall.
Western Neighbor County. You know Brethren (and have felt it) how of late
especially, Isa. 1.22.
Our Western silver (to borrow the words of the Prophet) was become tin,
ver. 25, 26.
and our wine was mixed with water. But now it has pleased God by these
Statutes, to purge away our dross; and to take away our tin, to restore our
Judges as at the first, and our Counselors, as at the beginning. And thus you
have the first five Paires of Additions, all of them (excepting one) are
Statutes enacted.

Sixth Pair are,
1. That blessed (though neglected) Protestation, and 2. The Order for due
Observing of the Sabbath.

These are a golden pair indeed, and were they so well executed, as they are
wisely and piously ordained, doubtless they might prove unto us some of the
chiefest masterpieces amongst our late blessings. I shall conclude touching
these, with the Word of the Lord to Israel, when they had good Commandments
and spoke good words of them, but did not act and practice, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
O that there were such an heart (in this people) that they would fear me and
keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them and with
their children for ever. But it is a Proverb upon the English Law, and we may
apply it to our Lawmakers in this case, that They have good Wills, but bad
Executors, the meaning is, that the will of the Law is just and good, but the
Executioners of it are dull and evil: So here, the Will and intention of that
Honorable House of Commons in publishing these Orders was good and holy, but
many Executors or Executioners of them in the Country are very bad, yea, most
ungrateful.

(Seventh Pair.)
Add next to these, that pair of Orders old and new.

1. One long since, for informing against scandalous and insufficient
Ministers. Yet not so long since neither, but that (me thinks) many men's
hearts should yet continue aching, for their bloody cowardice, negligence and
unfaithful dealing in that business. 2. The other very lately, it was for
setting up of Lectures in every Parish in England and Wales, These two
opportunities put together, might have made up a complete spiritual National
mercy. For this indeed is the right end to begin at. it is one hinge of
Reformation, and of all the rest of our blessings. Psalm. 81.13. ver. 16.
The Lord might say to us concerning this pair, as he does to Jsrael in that
Psalm, O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways! I should then have fed them with the finest of the wheat; and with honey
out of the Rock should I have satisfied them.

(Eighth Pair are Proclamations.)
1. For the Banishment of Priests and Jesuits, and 2. For the Disarming of
Papists. O what a double stabbe were these (if well set home) to all the Popish
Faction in England? This would be a twofold dis-arming to them, even a
spiritual and a corporal; yea it might have brought them to such a strait, 1 Samuel 13.6. ver. 19, 10, 21.
as Israel was brought into by the Philistines, when both their Smiths and their
weapons were taken from them. But these [Wills] too have had bad Executors or
Executioners (as it seems) and therefore here again I might take up those
other verses of the forecited Psalm, Hear o my people, and I will testify
unto thee: Ps. 81.8. ver. 14, 15.
O Israel if thou will hearken unto me, I should soon have subdued their
enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters of the Lord
should have submitted themselves unto him, but their time should have endured
for ever.

For the ninth Pair, let us join together,
1. The downing of so many Monopolies by Proclamation, as they came up, and 2.
The Command for a public Thankesgiving; in which all Ministers were required
to publish to their people, the loyalty, integrity and faithfulness of our
Brethren of Scotland, and that all Declarations, Proclamations, Acts, Books,
Libels and Pamphlets made against them should be suppressed. Who durst for
fear of his life to have prophesied such a thing for a year or two ago? Nay,
what Minister soever at that time should have spoken but a charitable word in
public of that people, and of their proceedings, he might have met with enough
Captains, which would have bin ready to deal with him, as Captain Irijah
dealt with Jeremiah, He took Jeremiah the Prophet, Jer. 37.13.
saying, thou fallest away to the Chaldeans. Then Jeremiah said, it is false,
But he hearkened not to him, but brought him to the Princes: ver. 14. ver. 15.
ver. 16.
Wherefore the Princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in
prison, and cast him into the Dungeon. Then was not this a choice Addition of
mercy? But now how grossly this day of Thankesgiving has bin neglected, we
do all know: But let this satisfy to be said of those neglecters, their
forwardness to the war may be sufficiently seen, by their backwardness to
give thanks for this blessed peace.

(Tenth Pair sinally must be,)
1. The Return and Release of our innocent sufferers, and 2. Instead of them,
the slight and punishment of the guilty. O the exact and wonderful Justice of
the Almighty! To see poor men which were adjudged to severe sufferings and
perpetual exile, yet fetched home again and released by public Votes and
Acclamations. Nay, and (which doubles the wonder) then, to see some of their
Censurers to become Prisoners and exiles in their room. But I am too narrow in
speaking of persons only, here is the wonder of Miracles, to see a whole Nation
banished at once, and yet (at last) published loyal and dutiful, in that
other Nation whence they were banished, while their enemies (mean time) are
fame to fly, lie and dye as traitorous Incendiaries. I shall close up this
point, and so the whole double decad with that Proverb of Solomon, Pro. 21.18.
The wicked shall be a ransom for the Righteous, and the transgressor for the
Upright. So much be spoken concerning Additions.

The Sixth and last observable head in our Deliverance, I called PROBABILITIES.
This head does answer somewhat to that third Branch of the former rank, which
we named Prevention; because it does concern good things (as that did evils)
approaching. And by it I do understand all Likelyhoods or Grounds of hope for
more good and mercy, then we have yet received, either by continuance of old
favors, or by the Additions of new ones.

Quest. But you may ask me, What mean you by those more good things, and what
are the Grounds of our hopes for them?

Answ. 1. By those [good things] I mean the increase of all the five former
Branches in more eminent degrees; as more Stoppage, more Removal, more
Prevention, yea longer Continuance, and more Additions. But if you would have
it in short, I mean a complete Deliverance and a through Reformation.

2. By the Grounds of our hopes, I mean, those topics or common places of
hope, which may be gathered and observed for our encouragement, and these are
three; Some we may gather by observing the carriage and condition of the Enemy,
others we may gather from the Church, and the third sort from the Lord himself
and his engagements.

1. Commonplace or Ground of our hope of a perfect Deliverance and complete
Reformation is gathered, Enemies at this time. And this does yield us diverse
particulars, as

First, in that the Lord does Discover and Disgrace the enemies of Deliverance
and Reformation. Act 8.9. ver. 10. ver. 12. ve. 21, 22. etc.
As Simon Magus was discovered by Philips preaching, He had used sorcery and
bewitched the people of Samaria for a long time, saying that he himself was
some great one, to whom they all gave heed, but at last he is unmasked, and
then his time is but short. 2 Timothy 3.9.
This also is the Argument that Saint Paul gives to Timothy, for the
Probability of cutting off those Heretics of whom he speaks, But they shall
prevail no further, why? for their folly shall be manifest to all men: So
then, when the folly (that is, the wickedness and witlesnesse) of the enemies
are made known; when their hypocrisy, deceipts, malice, etc. do begin to be
discovered, then it is very probable that they shall not proceed any further,
their market is marred. And is it not so with our Enemies at this time? their
vailes, vizards, maskes and periwigs are plucked off, so that men see them in
their colors.

Secondly, they are met withal and crossed (even by a Divine hand) in all
their plots, projects and conspiracies. As the Prophet Elisha directed the King
of Israel to meet with the King of Syria in all his stratagems, 2 Kin. 6. v. 8.
to ver. 13.
Then the King of Syria warred against Israel and took counsel with his
servants, saying, in such a place shall be my camp. And the man of God sent
unto the King of Israel, saying, Beware that thou pass not such a place, for
thither the Syrians are come down. And the King of Israel sent to the place
which the man of God told him and warned him of, and saved himself there, not
once nor twice: Therefore the heart of the King of Syria was sore troubled for
this thing, and he called his servants and said unto them, will ye not show me
which of us is for the King of Israel? And one of his servants said, none my
Lord, o King, but Elisha the Prophet, that is in Israel, tells the King of
Israel, the words that thou speak in thy bedchamber. Now when the
bedchamber counsels of traitorous Enemies do come abroad, it is a signo that
they are declining apace. Exodus 14.24. ver. 25.
The Egyptians we know were mirrours of incurable stubbornness against the
Lord, and yet even they, when they saw that their host was troubled, and that
their Chariot wheels were taken off, so that they drove them heavily, even
they do confess, it is time to flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord
fights for them against the Egyptians. And so it is reported of those
Spaniards that came against England in that Armado in Eighty eight, that seeing
the winds, and seas, and all against them, they cried out that God was turned
Lutheran, o (me thinks) the present factions of Papists, Anti-Deliverancers
and Anti-Reformists, they might as well imagine now, that the Lord God is
turned Covenanter and Puritan, I take the word so, as those men do usually
abuse it. Act.14 14.
And for mine own part, after the way which many persons do call Puritanisme,
so desire I to worship the Lord God of my Fathers. But this is a second sign
of their tottering, and of our standing upright.

Thirdly, 2 Samuel 3. v. 1.
and in their spirits. It Is said, There was long war between the house of
Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the
house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker. Yea, and in Saul's own particular case,
1 Samuel 28. v. 15
see how spirit-falne he is, when his destruction approaches. And Samuel said
to Saul, why have thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am
sore distressed: for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed
from me, and answers me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by dreams: ver. 20.
therefore I have called thee that thou may make known unto me what I shall
do. And after, hearing his doom from the Devil, Then Saul fell straight way
all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel,
and there was no strength in him.

But you will say, nay, Enemies now do grow more desperate and courageous.

No, Probability from the Enemies.

But from the Church and the Reforming party, Counsels do prosper, like that
of Hushai against Achitophel. And Absalon and all the men of Israel said, 2 Samuel 17. v. 14
the counsel of Hushat the Archite, is better then the counsel of Ahitophel;
for the Lord had appointed to defeat the counsel of Ahitophel. And 2. They are
now more and more Honorable before all tolerable men, as was Joseph, Genesis 41.
v 39.
coming out of prison, Dan. 6. v. 28.
and Daniel out of the den of Lions. Yea the hand of the Lord is upon them for
good, as it was with the same Joseph and Daniel. 3. In short, both their party
and their spirits, do in a comfortable degree, increase and grow continual,
as it was with the house of David before mentioned.

3. Deliverance and Reformation, are the Lords Engagements in this business,
and these are of two sorts.

First, his Engagements to the work it self, as an helper, Auxiliary or
beginner, and these ought to support our hopes not a little. It is an Argument
with which I find the Saints in Scripture do much stay their hopes, and press
the Lord in times of great provocation and peril. As when they had committed
that great sin in making a Calfe, and the Lord had a kind of desire to
consume them; Exodus 32. v. 9. ver. 10, 11, 12
yet Moses uses this Argument to appease wrath and to continue preservation,
and does obtain his request. 2 Chro. 20.1, 2
So when Jehoshaphat was in triple danger, there were three Nations to one,
against him: but he gives himself to prayer, and a maine argument of his
prayer is set down to be this. ver. 5, 6, 7.
Art not thou our God who did drive out the Inhabitants of this land before
thy people Israel, and gave it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?
Lo, with how many Relations and Engagements does he there press the Lord? His
Relations do lie in these words, Our God, thy people, and the seed of
Abraham thy friend: The Engagements in these words, Thou did drive out the
inhabitants of this land, and gave it to the seed of Abraham, etc. Brethren,
let us in an humble and edifying way, to the Lords honor, the works promotion,
and our encouragement, edify one another with these sayings, This is the Lords
Engagement to the work as an helper.

2. Is, his Engagement against the Enemies as a Party, or a Principal. And
this we may gather if we look upon the great blasphemies of the Enemies, even
against the Lord himself. It Is good news for the Church when her Enemies are
grown rank in blasphemy, when they are come so far as to despite the
power of godliness, and to hate holiness (quatenus ipsam) as holiness: for
then the Lord himself does take the matter into his own hand, and will be a
principal in the cause, and this ought to be our comfort. See a ground for it
in Scripture, in the case of Hezekiahs distress. when Rabshakeh had rayled
against the ways of the Lord [in him,] see how God does take it to himself.
And Isaiah said unto them (that is, Isa. 37. v. 6.
to the servants of King Hezekiah.) thus shall ye say to your Master, thus
says the Lord, be not afraid of the words which thou have heard, wherewith the
servants of the King of Syria have blasphemed [me.] mark the last syllable
[me.] He goes on, ver. 7.
Behold I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumor, and return
to his own land, and J will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.
Yea, the Lord does put himself into the quarrel, ver. 23.
Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom have thou exalted
thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy one of
Israel. ver. 24.
By thy servants have thou reproached the Lord, etc. But J know thine abode,
and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against [me.] ver. 28. ver.
29.
Because thy rage against [me.] and thy tumult is come up it to mine ears:
therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I
will turn thee back by the way by which thou came. Thus, when the Lord is
engaged to a work as an Auxiliary, Luk 21. v. 28.
or against the Enemies as a Principal, then let the Adversaries look to it:
but let the righteous lift up their head, for (in Probability) their redemption
draws nigh.

But although there are all these several grounds of Probabilities, yet let me
tell you (to prevent confidence) that there are also some Improbabilities of
the prosperous success of this work, there are Bitts as well as Spurs, yea
many a rough wind and tide is against it: and therefore we should do well to
follow that counsel of the Psalmist. Psalm. 2. v. 11.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Rejoice we may for the
Probabilities; but we must also [tremble] to consider what Improbabilities
there are. Would we hear some of them?

1. Then first consider our general Backwardness and unwillingnesse to be
Reformed. Remember again that place of Ezekiel, Ezekiel 24.13.
Because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.
What an universal unthankfullnesse is there now in England for mercies lately
received? The Scots are still rayled against by some, whilst Straffords memory
is favorably reported. The day of Thankesgiving was generally slighted, and
there are those which durst to grumble against the Parliaments zeal and
diligence Besides, those Declarations, Orders and Edicts, which tend to purging
and punishing of wickedness, what neglect of them, what disputes against them
do we hear of, on all sides? Brethren, these things do not a little set
back the balance of mine hopes.

2. Improbability, may be, the too much dullness, self-love, and
selfe-seeking of too many Professors even in these times. Base fear, muddy
covetousness, and Reserving pride, these do benumme their tongues, singers,
heads and hearts, so that they do not plead, spend, contrive and pant, for
the public good of Zion. Here I may fitly take up those words of our Savior,
(though spoken in another sense) For the day of vengeance is in mine heart,
Isa. 63. v. 4. ver. 5.
and the year of my redeemed is come. But how was it entertained? And I looked
and there was none to help: and I wondered that there was none to uphold. Upon
such a ground as this was that exclamation of Jeremiah, o that I had in the
wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, Jer. 9. v. 2.
that I might leave my people and go from them. Why? For they are not valiant
for the truth upon the earth, ver. 3.
they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me says the Lord. These
are Improbabilities.

Seeing then that there is both hope,

I answer again, be Active, be Active. I have already showed you [wherein] and
I shall now add only to show you [wherefore] or why we must be thus Active. My
desire is to stir us up by some motives to further the work begun.

First, consider the great Peril, the manifold mischiefs, Inconveniences of an
imperfect Reformation and Deliverance. I say again, the manifold mischiefs,
for they are diverse. As

1. In respect of the Lord himself, who is hereby provoked and offended far
more then if nothing at all had bin done. Halfe-service is as bad, and
sometimes worse to him then none; and therefore such a remiss servant is
accursed. Cursed is every one that does the work of the Lord negligently. Jer.
48. v. 10. Luke 10. v. 27.
God will have service (as love) with all the heart, mind, soul and strength.
We know what a brand and blemish there is set in Scripture, upon the memories
of those Kings which did Reform in part, but not thoroughly: 2 King. 14. v. 4.
2 King. 15. v. 4. ver. 25.
because the high places were not taken away. Thus we find a blot upon Amaziah,
upon Azariah, upon Iotham, etc. Thus in respect of God.

2. Such an halfe-stroake in Reformation does breed an Inconvenience in respect
of the work it self, for that is hereby made far more difficult, then if it
had never bin attempted. A foul cloth that has bin slim'd (as they say) in
washing, so that the dirt is scalded into it, will require far more labor to
cleanse it, then if it had never bin touched. A wild Colt that has once cast
his rider, will put him doubly to it, to sit him the next time.

3. Yea, in respect of other after-reformers too, such an half doing will be
no small disheartning and prejudice unto them, in case they may set upon the
same work in time to come. What? (will it be said) will these men do more,
then, their wise predecessors could compass? Tush, this attempt is an old
fancy, a stale project: Thus, in such and such a time of old there were some of
your humor that made a great noise of Alterations, and Reformations, they
forsooth would needs do strange businesses, but what was the issue? either
nothing or a very small matter. Thus the cure is made more difficult to those
Physicians which shall come after, and they by this means are discouraged from
the undertaking.

4. But especially such imperfect attempts and mere beginnings of a
Reformation and Deliverance, are most mischievous in regard of the Enemies of
those works, and that more ways then one: for by this means, 1. They do
become more bold, and audacious in their evils, according to that of the
Preacher, Eccles. 8. v. 11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily (I may put in
thoroughly,) therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil; or at least the enemies do hereby grow more subtle and cautious (if
not more impudent,) As a I ox that has once broken the snare or ginne, it will
cost you double art, pains, and patience, to get him upon that advantage
again: So if once the Enemies can escape such a scowring, they will work more
wisely ever afterward, and ten to one, if ere you take them so fairly upon
the hyp in future times. 2. But chiefly such short sparring (as we say) does
make the Enemies more fierce, cruel and malicious, against all the Reforming
party for ever afterward. When Moses and Aaron did attempt and begin the
Redemption, and Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and that they had made but
an entrance upon the work, Exo. 5. v. 1. and 3
they had but broken the ice with Pharaoh, concerning letting the people go:
Lo, then for a time it is far worse with the poor Hebrews then ever before;
for the tale of their brick is doubled, straw is denied them, and instead
thereof, stripes are laid upon them. Suppose now that those two great
Deliverers ( Moses and Aaron) had left the work in this plight, had they not
bin rather enemies, then friends to Israel in so doing? But once more, Suppose
that the Egyptians had recovered the Israelites back again, Exodus 14.
when they pursued them to the Red Sea? Oh then, what triple tusks of bricks,
with Scorpions instead of rodds, would they have laid upon them? To illustrate
this point a little more clearly: Suppose a hunter, or Woodman, in shooting of
a Stagg, or Wilde-Boare, does not strike it dead in the place, but only wounds
it: is not then the shooter himself in as much danger as the game? is it not
time for him presently to fly for his own life, for fear least the bleeding
beast does fall upon him? Or once more, Suppose that a Priest or Levite of old,
when he had a Bull or Bullock tied to the horns of the Altar; suppose (I say)
that he had given it such a faint blow upon the head, as might only have
amazed the furious beast, and caused him to break the cords, had it not then
bin high time for the man to look to himself, for fear least the Sacrifice
should have offered up the Priest? We know that the Philistines brought down
Sampson very low: Judge. 16. ver. 19. ver. 21.
for they did shave off the locks of his head, and with them his strength, they
did put out his Eyes, and bound him with fetters of brass, and he did grind
in the prison house. A man would have thought that this enemy of theirs had bin
sufficiently disabled from hurting them for ever after: but the case was
otherwise, ver. 22.
for in time the hair of his head began to grow again, and at last, when they
made but a play-game of him, ver. 25. ver. 28. ver. ^0.
he was at once avenged of them for his two eyes: Yea, he pulled down that
house-full of the Philistines at one pluck, so that the dead which he slew at
his death, were more then they which he slew in his life. Therefore there is no
good trusting of shaven, blind, bound and imprisoned Sampsons; their hair may
grow again, and then woe to the other side if ever they recover hold fast in
the pillars of the house. In short, whosoever does not strike home in cases of
great Reformations, and public acts of Justice, he does but irritate the
enemy, to the extreme peril of himself. I do here remember that speech of
Goliath unto David, and may well allude unto it, Choose you out a man for you
(says he) and let him come down to me, if he be able to fight with me, and to
kill me, 1 Samuel 17.8, 9.
then will we be your servants, but if I prevail against him, then shall ye be
our servants and serve us. The like words me thinks I hear founding from the
mouth of every grand-delinquent, and from each mighty Anti-Reformist amongst us
at this time. If the Reformers be now able to match and vanquish us, then we
must be servants for ever: but if our party can at this time prevail, kill,
and conquer them, then all is ours, and they shall be our perpetual servants,
and serve us. And hence (I suppose) do spring all those divellish Treasons,
and hellish Machinations of the Adversaries, in all the three Kingdoms ever
since the beginning of this Parliament, Irish, Scottish and English Rebellions,
Treasons and Conspirasies. The enemies are busy (like their father the
Devil,) because their time is short: Now or never therefore, let the holy, and
loyal side bestirre themselves too, even in their own defense. And to set on
this point yet more closely, we may allude in this case, unto that speech of
our Savior concerning the re-entry of the unclean spirit. Mat. 12. v. 43.
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks thorough dry places,
ver. 44.
seeking rest, and finding none, then he says, I will return into my house
from whence I came out, and when he is come, ver. 45.
he finds it empty, swept and garnished: Then goes he and takes with
himself seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in and
dwell there, and the last state of that man is worse then the first. The States
Ecclesiastical and Civil, in this Kingdom, were not long since pestered, and
in part possessed, with diverse bad members, which were unto us like so many
unclean spirits, some of these have bin lately dispossessed; I mean, by
flight, imprisonment, death; so that at present, we do walk through dry
places, that is, in better ways, seeking rest, and a through Reformation; but
if now we find none, then, then, let us be sure that those (Cacodemons) evil
spirits, may return again, and take with themselves many other spirits more
wicked then themselves, and (if possible) enter in, and dwell here, and the
last state of this Nation shall then be worse then the first. The Lord grant
that it be not even so unto this Generation. In brief (my Brethren) let me
speak it as effectually, as I do now faithfully say it. The Blessed Reformers
and their Adherents, do at this time (as they say) hold a Wolf by the ears.
By the Wolf I do understand, all Papists and Delinquents, if they chance to
let go this ravenous beast, he may turn again, and all to rent them; if they
hold it there for longer time, this also may be perilous. A third way yet
remains, and that is, to be sure and swift.

5. Finally, Such short-shooting may much redound, or at least be objected, to
the dishonor of the attempting Reformers: for will not after ages, yea, the
present enemies, be bold to put upon them that Proverb in the Gospel,
concerning weak builders, and say, These mend id begin to build, but they were
not able to finish? Lu. 14.30.
So much for a first Motive.

A second means to stir up Activity may be taken from our common interest in
this work. Consider that thy self, Mordecais first Argument to Queen Hester,
Est. 4.13.
Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings House more then
all the Jews: So say I to every one that hears me this day, what Religion
do thou profess? Art thou a Papist or a Protestant? If a Protestant, then I
must tell thee. Think not with thy self whersoever thou art, that thou shall
escape, more then all the Protestants: for the Irish-Rebels, the Traitors and
Conspiratours in Scotland and England, yea, the whole Anti-Parliamentary guilty
party, in all three places, are generally, either Papists in tongue or Popish
in heart.

Question. But thou will say, I am neither Papist nor Puritan, the middle and
moderated way is my desire?

Answer. True, we have both Church-Papists and Masse-Protestants, yea further
(if you will) there are amongst us, both mere Passive Protestants, and Active
ones, the latter are accounted Puritans, and the former are little better then
men indifferent: but to be short, art thou a Protestant indeed, that is,
completely Orthodox in Doctrine, and firmly conscientious in practice? Then I
tell thee once again, that thou art no better then an Heretic, yea a
Puritan, in the Definition and account of true Romanists. How long therefore
halt ye betwixt two ways and opinions, betwixt Popery and Purity? Be assured
Brethren, there is no third Tract to be found, and to convince you of this (for
we had need of conviction in this point) consider seriously these two grounds
or reasons.

1. First, Christ himself does make but two ways and gates, and two sorts of
Travelers, in, and to them. Enter ye in at the straight Gate: Mat. 7.13.
For wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat; ver. 14.
because straight is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life,
and few there be that find it. There we have a division of all persons in the
world, into two ranckes, Cursed and Blessed, and he gives us two marks of the
latter sort, you may know them by their strictness in practice, and pausity of
number. Again, our Savior says elsewhere, (...). 12.30.
He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me
scatters abroad; therefore Christ himself does make but two principal sides
now amongst us.

2. But if the Popish, rebellious or Anti-Reforming party should now prevail
(which God forbid) they also would pass a Dicottomy upon us all, they would
make but two parts of all the people in England, either we must turn
Catholics (as they call it) or else, we shall be Heretics and Puritans in
their Calendar: and therefore if there be any persons, present or absent, which
do dream of getting safety by compounding, and halfe-syding, let those Batts
know, that their lot in the conclusion, is like to be no better, then was that
of the wily Gibeonites which made a crafty lying league with Israel. Josh 9.3.
etc.
See the issue of their composition, first, they are both accursed and
inthraled, even by those with whom they made their league; Says Joshua to them
(when he had spied their Cap.) Now therefore ye are accursed, ver. 23.
and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood
and drawers of water, for the House of my God. And afterward King Saul, he does
massacre or slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah. 2 ^am.
21.2.
Let all the English Gibeonites of these times look for the like reward in the
latter end, and remember still, that theirs was slavery and slaughter. In a
word, the greatest favor that such Newters may expect, can be but this, they
may find so much favor, as to be eaten last, and to be served in for the
murderers second course. That is the next Motive.

Thirdly, Est. 4.14.
This was another of Mordecais arguments to Queen Esther, For if thou
altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall their enlargement and
Deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy fathers
House shall be destroyed. Let me clap this spurr in the sides of every dull and
unactive person that hears me this day, the Lord will never be bassed in his
work, but yet thou and thine may be ruined, for not conferring your help. Our
backwardness may hinder our selves, though it be not an hinderance to the
work. See an example to this purpose, in the cold reward of fearful Barak,
he had a fair prophecy and promise, Judge 4.
to encourage him to go against Sysera, the Captain of Jabins army; but he is
timorous and durst not to adventure himself alone, but will have Deborah (a
woman) to go with him, or else he will not go: ver. ^
Now what does the Lord loose, ver. 5.
or Barak gain by this fearefullnesse? Surely, the Lords work is done
nevertheless: ver. 23.
For God subdued on that day Jabin the King of Canaan: But Baraks wages they
are much the less, I will surely go with thee (says Deborah) notwithstanding
the journey which thou take shall not be for thine honor, ver. 9.
for the Lord shall sell Sysera into the hand of a woman. A just and
proportionable punishment, if Barak will play the woman by his fearefullnesse,
and will needs have a woman to go with him, most just it is that a woman
should take the honor of the day from him. Sam. 15.^.
Take but one president more to fortify this Motive, the man is King Saul, he
is commanded to destroy Amalek utterly; but he does this work of the Lord
negligently, and spares King Agag and the best of the spoil. What Is the issue?
ver. 33. ver. 28.
Is Agags life saved by this means? No, but the sword of Samuel cuts him off.
Or is King Saul a gainer by his remissness? No, but it costs him his Crown
and Scepter. So our cowardice and negligence, about the public work at this
time, though it cannot hinder the Lord, yet may it prejudice and undo, both
our selves and our posterityes.

Fourthly, Motive 4.
Consider the opportunity of this season, and our honorable privilege, in
being brought forth at such a time. Est. 4 14.
This is Mordecais last argument to Esther, And who knows whether thou art
come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? This Motive (it seems) did
strike the stroke with Queen Esther, and carried her through all difficulties,
so that now neither the wrath of a King, nor the late sad president of Queen
Vasthi, no, nor the fear of death it self could hold her in. When the Lord
has a purpose to do great public works of Reformation and Deliverance, and
does so far honor any of his servants, as to bring them forth in such a
nick, yea, and (perhaps) to call them to that service, it is then their duty,
and the Lords expectation, that they would endeavor to raise, fit and
proportion their spirits to the work that is set before them: yea and God
himself at such times is ready to be with them in an extraordinary measure.
Thus, when the Lord would have that first Temple builded at Jerusalem, 2 Samuel
11.25. 1 Chr. 22.9, 10 1 Kin. 3.9. 1 Kin. cap 5.
what a King did he give unto Israel? he was no less then a ledidiah and a
Solomon (beloved of the Lord and peaceable) Nay how does that King endeavor to
fit and furnish himself, both by prayer for wisdom, and by diligent
contrivall for materials? Ezra 5.1, 2.
So for the building of the second Temple, what active Prophets and Princes,
did the Lord raise up, and how do they rowse up themselves for that work? as
Haggai and Zechariah, with courageous Zerubbabell and Jeshua, besides Ezra and
Nehemiah about the same time: Neh 3.1.
So in building of the walls of Jerusalem; what choice and forward spirits do
we find, in that third Chapter of Nehemiah, first among the Priests and
afterward from the Princes, and from them it runs down to the very
Tradesmen, ver. 8. ver. 32.
as Goldsmiths, Apothecaries, and Merchants. In like manner, when the Lord had
a purpose to root out Baal, Iezebell and Ahabs posterity, what a man for the
nonce did he raise up, 2 Kin. ca. 9.10.
even furious Iehu the son of Nimshi? And so in England heretofore, when the
time was come for rooting out those Romish Baalites, and that Babilonish
Jezabell did not God raise up our English-Iehu, (King Henry the eighth) a man
made for the purpose? Brethren, let us lay this to our hearts, we all (of this
age and Island) are now honored, to be the Spectatours of a wonderful work,
yea, and some of us (perhaps) are borne to be happy instruments thereof in some
degree; Magn^^ anmus magna^^ fortunam decet.
o let us take this gracious opportunity as an honorable blessing, let us
improve it richly, to the honor of him, who has so highly honored us. Yea,
let every one that can do any thing (and who cannot holily, and loyally do
something toward this work?) let him or her say with themselves, Who knows
whether J am come to my present place, case and condition, for such a time as
this?

1. First, let every Magistrate and Officer say with himself, who can tell,
whether I am made a Mayor or Justice of the Peace, etc. in such an eminent
County, City or Borough, for such a time as this? namely, that I may promote
and enliven within my Sphere the Declarations and Orders that do come from
Parliament, that I may certify against contemners effectually, and may to my
utmost apprehend and send up all that shall let and offend the present work.
Nay (me thinks) the very wives of such Magistrates, may as well say to
themselves, as Mordecai did to Esther the wife of King Ahashuerus, Who knows
whither we are come to our derived dignity and reflected authority for such
times as these?

2. In like manner would I have every other inferior Officer, to commune with
his own heart in his Chamber, and say, I am now (suppose) a Constable, and
ordinary service is not sufficient in extraordinary times. I am but a mean man
(may another say) and have prayed (perhaps) heretofore for an occasion and
opportunity to further the Reformation, Lo, now I am one of the Churchwardens
of my Parish, and there is a Declaration for abolishing of Crucifixes, etc. now
put into my hands and even dropped into my mouth. A third man may tell his own
heart, there is now come down an Order for setting up of Lectures, and I am a
wealthy leading man amongst my Neighbors, Who knows whether I am come to this
Parish, to this estate for such a time as this?

3. But finally and especially, let this consideration kindle the spirits of
all faithful Ministers, and make them blaze with holy, loyal flames of zeal
and activity. O my Brethren, that we unworthy we, should be made Watchmen and
Pastors, in such hopeful, and yet fearful times as these, whereas so many of
our better Predecessors, have desired to see these things, but could not see
them, me thinks, this consideration should melt and ravish us, yea, it is
almost enough to make us cut up our flesh into hearts, and (if it were
possible) to distribute and deal them abroad into the bosoms of our friends
to enliven them. To wind up all, let every soul that wishes well to our Zion
and Jerusalem, to Church and State, cast himself and his upon the present
Reformation; Let him (as a good Christian and true Subject) adventure his All
in that bottom, it is no small hinderance to the public good work, that many
thousands of people do stand (in bivio) wavering in their judgments and
affections, they have (as it were) one foot upon the shore, and the other in
the Ship: so that if the Sea does chance to swell and grow rough, they are
provided to retire to shore with safety; but if the waters prove calm, they
will go off wholly into the Arc amongst the Reformers, and this division is
the rea^y way to cast away both ship and men: Let me say therefore to all these
as Saint Paul said of those shipmen, which were about to forsake their vessel
in the storm, Except these abide in the Ship ye cannot be saved. Act. 27.30,
31.
Let us all according to our places leap off wholly with both feet into the
public Arc of Reformation, and now to set on this last Motive with a pair of
spurrs at parting, let us in our thoughts and imaginations, represent the past
and future ages as now present to encourage and quicken our Activity. First,
for Past-ages, let us think and suppose with our selves, that if our Ancestors
of the last generation were now living again, even thy father, and mine, and
his, thy husband, wife, or (perhaps) brother deceased (I speak only of such
dead friends as wished well unto Zion) o how would these spit in the faces of
some of their children, nephews or kins-men, which are against this
Reformation? how would they check and spurr up all their midling kindred? but
as for all those of their offspring that go the right way, o, how would they
kiss, bless and embrace them? and what shewers of fatherly benedictions would
they let fall upon their heads? Brethren, let the very ashes of our Ancestors
put some fire into us. But secondly, for future ages too, think, o think upon
your children yet unborne, or not grown up, poor souls they are not yet able
to speak for themselves in this business, but much of their future happiness
does lie at the mercy of our present Activity. O let us give them cause to
bless our memories in the times to come, that so when they shall hereafter sit
upon our Tombs and Graves, they may there tell their children and childrens
children, that they had fathers and grandfathers once, which did live in a
golden age of opportunityes, and by their taking and improvement of those
seasons, they did treasure up unto us these blessed legacies of Truth and
Peace, which we and ours, do now enjoy.

And now, what more can I add? what golden Text of Scripture can I find that
is sufficiently emphaticall to tip and close up all this Discourse? Let it be
that of Saint Paul to his Corinthians, we will but vary the number, and take it
to our selves, 1 Cor. 16. ver. 9. A great Door and effectual is opened unto
us, and there are many adversaries. The words are a double spurr.

THE SECOND TREATISE INCITING TO HOLY AND LOYAL ACTIVITY.
EXODUS CHAP. 17. VER. 11. And it came to pass when Moses held up his hand,
that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
ALthough it be the proper element and errand of a Minister to feed his people
with spiritual knowledge and understanding, yet is it also upon our commission
to be your National Watchmen. Watchmen we are, to promote the good, Ezekiel. 33.
v. 7.
and to give warning against the evils of the land: If we fail in either case
to blow the Trumpet to the people, then shall their blood be required at our
hands. ver. 6.
The consideration of that heavy charge, does cause me to enterpose a
Parenthesis betwixt mine ordinary Lectures, and has put me for a while upon a
public discourse. It is concerning the Great things which are coming to pass
in England in these days. Judge. 7. v. 19, 20
In this discourse I am resolved (with Gideons men) to blow my trumpet, though
I break my pitcher, and to hold forth to all that hear me, a famous example
both of holiness and activity. The man is Moses, observe his endeavor, and
the success thereof. And it came to pass when Moses held up, etc.

This Chapter does present us with a pair of remarkable Histories. One of
Isreal's murmuring for water at Rephidim, and the issue thereof, that, to ver.
8th. The second of Amaleks treachery, with the consequents thereupon; from ver.
8th. to the end. The very order of these two is observeable, and does show us,
that where murmuring goes before, there enemies and invasions do follow after.
But I pass on.

In this latter History we have diverse particulars, as

First, Amalek, ver. 8th. Defensive, Joshuah, with some chosen men of Israel,
ver. 9^h.

Next, Auxiliaries or Aids, assisting Isreal's party, they were Moses, Aaron
and Hur, ver. 10th. and what they did, see ver. 9, 11, 12.

Thirdly, victory it self, is set down, ver. 13th.

Finally, Memorial of the whole is commanded and recorded in the following
verses. 14, 15, 16.

I shall handle the Text, Per praecognita and praecepta.

First, laying down the Premises, then the Doctrine thereof.

1. The Premises do contain both Explanation and Division of the words.

In the Explanation we shall move and answer two Questions.

What this Amalek was?

They were a people descended from Esau, Israel from Jacob. Gen 36. v. 12.
And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esaus son, and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek.

So that this grudge was hereditary, descended from Esau to his grandchild
Amalek, who though a bastard, yet prooves too true an heir to that old hatred
against Jacob, Gen 27. v. 41, etc.
for the birthright, and the blessing.

What is meant by this action or posture of Moses, hands.

Scripture. Sometimes 'twas used,

1. Civilly or Judicially: it was a posture used in taking of an Oath or Vow.
Abraham said to the King of Sodom, Gen 14. v. 22. ver. 23.
I have lifted up my hand to the Lord the most high God: That I will not take
from a thread even to a shoe latchet, etc. Iunius renders it [Iuravi elata manu]
I have sworn by lifting up my hand. And again, I lift up my hand to heaven,
and say, Deuteronomy 32.40.
I live for ever.

2. Sometimes it has a Religious use, and that either

1. In blessing, Lev. 9. v. 22.
As Aaron lift up his hand toward the people and blessed them.

2. Or in prayer, So sometimes in petition. Psalm. 28. v. 2.
Hear the voice of my supplication when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my
hand toward thy holy Oracle. And sometimes in praises or thankesgiving, Psalm.
134 v. 2.
Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary and bless (or praise) the Lord.

3. This posture has also a Military use, it was used in war by such as bare
the ensign or colors to a band of men. Isa. 49. v. 22.
Behold I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the
people (i.e.) Cum vexillo Evangelij, with my Flag or banner of the Gospel. And
in the same sense is that other text, the soul that does ought
presumptuously, clata manu, Numb. 15.30.
as a banner bearer; with a highhand, shall be cut off.

In the Text this phrase or posture may have (I conceive) a double use or
signification; Religious and Military.

1. The action might be Religious, that Moses during the time of the battle
did hold (or lift up) his hand to the Lord in prayer for victory. 1 King. 8. v.
22.
As Solomon is said to stand before the Altar, and to spread forth his hands
toward Heaven.

2. But chiefly this posture of Moses was Military. Like a Standard Bearer or
Ensign he held up the rod of God in his hand, (that is, sometimes in one hand,
sometimes in the other,) as a banner, or a Flag, thereby to encourage the
Soldiers which were now fighting in view, in the valley; for this rod of God
had been an instrument of diverse former Miracles and deliverances to that
people, Exodus 7 v. 20. Exodus 8 9, etc.
it turned waters into blood, it brought in the Froggs, and the rest of the
plagues upon Egypt. In a word it was the same rod that did divide the Red Sea,
Exodus 14.16, 21.
and made a way of escape for Israel through the floods. And therefore the
holding up of this rod to the fighting Israelites, was a silent Oration unto
them, and did signify as much as this speech,

Look hither O ye Hebrews, and beehold the Ensign of the Lords presence, and
assistance; this, this, is that rod which in my hand (by his power) did bring
all those plagues upon Egypt, and at last paved your way, and the Egyptians
Sepulchers, Heb 1.12.
in the waters: remember (therefore) that the Lord is still the same, and his
years do not fail; What is this Amalek more then Egypt, that they should be
able to stand before this God, this Rod, this Israel. So much for Explanation.

In the Division of the words two parts offer themselves.

First, here is Moses his posture; and this is set down Positively, the
lifting up of his hand. Privatively, the letting of it down.

Secondly, the different issues or effects of both those, for when Moses held
up his hand, Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.

Secondly, the Doctrine, which I called the Praecepta, and it shall be the sap
or quintessence, distilled out of all these branches thus unfolded, it must be
this.

DOCTRINE. In times of solemn Contestation, when the true Church lies at
stake, every right member ought to bestirre it self in it is behalf to the
uttermost.

In the complete handling of this point we ought to observe, 1. The
Explanation. 2. The Confirmation. 3. The Application thereof.

In times of solemn Contestation] that is, Parliament. When David is against
Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 2 Samuel 17.
and Hushai against Achitophel: then, when all this lies at stake, and the
game is playing (as it were) it behooves every true natural spiritual son,
to lay about him in the use of all Religious or Politic means lawful, to
help, heave, or draw a pound, for raising of the Bell, and for evening of the
Scales.

To the uttermost.] That is, he must leave (as we say) no stone unturned, no
poole unfished, no means unassayed, that might further the work of
deliverance. Whatsoever his heart, head, tongue, hand or relations can do,
holily, loyally, that must he try, use and improve, with all his might. Thus
was it with those in this Text and Chap. Joshuah and his chosen men being fit
for war, they do fight against Amalck in the Valley. Moses, Exodus 7. v. 7.
a man too old for Arms (being now above fourscore) yet thinks himself not
too aged to pray and give aim: but up he climes to the top of an hill, and
there shakes a Rod, though he cannot brandish a sword. Next Aaron, and Hur, a
pair of aged fathers, though unable to fight, nor may they hold up the Rod,
yet something they will be doing for the furtherance of victory, they will
help him that helps Joshua, they will assist at the third hand, and do stay
up the hands of Moses, when they had put a stone under him.

We may see it proved in Scripture in case of diverse Domestic factions arising
against the truth. Saul against David. It was an hot persecution of the Hawk
and his fawning Spannills, against a poor Partridge in the Moutaines; David
and his adherents are taken for a pack of Rebels, and the priests of Nob,
(though innocent) are executed as Conspirators with him; 1 Samuel 22. v. 13
yet the famous faithful ones of the land did stand to David, and for him,
even in his lowest ebbs and estate. 1 Samuel 19. v, 18 1 Samuel 22. v. 5. 1 Samuel 20.
Samuel himself does shelter him then at Naioth in Ramah. Gad the Prophet
gives him counsel. Yea true hearted Jonathan himself does (against his own
profit) covenant with him, and affords him continual help and intelligence.
So in the time of Absolons treacherous combination against King David, and the
loyal party that were with him, how near had they carried it, having on their
side Achitophel the Oracle, stout Amasa the general, and other able heads,
hearts and hands? But even then, 2 Samuel 15.19. ver. 23. ver. 24, 32. 2 S^.
17.27, etc. 2 Samuel 19.24.
there was many a faithful Israelite that did bestirre himself to the
uttermost, as, Ittai the Gittite, and all the Country thereabouts, also Zadok,
Abiathar, and the Levites Hushai, the Archite, with Shobi, Machir, Barzillai
and Mephibosheth. But a more clear instance, was the condition of the Church
of Israel in the time of the faction of Baals Prophets, they carried all
smoothly before them, it was hard for a man to find a knee that had not bowed
unto Baal. 1 King. 19.10. 1 King. 18.
In a word Elijah, orthodox and zealous Elijah, now thought himself left
alone: but therefore how does this Eliiah bestirre himself to the uttermost?
ver. 38.
he does (as it were) tun through sire and water, he brings down fire upon
the Altar, he procures rain from Heaven. ver. 44.
Yea, in that Chapter, he is the death of Eight hundred and fifty false
Prophets; 450. Prophets of Baal, ver. 40.
and 400. Prophets of the Grove. Our last instance let be the case of the Jews
in Esthers time, their condition was little better then desperate, Esth. 3.10,
11, 12, 13, etc.
proud Haman had begged (or rather bought) the whole people of the Jews, the
decree for their execution is signed and sent by posts, etc. But now how does
every true member in Shushan and else where bestirre themselves? Esth. 4. v. 1.
ver. 3. ver. 7, 8. ver. 13, 14
First, Mordecai at Shushan, Next, the rest of the Jews in other Provinces do
the like. Also Mordecai informs Queen Esther by Hatach, and presses her
vehemently until he obtains. Yea, Esther her self, how does she (though the
weaker vessel) adventure upon the wrath of a King, Pro. 19. v. 12.
which is as the roaring of a Lion? Thus in times of public Comestation (that
is) of hope and hazard, peril and possibility, every true member ought to
bestirre it self to the uttermost.

This truth may be confirmed and bound with no less then a threefold cord of
Argument which may not easily be broken.

1. Contestation. (By Church still I mean, that party, whether many or few,
rich or poor, which hold fast the purity of Doctrine, and powerful practice
of godliness.) Jude v. 3.
Jude calls salvation, the common salvation: It is true of the doctrine of
salvation, that is to all true Christians as a Common field to all the tenants
in a Parish, or Manor, every Freeholder or Copyholder, has his share and
portion therein. Quaedam universitatis sunt, (says the Civil Law) somethings
are every man's, as the seashore, the fish of the sea, and the like: good
reason therefore that every true member should bestirre themselves to the
uttermost for this common inheritance. When Israel fought with Amalek in
Rephidim, though Moses, Aaron and Hur, were not with Joshuab in the battle,
yet their lives, liberties and Religion, lay at the same stake, as much as his,
or any man's else in the Camp. And upon this ground it was, 1 Samuel 30.
that David returning with victory over those Amalekites which had spoiled
Ziklag, allotted as great a share to those which tarryed by the stuff, ver. 24.
as to them who went to battle. As his part is that goes down to the
battle, so shall his part be that tarryeth by the stuff: they shall part
alike. Brethren, this is a true rule concerning all public hazards and
contestations, of, or for, the true Church (whether by Arms, or by Counsels)
every member does share both in the good, and evil successes. This is the
argument with which Mordecai does press Esther so closely, to adventure her
self for the deliverance of the Jews. Esth. 4. v. 13.
Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings house more then
all the Jews. (i.e.) True, thou art the Kings wife, but yet being a Jew, the
Jewish case concerns thee also; so as if the Jews are cut off, the
destruction will find out thee even in the Royal Palace. Thus the great
Counfell of this Kingdom now assembled, does nearly concern every member of
the Church and State. There is not the poorest Mechanic, nay, child, or
servant, that has an estate, a body, or a soul, but behold, they all do lie
now at stake, therefore it behooves every member to bestirre himself to the
uttermost.

2. They must sirre at such times, Preacher) for every action, and to miss
that time is dangerous. A time to kill, Eccles. 3. v. 1. to 8.
and a time to heal, a time to break down, and a time to build up, a time to
get, and a time to lose, a time to keep, and a time to cast away. Man also
knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, Eccles. 9.
v. 12.
and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared
in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them. Thus not only private
persons, but even whole Nations and States have their good times, in which
help, deliverance and relief are offered unto them from the Lord, in which
there is great likelihood of obtaining pardon and purging, both in Religion and
Laws. Beloved, such a season is it for England, every time that God, and the
King, does give us an happy and peaceable meeting in Parliament; Pro 11. v. 14.
Pro. 24. v. 6.
as it is said, Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of
counselors there is safety. And, by wise counsel thou shall make thy war:
and in the multitude of counselors there is safety. Joh 5. v. 4.
Therefore that is one special season. We read of the poole of Bethesda, that
an Angel went down at a certain season into the poole, and troubled the
water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in, was
made whole of whatsoever disease he had. If a sick man had stepped into that
poole before the Angel stirred the waters, he should have found none efficacy
in them; or if he had delayed long after, then it would have bin too late: the
only proper season was, first after the troubling of the water. Such seasons
are there for whole States to step in and be healed.

3. Esaus birthright was sold, Heb. 12. v. 16, 17 Genesis 27. v. 3^, 37.
his tears came too late. When the blessing was gone, then his prayers, tears
and venison, came too late. Thus a Nation also may overstand the day of their
peace, both in respect of spiritual, and politke happinesses. So Jerusalem.
Luke 19. v. 42.
If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, etc. Whilst
Prophets could, and did prophesy in Jerusalem, whilst men of Counsel and Arms
remained in her, and had liberty and encouragement, so long she was in a fair
way, and then prayers, humiliations, informations, etc. might happily have done
her some good: but at last the case was altered, for those able pillars were
taken away. Behold, Isa. 3. v. 1. ver. 2.
the Lord, the Lord of hosts, does take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah,
the stay and the staff. The mighty man, and the man of war, the Judge and
the Prophet, and the prudent and the ancient, the Captain of fifty, ver 3.
and the honorable man, and the Counselor and the cunning Artificer, and the
eloquent Orator. Whilst these great helps remained with them, perhaps (as I
said) use of means might have done some good: But now that the iron is cold,
it is too late to strike. Therefore pray not thou for this people, Jer. 7. v. 16.
neither lift up a cry nor prayer for them, etc. These three Reasons prove it
sufficiently, That in times of solemn Contestation, etc.

1. REPROOF.
This does command me to rebuke sharply diverse sorts of Offenders against this
rule, but especially these two; those that are Careless or Opposites in such a
time.

1. The Careless, which scarcely take notice of such golden opportunities and
seasons. As the bruit-beasts know no difference betwixt working-dayes and the
Sabbath, but only by their ease and rest: So there is a generation of brutish
people, who take little notice or regard of Wars or Parliaments, but only so
far as may touch their present sensual particulars, Acornes they can taste
(like Swine) but as for Oaks (from whence they dropp) those Trees are too high
for their crooked and stooping thoughts to contemplate. The state of Religion
and the weale-publicke, are things which the greater number of people think
least upon; but do say that they must leave the former to Churchmen, and the
latter to Counselors of State; just like those sottish Russians (the
common people of Muscovy) of whom it is said, that if you ask them but an
ordinary question, touching their Religion or laws, the answer is, God and our
great Duke, do know all things, they can tell. Brethren, as I would not have
mean men to go above their latchet (as they say) that is, to seek to know
above that which is meet for them, both in affairs of Church and Commonwealth:
so I believe, that even private persons may sin greatly by too much ignorance
of public affairs, especially in these times, when as we hope the Carpenters
are cutting off those horns which have scattered Judah. Those two Disciples
going to Emmaus, Zech, 1.20, 21.
seemed to reprove our Savior (not knowing him to be our Savior) because he
made himself ignorant of the great new affairs which then had happened in
Jerusalem. Lu. 14.17, 18.
What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another as ye
walk, etc. And Cleophas said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem,
and have not known the things which are come to pass there in those days?
ve^. 19, 20. etc.
He checks him for his ignorance of the public affairs of the Church, and
afterward relates unto him the newest news that was going. But how many are
there amongst us which are persons of quality and yet are grosely ignorant of
the things which have come to pass here of late days? Phil. 2.21.
Thus every one cares for his own things, but how few do care for the things
that are for God? To all such I conclude with the threatening of the Psalmist,
Ps. 28.5.
Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands,
he shall destroy them and not build them up. That to the Careless.

2. Reproof, to such as are active the quite contrary way.

If every true member ought to bestir, etc. in such a time, then what members
may we account them, who are so far from this that they do the quite
contrary. Bestirre themselves they do, it is true, yea, and for a thing which
they call a Church too, but indeed it is an Anti-church rather, a Diana of
their own making, the Priest he makes the Church, and that Church it makes the
Priests again: As the Roman Priests they make their breaden god, and that god
does fill both their panches and their purses. A Church in these men's
definition, what is it else, but the greater number of such Clergy, as are most
richly Beneficed, yea though loose in life, and in opinion and practice,
fomenting a bundle of politic heresies and dangerous formalities? 1 Timothy 3.15.
But Saint Paul's definition of a Church is far different, he says, The
Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of Truth. A pillar (says one)
Non more Architectionico, not in the Masons language, to build upon as
infallible and unerring; but More forensi, in the Lawyers phrase, that is, as
the pillar or public post of a Guild Hall or Market-house, upon which the
Word and Sacraments are so held out, as we use to hang up a Proclamation to be
read of all: But these men's Church is little better then a signe-Poste with a
ballet pasted against it. Brethren, we have had strange definitions of a Church
of late years, some make it little different in structure from that of Rome,
which resolves it self into a consistory of Cardinals and the Pope their
Supreme and unerring Determiner. But blessed be God they have showed lately by
their unlawful decrees that such a Church may err. Let us examine that former
definition of a Church a little further; if the greatest number of richest
Clergy, and most dignified, do make a Church, may we not say that Baals
^rophets and their adherents, 1 Kin. 18.19, 20
were the Church of Israel in Elijahs time? Suppose those four hundred and
fifty Prophets of Baal, and those other four hundred Prophets of the Groves,
suppose those 850. (all false Prophets) had met in Convocation, surely they
were then both the most and greatest Clergy of Israel by far, and would have
carried any decree before them smoothly; but had not this bin a tite Church?
One Orthodox Elijah weighed them all up, 1 Kin. 18.40.
and did afterward destroy them all. Or suppose (once more) those other four
hundred flattering Prophets that persuaded King Ahab to go up to war against
Ramoth Gilead, 1 Kin. 22.6.
suppose that all those together with their little Pope over them (I mean)
Zed^kiah the son of Chenaanah, ver. 7.
that forward Prophet that made himself horns of iron to push the Syrians to
confusion. Suppose (I say) all those to have decreed that war, and to have
given an Ecclesiastical contribution toward it; was this the Church then, and
had such a Canon bin binding under penalty of a box on the check? No, no, ver.
24.
ye know that one honest Micaiah that dissuaded from the war, was better then
all that rabble so called a Church. And yet Brethren (to drive home this
Reproof) we have amongst us many hundreds of those which do bestir themselves
to the uttermost even for such a Church.

1. One he preaches for it (foolishly or falsely) I am sure confusedly enough.
The Church, the Church, o the Church and the pillars thereof go to the ground,
it is rent and torn on every side, etc. And perhaps the quotient and truth of
all this noy se is, that some Fox is caught in a ginne, some Woolfe or other is
fast in a trap, where they are like to pay for all their old bloudsucking and
woorying.

2. Another (of the faction) complains of strange proceedings, and blesses
himself to hear of such turning of things upside down in the Church. Q. And
what is the cause of all his chattering too? A. Why surely the nest is found,
the nest of Cormorants and Cockatrises, and so all their Eggs are likely to be
blown upon, or bruised to pieces. In a word, strange it is, but too true, that
there are many amongst us, both of the Clergy and Laity, which spare not the
uttermost labors and abilities of their hands, heads, hearts and tongues for
an Anti-church, I had almost said an Antichrist in this Land. Let me say unto
all this Tribe of transgressors as Joash to the men of his City, Judge. 6. v.
31.
Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him let him
be put to death whilst it is yet morning: If he be a god let him plead for
himself, because one has cast down his Altar. So say I, will ye plead for I
dolatrous, unlawful, innovating things, persons and acts? if the faction be
innocent let them plead for themselves, because their Priests, Images and
Altars, with all the rest of their trumpery, is like to be cast into the mire.
Nay, higher yet, let all such sticklers know that they sin directly against
God, 2 Chro. 19.2.
the King, and this truth of God in my Doctrine. For they help the ungodly and
love them that hate the Lord: Isa. 5. v. 23.
Therefore is their wrath upon them from before the Lord. They justify the
wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him:
ver. 24.
therefore as fire devoureth the stubble and the flame consumes the chafe, so
their root shall be rot tennesse, and their blossom shall go up as dust, etc.
In a word, ye opposites are guilty of two great sins in so doing.

1. Heinous and horrible Ingratitude for great and wonderful mercies, and
Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris.

2. Of Jewish and abominable murmurings, instead of thanks ye return
repinings against the Lord, his choice servants and your best friends. My
prayer and wish is this, that the Lord would pardon, that the Law would punish,
and that all good Christians and Loyal Subjects would complain of this rotten
and totering faction.

2. COMFORT.
Let our hearts be toward the governors of our Israel, that offered (and do
offer) themselves willingly among the people, Judge. 5. v. 9.
bless ye the Lord. (i.e.) Let us bless the God of Spirits, for raising the
spirits of all such as have put forth their hands to this plow, yea let us
honor and cherish them as precious and public spirits. Brethren, it is said
of good in general, Quo communius eo melius, by how much the more common, by
so much the better, and therefore a public is the best of spirits, for it is a
common one. Yea, such a soul (me thinks) comes near unto the nature of
Angels, For are they not all ministering spirits, Heb 1. v. 14.
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation? So public
spirits are like them, or like the Sun and Stars those heavenly worlds of
light which do travel chiefly for the use and benefit of others. And
therefore to such persons themselves let me say, Great shall be your reward in
Heaven. Mat. 5. v. 1^.
In earth perhaps you may sometimes meet with cold comforts and bad requitals,
but in Heaven doubtless your public spirits shall procure unto you eminent
places of glory, as our Savior promised to his Disciples for their
self-denial and activity, Mat. 19. v. 28.
ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Two Objections commonly there are with which the men of the world, and our
own timorous infirmities do hit such men in the teeth, Peril and Poverty. I
shall present you with an encouragement and preservative against both. Consider
but the Lords Protection and Providence, over all such public and active
spirits, and for both these in one example, look seriously upon Elijah. That he
was a man very famous for his public active spirit, no man that believes
Scripture can deny it, or if one should, 1 King. 17.18, 19, etc. ver. 1. ver.
3. and 9. ver. 42. Cap. 19. v. 3.
yet the whole History of his life would invincibly prove it. In which observe
briefly.

1. His Travels. From Tishbe to Samaria, from Samaria to the river Cherith,
from Cherith to Sarephath, from Sarephath to Mount Carmell, from Mount Carmell
he runs like a page to Jezreel, from Iezreel to Beersheba, thence a days
journey into the wilderness, hence to Horeb, and from Horeb who knows whither?
For he is sent to annoint Hazael, Iehu, and Elisha: It even tires our eyes to
trace him in the History. In short, (if I may believe my Geographer) all the
travels of this active Prophet were, one thousand thirty and three Dutch miles,
and of our English, four times as many, above four thousand in all.

2. Besides his travels, all on foot (for I read not that he did ^ide.) Note
his courageous and adventurous actions. He had an Ahab and a Jezebel, and about
eight hundred false Prophets to deal withal, and yet observe how wonderfully
the Lord preserves him both from Peril and Poverty.

1. From Peril (I mean) of death: his preservation was manifold, King Ahab did
hunt for him over all the world thereabouts, 1 King. 18.10.
As the Lord lives (says Obadiah) there is no Nation nor Kingdom whether my
Lord has not sent to seek thee, and when they said he is not there, he took
an oath of the Kingdom, etc. but yet the Lord hid him that while, and in the
Kingsowne Dominions afterward he does appear and has but a cold welcome from
Ahab, ver. 17.
Art thou he that troubles Israel? But the Prophet does not abate him an ace
(as we say) and yet comes he off in the end of that Chapter with the death of
eight hundred and fifty false Prophets. Again, besides Ahab he had a Jezebel
also to cope withal, 1 Kin. 19.2.
Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah saying, so let the gods do to me
and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to morrow
about this time. She was a Queen and she vowed his death; but yet she proves
both too weak and forsworn at last, yea her threatening is the intelligence
that preserves the Prophet. In a word, this active man of God lived to see
Ahab slain by the Syrians, the prophets of Baal and of the groves rooted out,
and at last was so far from dying a violent death, that he never properly
dyed at all, but was translated to Heaven alive in a fiery Chariot, and after
his translation, 2 King. 2. 2 Kin. 9.10.
both Iehoram the son of Ahab, with his whole posterity were cut off, and
Jezebel was eaten of Dogs. Fear not therefore o all ye holy and loyal active
spirits, whither Magistrates, Genesis 15.1.
Ministers or private Christians, the Lord himself is your buckler, and your
exceeding great reward; and in his might one aealous Elijah is an over-match
for eight hundred Baalites; speak therefore and do valiantly, not fearing the
faces of men.

Ob. But they may mistake or wrest my words?

An. Brethren, suppose there were now an hundred Bandites with in these walls,
every one with his paper or table-booke, yea and that they stood behind the
pillars out of sight, as that catch-pole Clearke (in the Acts and Monnments)
that took notes behind the Hangings: Suppose all this and much more danger,
yet the Lord can 1. Change their hearts, even in that act, and catch those
catchers (as the Father was caught) 2. At least he can dash their Notes and
confound their languages. 3. Yea and take them off in their own play, as Baals
prophets were twice taken off by Elijah and by Iehus. 1 Kin. 18.4. 2 Kin. 10.25.
Indeed if any man could prove unto me, that Satan and his instruments were too
wise or too hard for God, then I should conceive that there were cause for your
holy public active spirits to be in fear, but so long as we know the quite
contrary to be express Scripture, be we valiant and venturous for the truth.
The Lord has said it, the Lord he has said it, 1 Cor. 10.25.
The foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is
stronger then men. Thus the Lord was Elijahs buckler, and kept him from danger.

2. And from want and Poverty too did God preserve him.

3. Object. When we prosse men to be of public and active spirits, this is
another grand Objection, o it is the way to be undone?

Sol. But mark farther, God was also Elijahs great reward, at least he was a
competent maintenance still unto him.

How likely was he to have starved at the brook Ch^rith? There he had drink
indeed (water) but no meat: therefore the devouring Ravens shall feed him
morning and evening. 1 Kin. 17.3. ver. 4 and 6.
But now that he has recovered meat, lo^, after a while his drink fails him,
ver. 7. ver. 9, 10.
And it came to pass after a while that the brook dried up, etc. Now the Lord
provideth him another Hostess at Zarephath, and she is as unlikely a Cater as
the former, ver. 11, 12, 13.
for she had but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a
Cruse. Yet (see) rather then this precious, realous, v. 13, 14, 15, 16.
public spirit shall want, a miracle shall be wrought, The barrel of meal
shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, etc. So provident is
the Lord for such persons.

Ob. But now miracles do cease?

An. Yet the same providence does still continue, and wonders are wrought for
such persons to this day, do we not see it? Ps. 105. v 17. ver. 18.
Have not some such active spirits of late bin like Joseph (as it were) sold
for servants and exiles, Whose seet they hurt with fetters, they were laid in
irons. But what is the issue? May we not go on? ver. 19.
Until the time came that their cause was known, the Word of the Lord tried
them. ver. 20.
The King sent and delivered them, the Peers and the people let them go free.
And has the Lord done thus in our times already? Then let all holy, loyal,
active, public spirits know this, that he is still the same, and his years
do not fail. What need we any more examples? Psa 37 28.
I conclude this Consolation with those words of the Psalm, The Lord loves
judgment and forsakes not his Saints, they are preserved for ever.

3.
The third, General Exhortation.
last and greatest Use, is a vehement Exhortation, which must be divided into
two parts, the first General, the last Particular.

1. General. Let all real Christians, and loyal Subjects bestirre themselves
to the uttermost, now or never, to imitate these Israelites in my Text and
Chapter. 1. In the Chapter, as before, there is Joshua and the chosen men
(being lawfully thereunto called) fighting with idolatrous and implacable
Amalek in the valley. ver. 9.
2. In the Text and bordering verses, Moses, ver. 10, 11, 12.
Aaron and Hur clime up to the top of the hill to pray, and to encourage the
rest. Thus every one does further the great public work, either by himself
or by others, either immediately and directly, or remotely and by consequence;
and so let us all set our selves against Amalek.

By Amalek] I mean all spiritual and politic, all foreign and domestike,
all open and secret enemies of our God, our Religion, our King, Kingdom, Laws
and Reformation. Lo, here in my Text, are both old and young, high and low; no
age (therefore) no condition (that is able) may be exempted. Exo. 7. v. 7. Exo.
33.11.
For Moses, Aaron and Hur, they were aged men, Moses was fourscore years old,
and Aaron fourscore and three, when they spoke unto Pharaoh. Joshua he was a
young man. Again, Moses was chief Magistrate, Aaron the High Priest (there
are both Nobles and Clergy) and Hur, with Ioshuah and his soldiers, 1 Chro
2.^0.
may not unfitly represent the Commons, the Army, the Artificers, and all. For
Hur was grandfather unto that famous Bezaleel. Thus all estates and ages are
representatively present, and all present are active; learn we therefore this
heart-lesson from the Text.

Quest. But how and what may we do to be active, and to hold up our hands to
purpose against Amalek?

Answ. In this general part of mine Exhortation, I shall prescribe some
general lessons, means or directions, to be observed. If we would further the
great work against Amalek then,

1. Look we back with shame and sorrow upon our former cowardice and
pollutions. Brethren, these Ecclesiastical and Civil Amalekits (the popish
and tyranicall faction) have a long time bin unto the best of us, but as those
ensnaring Midianites to Israel. While Israel abode in Shittim, Number. 25.1, 2, 3
the people began to commit wheredome with the daughters of Moab: which called
the people unto the Sacrifice of their gods, and the people are and bowed down
to their gods. And Israel coupled himself unto Baal-Peor: wherefore the wrath
of the Lord was kindled against Israel. And thereupon command is given, ver.
17, 18.
to vex the Midianites and smite them; for (says Moses) they trouble you with
their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the
matter of Cozbi, etc. We have eaten too much of their broth, and have had our
fingers (many of us) too deep in the pie (as they say) by our connivance,
silence, cowardice, etc. I speak this both to Ministers and people. They have
vexed us with their wiles wherewith they have beguiled us in the matter of

1. Of the Sabbath, by their Antisabbatarian doctrines and commands, and we
have (many of us) yielded too far unto them, both within book and without.
It was the fashion you know of late, to dismoralize the fourth Commandment,
that holy, just and good law, so strongly centered in the very heart of the
Decalogue, and so providently fenced and marked in the forehead with a
Memento, Remember, that law has bin of late repealed by wicked men, and then
Antisabbaturianisme was become a stirrup to preferment. But alas, alas, here
lies our shame and sorrow, we have basely (as it were) held that stirrup to
those men (as that Emperor did to the proud Pope) whilst they have mounted
themselves into the saddle of profaneness. Oh that ever the sincere and
powerful Ministers of the Gospel, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
should so far be led away with the error of the ungodly, that ever (like
Peter, James and Barnabas) they should walk with a limping or crooked foot,
and destroy again the things which they had builded. Well (Brethren) let us 1.
Sit down and pick these thorns out of our consciences. R^v. 16.15.
2. Let us henceforth watch better and keep our garments, lest we walk naked
and men see our shame. 3. Let every one that has bin thus seduced by fear or
flattery, let him ( Sampson like) now revenge himself (in an holy and loyal
way) upon those Midianitish-Amalekitish-Philistines, for his eyes which they
have put out, let him put up one fervent prayer the more, daily against them.
Let him press (if a Minister) one Text, one Sermon, one ^^se, (at least) the
more toward a pure and through reformation. And as the (Roman) history faith
of that Empress. when her husband Domitian was slain, she dealt one blow
amongst the rest, and said, take that for the death of my Paris, (she spoke and
did that most unlawfully, but) let us as we may in a most loyal and Christian
way, give one stabbing prayer, protestation, exhortation the more, against the
wickedness of such ungodly m^n, and say, lo, that for your
Antisabbatarianisme, take this for the fourth Commandment. Brethren, this is
the way to draw good out of evil, and to fetch meat out of the eater. Jud.
14.14.
A word to the wise, half a word to the godly, is sufficient.

2. Vex those Midianites, for their wiles (to contract) in the matter of
Arminianisme, that Troian-horse (as one calls it) I may add, with a Pope in
his belly. Herein lies our guilt, (Brethren) in that we Ministers and people,
have not done our utmost, to bridle and curb this Roman beast, but rather have
suffered our selves to be gagged and mu^l'd against it. We have not bin valiant
for the truth, Je^. 9.3.
for the truth of those precious fundamentalls, of Original sin, free
Election, effectual Vocation, Assurance, etc. but rather have suffered these
truths to fall in the streets, and to be trampled upon by Athiesticall
libertines, and Machivilian apostates, Oh my bowels, my bowels, that ever the
men of God should thus fear the faces of men! Here is more picking work for
us also. That reproof sent to the Church of Pergamus, Rev. 2.13, 14, 15, 16.
may be worth our reading. I have a few things against thee because of the
Doctrine of Baalam, and the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans.

3. Vex these Midianitish Amalekites (in a word) for all their wiles in matter
of Innovation in worship; for their Altars and Images, duckings, dappings and
cringes, against the laws of God and the Kingdom, for their babyes, at best
childish, at worst Midianitish. Concerning these also we have bin too tame and
passive, and such silence (I fear) must needs contract the guilt of consent;
but let us therefore wash our souls, and revenge our selves from these noisome
aspersions.

2. Let us (generally) come over heartily to the right side, Meane^ 2.
and engage our selves unto it.

Quest. The right side (you will say) why, what is that? and who is the wrong
side? will you make factions and divisions amongst us?

Answ. Not make, but discover them I would, who knows not (that has read
Scripture) that there are two gates, and two ways unto them, (the broad, and
the narrow,) and therefore to the worlds end there will be two sides: So there
are now in this Kingdom, a Reforming, and a Deforming party, a just and
gracious Sovereign with this Blessed Parliament (like Moses, Joshuah and the
rest) on the one side; and on the other, there is a multitude of delinquents
and their adherents. The thing that I now press is, that all good Protestants
would come off in their very affections and judgments, from the Tents (that
is, the faction) of those wicked men, and would join themselves with heart,
head and hand, to those Noble Reformers, and to all their well-wishers. That
Dilemma of the Prophet Elijah unto all the people, 1 Kin. 18.21.
concerning the Competition of God and Baal, was a great furthering step
toward the Reformation that follows in that Chap. ver 40.
And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, how long halt ye between two
opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him, etc.
This preface laid the foundation of that following destruction of those false
Prophets. And Elijah said unto them, take the Prophets of Baal, let not one of
them escape: and they took them, and Elijah brought them down to the brook
Kishon, and slew them there. So let every one of us be thoroughly persuaded in
his mind, concerning the absolute necessity of a great and public Reformation
at this time, and resolve we all to further the same to the uttermost.
Brethren, it grieves my soul not a little to see the opinions of men so
divided and differing concerning the great and needful work in hand. Men (nay
good men) are not all methinks of one mind, heart and judgment, concerning
our present perilous condition in Church and State, nor touching the extreme
necessity of a speedy Deliverance, and severe Reformation, and this is no small
let to the work. Reformation amongst us, but ask, 2 Pet. 3. v. 5.
what is there so much amiss in Church and State? To these I answer as Peter
to those scoffers. This they are willingly ignorant of. In a word, either they
do wink and will not see, or else they are guilty and dare not confess what
evils and disorders they do behold. One said to a Bastard when he saw him
casting stones amongst a multitude of people, take heed and forbear least thou
hit thine own father. These men as if they had heard that advice, are afraid
to acknowledge that there are Delinquents, because they are afraid if such a
sort of men should be confessed, their own fathers or friends might be found
amongst them. To come nearer, in a word, they are loath to look into any glass
that does represent the evils of the times, least they should chance therein
to espy their own faces amongst the rest.

2. Another man (yea sort of men) does yield that some things, yea, many are
out of order, both in Church and Common wealth, the more is the pity, but yet
(say they) things are not so bad as some jealous-headed Puritans do pretend
and exclaim, their fear is a great deal more then our harm? To these I
answer, how could it have bin worse with us, unless you would have seen our
actual ruin, desolations and execution? Look upon Israel and Judah, at the
worst (before their Captivities) and compare our condition before the
Parliament with theirs, for the Civil and politic State, in Isa. 59. and for
the Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, in Jer. 2. But what do I confine you to
two Prophets and Chapters? run through all, and see if our late peril were
not equal with their greatest. Were not our very foundations out of course?
The Church, the Civil State, and the Military, are (I conceive) three of the
Cardinal rancks in the Kingdom; Who were the head Officers in all these? and
where are they? May we not say as he in the History, that there were enough to
be slain, to be taken prisoners, and to run away? In short, when our
Religion and Laws too, were by these men almost stolen away under hand, as
David slipped out of his bed, and nothing left but an Idol; 1 Samuel 19.12, 13.
Jud. 18. v. 24.
when they had taken away our God (almost) and our Ministers, and what have we
more? and yet they ask, what aileth us?

3. A third sort do acknowledge that all these complaints are too just and
true, many things are out of order, but yet (say they) we would not have such
violent remedies, such and such physic is too corrosive, and may endanger the
whole politic body, some lenitives, cooling julips and palliations, might do
better: But what if all the while there is a Gangrene with the sore?
^mmedicabile vulnus, etc.
then the very Heathen will tell us what physic is to be used; surely a saw is
the best salve. Again therefore (I say) let every man of us be thoroughly
persuaded in his mind in this point: for the division of judgments concerning
a disease, causes a different speed in prosecution of the cure, every man's
activity for the latter, being proportionable to his conviction of the former.
The good God that makes men to be of one mind in an house, make all men (at
least all his servants, and the Kings good Subjects) of one mind in this point,
touching the greatness of our disease, and the absolute necessity of a speedy,
though sharp remedy. And finally, as for you which are such bitter opposites
to the Puritanicall reforming party, (for so ye are pleased to brand them) I
mean, to Orthodox and Conscientious Protestants, and the Kings best Subjects;
be wise now therefore and learn, he is an infinite God with whom ye have to
do, he has an iron and crushing mace in one hand, as well as a golden scepter
in the other. Besides, ye are over-matched in the side too, for what is the
dross to the silver? what is guilt to innocence? ye are surely in the wrong
box. Remember that Prophetike admonition of Hamans wife and his wise men to
him. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, (...). 6. v. 13.
before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him,
but shall surely fall before him. Be advised therefore and take the counsel
from them, turn Puritans (as you call it) in time, I mean, holy professors of
Protestanisme, and well-wishers to Reformation. That to you. But as for all ye
midling persons which watch to see which will be the harder side (whether the
Reforming or the Deforming) that you may take it, above all others I pity your
condition, for ye are sure to fall which soever of these two sides does stand
upright. And I could wish you for your warning to look upon the reward of
halting Baalam, feign would he have kept in with both sides, with Balak and
with God: his singers did itch for the wages of unrighteousness, and therefore
he would have cursed the people of God, but again the terror of the Lord so
kept him in that he durst not but comply for Israel. But what is the issue?
First Balak sends him away dishonored and empty, Number. 24.11. Number. 31.8.
and then Israel cuts him off. Better therefore is it to be of any side, then
of both or of neither. I conclude this point with the counsel of Gamaliel,
Acts 5 39.
If this work of Reformation be of God (as it is) ye cannot overthr^w it,
least happily ye be found even to fight against God. Then let us all come over
heartily to the right side.

3. Prize and value those degrees of mercy and deliverance which are already
received.

The Lard has done great things for us already whereof we rejoice. Turn our
captivity O Lord as the rivers in the South. Psalm. 1^6.45.
There the Church makes her acknowledgment of, and rejoicing for, past mercies,
to be a step unto, and argument for, future favors. So let us recompt and
value that part of Deliverance that is in hand, if ever we hope to receive that
portion which is behind. But of this I have spoken upon an other occasion.

4. Take, use and improve to the uttermost,

It is not enough to view and value the degrees of salvation received; but we
must also hold fast, employ and improve them. To him that has shall be given,
we know is Scripture: Mat 25.29.
and it is an absolute truth too, he that holds fast that which he has, and
improveth it to profit, shall have more bestowed upon him, that is the proper
scope of the Parable. Brethren, methinks it is worthy our consideration to
observe, how the Lord does as it were drop in Deliverance and Reformation upon
us by degrees. We have bin sunck so deep into disorders and dangers, that the
Lord now in our Restoration does (as it were) diet us for a while (as we use
to deal with men that have bin almost famished by long abstinence) that so we
may the more thoroughly digest our portions of mercies as they are served in
unto us. Or to express this gradation by another comparison. The Lord does
deal with us in this case, as a wise father is wont to deal with his forward
son, when he comes lately from his apprentiship, first he sets him at
liberty, then gives him an Horse, and a few pounds in his purse to try how well
he can husband a little, and if he does prove faithful in that, then he shall
be ruler over much more; Or as a father deals with his prodigal son which
has runne-riot, first he compounds for his debts, and gives him his freedom,
after a while he does employ him, and as he finds his good husbandry, by
degrees he advances him higher: So deals the Lord now with us.
Ecclesiastical and Civil. Next, blossoms, Reformation unto this Isalnd: And
now behold he stands expecting how we will play the good husbands upon these,
and then doubtless we shall see (and that shortly too I hope) far greater
things then these: therefore be faithful in the first fruits, take, use and
improve them.

Ob. Like enough this is wholesome counsel, but show us then what, and which
are those first fruits and degrees which are already bestowed, and are to be
thus taken, used and improved?

Answ. I shall endeavor to set you into the way of this work, that so your
selves may afterward be able to go forward by your selves.

1. The Vow or Trotestation.
Amongst the many and not mean first fruits of Deliverance and Reformation, to
be taken, used and improved, one of the greatest hitherto in mine account is
that Holy and happy Vow and Protestation made and taken in Parliament in May
last, and by that Honorable Court commended to the whole Kingdom. Brethren,
in my judgment that time is much to be remembered by all true Protestants, and
loyal Subjects, and by their posterities after them; at least that act and
example of theirs is of so holy, loyal, just, prudent and needful a
consequence, that I believe no man can choose but long to take it, that is
right to our Religion, our King, our Laws, our Parliament or Liberties: for
all those five generals ( viz. Religion, Sovereignty, Laws, Parliament and
Liberties) are thereby fenced and fortified: What Subject soever therefore
shall dislike that sacred obligation, give me leave to suspect him as a
back-friend to those five Cardinal blessings of this Kingdom, and withal
suffer me (I pray you) to mind us all of the expediency of this duty, for our
particulars. My Brethren, let us not be like that unwise man (spoken of by that
wisest King) in whose hand there was a price (to get wisdom) but he had no
heart to it. Lo here 1. Is a price. 2. To get wisdom. 3. It is in hand.

1. A price. Beloved, we should have thought this offer a price for a year
ago, last May before this when we had another Oath anvil'd out and Canonized,
what a high price would good men then have given to have bin free of that
pressure only? They had not that ambition in their hopes, as to wish for such a
counter-vow as this is (a Vow against unlawful Oaths) and then is not this
Liberty of vowing a great price?

2. And it is to get wisdom too. This Vow doubtless may be one means to make
men wise Protestants and prudent Subjects, it will cast us all upon a more
serious study both of that Religion and of those Laws which we are so sworn to
defend. Thus it is a price to get wisdom.

3. And it is now put into our hand too. We have not only leave and permission
from that supreme Court (that represents us all) but also their president and
approbation. Themselves (say they) have all willingly made this Protestation,
and they cannot but approove it in all such as shall take it. Let us a little
expostulate upon those words, Have all the Members of that Honorable House
taken it so willingly? And shall we yet be dull and backward to the Action? Do
they send down their approbation (of it in us) in print, and can we choose but
approve it also in practice? Oh that ever we should thus requite the Lords
mercy and the Parliaments diligence for our safety I Consider and believe it
Brethren, that until we make more reckoning and use of those Hansell-tastes of
Deliverance and Reformation, there is little likelihood of greater things,
Nisi serves parva perdes ampliora. Mat. 25. v. 2^.
Be thou faithful in a little, and thou shall be Ruler over much. And indeed
this Vow is not a little, whatsoever some malicious or carclesse men may
conceive or pretend. What? Brethren, for us to have both liberty and
opportunity to be made Protestants once again (for we had first our name of
Frotestants from such another Protestation.) What? for us to be made
Protestants of anew and second edition, much corrected and amended: Is not this
a prime privilege?

But because I see that this mercy is generally too much slighted and
neglected (to say no worse) I shall spend a few lines to declare out of
Scripture, both the lawfullnesse and necessity thereof. Let us look upon the
History of the Lords own people during the reigns of their best Kings, and
we shall find that such sacred National Obligations (by Vow, Covenant and
Association) were the chiefest ingredients, if not very foundations, of their
greatest Deliverances and Reformations.

1. For Deliverances, both from wrath and enemies, see but one pair of
examples. The first may be that in the reign of Hezekiah. ^ Chro. 29.
Note the forlorn condition of the state in the beginning of his government,
both for sin and for wrath: for sin, ver. 5, 6, 7.
There was filthiness in the holy place, their fathers had trespassed, done
evil, forsaken God, turned away their faces from his habitation, and turned
their backs, they had shut up the doors, put out the lamps, neither had they
burnt incense, nor offered offerings, ver. 8, 9.
etc. For which it is said, God had delivered them to trouble (or commotion) to
astonishment and to hissing, their fathers had fallen by the Sword, their
sons, daughters and wives were in captivity, etc. And now what salve, what
plaster can be sufficient for such a festred fore as this? surely, no less
nor more then a solemn association, Now it is in mine heart to make a Covenant
with the Lord God of Israel, ver. 10, 11.
that his fierce wrath may turn away from us, etc. Another proof and
president see in King Iosiahs time. Never I think lay there more guilt upon
that Land at once, then when that poor child of eight years old came to the
Crown. 2 Chro. 33.
See how much wrath had bin treasured up, ver. 1, 2, 3, etc. to 11. ver. 22, 23.
first by his Grandfather Manasseh; and though Manasseh afterward reformed
some things, yet secondly, King Amon his son (and Iosiahs father) he renews
the old wrath and wickedness, and adds to them, neither humbles he
himself. And now what can this poor child King do, finding his Crown and
Kingdom charged with so much hereditary guilt and wrath? Lo, thus he does, he
destroys Idolatry, 2 Chro 34. ver. 3, 4, etc. ver. 8, etc. ver, 29, 30, etc,
he repaireth the Temple, and finally he betakes himself to a Covenant and
Association. Hereby we learn a means to turn away (at least for our own time)
wrath, great and hereditary wrath from a Kingdom; yea, wrath deserved by
Grandfathers, by Fathers, by Children, by Princes and by People; namely, such
a sacred Obligation, as is now offered unto us.

2. Another benefit of Jewish covenanting, was, in respect of their
Reformations, it was the cornerstone, if not the very foundation, of the
purest purgings that ever were made amongst that people. See here another pair
of examples. First, in the reign of young King Iehoash, there good and loyal
Iehojada (being as it were Protector to that young child of six years old)
does deliver the King from Athaliuh and her faction, 1 King. 1^.
and draws up a Covenant by oath, which like our Protestation is tripartite,
that is, consisting of three parts. First, ver 4.
betwixt the People and the King, which answers to that part of ours, To defend
His Majesty's royal person, honor and estate. Next, between the King and the
People, as it were for the power and privileges of Parliament, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and lastly, between them both and the
Lord, which answers to our Vow, ver. 17.
To maintain and defend the true reformed Protestant Religion, etc. But how
did all this further the Reformation? See the very next verse. ver. 18.
And all the people of the Land went into the house of Baal and brake it down,
his Altars and his Images brake they in pieces thoroughly, and slew Ma^tan the
Priest of Baal before the Altars, and the Priest appointed Officers over the
house of the Lord. ver. 20, etc. 2 Chro. 15.
Hereupon follows an universal joy and quiet. Another example is in Asa's
reign. Sad had bin the case of Israel for a long time both in Church and
State. In Church, ver. 3.
because for a long season they had been without the true God, and without a
teaching Priest (perhaps they had many fair Churchmen, good Readers) and
without Law. In State, ver. 5, 6.
there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great
vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the country, etc. What now may King
Asa and Judah do, to prevent the like again? ve. 12.13.14.
They entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all
their heart and with all their soul, And this they bind with an Oath and upon
pain of death. The issue and effect in Reformation follows, ver. 16. ver. 19.
the Queene-Mother is remooved for her Idolatry, the house of God is enriched,
and there is peace in the Kingdom. But this peace is but for a time neither,
until the five and thirtieth year of that Kings reign; ver. 17.
because the high places were not taken away out of Israel. More places and
patterns might be added, but (me thinks) these should be enough to kindle in
every holy, loyal, true Protestant English breast, an unquenchable desire
after this Vow and Association. Beloved, if my young judgment may guess, this
thing may prove a stronger Rampire and Defense to our Religion, King, Laws
and Liberties, then all those four Seas which do mote in this Island. I would
conclude the point with some part of two or three verses out of Ezra, We have
trespassed against our God, Ezra. 10. v. 2.
yet now there is hope in England concerning this thing. Now therefore let us
make a Covenant with our God, ver. 3.
according to the counsel of (the) Lords, and of those that tremble at the
Commandment of our God, and let it be done according to the law. ver. 4.
Arise, for this matter belongs unto Spoken to the Mayor of the City being
then present.
Thee, we also will be with thee, be of good courage and do it.

If any man pretend scruples and objections against the Vow, first, let me ask
him, whether or no he did scruple (the last year) at the Canonical Oath?
Next, whither he be a sound Protestant and a good Subject? and those questions
(I think) if duly considered, may be sufficient answers to all scruples. I
have bin too long upon this Hansell of Deliverance, because the thing is so
much neglected.

2. Hansell of Deliverance and first fruit of Reformation for our trial, use
and improovement may be,

That Order for the due observing of the Sabbath, according to the Laws of
this Kingdom. Like enough that many persons present have scarcely ever heard
of such an Order from the House, but an Order there is, and that visible in
print. We had once a Declaration touching sports and liberties upon that day,
and another enjoining silence to Ministers in the Arminian Tenants; and these
Orders and Declarations, o how soon were they dispersed? how vehemently were
they pressed by many, which are now as slow and backward to take notice of this
Order?

Brethren, we have a generation which are deaf in this ear, and blind in this
eye. Things that press to strictnes and exact walking are obscure to them,
though coming from a Parliament. The Lord open our eyes more and more, that we
may see even by these things, who are the chief fosterers, yea, the Garrisons
of profaneness in this Island. Yet such an Order (I say) there is both clear
and visible; but suppose it were but somewhat ordinary? Have we not a fourth
Commandment for this duty only, and is not that keen enough to sharpen even
an ordinary intimation from that High-Court? Let us therefore take, use and
improove this Hansell-mercy, this fore-taste of Reformation to the uttermost.
The Lord seems to prove by this short and fore-running order, how well we will
husband an opportunity of Reformation, how faithful we will be in a little,
that so he may take occasion upon our diligence herein, to give us greater
blessings.

3. Let us take, use and improve lawfully all the Degrees of our lawful
Liberty, as they are bestowed upon us by authority, Gal. 5. v. 1.
Let us stand fast in that liberty, wherewith Christ (by the King and
Parliament) does make us more and more free, and be not (We) entangled again
with the yoke of bondage. There is a twofold burden in this case, and
consequently a double Liberty to be lawfully taken and used.

1. One sort of burden is Civil or Politic, as illegal taxes or impositions
upon our bodies or estates. It was freedom from this that Saint Paul claims
of the Centurian when they would have examined him by scourging. Act. 22.^5.
Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman and uncondemned?

2. Other burdens are Ecclesiastical and spiritual, as all unjust pressures
and bonds upon the consciences of men, whither Ministers or people; such are
forbidden by Saint Peter, Now therefore why tempt ye God, Act. 15.10.
to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither our fathers nor
we were able to bear? Concerning both these sorts of yoaks, I say, that when
authority shall break them (because they were unfit or unlawful) then we
should all speedily shake them off from our necks; this doubtless is a thing
very well pleasing to God, and may further our Deliverance and Reformation.
Have you not sometimes observed a dull Horse at a door, there it stands, weary
and hungry, as though it were fast tied, when as all the while the bridle is
either off from it is head, or else loose from the post? Or have you never seen
an idiot sit whining in the stocks, as a man imprisoned, when all the while
there has bin no bar, nor lock upon his leg, but he might (had he so much
wit) arise and go his way? Brethren, I would not have any reasonable men thus
unreasonably dull and tame, but that when Law and authority shall bid them go
free, they should take, use and enjoy that freedom. The observation of this
lesson is not only a fit expression of our thankfulness to the Lord, and to
that authority that has so freed us; but it is also a good means to put us
into firm and actual possession of our new lawful liberty. If a man's
conveyances for a purchase of land be never so good and substantial, yet
neglect of taking speedy possession may endanger his good estate. Observe we
therefore very diligently when any unlawful fetters are struck off from our
necks and consciences by Parliament, and let us speedily (with Sampson) shake
our selves, and hold fast that which we have received.

5. General means (and a chief branch of activity) is Information. To
inform, complain, and testify against all Offensive things and persons,
grievers and grievances to the utmost of our knowledge and abilities. When the
waters of the poole of Bethesda, Joh. 5.4.
were stirred by an Angel, then was the time for all grieved persons to step
in and get cure of whatsoever disease they had; so now is the Blessed time when
there is a fountain opened in this Land against all spiritual wickednesses and
politic disorders. Act. 19.12.
The Bath is free and full, it is but come, nay, but send thy paper, as they did
their handkerchiefes to Saint Paul, and by the Lords blessing the evil spirits
shall be cast out and the diseases will depart. Let us not therefore lose so
great and cheap an opportunity.

Ob I know it is much objected by some, that it is no wisdom nor good manners,
for any one to come to a Council before he is called, and that all we of the
meaner sort must leave both things and persons to the judgment and censure of
that supreme Court of the Kingdom?

Answ. 1. True, we must not sit in the Council unless we are chosen
thereunto, but yet we may wait upon the Counselors with our submissive
Informations and Petitions. This themselves do both allow and expect at our
hands.

2. So also (we) which are inferior persons, must leave suspected things and
persons to the censure of the Houses; true, but yet I hope we may, nay I know
we must bring such Grievances thither, and there leave and lay them down (being
proved) at the feet of Justice. If any man shall be against this lawful
privilege and loyal duty of every good Subject, I shall suspect him for a
Delinquent, and shall conclude him as a secret underminer of Reformation and
the weale-publike.

Nay, my meaning is, that we must complain not only of those Grievances in
which our selves have felt a share; but I do press my self and you all, to
seek out, and gather up those things which do publicly offend, and to weed
the common field. Brethren, this is a duty generally neglected, and therefore it
is necessary, that all godly active spirits should look after it. When shall
we see an husbandman grubb up briars, or gather stones out of a field that lies
in Common to a whole Parish? No, but we say, every man's business is no bodies
business: Extremely needful it is therefore that some choice Angelical
spirits, whose hearts the Lord has touched, should put to it, and become
ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14.
as sent forth to minister for the good of the public.

Ob. But would not such stirring be accounted pragmaticall? Shall we not be
called busy bodies?

Answ. Yes, by Atheists, Papists and Delinquents; but with good men or
reasonable, it must needs be acknowledged necessary. Let us look either upon
the condition of diverse places and persons which do suffer such Grievances, or
else upon the nature of that great Court to which the complaint is to be made
and in both respects we shall see diverse reasons for this duty of stirring for
the public.

1. In respect of the nature of that Court, to which complaints are to be
preferred. For 1. They cannot see all that is amiss every where, because
themselves are not of all places distributively, though they are
representatively every Subject, and sometimes A stander-by (we say) may see
more then he that plays. 2. Besides, Experience is the best Informer of
Grievances, Plus videur oculi, quam ocul^s.
and who has more woeful experience this way then the mean and poor which
pay for all? There are some Cob-webb oppressions in a Kingdom which the
greater Flies do with ease break through, not taking notice that they were
snares, but the poor lesser flies are held in them fast enough; and therefore
the cry of these little ones may inform of a great oppression. Besides, in
bodily cures, we know that a plain and illiterate man, being the patient in a
disease, may give more light to the Physician toward the cure by his relation,
then all his learned books and long study may afford; for that Patient can tell
him, how, when, and where the distemper did take and hold him: So is it in
politic diseases, a plain man that has felt Greevances can better speak of
them then a greater person or Scholar, that kenns them but by reading or
hearsay. 3. It is not the proper office of that Court to be Informers,
because they are Judges; and therefore my self have heard some of their
members wi^h that the Country would do that office, to take off from them the
aspersion of pragmaticall. It Is needful therefore and reasonable, that we
inferiors do inform, in respect of the Court that is to judge.

2. In respect of many that suffer, it is expedient that other active men should
complain in their behalves. For first; many places (as well as persons) do
want skill and abilities to help themselves, they cannot tell their own tale
(as we say) and therefore it is charity to them, as well as duty to the State,
to be feet to the lame, and a mouth unto the dumb. But by the way, I should
advise all such to follow the example of Paul's sisters son, Act. 23. v. 18.
he was a young man, and therefore (like enough) somewhat bashful, and unable
to express himself to a great man, and therefore first he goes to his Uncle
Paul, ver. 16.
and from him is sent by a Centurian to the chief Captain: so let them
inform such as may inform, or at least, as may lead them or their suit, to
some one of the chief Captains. 2. Others are fearful and faint-hearted,
and so durst not complain, they are perhaps threatened and overawed by some
tyrannous Landlord, or insolent though scandalous Parson, Vicar, perhaps
Curate: and therefore as courageous Abishai rescued fainting David from
Ishbi-benob the Giant, 2 Samuel 21. v. 15, 16, 17.
who thought to have slain him; so ought it to be done in this case, when some
(perhaps good) men's hearts do fail them in the contestation and pursuit, then
every valiant and active Abishai should arise to the help of the Lord against
the mighty. 3. Finally, Judge. 5.23.
others are unwilling to go for redress, nay (which is lamentable) they
think themselves happy in their spiritual miseries, and delight in their
grievances. Jer 5.30, 31.
A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, (says God) the
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Quest. What will we do in the end?

Answ. Surely, the end is like to be extremely miserable, therefore Brethren,
let us now in due time deliver such poor souls against their wills, Jud. v.
23.
let us pull them violently out of the fire in which they delight to lie and be
consumed: therefore Informations to the Parliament, and that in the behalf of
others is now very needful and most reasonable.

Ob. But whereof, and how shall we complain and inform?

Ans. Matters to be complained of and informed against, are all grievers and
grievances, persons and things, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, in Church and
Commonwealth.

1. Ecclesiastical Persons.
These Brethren (as I conceive) are the very fountains or fuel of all other
grievances amongst us. Mat. 24. v. 15, 16.
When the abomination of desolation stands in the holy place (I do but
allude) then it is time for them which be in Judea, to flee into the mountains.
Spiritual wickednesses do usher in Civil disturbances. 2 Chro. 15 3.
For a long season Israel had bin without the true God, and without a teaching
Priest, and without Law. Mark the method, In the middle is the mischief. In
medio vitium.
Without a teaching Priest, no marvel then that they did neither fear God,
nor reverence man. It follows, ver. 5, 6.
And in those times there was no peace to him that went out nor to him that
came in, and still the cause is the same, they had either no Priests, or none
but Readers. Every politic body may be considered as consisting of three
parts. First, there is in it (or rather over it) the head, that is, the King as
supreme, and the under head officers as sent of him. Next, there is the trunck
or Lay-part, these are the Civil State. And lastly the Clergy or Ministry (the
part Ecclesiastical) and these should be as the soul to all the rest. When
this soul is sound and holy, it does quicken and sanctify; when it is sickly
and corrupt, it does help to infect and destroy the whole structure: therefore
these men ought primely to be looked after and to be rectified.

Ob. But which of these Clergy are those sickly and corrupting souls, and how
may we know them?

Ans. Alas, they are too many, and too visible, take a catalogue of some chief
sorts of them breefely.

1. Imprimis] All Pestilent and Persecuting Churchmen; such as imitate that
little Pope Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah, 1 Kin. 22. ver. 11, and 24. Act.
23 1, 2.
which would have pusht down a whole Kingdom with his horns, and smote
honest Micaiah on the cheek, for speaking against his war; Or like the high
Priest Ananias who commanded that Paul's mouth should be stopped with a fist,
because he professed his good Conscience. Or to come lower, Mat. 23.13.
Churchmen like those Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, which did shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, and would neither go in themselves, nor suffer
them which were entering to go in. It seems, the men would neither preach as
they ought themselves, nor yet suffer their people to go abroad to hear. Let
such be marked out for just complaint and punishment amongst the first, even
all our illegal suppressors of Preachers and hearers.

2. All Superstitious and Innovating Churchmen, the illegal, carving,
painting, cringing, ceremonious Clergy. This sort is often condemned by our
Savior, Mat. 15 3, 8, 9.
Why do you also transgress the commandment of God by your traditions? This
people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, but their heart is far from me.
Again, In vain do they worship, teaching for doctrine the precepts of men.
These masters of the complement Ecclesiastical are little better then pandars
to the scarlet Whore, and therefore ought to stand in capital crimson letters
in our complaints.

3. What think we of our Insufficient and Lasie Clergy; birds that cannot
sing, or will not? The former (that cannot) may say literally, Amos 7.14.
that which is spoken by Amos concerning himself, We are no Prophets, neither
are we Prophets sons, but heard-men, and gatherers of wild figgs. Doubtless
many of these are more fit to be heard-men, yea horsemen, and literal
Shepherds, then Pastors by a Metaphor. Brethren, I am ashamed for my
Coats-sake (as they say) to rake in this puddle; but that I remember that it is
made the ground of Levies blessing, that he said unto his father, Deuteronomy. 33.8, 9.
and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children in the case of the Lord. The latter sort
(our Lasie drones) are described to the life, and threatened to the death by
Ezekiel, see Chap. 34. beginning at the second. The punishment there appointed
for them is their utter removal.

4. Finally, Look seriously upon the scandalous and Debauched Churchmen;
Mica. 2.11.
men which prophesy of wine and strong drink, yea which take off these liquors
so freely, that they usually do err through wine, Isa. 28.7.
and through strong drink are out of the way. Brethren, as these drunken and
inordinate Clergy are one of the worst, Vitium hominu^ non temporum.
so are they absolutely the most obnoxious sort of all: and therefore, if these
be now suffered, it will be the fault of such as know them, not of the time
that bears them. Thus have ye had too long (and yet too short) a list, of the
sorts of Ecclesiastical grievers now complaineable.

But now where is that jealous Elijah, or that downright Micaiah, that will or
does encounter these Baalites? yea, how coldly do we all generally show our
selves in the quarrel? Alas Brethren, let it shame and confound us all, to
remember that we had once an opportunity for this great work. It is not long
since that this present Blessed Parliament did send forth an happy order to
this purpose, upon which every Parish might have certified touching scandalous
Innovating, and other peccant Ministers; the Parliament it self (as it were)
went in Circuit through the Kingdom, Justice, supreme Justice came home to our
very doors, Deuteronomy. 30.11.
so that we could not pretend, that the Commandment was far from us, no, the
opportunity did even fall into our mouths.

Quest. But then what was the issue, and how did we improve that advantage?

Answ. Surely, some were warm in bed, other some had farms and Oxen, Luke 11.
v 7. Mat. 22.5.
and they could not meet. Others ('it is to be feared) were present to plead
for Baal, for too many Clergy scandalous in life, superstitious in worship,
erroneous in judgment, and pestilent of spirit; in a word, unable, unfit,
unworthy. These gangrens and pests of the Church had but too many friends in
every quarter, concealing friends in the Parishes where they lived, and
interceding friends at the places where they were complained. Yeomen, Officers,
Gentry, Magistrates and all, (I mean, too many of each sort) were too too
ready, for kindred, fear, flattery and charity mistaken, to return almost an
universal, Omnia been, all is well. And thus thousands of poor souls are
betrayed, (what lies in these men) to incurable ignorance and perdition. Oh my
bowels, my bowels! When I consider how that divine opportunity was generally
slighted and abused. And now behold the blood of those poor ignorant
ecclipsed Parishes which heretofore did cry for vengeance upon their own guilty
Ministers only, does now roar louder against those late entrusted Yeomen,
Officers, Gentry and Magistrates (what ever they were that neglected that
golden season) and so we have more soule-murtherers (accidentally) since that
order, 2 King 20. ver. 35, 36. ver. 42.
then were before. Let those neglectors see that Parable against Ahab, for
sparing of Beahadad, and the application thereof, Because thou have let go out
of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to utter destruction; therefore thy life
shall go for his life, 1 King 22.31.
and thy people for his people: which afterward fell out accordingly. The King
of Syria commanded saying, Fight neither with small nor great save only with
the King of Israel. And it will be but just if those guilty Ministers so
unjustly favored by such, do prove, the souleslaughtermen to them or theirs
in after times. Consider we this late gross omission, (Brethren) to humble our
souls mightily for the same, 'twas a deep, yea, a spiritual wickedness. But
now suppose the great good Lord, should in much patience try us once more
shortly in this point, and should vouchsafe us one opportunity more by this
Parliaament? shall we play the Cowards a second time, and do again as
formerly? God forbid. No Brethren, let us fill our souls with holy resolutions
to do the work of the Lord with all our might, to set our faces, tongues,
heads, hearts, hands, bodies, souls, and all unto it, to farther the
information and testimonies against all spiritual murderers, which slay poor
souls by whole Parish-fuls. Remember this lesson above all the rest.

So much concerning Ecclesiastical Grievers, persons.

2. Things, Grievances Ecclesiastical.

And here are diverse particulars to be looked after, in all which we may be
grieved.

1. In Doctrine.] Sound doctrine is more precious then our blood; but there are
those of the Clergy which have endeavored to corrupt this. The very Articles
of our Church are oppugned, as of Original sin, Free Will, the 4^
Commandment, and diverse others are oppugned and impaired by the Arminians.
Let him that is wise consider these things. Brethren, to poison a public
spring is capital by Law, how much more in spirituals? Gal. 1. v. 8.
If we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

2. Pure Worship is as dear as life: Deuteronomy. 13. v. 6.
And therefore see the punishment of whosoever shall attempt to draw aside from
it. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son or thy daughter, or
the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice thee
secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou have not known,
thou, nor thy fathers: thou shall not consent unto him; ver. 8.
nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him neither shall thou
spare, neither shall thou conceal him; but thou shall surely kill him, ver. 9.
thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death. But even this (it
seems) bath been attempted by some amongst us, else what means those
approachers and approaches toward Idolatry already condemned and still
condemning in Parliament?

3. 2 Timothy 3. v. 5.
There is a power of godliness in practice, and whosoever shall cunningly
attempt to suck or soake out that, is a deep offender, and to be avoided. But
such also we had, and still have them, men that hate strictness and spiritual
heat, and would convay away our spiritual protestanisme, 1 Samuel 19.12, 13.
putting (as Michal did for David) a mere Image of formality in the place. If
it be death and treason to clip or to wash the Kings Coin, then what shall be
done bad enough to these wicked spiritual Alchymists? So much concerning
Ecclesiastical grievers and grievances.

2. I must and will now be very brief concerning the Civil or Politic.

Brethren, I am a Divine, and not a Statesman; these latter therefore are out
of sphere, I shall leave the men to justice, and the point to your own
disquisition and prosecution, concluding with the latter words of that Levite:
Consider of it, Judge. 19. v. 30.
take advice, and speak your minds. So much touching the fifth means,
Information.

6 Prayer and Praises. Though they are included under one head, yet I shall
handle them as two distinct branches; beginning with the latter.

1. Praises.
This duty is commanded in such times of Deliverance and Reformation. Psalm. 58.
v. 14. ver. 15.
Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high. I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Therefore the Lord does now look for
great Praises and glory from us.

Quest. But how may I thus glorify him? what must I do to Praise him aright?

Answ. 1. There is praising with the mouth, in words; and this is either
speaking of praise (1.) to God. Heb. 13. v. 15.
Let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually. It may be done in
singing, prayer, meditation, and other duties to him. (2.) Or by speaking
praises of God. Psalm 145. v. 5.
I will speak of the glorious honor of thy Majesty, etc. This is done (1.)
when we study to lay open the frame, mystery, and parts of Deliverance. The
works of the Lord are great, Psalm. 111. v. 2.
sought out of all them that have pleasure in them. (2.) When we labor to
entayle the remembrance of mercies upon our posterities. Psalm. 79. v. 13.
So we thy people will give thee thanks for ever, we will show forth thy praise
to all generations.

2. There is praising with, by, or in a man's life. Psalm. 50. v 23.
Whosoever offers praise glorifieth me, and to him that orders his
conversation aright, they are joined together. And again, ver. 16.
(speaking of praising) unto the wicked, God says, what have thou to do to
declare my statutes, Psalm. 119. v. 7.
or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? And again, I will
praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy righteous
judgments. Let us therefore live praises to the Lord, Mat. 5. v. 16.
let us show the light of our holy conversation before men, that our heavenly
Father may have glory.

3. There is a praising of God with the hand, ^sal. 50. v. 23. Prove. 3. v. 9.
or with the substance, to praise the Lord is to honor him, and we may honor
the Lord with our Substance. This is a touchstone to try the truth of our
thankfulness indeed. When a man is truly thankful for a courtesy received, he
is ready really to show his gratitude by his liberality to all those that are
under him, or about him. Now let us show that we prize our mercies received, by
our readiness to do any thing, to part with any thing to our inferiors, to
good uses, at Gods command. True thankful men are always bountiful. Luk 19.
v. 8, 9.
When salvation came into the house of Zacheus, presently he gives half of his
goods to the poor. And that act or statute amongst the Jews of sending
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor, Est. 9. v. 21, 22.
upon a time of Deliverance, is now seasonable for our imitation.

4. Finally, there is a praising of the Lord with the heart, yea with the whole
heart, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 138. v. 1.
I speak now of a spiritual and gracious heartiness^, that the consideration
of Gods mercy ought to raise our spirits, and quicken all the graces in our
hearts (as it is said of Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 17.6.
that his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord) I mean, the sense of
fresh deliverance should strengthen our faith to trust to the Lord more
perfectly, it should enlarge our love to cleave unto him more affectionately,
it should kindle our zeal to stand for him more courageously, and so in all
the rest of our graces. This of all sort of praises is the highest.

2. Another Branch are Prayers.
The use of this duty is commanded, and the nature, parts, and qualifications
prescribed, in one and the same Text, by Saint Paul to his son Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings and for all
that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. I need to go no further then those two verses for the
foundation or limits of my discourse in the present point: Let us therefore
fully discuss the words. In them we may observe these three generals:

1. The several sorts of prayers which are to be made, and those are four,
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks.

2. The persons for whom all those prayers must be put up. Generally all men
(i.e.) all ranks indefinitely: More specially, for Kings, etc.

3. The scope, drift, and end of our prayers for them; it must be peace and
quietness, but with two qualifications; the first Spiritual Godliness; the
other Moral Honesty.

As for the middlemost of three heads ( viz. the persons especially to be
prayed for) they are the Supreme Majesty, and the houses of Parliament, and
it is most evident. I shall insist upon the other two, the first and the last,
viz.

1. The sorts of prayers to be made for them. (1.) Supplications. (2.) Prayers.
(3.) Intercessions, and (4.) giving of Thanks.

It Is generally agreed by all good Subjects, that the King and High Court ought
to be prayed for, and many do fumble about the duty; give me leave to set my
self and you in a right way, it is this, says Saint Paul, we must make for
them.

1. Supplications.
Deprecations] is the proper English word. To deprecate (in their behalf) is
to pray off from them all evils of sin or punishment, feared or felt, whether
in souls, bodies, or estates: It Is a Defensive Prayer, to pray them safe and
sound from all dangers. To give an instance or two in Scripture. First, to pray
for the removal of all bad Counselors. Take away the wicked from before the
King, Prove. 25. v. 5.
and his Throne shall be established in righteousness. Next, for Security and
safeguard from plots and enemies. Psalm. 61. v. 6, 7.
Thou will prolong the Kings life, and his years as many generations: O
prepare mercy and truth which may preserve him. Thus we must Deprecate all
evil from King and Parliament.

2. Prayers.
Which most general name is used, because it does signify the largest Branch
of all, namely, Petition. We must beg for them all gifts, graces, and mercies,
not only in truth but in the highest degree; especially for governing gifts
and graces, in the most superlative measure. As Wisdom and Judgment is one:
So in Salomons prayer at Gibeon. And now O Lord my God, 1 King 3. v. 7. ver. 8.
thou have made thy servant King, etc. And now, thy servant is in the midst of
thy people which thou have chosen, a great people, etc. Give therefore thy
servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, ver. 9.
that I may discern between good and bad. Next, the Fear and dread of the
Lord. Moreover, Exodus 18. v. 21. 2 Chr. 19. v. 6.
thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, etc. And
he said to the Judges, take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man but for
the Lord. ver. 7.
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it.
Again, The spirit of Courage and Zeal (says Jehosaphat) Deal courageously,
ver. 11.
and the Lord shall be with the good.

3 Intercessions.
We must not only deprecate all evil from them, and petition for all good
things upon them; but also we must (postulare) intercede, plead, wrestle, and
strive with God in prayer, as is said in another case: Romans 15. v. 30.
For the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, we should
strive together with them in our prayers to God for them, ver. 31.
that they may be delivered from them that do not believe, and that their
service which they have for [England] may be accepted of the Saints. In great
and extraordinary times of hope and danger the Lord will not be moved with few
and ordinary prayers. Genesis 32 v. 6. ver 7.
See Jacobs perilous condition in his return from his Uncle Laban, he is
told that his twice offended brother Esau comes against him with four
hundred men, then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed But how does he wind
out of this trouble? Lo, an ordinary striving is not enough. ver. 24. ver. 25.
At Peniel Jacob was left alone. And there wrestled a man with him until the
breaking of the day, and he touched the hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of
Jacobs thigh was out of joint, ver. 28.
and he wrestled with him. Then said God, as a Prince have thou power with God,
and with men, and have prevailed. It cost him an ache, yea, an halting to
prevail with God in such a grand extremity. Diffi^ilia quae pul^^ra.
Good things are difficult. Once more, see what labor it cost Elijah and his
servant to obtain rain for Israel, 1 Kin. 18. v. 42.
after three years drought in the land. And Elijah went up to the top of
Carmel, and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his
knees. What a painful grovelling posture was that? ver. 43.
And he said to his servant, go up now, look toward the Sea, and he went up
and looked, and said, there is nothing. And he said, go again seven times,
and it came to pass at the severth time, that he said, Behold, there arises a
little cloud out of the Sea, ver. 44.
like a man's hand, etc. Thus, Brethren it has been a long time of drought with
us, many of our clouds in Church and state, though they have hid the face of
our Sun from us, yet have proved to the land but as clouds without water, Jud
v. 12.
carried about with diverse ^in^s, so that we have wanted both the former and
the latter rain in their seasons. Now what means are to be us^d that the Lord
may be moved to send a gracious rain upon this his Inheritance, Psalm. 68. v. 9.
and to refresh it now it is weary? Look upon this zealous Elijah, get we all
up to our clos^ts, and there cast down our selves upon the earth, with our
f^ees to our feet. Yea, let us thus go up seven times, (...) seven times a
day, and perhaps even our pray (...) at (...) may raise that cloud, whose drops
may refresh and make glad the City of God. Thus there must be (1.)
Supplications (2.) Prayers (3.) Intercessions, made for Kings, etc. but we must
add,

4. Thanksgivings too.
These are a means to water all the former three branches, and to cause them
to grow and speed the better. The Lord takes praises for an honor. Whosoever
offers me thanks and praise he honors me, Psalm. 50 (...) 1 ^^m. 2 v. 30.
and those that honor him he will honor them again. But I have spoken of
this particular before.

So much concerning the sorts of Prayer.

2. The scope (and matter both) to be contained in those prayers of ours for
them, viz.

1. Godliness with Quietness. Bonum spirituale, etc. 2. Honesty in Peace.
Bonum Politicum and Civil.
1. Bonum spirituale and Ecclesiasticum] Quietness with Godliness. Follow
peace with all men and Holiness, Heb. 12. v. 14.
without which no man shall see the Lord. We must so follow peace as we may
keep our selves in sight (and within the limits) of holiness, but no farther;
and sofarre we must follow it in the first place. This must stand in the front
of our prayers. Pray for Kings first, etc. that they may be instruments of
spiritual good unto us. Religion is the very soul of our souls, that one
thing absolutely necessary, and therefore the promotion and promoters of this,
do both need and deserve the prime of our supplications.

And in the next place, Honesty (i.) public, private, politic, moral
honesty is to be remembered and furthered by our fervent and sensible petitions.
The sword of Civil justice does guard our Religion, as that flaming sword did
keep the Tree of life in Paradise. Genesis 3 v. 24.
And he placed at the East of the garden of Eden, Cherubins, and a flaming
sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life. This office
of the Parliamentary Cherubins must (in the second place) be promoted by our
prayers.

So much touching General Lessons and Directions.

But by this time me thinks I see and hear diverse particular ranks of people
flocking to me, and enquiring of me, Luke 3. v. 10. ve^. 12.14.
as the People, the Publicanes, and the Soldiers did of John Baptist, what
shall we do? that is, what special Lessons can you give us? what distinct
taskes can you set us, that so each person may be (holily and loyally) active,
for the furtherance of the great good work in these times of public hope and
hazard?

Brethren, I shall endeavor (as the Baptist did) to give every one his
portion, and that stream of exhortation which hitherto I have carried in a
common and general Channel, I shall now sluice out into diverse lesser and
particular rivelets, that so all ranks of persons may be watered and made
fruitful. And,

1. Let me have leave to speak to Magistrates.
I beseech all those which are in authority and office, to hear me a few words
patiently. I would not presume to teach or prescribe any thing in your spheres
above mine own; neither do I peremptorily tax you of any special default or
transgression, My full purpose and desire is, so to carry my self in this
Exhortation to you, as young Timothy is licensed by Saint Paul to carry
himself toward those Brethren. 1 Timothy 4.6.
If thou put the Brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good
Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of Faith and of good
Doctrine. So there is something of which to put you in remembrance I conceive
it my duty: The sum in short is this, That all Magistrates and Officers in
this place (and elsewhere) wauld be pleased to Countenance. Promote, and Second
all Parliamentary Edicts and proceedings. Brethren, ye are unto the Common
people at this time, ^n respect of the Parliament, as those spies sent to
Canaan were to the Congregation of Israel; your relations and speeches may
bring up either an evil or a good report, upon that great Council and their
proceedings. (...) 14 2. 6, 7, 8, 9.
You know how some of the spies did cause a murmuring against Moses and Aaron,
whereas Caleb and ^oshuah (because they had another Spirit, and followed the
Lord fully) did endeavor to appease and satisfy them, and for this
faithfulness they had a great reward. (...) 2.
In this Exhortation I do not accuse you of negligence, but rather do commend
all your former diligence herein. Qui monet ut sacias, etc.
He that exhorts to a duty done already, his exhortation is no less then a
commendation. And this I add, that ye cannot (lightly) be too zealous in this
point. O what a goodly sight is it Brethren, when the Mountains do bring
peace, and the little hills righteousness unto the people? Ps. 7 2.3.
The words are found in the old translation, the hymn is entitled [A Psalm
for Solomon.] That is, when David (the sweet singer of Israel) had resigned his
Kingdom to his son Solomon, and was going out of the world, then (Swanlike)
he warbled forth that Prophesy of Christ, and direction of Solomon for
government. Oh that all our Governors would thus obey it. Now the Mountains
above, (those supreme highest Mountains) are bringing forth peace to the
people, what a blessed sight would it be now to see (the little hills) the
subordinate hillocks of authority in every County, City, Parish to bear their
several extraordinary crops of Righteousness also? Am. 5.24.
To see judgment run down as water, and righteousness as a mighty stream?
Nay, Ps. 133 2.
to see it run down like Aarons ointment, which being powered on the head,
ran down upon the beard, and from thence to the very skirts of his garment?
But remember I said, 1. Countenance. 2. Promote. 3. And Second.

I shall speak a word severally of each for your more clear and full
information.

1. Countenance all Parliamentary edicts and proceedings.

True it is, that that supreme Court of the Kingdom does nor need, nor fear
(in respect of it self) the best, or worst, that all subordinate Officers or
Authority can do concerning it; no, it is as far above their reach, as the
Sun in the Firmament is above all the Meteors here below: but yet in respect
of the lower region of people (the Common multitude as I said) so Magistrates
and men in Office here, may either cloud and blacken this sun by their
discountenancing, or clear and strengthen its beams by their well reporting
of those proceedings to the vulgar: As we said before concerning the spies sent
to Canaan, some of them disgraced the land flowing with milk and honey. Ye
Magistrates and men in great places, are betwixt people and Parliament, as the
Medium betwixt the eye and the object, or as the glass through which a man
looks out and beholds the Heavens; according to the color of the ^l^ss so
does the Heaven seem to be colored: Your judgments, affections, countenances
touching that Court, do give aim and copies to them all, both for their
opinions, speeches, actions. Therefore let it be your care to Countenance.

2. Next, Promote Parliamentary edicts and proceedings. That is, put on,
publish, prosecute and execute all such new Edicts, Orders and Commands
(especially touching Reformation) as are sent and issued from them. To
instance, there is a Vow or Protestation commended unto us by their practice
and approbation, there is An Order for the due observing of the Sabbath, etc.
Now the promotion of all those, and the like, do lie upon your charge and
consciences in the first place, and the neglect of them amongst us (when once
granted to you) will be required at your hands. Ye are our Civil watchmen, see
your duty. Ezok. 33. each of you according to his place, is our Moses, to take
the Laws at their mouth, and to declare them unto us, that we may hear and
do them. This is one weighty duty.

3. Next, Second them. That is, whilst they do endeavor above to set right
the great body of the Kingdom, ye should labor here below to reform your
petty and particular Jurisdictions: this would be no little furtherance to that
great work. As petty brooks do make up a River, and many Rivers fill a Sea:
so Family-reformations make up Parishionall, and all Parishionall ones, do
fill up a National and Universal. It Is a Proverb as true as ancient [The way
to have a clean street is for every one to sweep his own door.] So let the
Magistrates and Officers in every County, City, Corporation, Parish, now sweep
their own several Jurisdictions, and then the great public work of National
clensing, will more easily succeed. So much to Magistrates.

2. Partiular Lesson, may be to Ministers.
Brethren, I confess my self one of the last and least of all your Tribe; but
yet so clear and necessary is this lesson that the meanest Ambassador may,
nay, must press it upon us at this time: suffer therefore the word of
exhortation.

Now or never is the nick of time in which we ought to play the trumpeters,
Ezekiel. 33.3. etc.
to stir and call men up to the help of the Lord in this great work; who
knows but that that God which did throw down flat the walls of Jericho by the
trumpets (though mean ones) of seven Priests going before the Arc; I say,
Josh 6.20.
who knows, but he may also be pleased to do great things now by our poor
service? therefore let us up and be doing, and if we do need spurs in our
sides because the way seems somewhat cragged, let us consider these two or
three Motives.

First, look we upon the eminent examples of our most ancient and famous
Scripture-Predecessors in like times and cases; I mean, let us turn over the
Histories of Deliverances and Reformations in Judah, and there we shall find
that their Prophets, Priests and Levites, were some of the greatest and most
active instruments in both, they were (as it were) the holy bellows to blow up
the refiners fire. Let us take an instance or two to kindle us. First, in that
Deliverance and Reformation in the beginning of young King Jehoash his reign.
2 Kin. 11.
There good Jehojada the high Priest (being thereunto called) is the very
primum mobile, ver. 4, 5, etc.
the founder and finisher of that great work, yea, that tripartite National
Covenant, to which the Lord, the King and the people were parties, was
contrived and perfected by his means. 2 Chr. 29.3.
So (secondly) in King Hezekiahs Reformation, as the first thing that he
begins withal is the Temple; so the first persons that we find him
consulting with, ver. 4. ver. 5.
they are the Priests and Levites. He brought in the Priests and Levites, and
gathered them together into the East-street, and said unto them, Hear ye me,
ye Levites, sanctify now your selves, etc. Yea, and for furthering that
Covenant which he made, these, must be the chief men in the business, ver.
10. ver. 11.
Now it is in mine heart (says he) to make a Covenant with the Lord God of
Israel, My sons, be not now negligent, for the Lord has chosen you to stand
before him, to serve, and that ye should minister unto him and burn incense.
It Is no mean honor (Brethren) to be made some of the prime and immediate
Ministers of the Lord in such great works; and yet alas (I speak it to mine
grief, and to the general shame of our Tribe) who more backward to set on
Deliverance and Reformation now, then are many of us? The Protestation, the
Declaration for abolishing of Images, etc. how slowly, how faintly are they
executed? Yea, and the more dully I believe in many places, because the
execution of them partly depends upon the Minister. Let all the true
Embas^adours of Christ think upon this and be kindled.

2. Another Motive may be this, Our very Callings do press us hereunto. Ezekiel.
33.2, etc y Sam. 9.9. Isa. 58.1.
We are said to be Watchmen, we are Seers, yea, we are called trumpeters (as
before,) and what is meant by all these, but that it is our duty to descry
public evils and dangers, to discover opportunities of good, and so to call
men off from the one, and onward to the other?

3. Thirdly, this is a means both to settle and prosper us all in our
functions, and to entaile them, and a blessing upon our posterities. See how
the Tribe of Levi came by their Ministerial prerogative. Exodus 33.
When Aaron and the people had made a Calse, for this great sin justice must
be executed, ver. 26.
and Moses calls for it. Then Moses stood in the gate of the Camp, and said,
who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi
gathered themselves together unto him. Being called they do promote justice.
Hereupon see what a Reward and Blessing followed. ver. 27, 28. Number. 3.5, 6.
First a Reward. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Bring the Tribe of Levi
near, and present them before Aaron the Priest, that they may minister unto
him. Deu^. 33.8.
Secondly, a Blessing. And of Levi he said, let thy Thummim, and thy Urim be
with thy holy one, ver. 9,
whom thou did prove at Massah, etc. Who said unto his Father, and to his
Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew
his own children, etc. They shall teach Jacob thy Judgments, ver. 10. ver. 11.
and Israel thy Law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt
Sacrifice upon thine Altar. Bless Lord his substance, and accept the work of
his hands, smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again. There is a blessing with a witness.
See also how Phineas and his posterity came to have the Priesthood settled upon
them, it was his public zeal which procured that; and therefore see what is
said of him and his, Number. 25.10. ver. 11.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son
of Aaron the Priest has turned away my wrath from the children of Israel, etc.
Wherefore say, Behold, ver. 12.
J give unto him my Covenant of peace, and he shall have it, and his seed after
him, ver. 13.
even the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his
God, etc. Would we then Brethren upon a blessed time, in a blessed work,
follow the presidents of our blessed Predecessors, now in glory? Would we
adorn our high Calling, confirm our selves in it, and (perhaps) entaile the
same upon our posterities after us? In a word would we make us and ours rich in
mercies of all sorts? Lo, now, now, is that precious time in which we above
others, are called (in an holy and loyal way) to inform the minds, to kindle
the hearts, to open the eyes and mouths, and to strengthen the hands of all
our people for the furtherance of the blessed work of Reformation. And let me
say further unto you all (and to my self in the last place) somewhat like that
of Mordecai to Esther, Est. 4.14.
Who knows whether we are come to our places, to our callings, yea into the
world, for such a time as this?

3. Particular Lesson, to Parents and Masters, to all Governors of Families.
True, ye are no public Magistrates nor Ministers, yet know that to your own
Families ye are (in a private way) both as Kings and Prophets. Kings to
govern, and Prophets to instruct them. Exercise therefore both these offices
now toward your children and servants, for the furtherance of the present
great public work in these two duties.

1. As Kings, reform and purge your several Families especially from those
obstructive sins, which may hinder the public Deliverance and Reformation.
When Moses was employed to be the Deliverer of Israel, it had almost cost him
his life, Ex, 4.14.
for that he had neglected Family reforming. And it came to pass by the way in
the Inn that the Lord met him and sought to kill him. ver. 25.
But wherefore? You may see the cause by the effect, Then Zipporah took a
sharp stone and cut off the foreskin of her son, etc. He had neglected
Circumcision in his own house, and therefore could not safely be an instrument
of the great and public work So, when King Asa did swear and set himself to
reform the Kingdom, he takes not the last turn to his own Idolatrous Mother
Maacha, who it is like was one of his family, 2 Chro. 15.16.
He remooved her from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a Grove,
and Asa cut down her Idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.
Let every Governor of a Family follow that president now in his house, let him
purge it from all Superstition, Atheism, Halting, Profaneness; From all
Unbelief, murmurings and unthankefullnesse, which might hinder approaching
mercies. Once more to this purpose, look upon Jacobs example, many evils and
dangers had befallen him after his return from Laban, Genesis 34.
especially about Shalem, a City of Shechem, there his only daughter is
ravished, two of his elder sons do commit murder, and now the name of Jacob
does stink among the Inhabitants of the land. But what shall he do in this
case to deliver himself and all his? Behold, Family-Reformation is his only
means for their general preservation; and the Lord himself does direct him to
this course, Genesis 35.1.
Arise, Go up to Bethel and dwell there, and make an Altar unto God, etc But
how may this be done? He must and does, first, purge his own household. Then
Jacob said unto his Household, and to all that were with him, put away the
strange gods that are among you, ver. 2, 3, 4, etc.
and be clean, and change your garments. So in these times, whosoever would be
an instrument of the public Deliverance, let him first be a private Reformer,
and set his own house in order. That must you do as Kings.

2. As Prophets, Catechize your children and servants in the state of these
times, so far as shall be fit for their condition.

Quest. But how far is that? and what is it?

Answ. 1. Show them all the public execrable things and persons unvailed, that
they may be able in some measure to discern between the righteous and the
wicked, that they may know what to choose, and what to abhor, for whom to
pray, and against what. Thus, this act of Amalck (in the Text) is commanded of
God to be written by Moses, not only for all the children of that age, but also
to be declared to the Generations unborne. And the Lord said unto Moses, write
this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshuah, etc.
Much more ought we to catechize this present age.

2. Acquaint them also with the hopes of Deliverance and Reformation begun;
that so they may be directed and kindled to put up right praises and prayers,
and to use all other holy and loyal means, in their power, toward the
promotion of this great work of providence. Thus the Israclitish Parents were
commanded to instruct their children concerning the Lords Passover in Egypt.
Ex. 12.26, 27.
I pray remember those two duties. That Is your Lesson.

4. Lesson, to all Particular, Single, and Private Persons.
There are many things which ye may do toward the great work. What Lesson
among all my six general ones may not be practiced by you? (viz.) First, To
humble for, and to purge from your former cowardice and pollutions. Next, To
come over heartily to the right side, and engage your selves unto it. Then, To
value and prize degrees of Deliverance and Reformation received. Fourthly, To
take, use and improove, the first fruits and hansels of mercy. Next, To inform
(at least the Informers) against all offensive things and persons, greevers and
greevances. And finally, To praise and pray with all manner of Supplications.
Behold, all these things are in the power of private persons to do them in
some degree: Be ye of courage therefore, and let every one of us play the man
(in an holy and loyal way) for our God, our King, our Religion, Laws,
Parliaments and Privileges against all the race of Amalek.

OBJECTIONS.
Bu^ I know that your private, single, inferior persons, are full of
Objections against this Exhortation: I shall endeavor therefore to answer the
most material ones fully though briefly.

This deserves to be mentioned in the first place.

1. OBJECTION. I am but one, and what can one man do by himself, toward a
public Reformation?
Ans. I answer (to the whole Objection together)

1. There may be more active spirits nearer at hand then thou think. 1 Kin.
19.14. ver. 18.
Elijah an holier man then thy self was mistaken in this point, I, even I
only am left. Yet see the Lords answer, I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, etc. Put forth therefore
and try it, there may be many more in the deck, and nearer at hand then thou
dreamest.

An. 2. Howsoever, one man may do much.

1. Iam. 5.16. ver. 17.
In his Person, and that both spiritually and politiquely, The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. And example is given in the
next verse, Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed
earnestly that it might not rain; and it rained not on the Earth by the space
of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the Heavens gave
rain, and the Earth brought forth her fruit. Thus one man may pray a whole
Kingdom, both into fair weather, and into foul, into happiness and out of
it. Number. 25.6, 7, 8.
Phineas also was but one, and yet what service did he for his Country in one
act of Justice. ver. 1^.
Says God, Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, has
turned away my wrath from the children of Israel (while he was jealous for my
sake among them) that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.
Thus one Orthodox Athanasius in former times, stood it out against a whole
world of Arrians, and at last the stream was turned. In a word, all number
does consist of Unites. [Vnitas fundamentum numeri] and therefore if all should
say after thee [I am but one] what would become of all greatest public
affairs? Take all drops out of the Sea, and the whole Ocean will be drained,
take away pence or farthings, and there will be no pounds, take unites away,
and there can be neither thousands nor hundreds.

2. One man by Example may do very much. Brethren, it is a great matter to
break the Ice (I mean holily and loyally) in a public business. 2 Samuel 23.11.
Look upon that which is recorded concerning Shammah, And after him was
Shammah, and the Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a
piece of ground full of Lentiles: ver. 12.
And the people fled from the Philistines. But he stood in the midst of the
ground and defended it, and slew the Philistines, and the Lord wrought a great
victory. It Is spoken in a military case, but I do apply it to a politic and
civil. Shammah (as I conceive) got not that victory by himself alone, but
rather by his valiant example, so that the people which were before afraid of
the Philistines, did now (seeing his valor) take heart and turn again. In
short, see the Counter-counsell of honest Hushai, 2 Samuel 17.14. etc.
how it brake the neck of Achitophell and of his policy. And that exemplary
valor of Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, how did it open and lead the way to a
very great victory against the Philistines? The multitude melted away, 1 Sa
14.13, 14. ver. 16. ver. 20.
and they went on beating down one another. And Saul and all the people that
were with him, assembled themselves and they came to the battle, and behold,
every man's sword was against his fellow. Moreover the Hebrews that were with
the Philistines before that time, which went up with them into the Camp from
the Country round about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that
were with Saul and Jonathan. ver. 21.
Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in Mount Ephraim, ver.
22.
when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after
them in the battle. All this I allege only to show how far one or two
private men may by their Active Example promote (holily and loyally) a public
great good work.

3. A mean private person in his activenesse may express as much
faithfulness and sincerity, as the greatest and most prosperous Instrument in
the Kingdom. As we say concerning faithfulness in a man's particular calling,
that a poor Wench in the Kitchen walking conscionably in her place, may serve
the Lord as sincerely as a King upon his Throne: So here, a mean private
person, though a Mechanic or underling, giving faithful information of what
he knows amiss, may promote the great work as heartily, as the greatest good
Instrument in Parliament. Remember this, and say not, I am but one.

2. OBJECTION. But J am not of a public spirit.
Answ. 1. We must bring our spirits to the times and occasions under which we
live. This Objection was moved by Moses when the Lord called him to go to
Pharaoh, ^od. 4.10.
but it did not serve his turn, O my Lord (says he) J am not eloquent, but I
am slow of speech and of a slow tongue. ver. 11.
See the Lords answer, Who has made man's mouth, or who makes the dumb or
dease, or the seeing or the blind? Have not I the Lord? But Moses replyeth, o
my Lord! send I I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send. See Gods
answer again, ver. 13.^4, 15, 16, 17
Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother? I know that he can speak well. And thou
shall speak unto him and put words in his mouth, and I will be with thy mouth
and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. And he shall be thy
spokes-man unto the people. In which words I find two answers more, which I
make my second and third.

Ans. 2. The Lord can make thy spirit public, yea and he will do so, if thou will obey and try. Now therefore go and I will be with thy mouth, ^er. 12.
and teach thee what thou shall say. So the Lord will quicken, warm and
enlarge thee.

Ans. 3. God will raise up good seconds and fit consorts to draw with thee in
the teeme; as he did yoke Luther and Melancton in that great work. Like the
Calidum and Humidum radicale, the native heat and moisture in man's body which
makes him vigorous and long-lived.

Ans. 4. In a word, there is no spirit so private, but (if employed) would make
a knife or a whet-stone, a shaft or a bolt. Therefore stick not at this
Objection.

3. OBJECTION. The want of one man's help can do no great hurt?
Ans. 1. Yes, it may set back the scales. If one vote in Parliament may carry a
great work, then the want of one elsewhere may cause a great miscarriage.

Ans. 2. The example of one man's dullness may draw many the same way, because
it is down the hill.

Ans. 3. Thou do to thine uttermost (for thy particular) even hinder the
whole work; for if it prosper, no thank to thee, but if it sinck thou may
be the sole cause.

4. OBJECTION. But I am a woman, a weaker vessel, and (perhaps) under covert
barn, and then what can I do?
Answ. I conceive that even those weaker vessels may now do service, yea
double service.

1. Immediately, by, and from themselves, by their own parts and purses, if
they are free from husbands. Examples of the acts of that Sex even this way,
Iud 5.
we find not a few in Scripture. What is there recorded of Deborah and Iael in
one Chapter? But ye must know that such acts of their must not be imitated
without like calling and warrant extraordinary. Look also upon her of Tecoah,
what a strange thing did she effect for Absalom? But above all these, 2 Samuel 14.
the wisdom of that woman of the City Abell, is a famous example, 2 Samuel 20.
v. 16. to ^^.
honor and encouragement to all her Sex. She took off the head of Sheba and
saved the whole City by her Prudence. More testimonies might be brought, but
these are enough to prove that even the weaker vessels may do much toward the
public great work immediately.

2. But (perhaps) they may do much more mediately and by others. Perchance thou
have an Husband, Father, Brother or Son, that is somewhat over-wary,
timorous, Genesis 2.1^ 1 Samuel ^^ 37.
slack or unactive, then remember that thou wast given to be a meet helper. It
will be thy duty in such a case and time as this, with thy choicest wisdom and
humility, to do the office of a submissive Remembrancer, in due place, manner
and season. Yea, thou art called to such a service. Not only Abigail that had a
Nabal, did reason with him, in a fit time and place, concerning that which he
had said to David's servants: But even the wife of Manoah (it seems they were a
godly pair) she does wisely support and quicken (by her reasoning) the
timorous spirit of her husband in another case. (...) 13.22, 23 n. 4. ^, 10,
etc.
Also that good and great woman the Shunamite, she did in love provoke her aged
and indifferent husband in the behalf of Elisha, to entertain him, and
prevailed with him to the great advantage of her Family. In the last place
therefore let us stir up as many of this Sex, as shall have opportunity, to
cast in their mite in-to the happy treasury of Hope, they have souls too, and
children (with precious souls) to look after.

The good Lord give us understandings and hearts proportionable to the work
and to our hopes.

FINIS.

