Medicina Diastatica OR Sympatheticall MUMIE: CONTAINING, Many mysterious and
hidden Secrets In PHILOSOPHY and PHYSIC.

By the Construction Extraction Transplantation and Application
of Microcosmical and Spiritual MUMIE.

Teaching the Magneticall cure of Diseases at Distance, etc.

Abstracted from the Works of Dr. THEOPHR. PARACELSVS: By the labor and
industry of Andrea Tentzelius, Phil. and Med.

Translated out of the Latin BY FERDINANDO PARKHURST, Gent.

(...).

London, Printed by T. Newcomb for T. Heath, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Russell-street, near the Piazza's of Covent Garden, 1653.

To the Right Honorable Basil Earl of Denbigh Viscount Feilding and Baron of
Newnham.
MY LORD,
YOUR Lordship having sometime cast your eye upon the Original of this
Treatise, seemed to ratify the credit it had received in the World by the
honor of your Approbation: Upon the intimation whereof, I have (out of my
especial Obligations to your Lordship) pretermitted my more peculiar Studies
for the Translation of this Piece Not that it could thereby receive the better
acceptanc^ with your Lordship (where there is so much Language, a^ other
accomplishments of honor) but in respect of the thing it self (a Mystery of
Philosophy) lest it should out-grow the better knowledge, as i^ has the common
Press.

My Lord, These considerations have chiefly induced the employment of my best
Endeavors in the performance of this Work, especially the assurance of your
Lordships Protection; under which confidence I have made it Public, as the
least acknowledgement of my duty to your Lordship, or respects to the General
Good: Which if it may receive the favor of your Lordships Countenance, I shall
not doubt its preferment, and therein the advancement of the Magneticall
Mystery.

I confess, Subjects of this nature are not so usually qualified with that
honor here as in forain parts, under the protection of Great Personages; yet is
it not for want of President, but rather of Reason, for Nobilis est solus,
Virtute insignis, and Art: which is more then demonstrative in your Lordship:
wherefore the Dedication of this Treatise, being Exemplified by the Author to
several persons of honor (and those the most Eminent) I may hope your
Lordship (as inferior to none) will vouchsafe me the privilege to pursue my
Original: So may the defects of the Body be supplied in the Countenance, while
your Lops. favor shall Patronize both, by a dispensation or acceptance of
these my Endevors, to the future Encouragement of,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Serve. FERD. PARK HURST.

(...). The Translator to the Reader.
THE Philosopher contemplating the life of Man, would have Homo animalibus
sapientius esse, man to be wiser then all other creatures; I confess it is the
part of a wise man so to be, but how to be so every creature may direct: for
though reason be appropriated to Man, sense is as common to Animals, who by
instinct have learned the knowledge of their own preservation without our
principles of Reason; and by certain demonstrations (as) from the Liberal
Sciences of Nature, do daily teach us that (...) or Art of Knowledge,
disputing Nature, the commanding Emperesse of all Learning according to
Menander; (...) So that man's reason especially being prompted by the oeconomies
of Nature, will conclude him no less then what he is, (viz) the (...) and
Compendium of her self, or the very center, in which all the rays and
influences of her Sphere do meet.

And thus from the (...) and conjunction of Nature and Reason a new faculty is
created, called Art; whose sublime and subtle qualities in emulation of her
Progenitrices, are drawn from her own principles; Ars imitari Naturae solertian
potest: from whence it consequently appears, that, both Art and Nature are
requisite in the work of perfection.

Neque Natura sine art sufficit cutquam omnino quocunque in studio; Nec Ars
per se sine praesidio Naturae. Through this Coadjutorship and on Concatenation,
are all things governed under the Title of Providence, by whose Sovereignty Man
especially contributing in obedience, is not only protected, but also his
self-preservation and security sealed to him under that Magna Charta, Homo
Naturae obediens homini nocere non potest, Man obeying the Laws of Nature, can
neither hurt himself nor prejudice another; This is no rigid Law, but a Rule in
Equity, nay rather a gentle precept of an indulgent Mother, that Matter rerum
omnium the Philosophers so much adore.

When therefore (by omnipotent Providence) Nature, Reason, and Art, with all
their faculties conspire together for the preservation of mankind, as the
greatest miracle of the world; what stupid Nature, would not in reason study
that mysterious Art, wherein the life and conservation of our selves depend?

Wherefore I shall here (by way of President) present thee with an Abstract
from that most learned Philosopher Theophrastus Paracelsus, who (out of the
considerations aforesaid) did not only search into the most occult and secret
c^uses of Nature, but also (being well experimented by his own Art and Practice
made them public to the world in his Tract de Tempore seu Philosophia) Which
piece (being illustrated by Andrea Tentzelius, Dr. in Philosophy and Physic) I
may here prefer as an Epitome of the most abstruse part of Phil^sophy, treating
of many hidden Mysteries and operations, in the rare and admirable cure of
diseases at distance, by transplantation into other species, through a Mumiall
and Magneticall power, drawn chiefly from the Sympathy and Antipathy of natural
things.

This excellent piece, being recommended to my acquaintance by the favor of a
worthy friend, my respects could not less then salute him with a gratulor
adventum at the first sight; Afterward finding him (as) a complete Gentleman by
his language in the Latin tongue (though of Germane parents) and most
accomplished in his subject and matter, (being therewith so much affected) I
could not in discharge of my obligations to my friend, (upon his request) my
own satisfaction, and the good will I bear to general Learning, but discover
his true worth and intrinsecal virtues to a more public Surveigh; Wherefore
as providence had transported him into our own Country, so have my endeavors
translated him into our own Tongue; wherein (Gentle Reader) if he do not so
clearly express himself, the defects are mine, but if thou understand him not,
the error is thine.

In the Original (besides the difficulty of the subject) the long-breathed
Periods, and many imperfect Parentheses, together with the common escapes of
the Press, would require a good Master in the laborious work of Translation,
and as diligent an Artist in correcting the Errata's.

But as my greatest care has not been wanting in the composure of the least
scruple, so I hope (without the escapes of the Printer, or the Readers
Judgment) my endeavors may receive a due Construction: yet where a
strictness of capacity cannot reach the Latitude of this (Magneticall) Sphere,
such may happily be eclipsed in the whole by the interposition of their parts,
while the (...) is conspicuous to those of another Meridian.

Deficiences of this Nature are most contingent in a self opinion; which is,
(for the most part) either so blinded by ignorance, or hoodwinckt by conceit,
that they dare not inquire beyond their own knowledge, least by discovering
themselves they should forfeit that which they only pretend to; These of all
others I desire not to meet withal, but if it be my fate, I wish they would
begin where -- Here I close, (...).
It is wisdom to learn that which a^ man not knows.


London, June, 24. 1653. Ferd. Parkhurst.

On his worthy Friend Mr. Parkhurst and his Translation of this Mumiall
Treatise.
THis Rare Piece (treating of the wonderful effects to be wrought by Mumie) I
commend unto this Nation, inviting the Courteous Readers hereof, unto a due
acknowledgment of the learned Translators industry; Who, having met with so
Crabbed a Latin Author, such tedious Parentheses therein, words so ambiguous
and insignificant, yet has he very judiciously and dexteriously overcome those
difficulties, and rendered his Author in a perfect intelligible and pleasant
English style.

The Subject he Treats of, is Sublime and high (if not the greatest Mystery
known to mortal Man,) be thou therefore thankful who shall read it; and
learn, rather to admire then despise the wonderful works of the Almighty,
although unto thee they may seem Clouded.

William Lilly Student in Astrology.

(...) To his ingenious Friend Mr. Ferdinando Parkhurst the industrious
Translator of this Excellent Treatise.
PHysicians need no more their Trade advance,
By tedious, fulsome long Receipts and chance;
Here they may meet a nearer surer way;
Which will their tedious Fallacies display,
And show, what Nature, when discovered, can
Work in the body of imperfect Man;
By means so easy, and so secret, that
They slily order and direct our fate.
So what great Paracelsus searching mind,
Led by a higher Genius, first did find,
And what Tentzelius did from him display,
Scattering his clouds and showing brighter day;
We (being made sharers of such wealth) must owe
(Since you h've given it to the English World) to you
Whose worthy care has now brought home this piece,
And with it given us a Golden Fleece.
Roger Ellis Esquire.

To my honored friend Mr. Ferdinando Parkhurst Translator of this Magneticall
Tract.
MY dearest Friend such is thy worthiness,
That nothing but thine own can thee express;
What ever Learning, Wit, or Art, can teach,
Is comprehended all within the reach
Of thy capacity; for who can say
Thou art not read in All, although some may
Expose their Genius more to public sight;
Thy modesty conceales what others write.
While Learning languisheth, thou do Translate
Great Paracelsus from his first Estate
Into thy Native Country, and there land him
Safe to all those that rightly understand him;
But let your Mountebanck, Leech, Quak, and those
That deal in Simples, and their common Dose,
Keep to their Simples still; for ignorance sure
Can nere assume thy true Magnetic cure.
P. T.

(...) Chap. 7. Of the use of Spiritual Mumie (in general.) Chap. 8. Of the
favor of the Heavens toward the aforesaid operations. Chap. 9. Of the time
destined by the Heavens for the proposed operations. Chap. 10. Of the use of
Spiritual Mumie (in specie) and first to reconcile a friendship between two
men. Chap. 11. To reconcile private or public Enemies. Chap. 12. To reconcile
the Ape and Serpent (naturally hating one another) and other Animals, who are
by nature enemies. Chap. 13. To procure a mutual love and affection betwixt a
Man and his Wife. Chap. 14. Of the operation of Antipathy. Chap. 15. To cure
both kinds of Jaundles. Chap. 16. To cure the Dropsy Magnetically. Chap. 17.
Of the Plurisie, and of curing inward Impostumations Sympathetically. Chap. 18.
To cure Fevers Magnetically. Chap. 19. Of the oppilations of the Liver,
Spleen, Brain, Lungs, Reins, etc. Chap. 20. Of Aches in the Joints and Limbs,
by reason of oppilation. Chap. 21. Of the Podegra, and Catarrhs. Chap. 22. Of
Wounds and Ulcers. Chap. 23. Of the Hernia, or Burstennesse. Chap. 24. Of
Fluxions, and Salt Rheums hurtful to the Teeth and Eyes. Chap. 25. Of
Menstruous Evacuations and Retention. Chap. 26. Of the Consumption and Hectic.
Chap. 27. Of particular Blastings. Chap. 28. Of Sterility or Barrenness; and
also the manner of detracting strength from an Horse and communicating it to a
man; or from any man or Beast, and transmitting it into any other.
Reader.
IF these my Endeavors may receive a due construction from thee, thou will
thereby clear thy own judgment and encourage my future intendments of a second
Tract, viz. Of the natural reason of the Tree of Life, and of Knowledge of
Good and Evil. And also of the mystical interpretation of that great secret,
viz Cabalisticall concordancy of Life and Death; Christ and Adam*

Likewise many other Pieces both Philosophical and Mathematical: As also of
the Sciences in general, under the title of (...) are now preparing for the
Press, by the studies and industry of

Thy Friend F. Parkhurst.

A MUMIALL TREATISE.
CHAP. I. Of the definition, diversity, construction, nature, and property of
Mumie.
BEing now upon the Treatise of Mumie, I conceive it most proper first to show
what is commonly understood by Mumie, and what is meant by the same in this
place.

Mumie, from the Arabians (...) is generally denoted by the Physicians and
Apothecaries under these four kinds, viz.

1. Arabian. 2. Egyptian. 3. Pissasphaltos. 4. Lybian.
1. Arabian Mumie, is a certain compositio^ of Aloes, Myrrh, Croco's, and
Balsamum, with which they do (usually) embalme dead bodies; which (after a
while being taken out of the sepulchers) with the Sanies or matter sweating
forth from the Cadaver, is preserved and kept for Physical uses.

Thus much Rhases affirms (in his Synonymis) saying, Mumie is a thing which
i^ found in the earth, where the bodies of the dead embalmed with Aloes are
intombed, and the humors of the Cadaver is resolved with the mixture of the
Aloes: Serapis his Interpreter testifies the same, chap. 283. who writes,
that Mumie of the Sepulchers i^ from the humidity of an humane body, intermixed
and incorporated with Aloe^ Myrrh, and other ingredients.

2. Egyptian Mumie, is transported from Egypt to us, which is not made of any
bodies embalmed with Aloes and Myrrh, bu^ from (...) (so termed by the Greeks)
which is a kind of fat clay or sulphury matter of an aereal and fiery
quality:) For as the Nobility did use Croco's, Aloes Myrrh, etc. for
Embalmings, whose body (as Scaliger reports) was death to dig up (so as Strabo
writes) the dead bodies o^ the common people were usually embalmed with
Asphaltos, to keep and preserve them from corruption.

3. Pissasphaltos, (by the Greeks (...), from (...) pix, and (...) bitumen) is
a composition of a pitchy and sulphury matter; or rather, this Mumie is a
substance retaining the same virtues which Diascorides attributes to
Pissasphaltos, having the same effects as Bitumen mingled with pitch; but in
the mean while we get not the true Mumie, and very rarely the Pissasphaltos of
Dioscorides; but there is a counterfeit Confection of Pitch and Bitumen
commonly sold for Pissasphaltos.

4. Lybian Mumie (is so called in respect of the place from whence it is) viz.
for in the Region of Hammon being a part of Lybia, which is between the
Country of Cyrene and Alexandria are many Quicksands raised by impetuous and
turbulent whirlewinds, by which means the unwary Passengers are oftentimes
swallowed up, and so through the obvolution and rolling of the mountainous
sands are soon parched and dried by the heat of the Sun; the flesh thus
scorched with the humane bones, is brought away without any commixtures or
other embalmings: (which is he Mumie here meant.)

Wherefore it evidently appears, that there are four common sorts of Mumie; so
that Fuchius is not a little mistaken, in lib. 1. Paradox. 40. cap. when he
endeavors to make Serapio contradict himself, and Avicen and Rhases to oppose
themselves, and the whole Sect of Arabians; making Pissasphaltos (in some
places used for Mumie) the only Mumie, excluding all other.

Although these kinds of Mumie are esteemed very advantageous for the curing
of green wounds, ruptures, and bruises; yet in the prosecution of this
Treatise, will appear the danger of administering the Mumie of any body
promiscuously, for that Mumie is always most necessarily to be avoided, that
is not certainly known to be collected from an wholesome and sound body.

Wherefore Theophrastus Paracelsus upon this subject adds a fifth sort of Mumie,
viz. that which is extracted from some perfect body, not dying of any natural
disease, but of some violent death; upon the reasons following.

For as by divine ordination no edible Creature was to be slain for man's food,
but such as was perfectly sound, and free from diseases, lest with the
decoction of the meat, we should receive the disea^ into us; much less should
any thing that dies naturally be for internal use, or taken for nourishment,
when as the same death or disease that accompanied it before, might afterward
ensue. And this is generally manifested by all Creatures of Prey, as

Amongst Birds Beasts Fishes
the Kite, Eagle, Hawke, Lion, Wolf, Fox Bear, Cungre, Dolphin, Tuny, Mullet,
etc.

These, and many other Animals, that affect and live on Prey, (except the Bear
by chance,) will not feed on, or any ways touch Carrion, unless mere hunger
compel them; the reason is, because they do not only nourish and increase
their own bodies by the substance of their Prey, but also their own Mumie by
their spiritual Mumie, which does for the most part evaporate with a natural
expiration of the living Creatures.

From whence it is apparent, that if we could feed on living Creatures, and
digest, alter, and subdue the matter, it would be much more conducible to the
nourishing and preservation of our bodies and spirits: For as fresh flesh which
is tender, is more wholesome then that which is praemacerated, and corrupt,
having more vitality; so consequently, that which is sound, and vivacious, is
more nutrimentall then any which a disease has killed, and thereby deprived it
of its spirit or Mumie.

For thus through the harmonies and commissures of the parts kept sound, and
clean, may be extracted the virtues and faculties of things more entirely, then
otherwise by opening and extending the most occult and internal parts, which
causes evaporation: This is experimented by the Troglodites or Hedge sparrow,
seasoned with pepper and salt, and eaten raw by any one troubled with the
Stone, it has an eminent faculty of breaking or dissolving the same, which
being boiled or otherwise prepared, loses that effect.

Another reason may be here given, that nothing can be proper for food, unless
that which is alible and vital, because our life and spirit cannot be
otherwise sustained, then by the Analogicall and vital spirit of another.
Neither can the substance of our body be supported, without the materiality of
some other; wherefore those creatures that feed and live on the wholesomest
things, are most nutrimentall for us. Moreover every part cherishes and
affects it self with a certain delectation;

For through a spiritual and substantial sympathy our Brains Lungs Liver Heart
is nourished by the like in other Creatures.

Now as Theophr. Paracelsus delivers, this Mumie can no where be more truly
had, then from the bodies of criminal persons ( viz. such as violently
suffered death by strangulation, as on Gibbets, etc.) For from such there is a
gentle siccation that expungeth the watery humor, without destroying the oil
and spiritual, which is cherished by the heavenly Luminaries, and strengthened
continually by the affluence and appulses of the celestial Spirits; whence it
may properly be called by the name of Constellated, or Celestial Mumie.

Wherefore Theophrastus prefers this Aereall spirit (or Mumie) before all
other corporeal Mumies, either of fire, water, or earth; which may chiefly be
observed from his own words in the Germane Tongue, as follows; --

Benn die Arkte und sonst manniglich wusten, was mit dieser Mumia furzunehmen,
oder wozu sie nuke, wurdekein Bbelthater uber drey Lag am Dalgen oder auffdem
Rade liegen bleiben, sondern hinweg genommen, w^ es anders muglich were (that
is) If Physicians or any other body understood but the right use of this Mumie,
or what it is good for, not any Malefactors would be left three days on the
Gallows, or continue on the Wheel, from being stolen away; for they would run
any hazard for procuring of these Bodies.

Now Paracelsus does not speak only of this, but also of another spiritual
Mumie produced and derived from thence, (though somewhat obscurely) in these
words: Dass noch eine audere Mumie verhanden, nemblich die, welche bon einem
lebendigen Leibe separirt und praeparirt wird. Dann ein jeglicher Mensch kan
seinen Leib in Mumiam transmutirn, soinem Leib und Leiben ohne scaden, und ein
Stuk bon seim Leib nehmen dass man's doch them Leib nicht ansihet.

There is yet another Mumie, namely, that which is taken from a living body,
separated and prepared accordingly, for any ones body may be transmuted into
Mumie, without prejudice either to the body or the life thereof, and the body
shall be no whit the worse for it, neither shall it be discerned that any such
thing has been done thereunto.

Therefore I shall further explain what Paracelsus means by corporeal and
spiritual Mumie, and what is to be understood by it.

Now it is to be observed, that it is called Corporeal Mumie, not by reason of
its formal existent part, as that it is so in and by its self naturally, for
there is no Mumie properly but spiritual, or only in the same respect; because
from the destruction and dissipation of the spirit or vital Balsome, the
defect of all true Mumie may be argued, the body in the mean while no ways
suffering: but so called in respect of its subsistence and operation, as it may
be inherent to the body, as well by its self as by its properties, and advance
its power and efficacy, according to the oeconomie and order of the Artist, no
otherwise then by, and with the same body.

As therefore you may see from the Author it is improperly called corporeal,
so likewise he does not only call it spiritual (...) according to its ens or
being, but (...), according to its relation, because it keeps still and
effects its intended operation, both beyond and without its corporeal
subject, even by the emanation of the virtue of the Mumie only, as the accident
from the subject; so spiritual Mumie is here so properly called by Paracelsus,
because properly and substantially it is not spiritual Mumie, but only the
property of it. For how can the spirit have any divorcement or separation from
the body, if this be not also divided? Or would not some violent exercise,
motion, Physic, or opening a vein, by which the spirit evaporates, procure an
eminent danger, and irrecoverable loss of it?

From hence we do not determine truly and Philosophically, the corporeity and
spirituality of Mumie according to the essential difference of it aforesaid,
but only to speak of it in respect of its subsistence and medicinal use, or in
respect of its profitable dispensation, which would otherwise require several
denominations; for the Physician does not distinguish (...) accurately, but for
the most part (...), relatively, and so states and defines the Animal, Vital,
and Natural Spirits in man; which notwithstanding are but such ^n a certain
comparation. For as the seed of man is neither part of the man, nor any
substantial of the parts of the same body, but only a power or certain form
descending into the Testicles, with the most refined and subtle matter of the
aliementall superfluity, by whose ((...)) or spermaticall proclivity it is
afterward more exactly decocted, and augmented by the mechanic and
subordinate spirits, and is endued with a multiplying faculty of it self in the
place and time appointed by the Liturgy and rule of Nature. So spiritual
Mumie, in so much as it undergoeth the work of Transplantation; (seeing that
ought to be performed without any detriment of the body,) cannot be part of the
internal Mumie, much less of the body it self; but must of necessity be a
kind of (...) or (...), addition or trajection, which wholly pertakes of the
faculties, and properties of the internal principle; and so being received,
dissipates its self, not only amongst the utmost parts of the body, but even
into the best disposed matter, and discovers the same virtues as if the very
principle and substance of the Mumie were every where present (thoroughly
dissipated) which virtue does resemble that which is appropriated to the Magnet
or Loadstone: for after the same manner the soul disposes it self into the
alimentall accession of new matter; for as the flame of one lamp transmigrateth
into another, and yet remains entire, so likewise does the Rays or beams
issue out of the body and although it be something of, or pertaining to the
body, yet it is not the body it self, nor any part of it.

From hence it may evidently appear that Theophr. Paracelsus called Spiritual
Mumie its self, and its geniture (as I may term it) by one and the same name,
which properly fitteth it for Transplantation: The^^ considerations being had
will anticipate many doubts and errors which might otherwise happen in the
ensuing Treatise

This premised, we come now to the definition of the thing it self; Mumie
properly so called is the most subtle substance of the body, Spiritual,
Aetheriall, and in respect of its Nature and species coingenited, permanent in
some measure both in and after death, retaining for the most part both its
affections, and internal and special virtues, wonderfully diffusive of its
self and is qualities by means of its extracted and constellated
Transplantation, to the end the unsound and viciated disposition may be
rectified, and the uncorrupted and perfect be preserved and strengthened.

We may instance many examples before us of this Mumie, notwithstanding one or
two I hope may be sufficient in this place, taken partly from another kind,
from whence we may gather its wonderful operation.

There is a proper aliment or food ordained for every kind of Creature, as
certain flies feed on the leaves of Napell, by some called Wolfebane; Hemlock,
which is poisonous to man, is nourishing to the bird called the Starling; and
the herb Hellebore that is noxious to men, is food for the Quail. Moreover
every part of the body does accommodate it self, and has its existency from
its most proper nutriment; as the bone by the bony substance, the flesh by the
fleshy is preserved and augmented; which is no other then the quality and
propriety of the aforesaid Mumie, which requires the proper Mumie of another
for the conservation of it self, accommodating and applying it to its own use.
This is experienced in the Phthysick (or Consumption of the Lungs) which is
cured by using and eating the Lungs of a Fox (...) or the alteration of them;
and is truly of the same prosapiae (descent) or nature of those things which we
here treat of.

So a grain of Corn cast into the Earth putrifyeth, and as it were perishes
before it puts forth a new stem; where is here the Anatome and spirit of the
seed, which after by a new revolution adorneth the worldly Theater with a new
body? Wherefore (...) may without all doubt call that which retains the
seminall and procreative faculty, Mumie truly Balsamic (or spiritual)
homogeneall with the Humane Mumie before mentioned, the divine principle of all
secret operations of every natural thing.

The same may be said of the seed of man, in which though very little (for that
which is visible is not the seed) yet the whole man with all his properties,
faculties, actions, and passions does in the first act acquiesce.

It is likewise true of herbs, plants and other things, being plucked up and
dried, or in any wise dead; whereof there are many kinds, in which
notwithstanding the same virtue as was at first infused into them do remain and
operate. As there is in every root of Poeony gathered in a Mumiall and proper
time an Antepilepticall faculty, or preservation from the falling sickness,
(for it is no^ in vain that the same herb has diverse virtues, it being from
the diverse seed, and Celite or infused Mumie, of which we have given an
instance or two in our Philosopho Medico de Peste, or the Philosophical
Physician or Cure of the Plague) so in other herbs remains the like virtue
till their Mumie is wholly extinguished; as,

In Ivy, a virtue Artheticall to preserve from the Gout. Scordium, a virtue
against the Gangrene. Scabios, against pestilentiall tumors. Gallopsis against
the Cancer.


To what other thing may we attribute this, that sometimes in one and the same
thing there are diverse, and many times contrary faculties, unless to the
various congresse of Mumie from diverse species, which sometimes confer
diverse faculties, sometimes weakly disposing, and othertimes wholly changing:
Thus the weed Cuscuta or Dodder, (which from its windings about Thyme, is
called Epithymum (or Thymeweed) has far other virtue in it then that which
grows or twineth about other herbs or plants. Harts-horne has different
qualities from the Bucks-horn; the Sea-horse-tooth from the teeth of an
Elephant; the Oakegum from that of the Holly, so the Gals of other wood from
those of the Oak. What other cause has the contagion of diseases? according
to the verse, Cum spectant oculi laesos, laedantur and ipsi;
While they behold the soreness of an eye
Their own infected are (by Sympathy.)


For such as any man's constitution is, such is his Mumie, such is his
expiration, and such is the reception and transplantation Analogically in
another.

Obj. It may be objected from hence, that then all diseases would be infectious
from every ones Mumie?

Ans. I answer, All are contagious, eve^ health it self, if we consider it only
according to its proper active faculty, or ((...)) its perfection (as the
Philosophers term it): for every thing naturally is endued with a power of
affecting another thing with its own qualities, although every operation is not
equally effectual; for Sanity is a certain quiescency, temperament and
serenity favorable to Nature; and so o^ less activity, then that the suborned
Mumie of it should aptly or readily affect either the sound or diseased (body):
Which reason may likewise be given for many diseases not commonly infectious;
for either they are more deeply radicated in the body, and are disposed to a
fixed coagulation, or else they are less powerful in their spirits then to
communicate infection, though never so near or alter the substance
notwithstanding their contact. Although none of these in respect of contagion
are every where destructive (...) according to their efficacy and the passive
state of the object, but (secundum magis and minus) according to more and less
all diseases are contagious; so that we see in all these things that Mumie is
the principal cause. To these we might easily add many other things which do
vicissively affect or abhor each other, (by a sympatheticall and
antipatheticall disposition) whose spiritual Mumie is the principal Agent and
wonderful Arthitectrix of their most secret operations.

Now this very Mumie being according to its self entire, and according to the
parts and individual properties of them (which is but the parts otherwise
conditioned and related to their species) is so closely (and secretly) joined
by a peculiar influence, as the whole Kingdom and Monarchy of Nature does
admirably abound with consentaneous and dissentaneous, sympatheticall and
antipatheticall influences, that in whatsoever part or property any wise
divided from it, it will be united to it in a more noble degree, the whole by a
kind of divine right of Community, as in a man that which is part of the head
sympathizeth with the head, and of the feet with the feet, will admirably
conspire and consociate to that common victorious spirit of the World; and the
same whole will sympathize by a Magnetic power with good or bad either
philematically or plagetically at the greatest distance.

This appears by that true sympatheticall Unguent, and that there are natural
causes not only of this but of many other the like things, (without any
suspicion of Magic) Nature its liberal mother does daily confirm by many
experiments; amongst the rest (which may worthily be remembered) the
conservation of the vital spirit, from the appulses of the general spirit of
the whole World; which according to their constitution by the definite coitions
or conjunctions of the stars and planets, whose influences abundantly operating
do argue a synaphthis and contact of, and with the Planets in these things. In
its (...) or appearance, only part of the Mumie of the Wound (and that very
little) adhere^^ to the weapon, yet being cleansed with the unguent,
communicates the whole acquisited cure by a sympatheticall virtue flowing from
the animal and vital spirit of the Mumie, to its Consociate or syngennicall
faculty in the veins of the very member through the sudden mediation of the
(...) or great spirit of the World, which penetrateth and extends all things;
so as the curing of the part of Mumie in the instrument, so is the
redintegration and recovery of the whole Mumie in the part wounded; and
contrariwise, the affliction or malady of the same cleaving to the Instrument,
is the trouble and pain of the same in the wounded man.

From which kind of sympathy I presume it proceeds that the careless burying
of the (...) or secundine (pertaining to women in Childbed) and of other things
(excrementorum item alvinorum, etc.) parts of the Mumie it self, being
individual, do by unskilful and ill usage presently endanger the whole
individuum. So the zenith of a young maiden cast into the fire, is said to stay
the fire, but with damage to the Virgin, because it ought to perish. To which
may be added that old wines work a new in the vessel, their Lees rise and are
troubled at the same time, when the Vines spring and shoot forth their branches.

This Anempodesticall virtue (being of the same inclination and condition of
Mumie flowing in the very stars or genius of things as in a kind of center) may
be properly and truly said to be the cause of all manner of strange and
wonderful Antipathies, as of occult and Magneticall cures, of Plants springing
and budding at the same time in sundry places of the same Climate, blossoming
and bringing forth fruit, and other the like effects: of which there are many
examples obvious, showing the true and adequate causes.

For by what reason, when one Heliotropium turning toward the beams of the
Sun, should all other of the same kind do the like? and when one Lote erecting
it self from the bottom of the water at the rising and setting of the Sun, all
other kinds of Trefoile in the same Hemisphere move in the like manner by the
fame virtue? Or whence comes it to pass, that many which are born in the
Novilune or new of the Moon have en equal impotency and imbecility either in
their bodies or minds? Or from whence is it (as Mizaldus observes) that the
fat and flesh of a Bear taken and kept close in Troughs, or other convenient
vessels, do increase at the same time when as the Bears lying in their dens in
the Winter time do wax fat? Or why does a Woman's milk agitate and prick in her
breasts at the same time when the child (being absent) for want of it is
disquiet? Why do the Pease sowed in the New of the Moon in several places,
continually to the end of the Harvest blossom, and yet never bear? And why
also should that disease be fatal to many thousands that has been mortal to
one man? And that (as English Histories report) an Aquula or water prepared
only for the purpose, did signify and present the condition of the Kings
Sons Oliverius and Artus, notwithstanding they were many miles distant?

Or as some have beheld two musical instruments so proportionated that the
strings, of the one should sensibly move with the sound of the other, and non
to stir at the sound of any other instrument? What should be the reason that
blood should gush forth from the body of one slain, when the Homicide is in
presence, and as it were point him out? Or that the Ellychnium or match of a
Lamp fired by a singular Artifice should certainly predict the disease and
death of the person (though far distant) whose blood is adhibited or applied
unto it?

I speak not of the Magnetisme of the Electrum (or Amber) which though shut up
in several boxes, has the same virtue of transferring and conveying the
secret intentions of the mind unto those who are absent and far remote: Nor of
the Sambucum (or Elder) which has the same, if not greater, virtue against the
falling Evil, whose berries do increase and grow sometimes by the putrefyed
bodies of dead Sparrowes and Magpies, and sometimes by their excrements or
dung: Also the root of Tamarisk steeped in the urine of one that has the
yellow Jaundise, and afterward burned in the fire, cures the same. And the
herb Condyloma (or Mullein) applied to the diseased and cast into the air,
does admirably cure the Haemorroids. And also that there is sometimes a lesser,
sometimes a contrary quality in Vegitives of the same species; which may
likewise be said of the dispositions and natures of men, borne under either
equal or different Ascendants or Climats.

The true cause of all which, is the harmony of spiritual Mumie under the
certain stars or genius of every thing destined and empowered by sacred
providence, by whose excelling strength and motions all subordinate things
enjoy in every part alalegicall and true proportional virtues, unless some
hindrance by accident (as by the impurity or inequality of the matter) do
intervene.

So that hence is the diversity of things of the same species, according to a
greater or lesser power, for they may hinder all the Celestial influences by
the confusion and inhability or impotency of their matter: Hence also springs
that proverb of the Platonists, The heavenly influences operate according to
the merit or goodness of the matter, and those things in which the Idea of the
matter is most predominant ( viz. which have a greater similitude to the things
separated) can more properly operate the like virtues and effects as the
separated Idea.

This is the very reason, and true Philosophical cause of the sympathy of
things, to which all other (unless made Appendices to this) that have been
with much study invented, and with great applause received, must necessarily
give place.

Hear what Scaliger says (a man of that accurate judgment that I should
scarce believe he could be deceived) It is certain (says he) that there are
some things which are common to species, and therefore are enforced to a
certain Congruency; and so there are certain distinct qualities or
contrarieties of kinds, from whence proceeds different species; and these are
the original of Sympathies and Antipathies.

But if a genericall community be the adequate cause of sympathy, how comes it
to pass, that all species of what kind soever, have without order the same
congruency amongst themselves? I speak of the ^^vocall genus, for all species
have not equally one and the same affections: For example; suppose the species
of the Equivocall genus were here to be understood; then the sympatheticall
Cancer would not be rightly an Animal, as other fishes, without that Sympathy:
If also incongruent differences of Genus's, be the cause of Antipathy in
Species, (which nevertheless would be manifest (petitio principii) to affirm
what he does not in the interim tell in what the difference consists) how
comes it to pass, that all species of this difference are not
Antipatheticall? As for example; one Antipatheticall affection of a man being
common to every individual man, why (seeing every man equally participates of
the form of difference) should they not have principles tending to those
contrary affections?

Therefore the Philosopher seems unwisedly to carp at the Physician, yea, by
his favor, I may say) unjustly; for, though he endeavors to refute
Fracastorius, to whom, in this point, more credit is to ^e given) or makes at
him as it were with several passes, yet they may easily be put by, or avoided,
if we shall understand by the conjunction of form in Sympatheticals and their
propagation (which Scaliger does chiefly oppose) not the form as it is
distinguished from the whole matter and substance, but the species out of them
springing and arising together: and by the conjunction no other thing then the
promotion and mutual application of the power and properties of it, by which
it operates.

The effusion or (...) (emanation) of these and the like properties we shall
here deliver.

Theophrastus affirms, that the (...), or extraction and transplantation of
Mumie, may be made, and effected without the diminution of the thing, or the
substantial form of it; therefore it must be an Accidens which must be
subtracted, and which is used as the means of transplantation, and that
properly; its essence being not altogether divided from the substance of the
thing, which with the spirit of the matter being brought to its extremest
bounds, immediately with the property of the present Microcosmicall Magnetisme,
by a mutual concurrency is united; and lastly, by the mediation of the Terrene
stars, and the Celestial Spirits and Influences i^ accommodated, and by their
adspiration and conjunction, through a certain occult virtue of their
Constitutions it gains so much as before it wanted of perfection.

Wherefore, Transplantion is nothing else but a mutual propagation of one
thing into another, by the benefit of the property of Essential Mumie duly
extracted by a Magneticall virtue; and thence by their equal cognation with
the stars, promoted to a singular excellency and fortitude.

(The difference of Mumie follows.)

CHAP. II. Of the differences of Mumie.
WE shall not here inquire after the differences of Mumie in general, for
that has been principally treated of in the ^recedent Chapter, but only of
those which fall out in the Cases of Paracelsus, which he calls Corporeal:
These are to be taken from the nature of the Elements, to which the bodies
after death are commit^ed; for as they by themselves have not (...) like
operations, but interchangeably discede from themselves with great difference;
as in the fire, their fiery; in the air, their airy qualities, etc. showing
proprieties that are sometimes very contrary among themselves; so the
generations and corruptions of things begun in the same and perfected, are
distinguished by an extreme difference from themselves; nor are the conditions
of generated and corrupted things every where the same; For example, in
generated things the airy flesh of Birds is not the same with the watery flesh
of Fishes, nor the fiery flesh of the Wolf and Lion the same with the earthy
flesh of the Ox, etc.

So bodies receive a nature, clearly distinct from the diverse Elements to
which after death they are committed: for when a humane body is left by death
in the bowels of the earth, then it endures an earthy and a kind of tepid
putrefaction, the spirit within being suffocated, so that its Mumie is
loathsome and not proper for use. So likewise a body in w^ter follows the
nature of the Element, and turns into a mucilaginous or slimy kind of
putrefaction, which is also pernicious to the vital spirit or Mumie of a
thing. The fire is altogether destructive both to the spirit and body, so that
it wholly demolisheth it, and drives out the Mumie wholly, unless its certain
degree or quantity be observed.

Wherefore there are four corporeal Mumies specified by Paracelsus (viz.) of
the Fire, Water, Earth, and Air, but the three former do ((...)) as it were
susuperficially and uncommodiously make up those kinds of Mumie, only that
Mumie of the Air remains useful; and that is so far from being in the least
degree apt for the conservation of humane life, that it is rather quite
contrary, (to wit) more tending to antipathy then sympathy, and more
veneficiall (although forbidden by the Divine Law) then beneficial. There are
principally two causes of this; First the destruction of the whole body
putrefying within it self; by which the Earth and water of the Microcosme, are
forced to return into their first macrocosmicall ens; and seeing the other two
Elements ( viz. Air and Fire) are the retinacle and stay of life, which only
possess a perfect and incorrupted body, therefore that presently separates
from the other three Mumies aforementioned, and retires into the living body of
the Macrocosmicall Element, which receives it even as the field does the
essence of the dung: we do require nothing from Mumies for the preservation of
humane life, but the very life (which consists in the fire and air, or more
properly) is defined to be Calor and Spirit entire, therefore they retain
nothing more in themselves that may be useful for extraction.

The other cause is the same with the former concerning the elemented parts
returning to the Elements; this only excepted, that it is to be taken out of
those bodies that perish by the violence of the other three Elements: But here
we shall only speak (and that properly) of those that dye by defect of body, or
necessity of diseases; for this in respect of its decaying virtue, is not to be
preferred before the other three (rejected) Mumies; for although they are (...)
dissolved by the sensible action of the eternal Elements, yet they internally
co^rupt them in an insensible and indiscern manner; which afterward causes not
o^ a dissension, but also an intestine conten^on to the utter ruin,
destruction, and d^solution of themselves in several m^ners according to their
degrees of pred^minancy: Whence proceeds the vario^ Idea of diseases,
sometimes the Drop^ from the pluviall impetuosity of Wate^ sometimes the Fever
from the Nitro-su^phurous predominancy of Fire; otherwh^ the Leprosy from the
impression of Eart^ and many more which the Physicians o^ mention in their
Pathologicall Treatis^

Wherefore this corruption of Elemen^ being quickly moved, the Mumiall B^^ same
of life, and vital spirit (their hab^tation being dissipated) must of necess^
cease; and transfixed bodies being af^^ this manner seized on, or surprised
(...) sudden death, have an unwholesome a^^ unprofitable Mumie, improper for us^
which Theophrastus calls in the Germa^ tongue, Die Mumien der am Schelmen
(...) storbenen Leiber, the Mumie of execute bodies.

Which evils may be excited in these th^^ ^^mies contrarily and
Antipathetically ac^rding to the imprinted infection of every ^ody, which we
may gather from those that we eaten the boild flesh of a mad Wolf (...) Dog,
who presently become mad them^^lves; also the boiled liquor of pestilentiall
^^kasses, being sprinkled upon posts, handles ^f doors, etc. do cause a most
pestilentiall ^fection; whereof there are diverse sorts; that which proceeds
from the Mumie of ^orceresses, from the dust of infected Sepul^ires, and from
the Mumie which draws (...) infection from Spermate diabolical ta^n, etc.
Theophr. Paracels. in his Tract. 2. de ^stilitate, does (upon good
considerations) ^^ut obscurely handle this Pestilentiall infe^ion; wherefore
seeing Paracelsus was spa^ng herein, we shall modestly forbear to ^eat of it,
lest we should enduce any one too prone of themselves) to practice such
^mpieties.

But to the matter; a body dying by the interception of air, receiving not
tyranni^all or forcible impression Elementary into ^s corporal Mass,
remains wholly unde^troyed, and is less subject to the Elemen^ary resolution
or putrefaction, so long as ^t is preserved and kept under a moist heaven, and
in the Air: And that because the evolation of the watery humor being
accelerated by the air and motion, does preserve the oily and Balsamic humor
in their Essence, which would otherwise be accompanied with the watery humor;
And this plainly appears by wood burned in the fire (which we vulgarly call
Charcoal) and in flesh smoaked (in the chimney or otherwise) by which means
they are more durable, and also retain their alible and nutrimentall juice
entire; from whence they are usually had in great request.

Thus it happens that the Mumiall spirits suffering extremely by the present
evil, are drawn and retired into their chiefest ((...)) ripeness and
perfection, and are powerfully, and exactly commiscerated with their most
internal substances; as a living body is more capable of any faculties, so
after death being endued with this Balsamic potency more internally, more
powerfully resists the putrefying habitude of the Elements, and defends it
self against all encroachments of adulterating corruption. For the clearing of
which there are diverse arguments; (for instance) bodies dissected into many
parts (though they have not several spirits, but inclused) do contrary to
their nature leap and stir up and down with several motions; insomuch that
they are vulgarly esteemed innocent and not able to die while the sun is above
the Horizon: And sometimes a dog is observed to bark (as it were) and make many
motions, his heart being cut out, as if he would tell Aristotle he was deceived
in his opinion, when he said the heart is the first that lives, and the last
that dies.

Moreover, the Balsame is not necessitated to depart from the body or
habitation of the spirit, or vital Balsame, so long as it remains entire and
unhurt, in what part soever it is so irresoluted or resolved into its Elements;
and therefore nothing is here dear linquished or separated but the animating
rational soul, or the informing form of man, whose presence gave a difference
to every thing specifically; for a man being defunct and reduced into Mumie, is
no more a man but equivocally; and the vital spirit, vegetable, natural
Balsame, the Symphysis, and with it the exuberancy of the occult powers, in
such a body suffer no damage.

Therefore the Aereall Mumie only of the Microcosme, being extracted and
separated for the preservation of the health of man, (and for many other uses
hereafter specified) is approved of; so that the person or subject during life
was perfectly healthful and found, without any troublesome passion, or
essential constitution of parts or offending faculty, which may occasion any
Mumiall imperfection, for those procure an Antipatheticall operation.

CHAP. III. Of the Extraction of Aereall Mumie.
PAracelsus in many places wonderfully extolleth and openly professes that the
Balsame of the Aereall Mumie of the Microcosme does preserve the health of man's
body, because it most powerfully resists all sorts of poisons received; it
expels the contagious intoxication of the plague, and many other diseases:
And that ((...)) the efficacy and virtue, in perfection of Aurum potabile, and
of all other things of the greater world, even of the Philosophers Stone, may
be gathered and raised from it: wherefore I suppose it requisite to unfold this
mystery more deliberately, and more accurately to set down the Extraction of
it: In the pursuance whereof I find that this Aereall Mumie may be separated
and extracted several ways; as following.

First, it is performed by the way of Putrefaction and separation of Elements,
and their combination, so that from thence arises a new body in respect of the
difference in its members, the Mumie being extracted hence retains all its
former properties whatsoever, and is most ready to assist them in another.

Secondly, the Extraction of Mumie is perfected after the manner of
Quintessence, of which in our first Tract, etc.

Thirdly, by the destruction of the Body, and afterward transplanting the
spirit of the Mumie into another vegetable body.

Take these three Extractions particularly handled for their better explication
and exposition in the Tractates following.

The first manner of Extraction of Mumie: Or, Of the Tincture of the Microcosme.
Corporeal Mumie is to be taken when as the substance adhering to every
member, (viz.) the liver, lungs, or the whole body, (by which is understood the
flesh and blood) do putrefie during the time of a Philosophical month in a
vial Hermetically closed, that it may have (as it were) a mucilaginous form:
the Muccago or filthy matter being wrung or drained from it, must be laid in
dung to putrefie a Philosophical month, that so it may be reduced into a
Spagiricall Embryon; let the water be separated from this Embryon matter in
Balneo Mariae, and the air in Ashes; The water being again powered on the
residue, and the signature duly interposited, let it putrefie another month in
Balneo Mariae; then must the Water and Fire being extracted together by Ashes,
the Water being separated from the Fire through Balneo Mariae, and rectifying
the Fire apart by Ashes: This will so separate the Elements (though the
aforesaid Embryonian Earth may yet require another purgation) as if they were
resolved into their three principles. After which let that Foeculent and
drossie Earth be reverberated or boiled in a close vessel for four days; then
let the Element of Water be distilled by a Balneall temper, that it may only
consume the heterogeneous humidity; the residue is to be perfected by Ashes.

The water that flows upon the reverberated Earth boiling in Ashes, must
three or four times by a strong fire be repelled and forced out, so shall it
appear more pellucide and clear, and will be rectified with the proper Earth by
the same work.

In like manner perfect the Air upon the Earth by cohobating it to a purity
and reasonable sapor.

Then proceeding to the Fire; let that mixed with the Water, be put into a
place fit for putrefaction for some few days, so shall the Empyreuma (or dross
of the Fire) be abstracted from the water by an Arenarious or sandy kind of
distillation; then separate again the Water from thence in Balneo Mariae,
afterward place it to putrefie for some three days mixed with the Earth; then
distill it by the Sand in a strong fire, and the fire will rise up together
with the Sand, which is to be separated from the Water, the fire remaining in
the bottom.

Pursue the same Infusion, Distillation, and Separation from this Element of
the Earth, until nothing of that Fire remain in the bottom; the Water at
length being separated (after it has been divided from the clear Fire
remaining three days) must be abstracted from it thoroughly by Balneo Mariae;
the Fire at last being reduced to the Calor of Ashes; this will sublimate this
laborious rectification being of a more weakly operation: For thus by
cohobation the Airy Balsame from the Water and Air, will be conciliated to the
Fire, and the Fiery Balsame by Fire to the Water; so that the last Liquors will
be respondent to the two first Principles, Mercury and Sulphur; which afterward
being rectified by a circular motion will return into their proper Center,
(viz.) the Mercuriall Liquor with the Sal, but the Sulphur circulating by its
self will pass into its own Center.

The third Principle must be perfected according to the (...) or operation
following, viz. the reverberated Earth beaten upon Marble must be steeped in
four times as much of the Water separated in the first distillation by the
Balneo, and must again be coagulated by Ashes, and so to be continued until
the Earth shall have thoroughly sucked up the Fire, (for it will be sublimated
to the likeness of Snow) so the more impure part, as the Tares sowed in the
field of Nature, hindering the juncture of familiarity and concord, shall be
wholly relinquished and left rejected.

Which earth being refined by sublimation, will truly make the third principle
(viz.) Sol, which is the Matter into which the other two (Mercury and Sulphur)
are to be perfectly received as the procreating Spermate of Man and Woman,
being appointed and approved for a new and admirable increase, containing in it
self the Portracture and Nature of the whole World: (I mean of the Tincture
extracted out of the Microcosme) and therefore called by the name of the
Microcosme or little World, but rather by the title of the Microcosmicall stone
of Philosophers, seeing it a Medicine for all diseases.

The third manner of Extraction, or of Aereall Mumie.
A Third Extraction is of Aereall Mumie or of the Balsame of the body
prefocated and this must be done by the means of Transplantation.

First, let the Mumie being mixed in (...) fourth part of hot and dry earth be
dissolved in a close vessel for a month, or until i^ has a mucilaginous
form, then put in the seeds of such plants whose virtues are effectual against
the diseases you would have cured, viz. for the Plague Antipestilentiall seeds;
for Fevers the seeds of Plants contrary to them, and so of the rest; so leave
them in the open air while they begin to sprout and grow; for the magneticall
virtue of the seed and its spirit swelling in it, does not only answer in
proportion of Air, but the same (although often changing its nature with the
spirit of it) does as it were nourish the inward Balsamic spirit of the
Mumiall Earth, and so while it thus vegetates it will associate the spiritual
virtues and properties of that same Mumie with it self continually.

Moreover, the Extraction of the same ^arbe skilfully mediated with the spirit
of ^ne, after the manner of the Quintessence ^d Magisterium, will be very
commodious ^^d useful for the conservation of health, ^d repelling of many
diseases. Which ^^^stery of Transplantation is more amply ^^dled in the
subsequent Chapter; And al^^^ugh many reasons may be given for ^^^^all
Extractions, yet I shall only here lay ^wn Three as most principal and
requisite (...) show the potency and operation of the ^ore secret Medicine; the
rest (through the ^^^rt and Alembick) I will leave to the ^rofessor.

CHAP. IV. Of the Spiritual Mumie of a Micr^cosmicall living body.
THeophrastus Parac. (in his Book de T^^pore) having finished the four sorts
(...) Corporeal Mumie, as in the former Series; ^scendeth now to a more
mystical and adm^rable Mumie as he expresses in these word Quod insuper alid
Mumia deture vivo existen^ corpore, vel exquavis ejus part, integris and
inoffens^ iis permanentibus, extrabenda, etc. There m^ be also another Mumie
extracted from (...) living body, or from any member or pa^ thereof remaining
whole and entire, whi^^ will cure many affections (otherwise inc^rable) by a
common and easy way, b^ which, as by a natural and wholeso^^ Philtre, a
loving and mutual complacenc^ is procured between a man incensed again^ his
wife; and many other excellent experiments are found in it, though some
ignorant and evil disposed people will no^ grant any such thing in nature;
who^ frivolous arguments and sophistry bette^ experience has consuted. These
(Experiments) have hitherto been much concealed from the most learned, and
notwith^tanding have been used by the Rusticall and ^^mon people, of whom some
by this Mumie ^^ve caused their Herds, Geese, Hens, and ^^geons to love them,
others have (with like success) given it to Dogs, Falcons, Stags, and Lions,
by which they have been ta^ed, and also by the proper use of this ^^y have
persuaded and allured wild ^^sts into their nets; which mystery of ^^e
Magnetisme I intend not in this place ^^ther to enlarge.

The same Paracelsus (in lib. 4. de Origin ^b. invisib. toward the end)
speaks thus, which for the benefit of the matter and ^elegancy of the style,
I have here recited in ^is own Language.) Ran die Sondurch em ^lass schetnen,
unnd das Fewr durch den ^^en geben, unnd beyder Leib bleibet ^^aussen: So can
auch der Leih seine Krafft ^n die Weite geben lassen, unnd still liegen ^^ss
wohl als die Son durch dz Glass, und ^ompt doch selbst nicht dadurch: Drumb
^ird them Leibe an sich selbst nichts zuge^essen, sondern den kraffte die anss
ihm ^ben, ingleicher Weise, wie der Geschmack ^on eim Bisem, dess Leib auch
still lieget. Also find auff den Grund die Bielfeltigen Experimenten in Mumia
erfunden worden, dass man sagt das Lheil am Menschen is it gut dazu, das ander
is it gut zu den Dingen, dabon ich bie nicht schreiben will, biss ich zerlege die
Mumien in der Himmischen Schuel, in welchen Orten erklaret werden die Ding, so
euch hie werden gebresten, denn fie haben so gross Mysteria in ihnen, dass fie
eines trefflichen Buchs well bedurffen, etc. (which is thus rendered) If the Sun
can shine through the Glass, and the fire shine through the Furnace, and the
bodies of each is not near, then the body also can ejaculate its virtue though
it lies still and comes no nearer then the Sun does to the Glass, for it does
not pass through the Glass: And consequently nothing is attributed to the
body but to the virtues proceeding from it, even as the sent which the Moss
affords, whose body lies and stirs not. The like Experiments were found in
the Mumie upon good grounds, whereby it was known that some part of man was
good for such a thing, and some were found to do good otherwise; of which I
intend not to write now, but refer it to the Schools, when Mumie shall be
Anatomized in a heavenly manner, where such things shall be further declared,
which you now stand in need of; for there are contained therein extraordinary
Mysteries, whose demonstration would require a great Volum.

Which words of Parucelsus do excellently describe that Spiritual Mumie, and
other Sympatheticall and Antipatheticall Mysteries.

He demonstrateth the true foundation and use of the Mumie (according to its
doctrine) under the example or type of the Magnet and Iron, by which virtue the
Magnet does alliciate the Iron unto it, showing by it the (...) or true
extraction of Spiritual Mumie and its hidden faculties (of which further
hereafter, though he does somewhat obliquely and obscurely express himself)
by handling the thing it self, and foundation thereof in these words, Spiritum
Mumiae nullius usus esse, nisi mediante vivo quoclam corpore; that the spirit
of Mumie is of no use unless to a living body: which some may seem to enforce
from the 29. Psalm. For what profit is there in my blood, when I descend into
Corruption? Although many may suppose little or nothing is here meant of
Spiritual Mumie, yet if any one will narrowly search into it, by comparing
truth with truth, he may (by a more diligent enquiry) find out the true
concordancy of the Magnet and Iron, with their properties, nature, original
and virtues: After which he will easily know how to apply the (mentioned)
Example to the present purpose, and also (...) forms of different species are
received in one and the same subject: We have an Example of this in the
Lithopaedio Albosii, and also in Coralls, Metalls, and in diverse Mineralls,
bearing the figures and likeness of herbs and other things: Now each form
(viz.) the Spirit or Theamedall form by reason of its Lapidary Murcury, and
the Martial Spirit by reason of its Martial Mercury, (in some measure) is
received into the society of the Lapidary Mercury, to which the spirit of the
Celestial motions particularly qualified is a faithful and impart all
conductor and coadjutor; for the substances, forms, and innate powers of the
Terrene existences depend on the assimilative aspect of the heavens; and
therefore they both are mutually inspired by the Celestial influences, and
corrivally received into the love and bosom of the aforesaid matter.

Art poli vinclisque nova ratione paratis.
Thus heavens conspiring, Art does prove
A new found way to fetter Love.
When as the Twin-husbands having happily celebrated their Nuptials, (with
their aforesaid Spouses) by the consummation of this Marriage, the (...), or
more predominant Sulphurous Martial Spirit endued with a wonderful mobility,
subdueth and more internally possesses the whole Mercuriall Lapidary liquor,
the Metal merely proper being absent, and the Theamedall spirit but weakly
resisting and impotently endeavoring the performance of the same duty: On the
other side the Lapidary Mercury by its cognation or affinity with the enclosed
particle of the Martial Murcury, does not only affectionately retain the
Lapidary Spirit, but also the Martial, and coagmenteth the Metal into a
Lapidary body, by the mediation of the Sal; for the greater part of Mercury is
Lapidary, the less Metallic.

Thus the whole Concrete is not alike, neither Iron nor Stone, but (...)
Herma^hroditicall or mixture of both, but yet, (...) in such proportion, that
the Lapidary Mercury may obtain its natural matter from the Lapis, and its
spirits from the Iron, the rest being permanent and existent in it in the same
quality, but in a less quantity and efficacy.

This is the History of the Natural Magnelick generation, from whence are the
very principles and reasons of all its proprieties; For in that it attracteth
Iron, or is attracted to it in respect of its more massy (and ponderous) body,
is because the Sulphurous Martial Spirit being of a moveable and noble nature
is intricated in an improper (...) the more powerful one faculty is, the
weaker is the other; and contrarily one of the Contraries being settled, the
other is removed.

Lastly, whence is its Conversion to the North? briefly hence; The heaven in
that part of it, the Vrsae cauda (vulgarly called the Tail of the lesser Bear,
or any other Star) is the principium of this particular nature in the Magnet,
comprehending the reason of its whole being, as the Moon of the Selenite stone,
the Sun of the Lothes, and other Heliotropiums; or in a certain sense the Sea
is the cause of all other waters; therefore the Celestial Spirits flowing into
the Rudiments, Complements, and Suppliments of this Creature more abundantly by
reason of the immobility of the Polary stars, of which also the contrariety of
the mobible Air being a cause, is of such notable concernment, that they
continually have the same motion of the Star about the Earth; (which if you
desire a more narrow inspection, it is sufficiently experimented in the Tract
of the Loadstone) and so that in whatsoever adversity or exigence they are,
they naturally desire to escape and recreate themselves this way, by which
there is a conjunction with the familiar symbolicall and chiefest Celestial
Spirits, and a mutual and natural inclination with all other Elements and
Elementaries.

Hitherto sufficiently of the Magnet; where ^^rst we must note ((...))
ac^ording to its progression, that the Magneti^all Attraction proceeds from
the Sulphurous Martial Spirit, and the Celestial influence prelominant in it.

Wherefore it will be necessary and conveient to the exalting and extracting of
the ^^burous spirit of the Microcosme, to try it by a Microcosmicall Magnet
bearing affinity with the Martial Magnet; as in the subsequent Chapter shall
be more largely declared.

with it; so the generation and Principia of the Microcosmicall Magnet is to be
sought ((...)) in the Excrements of the Entrails aforesaid.

The familiar nutriment of our nature being singularly ingested, and reduced by
the Arches into the Materia prima or first matter, that liquid and Mercuriall
substance, (for whither else can they more commodiously apply then to the said
Lapidary Mercury) For those things which the sulphurous spirit of the
Microcosme does so much traverse up and down, being liquid, do cleave unto the
embracements of the superior intestines, and associateth with them though
contrary to it self, no otherwise then as the form does with the matter, is at
length deduced through the Monocle.

This Conjunction being made when as they shall draw the Magnetic powers and
faculties of its Microcosmicall sulphur, even as the Lapidary Mercury did the
Spirits of the Martial, does not only deserve the name of Mercury by its
Analogy with the Lapidary Magnet (so called) but may most worthily be termed
the Microcosmicall Magnes.

That this is truly so, appears by that the Microcosmicall Mercury endued
with the said spirit, demonstrateth that Magnetic nature, dignity, and use by
many various and wonderful ways, which is conspicuous and clearly exemplifyed
by that extemporaneous sympatheticall Unguent which is not unknown to many,
especially to Military men; for it is generally esteemed the most ready (Cure),
the Instrument or Weapon only that made the Wound being duly anointed with it,
wonderfuly mitigateth, and also heals the Ulcer or Wound: So in the very
Magnes of the Microcosme (being diversely disposed) sometimes it strangely
stops the violent solutions of the belly, and (amongst which) sometimes the
Dysenteria or Bloudyflux, which if it be Epidemicall it has its descent from
above, and sometimes it greatly provokes them: And this is generally observed
even by the common sort of people the said Magnet being burned or fired either
by throwing burning Coals on it, or else by burnt Wine and pepper together,
sprinkled upon it, does with as much torment afflict the Nates depositoris
inciviles, as the burning Coals themselves, were they applied to the same
parts.

Of which says Paracel. (in Tract. 1. de modo Pharmacandi:) that the aforesaid
(...) (...) spirit of Man, (according to their severa^ natures and proportion)
draws with as much alacrity and aptness, as is before specifye^ of the
Attractive faculty of the Loadsto^ to Iron, (viz.) from the well and soun^ part
a sound and well disposed Spir^^ from the diseased a languishing Spirit
infected with that disease, as this Conjunctive appetite is natural to every
things its like; and there is an easy solutio^ of the parts of a subject when
as like (...) drawn by power of its like; in which respe^^ that of Heraclitus
is not absurd, Omnia fieri p^ amicitiam and per litem, all things are do^^ by
amity and strife. Of which more amply^ in another place.

CHAP. VII. Of the use of Spiritual Mumie (in general.)
IT is affirmed before from Theophrastus, that the Spiritual Mumie extracted
from ^^e proposed Magnes, is of no use, neither ^^n it effect any thing,
unless a live body or ^^getable Animal does intercede, and not with^^t reason,
for seeing the virtue must only ^^sue out of the body, it would be more
^mpotent and incapable of procuring effects worthy its original; for nothing
operates beyond its species and degree; therefore it must of necessity be
invested with such a substance, whose interior Anatomy according to the
harmony of the Heavens does as much agree with it as its former substance from
whence it was extracted, or whose condition is the same with the former in the
series of the Celestial dignities; for it is most certain and confirmed by
invincible Experience, that these Terrestrial things dispose themselves in
order to these Celestial, and that what happens to one by the virtue of the
Celestials, that presently by the concordancy of the superior (powers) is
(...) unto it, and transferred into some vegetable subject capable of the
vital power o^ increasing it, might by its spiritual attractor^ virtue be
continually augmented.

To which may be answered, that although the Magnes of the Microcosme will
extract some part of the spiritual, yet i^ will not do it sufficiently, nor so
much a^ is necessary for transplanting or eradicatin^ diseases, but this
translation to another body will make it less operative, being banished from
its own: Of which more at larg^ in the ensuing Procession (being a continuatio^
of this Extraction.)

Take Magnetic Earth, into which some spiritual Mumie being received by
f^mentation, let it be inseminated into seed^ or implanted into some herb
prope^ for the disease and member you would Cure; as

For the Jaundies Dropsy Plurisie Plague Ulcers and Wounds
into Line-seed, Hemp Seed Juniperberies. Pimpernel, Cammo^^^ Wormwood.
Saint-Johns-Wort, Scordium, Plantane, Spotted Arsmart.
^d so in the rest, by adhibiting their pro^^r guides: Let them grow and
vegetate in ^^e open Air, and so the Attractive proper^y will wax much
stronger, and through (...) vegetative nature, will wholly draw and ^^ck up the
Mumiall spirits, Sympathetically and Antipathetically, by the benefit of the
^^it of the World; and through the means ^f the seminall quality of its
species, (if its ^roper form should degenerate) it will re^^in and keep its
properties without any ^ifficulty: And this proceeds from the ^ongruity of
forms in both; namely, in ^^e member administering Spiritual Mumie, and in the
seed or plants conforming to it; therefore, if the infected member be weak, ^^e
impotency thereof will be transferred (...) the seed or plant; if it be
naturally ^^ong, they will also, after their man^er, participate: And this is
readily per^^cted by the means aforesaid, as a kind of Magical allurement
and preparative, which is apt to receive the Celestial infus^ions.

But it is to be observed, that the plants ^r fruit must be diversely ordered
(that they may the more easily work this effect) and accommodated to the nature
and several conditions of the Disease: As for Example.

of the vital World, through the Rays of the Stars opportunely applied. (But
to our purpose.)

It is now carefully to be looked unto, that the herb or tree with which the
Mumie out of the sound member is mixed, may not decay or be cut, but that with
all care it may be preserved alive and growing; therefore that vegetable
species must be transplanted into the very kernel, near the root of a shady
and green tree, the hole being firmly closed up again, that so the moisture of
it may more properly be exhausted, and by applying every thing rightly, the
operation may the more effectually succeed

And it must also as carefully be observed, that the fruit or tree into which
the disease is transplanted, do not grow up too suddenly and rankly, (which
often happens) for such superfluous vegetation is dangerous, and hurtful for
the member: This may appear by the example of Hair, which is often transplanted
into a Willow, that it may grow the faster, nor is it without success; but
when they are left in it beyond their proper time, being not cut down nor
burned, that over rank and moist vegetation oftentimes proves hurtful to the
brain and eyes, especially to the latter; which is also dangerous to any
afflicted or troubled with Phthisick and Fevers, (while they happily think
themselves ^^ure;) which only proceeds from this er^s, that they improvidently
place their ^^nies in herbs and trees of a rank or too quick ^^tation.

Also, you must carefully provide, that (...) choose a species temperated
according to ^^e condition of the person or member in^^sted, that so it may
rightly perform its ^^ty.

Which proportion of general harmony ^very commendable: As for example, the
^ake eminent for its duration, and of a slow ^^th, is therefore most proper for
the teeth ^f Children (shedding them the first seven ^ears) to be transplanted
into, to avert any ^iseases from them, during their whole life. ^or with less
reason against the (...), or ^^stennesse of Children, a wedged piece of ^^cke
is taken, with a certain quantity of ^arley corns, upon which cause the Child
^o make water for some few days, then dig from under the Oak a handful of
fresh Earth, and mingle it with the Barley; after which, ^it a young Oak, and
put the Earth mixed with the Barley together into it, and also the aforesaid
wedge of Oak, not without a mystical Mumiall reason, like this of ours; which
may likewise occasion the commen^ations of that Shrub, which is said to be
(...) from Antiquity, (namely) a Bath made o^ the blood of Infants, for curing
the Lepros^ and to restore corrupted flesh: So that the (without cause of
injury) has rendre^ certain Kings hateful to the Common people.

For it is both detestable, improfitable and noxious, in respect of nutrition,
to receive the parts themselves, and humane blood into the body; for, illud
quod nutrit, non plane corpori debet esse homogeneum, that which nourishes
ought not properly to be homogoneall with the body; because sometimes a like
thing causes evil effects; an example whereof we have in Faustina daughter of
the Emperor Antonius, who drinking the blood of a Gladiator, whom she
affected, it wrought, in stead of love, a strange hatred, (as Julius
Capitilonus writes:) And that Roman (of whom Schrammius speaks in Fasciculo
Historiarum) who drinking the blood which gushed out of his own vein,
wonderfully forgot that Learning which before he was exquisite in: I might also
instance the blood of a Cat, which sometimes having been drunk, did infuse a
strange madness, with a Cats gesture and yawling. Many other examples might be
produced of this nature.

Therefore, if it be required to give Mu^^e extracted from another, to any man,
the ^^fest way is to prescribe the whole fruit in^reased by that
transplantation to be eaten or drunk; or otherwise, give the Essence of it
extracted by the benefit of the spirit of Wine; both which will be
successful: Whereof more at large in the Tract of Love and Amity following.

must be esteemed the first Cause; whence i^ the first and principle motion of
all things And ( in lib. 1. de Generatione) he says that the Heavens was
accounted by the ancient Philosophers) for the Progenitor, or fir^^ Parent:

Nor does subtle Scaliger (in Exere. 6. (...) Subtle. Sect. 2.) unfitly argue
against Pr^clus, That Nature is a Sublunary power; bu^ in this it differs from
Nature, that the u^versall Circuit of Nature is never comprehended; Nature
being the Motus principium and Motion being above the Moon, no movin^ thing can
be equal in power with the Mover^ but he says truly, that this power is no
separated from the Celestial bodies; that is distinct from those powers from
which the^^ our affections proceed; wherefore, according to their Power,
Concursion, Mixtion, an^ Alienation, it has a diverse Creation, Existency and
Dissolution: What else is this, but the motus principium to be in those
Celestials and that the Heavens have power to effect all things?

Thus strengthened therefore by the Authorities, I may presume with Fernel^ the
Physician an excellent Philosopher (in (...) de abd. rer. Cause.) gravem eorum
esse stupid^^ tatem, qui sidera nihil in era nisi calorem an^ frigus, imbres
aut siccitatem lumine motuque s^^ducere contendant; that such are very
igno^^nt, who would enforce upon the Stars ^ely a power over the Air, of
causing Heat (...) Cold, Moisture or Drought by their ^ight and Motion; if by
their good Con^^^ution they do defend and preserve the life ^f all things; why
by their evil disposition ^y they not discomodate the like? Thence (...) say)
is the first and chiefest health and con^rvation of al things, thence also
proceeds ^ath: Those therefore that are unskilful (...) this Contemplation,
do wholly abrogate (...) Causes and Powers; and deny them, as if ^hey were not,
contrary to the testimonies ^f Reason.

Neither are these (powers) received in the ^ublunaries by that universal and
equivocall ^ower of the Heaven, which is drawn by all and every singular thing
more or less, according to the various preparation and con^itution of their
Nature, to which action ^hey chiefly respect, and seem to govern over these
Sublunaries by their Light and Motion: ^or the same operation, and especially
of ^his, and of every singular part of it (of such the natures and species are
for the most part diverse) cannot be denied to be effected by their Influence
and Aspect. Neither do the virtue or spirit of the Celestial bodies always
perform their work by intermixing (...) at the rising of the Sun, at what time
the Cock is observed more earnestly to crow; which alteration the nature of the
Cock does more sensibly and accurately apprehend then any other Creature,
because in the series of things every one has its dependency from a certain
Star; the Cock is properly and especially constituted in the Solary order.

In which sense the opinion of the Saracens would not be so ridiculous and
contemptible, who feign that there is a great Cock in Heaven, whose Crowing
other Cocks here on Earth do only hear, and endeavor to imitate as often as
they hear him Crow. And that of Plato I conceive in the same so^^e, (viz.) that
in the Earth the Celestial bodies are in a Terrestrial condition, and in
heaven the Terrestrial bodies are in a Celestial dignity, etc. Also according
to the Philosophy of the Pythagarians, the Stars are great Systems containing
in themselves whatsoever we have in the Systems or compass of the Earth, Air,
and Water: To which that of Paracelsus agrees in Tract. 1. de pestili^. Ause
them Syder ischen Leben ent springet dash Thierische Leben dese Menschen, alle^
matu^tieh auss Eigentschafft und Krafft dess Himmels, Als i^r sehet an them
Haan, der schreyet die Mitternacht und den Tagan, das count ihm alles auss them
Gestirn, Bie ^un der Haan, also auch der Mensch.

From the Sydereall life arises the Ani^^ll life; all which is natural from
the Celestial property and quality: An example you see by the Cock, who gives
notice of the midnight, and for the break of day; which instinct he has from
Astralls: Man is in the same condition with the Cock.

For there is a double (...) or Essence in Man, (viz.) the body, and the life;
the one is quickened and governed by the inspiration of the Heavens, the other
follows the nature of the Elements: This is not only affirmed by Iamblichus
and Julianus, but by all others that have studied this particular, in Sole
omnes coelestium esse virtutes, that in the Sun is all the virtues of the
Celestial bodies: And Proclus says, that all the virtues of the Celestialls,
do meet and are congregated into one body according to the Aspect of the Sun.

Now let us speak of the Moon, with whom the bodies of Oysters, Cockles, and
all shell Fish, do equally increase and decrease; and Timber felled out of
woods, when the Moon increases and waxes very light by reason of an accession
of moisture withers, and rotteth; but being cut down when (...) of humors,
and commotion in the Member, either it works not with a body of less
activity, or is hindered by the indisposition of the subject. I have observed
(says Marsilius) that does move Physic very little. But concerning the
particular qualities of the Moon; see Macrobius in Septimo Saturnal. toward
the end; Gualterus Ryff, in Iatro-mathematica; and Antonius Maginus de legitimo
Astronomiae in Medicina usu; Theophrastus in lib. de Tempore; and Carrichterus;
in all which, you may sufficiently be satisfied.

These and many other Experiments do not only prove the Solary and Lunary
power, but also that al sublunary things (in what kind soever constituted) are
subject to the Stars, and that they borrow their obscure and imperceptible
virtues from other Planets and Stars: And it is affirmed by the most learned,
that such is the constitution of the Heavens, chiefly from the various
permixtion of the Planets, the cause of proper motion (as has been formerly
delivered) both men and horses, and all kind of perfect Animals, are generated
from the very Elements, as from the most conjunct and adjacent matter: And
likewise the more imperfect Animals as Mice, Frogs, Flies, etc. (which by
observation) are generated of their own accord, as it were in a moment, yet
time has here ^^e first and chiefest part; and many other ^^ings which we have
mentioned are not ^^fected or produced but in their certain ^^me; which the
Preacher confesses ( Ecclesiastes ^^ap. 3. v. 1.) To all things there is an
ap^ointed time and a time to every purpose under the Heaven; which he
manifests ^y a Catalogue of Examples, fitly ap^lying that to every sigular
and appointed ^^ing.

Therefore the natural Philosophers have wisely said Motus et actionis eandem
esse (...) ^d tempus qualis sit corporis ipsius ad locum and ^empus. There is
the same relation of motion and action unto time, as there is of the body ^t
self unto place and time: To which opinion Hippocrates consents (in Epidem.
2. Sect. 6.) saying all things have a solution like to the solution of the
voice, and every one of these are dissolved in a certain time; for from whence
is the mensuration of time but from the heavens? Therefore their power is in
the Celestial causes; as in seeds the power of those things which proceed from
them are in them; and the Effectrices of the most eminent mutations, are not
only in the Elementary nature, but in other things having a more noble
original: In which sense I understand that of Osea, (cap. 2. verse. 21. and
22.) confirming the golden Chain of nature; And in that day (says the Lord) I
will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear
the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Israel.

The heavens (I say) next to the first cause is the Center, beginning,
seminary, Architect and Archetype of all natural things; this same reconciles
the first with the last, and the supremest with the middle and lowest,
universalls with particulars, diversities with diversities, contraries with
contraries, like with like, joyneth, fashioneth, and perfecteth all things with
all things, by a certain natural law, (but much obscured from us by reason of
its too much remote variety) as you may safely confess, acknowledge and
maintain, that all visible things are the work, fruit, effect, offspring, and
power of Heaven, under whatsoever name or notion they are related to it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Time destinated by the Heavens for the proposed Operations.
SEEing therefore the power of the Heavenly bodies is so ample, according to
the various ejaculations of their virtues; in which respect, the Philosopher (
in 4o Physicorum) confesses the Superior bodies to be as the forms of those
things which are contained in them; and all the substances, facies, and powers
of Terrene things, depend on their affimilative countenance; which Scaliger
expressly concludes, with us; whether the World had a beginning, or is
Eternal: And Plato teaches that the proper series of things, even to the
last, depends on every Star: This truly may very well be said, that the
Condition of the Heavens do very much contribute to all kind of proposed
actions, upon whose favorable influence chiefly depends our dispositions. But
because we are not more ignorant of any thing, then of those which appertain
to the Heavens, as Job himself testifies (38. cap.) in these words, Know
thou the Ordinances of Heaven? Can thou set the Dominion thereof in the
Earth? therefore we will (though weakly sum up some particulars relating he^
unto: Wherefore, in these operation wherein the heart and vital spirit a^
Clients, the fortunate and powerful Sun to be chosen for their Patron, and to
the the Moon opportunely directed: Let the S^ therefore be in the Angle of the
East or We^ or of the Angles of either of the M^^ heavens, but chiefly in the
Angle of the Asc^dant or of the Tenth house, having the medi^^ Coeli above it,
or at least in the Plagis (o^ Cadent) which next succeeds the Angle: Also,
under the Signs or, but chiefly under the beholding him; for it i^ observed,
that then the spirit does so vegecate, that it may be able to resist the
pestile^tiall poison; which Marsilius reports to appear plainly in Babylon,
and Egypt, being Regions that are under, where, when the enters, the
Pestilence cease.

You may likewise observe, that when beholds in a or, or at least, when the
proceeds from the Aspect of one to behold another; especially, when she
passes from the Aspect of the to, for Ptolemy has taught, that does most
perfectly agree with the: As the Mansions of the in a fiery Sign, namely, in,,
or (...) she fortunately aspecteth and: Also, (...) applying of Cordial things
internally and ^ternally to the heart, is very expedient; and ^dyet of subtle
aliments (or of easy di^stion) being very wholesome and nutrimen^ll; a frequent
and gentle motion, a clear and temperate Air, especially a cheerful ^art. The
Natural virtue is governed by participating with and; but when ^trength is to
be increased in the geni^als, the and are to be chosen, for (...) makes a man
fruitful and cheerful, and when therefore she is either with the or, she is a
fortunate Aspect: The same is likewise to be understood of the, therefore she
must not be in the Ecliptic, nor within the Rays of the by 12 degrees,
unless by chance she be at the same minute in with the: Neither must she be in
her detriment, or hindered by or nor in with, nor diminished in light, nor in
her slow course, she must not be combust in her way, nor in the Eight, Sixth,
or Ninth house, nor in the bounds of or. Neither must she be found in any of
the barren Signs of,, or: But if you cannot observe these things, however take
notice of or in the Ascendant, or medium Coeli, for so they come under the
detriments of the, and let her behold or by a or Aspect: But (...) Talis men's
hominum, qualem Pater ipse Deorum,
Atque hominum adducit.
Such are our minds, and such they must be, when
Governed by Jove the Father of Gods and Men.


Jupiter has so great a power over the Animal or Vital spirit, that he is
said, with a Wand to Charm and Excite the mind of Man; by which they would
infer, that he is able by his Aspect or otherwise, sometimes to Dull and
Debilitate, other time^ to Quicken and Corroborate the disposition of Men.

In all these things Jupiter is to be looked upon, in respect of a certain
Universal relation; in which one, we may conclude the faculties of the other
Celestial: Also the member of the body is to be observed, and what Signs
govern the infected Member, and be careful that the Luminaries be found in the
Sign governing the Member; or atleast wise, that such a Sign ascends the
Eastern Horizon.

But if you can get neither of these, it will suffice if the Moon be found in
the Sign of the same Quadrant; but in the interim, not neglecting the hours
of the Planets (as they all them): Lastly, in whatsoever dispo^tion you elect
their addicted Planets, let ^t be either in the Ascendant, or in a good
Con^^guration to it.

The power of which Planets over certain Diseases, Maginus does largely treat
(in lib. ^^g. Astrologiae in Medicinae usu): It shall suffice ^or the
Conclusion of this Chapter to set down one or two examples:

In the Magneticall Cure of the Eyes: Let be taken in the Ascendant, or in a
good place near unto it, for the time of transplanting of Mumie, which is the
principal matter; and take heed of Constellations hurtful to the Lies; (of
which Maginus in cap. 1. lib. d.) Neither must the be in Earthly Signs, or
joined with, but rather in: so likewise observe the other Patrons of this sense.

In the Dropsy; when the Mumie is to be ^xtracted, let the be in Watery Signs,
not with too powerful, nor when he is corporally in with her: But when it is
to be set in the Earth and transplanted, let be then in his highest dignities,
either in,, or; or if in none of these, let the Signs themselves be in the
Eastern Ascendant; let the be decreasing, diminishing in light; or at
leastwise, let her be happily directed to the or, which though it be more
(...) would be too long in this place to relate) and let him procure sweat by
the motion of his body, still retaining the Magnetical Earth; then, having mixed
it with a little new and fertile Earth, put in it the seed o^ Magerome, of
Table-rayall, or of Spike, and o^ other herbs proper for the Brain: Afterward
let them thus grow in the open Air, and the spirit of the Brain will so be
transplanted, and will wonderfully vegetate with the Plant.

In like manner, you must order the Magneticall Earth strengthened with the
Mumie of the Heart, mingled with simple and pure Earth; and put in it seeds of
Cordial herbs, as Mint, Burrage, Buglosse, or the like.

But the third, which exhausteth the spirit of the Liver, (being mixed with
pure Earth before) put in to it Hepatick, Splenetick, and Nephritick Plants;
namely, Carduus Benedictus, Avens, (or Bennet) Rosemary, Seed of Ononis, (or
Resbarrow) etc. and the spirits likewise of the same parts will betake
themselves to it: Mingle these 3 plants or fruits in a Cucurbite, and extract
their Essences by the spirit of Wine: which Essence give to any one whose
favor you desire, in any thing you please; and so the Mumiall spirit extracted
will presently pass into its appropriated places, and become homogeneall and
conformable to them: Hence proceeds the same mind, ^e same affection in all
things, by reason of ^is union of Concordancy.

But if the Mumie shall be extracted only ^om the Brain, then they will
wonderfully ^gree in their mind, intellect, or spirit and vital ^^culty
proceeding from the Brain.

If from the Heart, they will be conjoined (...) their vital spirit and faculty
proceeding ^^om the Heart.

If from the Liver, and other inferior ^embers, then they will sympathise in
their ^irit, or natural, or concupiscible and appetive ^culty, and in other
subordinate things.

These Mumies of the Three principal ^embers, or the Essences of them being
gi^^n, as they occasion a singular Union of ^^ncordancy, and a perpetual
Conformity ^^ereof; so also do they cause love, and a ^ost absolute degree of
friendship; for every ^ing is most inclinable to that which is ^ost like it
self.

CHAP. XII. To reconcile private or public Enemies.
THis has (in a manner) the same effect as the Three Mumies treated of in the
precedent Chapter, this only excepted, (to wit) that the Mumie must be
extracted from both parties, and likewise administered to both; for if any one
should give his own Mumie to his Enemy, he would be incited in a love toward
him, insomuch that he would courteously present his affection^ to him, but the
other would ungratefully decline him, nay, he would never desist from a deadly
and inveterate hatred toward him*

Wherefore, in this it must be endeavored that a mutual Concordancy be made,
and that with equal passion; therefore, the Mumies of both persons must be
taken and intermingled with some kind of fertile Earth, and implanted into an
herb most proper for such an operation; and then to be indifferently
administered to both.

CHAP. XII. ^o reconcile the Ape and Serpent (naturally hating one another) and
other Animals, who are by nature enemies.
THeophr. Paracelsus in lib. de Tempore (besides other Authors) does write ^^at
Apes and Serpents do (with a certain ^^cret and more then Vatinian hatred)
mutu^ly prosecute each other; and although ^is be natural to them, as to
Scorpions and Mice, Serpents and Cancers, the Lion and Cock, Cock and Buzzard,
Wolves and ^heep, (whose skins made into Drums ^oe antipathize) which (besides
Boethius and Opianus) Homer testifyeth lib. 22. Iliad: (...),
(...).
The Wolf and Lamb do ever disagree
Among themselves, through their Antipathie.


Yet may that enmity be admirably composed by means of this Transplantation (so
much commended) and in stead thereof a wonderful Complacency may be had. And
the same may likewise be effected in all Creatures any way discenting among
themselves, as by this plainly appears; insomuch that the force and power of
this Mystical Philosophy, does penetrate the very principal of Nature; so
that nothing can be so natural or obstinately inherent, but may be extirpated;
or corrected, by this contrary of the same nature.

But to proceed to the scope of the matter aforesaid; In the first place, let
the spermes be collected with all the care as may be, and mingled together,
nourishing them with a certain refined and fertile Earth; then let them be
divided into two parts, (viz.) in one part, the nutriment of the Ape, Sheep,
Cock; in the other part, of the Serpent, Wolf, Hawk, etc. let it be
inseminated, etc. Afterward let the accrescency (or fruit) be given mutually to
the Creatures to eat.

To this chiefly pertains that admired gentleness of some wild Beasts and
brute Animals which naturally fly from Man; so that oftentimes it is seen, that
the most savage Beasts become tame and tractable, as Nazianzen (in carmine
sacro, or his Divine Poem,) in which (precepts to Virgins) he writes, that he
himself has seen a (...) or Lyon-keeper, riding on a Lion, who being trained
up to it has like an horse patiently endured the bridle; Which Virgill
affirms in Aeneid. 3.

Et juncti currum Domini subiere Leones.
Lions were joined with one accord,
To draw the Chariots of their Lord.
This has likewise been experienced by those who have triumphed in Chariots
drawn with Tigers; which Silius also witnesses in lib. 17. Of the Carthaginian
War.

-- Odoratis descendens Liber ab Indis
Egit Pampineos fraenata Tigride currus.
From the sweet Indies did descend amain
Driving a Tigre in his branched wain.
Martial, of the tamed Tigre.

Lambere securi dextram consueta Magistri
Tigris ab Hyrcano gloria prima jugo.
CHAP. XIII. To procure a mutual love and affection betwixt a Man and his Wife.
THis use of Mumie is related to the former, only this must be especially
observed, (which for many reasons I modestly refer to the more prudent as
follows) Quod si Maritus uxori suam mumiam paret, loco herbarum Renibus
dicatarum, Vterinas eligere necesse sit, quales sunt: Valeriana, Rosmarinus,
Satureja, Arthemisia, Satyrion foemina, etc. Virtus enim appetitiva erga viros,
quatenus in (...) constituta est, faeminis in matrice situatur; Proinde
Spiritus Mumiae appetitivae Epatis and Renum Virilium in praedictas herbas
uterinas transplantetur, ut ita ductu earundem Spiritus Mumiae Masculae in
locum a natura praemonstratum, matricem nempe feliciter dirigatur.

Quod si vero Uxor marito eandem intentant, loco uterinarum plantis,
Seminibusve, membris virilibus naturali proprietate dicatis utatur, Satyrio
nempe masculo, caepis and similibus; minime gentium vero menstruo, quousque
tamen audaciae non raro ab improbis and incautis meretriculis perventum. Illud
enim absque dubio deleterium est, citam mortem inferens. Et quanquam Sperma
virile and foemineum in plantam quandam translata, eo quo distum est modo and
artificio, pares effectus edant, divina tamen lege illud prorsus interdictum
Proinde ad usum praedictum illa in substantia minime revocentur; Quin potius,
ubi opus est, Spiritus eorundem terrae Magneticae beneficio e lumbis extrahatur.

Yet I intend not this Mystery should be common to all, or that it should be
practiced by wicked persons, though such an action may be done to a laudable
and good end, where the Husband may the more affectionately enjoy his Wife,
according to the bond of Matrimony, or where the Husband desires it for
propagation sake, which cannot be obtained by reason of discord from his wife;
in which case the Husband may with a safe conscience meliorate her nature, and
make it more tractable by his Mumie: And this Extraction of his Mumie according
to the most learned Professors of this Philosophy must be done under the
Exaltation of and when she is happily aspected with the and, (as I have
formerly noted.)

CHAP. XV. To cure both sorts of Jaundies.
IN the first place be sure of the Mumie extracted from the three principal
members (...) that thereby the whole Mumiall spirit may in some measure be in
your power; (for the Jaundies is dispersed through the whole body) let it be
implanted into the seed of Line, Nock-weed, Celandine, or into some other that
is proper to the Jaundies, let Onysoi (by some called Asselli) or the liquor of
them, be given to the Patient; into which they being laid in any vessel in hot
water are resolved: Or lastly, the excrements or dung of Geese dissolved in
wine, or Juniper Berries; for by means of all these that colorated humor is
preternaturally voided by the Urine: With this Mumiated urine, water every
morning the Magneticall Earth, and the seeds contained in it; Afterward the
seeds beginning to grow, the spirit of the Jaundise will be fully transferred
into the plant; which with all the Mumiated Earth you may afterward cast into a
River, or hang it up in a Chimny to be dried; either of which is to be observed
according to the disposition and constitution of the body, whose health is by
his means desired; for if the body be ^lethorical (somewhat inclining to a
Dropsy) ^e seed is to be hung up in the Smoke; but ^squalid and dry, it must
be cast into the water. ^y this Art there is no kind of Jaundies though
otherwise incurable) but may here ^d remedy; which may be proved even (...)
this common experience: It is usual (...) take horses dung, some three or
four clods, ^^on which the patient having made water ^nce before, it is to be
tied in a bladder or ^^nnen cloth, and hung up in a Chimny to ^^y, and
afterward cast into the fire: This experience has oftentimes been found
^ucccessefull in curing the disease aforesaid.

CHAP. XVIII. To cure Fevers by this Mystery.
ALthough the best and surest way of curing Fevers, is by diaceltatesson
Opo^pyron, although the matter (through the neglect of the Physician) be most
perfectly dilatated by opening a vein; Notwithstanding this shall (likewise)
somewhere be very useful.

Here therefore the Mumie, both vital and natural, must be extracted, in the
place and manner as aforesaid; yea, I could advise it might be from the
Arteries; this being done, afterward mix it with herbs good for the blood and
resisting putrefaction; herbs proper for this use are Nettles, Fumentary,
Celandine (the great) Century, Balm, Mint, Germander; let Urine be provoked by
the falt of Nettles, or Sage, or Juniper Berries; with which Urine, the
Magneticall Earth must afterward be duly watered; and the accrescency of them
must either be cast into the water or dried in the Air, with which the Fever
will presently consume as the same shall perish.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Oppilations of the Liver, Brain, Lungs, Spleen, Reins, etc.
FIrst extract the Mumie naturally answering to the affected part; then let ^e
former Transplantation into herbs ^propriated to them follow; (for ex^^ple)

(...) Liver Brain Lungs Spleen Reins
be infected then transplant it into Rue, Liverwort, Maiden hair. Sweet
Marjoram, Bears-foot, Rue, Serpyllum. Nettles, Vernacle, Lung-wort. Stone-wort,
Hedg-nettle, Germander. Restbarrow, Golden red, Parsley, Gromell, etc.


Let Urine be provoked by Salt of these herbs artificially prepared; with
which the Magneticall Earth must be watered to

CHAP. XXII. Of Wounds and Ulcers.
FIrst, (as before) take the Mumie from the places affected, into which must be
inseminated by way of Transplantation, either spotted Arsmart or Comfrey, or
other herbs favoring the affected parts; Let urin be provoked by Tartar, with
which the Mumiated Earth is to be watered for its better nourishment: then let
the accrescency be dried in the Air, and so the Disease will undoubtedly be
cured.

Where you must also note, that this Cure is oftentimes performed by the
Mumiall Magnetisme, although the extraction of Mumie does not always
intercede: for in some cases it happens, that the weapon or instrument that
gave the wound partaketh of the tacted Mumie, without the direction of the
particular Medicine, especially when it has remained long in the wounded part;
for any thing that continues long in the wounds, as a Knife, Nail, Glass, is
of much less force in a sudden transition, seeing such short time can scarcely
produce any effect: Or lastly, where it is imbrewed in blood by a deliberative
transmission, or by any retention of that place: And so it serves in stead of
Artificial extraction, some part of the Mumie being thus compendiously
attracted.

Therefore when any one is either hurt, wounded, or otherwise prejudiced in
this manner, Let the Dart, Knife, or Sword be thrust into the Earth, (which is
the Mother, and (as it were) potentative genericall branch of all Balsams,
(although by this reason that operation is of little worth) that the Mumial
spirit adhering to the Weapon may not evaporate; in the mean time, let the
wound be bound up with the root of Mead-saffron, pounded and mingled with 3 or
4 drops of Wine, or Vinegar, or the like, for a Plaster, but the excrements
(by a certain mystical virtue) is the best, or whatsoever is Balsamic and next
at hand, the Weapon may be thrust into, as Lard, Balsam, Unguent, etc. Yet here
is chiefly to be respected, those things which are of Mumie and Vsnea, which
indeed is the Sylloge and Collection of Mumial spirits, and also of the spirit
of the World, by whose mediation the active and passive qualities do most
happily concenter: Also, that which is by some observed, is no ways absurd, in
Cacoethical (or ill disposed) Ulcers, and old Fluxions which are continually
running; that the sanies of a Wound being anointed with Balsam or Weapon-salve,
and enclosed in a Nutshell, and afterward hung up in a dry place under a moist
Air, will most effectually further the Cure.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Hernia, or Burstennesse.
FIrst, let the Mumie be extracted from the place affected, into which implant
(as before) Symphytum majus, (or Walwort the greater) then hang it in the Air
til it be dry; or (where, by means of the Mumial Magnes, the Mumie has been
rightly extracted) choose the Rosin tree, Cherry tree, Fur tree, etc. let the
Mumie be placed at the Root, the tree being slit through the middle, and the
Clift so wide, that the sick party may there conveniently make his
transmission, which must be 3 times forward and backward, in nomine SS.
Trinitatis, in quo merito omnia inchoanda and perficienda: and that especially
in the hour and day of: Let the Patient also freely void his urine upon the
root of the tree; which being done, let the tree be conveniently closed up with
wax; so the Hernia (or Burstennesse) being never so monstrous, having been ^ut
into it as aforesaid, will in a short time be most perfectly cured (quamvis
alicubi nihil reposita fuerit sanata).

CHAP. XXIV. Of Fluxions and Salt Rheums causing pains and soreness in the
Teeth and Eyes, etc.
EXtract the Mumie of the place offended, and let it be transplanted into
spotted Arssmart, etc. Notwithstanding the same may be done compendiously by
the root of Groundsill plucked up with the whole herb, and rubbing the aching
teeth therewith till they bleed; then presently setting the same root in the
proper and native place wherein it was first plucked up, and so let it grow:
Thus any ache or pain in the Teeth shall with great wonder be assuaged and
cured.

CHAP. XXV. Of Menstruous Evacuation and Retention.
LEt the Mumie first be extracted from about the Hypocondria and Navill, which
(after the usual manner) is to be implanted into Arsmart, then provoke urine
by administering Peniroyall, with which wet the Mumiated Earth; then take the
plant (growing to perfection) and either dry it in the Air, or burn it in the
Fire.

For the Retention of Evacuations, let the Mumie be extracted from the same
places, and likewise from about the Paps; then let it be inseminated into
Peniroyall, by which also urine must be provoked: Afterward, let the
Excrescency be cast into the Water.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Consumption and Hectic Fever.
EXtract the Mumie from the 3 principal parts, and also from the spine of the
back, and chief Muscles of the body; implant it into Satyrion, and let them
grow together, then ^ranspose them into the Oak or Cherry tree; or else
transplant the Mumie it self into either of these, and the Patient shall amend
in a short time: Also, the Tincture of the Mumie of a sound body administered to
the sick person recovereth him: As I have delivered in another place.

There is another reason of this Magnetisme more commonly and easily practiced,
(as thus): Let a new laid Egg be boiled in the urine of the sick party in a
new Pipkin, (so as the urine may clearly cover the Egg) let it boil till the
Egg be hard, then take out the Egg, and pierce it here and there, afterward
sees it again in the same urine, always turning it, till the urine be wholly
consumed; then let the Egg (being thus prepared) be buried in an Ant hill, and
as the Egg consumes, so will the Disease, by a wonderful sympathy.

CHAP. XXVII. Of particular Blastings.
THis, according to the process of the former Magnetisme, has nothing to
peculiar to it self, only that the Mumie is to be extracted from the inferior
and superior Articles, or joints of the parts affected; and (that we may not
(as they say) always harp on the same string, but intermix some pleasure with
profit) we will here deliver a most excellent remedy against all Blastings, as
well universal as particular, and indeed, a sympathetical Magic from this very
Art: This Amulet is a particle of the Coffin wherein a Woman in Childebed
(dying through difficulty of Delivery) has been put, and therei^ laid upon the
spine of her back, and buried.

For the vegetative augmentation, and nutritive faculty of the Childebed woman
is principally placed in the spine or bone of he^ back, and being laid in the
Coffin, is now easily attracted, and assumed by a living body* symbolical and
agreeable to its former subject.

From this very foundation may a Childebed woman yet alive, and other
Plethoricall and sound persons supply another with this fruitful and admirably
nutritive Mumie, so that the Extraction be made from the spine of the back, the
aforesaid Magnes being laid upon it; then implanted into proper herbs; which
herbs must afterward be taken inwardly by the Patient: Thus truly there is no
Disease so vehement or dangerous, but may have a remedy by this our practice;
for that which seems most dissentaneous, may (by this) be successefully
adapted and reconciled.

CHAP. XXVIII. Against Sterlity or Barrenness: And also the manner of
detracting strength from an Horse, and transmitting it into a Man, or from any
Man or Beast into any other.
IT will here be necessary to extract the Mumie of the vital and natural faculty
from the ^^ine of the back, under the Armpits and hypohondriis of any pregnant
body; then transplant ^t into Satyrion, or (which some think better) into the
common or black Thistle; and when it has vegetated sufficiently, give it to
^he barren party; which nevertheless, that it ^ay be the more effectual, hang
the said herb with all the rest about the parties neck; and ^n short time she
will prove as fruitful as ^y other.

This I say (with Gods blessing) has often been the happy means of much
contentment to Noble Families, before destitute of Heirs*

Neither does this Art promise less succes^ to those that abstract from a
sound body ((...) speak not of men) the strength of their powers and faculties,
and implant it in another: By the same Art, after this manner extract the Mumie
from a sound body perfectly in health, and implant it into the black Thistle*
which afterward may be administered to the sick party; either in its substance,
or reduced into its essence; let it be hung about their neck, and the sick and
infirm will grow healthful and strong.

After the like manner also you may abstract the strength from an Horse and so
transmit or infuse it at pleasure into a Man* Mingle the sperm of the strongest
Horses wit^ pure Earth, implant it into the black Thistle; when it is grown to
its just bigness, administer it to the party whose strength you would
increase; let it be hung about his neck and a^ the strong Horses languish the
Party will strengthen: But you must take notice, that the aforesaid root is to
be implanted presently afte^ the New Moon, and taken up two or thr^ days
before the New Moon: This is equall^ successeful in other Beasts, whose faculty
i^ expedient to be communicated to Man, as the Learned in these mysteries shall
more exactl^ consider the occasion

FINIS.

