A GVIDE TO HEAVEN OR MORAL INSTRVCTIONS COMPILED Partly out of the Maxims of
holy Fathers, and partly out of the Sentences of Ancient Philosophers.

Written in Latin by the Reverend Father D. John de Bona, General of the Order
of Cistertian Monks: and now since created Cardinal Bona.

Translated into English By JAMES PRICE.

Printed at Roan: 1673.

TO THE EVER HONORED, Very Reverend, and truly Religious Abbess MADAME
WINEFRIDE GIFFORD, Thrice worthy Superior of the English Monastery of S. Clare
in Roan: And to all the virtuous Ladies and Gentlewomen living in holy
Obedience unde her charge and Direction.
MADAME,
BEsides the relation of my Employment to your whole Community in general, and
the many obligations which I have to yourself in particular, I had another
reason which determined my thoughts to make choice of your name and that of
your Spiritual Daughters to appear in the Frontispiece of this little work.
And that is: I was ever of opinion that all Books of this kind challenge it as
their Birthright to be dedicated unto persons of eminent virtue: for
otherwise, it were a sin against Justice, to present holy things unto those
whose life is quite contrary to all the Maxims of Christian Perfection. This
supposed, MADAME, it was not so much a choice as a kind of necessity in me, to
dedicate this little tranformed Piece unto yourself chiefly, and secondarily
unto all those virtuous Persons who have the happiness to live under your pious
Conduct. For, although virtue is practicable in all states and conditions, yet
we must grant that none can be said to practice it in a higher degree,
(whatsoever the Adversaries of the Catholic Church dare unreasonably murmur to
the contrary) then such as following the Evangelicall Counsels have willingly
and joyfully abandonned all the Charms of the world, to embrace a Monastical
retirement and therein to consecrate the remainder of their Lives to love,
serve, and praise God without cease or interruption: a life which has more of
Angelical solitude, then Terrestrial conversation. Upon this ground, I had
reason to presume, this little Treatise (which has nothing of mine but that it
speaks English) would not be wholly neglected by such devout Souls, who
willingly accept any thing that may contribute to their advancement in virtue.
I had this Interest also in it, that I durst flatter myself to have given it
unto those who are so much my friends as to be ready to pardon greater faults
then such as may have bine committed in this Translation.

Now as for the Book itself, I hope, you will find the matter pious and solid:
and consequenly worthly the reading and application (...) all sort of persons
who aspire unto Heaven. The Author, as I am credibly informed by those of his
own Order, is a Person of no common virtue: and I should not fear to be argued
of untruth, if I should tell the World, that his late Promotion to that eminent
dignity he now holds in the Church, was more a reward of his virtue and
learning, then a Gift of fortune blindly conferred on him for his birth and
friends. His Book then not degenerating from his Person, and his words not
contradicted in his life, I hope you will have a double satisfaction in reading
good Things originally delivered by so good a man. I will say no more of my
Author, but leave you to judge of the rest by the Book itself. It Is true, it
may seem at first sight more proper for secular persons and such as are still
entangled in the occasions and vanities of the world, then such as are already
withdrawn into the secure harbor of a Monastical life: It is more familiar
then studied, more Practical then speculative, more appropriated for the
purgative then unitive way. However I am persuaded, there are many instructions
in it, which are common to all states and conditions. And indeed to say the
Truth, As I do not love our pretended Illuminees and imaginary Saints, so I
do not much affect imaginary Writings; Books that will sooner make one mad
then make one a Saint. Certainly, there is more profit in a little intelligible
Piety, then in whole volumes of un-intelligible Raptures, and Chimericall
Elevations. I like those who take more care to live well, then to be esteemed
Devotes: who take more pains to do good Works, then to fancy high notions: who
are more diligent to mortify their Passions, then to fill their heads with
unprofitable Conceits. This Book is for such: And therefore, Madame, having no
reason to doubt but that you and all those who live under your Lady-ships
direction are of my opinion in this Point, I was moved to hope a favorable
acceptance of this little (though well-meaning) Present from him who is and
will ev^ be in all dutiful respect,

MADAME, Your most humble, and Obliged Servant, JAMES PRICE.

THE INTERPRETER to the Reader.
GENTLE READER,
Having an Interest in thy Salvation, as being a Christian, and consequently
rhy Brother in Christ, I make bold to present thee with a Guide to Heaven: and
I cannot think thou have so much presumption of thy own knowledge, but that
thou may have need of some other helps. The way to Heaven has always bine
counted very hard to find without a Guide. Wherefore I thought it worth my
labor to recommend One unto thee, contrived at first by an excellent master in
that Art. I know well enough that my Version of it does not approach the pithy
shortness of the Latin style: and indeed, it was neither necessary nor
convenient to render it so, nay (I dare say) nor possible. If thou art no
Latinist, perhaps it may seem tolerable: but otherwise, if thou go to
compare the English to the Latin, I shall soon loose my cause. However I
comfort myself with this Apology for not being able to give it the same grace
which it has in the Original, that it seems to me not only a common fault but
a necessary defect in all Translations. But thou will easily pardon me, if I
tell thee, that my principal intention was the same with my Authors in his
Preface; viz: to endeavor to teach thee how to live well, and not how to speak
well. As for the Title, I hope thou will not quarrel with me for not rendering
it according to the Latin expression, which is Manuductio ad Coelum: I had some
reason to apprehend, the word might sound a little harsh and un-usuall in our
English Tongue, especially coming from one who pretends no Authority to coin
new Terms and to make them pass for current. In fine, I humbly exhort thee, to
read, meditate, and practice the Contents: and I desire no other recompense at
thy hands, then that thou will make use of all for thy spiritual good.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE.
TWo things, Gentle Reader, I must acquaint thee withal in the beginning of
this Treatise. Firft, I am afraid least that I should be accused by some of too
much boldness and temerity. For how, will they say, dare thou presume to lead
or direct others unto Heaven, being thyself so addicted and tied to the world?
Or, with what confidence do thou go about to describe virtue unto us, being
thyself so little virtuous? Secondly, what new Instructions do thou give us
in thy Book? Thou repeatest the same things after a rude and unpolished manner,
which had bine written long since by innumerable Authors with much more
Learning, and in a more elegant style: and thou art not ashamed with a proud
deceit to expose the riches of others for thy own.

These are the words, wherewith some perhaps will endeavor to carp at my
labor. But first, I could excuse myself with the saying of a wise man, because
-- Fungor vice cotis, acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet exors ipsa secandi.
Horat. de Art. Poet. That is: If I cannot do well myself, I may at least
excite others to do well, Like to a Whet-stone, that an edge can put
On steel, though it self be dull and cannot cut.


And, that I may use the words of another learned man: I am not so foolish, as
to pretend to be able to cure others, being myself subject to the same
infirmities: but like one that lies sick in the same Hospital with others, I
make bold to entertain thee with the discourse of our common miseries: and I
communicate the remedies which I think are most proper to cure them. Imagine
therefore that thou only hear me talking to myself: I am not afraid to let
thee be partaker of my secrets in this kind. In writing these Instructions, I
do not so much profess myself a Master to teach others, as a Scholar that
learneth or rather teaches himself by teaching others. These are two things
which are done reciprocally: for whilst we endeavor to teach others, we teach
ourselves at the same time.

As to the second Objection, which may be brought against me, I have no better
Answer then to confess ingeniously, that here is but very little of my own
invention; having borrowed most of the matter from other writers. I have set
down many things, which I had partly observed by my own experience, and which
partly also, in reading the holy Fathers, and ancient Philosophers I had noted
as useful Documents for my own practice. But I have labored after the example
of Bees to make one good well-tasted Honey out of the mixture of several
Collections: mingling still something of my own to the words of my Authors.
And I have endeavored to use an easy style without any vain ornaments of
flourishing Rhetoric: because my design is to teach Christians how to do well,
and not how to speak well. Thou have here then a sum or Compendium of all the
Moral instructions, which have bine severally delivered by the ancient Fathers
for teaching us how to live well and happily in this world. Thou have here the
Quintessence of all the best moral sayings of Seneca, Epictetus, Antonius, and
other Sages of the ancient Times. And I thought it sufficient to set down those
wholesome Admonitions, which to me had often proved efficacious Remedies in my
greifs and troubles, without quoting the places from whence I had taken them;
because I had gathered them as spiritual Remedies for the Soul, and not as
points of wit to please the fancy: my intention and design being more to
profit, then delight my Reader. A sick man does not trouble himself to enquire
who it was that mingled the Physic which he is to take: nor is he sollicitous
to know whence the Remedy is brought, provided it be good and cures him of his
Sickness. I have omitted many things which I could have said: as also many
things, which might have bine declared with more Subtility. I thought it better
to have a few good Moral precepts, which may be always ready and at hand,
then to study a greater number and not to have them ready for use, when
occasion requires. He has learnt much, who knows as much as is necessary for
the Salvation of his Soul. God send that this my small Labor may be useful to
all those who shall read it; especially to myself, least that my Book should be
forced to blush, when my life is marked to be of a contrary practice unto what
I write.

A TABLE of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. OF man's last End. The misery of declining from it: and of the means
to arrive unto it. page 1 Chap. II. That he who desires to live well must
choose a good spiritual Directour: The Qualities of such a Directour: and the
duties of such as desire to learn Virtue. page 7 Chap. III. Of the Purgative
way: and how to extirpate all sins and vicious Affections. That the best motive
to this, is a continual Remembrance of Death and Eternity. page 13 Chap. IV Of
Gluttony. The disorders caused by it: and Remedies against it. How to know when
we have got the victory over it. page 24 Chap. V. Of Luxury: the shamefulnes of
it: how easy it is to fall into it: and how it is to be avoided, by seeking
spiritual Delights, and the solid pleasures of the mind. page 29 Chap. VI. Of
Avarice: the evil effects of it. The comparison betwixt a rich man and a poor
man. The inconstancy and Vanity of Riches. page 35 Chap. VII. Of Anger. The
Character of an angry man. The causes, effects, and Remedies of Anger. page 43
Chap. VIII. Of Envy, and Sloth. The description of both vices and Remedies
against them. page 58 Chap IX. Of Pride, Ambition, and vain Glory. The
Character of a proud man. The vanity and danger of Honors and dignities. The
evil effects of Pride, and remedies against it. page 62 Chap. X. Of moderating
our outward Senses. How we must treat our Body: and how to govern our Eyes. Of
the vanity of Apparel. page 73 Chap. XI. Of the Tongue: the importance and
difficulty of governing it. What is to be observed, and what to be avoided in
speech: and lastly, how to endure the evil Tongues of others. page 80 Chap.
XII. Of the inward Senses. The use of opinions. How to cultivate our mind with
good Thoughts. Diverse instructions how to govern the Sensitive faculties of
our Souls. page 88 Chap. XIII. Of Love: the nature, causes, and effects of it.
Of the Remedies against it. Of Hatred. page 93 Chap. XIV. Of Desire, and
Flight. What we are to desire, and what to fly or avoid. page 100 Chap. XV. Of
Joy, and Sadness. How a virtuous man is to rejoice. That he who foresees all
things is never sad. Several Remedies against Sorrow and Sadness. page 105
Chap. XVI. Of Hope, and Despair. How to moderate both. page 111 Chap. XVII. Of
Fear. How vain it is, and how to be overcome. How to avoid Boldness. Something
again of Anger. page 114. Chap. XVIII. Of the faculties of a Rational Soul.
How we are to keep our understanding from Curiosity. What Study is best. How
hurtful it is to search into the life and manners of others. How we are not to
heed what others falsely report of us. Of the Abnegation of our own will. page
120 Chap. XIX Of the State of proficients. Several helps for advancing in
Perfection. How to esteem and make good use of Time. Gods presence is
necessary. page 128 Chap. XX. The profit of Solitude. How to fly evil Company.
What are the common vices of the World. A Proficient must still labor for
virtue. Marks of advancing in it. page 134 Chap. XXI. Of the three Theological
virtues. Faith is to he shown by the exercise of good works. Our Hope must be
in God alone. Motives of divine Love. The love of our neighbors is showed by
helping them, and doing them good. An exhortation to Almsgiving. page 143
Chap. XXII. Of Prudence. The necessity, and difficulty of it. The duty of a
prudent man. page 149 Chap. XXIII. Of Justice, and Religion. What Penance is,
and in what it consists. page 150 Chap. XXIV. Of Piety, and observance.
Obedience, and Gratitude are commended. How to receive and return good Deeds.
page 158 Chap. XXV. Of Truth, and the use of it. Simplicity is commended. Acts
of Fidelity. page 163 Chap. XXVI. Of Friendship. How it is to be entertained.
Certain rules of mutual conversation. page 167 Chap. XXVII. Of Liberality.
What it is: and how to be practiced. How it differs from magnificence. page
174. Chap. XXVIII. Of Fortitude: and the duties for it. That a generous man
should contemn Death. page 178 Chap. XXIX. Of Magnanimity. The Character of a
magnanimous man. pag^ 184 Chap. XXX. Of Patience. The occasions, and effects of
it. Marks of true Patience. An Exhortation to Patience in all manner of
Sufferances. The necessity of Perseverance. page 188. Chap. XXXI. Of
Temperance. How much Modesty conduces unto it. Of Abstinence, and Chastity,
page 197 Chap. XXXII. Of Mildnes, and Clemency, The duties and Excellency of
both. page 200. Chap. XXXIII. Of Modesty. The properties of Studiosity. Of the
rule and use of Eutrapelia. page 203 Ch^p. XXXIV. Of Humility. In what it
consists. Of the Knowledge of Ourselves. The character of a true humble man.
page 208 Chap. XXXV. Of those who are arrived to the state of Perfection The
Character of a perfect man. The end of Christian Perfection is an union with
God. page 212
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 9. line 17. read skillful. p. 12. l. 1. r. some. p. 18. l. 9. r. think
of. p. 21. l. 15. r. to have it cured. p. 22. l. 6. r. quitting. p. 24. l. 21.
r. manners. p. 29. l. 24. r. the. p. 31. l. 5. r. breakest of. p. 47. l. 25. r.
least. p. 48. l. 23. r. bird-lime. p. 49. l. 4. r. bit us. p. 59. l. 11. r.
others. p. 60. l. 1. r. cannot. p. 63. l. 2. r. unto. p. 67. l. 21. r.
slippery. p. 70. l. 14. r. private. p. 73. l. 8. r. Thou will. p. 74. l. 25. r.
let it be thy care. p. 78. i. 2. r. things. p. 79. l. 19. r. worldly. p. 96. l.
29. r. we thought p. 98. l. 9. r. concur. p. 108. l. 24. r. it is. p. 110. l.
1. r. ently. p. 115. in the last line: r. Country. p. 121. l. 20. r. he may
live. p. 123. l. 8. r. mis-approuve. p. 131 l. 16. r. sleeping p. 137. l. 27.
r. unwothy.

The Reader is also desired to take notice that page 212. in the Title of the
last Chapter must be read: The end of Christian perfection is an union with
God: the word perfection having by mistake bine left out in some of the copies.

A GVIDE TO HEAVEN.
CHAP. I. Of man's last End. The misery of declining from it: and Of the means
to arrive unto it.
1. WHosoever thou art that read this Treatise, know that my intention is,
to lead thee as it were by the hand in the way to Heaven; and to conduct thee
unto that happy State, which once possessed will give full content to all thy
desires. This is the scope and aim of all men's wishes: and unto which we all
have a natural propension. All men would be happy: but through Adams fall we
are all become blind, and therefore the greatest part of men forsaking the true
and Sovereign Good, spend their time very unprofitably in seeking after vain
and transitory things. Some employ all their industry in gathering riches;
because they vainly persuade themselves, that the chiefest happiness of man
consists in wanting nothing. Others make it their chief business to purchase
Honors, and bear great sway in the world; and therefore are very ambitious to
be in some Government, or at least to govern those who govern. Some again
descend so low, as to seek and place their chief happiness in sensual
pleasures; esteeming thosse most happy who have liberty and occasion to besot
themselves with all manner of brutish delights. So little do they value and
esteem true Beatitude. And thus they all labor in vain, like men that wander
in a Labyrinth; the more they pursue their happiness, the more they stray from
it: in this most unhappy, because they do not understand their own unhappines.

2. This is the thing, Oh miserable man, which brings thee into great disorder
and misery: Thou desire to live happy, and also to make a happy end: but thou
art wholly blind in discerning what true happiness is, and how to arrive unto
it, foolishly straying quite out of the right way that leads unto it. All that
thou do, all that thou say, all that thou desire, proves for the most
part to be against thy self. For thou do not consider that Sovereign and
infinite Good, for which thou were created, and consequently which ought to be
the term and center of all thy desires; but thou wanderest here, and there,
without any settled design, like Ants that run up and down the body of an old
tree to little or no purpose. God who is the Creator of all things has drawn
thee out of nothing, and given thee a Being, to the end thou might love him
with all thy heart, and serve him with all thy forces. As he is a necessary
Being in himself, so also he must of necessity be our last End. Consider then
seriously, how much of thy life thou employest in his service, unto whom thou
owe thy self wholly. All thy actions, all thy designs all thy counsels are
vain, and to little purpose, if they are not directed to him. Even as the place
where thou arrivest is called the end of thy journey, and the place where thou
expectest to rest: so the end of thy life is terminated in God, to whom thou
ought to refer all thy thoughts, words and actions; until at last enjoying
his sight thou find the accomplishment of all thy desires. Whatsoever
withdraws thee from last End, leads thy soul to eternal perdition.

3. As in a Sea-voyage, if the ship should stop in some harbor, or cast anchor
nigh the shore to take in fresh water, thou would perhaps busy thyself in
the mean time to gather up cockle-shels, or some pretty-shaped pibles; but yet
thou would still keep an eye toward the ship, and be still listening that
way, least that the Pilot should call and give sign that all things were ready
to set Sail: which sign given, thou would presently make have to the ship:
So thou art to do in this life. Fix thy mind always on God, and use the
things of this world so, as not to tie thy heart unto them, nor to suffer them
to withdraw thee from thy last End, which is God. All the riches and creatures
of this world serve thee, that thou may serve God. The neglect of this
necessary care of thy salvavation, is the cause that thou permittest thy
thougts to wander after many unnecessary Objects; so that it is true to say, thou
adorest as many Idols as thou love Creatures with a disordinate love. These
are thy Gods, unto whom thou offerest sacrifice, not of an Ox, or Buck, but
thy self, and thy whole salvation. It is not permitted in the law of divine
Love to love any thing else besides God, unles it be in him, and for him. There
can be no greater misery then to abandon the sovereign Good, and to place our
affection on creatures.

4. That which the Prince of Physicians says of sick bodies, the same may be
said of vicious souls: to wit, the more they are fed, the worse they are. For
those who intend to pass from a bad life to a better, ought first to vomit up
all the Poison of their past sins, before they begin to receive the solid
nourishments of virtue. This purgation of thy soul must be done so, as not only
to expiate thy past sins, but also to extirpate all affection unto them, to
root out all thy vicious habits, to master all thy disordered appetites and
make them subject unto reason; to subdue thy body and senses, particularly that
of the tongue, and to avoid all that may hinder thee from arriving to the state
of perfection. Why do thou fear, and imagine the way that leads to eternal
Felicity, to be hard and difficile? It lies in thy own power to make thyself
happy, assisted with his grace, who is the beginning and end of all things. But
thou must first go out of thyself, before thou can come unto him: and the
more thou leavest thyself, the nigher thou will come unto him.

5. Wherefore thou should first consider with thyself what thou desire to
enjoy, and whither thou art going: and then examine the means thou art to use
for arriving to that happy state. Which done, thou will easily perceive what
progress thou do make every day. Be very careful in examining thy
Conscience; and taking a serious view of thyself, consider what thou ought
to be, whilst thou have time to amend. It will be too late to discover the
deceit, when thou can not avoid it. Learn how to moderate the violence of thy
passions and desires; and how to appease the frights and fears of thy mind.
Learn to contemn all earthly things, and willingly forsake those things, which
cannot remain long in thy power. Leave all things, before they leave thee; that
so when Death comes, it may find nothing to rob thee of. Let thy chiefest care
be to provide for thy soul; for, considering it is first in dignity, it is not
fit it should be the last in thy care. What will it avail a man to have gained
the whole world, if he loses his soul in the end? we cannot esteem it any
profit, if the soul perishes.

CHAP. II. That he who desires to live well must choose a good Spiritual
Directour. The qualities of such a Directour: and the duties of such as desire
to learn Virtue.
1. NOthing is more necessary for one that begins to serve God, then to permit
himself to be guided, and instructed by a good Master. And indeed what wise
man would undertake to perform a long Journey (where he knows not the way)
without a sure Guide? who would go about to learn any difficile Art without a
Teacher? We shall find but very few who have advanced in perfection, and
rendered themselves virtuous, without the help of others. It is an easy matter
to instruct in general terms those who are absent, and also to leave in
writing for those that shall come after us, what is to be done. But no man at a
distance can tell of persuade when and how this to be done. We must be present
in time and place to deliberate aright of that. A Physician can never prescribe
by letter the just time of taking some Medicine or diet: he must be present,
and feel the pulse of the sick person. So in curing the maladies of the Soul,
there are some things, which cannot be so well expressed and declared without
being present. S. Paul, whom God had designed to be the Apostle of the Gentiles,
after he had bine converted by Christ himself, was sent to Ananias, that he
might learn of him the way of Salvation. Thou have a hard task, to overcome the
corruptnes of thy Nature, to wrestle with the evil Spirits (thy invisible
Enemies) and to arrive to the height of Perfection amidst so many obstacles and
Impediments. Wherefore thou have need to call for help; and that, from one who
will lend thee his hand, who will show thee the dangers, and discover unto thee
all the Ambushes of Satan; and in fine, who will teach thee how to come of with
victory in all thy spiritual combats. But thou will tell me; whom shall I call
to help me? I answer: It must be a wise and trusty man, who shall be able and
willing to do all for thy spiritual Good: one that shall strike respect and
not fear into thee, when thou meetest him: one that is more ready to teach thee
how to rise and amend after thy fall, then to cry out against thee, when thou
fallest: one who gives more Edification by his virtuous life, then by his
eloquent words. He is little fit to govern, who commands others to do well,
but does no good himself.

2. Choose such a Helper or Director, who flatters no body, who does not haunt
much company, who does not go to great banquets, nor intrude himself into the
houses of great persons: choose one, if possible, who has the spirit of
discretion, and can discern betwixt virtue and vice, betwixt good and bad, as a
skillfull Goldsmith, discerns betwixt true and false money: who like a
shilfull Physician can judge of all thy spiritual diseases, and prescribe fit
remedies to every one of them. Choose one that shall be free from all interest,
and seeks nothing but thy spiritual profit: One that shall instruct thee in
the spirit of mildnes and charity, one that shall tell thee of thy faults: one
that shall be able to discover, and teach thee how to overcome all the
subtileties and stratagems of thy spiritual enemy the Devil: one in whom thou
may have a particular confidence, and unto whom thou may have no difficulty
to reveal thy most hidden thoughts. If thou can find such an one, thou are
happy is this world.

3. Speak frequently unto him of thy spiritual affairs: let him know all thy
evil inclinations, all thy vicious qualities: let him know all the good thou
do, and all the evil thou committest. Discover unto him all the particular
favors thou receivest from God. Desire him that when he perceives in thee any
irregular and disordinate affection, he will not forbear to tell thee of it;
and that too very often, least that by being ashamed to reprehend thee, he
should dissemble at thy faults. But if it should chance that he tells thee,
he finds nothing to be reprehended in thy life, do not presently conclude that
thou art innocent: because perhaps the reason of his silence is, for that he
sees he shall get thy hatred by speaking, or else that he despairs of thy
amendment. Wherefore entreat him more and more, that so he may see thou have a
real and earnest desire of advancing in perfection. Begin to lay before him
the number of thy imperfections, and resolve to reform thy manners according to
his Counsel. Rejoice as often as he reprehendeth thee for thy faults, and
still endeavor to come better from him, or at least in a disposition to grow
better. It is a great matter, considering the common frailty of our nature,
when a man is willing and desirous to amend.

4. These are the mutual offices of a spiritual Directour, and one that
desires to learn virtue of him; that so the one may grow better, and the other
not loose his labor in instructing him. The greatest obstacle in Beginners is
a rebellious refractory Spirit, impatient to learn, and incapable of being
cured. For some that confide too much in their own wisdom, refuse to be
governed by another. All these things (say they) which you tell me I know
already. What profit is there in showing me things which are clear enough of
themselves? and repeating the same things over and over? Very much; because
thou know many things, which thou do not perhaps attend unto. Admonitions
are not so much for teaching us, as for exciting the memory, and hindering us
from forgetting things. We often dissemble things that are clear; and therefore
it is not amiss to inculcate the knowledge of what we already know. Virtue
gathers strength, when it is touched and encouraged. Some are hindered and
disheartened by a foolish apprehension or fear, which is a childish fault, and
unworthy of any man. Others like frantic men keep all close to themselves, and
will not discover their infirmities to their spiritual Physician. The Devil
persuades them to this silence, hoping thereby to make his advantage of it, as
long as they discover nothing. When thou art troubled with any corporal
disease, however so shameful, thou have no difficulty to show it to him that
is to cure it; and yet thou hidest with great care the Ulcers of thy Soul, as
if hiding would cure them; whereas they will at some time or other discover
themselves, in spite of all thy care. He that hides his wounds will never be
cured.

5. Does the Physician do thee any wrong if he discovers thy disease: if when
thou art in danger, he tells thee that thou art ill, that thou art in a feavor?
that thou art to abstain one day from meat, and ordains thee to drink water in
another? Sure thou would commend him, and thank him for it. But if any one
should tell thee that thy passions or desires are violent, that thy opinions
are vain and idle, thy affections immoderate, or the like; thou would
presently cry out, that thou art affronted, injured, and abused; and therefore
wilt be revenged of him. Unhappy man! what hurt does it do thee to be
admonished of thy Salvation? What injury can thou call it, unles such a one,
as a looking glass may be said to do to an ugly face? He shows thee what thou
art: Mend therefore thy faults which he reprehends in thee, correct thy
manners, wash of the spots of thy Conscience. It Is in thy power, if thou will,
to live so that no man can justly reprehend thee.

CHAP. III. Of the purgative way; and how to extirpate all sins, and vicious
Affections. The best motive to this, is a continual Remembrance of Death and
Eternity.
1. Whenever any man commits a Sin, he actually strayeth from God; and
this is the cause of all the misery in the world. From this proceed all the
pains and troubles of this life: this is the Poison which infecteth the whole
world. We do not perceive the malice of it when we commit the sin; but when
it is once committed, then we understand the mischief it brings with it. We read
of Tyrants that were wont heretofore (a strange punishment!) to tie living
bodies unto dead carkases, that so they might be poisoned to death with the
horrid infection of an abominable stench. By sin we are brought to suffer the
like punishment; we carry about with us our own Executioner, and cannot easily
deliver ourselves from it. If thou can not resolve to suffer something for
avoiding sin, thou will be forced to suffer much, after thou have committed it.
An evil action is no sooner resolved upon; but it presently produces its own
punishment. It Is this which makes us guilty of death, and eternal damnation. We
must therefore have a special care to expiate our conscience from all Sin, by
contrition, confession, and satisfaction. And it is not enough to avoid falling
into great sins, but we must also have a care to avoid lesser faults; which,
although they do not cause immediate death to the Soul, yet weaken our
spiritual forces, and are a disposition to mortal sin. But the ship wrack is
equally the same, whither the ship be swallowed up and lost under one great
wave, or sunk by degrees, the water entering in drop by drop. We may be more to
blame for yiedling unto these lesser faults, in regard the difficulty to
overcome them was less. The weaker our enemy is, the greater is our shame, if
we permit ourselves to be overcome by him.

2. Thou will never be able to attain unto much Virtue, and to restore thyself
to thy former liberty, unles thou can first quit thyself of all affection
even to the least sins: For otherwise, thy body may be in the desert, and thy
mind at the same time in Egypt. All does not go well with thee, if after
having pardoned injuries, and forsaken thy dishonest loves, thou do still
give ear to calomnies and detractions against thy neighbors; if thou art still
delighted with some dangerous beauty. For to purchase an interior purity, it is
not enough to extirpate all sin out of thy soul, but thou must also root out
all evil habits or affections, which may often remain behind after the sin is
forgiven. If thou do only cut the boughs and leave the root entire, thou will
see in a short time new branches of iniquity grow up from the same stock. Thou
say, that thou art resolved to root out of thy soul all thy old Vices. But I
fear thou do not bar the Door against them, but leavest it seemingly shut,
so as it is easily opened again to the same vices, when occasion presents. Thou
tellest me, that thy former life displeases thee. I believe it: for who is not
ashamed of himself, when he seriously considers the disorders of his life past?
Even wicked men both hate and love their own vices, at the same time; nay even
then when they commit them, they detest and abhor them. But what avayls it to
abhor sin in words, and not to abhor the acting and comitting of it? There is
no man so wicked, who does not some time or other loath his own sins: but such
Converts are soon reconciled again to their old sins. But he that is truly
converted unto God, puts the Axe to the root, and cuts away all even to the
least sprout he can find. And then living in a continual memory and
apprehension of his own frailty, he carefully avoids all occasions of sin: and
trembles at the very sight of any evil and dangerous object.

3. Why do thou allege vain excuses, and insist so much upon the frailty of
thy nature, when God commands thee to exterminate thy vices? who can better
know the measure and strength of thy forces, then he who gave them? why then
art thou backward in obeying, when the thing does not so much redound to any
profit in him that commands it, as it concerns thy good? oh blind and wicked
rashness? How dare thou be so bold as to reproach unto thy master with a
servile impudence, that his precepts are hard and impossible? as if he had
designed to seek not so much thy Salvation as thy punishment. Such is the
perversenes of man's nature, not only to offend God, but also to pretend great
difficulties in what he commands. But if thou will try thy own forces, thou will find that thou art able to do much more, then thou think. It Is not the
difficulty of the things in themselves that makes thee not dare to practice
them; but because thou do not practice them, the things seem difficile. Many
things which we thought very hard to do, become very easy and of no burden
with a little use. Begin once for all, and have a better opinion of thy own
force and power. God does not forsake his soldiers; and he will give thee as
much strength as thou desire.

4. Thou will easily overcome all vice, if thou representest to thyself every
day to be as the last of all thy life. What is it that eyes thee to this world?
Beause thou never think that thou art to go soon out of it. Thou see
every day dead bodies carried to the grave, which should put thee in mind that
thou art also mortal. And yet in the midst of all these dead thou think o
nothing less then Death: thou see nothing more often, and yet thou
forgettest nothing so soon. The day will come notwithstanding, that must carry
thee also away; to wit when thy Soul shall be delivered out of her dark and
loathsome prison of the body. Thou will then clearly see that thou have lived in
darkness all thy life in this world. Produce, if thou can, amongst so many
years of a bad life but one day well spent in the exercise of virtue, which
has not bine defiled with some vice. Thy infancy is past away in childish
bables, thy youth is spent in foolery and idleness, thy riper ago in
debaucheries and disorders. Of all those years which thou have spent from thy
cradle until thy old age, nothing remains but grief, and the evil fruits of
iniquity. Alas! what a case will thou be in, when forced to be ashamed of what
is past, and afraid of what is to come? what will thy riches avail thee in that
hour, which thou have always sought with so much care and trouble? what will
all thy shameful pleasures help thee at that time? what can thou then expect
from all thy dignities and honors? Oh! if it were possible that thou might
begin again from the cradle, how careful thou would be to lead another life:
but (alas!) such wishes will be altogether useles in this hour. If thou
intendest to make good use of Time, begin from this present moment, and resolve
from this instant, to forsake those things, which thou would then wish to
have forsaken. It Is no great matter to forsake momentary things, that thou may
purchase eternal felicity.

5. Ask any dying man what he thinks of his life past; and thou will scarce
find one perhaps who has not at that hour a quite different opinion of the
riches, honors, and vanities of the world, then he had when he lived in
perfect health. Then all things are weighed in a more even balance, and we
judge of them as they are. He that is wise only in the end of his life,
begins to be wise very late; but thou may be wise in good time, if thou
learnest to be so from the follies and examples of others. Since then it is in
thy power to sail in present safety, why do thou expect a Tempest? Thou
may, if thou will, avoid and prevent thy own misery. Why then do thou
expose thyself to future dangers? It Is a late prevention, to think to avoid
shipwreck, when thou art just sinking: it is too late to use prudence, when thou
art wholly ruined and undone. We read of many great and holy men, who after
having renounced unto their own will and all they had in this world, spent all
the remainder of their life, to learn how to live and dye well: and yet many at
their death have confessed they had not yet learned that lesson: so hard it is
to learn this Art. Notwithstanding thou art so backward, as to defer thy
Conversion until thou art old; but it is a great folly to hope to begin then to
live well, when thou can live no more.

6. Unhappy man, to what danger do thou expose thyself? is this thy belief,
is this thy manner of living? Thy life passes away like a shadow, and lasts
but a moment. Thou art no sooner born, but thou beginnest to dye. Stop if thou
can but one day of thy life: hinder or prolong one hour one moment of it from
flying away. But such a labor would be in vain: Time will still hurl thee away,
and will never cease running until it has brought thee and all mortal things
unto their last general end, to wit Death. And yet thou dare prefer this
moment unto Eternity, which will have no end. Oh blindness! oh folly! Thou are
always laboring to provide all that is necessary for thy Body, which is
mortal; but as for thy Soul, which is immortal, thou have as little care to
purchase eternal rest and felicity for it, as if it did not at all belong unto
thee. When thy body is sick, thou art willing to undergo any thing, to have
(...) cured: but thy Soul is sick and thou wholly neglectest it, and do not
feel it. Did thy Physician ever tell thee, it was necessary for thy health, to
go to see and thou refusest it? did thou ever refuse to take the most bitter
medicine, when he told thee it was necessary? God commands light and easy
matters, that thou may gain eternal life; and will thou not obey him? If
thou had a suit in law, thou would employ all thy thoughts in it, thou
would be always speaking of it, and thou would not cease to solicit many
friends, to the end that the Judges might be favorable to thee, and deliver
their sentence in thy behalf: and yet whereas thy eternal doom is nigh at hand,
thou laughest, thou playest, and put thyself in danger of perishing without
redemption by perpetual sinning. Ah! forbear at last, grow wise whilst thou
have time, and quiting thy former dissolutions begin from this instant to live
so as if this day were to be thy last. This is true Philosophy, this is true
wisdom, to separate by degrees the Soul from the Body even in this life as
much as we can.

7. This must be thy constant employment and daily care: in labor, in rest, in
all occasions, still endeavor to forget this world, and think of nothing but
Eternity. All that enters into Eternity, remains fixed and immovable:
nothing can ever change it. The rich and covetous Glutton after so many ages is
still asking for a drop of water, and will be forced to ask in vain for all
Eternity, Eternity is a durance which is always present, and never to be named
without horrout and apprehension: it is a wheel that is always turning: it is
a beginning that is always beginning, and will never come to an end. One
serious thought of it changes all the pleasures of the world into bitterness,
and strikes men into a deadly fear, leaving them quite astonished: it tameth
all the rebellion of the Soul, and raises it up from the unprofitable cares of
the world to the exercise of Virtue: it seasoneth hunger and thirst, renders
all labor easy, all sorrow sweet, all pain delightful, and makes it seem
short. Suppose the vast and infinite spaces of the firmament were all filled
with numericall figures: who but God would be able to sum up these almost
infinite numbers? and yet this innumerable number is not the beginning of
Eternity. Suppose so many years, so many ages were passed, as are signified by
those figures; yet after all this, it could not be said that Eternity was
become so much the less. The miserable souls of the poor damned that are
tormented in everlasting flames, are not yet come to the beginning of their
desperate Eternity. If this consideration does not breed a horror in thy soul,
and if thou do not seriously mend thy life by considering it, thou art harder
then any stone.

CHAP. IV. Of Gluttony. The disorders caused by it; and Remedies against it.
How to know when we have got the victory over it.
1. THe first combat thou have to undergo is against Gluttony, which
nourishes all other vices. This was the sin, which opened the gate unto Death,
both spiritual and corporal. For our first parents, by eating the forbiddden
apple, killed us all before we were born. The Devil our spiritual enemy still
makes use of the same temptation of gluttony, that so he may overcome us with
more ease, when he has weakened our inward forces by means of this vice. Hence
(from too much eating) proceeds a stupid, heavy, and languishing disposition:
hence proceeds scurrilous language, too much prattling, dissolution of manners:
hence proceeds uncleanlines, wrangling and contention: by this our spirit
becomes dull: and all virtue is extinguished in our soul. This makes us, spend
our means, brings us into poverty, occasioneth many diseases: and in fine
hastneth our Death. Few are sick, whose sickness does not proceed from
intemperance in diet. For if the body could want those evil humors which arise
from too much eating and drinking, sickness could only attack, but never
overcome it: so true it is, that Gluttony kills more then the sword.

2. Oh vile and infamous servitude, to be subject unto our insatiable
appetites! Nature has given thee a little body; but thou by thy glutony
surpassest in greedines the greatest of Beasts. A Bull is content to feed upon
the pasture of a few Acres: one wood suffices many Elephants: but the whole
world is too narrow for thee; all that flies in the air, all that swimmeth in
the water, all that is fed and bred in the woods is not enough to content thy
belly. Behold what a stir there is in the kitchins of great men: see how many
cooks are still running from one fire to another: see what a troop of servants
and maids in perpetual labor and sweat: See what a slaughter there is of
living creatures; see how many are employed to draw wine in the cellars: See
how busy they are to cover the Tables with silver plate, how careful to
dispose the dishes in due order and with various art: in fine, see with what
promptitude every one runs about his own office. One can scarce think that all
this is for one house, where so many sorts of wine are brought together from
several kingdoms: where so many tables are prepared with so much care and
attendance. But in the mean time, I do not by this intend to dissuade thee
from allowing thy body sufficient nourishment. We cannot so overcome it, but it
will of necessity exact its ordinary food. But hete lies the cunning and deceit
of concupiscence, that under pretense of necessity it often draws us to seek
our pleasure in eating. Will thou know, how little will satisfy hunger?
consider that thou art but one, that thou have but one body and one stomach:
and by this means thou will easily know, that what is more then enough for one,
is too much, and consequently not necessary. A little contenteth nature, but
concupiscence has no end in her desires.

3. Hunger is not ambitious, but is content with what is enough, and cares not
what it is: The pleasure of Tasting is soon past; and then common meats are as
good as those which are esteemed most delicate. We must of necessity eat when
we are hungry, and drink when we are thirsty: but nature does not bid us
examine whither the bread be white or brown; whither the water be out of the
common river, or cooled and refreshed by art: all that it requires is, to
satisfy hunger and quench thirst. Fish that is brought from the Sea, Rivers,
and Ponds; Venison and Wild Bore; Variety of Fowl; and so many several sorts
of Wine, are Delicacies more fit for the kitchen of Apicius, then for a sober
man. Even Epicurus himself that sought his pleasure in good cheer, did use to
commend a sober diet: And indeed there is nothing so delicate, and sweet, which
does not seem unsavory when once we grow out of taste with it; and there is
nothing so unsavory which does not seem sweet and delicat, when hunger presses
us. Do thou desire to quitt all superfluous care for thy nourishment?
Consider thy End. Thou will dye soon, and that body which thou feedest with so
much care and pamperest with so many delicacies will be left to be a food to
the worms in thy grave. Ponder then with thyself for what banquet thou feedest
thy body; and resolve henceforth to feed it so, that it may not oppress thy
spirit. Use common meats and such as are easily found; which are neither
chargeable to buy, nor hurtful to thy health. A great part of our liberty
depends on a sober diet, and temperate feeding. We cannot easily see what is
superfluous, until we begin to be without it. Our body has need of sufficient
nourishment, but not of many delicacies.

4. But do not think thou deservest such great praises for contemning
superfluities. When thou can also contemn necessaries, thou may challenge
praise; that is, when thou art content with common bread for thy food, with
weak wine, or such as is well mingled with water for thy drink; when thou shall
be persuaded that herbs and roots do not only grow for beasts, but also for
men. I shall admire thee, when thou seek only the necessity of nature, the
reparation of thy strength, and the glory of God in thy meat; when thou can
contemn the full tables of great men; when thou come unwillingly to thy
ordinary repast, as a sick man to a bitter potion of Physic: when thou shall
study at least to moderate and overcome the pleasure of Tasting, since it
cannot be wholly hindered: when thou art unwilling to eat any thing that is
delicate, even in thy sickness: when in fine thou have attained to a true purity
of body and mind. For it is certain, that the proof of true Abstinence does not
consist in attenuating the body, but in purifying the soul from all inordinate
desires.

CHAP. V. Of Luxury: the shamefulnes of it: how easy it is to fall into it: and
how it is to be avoided, by seeking spiritual delights, and the solid pleasures
of the mind.
1. NO vice is more filthy or shameful then Luxury. The Apostle commands we
should not so much as name any sin of that kind. Hence it is that honest and
pious men are so much ashamed of themselves, if they suspect that others know
them guilty of the least immodesty or uncleanlynes. Hence it is that many in
the tribunal of holy Confession hide the lubricity of their youth from the
ministers of Christ; choosing rather to undergo everlasting torments with
eternal shame after death, then here in this life to undergo she imaginary
infamy of this vice. Add, that those who are fallen into a habit of this sin,
do not easily get out: and they are in much danger of their salvation that are
infected with it. Human forces are too weak to overcome it. For no man can live
chaste unles it be by a special gift of God.

2. Wherefore the first remedy against this sin is fervent prayer offered unto
God, to the end that he (who alone can do it) will be pleased to cure thee of
this dangerous sickness. Next thou must have a care to resist unchaste thoughts
in the very beginning, and to do it with as much have as thou would shake
of burning coals from ^hy garments. Woe be unto thee, if thou once beginnest to
deliberate the least in such temptations. That castle is nigh surrendering,
whose Governor once begins to parley with the Enemy. That thou may avoid all
occasions leading unto it, fly idleness, intemperance, unchaste imaginations,
evil company, and dangerous conversation: in a word, nothing is to be
neglected in this point. Even those that are just are not wholly free from the
danger of this sin: they may also have some hidden relics of it; some secret
hissings of the old Serpent; as for example, certain little affections which
although they are not bad in themselves, notwithstanding they are as preludes
tending to evil; and the mind being bewitched by little and little with such
charms, will soon be caught, unles thou suddenly breakst of with them. Thou will
never arrive to great perfection, if thou neglectest these small things. Great
things have their beginning from lesser ones.

3. Take heed above all things, thou art not deceived by too much confidence in
thyself. He that fears nothing is half fallen. How many great and learned men,
after having obtained great victories over themselves and their spiritual
enemies, after having done many wonders, have notwithstanding fallen into great
sins at last by inconsiderate looks cast upon women? It Is needles here to repeat
the sad examples (which thou have often heared and read) of Sampson, David and
Solomon. We have too many examples of the same kind in our own days. And
without seeking foreign examples, thou have enough perhaps in thy own breast,
whereof to be ashamed, and which should give thee occasion to humble thyself,
and be always in fear. Is it not great madness and folly after so many examples
in all ages and countries to put thyself in danger by presuming too much on
thy own forces. Yet such is the ordinary credulity of human obstinacy, that we
never believe others to have fallen, until we also fall ourselves. Woman was
created to help man, but by the malice of the devil she is become his greatest
enemy. There is nothing in a woman which does not wound, burn, and kill. No
Hyena to be compared to her voice: no Basilisk to be compared to her eyes. Ah!
whoever thou art then, if thou desire to save thy Soul, fly as much as thou
can the sight and conversation of women. They still keep their ancient and
first custom, which is, to be the occasion of banishing man out of Paradise.

4. Many excuses are commonly alleged in this business: Many pretenses of
necessity, custom, and a good intention. Notwithstanding all this, great
mischeifs often lie hid under the color of good. Hence proceed dangerous
familiarities, indiscreet and over-free discourses, light gestures, a neglect
of modesty, frequent letters and presents from one to another, and a certain
mirth which by little and little overcomes all shame, until at length all
modesty is lost. These things are practiced by degrees: and he that at first
did use to blush at the sight and approach of a woman now is not afraid to
behold wanton looks and a naked breast; which striking into his heart a sweet
and secret poison, he is undone before he perceives his own danger. Thus the
eye of our reason first becomes dim, and at last is struck quite blind. Thus a
rational Soul which was born for heaven is tied to the world, forgetting both
God and herself; until at length the flames of concupiscence deliver her up to
eternal flames. Oh miserable men! whose impure and momentany pleasures must
have such a sad end. One would think they had all eaten of the Sardonian herb:
since they laugh at the same time that they are dying.

5 Ah! foolish man! who art void of all wisdom thyself and wilt not hear the
counsel of others? what do thou seek? If pleasures: God has prepared
eternal ones for thee in heaven. Art thou content to enjoy the pleasures of
this world, and to be excluded from those in the next? where is thy reason,
where is thy wit? Look up to heaven, and behold all the blessed Citizens of it.
These are they who heretofore have mingled their bread with ashes, and their
drink with tears. Had thou lived in the same age with them, thou would have
seen them in continual tribulation, leading an humble obscure life, always
weeping, always constant in prayer, in a word wholly, separated from all the
joys and mirth of the world; and aspiring to heaven by suffering wheels,
swords, crosses, and all manner of torments. Look down into hell, to behold
that desperate multitude of damned souls which are buried in eternal flames.
These are they who once enjoyed the false joys of this world, and abandonned
themselves to all sort of carnal pleasures: but now they acknowledge too late
the misery and damage incurred by consenting unto them. Ruminate well on this
point, and if thou beleevest it, tremble with fear and apprehension. The
pleasures and joys of this world are past in a moment; but the torments which
follow, will last for all Eternity.

6. But if thou seek pleasure in this life, why do thou not choose true,
solid, honest, immutable pleasure, such as is found in a quiet mind, that so
thou may delight in something within thyself? Sensual pleasure is always
false, effeminate, frayl, entertained by wines and parfumes; and still fears to
be discovered. Its ordinary habitation is public stews, taverns, and such like
places, which apprehend nothing more then the Officers of Justice. Though it
may have a seeming outward grace, yet in reality it is a miserable
satisfaction. It is gone in a moment, no sooner begun but it perishes. But the
pleasure of the mind is a noble, peaceable, invincible, secure and lasting
content: never cloyeth, nor brings repentance. It is not accompanied with
shame, nor followed with sorrow; and it never forsakes those that enjoy it. If
thou desire to enjoy this, thou must first renounce all sensual pleasures.
The greatest and truest pleasure is to contemn all pleasures.

CHAP. VI. Of Avarice: the evil effects of it. The comparison betwixt a rich
man, and a poor man. The inconstancy and vanity of Riches.
1. AVarice has one principal invention or deceit, which thou must of
necessity understand, if thou desire not to be cheated in it: It still hides
it self, so that it is very rare to find one, tha^ will acknowledge he is
covetous. One man gathers riches, that he may provide for himself and his
children: another pretends he desires riches, that he may succor the poor: a
third, that he may satisfy for his sins by employing them in good works. But in
the mean time, when they have got much riches together; they are so far from
distributing it to the poor, that they are still greedy to heap up more and
more; and whilst they are thus laboring to get more, they loose their time,
and spend their whole life, for preservation of which they had such an
insatiable desire to gather riches. Even as running water does not quench the
thirst of a sick man, by seeing it run by and touching it with his hand, unles
he can also have it to drink: so a covetous man is never satiated and has
never enough, because his money and treasures have no proportion to and can
never fill his mind, which is the seat of Avarice. Nothing but God can fill and
content the soul, because it was created for God.

2. Suppose, oh covetovs man, that thou could possess all that the richest
of men ever possessed: suppose that fortune had so befriended thee, as to give
thee as much wealth as Solomon: suppose that thy houses were paued with marble,
thy chambers adorned with gold and pearl: suppose thou could so abound in
wealth, as to tread on nothing else: suppose thou had brought together all
sort of Statues and excellent pictures, with all the inventions of art for pomp
and magnificence: all this would only increase thy Avarice, and make thee still
desire more and more. Nature is bounded, and content with little; but the false
opinion of things makes us to have no end in our desires. What art thou the
better for what thou have in thy coffers, and in thy barns, if thou countest
not so much what thou have already, as what thou desire to have. It may be
said, the whole world is wanting unto those, whose avarice the whole world is
not able to content. I could wish thou would consider, how much evil comes
with riches, how much good they destroy thou would find without doubt that
saying of the Apostle to be true, to wit; that Covetousnes is the root of all
Evils. Cheating, wrangling, fighting, perjury and treacheries are all
occasioned by riches Take away Avarice, and there will be no strife or discord;
take away Avarice, and ambition will cease. It Is that which fills the woods
with thieves, the seas with pirates, cities with tumults, houses with treachery,
Tribunals with injustice. So true it is, that Vices and riches seem to be
inseparable.

3. Compare a little the poor man with the rich: consider the countenance of
the one, and the countenance of the other. The rich man being always full of
care and solicitude for his wealth, discovers the inward sadness of his mind by
his sullen looks: the poor man on the other side fearing nothing and coveting
nothing, discovers a sincere inward joy by the serenity of his looks: The one
enjoyes but a seeming happiness in the midst of a thousand cares and anxieties
of heart: the other being free from all sorrow and trouble, enjoyes a quiet
mind. The one being still intent to gather riches, and sollicitous to keep
them, is exposed to all the injuries of fortune; and the more he has, the more
he desires. The one esteeming himself rich in his poverty wishes what is
enough; fearing nothing, because he is tied to nothing, and possesses nothing
which can be taken from him. Thus the poor man enjoys happy days and quiet
nights, whilst the rich man is always troubled and disquieted in mind; carries
his distemper always about him, and finds himself still environed with thorns.
But his disease is a true lethargy: he is wholly insensible, and cannot awake
to see his own misery,

4. Hear, thou miserable man, who art still tormented with insatiable Avarice.
Although thou have man sumptuous buildings, although thou possessest infinite
treasures and heaps of money, although the extent of thy Possessions reaches to
foreign Countries: yet the day will come decreed from all Eternity, wherein
thou must leave all this, and thy life too, with a bitter and unwilling heart.
All these things will perish and vanish away: and God send thou do not perish
too, for having loved them too much. Then shall thou understand, how
contemptible those things were which now thou admirest, having rendered thyself
like unto those children, who make great esteem of mere bables. They are much
delighted with little pibbles, and painted stones which they find upon the
shore; and thou art ready to run mad for a little heap of yellow earth, and a
few glittering stones: and this thy folly may cost thee very dear in the end.
It Is not that I forbid thee to possess riches, if God has made thee rich: but
I could wish thou had no ill gotten wealth, nothing purchased unjustly, by
sordid gain, and too much care and solicitude. Receive thy riches into thy
coffers, but take heed of hoarding them up in thy mind: but be always ready to
part with them whenever it shall please God to take them away. No man is
truly rich, but he that thinks he does not want riches. Do not stay until
Thieves or chance shall rob thee of what thou possessest: prevent them in time,
and take away from thyself (by bearing a mind indifferent toward all these
outward things) all that others can robb thee of. Thou will then be master of
thyself, when thy riches do not master thee.

5. Learn to renounce all pomp and vanity in thy manner of living: and live
not so much according to the example of others as according to the law and
model which has bine left us by Jesus Christ. Poverty with the help of
frugality may be changed into riches. Nature desires but little; that is, to
have just provision enough against hunger, thirst and cold: and no more. What
hinders but that thou may have a house good enough without having it built of
marble: and be clothed well and decently enough without having thy apparel
made of the richest silks. Can thou not quench thy thirst, unles thou
drinkest in a crystal cup, that so thou may drink and fear at the same time?
Can thou not cut thy bread without having the haft of thy knife made of
Ivory, and beset with pearls? must thou needs have a basin of silver to wash
thy hands in, whereas an earthen one would serve as well? will not a lantorn
give sufficient light unles the work of it be all gilded? He is a slave to his
gold, who thinks his gold can any way adorn him. How mucn better would it be to
love true riches; to wit, such as make a man better, such as no fortune nor
death itself can take away from us? why art thou afraid of poverty since thou
have a kingdom in thy own breast? The kingdom of God is within thee. Let it
not be said then that thou seek any other riches. Seek the true and
sovereign Good, which is nothing else but God himself. In him is thy possession
and kingdom. For in him is all good, and all riches. Unto whom God is all
things, this world seems as nothing.

6. All that shines, all that seems great in this world, is but pure Vanity,
a mere nothing. What do thou wonder at to see a man richly clad in purple,
laden with gold, and followed by a great train of servants? All this is but
pomp. They are things which are shown, but not possessed: and they pass away
at the same time that they please. This is a truth which is learnt not so much
in the schools of Philosophers, not so much from the cross of Jesus Christ, or
from the eternal wisdom of God; as from the world it self, and those who are
enslaved in the vanities of it. Do but hear how Aman, the most rich, the most
powerful, the most favored of his Prince amongst all the men of his time: do
but hear how he speaks unto his friends, having assembled them together. I
esteem (says he) all that I possess as nothing as long as I am forced to see
Mardocheus sitting before the Kings door Oh folly! oh blindness! I have often
read and heard, that all the things of this world are nothing if compared unto
those riches, which are purchased by Virtue, and last for all Eternity: but
when I consider they were esteemed as nothing by such a wicked man, methinks we
should esteem them les then nothing. Wherefore unles thou can contemn the
things of this world, thou do nothing. Begin then to contemn something in
thyself, and contemn it because it is something It concerns thee to bridle thy
covetousnes; that so thou may accustom thyself to the love of poverty, and
learn to esteem things in as much as thou have need of them. Thou will easily
contemn all things, if thou do accustom thyself to think always of Death.

CHAP. VII. Of Anger. The character of an angry man. The causes, effects, and
remedies of Anger.
1. NO Anger is just and lawful, unles it be when we are angry against Anger
itself. It is a cruel monster, an outrageous and turbulent passion, which if
once it gets the upper hand in a man's heart, it scarce leaves any sign or figure
of man in him. Anger is a short madness, and makes a man out of himself;
thirsting after arms, blood, and slaughter: forgetting all honor, civility,
and friendship: snatching at any weapon or occasion to do others mischief;
like unto some great Ruin which breaks itself into many pieces upon that which
it overwhelmeth. Nothing is more hideous to behold then an angry man: his eyes
seem to burn and sparkle with rage, his veins swell, his hair stands upright,
his lips tremble, his teeth chatter, his mouth foams, his voice breaks forth
with a harsh and raging Tone. No passion puts a man into such disorder. It
renders the face dreadful, contracteth the forehead, makes the head shake, the
feet stumble, the hands tremble, and the whole body is put into strange
motions. Add his threatening gestures, the clapping of his hands, his striking
the ground with his feet, knocking his breast, pulling his hair, tearing his
garments, and his blood rising in every part. Now guess in what condition his
mind is within, since his outward motions are so extravagant. As the Poets
describe the infernal monsters all in flames, environed with serpents, and
howling with a most hideous noise; such is the picture of an angry man, when he
is in his bloody fury, and rages with a brutish cruelty. Other vices may be
hidden or disguised: Anger always discovers it self, appears in the face, and
like fire catches and lays hold of all things: and the more thou strivest to
hide it, the more it rages. He that is transported with anger, seems incapable
of all moderation.

2. Other vices have their certain limits, but Anger is boundles, and reaches
all things: we are angry sometimes against heaven itself. Hence proceed so
many blasphemies, so many murmurings against God; hence it is that the wicked
and libertin raise so many questions and disputes concerning his divine
providence. And we are not only angry with those, whom we think to have already
wronged us, but we are also troubled with the thought of future injuries; so
that if we apprehend (though perhaps it is but our fancy) that such a party
will do us wrong, we are moved to be angry with him, as much as if he had
already done it: so apt is our nature to invent new matter of sin. It happens
also very often, that we are angry, and yet we know not with whom: and if we
meet with no body else to exercise our rage upon, we are angry with ourselves.
But that thou may know, that this passion is not always occasioned by
injuries, we are angry sometimes with things, which can no way offend us, much
les do us any wrong. So, many times, we tear our garments, throw down our
plate, break our quils, tear our paper, when we do not find them proper to our
use. So many times, we fall into passion for a cup thrown down, for our table
not well covered, for our servant not making have enough, for a stool or chair
moved with noise; and many such little things, which can neither deserve nor
feel our anger. So, sometimes a stubborn and headstrong horse, a barking dog,
the noise of birds, the importunity of flies, or the biting of fleas rouse up
our anger, and make us impatient. Consider thy own folly, in revenging thyself
upon irrational creatures and things without life, whereas it were more fit
those things should be permitted to punish and correct thy folly.

3. If we look upon the damage and evil effects of Anger, there is no plague
imaginable that has done more mischief to human-kind. We shall find that all
the murders, slaughter, destruction of Towns and whole Countries have bine all
occasioned by this We shall find that anger has bine the cause of all those
great heaps of dead bodies, and rivers colored with blood. Behold the ruins
of many noble cities; Anger pulled them down, and has laid some of them so
desolate that it is scarce known where they stood. Behold vast deserts not
inhabited by men; Anger has depopulated them. Behold so many houses consumed
with fire, so many fountains maliciously poisoned, so many families quite
extinguished: Anger has bine the cause of all these mischeifs. A man might
term the world a society of beasts rather then of men, were it not that beasts
agree amongst themselves, whilst men are continually tearing in pieces one
another. Add, that the passion of Anger makes a man loose the likeness of God,
whose works are always full of peace: it blinds our mind so as we cannot see
the truth, nor follow the advice of friends: it troubles and perverts all the
faculties of our Soul, and yet whilst it discomposeth the whole man, we scarce
believe there is any thing in it unbeseeming a man: such is the common opinion
of the world, that they think it a brave thing to be angry. But it is now time
to speak of the remedies whereby this inordinate passion, if it cannot be quite
extinguished, may at last be made subject unto reason, and brought to a kind of
moderation.

4. Above all things the best remedy is, presently to contemn the first
provocation to anger, and to resist it in the beginning: For if it once begin
to carry us out of the right way of virtue, it will be a hard matter to return
again into it. It will then do what it pleases, and not what thou have a mind
to permit. When an Enemy is once entered within the gates of a Town, he does not
stand to capitulate with his Captives. For it is much easier not to admit and
consent unto what is bad, then to moderate it when once admitted. The upper
regions of the air which are nighest to the stars are neither darkened with
clouds, nor troubled with tempests, but free from all tumult: it is the lower
regions that are subject to thunders. Even so a high and generous mind, being
always in a quiet station, is above all those things which occasion anger,
refraineth all passionate motions, and gives little liberty to his tongue: for
he knows that anger does not take away the evil, but makes it greater. As
birds, thinking to shake of the brid-lime, which has touched them, entangle
all their feathers in it: so all impatience does but augment our torment. Anger
does us more hurt then the injury He that is angry, thinks he is contemned by
another; but he that has a right esteem of himself does not seek revenge,
because he is insensible to injuries. To seek revenge is to confess our grief
and sufferance. It Is no sign of a generous mind, to seek to bite one that has
bite us.

5. When thou hear any one speak ill of thee, presently think not what he
says, but what thou art to answer according to virtue. Let not the malice of
another have so much power over thee, as to disturb thy inward peace. God, who
is all powerful, suffers so many wicked men: and thou who art worse then all
the rest can not bear with one. It Is a foolish thing not to correct thy own
malice, which is in thy power, and yet to think to correct the malice of
others, which is not in thy power. If thou art guilty of so many sins,
whatsoever thou suffer is nothing in comparison to hell which thou
deservest. Who art thou, that nothing must be said to offend thy ears? he that
does an injury to another offends himself, because he sins. But what is it
that has happened unto thee? Even that which God had decreed from all Eternity
for the good of thy Soul. Hear what God says to thee. If you forgive others I
will also forgive you. If this word does not awake thee, thou do not sleep,
but art dead. Thou must forgive others, to obtain pardon for thy own faults.

6. We must endeavor to put all suspicions out of our mind: they are often the
cause of much anger. Such a man did not salute me civilly, another broke of his
discourse with me abruptly, a third did not look well upon me. Thus we seldom
want arguments, reasons and conjectures for suspicion, being always too
credulous to evil. Commonly the greatest part of the injury proceeds from our
misconstring of things. Wherefore simplicity, and a favorable interpretation of
all things is very necessary. Plead the cause of the absent party against
thyself, and ever suspect that passion, which makes thee still apt to believe,
what thou art afraid to hear; and which puts thee into anger, before thou have
time to judge of the matter. We must always take time; for truth is seldom
otherwise discovered. If thou were to judge some small mony-busines, thou
would determine nothing in the case without witnesses; and yet thou have no
scruple to condemn thy friend, without hearing him speak. It Is not the part of a
wise man presently to give credit to every report. Many tell untruths, with
intention to deceive: many again, because they have bine deceived themselves by
such reports. He that says a thing in secret, does in a manner not speak it.
But what is more injust, then to believe in secret, and to be angry in public?
In fine, it is good not to see all, and not to hear all things. For he cannot
be said to have suffered any wrong, who is ignorant of the injury done him.

7. When thou know that others speak ill of thee, ask thy own conscience if
thou have never spoken ill of them. Then think with thyself, of how many
several persons thou daily speak. By this means, if thou often consultest
thy own conscience, thou will be more moderate in regard of thy neighbor. For
how can thou exclaim so much against the debauchery of others, since thou
have spent thy youth in the same disorders. Why art thou so subject to blame
others for lying, being thyself guilty of perjury? why do thou rayl so much
against the perfidiousnes of men, since thou thyself have so often broken thy
word and deceived others? why art thou so forward to correct others, and yet
can not endure to be corrected thyself. Think with thyself not only what thou
suffer, but also what thou have given others to suffer. All that thou
reprehendest in others, thou will find the same in thy own breast. We are all
bad enough, and therefore we must pardon those faults which are common to all.
And though thou have not as yet committed the same fault, yet thou may do it
hereafter. He that stands, let him take heed he does not fall.

8. What wonder is it, that an enemy should do thee hurt, that a friend should
give thee offense, that thy children do amiss, that thy servants commit a
fault? These things are always as common in the world, as roses in the spring,
as fruits in summer. As it is impossible for a man to walk up and down a great
Town, and not to get a fall sometimes, to be stopped, to be spotted with dirt;
so many troubles, many wranglings, many impediments often occurr in the
various course of a man's life. Why do thou wonder then and art troubled to
see a wicked man do thee an injury? It is but what was to be expected from
him. But if thou art good thyself, do always good unto thy neighbor, and
strive to make others also good by thy example. It Is not thy revenge, but thy
patience and good deeds that must make them so: at least by this means, if
thou can not make them good, thou will make them Courteous, and civil: if
thou can effect neither, yet without doubt thou will make thyself much better
by it. Such a man perhaps speaks ill of thee, and is much incensed against
thee. Will thou know what thou art to do in this case? Say to thyself: I
cannot believe it. If he has said any hurt of me, he did it by mistake, his
zeal was good, and his intention not bad perhaps: either he said it for my
good, or I have given him some occasion to speak so of me We cannot properly
call it an injury, when we only suffer what we have done unto others. I am
truly guilty of such a fault, and it is but just I should be taxed with it. But
perhaps I suffer unjustly, and am blamed without reason. What then? I will
imitate my Savior Jesus Christ, and I will say with the Royal Prophet: I was
dumb, and did not open my mouth, because thou did it. The evil words and
evil deeds of others; although they are bad in themselves, will do thee no
harm, unles thou make bad use of them They are good or bad in our regard,
according to the use we make of them.

9. What is the cause of all offense? opinion. Take away the opinion of harm;
that is, do not think thyself hurt, and nothing will hurt thee. There is
nothing which can touch, reach, or enter into thy mind: nothing can move it but
thy own judgment: it is that which makes things seem insupportable when they
happen. Nothing can hurt thee, unles thou hurtest thyself. But thou will say
perhaps, he is a wicked man that persecutes me. Stay a little and he will
suffer that punishment from others, which he has deserved from thee; and he
has already begun his own punishment, because he has sinned. But he has wit
and knowledge enough; why then does he not mend his faults? True: and thou who
do not want the light of reason, why do thou not correct thy impatience?
The sins of others are still before thy eyes, but thou can not see thy own
imperfections. But hear me a little, whosoever thou art, who delightest in
revenge; I will suppose that God had given thee free power to revenge sin; but
with this condition, that thou art to begin with punishing the greatest
offenders. Let the injuries be punished in order. The greatest enemy thou have
is thy own anger, it is that which has done thee most hurt; begin then thy
revenge in punishing that Thou have no need to seek enemies abroad, having
still so great an Adversary in thy own bosom. Plato being once angry with his
servant, and having lifted up his hand to strike him, stopped saying: I would
strike thee, if I were not angry. Thus he thought it better to punish his own
anger rather then his servant; esteeming it more reasonable to punish the
master that was angry, then the Servant that was negligent. The greater is our
rank and condition, so much the more generous we should be in suppressing our
Anger.

10. Judges and such as bear Authority to govern others, may be obliged
sometimes to show themselves angry, and to make others suffer the effects of
their anger; yet so that nothing be done against reason and justice in the
case. Offenders against the law must be punished, but without anger. If a
virtuous man were always to be angry when he sees others do ill, he might
pass all his whole life in Anger. For he will scarce find a moment, wherein he
may not see something which is not good. He shall never have done, if he
resolves to be angry as often as he sees occasion to be so. He that is of a
mild and sweet nature will have the same compassion of those who commit
offenses, as a Physician has of frantic persons. As thou art not moved to
impatience against the heats and colds, which are caused by the several
seasons of the year; so also it does not become thee to be angry against
wicked men for the injuries they do thee, because it is their nature to do
so. They are like sick persons, who are always intemperate, and cannot be
ruled, and therefore we must pardon them. We revenge ourselves sufficiently
upon one that speaks ill of us, by seeking no revenge at all. Thy enemies
intention is to make thee grieve and suffer; But if thou take it patiently
and grievest not, the grief and suffering will fall upon him, when he sees he
has bine frustrated of his hope to see thee suffer by his contumelies: So
that the fruit (as we may say) of an injury depends on the feeling and
impatience of him that suffers it. When thou show thyself angry against
injurious words, thou seem to own them; but if thou neglectest and
contemnest them, they will vanish away of themselves. But thou will say
perhaps, it is a great disgrace to be contemned, and not to seek to defend our
honor. Say rather, it is a shameful thing to be afraid of contempt; for he
that fears this, commonly deserves to be contemned A wise man does not regard
what the world esteems a disgrace: nothing in his opinion can bring disgrace,
but Sin. If such a person contemns me, let him look to it: as for my part, I
shall take care not to do or say any thing which may deserve contempt. Does he
hate me? let him look to that also. As for my part, I shall endeavor to carry
myself peaceably and lovingly toward all. Thus the invincible patience of a
virtuous man wearyes and triumphs over the malice of the wicked; and in this he
imitates God, who pardons all things, endures all things and still
surpasses our wickedness with his continual benefits. It Is a more generous
action, not to take notice of an injury, then to pardon it.

CHAP. VIII. Of Envy; and Sloth. The description of both Vices: and Remedies
against them.
1. ENvy, which may be termed its own Hangman, first rages against itself,
before it attacketh the prosperity of others. The punishment of other vices
commonly follows them, but the punishment of Envy seems to go before it. For
the envious man makes his own torment of the felicity of others, and waxes
lean by seeing his neighbor in a good case. He that is troubled with this
vice, sins and is punished at the same time. Other vices are contrary to
some particular virtue, but this is an enemy to all that is good, and
perverteth the whole order of nature. It is opposite unto the divine Goodness,
whose nature it is to communicate all its perfections: it is opposite to the
state of the Blessed in heaven, who rejoice at the felicity of others as much
as for their own: it is opposite unto Christian charity, which rejoices for
the prosperity of her enemies: it is opposite in fine to the law of Nature,
which commands us to wish the same prosperity unto others as to ourselves. As
the Eye which is infected with a certain inflammation, which Physicians call
Ophthalmia, cannot endure the sight of any thing that shines; so the envious
man is tormented with beholding the virtue and credit of others. Envy is called
in Latin Invidia, because it sees too much the happiness of others.

2. The devils envy men, but do not envy one another: and yet thou who art a
man, enviest other men, in which thou art worse then a Devil. It Is a sign of a
weak mind, and that thou condemnest thyself in thy own judgment: for thou
would never envy others, unles thou did think them better then thyself,
and above thee in some things. Do thou desire not to give way to this
passion? Contemn all the fading and inconstant things of this world, and fix
thy love on eternal riches. The love of Eternity kills all envy. He that
aspires unto eternal happiness, cannot envy others for enjoying temporal
felicity. What Prince did ever envy the low condition of some mechanic Artist?
A mind that is employed in the contemplation of higher things, cannot descend
unto these vile offices. Is it not enough to be troubled with our own miseries,
which are very many, but we must also torment ourselves by envying the good of
others? Thou will never be happy, as long as thou enuyest those that are
happier then thyself. Do thou think, that that felicity which thou enuyest,
in others, can be taken away from them and conferred upon thee? I will suppose
thy neighbor is rich, learned, and placed in some eminent dignity: Thou may
make all these advantages thine, by loving him. He that loves to see others
happy, is happy himself: he that loves to see others rich, is rich himself.

3. I join Sloth unto Envy, because they are both a kind of Sadness: the one is
Sad for another good, the other for his own. Both are found in weak-minded
persons: for as the scripture says: Envy kills the little one: and sloth is
the vice of a drooping mind, which is weary with the labor of spiritual
exercises; and being frightened with the greatness and difficulty of them cannot
resolve to undertake any thing worthy of a man. The sluggard will and will not:
he is ever various and inconstant, a burden to himself, troublesome to others,
and by his continual wearisomenes working his own torment. He is like unto a
Top that children play withal, which turns round, but does not advance; and
though it is in continual motion by force of the lash which keeps it up, yet
for all this it may be said to stand still in the same place. The slothful man
seems to have a will to do good, but still he does nothing for all this. All
his actions are faint and like tepid water provoking to vomit they disgust both
God and men. It Is in vain therefore for thee to hope Salvation, unles thou first
shakest of all sloth, and resolvest with a firm courage to use a force over
thyself to practice virtue. As a bird is made to fly, so man is born to labor:
and although God had imposed upon us no obligation to labor, yet methinks the
world gives us care and trouble enough. How much pains do some men take, to
purchase riches? What do not others suffer, to obtain some honorable
employment? We buy our sins very dear. But if thou take so much pains for
temporal and fading riches, why do thou not use the same diligence to
purchase eternal felicity? Ah! thou have reason to be ashamed of thy negligence
and sloth in a matter of so much consequence, The labor is but short, the
reward will be eternal. There is nothing so hard and difficile, which human
industry with the help of Gods grace cannot overcome. Take a good courage to
begin, and all those monsters of difficulties will soon disappear. Whatsoever
the mind has resolved to do, it will at length bring it about. Do what thou
can, and in time thou will be able to do all things. God helps us in all
our actions.

CHAP. IX. Of Pride, Ambition, and vain Glory. The Character of a proud man.
The vanity and danger of Honors and dignities. The ev^ effects of Pride, and
Remedies against it.
1. PRide, ambition, and vain glory are neighboring Sins, of the same kindred
race; out of which as out of an Ocean of evils all mischief flows. For when
a man has proposed unto himself his own excellency for his Sovereign good, he
directs all his actions unto that end; contemning all the service which is
due unto God, and neglecting all respect which is due unto men. And if he finds
there is no other way to become great but by committing great crimes, he makes
no scruple to make use of that means to purchase glory: employing all manner of
craft, ruining his neighbor, and plotting the death of others to arrive unto
that place and dignity which his ambition ayms at. The proud man hated of God,
and intolerable amongst men, employeth all his wit and industry to purchase
the applause of the world. He still thinks himself worthy of some greater
honor, and takes much complacence in this thought. He rashly undertaketh more
then he can do, intrudes himself into much business, boasts of himself with
much impudence, and contemns all other men. He cunningly feigns himself
humble, that so he may be les suspected of ambition. When he misseth of his
aim or falls from his hopes, he complains without end, raises quarrels and
hatred amongst his neighbors. He is fierce and churlish to his Inferiors, but
no man is a greater flatterer of his Superiors, or more slavishly obsequious
to those who are above him. If he is endued with any good qualities, he does
not refer the chief glory of them to the true Author which is God, but to
himself. He much affects to be seen, and taken notice of in all things; and
gives his jugdment of high matters which are above his capacity, with as much
boldness, as if he knew them by his own experience He inquireth with much
Curiosity into other men's actions, judges of them with much rashness, condemns
them with much Severity; exaggerates their faults, diminishes their praise. In
his speech and gate he always discovers a certain Pride, and contempt of
others. He hates to be corrected, refuses all Counsel, and never hearkneth to
advice He thinks he has those Virtues which he has not; and those which he
has, he imagines them to be much greater then they are. He is very angry, and
cares not to commit any sin, if he sees that he is not preferred before others,
or is any way neglected. His heart is in a continual perplexity: because he
sees that those honors which he aspires unto, depend on other men's disposing.
Pride is the source of all sin.

2. If thou art wise, weigh in the balance of consideration all that this world
can afford thee, against the least part of eternal felicity; and compare unto
it whole Kingdoms, Empires, and the whole world: the least share of this
eternal bliss will weigh down all the whole world with all its pomp, and
riches; and all will seem but as a leaf, that is carried away with a blast of
wind. Raise up thy mind then to think of Eternity, and render thyself worthy of
heaven, for which thou art created. Shake of all those proud thoughts of thy
own excellency, and labor for virtue which is the only thing that can make
thee truly great. If a King or an Emperor had adopted thee for his son, how
proud would thou be of the honor? But now considering thou art the adopted
son of God and redeemed with the blood of Christ, why do thou forget thy own
Origin? why do thou meddle with earthly and abject things, which are
altogether unworrhy of thy noble birth? God calls thee to the kingdom of
Heaven, to an eternal possession, an everlasting inheritance. Take good courage
then in considering this promise of thy heavenly masters: boast as much as thou will of being descended from so noble a Father, compose thy life and manners
according to the pattern of his divine perfections. This is the way that leads
to true glory.

3. What are Scepters, what are Crowns? Painted fetters, a glittering misery,
which if men understood aright they would not fight and make war for their
Thrones: there would be more kingdoms, then Kings to govern them. A great
fortune is a great slavery. Those men, whom the common people esteems happy,
do not think so of themselves For their felicity is a troublesome felicity,
in regard it renders them burdensome to the people. Then they begin to praise a
quiet solitude, and a low fortune; which who enjoyes, enjoyes his liberty. Then
they begin to hate those dignities, which before they had so much admired,
Then they begin with fear and astonishment to exclaim like Philosophers against
the vanity of the world. Then they begin to fear death, and the dreadful
Judgment of God, before which when they are brought to appear, all their
diginities, all their honors purchased with so much labor sweat and blood
will avail them just nothing. Live therefore after such a manner that thou
may appear securely before this Tribunal. He that now humbles himself in
this life, shall be exalted in the next.

4. Thou art very unwise, if thou think to live in quiet and security, when
thou have obtained some great dignity. That which thou can not find in a low
state, will not be found in a higher condition. The higher thou art, the more
will thy crimes appear. He cannot be hid, that stands in a high place. If thou
have enjoyed any tranquillity in thy former life, all is now lost. Henceforth
thou will be able to do nothing without being noted, and thou can not
dispose of one day according to thy own private will. The fall is always great
from high places. It Is in vain for thee to seek rest in a state, wherein all men
find danger and labor, and some find a miserable end. The tables of Princes
and great men are not secure, Poison is often drunk in precious cups. How many
Kings have tainted their Thrones with their own blood? It Is slippery standing in
a high station; where all things are in continual danger of a precipice. It Is
more secure walking upon plain ground. He that is admited and applauded by
many, is also enuyed by as many others. How many snares, how many treacheries
wait upon great men? how all things are unsafe, all things to be suspected
about them? They cannot trust their own servants, their own friends, their our
children, their own Relations. But he that lives in a low condition is secure
from all attempts: no conspiracies enter into his house. He that lives in
obscurity, lives securely. He fears no man, because no man fears him.

5. If thou did see a horse or a dog pretend a Superiority or preeminence
amongst other horses or dogs of the same kind, could thou forbear laughing
at it? And yet thou better deservest to be laughed at, if thou think thyself
greater then others, because thou have more wealth and power then they have.
Why art thou proud, dust and ashes? No man should boast or be proud of things
which are not his own. What good or perfection have thou of thy own, if thou
have received all things from the hand of God? nothing is thine but thy sins.
If then thou have received all things, render thanks and glory unto him, who
has bestowed them on thee. Shall we prefer one horse before another, because
he has more hay and oats before him, because he has a gilt bridle, a rich
saddle, embroidered trappings? No sure: but he that runs best, is the best
horse. So a man, unles he be a fool, will not seek to derive his glory from
things, that are without him and not properly his own. But thou will say
perhaps: I am a better man, I am more noble them some others, If thou say
this thou art unworthy of all honor, because no man justly deserves to be
honored, but he that is virtuous, and comtemns all honor and glory. True
nobility is never proud, and he that is above others in dignity, is also above
them in modesty. the chief glory of great men is, when they humble themselves
most.

6. Consider the weakness of thy condition; measure thy body, and thou will find
many things whereof thou ought to be ashamed, but nothing whereof to be
proud. Do not contemn the opinion of Philosophers, and Mathematicians: it is
true what they teach, that the whole earth is but a point compared to the vast
extent of the heavenly spears. What madness, what folly then, to divide this
point into so many kingdoms, so many Governments. No man can be great in a
little space. This earth, which thou treadest on now with so much pride, will
cover thee ere long; and all that thou will possess of it will be but just so
much as will cover thy cold body. Go now, and build great and immortal
palaces upon this nothing. Go, and exercise thy fury, and insolency upon it.
Go and increase here thy avarice; extend thy ambition, gather armies, and make
war against thy neighbors. When thou have bine mad and frantic long enough,
thou will see and acknowledge at last the vanity and deceit of all these Titles
and honors. All that shines in this world is but glass: it breaks at the
same time that it casts a luster. Great trees are many years in growing, but
are cut down in one hour.

7. If thou can be content to live private, thou have cut of a great
inticement to pride. No man lives in state and pomp to please his own eyes, or
the eyes of a few of his familiar friends; but the reason of his living with
great spendor is, to be noted by the world. Who would put on purple, if he
thought he should be seen by no man? who cares, when he eats in private, to
have his meat served in gold and silver? who would expose his gallant
Tapestries, and other rich movables under the shadow of an old tree, where
none but himself should look upon them? Ambition desires to be seen as on a
Theater, and never strives to make a greater show, then when commended and
applauded. If the Be has made her honey, if the horse has run well, if the
Tree has born good fruit, they seek nothing else: but man still desires
praise, to be taken notice of, and to hear men cry, There he is: that is He.
But if thou considerest well, who they are, by whom thou desire to be
praised, thou will not find it such a hard matter to contemn the applause of
the Vulgar and common sort. The multitude is a vain and changeable rabble, whom
thou thyself often call mad; and who every moment accuse themselves of their
own folly, by disapproving and recalling so often what they had done and said
not long before. The life as well of him that praises, as of him that if
praised, is short: and these praises too are only given a man in a small corner
of the world, which is all but a point: and there too all do not agree to it,
nor perhaps does he that is praised believe all that is said of him. But it is
a brave thing to be spoken of in future ages, and to be praised by those whom
thou never saw, nor never shall see. Why do thou not grieve also, for not
having bine praised and commended by those who lived before thou were born? But
suppose that those who shall praise thee after thy death were immortal, and
also that thy memory should last for ever; what will this avail thee being
dead? and what does it avail thee being yet alive to hear thou art praised?
Thou art often praised where thou art not present, and at the same time thou
art troubled or tormented where thou art. The price of every thing is in the
thing itself; and it is not made better, by being commended; nor worse, if not
praised. Can we say that the Sun loses any thing of his light, if no man
looks upon it, or admires it? Can a fig loose its sweetness, a flowr its beauty,
a Jewel its luster, because they are not commended? It is a great argument of
a noble Soul and one that knows it has its origin from above, to contemn the
praises of men and to find content in itself. Thou loosest all praise, if thou
desire it: for what is there in thee, which deserves (...)? how great is thy
frailty, how great (...) misery, how great is the incertitude (...) Salvation?
Thou art an unprofitable serv^ to God, although thou did do all, which thou
art obliged to do. But with what face will thou dare to say that thou have
done all thou were obliged to do. Take heed therefore thou art not said to be
that without, which thou art not within: and take heed thou art not praised by
others for what thy own conscience tells thee thou art to blame in. Render unto
God what thou have received from him; to wit thy Being, life, and
understanding; and then what will be left thee but thy sins. Since therefore
thou art nothing, thou can not boast of this nothing. Thou will then begin to
be something, when thou shall acknowledge thyself to be nothing.

CHAP. X. Of moderating our outward Senses. How we must treat our Body: and how
to govern our Eyes. Of the vanity of Apparel.
1. OBserve well this commendable form of life; that is, to allow unto thy Body
those things only which are necessary to preserve it in health. Thou must use
it hardly, that it may not rebel against the Soul: for the body is to obey the
spirit, and not the Spirit to obey the body. Eat to satisfy hunger, and drink
to satisfy thirst; let thy garments be such as to keep out the cold, thy house
such as to defend thee against the injuries of the Weather. As for other
things, which have bine invented for vain ornament and pomp, be afraid to use
them; for they are like so many snares to catch thee in. He easily contemns
all that is honest, who is too sollicitous for his body and loves it too much.
Thou art born to greater things, and not to make thy Soul a slave unto thy
body: upon which thou must look as the prison of thy mind, and the fetters of
thy liberty. The just and wise man has a care of his body, not for the love he
bears unto it, but because he cannot live without it. The body is the
instrument of the Soul: and we should esteem that Artist but a bad workman,
who instead of working his Art should spend all his time in looking after the
Tools of his Trade. It Is the sign of a dull spirit, to be busyed and employed in
nothing but what concerns the Body.

2. In regard that Death commonly enters into the Soul through the windows of
our Senses, let it by thy care to change their sensual into a spiritual life;
and to withdraw them by degrees from too much application to external Objects,
least they should be engaged too far in them, and consent to unlawful
pleasures. The Senses are to obey, and not to command. And in the first place
thou ought to be careful to contain thy eyes: for the eyes being of a quick
nature, and suddenly catching the several species of things, are apt to convey
all these images first to the fancy or imaginative part, and next to the
understanding; where by moving the Appetite they often prove the cause of many
sins, if we have not a great care to prevent it. And if unto this guard and
custody of thy Eyes thou can also join a purity of intention in thy
Interior, thou will find God in all things: and when thou have once learnt to
adore God in his creatures, thou will easily be able to raise up thy mind from
contemplating the Creatures to contemplate the majesty of God himself. Beware
of casting thy eyes on a woman that paints and dresses herself to please men:
she is the true picture of Incontinency: and thou art in danger to perish, in
looking on her. Be not curious in going to Comedies, Balls, dances, and such
like Recreations: For such things distract the mind, fill it with vain
Imaginations, and hinder it from raising itself to heavenly Meditations Where
the eyes wander, the affections and heart also wander.

3. Hearing is the Sense of Learning, through which the knowledge of Truth and
Wisdom enters into the understanding. Thou must therefore be very prudent in
governing thy hearing, least thy ears should admit falsehood in lieu of Truth,
folly instead of wisdom. Shut thy ears against all detraction, calumnies,
backbitings, idle rumors, and unprofitable discourses: in a word, against all
that does not conduce in some manner to the good of thy Soul. For as one that
has heard good Music, still retains the sweetness of it in his ears, even
after he is retired from the place where he heard it; so evil speech, although
it does not always hurt just when we hear it, yet often-time, it sticks for a
long while in our memory, and our mind often ruminates upon it. By how much the
more seldom thou hearknest unto men, so much the oftener shall thou perceive
God speaking interiorly unto thy Soul. The use of sweet perfumes is the mark of
effeminate persons, and such as have a bad name. Wherefore I counsel thee to
reject this sort of vanity, and to render thy life exemplar by the sweet odor
and perfume of thy Virtues. As for thy Taste, thou may if thou will mortify it
by abstinence and sobriety: but as for the sense of Touching, it is to be
overcome by using hair-cloaths, disciplines, and such other like austerities.
It is better to afflict thy body in this world and by that means to save it;
then to damn it and thy Soul too by consenting to all sort of unlawful
pleasures.

4. Whereas we may sometimes judge of the inward state of So^l by the outward
habit and dress of the body, have thou a special care to banish all outward
marks in thy apparel of a corrupt mind. Those who were esteemed the wise men
amongst the ancient Heathens, would have an honest man to live so, as not to
move a finger without some reason for it. I do not exact from thee such a
strict behavior: but I could wish thou did observe it, and I mention this,
because I would have thee abstain from all dissolute laughter, scurrilous
discourse, too much freedom, uncivil gestures, and all other rude behavior:
that so thou may have nothing in thy carriage, which may give offense unto
others: either by the undecency of thy clothes, stern looks, unbeseeming
gestures, contempt of others, showing a dislike of their company, or any thing
else which may give them a horror and aversion from thy person. Remember also,
that many things may be done with honesty, which are not honest to be seen.

5. Man was created naked, and was not ashamed of his nakedness, because he had
no knowledge of it. But after he had sinned, and cast of the robes of
Innocence, which until then was a sufficient mantle, outward garments became
afterward necessary to hide his shame. And yet such is the pride and vanity of
men, that what was at first enjoined as a kind of punishment, is now esteemed a
prerogative of dignity. We now seek clothes, not so much to cover as to adorn
our bodies, and to please the sight of others. The quality of clothes often
discovers the inclinations of the mind: and to be over curious in dressing and
composing ourselves before a looking-glass shows an effeminate nature. Thou will soon be ashamed of these outward ornaments, if thou considerest what they
cover. He that is rich with the ornaments of virtue does not need these outward
ornaments of the body. Virtue makes the best show, when it appears without
disguise; whatsoever we add to it to make it seem greater, is still less then
virtue itself. It Is a mere vanity and mistake, to make a fair show without by
being richly clad, and within to cover nothing but Vice. Men wilfully load
themselves with chains, but because they are of gold, they do not apprehend
the infamy of Servitude. Some again are not content to be fettererd with gold,
but they will also pierce their very flesh with it; to wit, when they bore
their ears to hang gold rings and pendants in them, which are worth sometimes
the revenue of their whole Estate; making that which was once a name of
punishment, now to become a term of ambition, Many again spend much time with
their comb and a looking-glass, and are more sollicitous for the neatnes of
their hair, then for the salvation of their Soul. Such is the force of foolish
opinion amongst wordly people, that they think themselves much adorned with
those things, which they ought rather to throw away and tread under feet. Let
thy clothes therefore be without Vanity, and made not for pomp, but necessity:
keep a decent medium, not too uncomely, but fitted to thy state and condition.
Although thou were all dressed with gold and precious stones, yet without Christ
and the ornaments of his grace thou art still deformed and ugly in the sight of
God. These are the ornaments which are lasting, which cover and adorn not a
dying body, but the soul which is immortal. It is a mere folly to cover a
dunghill with gold.

CHAP. XI. Of the Tongue: the importance and difficulty of governing it. What
is to be observed, and what to be avoided in speech: and lastly how to endure
the evil tongues of others.
1. THe government of our Tongue is a thing of as great importance, as the
preservation of the apple of our eye; because life and death are both in the
power of the Tongue. He that is not able to rule his Tongue is compared to an
open Town without Walls: notwithstanding it cannot be tamed without a special
grace of God. Men have found a way to tame Bears, Lions and Bulls; and yet no
man can tame his own Tongue Our nature is so subject to prattling, that we
presently desire to utter whatsoever comes into our mind. The tongue is so near
unto the brain, and the mouth so near unto the fancy, that what the fancy
represents, is presently formed into words. Nature has taught thee, how
necessary it is to guard thy Tongue well, since it has walled it in with a
double fortification of Teeth and lips. But as the sweet smell of a precious
ointment is soon dissipated if the box that keeps it be left unshut, so the
vigor of the Soul is easily weakened through an open mouth; that is, by too
much talking. He cannot be truly said to attend unto himself, who does not
attend to rule his Tongue.

2. Be ever wary in thy discourse, and moderate that unbridled custom (which
most men are subject to) of speaking without any consideration all that comes
into their fancy. Fly all dissimulation, and still declare thy mind openly
without all reserved meanings. God has given thee the faculty of speaking,
that thou should use it to express things truly and sincerely as they are
in themselves. Before thou speak consult thy reason, and see if thou art not
possessed with some disordered affection; and do not speak till that passion
is over: Otherwise thou may speak many things, which hereafter thou will
repent to have spoken. Thou will have no difficulty to be silent, provided thou
art not disturbed with some irregular clamors within, and that thou enjoyest a
peace and tranquillity of mind. Our speech and mind cannot easily disagree. If
the mind be temperate, quiet, and in good order; our speech will also be sober
and good: If the mind be any way discomposed with passions, the Tongue will
also discover the same: for we all discover what we are within by our outward
speech.

3. Do not use thyself to idle words. As thou choosest what to eat, so choose
what to speak. Thou examinest the meat that goes into thy mouth, and why do
thou not examine the words that are to come out of thy mouth, which many times
are occasion of greater trouble and disorder in thy house, then thy meat is in
thy stomach. Accustom thyself to speak little unto others, and much with
thyself. Wise men often repent themselves to have spoken, but never to have
held their peace. Even amongst irrational creatures, those which seem to have
most wit are observed to make the least noise. Too much prattling is the defect
of children and women, who have naturally less reason then men. He has little
virtue, who is always speaking vain and frivolous things. If thou did love
God and were careful of thy Salvation, all thy discourse would be of God, of
virtue, and perfection. Love cannot feign, cannot be hidden. Every one commonly
speaks of those things which he loves; and his Tongue is ever subject to
discover that which his heart feels. The reason why thou speak so little
of heavenly things is, because thou art still plunged in the deep abisse of thy
old vices. To which may be added another reason; to wit, the little reading;
and less meditation which thou practisest: so that if thou had a mind to
speak of good things, thou know not what to say. The mouth speaks out of
the abundance of the heart.

4. When we are in company we commonly talk of nothing else, but of the life,
manners, and affairs of our neighbor. Thus every man has as many Judges of
his actions, as there are heads in the city. Every one has his eyes abroad to
see the faults of others, and scarce any one keeps them at home to see his own
imperfections: we are blind in our own concernments, and quick sighted in what
belongs to others. We are still ready to hearken unto detractions against our
neighbors fame, but seldom or never willing to hear any thing said in his
praise. Wherefore by how much this sin is more common, we ought to avoid it
with so much more care. Thou have enough to do with thy own vices; mark and
correct those. Take heed of revealing to any man thy own or others secrets, in
things which ought to be concealed. Many have put themselves into great
disquiet and trouble, by their own indiscretion in committing their secrets
unto such as could not or would not keep them private. There is little
difference, whither thou revealest such things to one, or more. It is an easy
matter for a secret to be told from one to another, and so to be diuulged to
all the world. This facility of discovering our mind too freely, commonly
arises from talkiing too much and too long; so that we take a pleasure in
talking, which has the same effect on our mind as drunkenes would have: for by
this it happens, that there is no secret however so private and holy, which
does not come forth in discourse. He with whom thou talkest, first tells thee
his secrets, and thou upon this as being assured of his faithfulness presently
discoverest thine also unto him. But thou perhaps art true unto him in keeping
his secrets, whilst he is unfaithful unto thee and reveals thine unto every
one he meets: so that by this means although they are all ignorant of thy
business in public, yet thy all know it in private. A man would think that a
hundred Tongues did secretly fly to all ears, until at last that which was a
secret is now diuulged, and become a common report. All the mischief committed
under the heavens has bine either caused immediately, or promoted by the
Tongue. Wherefore make a balance for thy words, and bridle thy Tongue: and
never speak any thing which had bine better unspoken. It is more commendable to
be sparing in thy words, then in thy money. He that prodigally spends his money,
does good to others, although he is bad to himself: but he that is prodigal of
words, hurts others, and himself too. He imitateth the perfections of the
Almighty, who can be content to hear much, and say little.

5. Nothing is secure from an evil Tongue. The Princes of the world are not
free from calumnies, though their power and authority has placed them above
the reach of their enemies swords: those who are eminent for Sanctity, are not
yet free from slanders, though the innocence of their lives is above all
censure. Christ himself, whilst he was upon earth, was not exempt from the
calumny and censures of evil Tongues. Considering these examples, learn to be
patient in the midst of all calomnies. Look upon detraction as an incitement to
virtue, and a bridle to keep thee from running out of the right way to it.
Nothing is a greater enemy to vice, then the censure of others. When any one
speaks ill of thee, thou art taught what to avoid. If thou desire to be
secure from the poisonous stings of an evil Tongue, contemn all its darts.
Thou will feel no wound if thou can hold thy peace, and esteem more the
judgment of the virtuous, then fear the insolence of those who calumniate
thee. It Is no great matter what others think of thee. Thou have within thee a
more just witness of all thy actions. Ask thy own conscience, and believe what
it tells thee. What is more base, then to regard the speeches of fools, and to
seek our esteem from the judgment of others? Whatsoever others say, thou art
obliged to be good: just as if gold or an Emerald should say; whatsoever the
world says; I must be gold, I must be an Emerald, and still keep my color.
If any one should rail against a clear fountain, will it cease for this to
yield a pure water? and if any one should throw dirt into it, will it not
presently wash it out? So thou may still keep a quiet mind, although evil
Tongues speak ill of thee, and calumniate thy fame. He that is troubled with
every little report, shows that he has no great esteem of himself. Children
strike their parents in the face, an infant will tear his mothers hair, bite
her breasts, scratch her cheeks, and spit against her; and yet we dare not say
these actions are contumelies, because the party that does them is not capable
of contempt, which always supposes a knowledge of what is done. Wherefore as
parents in this case are not angry with their children, do thou bear the like
mind toward those who injure and calumniate thee. If thou once show thyself
to be moved with their injuries, thou will honor the authors of them. For thou
show by this that thou would be glad to be honored and well spoken of by
him, from whom thou art unwilling to bear any injuries; which is a mark of a
low spirit and little courage. Thou will always be unhappy, if thou think
thou can be contemned.

CHAP. XII. Of the inward Senses. The use of opinions. How we must cultivate
our mind with good Thoughts. Diverse instructions how to govern the sensitive
faculty of the Soul.
1. THe chief point of wisdom consists in relying upon no opinion which is
contrary to nature or inconsistent with reason. Wherefore thou must endeavor to
arm thyself against all the motions of fancy; as Logicians use to provide
against all the fallacies of Sophysticall Arguments. A son dies. It was not in
our power to hinder it, and therefore it cannot properly be counted an Evil. A
Father desinherits his son: and this also, since it was not in our power, is no
evil. But the son did not bear this patiently. This being in our power, is bad
of itself. He bore it patiently, and with much constancy. This also being in
our power, is good. If thou considerest well these things, thou will find much
profit by it. A friend is carried away to prison. What then, what has happened?
nothing, but that he is put in prison. But every man presently cries, that he
is an unhappy man. Correct thy opinion, and all things are wll. As we bind a
man that is run mad, that he may hurt no body; so we should correct our fancy,
that it may not fill our mind with false opinions. It is our fancy that spoils
all: it escapes from us like a wild beast, and runs with all liberty here and
there: it is always vagabond, always prattling, impatient of rest, desirous of
novelties, and keeps no moderation. Thy chiefest care then must be, to bind,
govern, and settle it; to the end that thy thoughts and designs may not still
depend on the opinion of others. All that is not bred in thy own thoughts, does
not concern thee.

2. Examine well all that comes into thy mind, that thou may thoroughly know
the nature, propriety, end, circumstances, and profit of every action, before
thou do it: consider whither it concerns thee, and whither it be in thy
power or no: otherwise, give it no admittance, but resist it as much as thou
can. God who is always and intimately present to thee knows all the secrets
of thy heart, and there is nothing so hidden, which his eye does not reach. Take
heed thou do not meditate any thing in thy mind, which thou would be
ashamed to speak before any honest man. Let thy thoughts be quiet, simple,
pure, and void of all malice. In a word let them be such, that being suddenly
asked what thou think, thou may openly declare without any shame what they
were. Be ashamed to think what thou art ashamed to speak. The way to keep out
all evil thoughts, is to have our mind always employed in good things.

3. Nothing is more hurtful to the Soul, nothing more contrary then that
brutish, inferior, and sensitive desire. It is the source of all vice and
imperfections: it is an enemy, which thou ought always to fear, always to
fight against, until that thou have made it subject unto reason, as much as is
possible in this life. It will give thee no rest, no Truce. Thou will be forced
to fight against it without end, without measure, because it is an adversary
that has no end, no measure in attacking thee. It is an enemy that is within
thee, or as I may say thou art thy own enemy, more to be feared then if a whole
army were set against thee. Defend therefore thy Soul from thyself. It is an
act of greater generosity to attack thyself, then to attack a Town: to conquer
thyself, then to conquer others. It Is not that I exact of thee that thou
should wholly destroy thy passions and inclinations, but that thou would
learn to govern them. Let reason moderate and refrain them, which is all that
is required of thee. The Stoics had little reason in their doctrine when they
maintained that all passions were bad. Our natural faculties have nothing bad,
nothing superfluous. He takes away all virtue, who takes away all passions.
Where there is no combat, there is no victory.

4. It Is true, this is a hard combat, and the victory is doubtful: for our
passions are born and grow with us, and our reason follows a long time after,
when our passions have got the upper hand, and our will being deluded under
pretense of a feeming good, permits itself to be wholly overswayed* by them:
until reason afterward and experience gathering strength comes to know her
own right of commanding, and then begins to resist the Tyranny of our passions.
The first motions of nature are hard to overcome: but thou must always attend
unto thyself with great watchfulnes, and as soon as thou perceivest thyself to
be moved with any passion, then presently employ thy reason to hinder the
violence of it. It is easier to resist them in the beginning, then to govern
them in their violence. Thou will soon arrive to great tranquillity of mind, if
thou can accustom thyself to foresee all occasions, before they happen; that
so the enemy may always find thee prepared against him. It is too late to seek
for the remedy, when the danger is past. In the next place, learn to do and
speak little; for if thou cuttest of in thy words and actions all that is not
necessary, thou will have less trouble of mind. Do not say, this is a thing
of no great importance or concern. Whatsoever is the beginning of virtue and
perfection, although it seem of little consequence, is notwithstanding a matter
of great concern.

5. The original and sinful man which is derived from Adam, if we consider
him as bearing the ressemblance of a Tree, has for his root selflove, for his
trunk a propension unto evil, for his boughs, his disordered passions, for his
leaves vicious habits, for his fruit thoughts, words, and deeds which are
contrary to Gods law. Wherefore that the boughs of evil affections may not bud
forth into leaves and fruit, put the Axe to the root, and cut down all
self-love. When thou have once taken away this, thou have cut of with one blow
all the vicious offspring of thy sensitive appetite. The means to root it out is
to contemn thyself: to esteem thyself the least amongst men, and that thou have
no preeminence before others either in learning, virtue or other prerogatives;
not to be afraid to displease men, and be contemned by them; to be willing to
want all comfort, and temporal commodities. Thou wild save thyself if thou
can hate thyself; thou will damn thyself, if thou have too much love for
thyself.

CHAP. XIII. Of Love. The nature, Causes, and Effects of it. Of the Remedies
against it. Of Hatred.
1. LOve is a compleasance of Good, or the first impression which is made upon
our desires, when the knowledge of Good begins to make us like it. It Is this
which rules all the world; which if once subdued, and brought to obey, it will
be an easy matter to overcome all our other passions. True love ever tends unto
that, from whence it had its beginning: it still inclines to Good, because it
is derived from the Sovereign Good. Examine thy life, and weigh thy heart in the
balance of a strict consideration: observe what sort of love prevails in it;
for, that which weighs heaviest in the balance of love, that is thy God, that
is the Idol which thou adorest. God has commanded thee to love him with all
thy heart, to this end, that he might keep thy mind and affections employed;
because it is certain that that which thou love with all thy heart, is the
thing which thou adorest as thy God.

2. It Is not only goodness and beauty, which makes us love any person, but also a
certain sympathy and proportion of mind and manners, as also an exterior
modesty, industry, noble birth, learning, quicknes of wit, and such like other
endowments of body and mind. Love itself is the loadstone of love, which if
accompanied with any curtesy or civility, he is now forced to return love, who
before would not begin to love. In fine, some have more natural inclination to
love then others. For example, those who are of a lively spirit, a tender heart,
a delicate blood, a sweet and facile nature.

3. The power of Love is very great; it transformeth him that loves into the
thing loved. Love is a kind of sally and wandering out of ourselves; a kind of
voluntary death. He that loves is absent from himself: thinks nothing of
himself, takes care of nothing, does nothing, and unles he is received by the
person loved, he seems to himself to be settled no where. Oh how unhappy is that
love, which is not directed to God. For he that loves the objects of this
world, cannot dwell in them, nor find any solid contentment in them; because
they are limited, subject to vanity and death. But he that loves God, is in
God; and ceasing to live in himself, lives in him, in whom all things live, who
is our center, and immutable Souveraign Good. Human love is violent and bitter;
divine love is always humble, and peaceable: human love is tormented with
jealousy, but we need not fear any Rival in divine love. The one fears least
another should love the same object, the other wishes all may love the same he
loves. Wherefore if thou love thyself, love God: for this love profits
thee, not him. Any human object may change or perish: but God is never lost,
unles we wilfully dismiss him from our hearts.

4. That the love, wherewith thou love thy neighbor may be sincere, be sure
to exclude from it all human causes of wit, compleasance, and similitude: and
regard only those causes, which consist in piety and virtue. That sort of Love,
which is called Platonic, and by which some fancy that the Soul is raised from
the sight of a corporal beauty to contemplate the eternal beauty of God, is
very dangerous. The sight of a beautiful face raises a desire of touching it:
and whatsoever it is that proceeds from the eyes of a beautiful person,
whither it be a light, or some subtle spirit or humor, it bewitcheth a man's
heart, and is often the occasion of his ruin. It is better and more safe that
our feet should occasion our fall to the ground, then our eyes be the occasion
of our falling into sin. But the remedies of love are very hard, because whilst
we seek to overcome it, the more it torments us; and unles we resist it in the
beginning, it so creeps by little and little, that we find ourselves much
entangled in love, before me thought of loving. But if we resist it in the
first beginning, it is easy to be cured. It Is not amiss likewise, to keep our
mind employed in other things, which bring some care with them, and may blot
out the memory of the object we love. Then we ought to avoid all things that
may bring it again into our mind, as seeing, and speaking of it; for nothing is
sooner renewed then love, which if it once invade thee, and take possession of
thy heart, it will so vex thee, that nothing but the slow remedy of time and
absence will be able to cure thee of it; to wit, when tired with long
sufferings it will expire of itself. Many have bine cured by shame; to wit,
when they have perceived they were noted, talked of, and pointed at by all that
knew them; as also by considering the shamefulnes of it, being a thing full of
disgrace, full of danger, and subject to much sorrow in the end. Others have
found help by seeking into and considering attentively the defects and
imperfections of the object they had loved; for by this means the beauty and
lovelynes of it is much lessened. Lastly, it is a good remedy to change our
love into the love of God, into the love of virtue and eternal rewards, things
which truly deserve to be loved; that so good love may drive out our bad love,
and our mind which was created for more noble objects blush to soil and defile
itself with terrene objects. Evil and dishonest loves cannot but infect good
manners.

5. Nature seems to have tied all things together with a certain chayn of love.
It Is love which governs, and makes the Stars coneur in their motions and
influences: it is love which gathers together such vast flocks of birds in the
air, such vast herds of catitle in the fields and mountains, such vast troops
of wild beasts in the woods and deserts. Nothing can untye this holy knot of
love, but Hatred: for as love tends to union, so hatred tends to division and
dissension. Those who are most subject unto this passion of hatred, are idle,
fearful, and suspicious persons, who fear some loss or mischief on all sides.
Some again are of such a nature, that they hate all men, and like those birds
of evil fortune hate even their own dark habitations. If thou should chance
to meet any one of this temper; do not hate, but pity him. Even as in a
fencing school thou strivest (quietly and without anger) to defend thyself from
him that fenceth against thee; so in all thy life, decline and avoid those who
hate thee, without hatred. The way to refrain hatred in thyself is to endeavor
to excite thy mind to a love of that person by considering some perfection in
him whom thou hate There will be no place in thy heart for hatred against any
man, if thou can interpret all things to the best. Then turn thy hatred
against those things which deserve to be hated, as the deformity of Sin and
eternal damnation. If thou hate any thing else, the damage and hurt falls
upon thyself, and not upon the object which thou hate. For if we are
commanded to love even our Enemies, whom can we hate? Thou must fly out of the
Society of men, to find those whom thou may lawfully hate. All evil is to be
ranked by itself, out of the order of natural things, and it is that alone which
thou art permitted to hate. But if thou will needs hate a man, hate none more
then thyself; for no man has done thee so much hurt, as thou have done to
thyself.

CHAP. XIV. Of Desire, and Flight. What we are to desire, and what to fly or
avoid.
1. HAppy is that man who is always subject unto God, who obeys his Will,
who desires nothing with too much earnestnes, who is content with all that
happens, and still says: Since it is Gods will that I should be sick or in
health; that I am poor or rich; that I should live here, or in another place; I
am ready to submit my self unto his will, let him dispose of me either way, I
am content. But if thou once beginnest to say, when shall I remove? when shall
I have this or that thing? thou will never be at quiet. For if thou desire
what is not in thy power, thou will live in continual anxiety, and (like one
that is turned round in a Wheel) thou will always be following it, but shall
never attain it. Thy opinions, thoughts, affections, and all thy actions are
things which are in thy own power; but thy body, riches, honors, dignities,
and all things else which thou do not make, are thinks out of thee, and out
of thy power. No man can hinder thee of those first things: but these latter
depend of others, and are subject to many impediments: wherefore resolve either
nor to desire them at all, or to desire them so as still to remember that they
depend on others disposing, and that their nature is such that they cannot be
long in thy possession. None of these outward things deserve to be loved: for
the figure of this world passes away. Although all things should go according
to thy wishes in this world, yet when death comes thou will be forced to leave
all behind, whatsoever thou have had. Look into thyself: the source of all true
riches is within thee, and the more thou searchest for it, the more will thou
find.

2. In this consisted the wisdom of some ancient Philosophers, who being free
from the slavery of fortune seemed in the midst of most cruel torments to be
as happy as Angels. For whilst they contemplated the limits of human power,
they were easily persuaded that nothing but their own thoughts and affections
was truly in their own power. And by means of this consideration, they obtained
such a power over their own affections, and were able to govern their passions
in such a manner, that they bragged (and not without some reason) that they
were the only rich, the only powerful, the only happy men in this world. But
there is need of much practice to be able to contemn all these external
things. If thou can once bring thyself to this, thou will never after be
sorry for the want of such things as are witnout thee; as thou do not
complain that thou art not King of the Tartars, or that thou want wings to
fly. What is withont us, does not belong to us.

3. It Is this that must bridle thy desires, which if thou can not govern thou will never content thy insatiable mind, and whatsoever thou give it, it will
not make an end of thy avarice, but only serve to irritate it the more. Those
who are in a burning feavor can never drink enough; because their desire of
drink is not so much a thirst, as a disease: so it happens with those, whose
desires are not moderated, and kept within the compass of reason, but are
guided according to luxe and pomp, which have no end or bounds. Thou will find
the want of nothing, if thou containest thyself within the bounds of nature and
reason; but if thou exceedest this, thou will ever be poor in the midst of all
thy riches. Avarice has never enough, but nature is content with little.

4. Remember thou art to comport thyself in this life, as in a banquet. If any
delicate meat is brought in and presented to thee, stretch out thy hand
modestly and take a part of it. If he that carries it about from one end of the
table to the other should chance to miss thee, do not call to him or pull him
by the sleeve. If he is not yet come nigh thee, do not show thyself greedy by
looking toward him, but stay until he comes to thee. If thou do use the
same prudence in order to riches, dignities, and the like, thou will be worthy
of the banquet of Saints, and thou will enjoy such peace of mind, which will
place thee above all the chances of fortune. But if thou absolutely refusest
and contemnest what is offered thee, thou will be made partaker of the felicity
of Angels, and thou will begin to taste upon earth that which they enjoy in
heaven. It is in thy power to make thyself happy, if thou desire nothing that
is without thee. What man is happy? He that has what he desires. He then that
desires nothing but what is in his own power, has all that he desires.

5. We fly and avoid many things as hurtful and contrary to our nature, which
notwithstanding are very profitable in themselves. For it commonly happens that
what is contrary to our inclinations, is good for our spirit. Things which
afflict us, teach us wisdom. Death, banishment, poverty, confusion, labor,
sickness, and the like, which are not in thy power, are neither bad in
themselves, nor do they belong unto thee. Wherefore it is not necessary thou
should fly or hate them, but only change the opinion thou had of them.
Socrates wittily termed all these things Masks or vizards: for as children are
frightened with vizards, although there is nothing dreadful in them but the
outward shape: so it happens with thee, who art often afraid of things not as
they are, but as they seem. What is death! A bugbear. Consider how sweet it
has bine esteemed, not only by Saints, and holy men, but also by Socrates and
many others of the wiser Heathens. What then is there terrible in death?
Opinion. It Is the fear of death that is dreadful, and not death itself. Thou will find the same in other things, which thou art wont to abominate and fear.
Correct thy opinion of things, and thou will find that nothing is to be feared,
nothing to be abominated but Sin.

CHAP. XV. Of Joy, and Sadness. How a virtuous man is to rejoice. He that
foresees all things is never sad. Several Remedies against Sorrow and sadness.
1. Rejoice after such a manner, as not to loose modesty in thy joy: and let
not thy mind be so transported with joy, but that (if need be) thou may
easily change thy mirth into mourning. Our B. Savior who could best judge of
things does not call those blessed who laugh, but those who weep. For it is
much unbecoming a Christian, that pretends to eternal felicity, amidst so many
dangers of body and Soul, to laugh and rejoice after the manner of fools, when
he is in greatest peril. All wordly pleasure passes away, and that which we
call joy, is often times the beginning of Sadness. True joy is never found but
in a good conscience and the practice of virtue; as justice, fortitude,
temperance, etc. That thou may never want true joy, rejoice in what is thy
own, and within thyself. All other joys are vain, and cannot give thee true
content: and he has not always cause to rejoice, that is outwardly merry.
True joy is ever mixed with gravity, proceeds from a good conscience, honest
designs, good works, contempt of pleasures, and a quiet innocent life.
According to the rules of virtue, thou must accustom thyself first to much
sorrow, before thou can have true joy.

2. Sadness is caused by a certain horror, or apprehension of some present
evil, joined with a certain perturbation and disquiet of mind. We are often
tormented not so much with the things themselves, as with the opinion of them.
Do not concern thyself so much with the nature and quality of things; for
example, the services of others, thy lands, thy money, thy employments: but
rather consider what opinion thou have of them. If thou art fallen into
disgrace, if thou art robbed of thy money, if thou art beaten, or the like:
these are things which are not in thy power: but it is in thy power to have a
good opinion of them, to bear them patiently, and receive them from the hand of
God as means to work thy Salvation. Thou will never be sad, if recalling thy
mind from the thoughts of thy present afflictions, thou turnest thyself to
consider the joys of heaven. No evil or misfortune can happen to a virtuous
man, not because he is insensible to the blows of fortune, but because he
overcomes all. He looks upon every adversity as an occasion to exercise his
patience, as an instrument of Gods grace, as the way leading unto eternal
glory. A good man may be thought or termed miserable by others, but he can
never be so in his own thoughts.

3. Look upon all things which may happen, as if they really were to befall
thee. By this means, thou will diminish the force of all miseries, which never
come unexpected unto those who are prepared to receive them. Afflictions seem
intolerable only unto those who expect nothing but prosperity. What if fortune
should deprive thee of half thy estate? what if thou should loose all? what
if thy house should fall, thy corn be burnt, thy friends forsake thee? what if
thou art in danger of loosing thy credit, and by some false accusation art
deposed from thy office or dignity? Sickness, captivity, ruin, fire, nothing of
all these things come suddenly and unexpected to a wise man. He premeditates
all future misery, and what to others seems less only by long patience, to him
is lessened by long meditation. That which happens to one man, may happen to
any man. What riches are there, which may not change into hunger and poverty?
what dignities, which may not fall into misery and disgrace? what kingdom,
which must not at last come to a period? Have we not seen in this our age a
Kings head struck of by the hand of a hangman, and that by the command of his
own rebel subjects? There is no such great distance as we imagine betwixt
riches and poverty, betwixt a Princes court and a shephards cottage, betwixt a
Throne and an Axe. Know then that all conditions are variable; and all that
thou see happen to another, the same may befall thee. He will easily bear a
cross fortune, that always expects it.

4. Virtue does not flourish, when our life passes in all prosperity. It Is then
we see how great is is, when patience shows what it can suffer. We are made a
spectacle unto God, Angels, and men, says the Apostle. Behold a spectacle
worthy of God himself, to wit, when a virtuous man in the midst of Adversity
triumphs over himself and the affliction too. A skillful Pilot cannot show
his art in a calm sea, and favorable wind. He that is never tempted, knows
nothing. Ah! how unhappy a man am I (will some one say) that am forced to
suffer these misfortunes. But I tell thee, thou art happy; because thou have an
occasion to try thy virtue. Such a thing might have happened to any one else; but
every one else perhaps could bear such afflictions without complaining. Do not
therefore fall under the weight of Adversity; but stand up firmly against it,
and endeavor to bear all patiently that is laid upon thee. If thou can but
break the first shock, thou will find nothing hard in it but opinion. Natural
sufferances are equally hard unto all sort of men: but as for poverty,
ignominy, contumelies, and such like things which are commonly esteemed Evils,
many bear them all with great patience, and seem in a manner insensible in
them; wherefore if we are grieved, sad, and impatient in them, this does not
proceed from the nature of the things, but from the bad opinion we have
conceived of them. Why will thou deceive thyself with a false persuasion? It is
in thy own power to make all calamity easy, by bearing it patiently. No sorrow
can be great, unles opinion add something unto it. Do not therefore make thy
afflictions greater by thy impatience. Every man is so far miserable as he
esteems himself to be so.

5. Every sickness or distemper decreaseth after a while, and Time allayeth or
takes away the greatest pain. Consider therefore which is better, to stay
until thy afflictions leave thee of themselves, or that thou thyself should
put an end unto them. Why do thou not cure thyself and prevent time, by
lessening that which length of time will at last mitigate without any other
remedy. Although thou keep and nourishest thy grief, yet time makes it wear
away. For nothing is sooner hated, then sorrow; which whilst fresh has need of
a Comforter but when old it is laughed at (...) thou can overcome thy
miseries with grieving, go and spend all thy days in mourning, pass thy
nights in sadness and without taking any rest, wring thy hands in a doleful
manner, and give thyself wholly up unto sorrow, supposing thou can find a
remedy in this. But if thy Tears avayl thee nothing, if all thy weeping cannot
mitigate thy sorrows; learn to govern thyself, and stand firm with an undaunted
constancy against all adversity. He is but bad a Pilot, who permits the waves
to carry away his stern, and carelessly leaves his ship to the mercy of the
Tempest: But he is to be commended even in a shipwreck, who is over whelmed
with the waves, and yet holds fast the stern of his ship.

CHAP. XVI. Of Hope, and Despair. How we are to moderate both.
1. HOpe is vain and deceitful; a mere dream, unles it be placed in God, who
alone can give us force to overcome all difficulties. Why do thou torment
thyself with the expectation of what is to come, and fillest thy thoughts with
the Ideas of things which are afar of? Thou will hope for nothing, if thou
desire nothing in this world, and can contemn all things. No man hopes for
what he contemns. Although thou have never bine deceived perhaps in thy
hopes, although what thou hopest for may be easily got, yet notwithstanding as
long as thou art still in hope, thou shall ever be full of solicitude, full of
uncertainty, full of doubt and anxiety. As thou do not willingly walk in
unknown paths, nor climg up rocky hills, so thou should not use thyself to
hope for those things, which are not in thy power to come at. There is no
greater misery, then to be frustrated of what we long hoped for.

2. Thou should often consider, that all that is without thee and round
about thee, is subject to perish, and ready to fall, as hanging only on a very
small thread. Why do thou forget thy condition? Thou art born mortal: and
thou art not sure of one day nor of one hour. Death is still ready behind thee;
and all that thou have, is but lent thee. Thou have only the use of it, and
that as long only as it shall please God to permit. All must be rendered back
and without murmuring whenever he shall call for it. He must be a very bad
Debtor that speaks ill of his Creditor. There is nothing therefore under the
Sun which thou may or should hope for. There is no true hope, but that
which is directed to the true and Sovereign Good.

3. Despair is caused by sloth, abject thoughts, too much fear or apprehension
of difficulties, too much diffidence of our own forces, and want of resolution.
The way to overcome it, is to call to mind the examples of those who by a
generous constancy have overcome far greater difficulties. Begin, and force
thyself it, because God always helps such as begin to work and do good: thou will find at length that what seemed most hard, is easy enough, when thou have
cast away the false Opinion thou had concerning it. Whatsoever befalls thee,
was decreed from all Eternity. And either that happens which thou art able to
bear, or that which is above thy forces: if the first, do not despair, but
bear it patiently: if the second, do not yet despair, for all that; for
whatsoever it is, it will soon have an end, and make an end of thee. That which
thou can bear, is but light; and that which thou can not bear, is short and
of no durance. But remember that it is in thy power to make many things
tolerable; if thou considerest them as means to work thy salvation. Adversity
is always the the occasion of Virtue.

CHAP. XVII. Of Fear. How vain it is, and how to be overcome. Boldness to be
avoided. Something again of Anger.
1. IT is the folly of the greatest part of men, to afflict and torment
themselves; to feign or increase their own misfortunes, by fearing things which
either are not bad in themselves, or by fearing that which perhaps will never
come to pass. Human cruelty could never yet invent so many torments, as he
suffers who is always in pain for what may befall him, who is always
sollicitous for fear of loosing his present felicity, and for fear of suffering
future miseries. Many evils which would never be, are, because we fear them.
What does it avail thee to be afflicted before thy time, and by a vain
providence to meet thy adversity? Is it necessary that thou should be now
miserable before hand, because thou art to be or may be so hereafter? It Is a
mere folly to yield unto vain apprehensions, and when we have no true signs of
future misery, to be frightened with false Idea's. How often art thou deceived
by a false conjecture, still interpreting any dubious word to the worse sense.
How often do thou believe the anger of those who are above thee to be greater
then it is; and thou do not so much consider the greatness of his anger, as
how much he is able to do against thee, when he is angry. But these fears are
vain, and therefore they trouble us more, because they are vain. Things which
are true have a certain measure, but that which is doubtful and uncertain is
nothing but the conjecture of a timorous mind. There is little difference
betwixt suffering adversity and expecting it: only that sorrow has a certain
measure, but fear is boundles and without end. Thou greivest for what has
already befallen thee, but thou fear all that may happen hereafter.

2. If thou desire to be quit of all fear, all that thou fear may befall
thee, suppose it already present; and then measure thy evil and thy fears
together, and thou will find that the evil which thou fear is great only in
thy opinion and not in itself. Is there any thing which would give thee greater
sufferance, then (for example) to be banished out of thy cuontrey, or to be led
to prison? Is there any greater evil which can happen to thy body, then to be
burnt, or to dye? Examine thy fears according to Truth* in relation to all
these particulars: and thou will find that many even among Infidels have
contemned all these things. S. Stephen prays with a quiet mind in the midst
of his pains when he is stoned to death: S. Laurence rejoices, and triumphs
over the Tyrant in the midst of the flames: S. Apollonia a young Virgin throws
herself into the fire which was prepared for her. Anaxarchus the Philosopher
being pounded in an iron mortar, laughs at his Tormentor. Socrates takes the
poison which was brought him with a cheerful countenance, and drinks a health
to Critias. Why art thou afraid of fire, and a troop of hangmen that stand
about thee ready to butcher thee? Death lies hid under all these preparations
(which are terrible only unto fools) death lies hid, which so many children and
young Virgins have embraced with joy. Consider the things in themselves without
all disguise, and thou will see there is nothing terrible in them, but thy
fear. We are like children, who are afraid even of those whom they love most
and are most familiar with, if they fee them ma^ked. But thou art worse then
any child in thy folly, whilst thou art afraid not only of grief itself, but of
the very shadow of it.

3. Turn thy mind from thy own private cause to consider the common misery of
the world. Say to thyself: I know that my body is frayl and mortal; subject
unto many, miseries, and must at last yield to death. I knew long ago, that
many afflictions would befall me. What then am I now afraid of? If I am sick;
the infirmity of my body will conduce to my spiritual health. Shall I be
reduced to poverty? I shall lead a more safe and quiet life. Shall I loose my
riches? I shall also be quit of many cares, and freed from continual danger.
Shall I suffer any shame? if it be just, I will hate the cause of it: if
unjust, I shall comfort myself with the innocence of my own conscience. Shall I
come short of my hopes? I will consider that even Kings are not able to obtain
all which they desire. Shall I be banished? I will go with a willing mind and
I will esteem it as a pilgrimage: Shall I be blind? by this means I shall not
see such objects as move concupiscence. Will men speak ill of me? They will
only say what I deserve, and do as they are wont. Shall I dye? I know I came
into the world on this condition, to go out again. But shall I dye abroad? no
country is a banishment to him that considers we have no permanent City in this
world. Shall I dye young, and before my time? no reasonable man should complain
that he is released out of prison too soon and before his time. Death,
banishment, and sorrow are not pains to be feared, but the Tributes of our
mortal condition. It is a folly to fear that, which thou can not avoid.

4. Be not too confident, or bold; and undertake nothing above thy forces: for
no man is sooner oppressed, then he that presumes too much of himself. Our
forces are but weak without Gods help, from whom comes all our power, all our
strength. Boldness ever proceeds from too much esteem of our own strength, from
contempt of our Adversaries, from a hasty wit, and a mind not much accustomed
to the management of affairs. He that is more wise, fears more: for he
measures his own forces, and considers what he is able to bear, and what not.
Bold persons when they are fallen into some great dangers contrary to what they
expected, resist a little, but presently loose courage; being forced at last to
confess that human counsels are full of vanity and incertitude. A careless
unwary security is the beginning of future misery.

5. Anger will never overmaster thy judgment, if thou first take away the
opinion of a supposed injury. Thou art thyself the cause of all thy own evils,
misery, and sufferings? Why do thou cast the blame of all thy disquiet upon
others, if thou fallest into them by thy own fault? No man is hurt but by
himself. As nurses use to say unto children; do not cry, and thou shall have
it: thou may say the same with better reason unto thyself when thou art moved
with anger: Be not angry, do not make a stir, and thou will sooner obtain what
thou desire. Resolve with thyself upon certain days, not to be angry at all
whatsoever shall happen: and so try thyself after this manner for a month or
two, and thou will find in time that thou have much profited by it and thou will laugh at those things which formerly were wont to make thee angry, and
disquiet thy mind. A quiet and sweet disposition is not only grateful to those
with whom we converse, but also is most advantageous unto him that is endowed
with it. A quiet mind has this advantage, that it always rejoices, always
triumphs.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Faculties of a Rational Soul. How we are to keep our
Understanding from Curiosity. What study is best. How hurtful it is to search
into the life and manners of Others. We are not to heed what others falsely
report of us. Of thee Abnegation of our will.
1. GOd has given thee Understanding, that thou might know him, and by
knowing love him: but thy understanding has received a double wound by sin, to
wit Ignorance and blindness. Thou mistakest in the knowledge of Truth, and thou
art ignorant for the most part, what to do and what to fly. How great
diligence is used to preserve a Town from the plague, or to defend a castle
from the enemies forces, least any Spy should enter within the walls: So
should thou watch, least thy understanding should give entrance to any evil
object. The Senses first represent the species of things, then the undersanding
admits them, and proposes them to the Judgment, and lastly the judgment
proposes them to the will. But the senses propose equally good and bad, and it
belongs to the mind to admit them or exclude them.

2. First we must keep our mind and understanding from Curiosity. Why do thou
employ thy mind in vain things, since it was created for God, and solid
wisdom? Wisdom is thrifty. As he that tastes the herb wolf-bane that he
may know the quality of it, dies before he can judge what Taste it has; so
they who look after what does not belong unto them do themselves much harm
before they come to know what they sought after. To know unprofitable things,
is little better then being ignorant. He that desires to be truly wise, does
not study to get knowledge that he may be esteemed, but that be may live well:
nor does he seek so much to delight his mind by his studies, as to find in them
a remedy of his passions and evil inclinations. Do thou desire to know the
course, force, and influence of the stars? What art thou the better when thou
know all this, if in the mean time thou art ignorant of thy own weakness?
Do thou desire to speak in an elegant style? It will be more to thy purpose
to learn to be silent. Do thou long to know news? what better news can thou
desire then to renew thyself? Learn that. Art thou moved to reprehend other
men's faults? why do thou not rather correct thy own? do thou take pleasure
in reading Histories, and to know the actions of others? There is no hurt in
this, provided in the mean time thou do not forget, what thou art to do
thyself. Do thou delight in composing the differences of other men? why do
thou not rather compose and reconcile thy own passions? If thou did not seek
after superfluous things, thou would easily find enough to do in what is
necessary. That science only is necessary which makes thee rather good, then
learned.

3. To what purpose do thou spend thy time and break thy head in studying
Questions, which thou should rather contemn then strive to understand? Why
do thou labor to learn those things, which if known thou should desire to
forget? but, as in all other things, we are intemperate also in our studies.
There is no end of Books How many are there who buy great Libraryes more for a
show and ornament, then for any use or reading. Though thou should live many
years, yet thou will scarce have time to read all the Titles only of all the
books which have bine written. Of these, many treat of evil subjects; many
again are unworthy to be read; many are vain and foolish; which when thou have
read, thou will be nothing the wiser for them. I do not mis-approuve, that
thou should read and pass over slightly many books, least that thou
should think some great and excellent matter is hidden in them; but I would
have thee fix thy study upon few, and those well chosen. We do not need many
books or much learning to lead a good life; or to frame a virtuous mind.

4. Oh the vanity of human thoughts! we spend all our days in studying books,
and exercise our wits in all sort of arts and sciences, as if we were to live
many ages: but we neglect the care of our salvation, which is purchased not by
learning but by virtue. What does it avail thee to know all the actions of
foreign Kings and to compose whole volumes of the wars, troubles, and
enterprises of other nations? It were much better, thou would seek a remedy
to thy own misfortunes, then write what others have suffered. Thou learnest by
Geometry how to measure Lands: how much better would it be that thou would
learn to measure and know what is enough for thee. Arithmetic teaches thee how
to cast accounts, and how to apply thy fingers to Avarice: why do thou not
rather learn to contemn and to be willing to loose those riches, which are
gathered with so much care. Music teaches thee how to accord different
voices: why do thou not rather learn how to accord thy own thoughts, so that
thy Reason and thy senses may not disagree, or give a different sound. Thou art
taught how to distinguish merry and doleful Tunes: learn rather how to comport
thyself in prosperity without pride, and how to suffer Adversity with patience,
and resignation. I do not blame the study and knowledge of those Arts: but
that thou may make thy profit of all such things, first learn to know
thyself, and thy last ends. Although thou knew all things, yet if thou
know not thyself, thou know nothing.

5. It Is a shameful vice to be always observing the actions of others, to be
always searching into their manners, and rashly to interpret all things in an
ill sense. For Who art thou, that judge another man's servant? To his his own
master he stands or falls. It is he that judges all men, and has reserved
all judgment to himself. With what boldness dare thou attempt to judge in Gods
tribunal? Look to thyself, and search into thy own conscience. See the evils
which reign there within thee, see the good which is wanting, and do not turn
thy eyes to behold the life of others. Thou will find imperfections enough in
thyself, which deserve thy censure. There is scarce any thing, which by a
malicious spirit may not be interpreted to a bad sense. Heretics abuse the
very Gospel itself: the Jews, calumniate the actions of our B Savior* Even as
melancholy bodies and such as are of a bad temper convert all their nourishment
into evil humors, so a soul that is full of evil dispositions, whatsoever it
sees, whatsoever it hears, it still interprets all to a bad sense. A good or
bad intention often makes men's actions good or bad; but this intention is
known only unto God, who sees the hearts of men. But if the actions of other men
cannot be excused from being bad, what is this to thee? why art thou not
ashamed to discover the fowl and hidden sins of others, and to make them known
to all the world? why do thou not observe thyself, who art worse then others?
Exercise thy censuring Tongue upon thyself, blame thy own actions within
thyself, accuse thy own malice, and perversenes; and judge thyself. For if thou
do fist judge thy self, thou will be secure from the rigorous judgments of
God.

6. As we are always ready to censure and carp at the actions of others,
seeking by this means to be esteemed wise and discreet: So we are apt to
suspect that others think or speak ill of us; and that they hate and contemn
us. That thou may overcome this vice, endeavor first to moderate in thyself
the desire of pleasing, and to be well esteemed of by others. In the next
place, thou must endeavor to remove out of thy mind the thought of desiring to
know what others think or speak of thee: whereas it often happens that those
whom thou supposest to speak ill of thee and to mark thy actions, do not so
much as think of thee. Say with.S. Paul: If I should please men, I should not
be the Servant of Jesus Christ. Whatever others speak of thee, do thou still
say with the same Apostle: To me it is a thing of least account to be judged of
men. Such as thou art in the sight of God, such thou art in thyself. What
others think and speak of thee cannot make thee better or worse. It is better
to be good, then only seem to be so.

7. Nothing can happen contrary to thy will, if thou can wholly renounce thy
own will, and seek nothing but to conform thyself to the will of God. So thou will enjoy solid peace, and true quiet of mind. Thou may live as thou will,
if thou first learnest what thou art to desire. But thou must remember thou art
to desire nothing but what God wills. The only felicity we can have in this
life is to desire to do all our actions according to Gods will, and not
according to our own. God leads thee to thy Sovereign end, for which he had
decreed thee from all Eternity, through sorrow and joy, through adversity and
prosperity. Submit thyself to his divine providence, and cheerfully obey his
will: for although thou resistest his will, yet thou will be forced to follow
it, yet by this resistance thou make thyself guilty of Impiety. So true it
is, that God sweetly leads those who are willing, but draws them by force who
resist.

CHAP. XIX. Of the State of Proficients. Several helps for advancing in
Perfection. How to esteem and make good use of Time. Gods presence is necessary.
1. IF thou desire to be good, first esteem thyself bad. Thou will never grow
better, if thou do not desire to be so. To be unwilling to go forward, is
to go backward. Persever then as thou have begun, and make as much have as
thou can, that thou may enjoy so much the sooner a better mind, and a more
quiet conscience. It is a sign thou art mended, if thou beginnest to see thy
own faults, which before thou could not see. So we are wont to
congratulate sick persons when they acknowledge and are sensible of their
infirmities. Be not too facile in giving credit to thyself, but examine thyself
well, and guess of thy amendment by the firmnes of thy mind, and by the
lessening of thy passions. Esteem thyself a proficient, when thou have a full
power over thyself. It is a great happiness to possess ones self, and not to be
divided. A good man is always the same, but the wicked man changes every hour.

2. Thou may if thou will in one day arrive to the height of perfection; that
is, if forsaking the creatures, thou convertest thyself wholly unto God. To
know if thy interior be conformable unto him, mark these signs. If thou can
contemn transitory things, if thou love solitude, if thou embracest
perfection, if thou little heedest the Opinions and judgments of the world. And
remember that for obtaining all virtues there is no better help then constantly
to meditate on the life and passion of our Savior J. Christ. This is the book
of life, in which alone, as in a rich and copious Library, thou will find all
that belongs to Salvation, although all other books in the world were lost. But
it is not enough to know Christ and to meditate on his life, unles thou do also
imitate him, and live according to the rule which he has taught us, both by
his words and examples. Thou will never be able to correct that which is
amiss, but by some rule.

3 It was an excellent saying of him who said, that those who desire to profit
in virtue, must live so, as to be always mending. For there are many things,
which may give hindrance to a Soul that is laboring for virtue. For example,
when thou bear an inordinate affection to thyself, or to any other creature:
when thou art so tied to thy riches, that if it should happen they should be
taken from thee, thou would murmur very much at it: when thou seek too
much thy convenience in meat, drink, company, and divertisements: when thou art
too much entangled in wordly affairs, and followest with much obstinacy thy own
will and judgment in all things: when thou do not heed, nor give ear to Gods
inspirations when he speaks inwardly to thy heart. These are the chief
impediments which hinder thee in the way of virtue, which thou must endeavor
with all care to remove. Whatsoever thou do, let virtue accompany thy action;
whatsoever thou do, do it with promptitude and alacrity, direct it to a
perfect end; and still remember to have a good intention in all things: and
lastly do it with such a serious application, that the work itself may have
proportion with the knowledge thou have of the end unto which it is directed.
Perfection does not consist in the multitude of exercises, but in doing our
daily actions with a perfect intention. For the praise is not due to the work,
but to the manner of doing it.

4. The days fly, time runs away, and no man is able to restore what is past
of it. Thou do not live, but art about to live; for still thy life regards to
morrow. So thy life escapes from thee, whilst thou art busy in seeking how to
live: in the mean time old age comes upon thee, death follows, and seazes upon
thee yet unprovided. As Travelers, who entertain one another with mutual
discourse on the way, find themselves at their journeyes end, before they think
they are nigh it; so thou who art continually marching to thy grave sleeping
or waking with an equal pace, wilt not perceive it until thou come to it,
because thy mind is filled and distracted with worldly things. Why therefore
do thou delay? Learn how precious Time is, and how to make use of it with all
speed: this day, this hour is precious, and if thou loosest it, the loss is
irrecoverble. Thou art careful enough nor to let thy lands be invaded by
others; and if the least dispute happens concerning their limits, thou
presently flyest to arms or lawsuits to defend thy Right: but as for thy Time,
thou permittest any man to rob thee of it; being lavish and prodigal of that,
which of all things thou should endeavor to conserve with most avarice.
Reckon thy age, sum up thy past years; and though thou had lived above a
hundred, yet thou will find thou have not so many years as thou imaginest. For
how much of this Time have thou spent in sleeping, feasting, wrangling, and in
conversing with thy friends? Add all those hours spent in doing nothing, which
pass away unawares to thee: by considering this, thou will understand how
little Time in thy whole life is properly thine, and thou will confess thou
dyest very soon. Thou often complainest of having lost many days: why then
do thou not endeavor to make such use of present Time, that when it is gone
thou may say, I do not see how I could have employed it better? Our days
are only present one by one, and we possess them only by moments. Why do
thou loose to day, which is in thy power; and disposest of the future, which is
not thine? The greatest impediment to a good life is delay. Live to day, for to
morrow is too late.

5. Consider God as present in all thy thoughts, words, and deeds: regard no
other end but him, and still follow his will. He never strayeth out of the
right way, who takes God for his Guide. The business of thy Salvation will go
well, if thou directest all thy actions to the honor and glory of God, and
live so, as if he beheld thee, who sees all things, sustains all things, and
disposes all things. Thou can never be out of his sight; for he is present
not only to thy words and actions, but also to thy most secret thoughts: when
the doors are shut upon thee, and thou in the dark, do not think thou art
alone: God is still with thee, nothing is shut to his sight; and consequently
the consideration of this his presence ought to sanctify all thy secrets. In
him it is we live, move, and have our being. Remember therefore, to eat and
drink in his sight, to walk with him, to do all thy actions in his presence,
and to order all thy whole life his sight. Make thyself worthy of his sight,
that he may always behold thee with a favorable eye. Thou will find thyself
necessitated in a manner to live well, if thou considerest that thou do all
thy actions before him who sees all things. Live so, as if there were none in
the world but God and thyself. Whatsoever his divine providence has ordained
for thee, embrace it with a willing mind, whither it be prosperous or adverse
fortune. Thou seek God; and what matter which way thou come to him?
whither it be through prosperity or adversity? God send thou may find him at
last any way.

CHAP. XX. The profit of Solitude. How to fly evil company. What are the
common vices of the world. A proficient must still labor for virtue. Marks of
advancing in it.
1. IT is a great sign of a settled mind and well purged from evil affections,
to be able to live solitary. As God dwells in himself and is happy in
himself, so thou will imitate Gods happiness, if thou can learn to dwell
within thyself. And indeed, if thou will thyself, thou will never be alone;
that is, if thou will never separate thyself from Christ. But if thou will
needs be talking, speak with thyself, but take heed thou do not speak with a
bad man. Will thou know, what thou art to talk of to thyself? that which men
commonly speak of others: that is, speak ill of thy self to thyself. Mark and
speak of thy own faults, and reprehend all thou find amiss in thyself. Thou will never want faults to correct. Retire thyself from the world, and yet hide
thy solitude as much as thou can. It Is a poor ambition to boast of thy
solitude. But remember to join inward solitude to thy outward retreat, thereby
to make profit of it, and render it sweet and easy. Withdraw thyself from all
vain occupations, and fly not only men, but also business which does not concern
thee. Keep thyself free from all creatures, and blot out of thy heart all images
of them. Cast away all care of transitory things, all idle thoughts; and attend
only to God and thyself within the secret retreat of thy own heart. In this
silence of the mind, in this oblivion and privation of all things is found true
quiet of heart, and tranquillity of mind. Let this therefore be thy refuge; hide
thyself in it, and employ all thy thoughts in it. For the way to find God is to
forsake all creatures.

2. If thou desire to be good, fly evil company. Nothing corrupts good
manners so much, as to be familiar with many. If thou hauntest much company,
thou will not always bring back all the virtues thou had when thou wentest
amongst them. A weak mind that is not well grounded in virtue, is not so well
able to resist the power of so many vices, when it sees they have so many
patrons. We are subject still to follow the greater number. If we live and
converse with such as are delicate, we are apt to follow their steps and grow
effeminate too with them: if we have rich neighbors, this commonly makes us
also covet to be rich. One bad example of Luxury and avarice is enough to undo
thee. Our own parents sometimes, our own servants, our own companions draw us
to evil. All is full of dangers, all is full of snares. We are no sooner born,
but we are taught to be wicked. We shall scarce find any man who does not teach
us some vice, either by commending it, or by infecting us insensibly with it.
Thou will do well to keep thyself sometimes at home, in thy own private
chamber, free from all the tumult and conversation of men. Oh, how sweet is
such retirement? when thou art alone, all is quiet, peaceful, and secure. Thou
art called to walk abroad, and thou followest. Thou meetest with more company;
and then many being gathered together, many sins are committed in discourse; so
that, although thou wentest out with a good conscience, thou come home guilty
of sin. And yet thou do not perceive the wounds which thy soul has received
until thou returnest to thy solitude. Retire therefore into thyself, as much
as thou can, and permit not thy mind to be infected with the sins of the
multitude, which is commonly too prone to all manner of vice. He has most
content and joy of mind, who is least distracted with worldly discourse.

3. Suppose thyself on the top of some high mountain, and that from thence thou
could behold all the miseries of the world: and by this thou will easily
learn to hate the world, and to fly from it into solitude. Thou will see the
high ways beset with Thieves, the seas infested with Pirates, war resounding on
all sides, fields stained with human blood; in a word, all sort of vice
reigning every where. Thou will see voluptuous persons commit such sins, as
they themselves cannot approve of. Thou will see so many abominable and
unworthly crimes, that thou would think they were all mad that commit such
things, if the number of sinners were not so great: and it is this that makes
them think they are not much to blame, because they see the whole world commit
the same faults. There is no security in the Laws; and even those who should
protect innocence, oppress it. The innocent are condemned, whilst the guilty
are absolved: and the Judge becomes more criminal, in favoring and absolving
sin, then he was who committed it. The laws are not feared; for he who thinks
he can buy of his sins with bribing, fears nothing. The Tongues of Detractors
are full of bitterness, and there is nothing but deceit in the words of
flatterers. Those are full of hatred, these full of lying. Some are given to
drunkenes, others to spend their time idly. Some are insatiable in their
Avarice, others still ambitious of praise and esteem. Consider and look upon
the public marketplace of some great Town when full of people, and thou will
find there are as many sins as men. They are all guilty of injustice toward
their neighbors, contemning their Maker, and abusing his creatures, which
consequently will appear as so many judges and witnesses against them in the
last day. And how is it possible thou can stand firm, or be retired within
thyself, in the midst of so many Vices which encompasse thee on all sides, and
which still keep thy thoughts fixed on earthly things, whilst thou strivest to
raise up thy mind to heavenly contemplation? is a hard thing for a man to keep
himself innocent in the midst of innumerous sinners: For if they cannot change
thee, they will at least hinder thee very much. The only way to be secure is to
withdraw thyself from so many evils, and to put thyself in such a quiet
condition as to be able to look upon all the disorders of the world without
fear of being infected thyself with them. He has an invincible spirit, who
has bid adieu to all wordly things, and can live within himself as in a strong
castle well guarded against all enemies: To such a man the world seems a
prison, and solitude a paradise.

4. It Is no great matter to have quitted the company of men, unles thou art
attentive to thyself, and to the practice of virtue. There can be no good,
where virtue is wanting: no quiet, no happiness unles it proceed from virtue.
There are three things which correspond with one another in the whole universe.
Amongst all things and above all things God, amongst sensible things light, and
amongst the affections of the mind Virtue. God is the light and virtue of all
things: light is the Virtue of the world and the image of God: Virtue, is the
light of the mind, through which we are named and become the children of God.
Thou must approach it with a clean heart and purifyed mind, if thou desire to
arrive to the height of perfection. For virtue is the perfection of man,
restores innocence, and is full of all spiritual sweetness. It supplyeth the
defect of nature, which of itself is not capable of supernatural felicity. It
consists in a facility to do good, by means of which we live as we ought,
are enlightened in our understanding, resist sin, and merit eternal life. In
pursuance of this, thou must first learn the nature and acts of those virtues
thou pretendest unto, because no man loves, what he does not understand. Then,
when thou have once begun, endeavor not to intermit or cease from the practice
of it: although occasion should be wanting, we must imitate soldiers, who in
the midst of Peace are still exercising themselves, and by fighting with one
another only in jest, prepare themselves for real combats. Imagine thou were
accused of the greatest crimes, fancy thyself calumniated, or that all thy
riches were suddenly taken away from thee; and by this mean thou may exercise
thy patience, as much as if such things were really so. Thou will not be
dismayed when the thing happens, if thou can thus exercise thyself before it
comes. He that has bine often wounded in the war, fights with a good courage
when the battle comes.

5. The habits of Virtue are not got but by long exercise. To know if thou have
learnt any virtue, take these marks. To wit, if thou find that the vices
which are opposite to the virtue thou desire to practice are quite
extinguished in thee, or at least very much suppressed. If thou have overcome
the motions of evil affections, and brought them to obey reason. If thou
find not only facility, but also an inward delight in the practice of
virtue. If thou can contemn the murmurs and reproaches of tepid spirits, and
use a full liberty of will in the exercise of those virtues, which displease
such imperfect Christians. If thou beginnest to detest and abhor those evil
practices, unto which formerly thou had a strong inclination. If thou art
afraid even in sleep to consent to or take delight in any dishonest action, or
to approve any unjust proceeding. If thou striuest to imitate, what thou
praisest and admirest in others; and abstainest from those things which thou
reprehendest in them. If thou esteemest no fault little, but art careful to
avoid all sort of imperfections, however so little. If, when thou see and
hear that those who are no better than thyself abound in riches and are
raised to great honors, thou can look upon them without envy or emulation.
If thou have no difficulty to acknowledge thy faults, desiring that all men
would reprehend and correct thee. If content with the testimony of thy own
conscience, thou hidest and concealest thy good works. For virtue is a reward
to itself, and desires no other recompense for doing well but the satisfaction
of having done it. Finally, if thou applyest thyself without cease to the
practice of virtue; for true virtue never droop^, but is always in action.

CHAP. XXI. Of the three Theological Virtues. Faith is to be shown by the
exercise of good works. Our hope must be in God alone. Motives of divine Love.
The love of our neighbors is showed by helping them, and doing them good. An
Exhortation to Almsgiving.
1. FAith is the ground of all other virtues, and foundation of the life of a
Christian; without which it is impossible to please God. This was the wis^dome
by which the whole world was subdued; and we must stick close to it, laying
aside all curiosity or searching into the mysteries of it. Believe then and do
good works withal, because Faith without good works is but a dead faith. In
thy speech and profession thou endeavorest to pass for a faithful Believer:
take heed thy life and manners do not speak thee an Infidel. Thou beleevest
the Gospel, why then do thou not obey it? Thou beleevest there is a life
everlasting; why then do thou prefer a short time in this world before
Eternity which shall have no end? What does it avail thee to believe Truth and
goodness, if thou art false thyself and workest iniquity? It is impossible, that
he who believes well, can live ill: for no man can be said to believe well,
but he that practices what he believes.

2. Since it is certain that all things are disposed and governed by the
providence of God, so as not so much as a bird falls out of the air, nor a leaf
from any Tree, without his will and knowledge; thou ought to commit thyself
wholly to his protection, and to have a strong confidence in his help; not
doubting but that he will always be ready to help thee in all occasion. Know
that all human Counsels are deceitful and uncertain; and therefore thou
ought to permit thyself to be wholly guided and governed by God without the
least trouble or anxiety. And though some unexpected misfortune should happen,
which may seem to confound and spoil all thy actions and designs; whither it be
sickness, calumnies, false accusations, or some other greater afflictions; do
not loose courage for all this, but confiding in his divine assistance commit
thyself wholly to his will: for God has decreed perhaps from all Eternity to
make these chances and afflictions a means for working thy Salvation. He that
has a strong hope of the future joys and riches of paradise, does not feel
the present miseries of this life. As much as thou hopest and believe, so
much thou may be said to possess.

3. Charity which is the Queen and soul of all other Virtues regards God and
our neighbor. As for God, we are bound to love him above things with all our
heart, with all our Soul, and with all our strength: we must love him purely for
himself, and for the love of his goodness. That thou art, that thou live, that
thou have motion and sense, that thou understandest, all this is the grace and
gift of God. It is he that has redeemed thee from the slavery of the Devil:
it is he that has endowed thy Soul with innumerable prerogatives: it is he
that has prepared life everlasting for thee without any preceding merit of
thine. The skies, the earth, the air, the water, all things contained in them,
cry daily unto thee, that thou art bound to love him above all things, because
he is the Author of all these things and has created them for thy use. Why
then do thou wander here and there to seek thy happiness where it is not to be
found? Love that one sovereign good (to wit God) in whom alone is all that is
good. Seek that sovereign Good, then which nothing is greater, nothing more
desirable. It Is Love alone, that can make us capable to show our gratitude to
God; although it is altogether impossible we should requite his benefits with
an equal proportion of Love. Love is not idle, does not seek its own
interests, it works great things, when it is great itself. Nothing seems hard
unto Love. A true lover may suffer death, but can never be overcome.

4 Nature has made us sociable, and given us all a mutual Love: for we are
all members of one great Body, being all called to the same Faith, and same
glory. He does not love God, who loves not his brother. The effect of charity
to our neighbors is to do good unto all, to be kind, to be civil, and prevent
them with love, and good turns. Do good unto those who have need of thy help
with a cheerful and willing mind, without delay, unles it be requisite to
deferr it for a while, thereby to favor the bashfulnes of those who are to
receive thy benefits. Do not stay until thou art asked when thou once know
the necessity of a person. It is a hard word, to be obliged to say, I desire
your assistance: If thou preventest thy friend, by doing him a curtesy before
he asks it, it is a double good turn. He that has obtained by asking, cannot
say he had it for nothing. If thou can not prevent his asking, at least let
him not ask long; but grant him what he asks with such a readiness, that he
may think thou were ready to assist him without being asked. Then, together
with the good turn thou do him, give him also good words; and let no sadness,
slownes, upbraiding, or boasting be mixed with thy Curtesy. The matter will
speak for it self, although thou say nothing in giving it: God who sees thy
most hidden thoughts, will reward thee for it.

5. Amongst all the acts of Christian Charity we may give the first place to
Almsgiving, by which our faith is shown, our sins are redeemed, heaven is
bought. Take heed then, thou do not contemn the poor, who although he is in
want himself, yet is able to make thee rich in the sight of God. Thou art sold
to the devil by thy sins, redeem thyself with thy money: and change the
instrument of Avarice into a subject of mercy. Thou give a Comedian money to
fill his purse, only for making thee laugh: and will thou give nothing unto
Christ who promises thee the kingdom of heaven? Thou payest tax and
contribution to a Prince, and that unwillingly, although thou have received no
advantageous crop from thy harvest; and can thou deny to give a small alms
unto God, out of the abundance of thy stock? Take heed least by sparing thy
money, thou becomest guilty of thy brothers death. Thou have killed him perhaps,
by not feeding him in his want. Thou take great care how thy Heirs may live
at their ease after thee, but thou take no care to make a happy end thyself.
It is better thy heirs should want something of that full Estate which thou
intendest to leave them, rather then thou should hazard thy Salvation to
enrich them. Cast up thy accounts: and see what portion or chare thou have in
heaven, and what thou possessest in this world. Of all that thou possessest in
this life, nothing will remain thine when death comes, but only that which thou
have sent before hand into heaven by the hands of the poor. Consider, and blame
thy own infidelity. Thieves may deprive thee of what thou lockest up in thy
chests, but that which thou have sent into heaven is secure for ever.

CHAP. XXII. Of Prudence. The Necessity and difficulty of it. The duty of a
prudent man.
1. AS it is impossible for an Architect to make his work just and even without
the help of his Rule and Plummer, so we can never do our actions aright
without Prudence. This is the Guide of all other virtues, by this things are
done in due order: it is the eye of our Soul, and the art of well doing. No man
can lead a contented life without prudence. And yet it is the most difficile and
most obscure of all arts to learn. The difficulty proceeds from its
comprehending and considering all manner of things as well general as
particular. Besides, whereas the things of this world are subject to continual
change, and depend on several circumstances; it is not in every man's capacity
to reduce them to a certain rule, or to join, temper, and reconcile things
which are many times quite opposite and contrary. As for the obscurity unto
which it is incident, the cause seems to be in a certain darkness wherein the
several causes of things are involved. We see as it were the top of our
affairs, but we know not where their foundation is hidden. Moreover, the
prosperous or unhappy event of things depends on the eternal decree of God;
which is another cause that true prudence is rarely found. Very few, and
perhaps not one man in the whole world, can always foresee what is most
expedient in every matter.

2. Prudence is got by use, memory, and experience. Particular things which are
governed by prudence, are known unto man by use and experience. Thou will ever
be safe, if thou will believe thy own and others experience, and never
undertake any thing, which may give thee reason to fear, or put thee in danger
to fall. But that thou may dispose all things with prudence, first look unto
thyself, then consider the business thou art going about, and lastly the persons
for whose sake, or with whom thou art to deal. Examine well thy own ability,
least that thou may seem to thyself able to do more then really thou can.
One falls by trusting to and relying too much on his own eloquence; another
offends against prudence by undertaking more then his Estate is able to bear a
third indiscreetly oppresses his infirm body by some laborious office.
Consider what thou undertakest, and compare thy forces to thy designs. He that
will go about to carry more then he is well able to bear, will fall under the
burden. Undertake nothing then, unles thou know or hopest at least thou
shall bring it to a good end. Choose such persons to deal withal, which thou
think are worthy of thy friendship, and deserve that thou should employ
part of thy life in their service: study their nature and manners, that thou
may not endammage thyself, by seeking to profit others. In fine, thou
ought to consider, whither thy nature be proper for such employments; and
endeavor still to apply it to those things which thou have a natural
inclination to. It Is but lost labor to strive against nature.

3. A wise and prudent man undertaketh nothing, as long as his thoughts are any
way troubled: for a troubled mind, that is deluded with the fancies of some
inordinate passion, cannot discern Truth and honesty from their Contraries.
Precipitation also is very much contrary to prudence, and leads many into
great and inextricable troubles. Wherefore a prudent man does nothing rashly,
but submits his own judgment to the counsel of a friend. Men's thoughts are
full of fear, their forecasts very uncertain, the event of things always
dubious, experiences deceitful. Where many advise, there is most certainty. It
concerns also a prudent man to consider things in themselves, and to look
upon them divested of all painting and disguise, which are wont to deceive the
unwary. Lay aside the consideration of money, fame and dignity. Search the
matter in itself: ask what it is, and not what it is called. It Is a great folly
to permit ourselves to be deceived with figures and shadows. Then look upon the
whole business, and behold all that can happen, as out of a high Watchtower,
that thou may not be forced to say in the end like a foolish man, I did not
think this would happen. To this purpose thou have need of long consultation,
mature judgment, and a strict examination, least that some bad circumstance
should spoil the action, least that prudence should degenerate into craft, and
in fine, least that (true and apparent good having so much similitude) thou
should embrace vice for virtue. Having thus at length resolved upon the
election of what thou art to do, break of all delay, and presently put in
execution what thou have resolved. No delay is to be admitted where good
Counsel is once taken; which cannot be praised, until it is put in effect.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Justice and Religion. What Penance is, and in what it
consists.
1. Justice being a supreme virtue and born for others not for itself,
transmitteth all that it has unto her neighbors, seeking nothing for itself,
but to be put in practice. This is the virtue which keeps men from mutual
injuries, and keeps the whole world in peace. It is this which makes a secret
agreement of all things in nature, and is the bond of all human society: and
nothing can be right without it. The just man offends no body, challenges
nothing which is not his own, does good to all, thinks and speaks well of all
his neighbors, gives every one his own, and never hinders the good of another.
If he is in Authority, he commands what is just, he deals openly, and
prefers the good of those who are under him before his own private Interest:
he punishes vice, rewards virtue, and so keeps all in good order. If he is
subject to others, he is quiet and peaceable, obeyes the law, and command of
his superiors, and being content with his own state he does not ambitiously
aspire to any dignity or office; neither does he intrude himself into affairs
which do not concern him. He exercises Justice gratis, because he knows there
can be no greater reward of just actions, then to have occasion to show
ourselves just.

2. Religion which is the most excellent of all virtues which can be practiced
in this life, regards God immediately in himself, as he deserves to be
worshipped and hounoured. The first worship we owe him, is to believe in him,
and to know him: and next to adore his majesty, and admire his goodness. It
avayleth little to know God; the Devils who hate him, know him as well as men:
he exacteth our Love and worship, which consist of things which are better
known then practiced. Thou know he is that God who governs the world, has
care of all human kind, moderateth all things: thou confessest he is all power,
all goodness, all majesty: and thou hopest to find eternal Beatitude in him, as
thy sovereign good and last end. Why then do thou not adore him as thou
ought? Why do thou not give him supreme worship? why do thou prefer
earthly things before him? All thy Religion is vain, unles thou show it by
thy actions. Do thou desire to be truly religious? walk in the presence of
God, and thou will be perfect. He may be truly said to worship God, who
imitateth his Attributes. True religion tyeth thee to God, and God to thee. Let
thy religion be free from negligence, error, and sins. It Is a great folly to
talk much of religion and faith, and to live like an Infidel A learned
heathen-Philosopher in the primitive times speaking of such men, scoffingly
said; Nothing is more glorious then your Christians when they speak, and
nothing more miserable when they come to action,

3. Penance is virtue by which we make reparation of honor to Gods law which
we had transgressed: by this we are inclined to detest and expiate all our
sins, and to make resolution of never consenting to them again. The pleasures
of this life pass away in a moment, but that which disquiets and torments the
conscience, still remains. What does it avail thee to hide the shamefulnes of
thy past sins? no man guilty of sin thinks himself absolved even in his own
judgment. Nature has framed a Tribunal in every man's breast wherein every one
is his own Accuser, his own witness, and his own Judge. Call thy mind and thy
senses every day to render an account before this Tribunal. Plead thy own
cause against thyself, and accuse thyself as much as thou can. Examine how
thou have spent the whole day: recall to mind all thy words all thy actions,
and if possible all thy thoughts; hiding nothing, omitting nothing. If thou
acknowledgest thy sin, God will pardon it: if thou confessest it, thou curest
thy own Soul. Do not think thyself secure, in that no body but thyself knows
thy wickedness. Do thou think it better to be condemned in secret then to be
absolved openly? Wheresoever thou hidest thyself, thy own conscience is still
with thee, and thou can never fly from it. Thou art in a miserable state, if
thou contemnest what it suggesteth to thee.

4. Our life is divided into three sorts of Times: present, past, and future.
The present is but a moment, is gone before it comes; the future is not yet
come: as for that which is past, it is in thy power to recall it at least to
mind and to examine it as often as thou will. Do not fear thy memory will fayl
thee, nor be not ashamed to look back on thy life past, nor to reproach to
thyself thy own errors. The oftener thou do this, the sooner thou will mend.
Resolve to be revenged on thyself, and never to commit those faults which now
thou art sorry to have once committed. Those who have escaped a shipwreck bid
adieu for ever to the ship and sea, and ever after bless the providence of God
as often as they think on the danger they escaped. I could wish thou would
make the like resolution, that is, never again to expose thyself to that which
thou have once feared. Thou have escaped a great danger; do not expose thyself
again to the same. God has still pardoned thee, as often as thou have sinned:
take heed thou do not make this a pretense to wickedness, by growing worse,
because God is good. Thou advisest sometimes what thou art to do; why do
thou not rather call to mind what thou have done? For advice for future
proceeds from experience of what is past. Many would become wiser then they
are, did they not think themselves wise enough already. Unles thou mendest
daily, thou will grow worse and worse every day.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Piety and observance. Obedience, and gratitude are commended.
How to receive and return good deeds.
1. NO tongue is able to express and sufficiently to extol the praises of a
man who can truly say: I have always obeyed my parents, I have always
submitted to their will in all things, without the least murmuring: I have
always observed the laws of my country: I have always done good to my
kindred and relations: I have always endeavored to oblige every one by good
turns. These are the duties of Piety, which we owe and ought to pay to our
country, friends, and relations. But as we are to pay these offices of Piety
to our friends, so likewise we are to pay due respect to all our Superiors,
Princes, masters, and others, who are any way above us in dignity, wisdom,
age, religion, and piety. For it is the custom to rise and stand in their
presence bareheaded, to give them way, to light from horseback or to come out
of the Coach when we meet them, to kneel at their feet, to kiss their hands or
garments, and to show them other signs of our respect, according to the
fashions of the country we are in. And thou will find no difficulty to give
them their due in this point, if first thou have conceived a high esteem of
their dignity. For by this means there will arise in thy will a certain care
and fear, which will make thee avoid all familiarity with them, and by
considering their greatness acknowledge thy own littlenes. All power is from
God: and consequently all the honor and respect thou give to thy betters, is
still less then what thou owe them, that is, if thou considerest God in them.

2. As all misery had its beginning from the disobedience of our firsts
parents, so we have bine put again in a capacity of being happy by the
obedience of the son of God, provided we also keep our obedience to God and our
Superiors. Obedience is the perfection of all things, and strongest connection
which they have with their first beginning. For it deriveth all things from
God, and refers all to him. Christ recommended this virtue in particular,
and chose rather to loose his life then to loose his obedience. Obedience is
better then sacrifice, because thereby a man sacrifyes his own will. We must
receive the command of superiors as a voice coming from heaven, without
examining the cause and motive of such commands. He that has learned perfect
obedience, will not stand to give his own judgment of the thing commanded. When
my superior admonishes me, when the law commands me, and tells me what I am
to do, I must not dispute or excuse the business, but obey with promptitude and
simplicity; showing myself equally ready to perform all things, great or small,
easy or hard. There is only one case, wherein thou may be obstinate and
refuse to obey; that is, if any one goes about to draw thee from virtue or
force thee to do any thing against Gods law. As for any thing else which is
commanded thee, thou art to obey readily and without all murmuring.

3. Gratitude consists in acknowledging ourselves obliged for some curtesy
received. Our chief care must be to have a true esteem of the benefit which is
done us, in which we should not so much regard the greatness of the gift itself,
as the greatness of his good will who gives it. And we ought to have such
continual memory of good deeds which are done us, as never to forget them. He
cannot be thankful for a curtesy* who soon forgets it: and he that still
remembers it, may be esteemed to have already requited it. There needs no great
riches, nor labor, nor prosperity, to show ourselves grateful. It Is always in
our power. If thou want means and strength, thou can not want a will, in
which thou art able to repay Kings. When thou receivest a curtesy from any one,
receive it cheerfully, and in such a manner, that he who obliges thee may see
his curtesy is well bestowed. He has good reason to rejoice that sees his
friend merry and light-hearted, but his joy increases when he considers that he
is the cause of his friends joy. He that receives a benefit with gratitude, and
with a kind acceptance, may be said to repay the first pension of it. He has
no intention to be grateful, who throws (as we may say) all courtesies so far
out of his memory that they seem quite out of sight. He that extolleth the good
which is done him, and confesses his own incapacity to requite it, has
already requited it. He that receives a curtesy with a proud or negligent
carriage, seems to make no account of the gift. He that is cold in returning
thanks, and scarce moves his lips to acknowledge the obligation, is more
ungrateful, then if he said nothing. An honest man at the very time he
receives a curtesy is thinking how to requite it. For what is more contrary to
civility, then not to return what thou have received? and when we return a
curtesy, we should endeavor to do rather more then less, as good ground is
wont to yield a double increase of the seed it has received. Notwistanding
take heed thou do not make too much have in returning thanks. Some are of
that nature, that when any little present is sent them, they presently send
another to the same person, as if they would restify they owe him nothing This
is a kind of refusing to accept a curtesy, when thou blottest out one gift with
another with so much have.

CHAP. XXV. Of Truth, and the use of it. Simplicity is commended. Acts of
fidelity.
1. IN all thy words, gestures, writings, and other outward signs, still
observe Truth. It does not become a Christian to have a lying Tongue. It Is a
weak, vulgar, and womanish imperfection, to speak one thing and think another.
An honest generous spirit speaks things as they are, does not exaggerate, or
amplify them, does not deceive, does not dissemble, does not use ambiguous
words. Truth which is simple in itself, loves simple expressions. It hates all
disguise, because it is innocent. But he that lies or deceives, uses double
terms to cover his designs. He that speaks ill, hates light, as well as he
that does ill. Take heed therefore, thou do not observe the same rule in thy
words as thou do in thy clothes, that is to have one to wear when thou go
abroad, and another to use at home: least one thing appear in thy looks, whilst
thou concealest the contrary in thy heart. Nature itself abhors this vice.
Do but take notice of young children not yet come to the use of reason. They
object lying to one another as the greatest reproach; and although out of a
childish lightness they often fall into it, yet by a natural inbred judgment
they always condemn it in others. In which we ought to admire the providence
of God, which has planted in our minds a natural inclination to those
virtues, which are necessary to maintain human society: And lying is the most
prejudicial to this. For if thou detestest all falsity of speech as unworthy
of a generous mind, why do thou permit thyself and thy whole life to be
nothing else but a continual cheat? It it is a great matter to deal plainly,
and not to have a double heart.

2. Simplicity though a virtue little known amongst men, is notwithstanding of
so great dignity, that God is wonderfully delighted with it; for, as the
Scripture says, his discourse is with the simple. For whereas he is simple and
sincere in himself, he also requires the virtue of simplicity in all souls,
that come unto him: and this consists in speaking our mind plainly, without
all equivocation or hypocrisy, so that our exterior be still conformable to
our interior. It consists in acknowledging plainly and sincerely our own
faults, when occasion requires: it consists in shunning all malice and
detesting all cunning and politic way of dealing: it consists in giving
credit to all men's words (unles prudence requires the contrary) and thinking
well of all men: it consists in not refusing to be esteemed fools by the
world, that so we may be found wise in the sight of God. In a word, he that is
free from all duplicity of heart does all things with a pure and simple
intention to please God alone. Unhappy craft! why do thou seek so many ways
of deceiving? There is but one thing necessary, that thou may find him, whose
nature is Unity and simplicity. Thou will never arrive to the place thou aymest
at, if thou walk in two different ways.

3. Fidelity is the greatest and chiefest good which can be wished for amongst
men: for, take away this and all commerce and communication will cease, all
freindship will be broken, all Leagues will be dissolved, all things will be
out of order. And yet this is a virtue which is very rare and little known in
the world. It Is a sign that perfidiousnes is very common amongst men, since we
see so many witnesses, so many cautions, and so many sureties are required in
every contract; yet all too little many times to render the compact sure. The
greater part of men is grown so base and treacherous, that they make more
account of temporal gain then of keeping their word. Oh! what a shame it is
for human kind, thus to confess themselves guilty of public fraud and common
malice! We trust no man now a days without a witness to answer for him: and we
are forced to put more trust in the Notaryes book, then in the minds and
meaning of those we deal with. But a true honest man faithfully performs all
that he has promised, he never reveals any man's secret, he keeps his word
and promise even to his enemies, and will rather dye then break it. It Is true,
he is somewhat slow in promising, because he knows that he who is too hasty in
promising, is often forced to repent very soon: but if he has once promised,
he will not deceive, he will not break his word, unles perhaps the matter
should so change, as it cannot be performed without sin* No man is obliged to
keep a promise which cannot be fulfilled without offending God.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Friendship. How it is to be entertained. Certain rules of
mutual Conversation.
1. NOthing is more necessary in human society then Friendship, nothing is more
commodious, nothing more sweet. It consists in a mutual benevolence
(grounded upon virtue) betwixt two persons, and in a mutual communication of
each others felicity. How happy will thou be, if thou can find a friend to
whose breast thou may safely commit thy most secret thoughts, whose conscience
thou may trust as much as thy own; whose speech may comfort thee in thy
afflictions, whose advice may help thee in thy affairs, whose merry disposition
may dispell thy sorrows, whose only sight may recreate thee? what is more sweet
then to have a man, unto whom thou have no difficulty to confess any fault
thou have committed? As we do not perceive that we are bit by certain little
beasts, until we see the swelling: so in conversing with a good friend, thou will not perhaps perceive when and how he does thee good, yet thou will find at
last that thou have profited by his conversation. If there is not a mutual
love, there can be no true friendship; but it is more noble to love, then to be
loved; and therefore benevolence is the main ground of friendship, and
reciprocal love is but an addition to it. Besides that is to be counted true
Christian friendship, which is begun not for any temporal interest, but for
the interest of God; which is entertained not by a corporal presence, vain
services, or deceitful flattery, but by a mutual assistance in the study of
holy things. There can be no solid friendship, if grounded on evil.

2. Great caution is to be used in choosing a friend, according to the common
saying: That we must eat many bushells of salt together, before we make a
perfect friendship with any man. Four things are to be tried in one, whom thou
desire to choose for thy friend. First his Fidelity, a thing which is very
rare in this world, that thou may safely trust him with thy person and most
secret affairs. Secondly, his Intention, that friendship may have a lawful
end, and least that a holy thing be changed into some shameful commerce.
Thirdly his discretion, that thou may know what to ask of him, and what
services thou art to render him. Fourthly his Patience, that thou may know
whither or no he will be willing to undergo any hazard or adversity for his
friend. When thou have tried all these things in him, inform thyself also, how
he has behaved himself formerly toward other friends: for thou may expect
he will prove the same to thee as he was to others. A true friend is a living
Treasure, and therefore to be kept with great care, and to be lamented (if
lost) with great sorrow. Thou art happy, if thou have a friend who loves thee,
and not thy riches, table, or wit: who will correct thee committing any faults,
who will help thee to rise and amend when thou fallest, who will comfort and
exhort thee in the pursuit of Virtue. Thou will not find another like him in
the whole world. There are many who bear the name of Friends, but few are
really so. No man loves another gratis, and for nothing. He that regards his
own interest, and proposes temporal things for the end of his friendship, is
no true friend. He will love thee as long, as he finds his profit in thy
friendship. If thy fortune chance to decay, he falls of; and he will end, as
he began. True friendship is least found, where it seems to abound most.

3. As a Physician that goes about to cure a sick friend, spares neither
cutting nor burning; so thou ought to behave thyself toward thy friend who
needs thy correction: reprehend him freely, boldly, constantly, neglecting
nothing, dissembling nothing. It is a poor way of obliging a friend, to foment
his vices. Yet let thy admonition be secret, with all sweetness, and without
mixing the least bitterness in words. Take time to deliberate before thou
admittest any man into thy friendship: but when thou have resolved to admit
him, receive him with a sincere heart: speak as freely unto him, as to thyself.
Thou should live so, as to do and speak nothing, which thou art afraid
should be known even to thy enemies: but in regard custom has so prevailed,
that many things are esteemed necessary to be concealed according to prudence,
at least communicate all thy cares, all thy thoughts with thy friend. Some are
so indiscreet as to tell every one they meet what they should commit only unto
friends: others are so timorous as they dare not trust their dearest friends,
and foe keep all their secrets within their own breast, and would not trust
themselves if they could help it. It Is equally faulty, to believe all men, and
to believe no body: the one seems to carry more Civility, the other more
safety. But if thou desire to converse with all men without danger, thou
may easily do it, not by hiding what thou do, but by doing nothing which
thou desire should be secret.

4. Affability has great affinity with friendship; for it moderates human
conversation, in which we ought to keep a certain modesty and silence. A
virtuous man should hear much and speak little. It Is a great fault to be more
desirous to be known, then to know: no make ourselves known, then to know
others: to be prodigal in spending our own wit and judgment to no purpose,
rather then learn wit from others. Thou must accustom thyself to bear with the
rude language and manners of those with whom thou live: and because many
speak things which are perhaps false, childish and impertinent, it is thy part
to dissemble at all this with prudence. It Is the mark of an abject and
effeminate mind, to desire to converse with none but those who those applaud
and flatter thee. Speak less of thyself and thy own affairs; be not obstinate
in thy own opinion, and abstain from all haughty words, which sound as if thou
did intend to show thy authority over others. When thou see any thing done
amiss, enter into thyself and examine thy conscience, to see if thou art not
guilty of the same vice: and whatsoever thou hear or see, still endeavor
to make thy profit of it. Things go well with thee, if thou learnest to amend
thy own faults by seeing the defaillances of others.

5. When thou meetest with any strange, sudden, and unexpected thing, and which
is contrary to the custom and fashion of thy country, do not presently
condemn it: for it is a sign of great lightness to wonder and laugh at the
customs of other nations, and be a slave to the fashions of ones own country.
We must esteem things as they are, and not as they seem to be. The common
people judge of all things according to the novelty, art, rarity, difficulty,
pomp, rumor, and outward show. But a wise man looks upon the intrinsecall value
and grace, and contemns all that which the foolish and mad multitude admires.
Whatsoever happens, it is in thy power to make thy profit of it. Do not lessen
thy fortune nor diminish thy rents. It is permitted thee to imitate
Stage Players and to act thy pa^ (...) this world. Actors weep, when they (...)
no sorrow; they buy, and yet do not possess; they command, and yet have n^
Authority: they are reprehended without any revenge; they reprehend others
without anger: because in all these things they represent the actions of other
men, and not their own. I wish thou could also carry thyself after this
manner in thy conversation with others, without all affection or propriety. The
world is a great stage, on which appear as many Actors as there are men in the
world. Do thou take care to be not only an Actor in, but also a spectator of
the Play. Those who come upon the stage to play their parts, are forced to take
pains: but those who sit as spectators, laugh and take delight.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Liberality. What it is: and how to be pract^. How it differs
from ^gnificence.
1. I do not ^ll him Liberal, who seems angry with his ^ey, who neither knows
how to given not how to keep it: who does not give it, but throws it away. He
is truly Liberal, who gives according to reason and prudence, who gives
according to the measure of his ability, when and to whom necessity requires,
not regarding his own interest but the profit of his neighbor. Moreover
liberality is a virtue which distributes benefits, has for its object the
giving and receiving of money: but the principal intention of liberality is
giving, because it is more commendable to give, then receive. But a good will
suffices, when we have nothing to give: yea, the will is more considered, then
the gift; and friend will make more esteem of thy will to do him good, then
the curtesy itself. No man is so foolish, as to go about to thank the Rivers
and Sea for that they carry our ships; or to thank the Trees for bearing fruit:
or the wind for blowing a fair gale: for although all these things are benefits,
yet they want a will of doing good. But when we giv^ ^y thing, the sooner we
give it the (...) it is esteemed. Some when they do a cur^sy spoil all the
thanks which is du^ unto it, by showing a discontent in their looks, and
deferring the doing of it until another day. By this means they weary their
friend with delay, they torment him with expectation: and whereas it is the
property of a willing giver to give soon, he that shows himself unwilling for a
long while, cannot be said at last to give with a good will. A liberal heart
hastens a benefit; and then it is that the gift is sweet and acceptable, when
it meets the person that has need of it.

2. No man can lead a happy life, who looks only on himself, and regards
nothing but his own profit and interest. Thou must endeavor to live for others,
as well as for thyself. Why art thou so sparing of thy wealth as if it were
wholly thine? Thou art only a Trustee in it. All that money and Treasure which
thou lockest up in iron chests, and which thou have injustly extorted from
others, is not thine. It was only entrusted in thy hands, and now it belongs to
another master Either thy Enemies will come to possess it, or at least some
Heir that is little better then an enemy. Wilt ^u know how to make it thy own?
By ^ing it away. In what is it, that thou esteemest thyself rich? in that thou
have house^ money, and lands. If thou give part of these things to thy
neighbor, thou will hereby oblige him, and practice a virtue, which will
remain with thee for ever. Money is never precious, but when we liberally bestow
it in good uses, and loose the possession of it.

3. Because we cannot do great matters with small expenses, therefore, as in
moderate charges we are said to be governed by liberality, so when we make any
splendid expenses, it is called magnificence. These two virtues though alike in
other things, differ in this, that the one appears also in little things, the
other only in great things. A man that has but a small fortune, may
notwithstanding be liberal: but to have the name of being magnificent, a man
has need of great riches. Magnificence appearet^ chiefly in some remarkable
excellency of a gift. For if a man should give a Jewel of great of worth to
adorn some holy thing, we should rather call him very liberal, then
magnificent: but if he should employ the value of this Jewel to build a
church, Altar, or some other magnificent piece of work, we might then call him
magnificent. And when we speak of magnificent works, we mean such as belong to
the honor of God, the public good, recreation, or the like. But in all these
things there is a decorum or measure to be observed, as well in order to the
giver as the gift. He is not properly magnificent, who spends more then he is
worth; who engages himself and his family in great debts, out of ambition to
be esteemed magnificent. He is truly liberal and magnificent, who gives what
is his own, and spends nothing at the expenses of others.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Fortitude: and the duties of it. That a generous man should
contemn Death.
1. THe nature of men is commonly weak, and their minds effeminate: wherefore
they should still endeavor to arm themselves with fortitude, least that being
terrifyed with dangers, they consent to any thing against Gods law. Fortitude
has a double office: first and chiefly, to bear all labor and danger with
patience: Secondly, to meet and defy them, when occasion is offered. A generous
man does not rashly cast himself into dangers, but bears them with constancy
when they come: he does not desire occasions of fear, but contemns them when
they happen: he takes courage, where others loose it: where others fall, he
stands firm: he is not daunted with disgraces, repulses, banishment, or
injuries: he is not frightened with prisons, torments; no, not with Death
itself: he overcomes all sorrow, sickness, and trouble with the greatness of his
courage: niether threatening nor entreating can withdraw him from virtue: he is
not discouraged, although he finds many obstacles in his affairs: he does not
fall under his burden, nor seek to shake of what he has once undertaken; but
he continues firm, until he has brought it to a good end; no burden can make
him shrink: no force, no power, no fear can make him less: all the dangers in
the world cannot make him forbear or hide his virtue. He does not regard what
he suffers, but still considers what he has designed, and what he ayms at.

2. As those who sail with a good wind do not forbear to provide against a
Tempest: So thou ought, in time of prosperity to prepare thyself to endure
Adversity. Fancy to thyself that some great misfortune had befallen thee; as
loss of children, shipwreck, banishment, wounds, torments, sickness, calumny,
reproaches: and carry thyself with that moderation in this fancy, as if those
things were really befallen thee; that so by this kind of exercise thou may
be able to say on all occasions. I had long since prepared myself against this
misfortune, I foresaw it, and contemned it long since. It is decreed from all
Eternity, what thou art to suffer, and when thou art to rejoice: and although
every man's life is subject to several chances, yet we all agree in this. As we
are mortal ourselves, so all that we possess is subject to perish. Why art
thou out of patience? What do thou complain of? Although all that thou have
should perish, yet thou loosest nothing which is properly thine. It is better
to give it willingly, when God calls for it, then to stay till we are forced to
render it. Epicurus has taught us that a wise man may be happy in the midst of
torments. Although, says he, he should be enclosed in Phalaris his brazen Bull,
yet he will say: How little do I value to be thus tormented. It was generous
saying, and not incredible unto us Christians, amongst whom are extant the
examples of so many Martyrs, whose Constancy in the midst of Tortures, and
alacricy in the midst of flames has bine so great, that they seemed to have
no feeling at all of their Torments. To those who love God and willingly suffer
for his cause, all pains are delights.

3. The excellency of Fortitude never appears with more glory, then when we are
brought to suffer Death. It is very hard to contemn life, in regard we see most
men esteem it at so great a rate, that they think nothing more precious. But if
thou art wise, as it behooves thee to be, thou will not esteem Death an evil,
since it is the end of all Evils, and the beginning of life. Thou should
leave thy body with a willing mind, considering thou art to receive it again in
the last day. The necessity of Death is invincible, and it is mere madness to fear
it: for that which we fear is always dubious, but that which we expect, is
certain. Consider how that children, and those who have lost their wits, do
not fear death. Is it not a shameful case then, if reason cannot give thee the
same security which want of reason gives unto fools. God has given us life,
but not without a condition of being subject to dye: he that is not willing to
dye, shows that he never desired to live.

4. We are obliged to nature, for having granted us a certain time to see and
make use of all her riches and glory: and now the time being out, we must part.
What wise man, when he is brought to the last gasp, would be willing (if it
were possible) to begin his life anew, to be first shut up in his mothers womb,
then to pass over again all the follyes of his infancy, to undergo again all
the fears of his childhood, all the dangers of his youth, all the cares of his
manhood, all the labors of his old age? No man has lived so happily, as to
wish to be born again. Consider therefore whither thou art going, and whence
thou art parting. But perhaps thou would not be afraid to dye, if thou did
certainly hope to go to Heaven. This is the cause of thy fear, because thou
are void of all virtue, and good works, and only now beginnest to be good when
thou art forced to leave the world. Were it not for this, thou would not be
afraid to dye, considering that it is the Gate to eternal felicity. It would
be a torment to a just man to be born, unles death were to follow.

5. No man dies with joy, unles he has long prepared for it before hand.
Render it familiar to thy thoughts by a continual meditation of it, that so
thou may receive it when it comes, with a joyful heart. A man is not said to
have lived enough, for having lived many days, or many years, but for having a
mind that desires to leave the world, and to fly to its Origin. He has lived
long enough who dies well: and he dies well, who has lived well. Do thou
desire to procure thyself a quiet death? Accustom thyself first to contemn all
temporal things. He cannot fear death, who has already deprived himself of
more then death can take away from him. Do thou desire to lead a pleasant
life? Clear thy mind of all un-necessary care concerning it: be ready for all
sort of death: and do not concern thyself, whither thou art to dye by the
sword, or by the violence of a feavor: Live foe, that thou may daily say: I
have lived. He lives in security, and dies with joy, who daily fancies himself
carried to his grave, and who is permitted to live after he was content to dye.
It is impossible thou should live well, unles thou dyest every day.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Magnanimity. The Character of a magnanimous man.
1. THe very name of magnanimity denotates some great matter; it is a high
virtue, of great force, and always tending to great things. Without this all
other virtues would droop and languish. For whereas there occur many
difficulties in the practice of virtue, magnanimity resists all and ouercomes
all: and never shrinketh, until having past all difficulties, it has
generously arrived unto what it had proposed to bring to effect. This is the
property of magnanimity, to wit, to incline us at all times to great and
heroical actions, and with the help of Gods grace to make us undertake the
most difficile labors with a secure and ready mind. Thou must resolve to be
bold and courageous if thou intendest to come to any thing. We cannot expect to
perform great matters without great pains. Man is able to do much, when he
resolves to do like a man.

2. A man of a great spirit always aspires to great things, and contemns all
those things as little, which the vulgar esteems great. He does things, which
are worthy of much honor; but is not sorry when this honor is not paid, and
contemns it when offered, unles Obedience, or Gods honor requires the
contrary. He does nothing for ostentation, but all for conscience sake, and
seeks a reward for doing well not in the mouth of the world, but from the
work itself. He stands always firm, is invincible, above all bad fortune, and
still equal to himself upon all occasions: and does not strive to ascend to
higher dignities, but is content with his own greatness. He is above all things,
and therefore is a Slave to no body, begs and entreats nothing of others,
because he wants nothing of all that is without him. Nothing can frighten or
make him yield. Sometimes he makes show of his generous nature, but then it is
not out of any vain glory; for he still considers the degree he is in, and the
gifts which God has given him. But he always joins unto this a firm and
profound humility in the sight of God, because he refers all his glory and all
the gifts of nature and fortune which he possesses unto him alone; holding for
certain that of himself he has nothing, can do nothing, and is really
nothing. This is to know the true limits of virtue, always to have an humble
opinion of our selves and all our actions; and yet not to refuse those honors
which are due unto such actions, when we may accept them without breaking the
rules of modesty. We must not pursue honors, but permit them to follow us.

3. He that has this virtue of magnanimity, receaveth all the blows of adverse
fortune with an undaunted heart, that he may attain to the height of perfection.
When he meets with inferior persons, he can still carry himself toward them
with a certain moderation; and when he meets with Princes or some other
powerful and wealthy persons, he does not cast himself at their feet in a
flattering manner, nor will he permit his liberty to be oppressed with their
tyrannous power. Those things which are worthy of hatred, he hates openly; and
those things which are worthy of Love, he loves them after the same manner.
And those things which ought to be done and spoken openly, he does and speaks
them openly; because he fears nothing, and hopes for nothing. He does the same
things which other men do, but not after the same manner; and therefore he
hides his actions from the eyes of the common people, and does not willingly
make himself familiar with them. He soon forgets injuries, and is not
subject to complain when forced to suffer any thing. He praises few, nor does
he desire the praise of others, but still labors to do things worthy of
praise. He cares not for pleasing any but his friends and superiors: nor does
he easily admire any thing because nothing ever seems great or new unto him. He
fears no disastrous event, being ever secure in his own Virtue. He has a slow
gate, a grave voice, a moderate staid speech; for he that is not sollicitous
about many things, has no need to make great have; amd he that is content
within himself, needs not any great wrangling.

CHAP. XXX. Of Patience. The occasions, and effects of it. Marks of true
Patience. An exhortation to Patience in all manner of sufferances.The necessity
of Perseverance.
1. PAtience is a Virtue, which makes us suffer all the miseries of this life
with a willing mind. But because these miseries are manifold, this virtue has
several names, according to the diversity of Evils which we are wont to
suffer. It is properly called Patience, when it bears injuries with an equal
mind: it is called Equanimity when we suffer patiently the loss of outward
goods: It is called Longanimity when it fortifies the heart in the long
expectation of some good: It is called Constancy, when it strengthens the will
to bear all other sort of public and private miseryes. There is no virtue,
which we can have a more frequent occasion to practice. For we are encompassed
on all sides with so many enemies and so many miseries, that Job had good
reason to say, that the life of man is a warfare upon earth. There is ^rdly any
moment of our life, wherein we have not occasion to fight. And although we had no
outward enemies, yet every man is a sufficient enemy to himself. The source and
cause of all that troubles and torments us, is in ourselves and from ourselves.
We begin our life with Tears, and we are fit for nothing else in our infancy.
This is the first thing we learn, and we practice it ever after, until death.
We read of many that never laughed, but we have not one example of any man that
never wept. Patience therefore is necessary, to fortify our hearts, to
strengthen our spirit, to complete our virtues. No man knows his own strength
and virtue, unles he has suffered some cross or adversity. And he that
wants patience, cannot be esteemed a wise man.

2. He cannot be happy, who has never suffered some adversity. Physicians tell
us that too much health is a bad sign, and consequently to be feared and
Mariners are ever afraid of the sea in too great a calm. If thou art in some
calamity or sufferance, do not think it intolerable, but remember it is a
combat which God has sent thee. Unles thou fightest, thou can not overcome;
and unles thou overcomest thou will never be crowned. And since it was
necessary that Christ should suffer, and so to enter into his glory; dare
thou presume or hope to be partaker of his glory and felicity without having
suffered any thing? Thou art much mistaken, if thou think to find any other
way to heaven. The two main principles of virtue are, to do good, and suffer
evil. It is a mark of true patience, when thou can quietly bear an injury
from another, when thou can suffer misery without murmuring against God, when
thou can endure the company of those who have done thee wrong, when thou
can hear thyself calumniated without hating the person who does it, when thou
submittest thyself to the will of God in all thy sufferances, when thou do
not complain unto others of thy crosses, when thou love those who hate thee:
when thou make thy complaints only unto God, and art ready to endure much
more with joy and thanksgiving. Lastly, he is truly patient, who does not fall
into impatience against the imperfections of others.

3. When we suffer any loss in our temporal affairs, we may soon comfort
ourselves if we consider the inconstancy of all wordly things. Whatsoever thou
possessest, whatsover thou love, naturally flies away from thee: it is in thy
custody for a while, but is not properly thine. Do not permit thyself to be
deluded with the hopes of an imaginary stability in such things. Being thyself
infirm thou art not to expect any thing firm in this world, and of all things
thou possessest, nothing will remain with thee to the end but virtue. This is
the only immortal thing which mortal man can challenged: all things else are
subject to death. Therefore whatsoever thou possessest esteem it so, as still
to leave a great distance betwixt it and thyself. A virtuous man can loose
nothing, because he possesses nothing as his own. Why do thou grieve for the
loss of thy money, for the death of thy Children, and the burning of thy house:
and yet art not sorry for the loss of thy modesty, constancy, and other
virtues? whereas these latter are in thy power, and those first are neither
thine, nor in thy power. If thou art sorry for the loss of them, thou show
thyself worthy to loose them. Thou would esteem thyself to have lost nothing,
if thou did love nothing with a disordinate affection. A wise man is never
troubled for these exterior things, because they do not touch nor concern him.

4. Before thou go about to do any thing, consider all the circumstances
that belong unto it, and thou will find many things which may give thee
trouble, unles thou preventest them. Have thou occasion to call a Servant? it
may happen, that he is not present, or does not do what thou would have him
do? Art thou going to visit any body? it may happen, that the party is at home
but neglects thee and will not answer. Foresee all these things, and all will
be well. Such a one would not accept of my company to day, having admitted
others: He would not hearken to my discourse: he placed me in the last place.
These are the ordinary complaints of difficile spirits, into which delicate,
effeminate, and indiscreet persons are wont to fall. A wise man never takes
notice of these things, because he knows the life of man is subject to them.
The best remedy is to suffer what thou can not mend. If thou art offended
with the malice or impudence of any one, consider that it is in a manner
impossible the world should be without some wicked or impudent people. And if
this seems impossible, what wonder is it to see evil men do evil? Take heed
thou art not more to blame thyself, who did not foresee that such a person
would offend thee in that kind. The world is still like itself, and will never
be without sin as long as men are in it.

5. When thou suffers any pain or grief, consider not so much what thou
endurest, as what thou have done to deserve it. And if thou will acknowledge
the Truth, thou will confess thou have deserved far greater sufferings. God is
the author of all things. The end of his chastising thee is, that he may cure
thee, that he may exercise thy virtue, that he may harden thee to afflictions,
and prepare thee for himself. And those Whom he seems to spare, he reserves for
future punishment. How shall I know what virtue thou art armed with to suffer
Poverty, if thou aboundest in Riches? how shall I know thy constancy against
the calumnies and hatred of thy enemies, if thou growest old without over
having had any? I have often heared thee comfort others in affliction; but I
should be more willing to hear thee comfort thyself, and see thee moderate thy
grief when any Cross does befall thee. If thou art wont to thank and reward
the Physician, that burns and cuts thy flesh; why do thou not also yield to
that medicine which is sent thee from heaven? It is a folly to esteem that a
loss, which is rather a remedy. If poverty, sickness, and all those other
things, which thou call evils, could speak, they would insult over thee, and
tell thee: why, oh man, do thou think us thy enemies? Art thou deprived of
any happiness through our fault? What virtue have we taken away from thee? have
we made thee loose thy Prudence, Justice, or Fortitude? what hinders on our
part but that thou may still be merry? That which thou esteemest bad will
turn to good, if thou still keep thy patience, and stand firm against all
events. It is a great evil not to be able to suffer evil.

6. Thou may sometimes dissemble thy constancy in the afflictions of others,
but never in thy own. Let thy sorrow and mourning be common with those that
mourn, but not the cause of it. Comply a little with those who are afflicted;
show thyself concerned in their miseries, that by this means thou may be a
comfort to them. No man can help another that is fallen to rise, unles he bows
himself to lend him his hand. But because all things may be taken two ways,
whereof the one is tolerable, the other intolerable; if any one has done thee
an injury, do not thou regard him in that respect, because that is the
intolerable side: But consider that he has bine redeemed with the same blood
of Jesus Christ, and is ordained for the same glory as thou art: and this way
thou will take him on the tolerable side. And whereas friendship does not
easily break forth into words of reprehension, endeavor still to hear the Truth
from thy Adversary. For he is always very vigilant to observe all thy actions;
and thy vices are better known unto him then unto thyself. He shall speak of
thee in all places and in all companies; and in his anger he will not fayl to
discover thy most hidden faults, and all those imperfections which thou
neglectest to mend. Do thou make thy profit of this, and still have a care of
thy salvation. Whosoever shall remember that he has an Adversary who still
censures him in all things, takes more care to govern himself.

7. Perseverance is the Crown and compleatment of all virtues. A reward is
promised to Beginners, but is given only unto those who persever. Wherefore
above all things, endeavor to be constant and firm in thy resolutions. Nothing
is so profitable, because it does thee good when it is past. Thou go back,
if thou do not advance: and if thou beginnest to stand, thou fallest down.
Resolve with thyself what thou art to do, and persever in that resolution to
the end. He must be of a very unconstant mind, who is always taking new
exercises, and is always changing from place to place. It is more to thy
purpose to strive to be another man, then in another place. A plant or Tree
that is often transplanted, withers at last: and variety of medicines hinders
and spoils the health. If S. Paul (who is termed in Scripture a vessel of
Election) not regarding what he had done, but what he was to do, thought he
was not yet perfect enough; what must thou do, who have reason to wish, that
thy end may be foe good as his beginning? The desire of knowledge is endless,
the love of riches is insatiable, and the ambition of men has no limits. There
is no end of hunting after things which must soon have an end: but if thou
had once had a taste of the divine wisdom, thou would soon find
satisfaction and have enough. He invites thee to Perfection after another
manner, who said: Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. This is
the mark which is set before thee, that thou may know thou can never be so
perfect but that thou may still attain unto a higher degree of perfection.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Temperance. How much Modesty conduces unto it. Of Abstinence,
and Chastity.
1. TEmperance is a virtue which refraineth those pleasures which proceed from
Tasting and Touching: it hates and refuses all superfluous delicacies, and is
content with that which is necessary, in as much as reason permits. It has
this for an infallible Rule, to prescribe no other measure but necessity in
things which belong to the body; and never makes use of pleasure for the
pleasure itself. This is the virtue that must keep thee from making thyself a
beast. A natural modesty helps much unto it; in regard it is the curb of all
evil motions, the chief mark of a good nature; the Guardian of Chastity, and a
testimony of Innocence. If thy mind is endowed with this, it will teach thee
how to fear all dishonesty, to abstain from unlawful actions, to keep thyself
always in the presence of God, to carry a respect to thyself in all time and
place, and always to love that spiritual beauty which appears most in the
works of Temperance. Moreover, Thou may then esteem thyself modest; when the
very name of immodesty is displeasing to thee; when thou shall consider that
thy walls enclose thee, but do not hide thee from the sight of God; although
most men think their walls do not so much contribute to their living more
safely, as to their sinning more privately. But what does it avail thee to hide
thyself from the eyes of the world, and to be out of their hearing? God is
always with thee, and sees thee every where: thy own conscience too is always
with thee, which accuses thee in all places.

2. Abstinence and sobriety moderate the use of eating and drinking. Chastity
governs the sense of Touching. It is a hard matter not to exceed the bounds of
necessity in our diet. The belly obeyes no law: it is still asking, calling
for, and exacting a daily Tribute. But few consider, how little will content
nature. We force nature, and make hunger, and thirst to be slaves to our vices:
and whereas we might easily content them with natural remedies, we provoke
them with variety of delicate meats and exquisite drinks. Chastity also is very
hard amongst so many objects that lead unto Impurity: unles they are prevented
and overcome with the fear of God, by avoiding the occasions, with keeping
watch over our senses, and by having a respect to our own souls. He that has
no respect for himself, will have none before others. Do thou desire to be
chaste? keep watch over thy eyes, least that thou should love against thy will
some object which thou have beheld with an unwary look. Why do thou admire
the transitory and false beauty of a creature? Stay a little, and it will
vanish away. Thou will see after a while those pleasing faces filled with
uncomely wrinckles, those sparkling eyes overshadowed with a cloud of sadness,
those Ivory Teeth covered with a black and filthy scumm. Fly also all evil
company and idle hours: Tame thy body with frequent fasting, and never use it
with too much tenderness. He is undone, who bears to much love to his own
epulcher.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Mildnes, and Clemency. The duties and Excellency of both.
1. MIldnes is a virtue which breaks the violence of Anger, and keeps us
within the limits of patience. Anger is a weapon, which thou may lawfully
use, when thou art obliged by thy office to correct and punish vice: and when
prudence dictates that thou art obliged to repel an injury from thyself or thy
neighbor, least that the wicked take occasion from thy unreasonable patience
to increase their malice. There is as much cruelty, in forgiving all, as in
forgiving no man. Yet when thou art forced through justice to punish Criminels,
be not wholly unmindfull of mildnes and Clemency. When thou punishest the
guilty, do it as if thou were forced to it against thy will and inclination;
and carry thyself toward those who offend the Laws, as God bears with thee.
As he bears with thee, in hope of making thee better: so thou ought to
bear sometimes with others, that they may grow better. Thou have no confidence
in the Physician, when thou despairest of the sick man's recovery. But we ought
to have more hope of his recovery, by how much the Physician is more skillfull
and obliging. A man that is mild appears as a Rock above all the waves and
storms of Anger; and breaks all the force of the Tempest. He is more contented
to see the sinner repent, then punished. Our B. Savior cries unto all human
kind: Come all, and learn of me, not how to cure the sick, and give health to
Leapers; not how to restore sight to the blind, or raise up the dead: But what?
Learn (says he) of me, because I am mild. He seems to have included all the
Treasures of wisdom and science in this one point, to wit, that we are to
learn of him how to be mild. Such is the excellency of this Virtue.

2. As mildnes is a virtue that moderates Anger, so clemency is a virtue which
moderates the severity of punishment. The first belongs unto all men, the
second unto Princes only and Superiors. The nature and property of it is to
inflict a lesser punishment then the Laws require; not out of fear, interest,
friendship, or other motive, but through a pure motive of mildnes. He that is
armed with this virtue will have no need to build castles and fortresses upon
steep Rocks: a Prince that is clement is secure without all fortifications.
Clemency is the only invincible strength which secureth Governments. An evil
Prince is hated, because he is feared: and he desires nothing more then to be
feared, because he knows he is hated. All subjects hate those whom they fear,
and consequently wish the death of such as they hate. He that contemns his own
life, is said to be master of his Princes life. It Is in vain for a King to think
to secure himself by his power, if he wants the good will of his people. It is
as great a disgrace for a Prince to punish many, as it is for a Physician to be
the cause of many funerals. If a King is slow in making use of his power to
revenge, if he contemns and thinks himself above all injuries and affronts, if
he sacrifices some offenders to the anger of others, and none to his own; he
shows himself a true King. It is the nature and property of a gallant spirit,
to be ever mild and quiet.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Modesty. The properties of studiosity. Of the rule and use of
Eutrapelia.
1. MOdesty is a geat ornament to all other virtues and good qualities. It is
the true form of honesty, and bridle of vice. Although thou speak nothing,
yet thy habit and gestures show what thou art. We may judge of virtue by small
signs. We often see what a man is by his countenance, laughing, gate, and
turning of his eyes. Live so, that all may know thou belongest to the society
of Angels. Observe a constant decorum in all the motions of thy body, in all
thy gestures, speech, and looks; that thou may not seem rude or effeminate in
any thing. True modesty does not only reside in the mind, but appears also in
an outward gravity of the body, as if the soul took pleasure in seeing the
exterior conform itself to the interior. A modest man is a living picture of
the Deity: for his only sight is enough to strike gravity into those who behold
him. And who can express what an excellent thing it is, to do good unto our
neighbors by being seen only? It belongs also unto modesty, not to exceed thy
state and condition, in thy clothes, household-stuffe, and multitude of
Servants. These are impediments of thy mind, which do not adorn thee, but the
things that are without thee. Why therefore do thou rejoice in thy
unhappines? Why do thou admire vain things, and make glory in things which
do thee more hurt then good. This great Trayn of servants which are always
about thee, may be rather called a troop of Enemies, whom thou can never fear
enough. They are still more ready to observe what thou do then to hear what
thou command. Nothing is more humble then their entrance into thy service,
nothing more insolent then their progress or comportment in it, and nothing
more full of hatred then their going from thee.

2. Studiosity has two properties: the one is to know how to govern and
moderate the desire of knowing, which most commonly is greater then it should
be: the other is, to shake of all idleness, and to stir up out industry to learn
those things which are necessary. Nature has given man a wit naturally
inclined to Curiosity; and conscious of her own beauty and skill, has made us
spectatours of all her excellent works; and would esteem all her labor lost,
if so many great, and excellent things lay hid, and were seen by none but
herself. But we abuse the goodness of nature, searching with too much curiosity
into those things, which were better unknown. He is not to be counted wise or
learned, who knows much, but who knows what is to the purpose. We should first
learn those things which concern our Salvation. But I do not dissuade thee
from reading other things, provided thou referrest all things to good manners
and to make thyself better. Take heed that too much reading of too many books
does not discover a fickle unconstant spirit. Thou must fix thy study upon a
certain number of good and choice books, if thou desire to learn any thing
that may remain in thy mind. There is more pleasure in reading several sorts
of books, but more profit in reading few choice ones.

3. It is necessary to let our mind rest sometimes, and to recreate it after
much labor; for no study can last long without some intermission. The ancient
Lawgivers designed certain days, wherein the people might meet together to be
merry, and recreate their spirits. There are several sorts of actions which
may divert and recreate the mind. As for example, to walk in some open and
pleasant place, where the mind may be free to contemplate, and the body grow
more vigorous with enjoying fresh air: to go and pass some time in the
country, free from all the tumults of the City: Thou may also divert thyself
in hawking, hunting, fishing, and the like innocent recreations, supposing they
are not misbecoming thy state and condition: thou may likewise apply thyself
to some mild and recreative Study, hear or play upon some Musical Instrument;
use some innocent play; converse merrily and jest with thy friends; but with
this caution, that thou do not speak any injurious or undecent words. Some
men are too severe in their conversation, and as if they hated all society, are
too much addicted to their solitude, and can never be brought to speak a merry
word. Others are always in a jesting humor, and can never apply themselves
seriously to any thing, never use any retreat. But these things are to be taken
alternatively: for solitude will make thee desire the conversation of others,
and too much company will make thee desire solitude: and thus the one will
still be a remedy to the other. Besides, a little Remission sometimes will take
away the unwillingnes of taking pains, and a little labor will take away the
tediousnes of Remission. There are some again who not understanding how to
dispense their own forces, have no moderation in their actions, but weary
themselves with too much labor. They neither know how to leave of their
studies when once begun, nor how to settle themselves again to them, when once
intermitted. When they have once begun to do a thing, they follow it day and
night, and never leave of until they find their strength fayl with too much
application. And on the other side when they begin to take their recreation,
they are so addicted unto it, that they cannot be easily brought again to
apply themselves to any serious business. Wherefore we must endeavor only to
recreate and divert our mind for a while and not to distract it too much with
unprofitable dissolutions. To perform this we have need of that virtue which is
called Eutrapelia; which turns all things to the best, and prescribes certain
bounds unto all things, which we must never pass. The best things become bad,
when a man observes no measure or rule in them.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Humility. In what it consists. Of the Knowledge of
ourselves. The character of a true nature humble man.
1. ALL Humility comes from our Savior Jesus Christ. It Is he who has preached
it in words, and taught it by his own Example. Next unto the Theological and
Intellectual Virtues, Humility holds the first place; because it is directly
opposite to Pride, which is the source of all evil. This is the virtue which
makes us agreeable unto God, because he converseth interiourly with those who
are humble of heart. Without this, which is the Ground and foundation of all
other virtues, all our spiritual building will be but weak and unstable. And
although in its name it seems to carry something of low and inconsiderable, yet
it is the virtue of great persons, because it is the virtue of the perfect, and
elevates the mind to higher things. It undertaketh great things without all
danger of pride or vain glory, without fear of the difficulty; and still
bears up with the same tenor, constancy, and tranquillity against all
hazards. Humility does not consist, as the common sort of people falsely thinks,
in having an abject and contemptible opinion of ourselves; but in a certain
moderate desire of honor and glory, which has neither any excess nor defect.
The humble man desires glory as the reward of virtue, regarding the action
itself, not for any vain glory, but virtue alone. All honor is illegitimate,
which it not got by virtue. But whereas he that is humble understands himself
well, and judges aright of himself, he therefore justly refuses as much as he
can all honor; as well because he knows he contributes very little to his own
virtues; as also because he fears, least that by consenting to the honors
which are due unto him, he should by degrees be tempted to desire those which
are not due. It is more safe still, to contemn all honors; for he who refuses
them, augmenteth them; and he who contemns them, increases his own glory.

2. The reason why thou art not humble is because thou do not know thyself.
There is no country so remote, of which thou will not sooner believe a
hundred false stories, then of thyself. What is man? A frayl body; without all
defense of its own nature, needing the help of others, and exposed to all the
rigours and injuries of Time: a heap of clay, an unclean animal, inclined to
all evil, and of so perverse and depraved a nature, that he prefers earth
to heaven, and transitory vain things to Eternity. Every living man is nothing
but vanity. There is no creature of so frail a life, so fierce a nature, so
subject to many fears, and so addicted to Lust. Why then art thou proud, oh
miserable man, and unhappiest of creatures? Look upon thy own misery, consider
thy own shame and disordered inclinations, if thou have but the least spark of
reason. Thou will then be truly humble, when thou have learnt to know thyself.

3. He that is truly humble, has a perfect contempt of himself; and does not
desire to be esteemed humble, but abject: he refers all the honor that is
given him unto God, and is diffident of himself in all things: he rejoices in
being contemned, and all his pride consists in contemning all praise. He
measures himself according to those things only which he has from himself,
and he esteems others according to the gifts which they have from God; and so
in comparing himself unto others, he still esteems himself less and worse then
all men. For this is the propriety of humility, to compare its own
imperfections to the virtues of others; by which rule the perfectest man in the
world may without any lie esteem himself more imperfect then the greatest
sinner. Moreover, he that is truly humble, submits himself with all
obedience unto those who are above him, does not seek to satisfy his own
desires, willingly discovers his own defects, patiently endures all injury,
embraces with joy the most servile offices, flies all singularity, abstaineth
from too much talking, desires to live in private and unknown: he contemns
all things: esteems himself lower then all things, and shuts himself as it
were within nothing. He is modest and circumspect, does not speak but when
necessity requires, and then very modestly and without laughing; desiring
rather to weep then laugh. He discovers the humility of his heart in his
outward carriage, having his eyes fixed on the ground, using a grave and
moderate gate, with dejected looks, like a Criminal that expects every moment
to be presented before the dreadful judgment seat of God. His conscience
accusing him of the sins he has committed, and having no assurance of Gods
grace, and doubtful of his salvation, he dares not lift up his eyes to heaven,
but standing afarr of with the Publican, beggeth with earnest prayer forgivenes
of his sins. In a word, he is afraid of all his actions, comtemneth all earthly
things, treads as it were under his feet all the pomp of the world; for he
esteems all the world as nothing, who believes himself to be nothing.

CHAP. XXXV. Of those who are arrived to the state of Perfection The Character
of a perfect man. The end of christian is an union with God,
1. HE is called perfect, who wants nothing of what he should have. And what
can he want, who purged of all sin and imperfection, and adorned with all
virtues, adhereth interiorly unto God, and becomes as it were one spirit with
him for all eternity? This is the height of Christian perfection, this is thy
last end, unto which thou art bound to aspire. For since every thing is then
esteemed perfect, when it is united to its end, and God is thy end; it follows
that thou can never be perfect, until adhering perfectly unto God thou
returnest unto him, from whom thou had thy beginning. But no man can be truly
perfect without the special grace of God. And because few dispose their Souls
to receive this interior help of God, this is the reason that few arrive unto
perfection. In a whole age, we see but very few that become perfect or Saints.

2. Thou may count him a perfect man, whom thou see undaunted in the midst
of dangers, free from all covetousnes and evil desires, happy in adversity,
content when he is calumniated, quiet and peaceable in the midst of storms; who
is still merry and the same whatsoever others fear or hope, who esteems himself
above all things; who trusts nothing but his own virtue; who is always free,
always constant, always like himself, firm, high, full of God, and esteeming
himself nothing: whom no power can rob of his own riches, who turns bad to
good, who is never frustrated of his expectation, who is never moved or
offended with any chance, who esteems things not according to the opinion of
the world, but as they are in themsel^ who standing as it were above all the
world, considers and contemplates all that is done in it, but is still quiet
and unshaken in himself: whose better part always dwells in God, from whom it
had its beginning. As the rays of the sun, although they touch the Earth, yet
are really in the sun, from which they proceed; so a perfect man converseth
with the world, but his better part is absent from the world, and always
adhereth to its sovereign end. His mind is like the regions which are above the
moon, always serene and untroubled. He knows no imperfection in his actions,
and is never unconstant: all Times are alike unto him, and like the sun he
looks upon all things with an equal regard, and flying all multiplicity of
objects he ^eth content in one simple contemplation of God alone. He wishes
for nothing, he seeks nothing out of himself; having no need to seek felicity
far from himself, because he has it included in his own heart. He does all his
actions for God, he lives only for God, and is always ready to dye when it
shall please his divine will. Examine thyself in all particulars according to
this Rule, and thou will easily see how far thou art from perfection.

3. Perfection is a thing which is far above thy reach, and thou can never
attain unto it, unles he helps thee, who said, without me you can do nothing.
Many dispositions are required unto it. The end of a perfect life is an
intimate union with God: and because he dwells in inaccessible light, thou
can never arrive unto an union with him, unles thou first disengagest thyself
from the darkness of creatures. No man can be made partaker of the divine nature
unles he raises himself above himself, and above all created things. The least
adhering to any earthly objects, is like the fish called Remora, which if it
does but stick to the keel of a ship, it presently stops it in the midst of its
course, so that it can sail no further. So it happens to many souls, which
like ships laden with havenly riches would happily arrive to the Port of a
blessed union with God, if they were not hindered and detained by some evil
affection. God is one and simple, and consequently a Soul can never be fit for
a happy union with him, unles it also becomes (...) and simple like him.

FINIS.

