THE POETS RECANTATION, having suffered in the Pillory. the 2. of April 1642.

With a penitent submission of all things, that have been written against the
King and State.

In an humble Petitionary description, obsequiously commended to the Honorable
and High Court of PARLIAMENT.

JOHN BOND.

Scribimus, and scriptus consumitur igne Libellus. London Printed for T. A. and
Joseph Wren. 1642.

THE Poets Recantation, having suffered on the Pillorie.
THe inumerable multitude of Pamphlets, which have been surreptitiously
inserted above this twelve months and half to the ignominious scandal of the
State, did not only exasperate his Majesty's just indignation against them, but
also highly incensed his Parliament against the same. Who to give plenary
satisfaction as well to the whole kingdom in general, as also to his Majesty
in particular, intended to inflict an exemplary punishment on the Authors
thereof. And it being my hard fortune, or rather misfortune to be found
culpable in one peculiar Letter; (though thousand more scandalous Libils, and
more invective against the State have been published, whereof I am innocent)
yet I was exposed publico dedecore, to the public shame of the world; as the
sole contriver of them all. I confess impartially, I acknowledge the sublimity
of my crime, and error, without which there is noe man living: for according
to the grave, and prudent (I had almost said oraculous) sentence of Cato, Neme
sine crimine vivit. It was not withstanding no voluntary Act of criminal
offense in me, but rather an astimulation, and inducement of impendent, and
urgent necessity, et ingens telum necessitas est. Moreover I speak before
God, and the whole world, I was suggested to write the same by a calumnious
instigator. In all which, my cogitations in the compositing thereof may
perspicuously be conceived to be innocent though it is not innocence that I
must plead now so much as penitence.

Artificis scelus est, art perire sua. Thus Perillus invented and made a
brazen Bull, which was the sole cause of his own destruction, thus Daedalus
having framed an irremiable Laborynth, was first exposed thither himself. So
that which was extracted out of mine own brain, (as Minerva was from Jove's,
though she was more divinely guided, and inspired) was the prime cause of my
misery, whereupon I am involved in that Condoleable Laborynth of durance, that
unless I be reduced by the Ariadnaean thread of Compassisonate mercy, and
Commiseration Actum est de me et de fortunis meis, would I had been Pythagoras
his Scholar, for then et labiorum ostia stricto silentii obdideram pessulo, et
simul effrenatam Calami licentiam cohibuissem, et tum in catenatis hisce
miseriarum voraginibus nunquam illapsus essem. But sero sapium Phryges, we are
wise, when it is too late: and had I maturely Considered, and presupposed the
subsequent casualities, which were incident, I might have prevented that danger
wherein I am now involved. But I wonder with a repercussive amazement, that the
Muses, and Graces did not descend their auxiliary asistance unto me, whom I
will invocate respectively, to know really whither or no they have divorced
themselves asonte Pegasaeo from the pegasean fountain.

Where are those Dames, from Aganippe's Spring,
That to their lovers a Protection bring,
Against inauspicious fate; where are the Peers,
Of all Poetck wits; who hearks? or hears?
Where is Pol'ymnia, or Appollo gone?
What have they all forsaken Helicon?
Poor helpelesse I must then exposed be
In public shame unto the Pillorie.
But stay, retract that word my Muse, my Pen,
Let it not pass, but call it back again.
The Pillorie? Prodigious word! Have I
Trespassed, offended, or transgressed so high?
Let me plough through my works, if I can find
What can be artickled against my mind.
Now I perceive the Cause, hence does distill,
That I have been too saucy in my Quill.
It Is not expedient that a Vulgar eye,
Should gaze upon superior Majesty.
'Twas that, which dazzled my dull Muse, I see,
'Twas that involved her in this misery.
Was Phaeton too bold, into the air
Whose thoughts aspired, to sit in Phoebus Chair?
As rash, as temerarious then was I
Who touched Charles his Wayne too loftily.
'T was not for perjury, that I have been
Thy Captive, Pillorie, nor was there seen
Heretic thoughts in me: oh then forbear
Or to dissect my nose or geld mine ear.
Thy ostentation most sublime may be,
Which boast of That: A Poet honored Thee.
Since I perceive that the Muses have all forsaken me henceforth I will never
dip my pen in Helicon to embroyder my words with Poetical elocutions: I will
rather soake my Quill in Acharon, that all things (what soever I have written
either dependent, having any reference, or against the state) may be
obliterated with oblivion. But it is very stupendous, that those things,
which naturally descend from any man, should oppress him with misery. Thus a
Viper Produces young, and she is macerated and sometimes killed by those,
which she did once bare in her own womb. Thus Cassiodora was betrayed by the
Crying of her own Child: And thus I was both introduced into this deplorable
estate by the crying of my own Poetic babe, promulgated by the
street-cantors, and also wrapped up in this indigence by the same. The Capitolium
was delivered, and secured from conspirative machinations by the irregular, and
tumultuous noise of Geese, that frequented there: but in a mere antipathy and
Contradictory Mytholagie I was betrayed by a Goose quill, so that both fortune,
time, and example did all conspire against me. First fortune was mine enemy,
that I should be induced to do that by the palpable, and Parasiticall
incitements of others, which now is like to subvert both me and my fortunes
also. Secondly time was malevolent, in regard it was done in the period of
things, when they were all questionable, and amongst the the rest, that this
espetially should reflect on mine own detriment. Thirdly example conspired
against me, for in respect such a multitude of Libels being published, whereof
there were many Authors, that my fate espetially should be so disastrous to
suffer exemplarily for all. And now I do most submissively recant in all
humility, and what I have offended in I am heartily sorry, and penitent for the
same. Yet I was never invective either against the state or distressed
Delinquents: only I confess some times I was conversant in innocent things:
and I hope the apprehensive eye of the world will not mis-interpretate what I
have don. And I do with all obsequious devotion implore forgiveness and
absolution of the whole world, for what I am reputed culpable in, and peccant:
but more espetially I most humbly supplicate the propitious reflection of the
high Court of Parliaments mercy, and Commiseration, promising hereafter before
God, and their Honors an absolute Reformation in my pen hereafter.

FINIS

