THE PARLIAMENTS AND LONDONS PREPARATION FOR HIS MAJESTY'S RETVRN.

With the Manner how many Parliament men, with the Lord Major, and Aldermen are
to congratulate his Majesty. With the manner likewise how many Petitions are to
be delivered unto him, and the Substance of the same.

As also the true Relation, how the 12. accused Bishops are devoted out of the
House of Peers, and being called to their Trial, they expected the Kings
either Ascent, or Descent thereunto, which induced His Majesty to return.

With the certain time prefixed when he does return.

Composed and published by John Bond.

LONDON. Printed for John Tompson. 1641.

THE PARLIAMENTS AND LONDONS Preparation for His Majesty's Return.
A King is Quasi caput populi, the head of his people, and if the head be
absent, the other members must consequently languish. Yea the joy and prosperus
consolation of a Nation, is the present enjoiment of their Prince. But I do not
delineate this in a Tropologicall sense, or that any should conclude hereupon,
that our Royal Kings Absence should cause, or produce any distasters.

For he had bin so opposed in his pleasures, and Commands, that it did not
only cause his just indignation, but likewise respectively induced him to
leave his Palace at Westminster, and progressed forwards to Windsor, where his
Majesty has continued a long time.

But he taking into his Princely consideration the longing expectation of his
loyal Subjects for his presence, the great desolation, and condole for his
absence: together with the manifold distractions, and distempers in the
kingdom, did most discreetly resolve himself to honor the Parliament and City
once more with his presence.

Whereupon the Parliament and City having intelligence, did respectively
consult, how they should congratulate his Majesty in such satisfactory manner,
as might be correspondent to his contentive pleasure. Diverse Parliament men
were immediately selected both out of the House of Peers and Commons, to meet
him: as also, the Lord Major, Aldermen, and chief Citizens, are in preparation
to congratulate his Majesty. But after their submissive, and humble salutation
there are diverse Petitions to be delivered, and, presented to his Majesty,
concerning his gracious concurrance with the Parliament, in extirpating the
Recusant party, and devoting the Popish Lords and Bishops from the House of
Peers, and desiring his longer continuance with them, in the establishing of
the weighty, and impendent affairs of the Kingdom.

I cannot absolutely and directly satisfy the Reader hereof, the prefixed time
when his Majesty will certainly return for that is very ambiguous: but this J
can resolve him off, he is daily expected, and without doubt he will be here
present in a sudden process of time: And as soon as the Parliament and City
can have more direct and confident intelligence of his more certain return,
they will perform what is aforementioned: in the mean time they are in great
and deliberate preparation for the same.

Yet in his absence, he has not bin altogether unmindful of his People, but
has bin rather more sollicitous, and as tender over their welfare, as a father
is over his own Son. He has oftentimes sent Letters to his Parliament to
comfort, and encourage them in their unwearied sedulity.

He has likewise graciously answered them in all their Petitions, and has
become as indulgent as ever Prince has bin.

None knows the care and solicitation of a Prince; for they ( Atlas-like) do
support the burden of the whole Kingdom besides: and withal they do
judiciously consider, that Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.

For the Subjects are composed to follow the pattern and example of their
Prince.

And God be praised, our King may be esteemed, and reputed the glory, and
mirror of the world: both in his own Princely life, and exhortive admonitions
to his Subjects two things especially entertained in his Royal breast seen to
be unparalled. First his Patience, then his constancy for the truth.

For which two, he ought not only to be applauded, but likewise meritoriously
deserve the diurnall prayers of his liege People, for the continuance, and
corroboration of the same.

God of his infinite mercy grant that the King and Parliament may co-unitely
concur for the settling of peace and tranquillity amongst us, the establishing of
Religion, and the mittigating of these various distempers, and distractions:
that all obstacles, and obstructions whatsoever, that interrupts either of them
may be moved, and the pure streams of Justice run clearly against all
Delinquents without connivance, or partiality. For the State lies sick, and of
a dangerous disease too, which (if it be not suddenly cured) will contaminate
the whole land, break out into an ulcer, and so exulcerate all parts by its
pestiferous, and diffusive contagion of ruinate destruction, But I hope that
malady likewise will be averted from us, and the Kingdom likewise will be
soundly purged from all distempers that now corrupt it: then I say, all
discords and distractions will be ended, at the reciprocal and mutual
conjunction of the King and Parliament. Thus shall piety, and sincere Religion
distend its branches once more, peace and security reflourish again within our
walls, and all tumultuous confusions be anihilated and abolished, to the
honor of Gods holy name, the glory and fame of his Majesty, the immortal
renown and credit of the Parliament, and the eternal prosperity of the
Kingdom.

FINIS.

