THE GUARD OF THE Tree of Life: OR, A Sacramental Discourse; SHOWING A
Christians Privilege, in approaching to God in Ordinances. Duty, in his
Sacramental approaches. Danger, if he do not sanctify God in them.


By SAMUEL BOLTON, Preacher to the Congregation of Saviors South-warke.

1 Cor. 11.27. Whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Verse 29. He
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.
LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for A. Kembe, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Talbotgate in Southwark, 1644.

TO MY BELOVED FRIENDS, The Godly and Well-affected of Saviours-Southwark;
Grace and Peace.
Beloved,
IT is now well-nigh four years since I was removed from a loving, a very
loving people in the City, and fixed among you; the expresses of love which in
this time I have received from you, have put me on to think, what way I might
again manifest my engagements to you: And considering with my self the relation
wherein I stand, I could think of no better way of acknowledgement then to
impart something spiritual to you; and no better subject then this which is
now presented to your view, nor could I think of a better time then this for
the doing of it, when God in our blood shows us what a fearful thing it is to
be guilty of the blood of his Son; It is not unknown unto you, how greatly
this place above many others, has been guilty of the profanation of this
Ordinance of the Lords Supper; God has discovered it to us, humbled us for it,
showed us the necessity, and graciously inclined your spirits to the desire of
the reformation of it. In reference to which (through the countenance and
assistance of you) my brother Minister and my self, have adventured to set upon
the work, being willing to put our selves to no little trouble, if by that we
might prevent a great deal of sin. In this work (the searcher of hearts knows)
we have had no other design, then to express our Pastoral duties, and declare
our Pastoral affections toward your souls: In short, to serve you in love:
Probably we may meet with many obstacles in the carrying on this work; Indeed,
it is that which is expected; nay, and that which we reckoned on before we
entered on it. But if the work be Gods, he will either facilitate and make it
easy for us, or give us spirits proportionable to the greatness of it, I say
he will either lessen the difficulties, or heighten our spirits to conflict
and encounter with them.

There are two sort of adversaries which we expect to meet withal: some that
will say, we go too far, and others who will blame us that we go no further.

To them that think we have gone too far, I shall only say, that we hope we
have not gone beyond Gods bounds; sure as God has a purpose this Ordidinance
should be continued, so he has a care also, that it should be fenced from
profanation in the continuance of it; and when a better way shall be
discovered to us, wherein we may hold up the use of this Ordinance, and yet
fence it (in the use of it) from evident profanation, we are ready to listen
to it, and be thankful for it; in the mean, we do not see it our duty to hold
up the use of this Ordinance, except there be some fence set up (all former
fences being insufficient, and now broken down) to keep this Ordinance from
manifest profanation, unless you will say our Pastoral office does, in the
exercise of it, necessitate us to sin. Much more might be said, if we saw it
either requisite or convenient for an Epistle.

To those who blame us we go no further, I must say our design has bin rather
to tempt on, by going their pace, then to discourage by over-driving our little
ones; I say it has been our aim to cherish not to quench, to draw out, not to
suppress the graces of our people; and therefore have we desired to improve
those graces which we found, though weak, rather then to expect that which was
not to be found. Our present reformation, it is not the measure of our will,
but of our power; it is not the utmost we desire, but the utmost we are able:
And though it may seem small to you, yet despise not the day of small things;
though the house is not built, yet we rejoice the first stone is laid, and we
could not choose but bring it forth with shouting, Grace, Grace, unto it, and
Glory, Glory to the Lord. Babylon was not built in a day, neither is Sion; God
carries on his works without us, as he does his works within us, by degrees;
the greatest fire was at first a spark, the tallest Oak at the first an
Achorne, the strongest Christian had his infancy, and the greatest work of God
its mean beginnings; Would the corruption of former times have suffered our
godly predecessors, to have left the work in that forwardness to us, in which
through Gods blessing, it may be left to them who shall succeed, possibly, nay
probably, the work might have been carried on to a greater height then now it
can; That which is done we desire to bless God for it, and think it our duty
to cherish with our utmost prayers and endeavors; In relation to which, these
ensuing Sermons formerly preached, are now printed, to which work, if they
shall be any thing serviceable, they have obtained the end of him,

Who is not unwilling to spend, and be spent for you: S. BOLTON.

A brief Table of the maine things contained in the following Discourse.
THe Introduction into the Discourse and parts of the Text, and explanation of
the term. page 1, 2, 3, 4. Doctr. 1. To have to do with an Ordinance of God, is
to draw near to God. p. 7. Use 1. Judge how much you are bound to God for
Ordinances. p. 10. 2. What cause to lament the sad condition of those that want
them. p. 11, 12. 3. What a sin to disturb the Saints in the use of Ordinances.
p. 13. 4. See the ground the Saints so much taken with Ordinances. p. ibid. 5.
See what cause there is to keep our hearts in a holy frame. p. 14. Use. Exhort.
1. To a conscionable use of Ordinances, upon four grounds. p. 20. to 25. 2. To
conscionablness in the use of them upon three grounds. p. 26, to 28. 2. To
Exhort, When ever you have to do with Ordiuances, take Christ with you, p. 30
The necessity of it: 1. In regard of admission: 2. Assistance: 3. Acceptance.
page 31, 32, 33. Doct. 2. Those who have to do with God in an Ordinance, must
sanctify God in it. 34. 1. What it is to sanctify God in an Ordinance. 35. To
which something is required: 1 In the work. 35. 2 The workman. 1 In his head,
knowledge, etc. 36. 2 In his heart. 36. 1. Holy affections 2. Suitable. 37. 3.
Excited. 38.



2. How we must sanctify God in this ordinance. p. 40 1 Something is required
before. 41. 1 Habitual 43. preparation. 2 Actual
2 Something in the time. 44. 1 Exercise of Grace. 2 Suitable demeanors. Faith
Repentance.


1 Faith, where is discovered: 1 What act of faith. 45. 2 Upon what object. 50.
3 For what benefits. 54.
Faith is to be exercised for four benefits in the Sacrament: 1. For the
further assurance of our justification. 56. 2. For the increase of
sanctification. 59. 3. For the subduing of corruptions. 70. 4. For deliverance
out of temptation. 74. And how faith is to be acted upon Christ for these
benefits, is discovered. 2. The second Grace to be exercised in the time, is
Repentance. page 78. Where is set down: 1 The kinds of mourning. 1
Historical. 79. 2 Spiritual. 79.
2 The advantages to it. 82. 1 The discovery of love. 2 Sufferings of Christ,
etc.


These are the Graces required in the time; now the demanours, p. 89. 1. An
humble reverence: 2. Discharge of worldly thoughts. p. 90. 3. Something is
required afterward to sanctify God in this ordinance. p. 93. Thankfulness. 94 2
Obedience. 98.
3. Why we must sanctify God. 3. Reasons. p. 103. 1 Because God commands. 103.
2 Because otherwise get no good. p. 105. 3 Because otherwise get hurt. p. 107.
Use Of complaint. How few do sanctify God in this ordinance. p. 100. 2 Use
Examination; Whether you have sanctified God in it. p. 112. Before 1 See if you
have observed God's order. p. 113. 114. 2 See whether observed God's rules. p.
16. 3 See whether you have observed God's ends. p. 118.
2 See if you have exercised Gods graces in the time. p. 123. 3 See whether we
have returned home with God's quicknings and refreshments. p. ibid. 3 Doctr.
God will be sanctified of every one that does not sanctify him in Ordinances.
p. 130. 1 What is meant by God's sanctifying himself on men. p. 131. 2 What are
the reasons why God does sanctify himself on those who do not sanctify him in
ordinances. p. 132. 6 Reasons of it: 1 For terror and dread of profane
persons. p. 133. 2 For caution to others. p. 134. 3 To declare his justice. p.
136 4 To remove scandal. p. 137. 5 To hold up his great name. p. 148. 6 To
declare his hatred against sin. p. 142.
Use, Caution to profane persons. 143. Use, To exhort us to turn our eyes
backward, and examine whether we have not been guilty of the profanation of
this ordinance. p. 151. The trial is put upon three further designs. page
151. 1 Sign. If the Sacraments have wrought no further good upon thee. p. ibid.
2 Sign. If thou art worse after then before. p. 153. 3 Sign. If thou have fed
upon nothing but outward elements, thou have been a prophaner of this
ordinance. p. 156. A brief rehearsal and application of the whole to wicked
and unregenerate persons.
Imprimatur,

John Downam.

LEVIT. 10.3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is that the Lord spoke, saying,
I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me. --
WE are all here present met together at an Ordinance, and many of us have
intended to go upon a further Ordinance. And there is no man or woman who has
to do with any Ordinance of God, but has to deal with God in it, he draws
near to God. And God has said he will ^e sanctified in all them that draw
^eere to him; either he will be sanctified by you, in your active glorifying ^f
him, or upon you, in your passive ^earing his displeasure. A te, vel De te.
There is never a one of you here present, but God will be sanctified and
glorified in you this day. And it is my earnest desire that you may all actively
glorify God, that he may not passively glorify himself upon you, and raise
his glory out of the ruins of any of you.

I need not travel far back to find you a coherence, the verse before will
afford it; And the first word of my Text bids me go no further.

There is, 1. The occasion of these words. 2. The Preface to them. 3. The words
themselves. 4. The effect of them.


1. The occasion of these words, and that was the untimely death of Aarons two
sons, their death gave birth to these words. And a sentence it is not too
dear, if bought with the lives of thousands of men. 2. The Preface to them,
This is that the Lord said; why, where did the Lord speak it? Did he speak it
to Moses only? or did he speak it ^o the Congregation also? we never read it
was booked before, totidem verbis. Some think this punishment was all the
command they had, but I cannot think, that God does first punish, and thereupon
raise a precept, but he first gives his Law, then punishes the breach of it.

And the words declare there had been some charge given, This is that the Lord
said, so that there was some charge. But where was it? We read not of it here.
Some say it was spoken, but not written; and this they would have to
countenance their unwritten traditions. Some will have it, in Exo. 19.22. Let
the Priests sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break in upon them. Others will
have it in Levit. 8.35, 36. Keep the Lord's charge that you die not. Calvin
will not have it referred to any particular place, but a general charge, given
at diverse times; and now the present occasion brings it forth to particular
application, to which I assent. 3. We have the words themselves, I will be
sanctified. Why, what is that? Can God be sanctified of us? Indeed he
sanctifies us, but how can we sanctify him?

God is sanctified two ways: 1. Actively. 2. Passively.


1. Actively, as 1 Pet. 3.15. Sanctify the Lord in your hearts; and thus God
is sanctified, when we cherish and maintain high esteems of God in our hearts,
when we do honor, esteem, and advance God in our hearts, and in our lives.

2. Passively, by punishing of offenders, Ezekiel. 28.22. When I have executed my
judgment on her, Sanctificatio Dei, est poena peccantium. Jerome.
then shall I be sanctified in her. Jerome on this place says, The punishment
of offenders, is the sanctification of God; So you see it was in the Text, God
was sanctified on them, not by their doing good, but by their suffering evil;
not Actively, but Passively: And in both these senses the words are to be read,
I say the words are to be read in this disjunctive sense, I will be sanctified
of all them that draw near to me, that is, either actively, in glorifying me in
the work; or passively, in glorifying my self upon the workman; Si voluntas Dei
non fiat a te, fiet de te. Aug.
if you do not sanctify God in an Ordinance, he will be sanctified upon you.
4. We have the effect of these words upon Aaron, it is said, it struck him
dumb; a dutiful dumbness; he was silent to Jehovah, he held his peace; he was
dumb, and opened not his mouth, because it was God's doing. Silet audita
voluntate Dei. Calv.
God's will being manifest, it chained up his tongue, he held his peace;
thereby confessing, says Calvin, Iusto Dei judicio extinctos esse.
that they were slain by the just judgment of God. His silence cleared God in
his dealings. And what a power is there then in faith, and grace; to silence
the soul in such a sad condition as this? The loss of his sons, his eldest
sons, when young, and without posterity, in the first day of their
ministration, in the sight of all the Congregation, and by so fearful a
judgment, fire from the Lord, and in the act of their sin, which some think
was joined with drunkenness too, whereupon the prohibition against wine
follows, v. 9: so that the Congregation might suspect they went but from fire
to fire, from a destruction by fire, to a preservation in fire, from a
temporal to an eternal burning? Yet in all this Moses having declared the
author God, the cause their sin, Aaron was dumb and held his peace: It was not
such a dumbness as Zachary had; that was poenal, and unbelief struck him dumb;
this was a spiritual dumbness, and faith struck him dumb, it did not so much
suspend his tongue from speaking, as silence his heart from complaining, and
made him quietly submit to God's dealing.

Thus having at once showed you both the parts of the Text, and cleared what
ever had any appearing difficulty in it, Conclusions.
we will now lay down the several conclusions the Text affords us.

1. That they who have to do with any Ordinance of God, draw near to God.

2. That they who draw near to God in any Ordinance, must sanctify God in it.

3. That if we do not sanctify God in an Ordinance, he will be sanctified
upon us.

We will speak a little of the first, which is an Introduction to those which
follow.

That they who have to do with any Ordinance of God, draw near to God.

You see it is the language of the Spirit of God here, that to have to do with
any matter which concerns the Worship and service of God, is, do draw near to
God. And in other places it is called a coming before God, a treading his
Courts, an approaching to God, a meeting of God; all which languages imply thus
much, that who ever have to do with God in any Ordinance, draw near to God. You
tread his Courts, you come into his presence, you approach unto God, you meet
God, you have communion with God; Nay, you have to do with God's Name; God's
Ordinances are part of his Name. Nay, you have to do with God himself. He
that has to do with any Ordinance, with any part of his Worship, has to do
with God himself. When you have to do with the Word, when you go to Prayer,
when you have to do with the Sacraments, you have to do with God himself in
them. What could the Word do, either in commands to engage us, in Promises to
comfort us, in threatenings to terrify us, if we had not to do with God in
them? What were Prayer, but a distracted seriousness, a religious madness, if
we had not to deal with God in it? What were the Sacraments, but gaudie
Pageants, nay, empty fantasies, beggarly elements, if we had not to deal with
God in them?

It is God that we have to deal withal in Ordinances, that sheds a glory,
casts a Majesty, and puts an efficacy into all the Ordinances we have to deal
withal: It is he who makes the Promises of the Word rocks of stay and
support, that makes the commands of the Word full of authority, that makes the
threatenings of the Word exceeding terrible; It is he that we have to deal
withal, that makes a little handful of water, a little bit of bread, and sup
of wine, exceeding glorious and efficacious. What empty, what poor, what
conte^ptible things would these be (and are to unbelieving men) if we had not
to do with God in them? It is this God we have to do withal, that casts a
Majesty upon, and puts an efficacy into every Ordinance.

But we will pass over this. If they who have to do with any Ordinance of God,
draw near to God, then let me put some things to you to judge of.

1. Judge then, if ever Kingdom was more engaged to God then ours, who enjoy
the Ordinances by which we draw near to God. Has he dealt thus with any
Nation? What Nation under heaven that enjoy the like privileges of drawing
near to God in Ordinances as we do? Well may we say in the words of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 65.5. Blessed is the Nation which thou chusest, Psalm. 65.5.
and causest to approach unto thee, that they may dwell in thy Courts, we shall
be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple.

2. And with blessing God for our own privileges, judge what cause we have to
take up a lamentation for them that never enjoyed; and for them who have
enjoyed, but are now deprived of this means of drawing near to God.

1. Them who never enjoyed the Ordinances, who sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, who never had a Christ, a Gospel discovered to them. Oh, pity
and pray for them, that the Word of the Lord might run and be glorified, that
God would enlarge the bounds of his sanctuary, stretch forth the Curtains of
his Tabernacle, that the eyes of Nations might be opened, that the fullness of
the Gentiles might be brought in, and that they might fly to the Church as
Doves into the windows, which is prophesied, Isa. 60.8. And with them, Oh,
remember that ancient nation, the Jews, who have drawn near to God in
Ordinances, but now at distance with him, and even set at further distance by
the use of those Ordinances, whereby formerly they drew near; Oh remember them!
that that blood which they imprecated upon themselves for a curse, may now be
upon them for a blessing, that it may lie no longer upon their heads, but now
be sprinkled upon their hearts, and be in veniam which has been so long in
vindictam; That as it was said of the Gentiles, so it may now be said of the
Jews, That unto them is granted repentance to life.

2. And take up a mourning for them who have enjoyed the Ordinances, but now
want them; look into Germany, look into Ireland, nay look into many places in
England, how many Pastors, who are driven away from their flocks, how many
Shepherds smitten, and the sheep scattered, how many poor scattered flocks,
who had the Manna fell at their tent doors, and their tents about the
Tabernacle, who now have the Tabernacle removed, are without Word, without
Sacraments, without Ordinances, and are forced to wander from place to place,
to gather of the bread of heaven, to enjoy the Ordinances whereby they may draw
near to God?

3. Judge then, if it be not a vile thing, to hinder and disturb the Saints in
those things whereby they draw near to God. 1. Either by depriving them of
Ordinances, and robbing them of the means: 2. Or by corrupting of the
Ordinances to them, that they cannot enjoy them in that purity which God left
them. In the first, the bread is taken from them: In the second, they give them
poison with their bread; both these will have a sad day of reckoning.

4. See what is the reason the Saints are so much taken with Ordinances, because
they draw near to God in them; they look upon Ordinances as Bridges to give
them a passage to God; as Boats to convey them into the bosom of Christ,
Vehicula Spiritus.
as means to bring them into more intimate communion with their Father,
therefore are they so much taken with them. When they go to the Word, they go as
one goes to hear news of a friend; when they go to pray, they go to talk with a
friend; when to read, they go to read a letter from a friend; when to receive,
they go to sup with a friend: they look upon Ordinances as those things whereby
they have to do with God, and therefore are ordinances so precious. Indeed to
them who have to do with nothing but duty, in duty, but prayer, in prayer, but
hearing, in hearing, to them the Ordinances are dead, dry, and spiritless
things, but they who have to do with God in duty, they who have communion with
God in Ordinances, to them Ordinances are passing sweet and precicious.

5. Judge what cause there is to keep our hearts in a spiritual and holy
frame; we have often to do with Ordinances, and when we have to do with
Ordinances, we have to do with God, we draw near to him. And therefore, what
cause to get and keep our hearts in a holy temper, that we may be ever fit to
close with God in them, and not have our hearts like bad servants, to seek when
we are to use them. The Apostle bids us pray continually, it is not meant that
we are ever to be upon our knees, ever in actual prayer, but seeing we are to
pray so frequently, we are to get and keep our hearts in such an habitual
frame and disposition, that they may be ever fit to close with God, when ever
we are called out upon the duty.

Were we but seldom to have to do with God, you might think there were no such
need of keeping our hearts in frame; but seeing we are to do with him daily,
who is so pure and holy a God, Oh, what manner of persons ought we to be? How
exactly should we walk? Jerem. 7.9.10. Will you steal and murder, and come and
stand before me in this house which is called by my name, says the Lord? so
will you walk loosly, live vainly, when you are to do with so holy a God every
day? Oh, let every man that calls upon the name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity. Let every one that holds up praying duties, keep his heart in a
praying frame: such a Christian is not worth a pin, who is only good when he is
on his knees, who thinks it sufficient to snatch up affections to serve the
turn of a duty, and then to lay them aside as soon as the duty is over: he
is a Christian indeed who prays on his feet as well as on his knees, whose life
is nothing else but a real prayer, that if you look into his heart, there is
all his desires engraven, his heart ever pants and breaths the same things he
prays; and if you look into his life, his life speaks the same language his
lips do; his life is a walking prayer; many men are one upon their knees,
another upon their feet, but he is the same; he walks with the same spirit,
the same affections, the same desires and disposition: he is the same man. It
is something to pray, more to pray as a Christian, and more when you have
prayed your prayers, to live your prayers; nay, to live those affections, those
dispositions wherewith you prayed, to live as high as prayer. It is a shame to
see, how we slide out of duty into the world, and out of the world into duty
again; as if we were two contrary men, one upon our knees, and another on our
feet: And therefore you shall see men to gather up some affections, some
dispositions, before they enter on a duty, and put themselves into another
frame; but lay them aside as soon as ever they have done; these must only serve
to act a praying part, when that is done, then lay them aside; you have no more
use of them, you must put on another spirit to go into the world withal.
Christians, you have often to do with Ordinances, and had therefore need to
keep your hearts in an Ordinance frame: he who keeps not close to God in
practice, shall never keep close to God in prayer; distance in life breeds
distance in duty. And what need of keeping up praying affections? what a shame
to have our lives give our lips the lie, our practice be a confutation of our
prayers? In our prayer to be warm, in our practice cold, up in duty, down in
life? Oh learn to live as high as duty; thou never prayest indeed, till thy
practice come up as high as thy prayers, till thou loves confessions, and art
humble, thou loves petitions and art thirsty, and diligent for those things
thou begs, till a man may read by thy life, that thou art one who desire
those things, which thou have uttered with thy lips. Let this frame of spirit
be in your eye to aim at, and in your life to endeavor after. -- But I am too
large, I intended this doctrine only for the porch or entrance to the rest. To
draw therefore up to the conclusion of it.

I. If it be so, that who ever has to do with an Ordinance, has to do with
God in it, he draws near to God; Let me then exhort you: 1. To a conscionable
use of Ordinances. 2. To conscionablenesse in the use of them.


1. Let me exhort you to a conscionable use of Ordinances. Be more frequent in
hearing, in praying, in receiving, etc. -- I might say something to this last,
viz. Receiving, The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as we eat this
bread, we show forth the Lord's death; it implies a frequent use of the
Ordinance, more then once or twice a year, or once a quarter. Indeed the
opportunities might be more frequent, if it were not for the coldness and
deadness of our hearts. In the Primitive times of the Church, while the blood
of Christ was warm, they had the Sacrament every day; we have an
uncontradicted authority, that they had it every Lord's day. And as men grew
colder, so the distances grew greater. Sure, were it not for the coldness and
deadness of our hearts, it might almost be our daily bread; at least we might
enjoy a more frequent use of this Ordinance then we do: but as the Apostle
says, as often as you have opportunity do good: so as often as you have the
opportunity, take the occasions to meet God in his Ordinances.

1. By them you see you draw near to God, you come into his presence, you have
to do with God's Name; nay, you have to do with God himself.

2. By them God draws near to you, he walks among the Candlesticks, he presents
himself in his Ordinances; Matthew. 28.1. and there he directs us to find him;
Cant. 1.7, 8.

3. If we keep not up a conscionable use of Ordinances, distance will grow
between God and you: As the Water-man may lose more by the omission of one
stroke then he is able to recover again by many; so may you lose more by the
omission of one duty, then you are able to recover again by the performance of
many; especially, if this omission has arisen, 1. from neglect of God: 2. from
carelessness: 3. from sleighting of the converses with God: 4. or from the
importunities and solicitations of Satan and our corruptions: 5. or, from the
blandishments of the world: If upon such grounds, little do thou know what
thou losest by such an omission. If notwithstanding all endeavors, it be so
hard to keep communion with God, what would it be, if we should cast up our
Oars, and neglect it wholly? You see what a distance was bred between God and
Israel, Jer. 2. And what was the ground of it? why, says the Text, My people
have forgotten me days without number; they had no care to keep and cherish
communion and acquaintance with him, and so distances were bred between God and
them: neglect of duty breeds strangeness, strangeness distance, distance
falling off. A good caveat in these days, when so many do cry down duty; shall
we look upon that as our burden, which is our glory; our bondage, which is our
privilege? what is the happiness of a glorified Saint, but only that he is
always under the line of love, ever in the contemplation, and converses with
God? And shall that be thought our burden here which is our glory hereafter? By
this, first, you come to see the face of God: secondly, you have converses with
him: thirdly, you get new quickenings: fourthly, new encouragements: fifthly,
fresh strength against sin: sixthly, new supplies against the temptations of
Satan and the world: seventhly, fresh strength to walk with God: eighthly,
armor against our lusts; and this is enough to make us conscionable.

4. We know not how soon we may be deprived of Ordinances; we have played with
the breasts, and God might put them up; we have sinned in the light, and God
might put out our light. How justly might God remove his Candlesticks, let out
his Vineyard to other Husbandmen, and seek for other ground to sow the seed of
his Ordinances upon; seeing the ground where it has been sown has brought
forth so little fruit, how deservedly might he suffer us to wish and wander to
enjoy one of the days of the Son of man which we have enjoyed?

But though God do not take away the Ordinances from us, yet he may take us
from the Ordinances, and that not only by death, but in life it self; and a sad
thought this will bring to thy soul, when conscience shall report to you, your
former negligence in the use of Ordinances. --

II. Let me exhort you not only to a conscionable use of ordinances, but to
Conscionableness in the use of them; be not only conscionable to use them, but
let your hearts be wrought up to a Conscionablenesse in the use of them. The
power of the Word, the terror of the Law, the fear of wrath, and the hope of
reward, may put a man to do duty; yea, and have power upon the spirit, and
engage the conscience to do duty: You see many that dare not but pray, and yet
have no heart in prayer; they have a conscience to do duty, but their hearts
are not brought to any conscientiousness in the doing of it. A common work of
God, may make men conscionable to do many duties, but nothing but the Spirit
and Grace of Christ, will work up the heart to a conscionablenesse in the doing
of them.

To this conscionablenesse in the performance of Ordinances, would I exhort you
upon this ground, because you draw near to God, have to do with him. And as
in all, so in particular in this Ordinance of the Lords Supper.

1. Because otherwise ye get no good: 1. no good of Grace, no improvement of
Holiness: 2. Nor no good of comfort. Comfort comes not in from the bare doing
of the duty, but from the manner of doing, it is not the issue of conscience to
do, but of conscionablenesse in the doing of them. All the Sermons you have
heard, all the Prayers you have prayed, all the Sacraments you have received,
though done out of conscience, as you say, will not minister one dram of true
comfort to you upon your deathbeds, if your spirits have not been wrought up to
a conscionablenesse in the doing of them.

2. Because otherwise you provoke God; to give him the carcass and outside of
duty, and to withold the life and spirit of duty, is a provocation of God.

3. Because otherwise you will contract much guilt, and bring much evil upon
your own souls. This is sure, that Ordinances used in an unconscionable way, 1.
They give Satan further possession of us. 2. They put much weight to our sin.
3. They set our souls at further distance with God. 4. They ripen us to the
great downfall, the great sin lies among such. 5. They make our conditions more
irrecoverable. When a man comes to be Ordinance-proofe, prayer-proof, Sermon
and Sacrament-proofe, that none of these can enter and work upon him, he is
out-grown the power of Ordinances, that man's condition is very near desperate.

There is nothing makes the condition of the soul more desperate and
unrecoverable, then the use of Ordinances in a formal and unconscionable way,
when a man does harden under means of softning. When a man's soar runs under the
plaster, nay when the plaster increases the soar; when that which should
draw us near, sets us at further distance; this man's condition is dangerous.
Scarce one of many are ever wrought upon: When once a man can hear and pray,
and receive, and yet retain his sin too without disturbance, all this does
not trouble him, no weapon will pierce him; no command, no threatening of the
Word, no power of Ordinances can move him: this man is in great danger to die
in this condition. And the use of Ordinances in a formal way, brings men to
such a condition. As the use of Physic in an ordinary way, does take away the
working of it; so the use of Ordinances in a formal way, does take off the
edge, and blunt the power of working on the spirit.

Well then, let me exhort you not only to be conscionable to use, but to a
conscionablenesse in the use of this ordinance. And this lies in two things.

1. That you come with hearts habitually disposed: which lies also in two
things:

1. To be brought out of a state of sin; 1. the power, 2. practice, 3. love of
all sin: for Sin sets a distance between you and God in ordinances, it pollutes
an Ordinance, it indisposeth you for acceptance in it.

2. To be brought into a state of grace, to have your natures changed, not
partially, but universally and spiritually, not only to have new practices, but
new princples. Old things past away, and all things become new.

2. This conscionablenes in the use of Ordinances, it lies in this, That you
come with hearts actually disposed, and that consists in two things, 1.
Examination. 2. Excitation.
But of these I shall have occasion to speak larger in the following discourse.

There is yet another branch of the exhortation.

If so be that whoever has to do with any Ordinance of God, has to do with
God in it; Oh then when ever you go to have to do with any Ordinance, be sure
you take Christ with you. There is a necessity of this, 1. In regard of
Admission. 2. In regard of Assistance. 3. In regard of Acceptance.


1. In regard of Admission, God is a consuming fire, and we are but dried
stubble, there is no approaching of him but in Christ, in whom we may have
access with boldness to the throne of grace; God will not look pleasingly on
you, if you come without Christ, here is no throne of grace without him;
without Christ it is rather a Bar or Tribunal of justice, then a Throne of
Grace. Ephesians. 12. Heb. 14.14, 16. Heb. 10.12.23.
It is Christ who makes that which was a Bar of justice, a Bench of mercy.
In him we have admission. You go upon this Ordinance now, but go not in the
strength of your preparations, but in the strength of Christ. Say, Lord I come
alone in the Merits of Christ, to partake of the Merits of the Lord Jesus. I
come in the blood of Christ, to partake of the blood of the Lord Jesus. I have
indevoured to prepare and fit my self through thy grace, but I look not for
admission through my preparations, but through the blood and mediation of
Christ.

2. There is a necessity of Christ in regard of Assistance: You go upon
Ordinances, but you have no strength to do them without Christ, who is
sufficient for these things? you might as well be set to move Mountains, as to
undertake Ordinances, without the strength of Christ, without me you can do
nothing, says Christ, Joh. 15. without Union with him, without Communion with
him: from him we must have both opeperating and cooperating strength, both
inherent and adsistent strength, otherwise though you have grace, yet you will
not be able to perform any work, nor exercise your own graces. It is he
that must work all our works in us, and for us; the inherent work of grace
within us, Quoda me requiris ipse donasti prius. Chrysostom.
and the required works of duty for us. And blessed be that God, who has given
to us what he requires of us, and has not only made Precepts promises, but
made promises, performances.

3. There is a necessity of Christ in regard of acceptance. Our works, Nihil ab
homine exit quamvis perfecto quod non sit aliquae macula inquinatum. Calvin.
they are not only impotent, but impure too, as they come from us. It is Christ
that must put validity to them, and Christ that must put his own odours to
them; Christ must put both his spirit and Meritu^ meum miseratio Domini, non
sum plane meriti inops quandiu non fuerit il^e inops miserationum. Domine
meminero justitiae tuae solius, ipsa enim est and mea, etc. Calv. Instit. lib.
3. c. 120. Sect. 3.
merit to them, his Grace to work them, and his blood to own them; what ever
comes from his Spirit, is presented through his Spirit.

And here is a great comfort; thou looks over thy performances, and can not
see, how ever God can accept them: so much deadness, so little life, so much
coldness; God looks not on the works of the Saints, In foro stricti juris but
in foro Evangelii. Ephesians. 1.6.
But God looks upon them not as thine, but as Christ's, in whom not only our
persons, but our performances are accepted. Christ gives us his Spirit, and
Christ is willing to own what we present by his Spirit, and God is willing to
own what ever is presented to him by his Son.

Well then, thou have to do with the Ordinances of God, by these thou draws
near to God; but would you be admitted into the presence of God? would you have
God to hold out a golden Scepter to you? would you have grace and assistance to
perform the work? would you have acceptance when the work is done? Oh get
Christ to go along with you! And thus much for the first Doctrine, which is an
introduction to the 2d.

That they who draw near to God in any ordinance,

In prosecution of which, we shall do three things: we will show,

1. What it is to sanctify God in an Ordinance.

2. How we must sanctify God in an Ordinance.

3. Why we must sanctify God in an ordinance. And so to application.

1. What it is to sanctify God in an Ordinance.

To the sanctifying of God in an Ordinance, there is something required, 1. In
the work. 2. In the workman.


1. The work, and that is, that it be an ordinance, such a one as he himself
has instituted and set up, otherwise we cannot sanctify God in it, no more
then the Papists in their blind devotions and superstitions. These offer
strange fire. As God's Benediction does not accompany any thing further then
it is an Ordinance of his, so our sanctification of God extends no further then
to his own ordinances, which he himself has set up and ordained; in other
things we sanctify him not, we dishonor him.

2. Something required in the workman: To say nothing here of the main
requisite, which is, that he be in Christ: for that we take he be in Christ:
for that we take for granted; and to qualify such a one to this ordinance: and
in such a one there is something required in his head, something in his heart.

1. In his head, and that is, first, that he conceive aright of God: secondly,
and that he conceive aright of the ordinance. 1. That he conceive aright of
God, that he has a right knowledge of God, right conceptions of God in his
Nature, in his Person, in his Atitrbutes, Son. 2. Of his Ordinances, 1. in the
nature of them, 2. the use of them, 3. the fruit and benefit of them.

2. Something in his heart; and that,

First, that he bring holy affections to it; every ordinance of God requires
the affections to be employed about it, and not only affections, but holy
affections, such affections as do arise from a holy heart; there is the spring.
Unsound professors may sometime have some flashings in their devotions, as you
see Herod, who heard John Baptist joyfully; they may have some affections, but:
1. They are not holy affections: 2. Not such as arise from a principle, a
spring within, there is no root: 3. They are not orderly affections, they break
out before knowledge, before faith: 4. They are not constant affections, but
land-flouds, for a time: 5. They are not transforming affections, such as
change the heart; and therefore such affections may be exercised, yet they
leave a man as they found him, and such a man cannot sanctify God in an
Ordinance.

Secondly, there must not only be holy affections, but such as are suitable to
the Ordinance and Work in hand. It is possible to have holy affections, them
stirred up in an ordinance, and yet not sanctify God in it, because these are
not suitable to the Ordinance, Nihil ad rem, nothing to the work in hand; they
suit not with the present ordinance that God has called the soul out upon, as
I could show you at large.

Thirdly, there must not only be holy affections and suitable affections, but
those excited and stirred up. A man may have holy affections, and such as are
suitable to an Ordinance, as the Saints have in the frame of Grace, and yet not
sanctify God in an Ordinance, because not excited and stirred up: 1 Timothy 1.6
(...), signif. ign^m sopitum and ignem cineribus conditum folle aut flatu
suscitare, ut reardescat. Passer.
Stir up the gift of God in thee, says the Apostle to Timothy; that is, excite
and blow up the gifts and graces of God in thee.

When you are to do with God, you must stir up those affections, and graces
which are within you. And this requires a matter of pains; affections are not
ever at hand, nor ever at command; a man has not his heart under lock and key.
And therefore God in mercy considering and respecting our weakness, has
graciously allotted a time of preparation, before he call us forth upon the
performance of an Ordinance, that so we might get our affections up, our hearts
in tune. Once indeed we read, that men were called out upon an ordinance, and
were straightened with time to prepare themselves according to the preparation of
the Sanctuary, as in Hezekiah's time. 2 Chronicles. 30.18.19.
They had habitual preparation, but wanted actual; and in that case, the want
of time, God pardoned it, but it was prayed for, it was sought for, and sought
for earnestly. But we read another time, that God punished the want of this
actual preparation, and stirring up their graces and affections; yea, and
punished it severely, with the weakness, sickness, death of many of the
Corinthians. For this cause many are sick, many are weak, many are fallen
asleep; yet were they habitually prepared; 1 Cor. 11.1.

God takes it for a great dishonor to him, that we should come slightly on so
great a work, to which all the affections we have, and all the affections we
can stir up, are little enough. We had need call in for all the strength of
grace, nay all the succors in Christ, and all the supplies and aids of the
Spirit to the performance of it. By this you may gather what it is to sanctify
God in an Ordinance.

2. How must we sanctify God in an Ordinance?

To sanctify God in an ordinance, there is required something 1. Antecedent. 2.
Co^comitant 3. Subsequent.


1. Something Antecedent, or before. 2. Something in the time. 3. Afterward.
These are generals, which belong to every particular Ordinance, as I could show
you at large. In hearing the Word.


When you come to hear the word, there is something required before, as 1.
Meditation, into what place, into whose presence, about what business we go.
2. Examination of 1. our sins, that here we might have them slain by the sword
of the Spirit in the Ministry of the word. 2. Our graces, that here we might
have them strengthened and nourished by the spiritual food of our souls. 3.
Prayer for the Minister, for the Congregation, our selves, that a blessing may
be upon.

2. In the time is required, 1. Reverence, 2. Attention, 3. Submission of
spirit and humility. 4. Faith.

3. Afterward, Prayer again, which must be the Alpha and Omega, 2. Meditation,
3. fruitfulness, and obedience.

So for Prayer, there is required, Prayer.
1. Before, Meditation, preparation. 2. In the time, faith, fervencie,
humility, (...) Ex radic. (...) Ordinavit, aciem disposuit.
sutablenesse of spirit, enlarged desires. 3. Afterward such a deportment and
demeanor as is suitable to such who call upon God, as to depart from sin, to
apply our hearts to obedience, to expect the answer and return of our Prayers.
Psalm. 5.3. In the morning I will direct my prayer, (...) Ex radic. (...)
Speculando expectavit hinc (...) speculator.
and look up. There are two military words, he would not only pray, but
marshall up his prayers, put them in array; and when he had done, he would be
as a Spy upon a tower, to see whether he prevailed, whether he got the day.

But to pass these, and come to the Ordinance we are to enter upon, the
Sacrament. Sacrament
To sanctify God in which, there is required, 1. something before, 2. something
in the time, and 3. something after.

1. Something before, which may be laid down in these two heads, 1. Habitual,
2. Actual.


1. Habitual preparation, which does consist in the whole frame of grace and
sanctification. It is an ordinance only for such who are sanctified, we are to
have, 1. A saving knowledge of God, of our selves, 2. lively faith, 3. a true
repentance, 4. love, 5. hunger and thirst after Christ: this is a feast, and no
coming without stomach. 6. Thankfulness.

2. Actual preparation, and that consists in the actual stirring up and
exciting of those graces which are in you. There must be a new exciting of
faith, a new exercise of repentance, the latitude and extent whereof is for all
sin, but especially for those sins which you have committed since the last
time you renewed your covenant with God, in this Ordinance. So a stirring up of
our love, affections, our desires, hunger, thirst. This is required before,
which because it is so largely treated upon, Mr. Dike on the Sacrament. Mr.
Downam.
by many learned and godly Divines, I shall purposely wave any further treaty
of it, referring you in this point to what they have so largely written.

Passing this therefore, we fall upon the second, which has not been so
frequently taught.

2. As there is something then required before, viz. Habitual and actual
preparation: so secondly there is something required in the time; and that is
the exercise of Graces, and gracions dispositions. A man may be a sanctified
person, and yet not sanctify God in this Ordinance, if he do not exercise
those Graces, and gracious dispositions which God requires here, and are suitable
to the quality and nature of the Ordinance.

1. Now the first and great grace that here is to be exercised, is Faith. Faith
is the great Grace which gives admission unto this ordinance, and faith is the
great grace that is to be exercised, and to run through the use of it.

Concerning which we shall desire to unfold three things.

1. What act of Faith is here to be exercised.

2. Upon what object we must exercise our Faith here.

3. For what benefits faith must here be exercised.

For the first, viz. what act of Faith is here to be exercised. There are
these two main acts of Faith. 1. An act of Recumbence: 2. An act of
apprehension and application of Christ. Fides potest habere aliquem modum
dubitationis salva fide. Daven. Fideicertitudo importat firmitatem adhaesionis,
non quietationem intellectus. Aquin.
Both these may be exercised here, and to our spiritual benefit.

By the one we go over to Christ, by the other we bring Christ over to us.

The first act of Faith gives us an interest in all the benefits of Christ,
though as yet the soul is not able to bring home to it self the great revenue
of mercy and grace, which Christ has purchased, and the soul has an
interest in. The second act of faith brings it all home. In the former God
makes Christ ours, and we his; in the latter we make him ours. Christ in his
blood and merits, Christ in his grace and Spirit, Christ in all his doings and
sufferings; so far as he is co^municable to poor sinners. Now there is not
much difference between these two acts. The difference is not in the nature
and essence of the grace, both are faith and saving faith; nor in the fruits
and benefits, both give a man union and communion with Christ, etc. But the
difference is in the measures and degrees, in the comforts of it. To the first
there goes a conviction of sin, a manifestation and clearing of the promise, a
persuasion of the truth, fullness, freeness, sutablenesse, and goodness of
the promise. And upon all this here is a rolling, a resting upon Christ. And
the latter is but a further degree, a bringing over or home all this to its own
self. In the former act the soul has communion with all the benefits of
Christ. It Is such an act of Faith, as gives a soul union with the person, and
that cannot be without communion with the privileges and benefits. In this
latter there is but a clearer apprehension of it. In the first we go over to
Christ: in the latter we bring over Christ to us. In the former we are
apprehended of Christ, Phil. 3.12.
in the latter we apprehend Christ.

Now, to the Answer, what act of faith is here to be exercised: unto which I
say, that that act of faith which does apprehend and apply Christ, is most
suitable to this ordinance of the Sacrament; hence is this called a taking of
Christ, a receiving of Christ, a feeding upon Christ, eating his flesh, and
drinking his blood; all which show this act is most suitable to the ordinance.

Here we have an offer of Christ, and this act is most suitable to take him as
offered. And the more strength we have to apply and bring Christ home, the
more we feed on him, the more we are nourished, and built up.

But though this act of faith is most suitable to the ordinance, yet we shut
not out the other from the comfort and benefit of it. That which gives the soul
union with Christ, does give it communion with all the benefits of Christ.
Christ and his benefits go together. Yet I could wish that every one who has
done this first act of faith, would work it up one degree higher, to apprehend
and apply Christ in the promises of grace. Seeing according to the measure of
your faith, and feeding upon Christ; such is the measure of the benefit by
Christ here. But however, be not discouraged, such as are weak in faith will
Christ receive. Romans 14.1.
If he have a care that others shall not reject them for their weakness, but
bid them to receive them, much more will he himself receive them; and whom he
will receive shall receive him.

If therefore thou art weak in applying faith, and thou cannot bring Christ
over to thee, go thou over to Christ; if thou cannot fully apprehend him, let
him apprehend thee, Phil. 3.12.
cast thy self into his arms; In languida fide magis nos apprehendimur a
^hristo, quam quod nos ipsum appr^hendamus. Chem.
by this act set thy seal to Gods truth, and expect here in this ordinance that
God should put his Seal to thy heart by assuring. So much for the first, what
act of faith is here to be exercised. We come to the second.

2. Upon what Object must the act of faith be terminated here? You must know
there are many objects of faith in general; as God himself in the unity of
Essence, and trinity of Persons, the Word of God, the Promises of God. But
there is but one object of Justifying faith, and that is Christ, Godman, Act.
10.43 Genesis 3.15.
the Mediator. To him give all the Prophets witness, that who ever believes in
him, shall receive remission of sins. This is the object upon which the faith
of Adam was terminated, Genesis 3.15.
the seed of the woman, and thereby was justified, and had his recovery after
the fall. This is that object upon which the faith of Abraham, who was the
Father of the faithful, was terminated, who saw his day and rejoiced; it was
not the believing of the Promise of seed, but in the promised seed. To him also
did the eyes of the faithful look under the law, through the shadows and
sacrifices, and were justified by Christ to be, as we are now by Christ
exhibited.

And upon him must our faith be terminated, not only in the first act of faith
for justification, but also in the exercise of it in this ordinance for the
further assurance of justification, and increase of sanctification.

And let it not seem strange to you, we are not so much to deal with a
promise here as with the thing promised, nor to feed on a promise as upon
Christ himself by faith, to eat his flesh and drink his blood, Matthew. 26.26.
Corpus Christiest pabulum fidei. Joh. 6.15.
This is my body, etc. Christ is the meat here for the hand of faith to
receive, the mouth of faith to eat, as he faith, My flesh is meat indeed, and
my blood is drink indeed. You may make use of the promises here, the Sacrament
is the seal to every promise in the covenant. But the matter of the Sacrament
indeed, and that whereon we are chiefly to feed, is Christ himself. Christ as
he is laid out unto us in his death and sufferings, whereon feeding, we get
spiritual nourishment for grace, and death of sin. The blood of Christ, like
the waters appointed for the trial of jealousy, has a double property, to
kill and to make fruitful; to kill our sins, and make our graces grow; to
rot our sins, and ripen our grace.

Well then, remember that the great dish thou feedst on at this Feast, be
Christ himself. Christo sublato nihil restat in sacramentis, praeter
inanespectaculum. Dav. in col.
Thou can not feed upon a promise, until thou first feed upon Christ; he
does not only give us title and interest in them, but appetite to them. If
thou feed on him, thy stomach will be quicker to feed on them; nay, if thou
feed on him, Christus est substantia sacramentorum; and ejus operatio est ipsa
vita sacramentorum.
thou feedest on all the promises, and have an interest in all the good of
them, the sweet of all the promises is tasted in Christ. All the promises are
folded up in Christ, and thou can not feed on him, but thou feedest on all,
and have the blessing of every one in particular. The promises of
justification, sanctification, subduing of corruptions, increase of grace,
upholding in grace, interest in glory, they are all of them folded up in
Christ, he is all.

The promise does not, but Christ does justify, Christ does sanctify; you get
nothing from the promise separate from Christ, but all the good of the promise
comes in by Christ, and therefore here terminate your faith. And so much for
the second, upon what object we must terminate our Faith. We come to the third.

For what benefit must Faith here be exercised? Partic. 3.


First, faith must not be here acted for your justification; it is required
you should be justified persons, have your sins forgiven before you come
hither. He that comes hither under the guilt of sin, goes away with more guilt,
and his former guilt is doubled and confirmed on him. So that for this benefit
faith is not to be acted, as we shall show hereafter.

Secondly, faith must not be here acted for Regeneration; It is required a man
should be borne again, be in the state of grace, sanctified, before he come
hither. Here is the multiplying of grace, but no begetting of grace. As in the
miracle of loaves, Mat. 14.19.
there was no new bread created, but a multiplying of the bread they had: So
here is no giving of grace where there is none, but a multiplying of grace
where it is: where grace is, there it is increased, but it is not here
begotten. A man may come to the Word though he be graceless, Romans 10.14.
because the Word is an Ordinance set up for the gathering of men, and
begetting souls to Christ: but none are to come to the Sacrament, but such as
are begotten anew; the Sacrament is not the Font, it is not the place where men
are born, but the table where men are nourished; it is not the seed of the new
birth, but the meat of the new born, we must be born before we eat, bred before
fed, begotten before nourished. If we come graceless hither, we shall go
graceless away, and worse then we came. In particular then:

Faith must here be exercised for the further assurance of our justification.
Fides non toll it, sed vincit omnem dubibitationem. Dav.
there is no such assurance in the world as to expel all doubts and fears,
though to overcome them; but though they may be suspended in their actings for
a time, and well subdued and conquered, yet they are not altogether expelled;
if they were, then were there no need of the Sacrament for this end, to
confirm and strengthen faith, Fides potest habere aliquem modum dubitationis
salva fide.
and so one of the ends wherefore God set up this Ordinance, were in vain to
that man. But I say there is no man so sure, but may be surer: there are
degrees of assurance as well as faith, and so may we grow up in assurance as
well as faith. And now for the further assurance of our justification, God to
the covenant of grace and mercy, wherein he promised the free pardon of sin,
has annexed the Seal of the covenant, whereby we may be more assured.

Indeed here is no need of this in respect of God, our justification is sure
with him, his intention is as good as his promise, his promise as his oath, his
oath as his seal. But it was God's goodness to us, pitying the weakness of
our faith; he stooped below himself, and was not only content to give us his
promise, but to confirm it with his oath, the great seal of Heaven, and to all
this to afford his Sacraments, to seal up all unto us, Heb. 18.19.
that we might have strong assurance and consolation, Heb. 6.18. It was to this
end, to assure us, who have such unbeleeving hearts, that God gave word upon
word, promise upon promise, oath to oath, seal to seal, heaping mountain upon
mountain, and all to confirm our staggering hearts. That we might be strong in
him, when weak in our selves; faithful in him, when fearful in our selves;
steadfast in him, when we stagger in our selves.

And how should we exercise faith here, and go doubting away? How shall we go
away trembling after all this confirmation? An oath among men is the end of all
controversy, the concluding of all difference and disputes; and shall not
God's oath prevail thus much with you? Why do you suffer return of fears and
doubts, after such a seal? Woe be to us, Vae nobis si nec juranti Deo
credimus. Aug.
if we will not believe God, no not upon his oath. Do thou desire better
security? Thou shall never have it, thou can not. If you would come up to
God, and take his security, how could you doubt?

2. A second benefit for the compassing of which faith must be exercised, etc.
is the increase of our graces, or perfecting of our sanctification. My
brethren, we are weak in grace; you know how much infidelity, and how little
faith; how much enmity, how little love; how much obstinacy, how little
pliable conformity to his will; what a deal of formality, how little power;
what hardness of heart, how little brokennesse of spirit for sin? etc. And
being weak in grace, there is a necessity that these graces should be
nourished. As there is necessity of daily bread, for the nourishing and
upholding of our bodies; so there is necessity of spiritual food for the
nourishing of grace in our souls. And as there is necessity of our
nourishment, so is there necessity our nourishment should come from Christ, he
is the staff of nourishment. Eo modo quo generamur, nutrimur.
As in natural life the same way we are begotten, the same way we are
nourished: so in spiritual life, Christ he is the Breeder, and so he is the
Feeder of grace in us; he is the Begetter, and he is the Nourisher. From Christ
we have our graces, he is the fountain from whose fullness we receive grace
for grace in our regeneration; and he is the nourishment of whose fullness we
receive Gratiam gratiae accumulatam.
grace to grace in our sanctification. Hence he is called the Bread of life,
not only because he begets life in dead men, but because he nourishes and
maintains life in living men. He is panis spiritualis, spiritual bread, in
the word to beget life; and panis Sacramentalis, bread in the Sacrament, or
Sacramental bread, to nourish and to maintain life begotten; and hereafter he
shall be panis aeternalis, our daily bread in heaven, to preserve us in
holiness with happiness to all eternity. And as there is a necessity of
nourishment, and nourishment by Christ; so Christ for this end, that we might
be nourished, has set up this ordinance of the Sacrament, for the nourishment
of the Saints in grace, for the strengthening our faith, to which it has a
proper influence, being the seal of the covenant, and for the increasing our
sorrow and repentance, unto which it has the like influence, being the
representation of Christ wounded, broken, bleeding for sin; who looks on
Christ bleeding, but his heart must bleed? etc. And so of the rest.

Christ is a full fountain, and unwilling to be a sealed fountain to you;
Gratia derivantur a Christo.

1. Efficatia operationis.

2. Beneficio intercessionis.

3. Merito passionis.

4. Virtute applicationis.


he is a treasury of grace, and unwilling to be locked up, and therefore has
been so gracious, as to set up an ordinance, not only to be a seal, but an
instrument or conduit-pipe to convey grace to us from him, the Fountain of all
grace; which nourishment he does convey unto us by virtue of our union and
communion with him, and application of him to us in these ordinances; which
though they be all secret ways of conveyance of nourishment, and under ground,
that the world cannot see, yet there is real nourishment brought down to the
soul, whereby the soul goes home in a better frame, faith more increased,
affections more enlarged, our love more inflamed, our desires more quickened,
and yet more satisfied.

Quest. But I know you will ask of me, how faith is here to be exercised, for
the drawing down of life and nourishment from Christ in this ordinance.

Answ. For the answer of which in brief:

1. Faith looks upon Christ as the treasury and common stock of grace, in whom
dwells all fullness, Joh. 1.14.16. Joh. 3.34. Col. 1.19. Col. 2.3.9.
all our fulness; faith looks on him as the universal principle of life and
root of holiness. God gave not him the Spirit in measure.

2. Faith casts its eye on the promise for the conveyance of grace from him,
Ille est canalis gratiae; and ab illo nobis omnes rivuli derivantur. Daven.
it sees a promise for derivation of grace from him to us: Faith works, virtute
promissi: by virtue of the promise; where there is no promise, there can be no
faith, and therefore faith discovers, that there may be communion and
participation with this fullness; there are such promises made that of his
fullness we shall receive grace for grace, John 1.16. and Christ is made unto us
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. and he came that we might
have life, and have it in abundance; Joh. 10.10.

3. Sacramenta ex similitudine repraesentant ex institutione significant, ex
virtute Christi sanctificant, Aquin.
Faith looks upon this ordinance as an Instrument, a means which God has set
up for the conveying of life and nourishment from Christ. Though God can do it
without, yet in God's ordinary way, Ordinances are the means of the conveying
of life from him to us.

4. Now then, faith being steeled by such considerations as these, that there
is a fullness in Christ, that there is a promise of this fulness to be made over
to us, and that the Sacrament is an Ordinance whereby God as by an Instrument
will convey of this fullness of Christ to a poor soul: faith goes over to
Christ, and by virtue of the Promise, applying and feeding upon Christ, draws
down further life and nourishment from him to the soul: As one said of the tree
of Christ's ascension, though the fruit were high, and above our reach, yet if
we touch him by the hand of faith, and tongue of prayer, all will fall down
upon us: So here, if we can but touch him with the hand of faith, though a
palsy hand, though a weak and trembling hand; if we can but go to him with a
praying heart, Christ can withold nothing from us.

And after this manner does faith form a Prayer to him: Lord, thou knows I am
weak in grace, thou see my faith is feeble, my love cold, my desires faint,
my obedience small; but thou have all fullness of grace; thou art the Fountain,
and this Fountain is opened here; thou art the Treasury, and this Treasury is
here unlocked. Those graces I have, though weak, thou begatst them, and wilt
not thou now nourish them? From thee I had the being of grace, and from thee I
must have the nourishing. Thou have set up this Ordinance as a means to convey
grace, and thou have promised to remember them that are in thy way, Isa. 64.5.
therefore help, -- etc. Besides, may faith say, Lord, thou have been pleased
to implant me into Christ, and shall I die for want of nourishment? thou have
made me a member of Christ, and shall I decay and wither for want of influence?
Oh! never let it be said, that a branch in Christ shall wither and decay for
want of nourishment, when there is so much in the root; let it never be said,
that a member of Christ should wither and die for want of influence and life,
seeing there is so much in the Head. Thou came, Joh. 10.10
that I might have life; yea, and have it in abundance; why Lord, my graces are
weak, here are dying affections, dying dispositions, dying graces, Oh! come
down before I dye, strengthen the things that are ready to dye in me. Rev. 3.2.
Thou have raised me from the death of sin, let me not again drop into the same
grave; thou have wrought graces in me, let them not decay for want of life,
when such abundance in thee.

Thus does Christ, formed in the heart, cry out for Christ nourishing in the
Sacrament. The work of grace is called a forming of Christ in the soul, Gal.
4.9.
and Christ does but nourish and feed himself, his own graces here. Christ in
the Sacrament does nourish Christ begotten in the heart by the Word. And the
soul feeding upon Christ by faith, is further changed into his Image. In our
corporal feeding, the meat is changed into the nature of the eater, but in our
spiritual feeding, the eater is changed into the nature of the meat eaten, the
Believer into the nature of Christ, 1 Cor. 3.18. While beholding him as in a
glass, we are also changed into his Image. -- Thus does faith feed upon Christ,
and draw down nourishment for the strength of every grace in us, etc. And
according to the measure of faith's feeding, such is the proportion and measure
of nourishment conveyed. As the stomach sends down nourishment to all parts,
from the supply of food, which it has fed on: Or, as the Liver having drawn
down and made blood from the nourishment in the stomach, diffuseth and
spreads abroad, and sends to every part some: So Faith, having fed upon
Christ, does here send down nourishment to all the graces: or, as in a Feast,
you send portions to your poor brethren; so Faith having feasted it self on
Christ, sends down portions to her sister-graces. All our graces have a
dependence on Faith, and Faith on Christ; our Graces depend on Faith as a
Mediator to our Mediator: as that grace which has immediately to do with
Christ, from whence it fetches supply and provision for all the rest. That is
the second benefit faith is here to be acted for.

3. The third benefit that Faith is here to be exercised on Christ for, is the
further subduing and conquering of our corruptions. Faith has a double work to
do; It works in Heaven, and it works in Earth: As it works in Heaven for the
justification of a sin, so it works in earth for the mortification of sin; and
here in this Ordinance is faith acted on Christ for the further killing of sin.
Faith has a special art in going over to Christ, and fetching from him such
help as is suitable to the necessities of the soul. If we be weak in Graces,
Faith can go over to Christ for the strengthening of them. If corruptions be
strong, Faith can go over to Christ for the subduing, and conquering of them.
And by making use of the merit, power, promise, Spirit of Christ, gets strength
from him for the subduing of unruly lusts, untamed corruptions. Why, will Faith
say, Lord, thou have promised to subdue my corruptions, and thou art able to
subdue all to thy self, Oh! therefore set thy power against the power of my
lusts. These sons of Zerviah are too strong for me, but not for thee: I am
burdened with a dead heart, a hard heart, unbelieving heart, etc. But never
was there heart so hard, but thou can break it; never heart so dead, but thou
can quicken it. There is life enough in thee for all the sons and daughters
of death in the world, oh! that therefore thou would quicken me, that thou
would break me -- Thus does Faith make use of Christ here for the subduing
of corruptions.

And let me tell you, there is a special art, dexterity and skill which faith
has, whereby it forms such conceptions of Christ, as are ever suitable to the
present necessity of the soul, whereby it gets more speedy relief.

1. If there be a return of guilt upon the soul, and burden upon the
conscience. Faith looks upon Christ in blood, Christ a Priest, a Sacrifice for
sin.

2. If the soul labor under ignorance, Faith looks upon him as the great
Prophet of the Church; and says, Lord, thou have taken upon thee to be the
great Prophet of the Church, Joh. 6.45. Isa. 14.13. Jer. 31.34.
thou have promised we shall be all taught of God. Oh! therefore teach me,
instruct me, etc. It is not so suitable to look upon Christ as a Priest, when we
desire he should do the work of a Prophet.

3. If we be weak in grace, faith looks upon him as the universal fountain and
principle of grace, one who has all fullness in him, able to fill a world of
hearts with grace, though they were never so barren or empty; And so goes over
to him for strengthening, etc.

4. Mal. 3.2.
If we labor under the pollution of sin, faith looks upon Christ as a refiner,
a purifier, a purger of his people from sin. As one who came not only to be a
Redeemer, but a refiner; not only a Savior, Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 2.14.
but a sanctifier of his people, Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 2.14.

5, And so, if corruptions be strong, faith looks upon him as a King, who is
able to subdue and conquer unruly affections, and to bring every thing into
subjection to himself.

God has not only furnished Christ with fullness of supply to answer every need
of the soul, but God has given to Christ diversity of titles, that we might
conceive of him not only as a full, but as a suitable good to every necessity of
the soul. And God, having thus diversely represented Christ to our
understandings, as a Prophet, a Priest, a King, a Refiner, etc. Faith does form
such conceptions of Christ, as are most suitable to the present necessity of the
soul.

4. A fourth benefit for which Faith may be exercised in this Ordinance, is for
deliverance out of temptations. Thou have been long assaulted by Satan; Vnus
filius sine peccato, nullus sine tentatatione. 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 12.9. Heb.
2.18. Romans 16.20.
thou have felt the blows and buffets of Satan many years; God has not only
promised to support thee and succor thee in this condition, but God has
promised to deliver thee out of this condition Romans 16.20. The God of peace
shall tread down Satan under your feet shortly. Why now exercise faith to sue
out these promises God has made; go over to Christ, not only for strength and
support in the condition, but for victory and deliverance out of it. These
days, they are not only God's sealing, but God's performing days: God does
not only here put his seal to every Promise folded up in the covenant, but he
is ready here to make performance of the things he has promised. And therefore
go gather a catalogue of promises, which suits with thy condition, spread them
before God, and here come sue them out in this Ordinance.

Thus you see the first grace which is to be exercised in this ordinance,
namely Faith. And I have showed you, 1. what Act, 2. upon what Object, 3. for
what benefits faith is here to be exercised. I have named four, but here is
not all; the Sacrament is the Seal of the whole covenant, and what ever
particular benefits are folded up in the great draught and covenant of God,
here you may exercise faith for the compassing and obtaining of them. Where
ever there is a promise in the Word, there is work for faith to sue it out in
this ordinance, which is the seal to all, etc.

By the way then, this may discover to us, where the fault is, when we return
home, our faith never the more strengthened, our hearts never the more warmed,
our graces never the more nourished, our corruptions never the more weakened. It
is a shrewd sign faith did not play its part in the mount. It is great
suspicion that your faith did succumbere in conatu, did fail and sink in the
encounter. Faith was entrusted in this imploiment to go over to Christ for
these benefits, and thy faith did fail in the undertaking; therefore God
suspends the bestowing of these benefits, because thou suspendest thy faith.

A man may halt after his striving with God, and yet overcome, as Jacob did;
but when a man's spirit does halt in striving with God, when we do not strive
fully with God, there is little hope of prevailing. Well then, if thou see not
the fruit and benefit thou expected to come into thy soul in the use of this
Ordinance, charge thy faith with it, and bewail the weakness of it: and for
the future put it to its burden, let it have its full and perfect work, and
thou will then find the comfort and fruit of it. Never did faith touch Christ
in any Ordinance, but virtue came from him. But so much for the first Grace --

2. 2d Grace to be exercised.
A second grace which is here to be exercised in the use of this Ordinance, and
requisite to the sanctification of God in it, is Repentance.

The Sacraments they are the crucifixes of Christ, in which Christ is
represented as crucified afresh before our eyes: the bread broken does preach
unto us the breaking of Christ: The wine powered forth does preach unto us the
Blood of Christ poured forth for our sins. And who is it that can with the
eye of faith, look upon a broken Christ, but with a broken heart? a wounded
Christ, but with a wounded spirit? a bleeding Christ but with a bleeding soul?
God has made in nature the same organ for seeing and weeping: And in grace he
who sees clearly, weeps thoroughly, Lam. 3.5. The eye will affect the heart.

The Passover under the Law was to be eaten with bitter herbs: So Christ, the
true Passover, is here to be eaten with bitterness of soul: as it was
prophesied; They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and shall lament, and
mourn; first seeing, and then weeping, etc. Zach. 12.10.

There is a twofold mourning, 1. Historical; 2. Spiritual. 1. Historical
mourning; there is a natural tenderness in men and women, whereby their
hearts do yearn and melt to hear the relation, or behold the sight of some
sad story. Such a one as Augustine confesses he had when he read the sad story
of Dido: and yet his heart was hard, he could not mourn for sin. Or such a one
as they had, whom Christ blamed in the Gospel, who lamented the cruel usage of
Christ out of natural compassion only; to whom he says, O daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me. Homini non est necessarium ut Christu^ in ipsius
passione deploret, sed magis ut seipsum in Christo.
Of this the Father speaks, It is not necessary you lament his passion, so much
as your sins, which have caused his passion. There is a kind of natural
tenderness in men and women, wihch yet is often joined with hardness of heart
for sin. As an Historical faith, with spiritual unbelief, and an Historical
love, with spiritual enmity; so a natural tenderness, with spiritual
hardness of heart for sin.

2. There is a spiritual mourning, which arises from spiritual grounds and
causes, and tends to spiritual ends. A sorrow which is caused by faith,
looking upon heart-melting promises, or taking up heartbreaking
considerations, or beholding a heart-softning object, by which Faith does draw
waters out of the fountains of the soul for sin, as you have it, 1 Samuel 7.6.
they drew water (as out of a well) and poured it forth before the Lord. And
this is that sorrow which is here to be exercised, which will melt and mellow
the heart, and cause it to be more fruitful in obedience. Never does the
garden of graces better grow, then after such a shower of repentant tears. And
therefore does God preserve these springs in the soul, to water the seeds of
grace, and make us more fruitful, which it surely does when they are
Sun-shine-showres, such showers wherein the Sun appears, Christ is not hid
from the eye of faith.

And, my brethren, here are many things in this ordinance, which if but looked
upon with the eye of faith, will open all the springs of sorrow in the soul,
and call forth all the waters in him. Bellarnine he lays down twelve
considerations to provoke sorrow, as the miseries of mankind by nature, the sad
condition of the souls in Purgatory, and such like stuff. But we need not be
beholding to him for such considerations as these, to occasion mourning. Here
is enough in the Sacrament presented to the eye of faith, to open all the
Springs thou have, and if thou had a fountain of tears, to spend them all for
sin. We will name some particulars here which draw out mournings.

1. Here is a discovery of the love and sweetness of God, in giving his Son to
die for us. Joh. 3.16.
So God loved the world, etc. enough to cause us to mourn that ever we
offended. Oh that God should be more tender to us then to his own Son, not
spare his Son that he might spare us, give him to die, that we might live,
pour the curse upon him, that the blessing might be poured on us! Quis
temperet a lachrymis?
O how should this affect us! Who can think of this, and withold from tears?

2. Here is presented to us the sufferings and breakings of Christ, enough to
break our hardest hearts. 1. The sufferings of Christ, in se, in themselves, as
those upon his body; what breakings? what woundings? what scourgings? what
crownings, piercings, did he endure in his body? and those in his soul: What
conflicts and struglings did he undergo with the wrath of God, the terrors of
death, the powers of darkness? Oh what weight, what burden, what wrath did he
undergo, when his soul was heavy unto death? beset with terrors, as the word
signifies, when he drank that bitter cup, (...) Vndequaque tristis, valde
tristis, Passor. Supra modum dolens Scap. Obsitus terroribus, Arist.
that cup mingled with curses, which if Man or Angel had but sipt of, it would
have sunk them into hell; Nay, it made him, who was God as well as man,
sanctified by the Spirit, supported with the Deity, comforted by Angels, sweat
such a sweat as never man sweat; drops, clods of blood, (...) tanquam grumi
sanguinis.
as the word implies.

2. Consider them in Causa, as the meriting cause of all our good, the
procurers of all our peace, salvation, etc.

He was wounded, that we might be healed; scourged, that we might be solaced;
drunk the cup of wrath, a bitter cup, to procure all our sweet draughts: He was
slain, says Daniel, (...). Dan. 9.26.
but not for himself; he was wounded for our transgressions, broken for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes are
we healed, Isa. 53.5, 8.

3. Consider them as effectus peccati, as the effects of our sin, as those
things our sins brought upon him, Solvere gelicidium.
and needs must this melt and thaw our Icie and stony hearts. Oh, will the soul
say! it has been I who have been the traitor, the murderer, my sins which
have been bloody instruments to slay the Lord of glory. I have sinned, Ezekiel. 18.
thou suffered; 'twas I that did eat the sour grapes, yet thy teeth were set
on edge; I have been thy death, yet thy death has given me life; I have
wounded thee, yet thou have healed me; yea, and even out of that wound my sins
made, thou sent a plaster to heal me. This consideration must needs fill the
heart with sorrow, Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have
pierced, and how shall this sight affect them? why, it follows, they shall
mourn, and be in bitterness of soul, as one in bitterness for their firstborn.

They say, if one man kill another, and you bring the murderer into the place,
where the slain person lies, the dead will bleed afresh: We are the murderers
of Christ, and we come here to an Ordinance where Christ is represented in his
blood, as broken and wounded for our sins. O! that our hearts might bleed! as
he bleeds afresh to us; so that we might bleed a fresh to him. A Prince will
weep himself when the Page is whipped for him: but how should the Page mourn
when the Prince is scourged for him? My brethren, there is infinite more
disproportion between Christ and us, then between the Prince and the Page, the
Lord and the slave. And how can we then look upon him as wounded, scourged,
pierced, for us, and not be affected with, afflicted for our sin, the cause of
it. Bernard says, Sivis ipsum cognoscere, sicut se fregit, ita te frange.
If thou would be conformable to Christ (in the Sacrament) as thou beholdest a
broken and a bleeding Christ, so labor to behold him with a broken bleeding
heart. Look on him in this Ordinance, as Mary looked upon him on the Cross,
when Simeon's Prophecy was fulfilled, that a sword should pass through her
soul; Luke 2.35. for then indeed did a sword pass through her soul, when she
saw him pierced on the cross: so when you see him pierced and broken in the
Sacrament, which is the lively representation of Christ broken, Oh, that then
it might be as a spear to our hearts! as a sword to our spirits, that we by our
sins have wounded and pierced him!

This is the second grace to be exercised in this Ordinance. And beside these
two, there are many more to be exercised here, viz. Our love to God, our
hungring and thirsting after Christ. There is that in Christ represented to the
eye of faith in this Sacrament, that calls out for all the affections,
dispositions, and desires in you; You cannot see Christ here, but it will make
every grace within you stir, every disposition within you to move, every wheel
go. Who can see him but love him, who is so exceeding lovely? Who can see him
but prize him, who is so exceeding precious? Who can see him but desire him,
who is so exceeding desirable? Who can see him but delight in him, who is the
joy and delight of the soul? You cannot possibly see him here, but all the
powers of the soul will be up. 1. Your judgments to prize him, your wills to
choose him, and make a new match with him; your affections to love him, embrace
him, delight in him. And the clearer your sight is here of Christ by faith, the
more will your hearts be stirred, your spirits moved. Men that sit here as logs
and lumps of clay never stirred, never taken up, they see not Christ, they see
no higher then the table, the Bread and Wine, and therefore dead and senseless.
Oh! but if if one crevise of your hearts were opened, to let in but one beam,
one glimpse of Christ, it would set you all on a burning heavenly fire, this
would warm you indeed. But besides these graces to be exercised, there is
required some demeanours in the soul in this Ordinance, if we would sanctify
God in it.

1. An humble and holy reverence, which is the fruit of that dread and fear of
God which is in the heart. There is abundance of lightness, looseness and
vanity in the spirits of men by nature. And the Majesty and dread of that great
God, with whom we have to do in this Ordinance, must consolidate, and make our
spirits weighty in these great Ordinances. The Sacrament is called an
Eucharist, (...) grata beneficiorum recordatio.
it is a gratulatory service, and God is fearful in praises, Exodus 15.11.
which has special respect to the affection wherewith you are to praise him.

2. There is required a discharge and dismission of all worldly thoughts and
businesses. When Abraham went up to the Mount to sacrifice, he left his
servants in the valley. Thou art now to go up to the mount, where God appears.
Oh! leave all your servile affections, your worldly thoughts in the valley. And
if any enter, do as Abraham did by the Birds that would have eaten up his
sacrifice, chase them away; do by them as you do by straggling beggars, give
them their pass, and send them away.

In the Temple, though there was so much flesh for sacrifice, yet there was not
one Fly appeared stirring; oh that it might be so with us this day! that not
one thought might arise upon our hearts, unsuitable to the place and work in
hand. It is a thing unbefitting these great employments, to have our hearts and
thoughts taken up with other businesses; what have you to do here with your
shops, your bags, your chests? What have you here to do with things of this
world? Quid proficit si meditationes tuae in lege Dei sint? and ipsae in se
ipsis sine lege sint. Bern. in Cant.


Oh make not this place an Exchange, a Shop for merchandise, men are not able
to do business in a crowd, nor you so great a business as this in a crowd of
thoughts. But this is the misery, you are servants and slaves to the world at
other times, and therefore the world will master you now. If you pass over your
hearts to the service of the world at other times, the world will make you
serve it now. Because you have not spiritual hearts in your temporal
employments, therefore have you carnal hearts in your spiritual employments.
The less of the Sabbath in the week, the more you shall find of the week in
the Sabbath. The less spiritual you are in affairs of earth, the more carnal
you will be in the employments of Heaven. This is certain, if the world once
take your heart, it will take your head also. I say, if ever the world leaven
your hearts, it will also poison your heads; it is a leaven diffuseth it self
through the whole man. And therefore as Christ said of the leaven of the
Pharisees, Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, h. e. hypocrisy: (for if
once the heart be leavened with that, it will sour the head: if the Principles
are unsound, then are the purposes also, and performances too, etc.) So I say
here, beware of the leaven of worldly-mindednesse, if ever you would sanctify
God in this ordinance. Beware of that, this will sour the soul, and make all
you do to be carnal and fleshly. I tell you, if you be servants to the world
at other times, the world will command and master you now. Thus much shall
serve for the second general Head, What is required in the time for the
sanctification of this ordinance. We come to the third.

To the sanctifying God in an Ordinance, is required something after. And

That now which is required afterward, is, That you labor to see the fruit of
this ordinance to run down through your lives. Thou exercisedst faith, labor
to see thy heart more established in assurance of pardon. See thy graces more
strengthened, thy corruptions more weakened. I will name only two things which
are to follow the performance of this ordinance, if ever you would sanctify
God in it: 1. Thankfulness, 2. Obedience.


1. Gratiae nullu^ certius signum quam gratiae. Aug.
Thankfulness: Return home now, as thy heart, full of the benefits of the
Lord; so thy heart full of praises to the Lord. Angels employments are most
suitable to Angels food: thou have had Angels food, and let thy heart return
Angels retribution, praise and thanksgiving. If God do but feed your bodies,
there is none, I hope, such beasts, as will not return the retribution of
praises: And will you be slow and backward to it when he has fed your souls?
Shall we bless God for a Crumb, and not for a Christ? Other mercies are but
crumbs in comparison of this rich mercy, and shall our hearts savor them so
much, and not relish these? Divitiae dantur,

1. Bonis, ne putentur mala.

2. Malis, ne putentur bona.

3. Multis, ne putentur magnae.


Other mercies he gives to his enemies, wicked men may run away with the
greatest portion of belly-blessings; but these he only bestows on his
friends: and shall we be unthankful for them? How ever carnal men are most
taken with carnal things; yet sure I am, those who are spiritual, as they are
most apprehensive of spiritual wants; so the greatest layings out of their
spirits in thankfulness, is for spiritual enjoyments. What Is corn and wine,
etc. to this? This is a mercy in which all other mercies are folded up, the
summum genus of mercy, the top-mercy. Quid tibi sufficit, si Christus non
sufficit? Christum habes, ^mnia habes.

Omne bonu^ aut ipse est, aut ab ipso. Aug. de doct. Chri.


God does eminently contain al other comforts, and therefore in the want of all
he can cheer the heart, Hah. 3.7. So Christ does eminently contain all other
mercies, and in the want of all, Christ enjoyed, is exceeding great reward.
Nay, all mercies are not only folded up in him, and entailed to him, but he
sweetens and sanctifies every mercy. Let us then return home as full of the
blessing from on high, so full of praises to the most high. Thankfulness is
the great grace to be exercised in, and thankfulness is the great grace to be
exercised after; and therefore while the present sense of this mercy warmes
your hearts, let the heat of it burst forth into thankfulness toward God; it
is the most suitable service, and the most suitable time to return it. The best
time to have thanfulness in our hearts, is when we can look there, and find
the mercy for which we praise him also. The best time for praises and
thankfulness in our mouths, is when we have the blessing in our hands. Well
then, all you who are right partakers of this Ordinance, summon up your hearts
to return thankfulness to God. And let your thankfulness carry some proportion
with the mercy. The mercy is great, do but measure it in all the dimensions of
it, how high? how deep? how broad a mercy? pardoning, purging mercy, and how
long? even to all eternity; And as the mercy is great, so should be the
praises. (The more a man's apprehensions are enwidened to conceive of the
vastness and greatness of the mercy, the more will the affections be enlarged
to praise him for it. There was never man that did know the preciousness of
Christ, and his own need of him, in respect of pardon, purging, and his own
unworthiness to partake of so glorious a mercy, but had his heart mightily
enlarged to praise God for it. This is that then which God expects at your
hands, after he has filled you with the blessing of Heaven, that you should
return praises to Heaven. Though he does not reap where he does not sow, as
that idle servant charged him; yet where God sowes blessings, he expects to
reap praises. Where there is a flood of mercy, he looks for a stream of
thankfulness. Oh! then let us proportion our returns to our receipts, let us set
up monuments of praise in our hearts and lives for this great mercy; Say with
David, Psalm. 103.
Bless the Lord, o my soul, etc.

2. The second thing required after this Ordinance, is obedience and
fruitfulnes. That now for the time to come, you should apply your hearts to
walk more worthy of God unto all manner of pleasing: 1. That we should have our
hearts further set against sin: 2. That we should have our hearts further
strengthened to service.

1. Get your hearts now further set against sin. Oh! let your souls say, Has
God been so gracious, as to renew and confirm my pardon, and shall I again
dishonor him? Has he wiped off my former scores, and shall I run on afresh
to offend him? Has he taken off my former burden, and cast it on the back of
his dear Son, and shall I again lay more load upon him? Has he spoken peace to
me in his Ordinance, and shall I again return to folly? No, far be it from me.
I have washed my feet, how shall I again defile them? I have put off my coat,
how shall I again put it on? says the Christian soul. Profane men, they do by
their sins, as the Serpent with his poison, lay it aside when they go to drink,
but afterward take it up: Or, as men do with a garment, put it off at night,
but put it on in the morning. And this is fearful, to return with the dog to
the vomit. 2 Pet. 2.22
But God's people cast them away, Isa. 30.22.
as a menstruous rag, never more to have to do with them.

2. Get your hearts further strengthened to service. Here is in this Ordinance
a mutual sealing of Covenants between God and you. As God seals to thee, so
thou seals again to God. God seals to the first part of the Covenant, pardon,
mercy, grace; and thou seals to the second part of it, service, subjection,
obedience: God gives Christ to thee here in this Ordinance, and thou gives thy
self back again to Christ. As there is matter of bounty from God to thee, so
there is matter of duty from thee to God; God here in bounty bestows Christ
upon every humble, broken hearted and believing receiver: They take him, and
re-give themselves back again to him for subjection and obedience. There was
never any soul, to whom God said in this Ordinance, I am thine, whose hearts
did not echo again the same to God, Lord, I am thine. This head is thine to
contrive thy glory, this hand is thine to work for thee, this heart is thine to
love thee, He that says, my beloved is mine, says again, and I am his; Cant.
2.16. Cant. 2.16
Let us then labor to see our hearts further strengthened to service; let this
enable thee to walk:

1. More strongly; The Sacraments are our spiritual baitings and refreshments
which God affords us to strengthen us in our journey to Heaven: They are
spiritual meat and drink to strengthen us in the performance of al spiritual
obedience; such meat as will not only enable a man to work, but to work more
strongly. And it is to be feared, that they who are never the stronger for
service, feed not upon the substance, but upon the shadow, they feed upon the
elements, but never taste of Christ the staff of nourishment; Purum elementum
non est alimentum.
and it is true here, the mere element is no nourishment.

2. More willingly and cheerfully; Then shall we be able to run the ways of
God's Commandments, Psalm. 119.
when God once here inlarges our hearts. It is said of Jacob, that when he had
been refreshed with the presence of God, he plucked up his feet, and went on
cheerfully. So here, when the soul has been refreshed with the presence of
Christ, he will be able to walk more cheerfully in the ways of God. The food
we feed upon is Angels' food, and will enable us to Angels' employments, h. e.
to do our work with an Angels spirit, with all alacrity, cheerfulness, joy and
delight; though not in the same equality, yet in the same quality, Siquid boni
triste feceris, fit de te magis quam a te. Prosper.
though not in the same measure, yet in the same manner. And thus much for the
second general, viz. How we must sanctify God in an Ordinance.

We will now come to the third general, which is the Reasons why, Who ever
have to do with an Ordinance of God, must sanctify God in it.

1. Reason. Because God commands it. God says he will be sanctified; and
God's will is our law. God does not only command the substance, but the
circumstances; not only the matter of worship, but the manner: And though the
matter be good, if the manner of performance be naught, God does not regard it.
You see what he says to the Jews, He that sacrifices, is as he who killed a
man, and he that kills a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's head, and he who
burns incense, as he who blesses an Idol, Isa. Isa. 66.3.
66.3. These seem strange expressions. What, were not these such duties as God
commanded? Does not God command sacrifice? etc. Yes, but because they did them
not in that manner God commanded, therefore were they abominable to him. If
therefore thou gives God the bulk of outward performance, without the spirit of
devotion, thou deals by him as Prometheus by Jupiter, who did eat the flesh,
and present him with nothing but bones, covered over with skin; Or, to use the
Scripture phrase, you compass God with a lie, Hos. 11.12. Hos. 11.12
Thou gives him the shell of outward performance, but not the kernel of inward
devotion: thou gives him a body without a soul; And as the body without the
soul is dead and stinks, so does that service which wants the spirit: As God's
will does command service, so our will and affections must perform service.
Though our will must be no instrument of devising service, yet it must be an
instrument in performing service. Though God will not own will worship in
regard of prescription, yet he will own it in regard of performance, and none
else.

Thus you see God commands it, and therefore, etc. Impu Petram lambunt, sed
inde nec mel, nec oleum sugunt, etc. Ambr. Ser. de coena.


2. Reason. Because otherwise we get no good by this Ordinance, no good of
Comfort, nor none of Grace. If indeed the Sacraments did ex opere operato,
confer Grace; or if that this Sacrament were an Instrument for the begetting of
Grace in graceless hearts, then might you get good, though you came
unpreparedly. The word, it is set up for that end, to be the instrument of
regeneration; and therefore, though you come unpreparedly thither, yet you may
be wrought upon there. Nemo bonus qui non ex malo bonus. Aug.
Many that have come to the Word with purpose to scoff, to taunt, to deride,
nay, to ensnare and accuse, who yet have been wrought on there, and sent away
other men. Were the Sacraments set up for such an end, to beget grace, where
there is no grace, then might you get good, though you come unpreparedly and
unsanctifiedly thither; but as I have told you, it was never set up for such an
end: here its true, habenti dabitur, to him that has shall be given; he that
has grace shall in the exercise improve his graces, but he that comes
graceless hither, goes graceless away, nay, worse then he came, which is the
next Reason.

3. Reason. Because otherwise we get much hurt.

The Ordinances are not idle, but operative, they either work for life, or they
work for death. As Paul said of the Word, it was the savor of life and of
death; so I may say of every Ordinance. There is never a time you come to hear
the Word, but you are set a step nearer heaven or hell: so never a time you
come to receive the Sacraments, etc. The fruit of the tree of Knowledge of good
and evil might be wholesome in it self: yet Adam did eat his death, when he
tasted of it contrary to God's command. So here the Sacrament, though in it
self it be good, yet it becomes the bane and destruction of those souls, who
partake thereof unworthily: As the Ordinances of God are precious things when
God is sanctified in them; so they are costly things, when profaned. Hezekiah
knew this full well, and therefore he prays, Now the good Lord pardon all
those who come to seek the God of their Fathers, though they are not prepared
according to the preparation of the Sanctuary; he saw the danger of the
unsanctified use of Ordinances.

To be short, it will bring upon thee, 1. Corporal hurt; you see this in the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you,
and many are fallen asleep. It was some Epidemicall disease, flagellum
inundans, some overflowing scourge, whereby God swept away many, in all the
quarters of the Church; and will you know what was the ground, what was the
reason of it? The Apostle tells us; that in the beginning, it was for this
cause, viz. the profanation, or unsanctified use of this Ordinance, there was
mors in olla, death in the cup, they partaked of the cup of the Lord
unworthily, and drank their own death in it; the cup of life was become a cup
of death, the blood of pardon a cup of guilt.

2. Spiritual hurt; though God do not break out in visible judgments upon the
carcasses of men as formerly, yet the curse of God eats secretly into the
consciences of men. You cause God to give you up to blindness of mind,
hardness of heart, and these are curses with a witness; the curse of curses is
a hard heart.

3. It puts you in danger of eternal judgment. The Apostle tells you so, 1 Corinthians. 11.29. verse. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation: Better, says Melius erat mola asinaria collo alligata mergi in
pelagus, quam illota conscientia de manu Domini buccellam accipere. Ambr. de
coena. Applicatiof the second Doctrine.
Ambrose, that a millstone were tied about thy neck, and thou cast into the
midst of the sea; then to take the least bit of bread, or drop of wine from the
Minister, with an unsanctified heart, and polluted conscience. And thus much
for the doctrinall part, we will now come to the application.

Use 1. If so, that whoever has to do with an Ordinance must sanctify God in
it; and that there is so much required before, so much in the time, so much
afterward; Oh! how few then shall we find, that sanctify God in this
Ordinance? Some there are, who openly profane this Ordinance, some who steal a
draught of damnation to themselves, your close and civil men; this is the
difference, where the common profane man goes to hell the plain road way, this
man steals to hell behind the hedge; And indeed, the best of men do not
sanctify God as they ought in them. Alas, what preparation before we come
upon these Ordinances? What exciting and stirring up of our graces? What
exercise of grace here? Faith, Repentance? What thankfulness? What obedience
afterward? Where is the fruit of so many Sermons, Sacraments; have they not
been like rain that falls on the rocks? Are not all these like so many clouds
which pass over our heads, and leave never a drop of moisture behind? Are we
not like Pharaoh's lean Kine, never the fatter for all our feeding? Are we not
like men sick of an Atrophy, who, though they feed upon never so good
nourishment, yet they grow not thereby? Do we not shame our meat, discredit
those heavenly dainties, that we thrive no more by them? Other ages, like Leah,
were bleer-eyed, but fruitful: ours like Rachel, beautiful, but yet barren:
We answer not God's care and cost toward us; we profit not; we grow not; and
what is the reason? Because we do not sanctify God as we ought in these
Ordinances; therefore are we so weak in faith, therefore so feeble in grace;
therefore corruptions so strong in us: they who look the Ordinances should be
means for the perfecting of their sanctification, they must labor to sanctify
God in them.

Use 2. Is it so? Then it behooves us to enquire, whether we have sanctified
God in these Ordinances. We have to do with God's Ordinances daily, you see
God requires, who ever have to do with his Ordinances, should sanctify God in
them. Let us then ask the Question of our selves: Have I sanctified God in this
Ordinance? I have often come to the Sacrament, but have I sanctified God in it?
Now you might know this by looking over the things: 1. Precedent: 2.
Concomitant: 3. Subsequent. But at this time I shall follow this method: Would
you know whether you have sanctified God in this Ordinance; see then, whether
you have observed: 1. God's order: 2. God's rules: 3. God's ends; and this
before your coming. 2. whether you have exercised God's graces in the time. 3.
whether you have returned with God's quickenings, God's inlargements, God's
inablements afterward.

1. See whether you have observed God's order. Now God's order is this, to
justify a man, put on him the Wedding Garment; to sanctify a man, to beget
him anew before he bring him on this Ordinance. 1. Art thou then justified?
Has God given thee an interest in Christ? Has he discovered thy sins to thee?
Has he humbled thy soul under the sense and burden of sin? Has he revealed
to thee what footing and ground there is in the Word, for receiving graceless
persons to life? Has he cleared to thee the truth, fullness, freeness, goodness
of the promise? Has he brought thy soul over to assent to the truth, embrace
the goodness, rest upon the firmness of it; and to bring all this home to thy
own soul? Thou art a man who art justified, and God calls thee hither to put
his Seal to thy Evidence, that thou may be assured for ever, that Christ is
thine, and thou Christ's.

2. Art thou a man sanctified, renewed, regenerated? Has God wrought a
through, an universal, spiritual change; I say spiritual, not a partial,
moral, formal change, but a spiritual real universal change. That thou
have a new judgment, new will, new affections; Whereas before there was
disagreement, now there is a blessed conformity between God and thee in all
things; thou see as God sees, loves as God loves; thou differs as much from
thy self, as if another soul lived in the same body; thou were once darkness,
now light in the Lord; once dead, now alive; once blind, now see? Thou art a
man whom God calls hither to strengthen and nourish his own work in thee. As
the maid whom Christ raised from death, he said, Give her meat; so Christ
having raised thee from the death of sin to the life of grace, he calls thee
hither, that thou may have meat for the nourishment of spiritual life in thee;
and this is God's order.

2. You may know whether you have sanctified God in an Ordinance, if you
examine, whether you have observed God's rules. Now the grand rule is
Preparation, which lies in two things: 1. In Examination. 2. Excitation of our
graces.


1. Examination, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat,
etc. which examination is more general or more special.

1. More general, of all our sins; those before, and those after our
effectual calling.

2. Of our Graces. 1. What knowledge of God: 2. What faith: 3. what repentance:
4. what love: 5. what hunger and thirst, etc.

2. It is more special: 1. how the soul has carried it self under former
Sacraments, and in particular since the last Sacrament: what good it has
gotten; what more strength of faith; what more weakening of corruption; what
more increase of grace; what more ability to serve God; and what evil it has
done; all which should be set on upon the soul, with the many aggravations,
being sins against vows, promises, against covenant, which does add much
guilt to sin, and double the offense. 2. The soul is to examine it self, how it
stands for present; what aptness, what fitness for the duty; what Sacramental
sorrow; what faith to close with God in the present offer, what fitness to join
with its fellow members in holy communion and love; what hungring and thirsting
after Christ in this Ordinance; what spiritual appetite; what present
disposition of soul to renew bonds and covenants with God in this Ordinance.

Of these and the like are we to examine our selves, that is the first.

2. There is required Excitation of our graces, that we stir up our faith, our
repentance, our hunger and thirst, etc. 1. Our faith to close with a new offer
of Christ: 2. Our repentance to mourn afresh: our hunger and thirst after
Christ tendered here. These are God's rules, and if observed, God is
sanctified; and that is the second.

3. You may know whether you have sanctified God in this Ordinance, if you
examine whether you have observed God's ends. Now God's ends are many; viz. 1.
to glorify God: 2. to get strength against our corruptions: 3. to get
increases for our graces. But I shall only name one, set down by the Apostle, 1
Cor. 11.23. Do this in remembrance of me. Christ did a great work for us, and
he is desirous it may may not be forgotten; He has taken care it should be
remembered both in heaven and in earth. As he remembers it in heaven, it being a
part of his intercession for us there, to represent his blood and sufferings
before God; As under the Law, the Priest, when he had offered the sacrifice,
was to go with the blood before the Altar and Mercy-seat, and show it to the
Lord: So Christ, having offered himself a sacrifice, presents his blood within
the vail, appearing in the presence of God to intercede for us. And as he has
taken care to remember it in heaven; Heb. 9.24.
so he has taken care to keep it in remembrance on earth. And therefore he has
set up this ordinance, to show forth his death, to put us in mind of his
sufferings: and charge us to do this in remembrance of him. And when we
observe this end truly and rightly as we ought, then do we sanctify God in
this Ordinance; I say truly and rightly, for every remembrance will not serve
the turn. 1. It must be a cordial and hearty remembrance; we must remember
him with an affected heart; in Religion, Quod cor non facit, noa sit.
what the heart does not, is not done: Many remember him in a bare historical
way; to recount his sorrows, and yet their heart not affected. It is not enough
to remember Christ in the head, but you must remember him in the heart; words
of knowledge imply affection: It must be cordial. 2. It must be a grateful
and thankful remembrance; and there is great cause; it is the top-mercy, that
which purchased all for us; Look on all coming swimming in a stream of blood;
See upon all your mercies engraven, The price of blood; and you will see great
cause to be thankful. 3. It must be a mourning bleeding remembrance: So to
look on him pierced, as to be pierced; on him wounded, as to be wounded, etc.
And indeed, who can look upon Christ in blood; who can behold what he has
suffered, and conceive himself to be the actor of all this, and yet the sharer
in all the fruit and benefit; for though we were actors of it, yet he put us
not out of his Will and Testament; he did not except against us in the
partaking the fruit of it: who can thus behold him, but must weep over Christ,
as the old Prophet over the other; alas my brother, alas my brother! so, alas
my CHRIST, alas my CHRIST. 4. It must be a crucifying remembrance; such a
remembrance of Christ crucified, as crucifies our sinful affections, our lusts
and corruptions; as deals by sin, Pro me Dei filius jugulatus, and iterum me
peccare dilectat.
as sin has dealt by Christ; kills sin, as sin has killed Christ; Oh! say,
shall I give life to that which has been the death of Christ? shall I cherish
that has killed Christ? shall I take pleasure in that has been so bitter to
Christ? shall I count that light which has been so heavy to him? shall I love
and bosom the knife has killed my husband? Under the Law, if an Ox goared a
man, the Ox was to die; and shall sin kill Christ, and shall it not die for it?
such a crucifying remembrance it must be, as makes us take up weapons against
sin; And he that thus remembers Christ, observes God's end; and he who
observes God's ends, does sanctify God in his Ordinance.

Well then, would you know whether you have sanctified God in this Ordinance;
see if you have observed God's order, God's rules, God's ends, before you come;
and so much for the first.

2. Would you know whether you have sanctified God in this ordinance, see if
you have exercised God's graces in the time, what those are, and how to be
exercised, I have showed at large.

3. See whether you do return home with God's quicknings, with God's
inlargements, with God's inablements? are you more humble? more serviceable? Are
you more thankful? Do you find corruptions weakened? your graces strengthened?
Does your endeavors afterward answer your care and conscience before? Is your
heart set further against sin? Are the ways of God more lovely to you? Are
your souls knit nearer to God, your spirits more inflamed with love of him?
These are plain demonstrations that you have sanctified God in this ordinance,
and that God has sanctified it to you. But now on the contrary, let me tell
you: 1. If thou have broken God's order and method; that thou have come hither
in a graceless, Christless condition; the soul never yet awakned to see sin,
and be humbled for it. Thou know what sin is in the Catechism, but do not
know what sin is upon the conscience; Thou can tell me what faith is in the
book, but art not acquainted with the working of it in thy soul; and what
repentance is, but yet a stranger to it; The day is yet to come wherein thou
set thy self to mourn, and break thy heart for sin. Where are the chambers?
where the closets? where the bedsides? that can bear witness of thy mourning
for sin? And yet do thou come? Thou breakst God's order, and so art a
prophaner of this holy Table. 2. If thou breakst God's rules, that thou do
not prepare thy self by examination and excitation of thy graces, but rushest
into God's presence, breaks in upon this Ordinance, without any suitable
affections to it, thou art a prophaner of this Ordinance, etc. 3. If thou do
not observe God's ends, but comes hither, as many do: either to avoid scandal,
or the censures of men; or, for custom, or, for fashion sake; because others
come, therefore thou will not stay away; or (which I cannot express with
abhorrencie and detestation enough) because thou shall sit at thy Master's
table that day, and go into the fields afterward. Thou art a prophaner of this
ordinance; And, Oh! that we had some Tirshatha to drive these away: We read in
Ezra 2.61, 62. that Tirshatha would not suffer the sons of Kosse and Barzilli
to eat of the holy things, because their genealogies were not found registered
among them: If thou be not in the book of life, if thy name be not written in
the genealogies of the Saints, thou art not fit to come.

In the want of coercive power to fence this Ordinance, give me leave to put a
few places to you to consider: The first is in Titus 1.15. To the unclean all
is unclean. the second is in the Proverbs 21.27. The prayers of the wicked are
abomination. The third, Psalm. 66.18. He that regards iniquity in his heart,
etc. though he never come to act it in this life, God will not regard his
prayers: The fourth, Psalm. 50.16. What have thou to do, to take my covenant
into thy mouth, and hate to be reformed, etc. And if this will not prevail,
read and tremble, thou profane person, 1 Cor. 11.29. He that eats and
drinks unworthily, etc. He is made guilty of Christ's death, as Pilate,
Herod, Judas, the Soldiers were; He eats and drinks damnation to himself, and
for this cause many were sick, weak and fallen asleep; And to this add the
example of the unbidden guest, who came without a wedding Garment, it fared ill
with them that came not, but worse with him, which tells us, an unsanctified
presence is worse then a profane absence. But yet will thou adventure? do
thou find any thing in the Sacrament to encourage thee to come? Let us look
upon it under the several names and notions, under which its presented.

1. Its called a Seal, and is the Sacrament any encouragement to thee under
this notion; unto whom the Word does promise nothing, the Sacrament seals
nothing; but the Word promises nothing to unregenerate men. All God's Word is
against thee, nothing for thee, and therefore here is but poor encouragement,
the seal annexed to a Deed, does confirm it to none, but such to whom the Deed
was made: So here, the Sacrament being the seal of the Covenant, belongs to
none, but those to whom the Covenant is made. Now art thou out of Covenant, one
that has no interest in Christ? thou have nothing here.

2. Its called a Communion: 1. A Communion of the members, one with another: 2.
A communion of the members with the head. Now, till thou be united to Christ,
thou have nothing here; Christ derives influence only to branches, life only
to his members; Qui vult vivere in capite oportet esse in corpore. Caput
corporis sui caput, non alieni.
he must be in the Son, that has life from him; he that has the Son has
life, and he that has not the Son has not life.

3. It Is called a Supper, the Lord's Supper. Now, is this any encouragement for
thee to come, who art a profane person?

There are three things requisite in the persons that go to a supper: Life.
Appetite. Apparel.


1. Life: Dead men cannot feed; Christ never spread his table for dead men; if
thou be not alive, thou art not called hither to feed.

2. Appetite: What shall they do at a supper that have no stomach, no appetite?
and what do you here, who have no hunger, no thirsting after Christ, you that
never apprehended what the want of Christ, nor never knew the worth of Christ?

3. Apparel: No man will go naked to a Feast; your apparel here is the
Wedding Garment; Christ for justification, Christ for sanctification; and he
that came without this, you see what became of him; it had been better he had
stayed away; it fared better with them then with him. An unsanctified presence
will be found as bad as a profane absence. Those that draw near to God in an
Ordinance, and do not sanctify God in it, God will be sanctified upon them;
And that is the third and last Doctrine which we now come unto, viz.

God will be sanctified upon every one who do not sanctify him in his
ordinances.

1. What is meant by God's sanctifying himself on men.

2. Why God will sanctify himself on those that do not sanctify him in
Ordinances, and so we shall come to application.

1. For the first, What is meant by God's sanctifying himself on a man.

For the answer of which, I conceive that place which I named in the beginning,
Ezekiel. c. 28. v. 22. will afford us some help; When I have executed my judgments
on her, then will I be sanctified in her. Upon which Jerome, Sanctificatio Dei
est paena pecca^tium.
God is sanctified in the punishment of offenders: so you see it in the Text,
God's punishment of Nadab and Abihu, was the occasion of the word; I will be
sanctified. --

1. Then God does sanctify himself on men when he inflicts corporal
punishments upon men for profaning his Ordinance: as you see here, and the
like, 1 Cor. 11.29. For this cause many are sick, -- etc.

2. God sanctifies himself on men, when he inflicts spiritual punishment upon
men, etc. viz. security, blindness, hardness; when men do not walk sutably to
the light of Ordinances, he takes away either light or sight, either
ordinances or men's eyes, that seeing they might not see, -- etc.

3. God does sanctify himself on men who profane his Ordinance, when he does
inflict eternal punishments upon men; this see in the 1 Cor. 11.29. He who
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself; that
which for the present makes him obnoxious to damnation, and shall in the end
fix him in flames, lay him in hell, if he do not repent; yea, and the deepest
cellars in hell, are for them who have lived in a profanation of Ordinances.
And this in brief shall suffice to tell you what is meant by God's sanctifying
himself upon men.

We come to the second thing propounded, what are the Reasons God does
sanctify himself on those that do not sanctify him in Ordinances.

1. In terrorem, Peter 3.3. There shall come in the last day, (...), scoffers,
such as shall make children-play of all the threats of God, and look upon them
but as harmless Bug-beares, to keep them in awe only. But when God does back a
threatening with a punishment, as you see he did here in the Text, and on the
Corinthians, this strikes dread into the hearts of profane persons.

2. cautionem, for warning, That others (...), might be our (...), others woes
might be our warnings; others sufferings might be standing Sermons to us,
preaching this lesson, to beware of the like sin, lest you share in the same
punishment; therefore God punishes sin in some, Ne in alios grassetur
peccatum.
that others might beware; Deuteronomy. 29.20. And those which remain shall hear and
fear, and do no more wickedly, Vt te condiret.
etc. Lot's wife was turned into a pillar of salt, to season thee, says the
Father: Beware of backsliding. Moses was denied entrance into the Land of
Canaan for his murmuring and unbelief, that thou might beware: David was
punished for his uncleanness, that thou might take heed: The man was stoned for
gathering of a few sticks on the Sabbath day, to teach us to beware of
profaning the Sabbath. Jerusalem was destroyed for her Idolatry, Babylon for
her pride, Sodom for uncleanness, the old world for drunkenness, that these
might stand up as warnings to us. As the Apostle shows at large, 1 Cor. 10.5.
to the 12. Let us not be Idolaters, as some of them were, etc. All these things
happened them, for ensamples and admonition to us. We may well say of all, Lege
exemplum, ne exemplum fias, Read the example lest thou be made an example.
Read the example of Pharaoh destroyed for his oppression, contempt of God, and
hardness of heart; and beware thou of the same sins, lest God make thee an
example, etc. Read the example of Herod destroyed for his pride, Jezabel for
her paint, Saul for his disobedience; and beware thou of the like sin, lest God
destroy thee. And as in all others, so in this sin of profanation of this
ordinance, God does thus punish the prophaners of it, that others might beware
of the profanation; therefore did he punish the Corinthians with sickness, with
death, weakness, for the unworthy partaking of this Ordinance; that so they
that remained alive, and we that follow them, might beware of the like sin,
lest we partake of the like, or a worse punishment; for usually, God's second
blows are more heavy then the first: they were the first sufferers for this
sin; and if they were so heavily punished, what may we then expect, if we do
profane this Ordinance?

Reason 3. In manifestationem justitiae, to declare his justice against sin.
God, he made a threatening against this; and if God should not sometimes punish
offenders, either men would think they did not offend; or if they did, that God
was not just, because he did not punish. Therefore God to clear his justice,
and convince men of sin, does often sanctify himself on such as profane, etc.

4. Ad removendum scandala; David, then by all the filth of Sodom; and
therefore, because he had caused the name of God to be blasphemed, God
punishes him, though he pardoned him; and as he does punish his own people,
if they sin, because they have given occasion to the wicked within the Church
to blaspheme: so he punishes the wicked, because they give occasion to them,
who are without the Church to blaspheme; What will Heathens, Turks and Pagans
say? Ecce quales sunt qui Christum colunt! aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut vos
non estis Evangelici.
Behold what manner of persons they are, who worship this Christ! This is
either no Gospel, or you are no Gospellers.

Reas. 5. Why God does sanctify himself on such as do not sanctify him in an
Ordinance, is to hold up his great Name, and the purity of his Ordinances. God
could no way hold up his dread, his fear, his holiness, his glory, his purity
and truth of his Word, if God should not punish such as profane his
ordinances. You see what a conceit those had of God in Psalm 50. verse. 21.
because God did forbear to punish offenders: When thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst with him, etc. These things have thou done, and I kept silent; I
did not presently come forth to punish thee, to execute my judgments on thee.
And what was the fruit of it? What conceit did this forbearance of God work in
those that were guilty. Scelerum paetronum.
Thou thought I was altogether such a one as thy self; that is, that I was one
who liked and approved of thy doings; thou thought thou did not amiss,
because I did not punish. Here you see God was wronged by forbearing, and not
executing judgment upon offenders: And there was no way for God to clear
himself, to hold up his great name, but this way, to make them know what they
had done, and therefore it follows: I will set thy sins in order before thine
eyes. Oh! consider this, ye that forget God, lest, etc. So you see God does
punish offenders to hold up his great name; and there is no other way to hold
up the name of God, the purity and holiness of God, but by punishment of
offenders: You come to the Sacrament, and you profane this Ordinance, God has
threatened death and damnation to every unworthy receiver. Why, but you know
God does not execute sentence speedily on you, and therefore you think you do
not offend; sure God is pleased with it. And therefore God to uphold his Name,
the purity of his Ordinance, and make you know what you have done, does
sanctify himself upon those who do not sanctify him in this Ordinance;
sometimes in afflicting visible and corporal judgments on offenders, as you
see in the Corinthians; always invisible and spiritual judgments for the
present, and eternal judgment if you do not repent. And this you see God does
to hold up his name, which otherwise would be polluted by men. As in nature for
preservation of the whole, particulars perish: Its better one perish then unity
it self: So here, for the preservation of the glory of God, (which is worth ten
thousand of our lives and souls, as the people said to David) God does inflict
punishments upon offenders. And there is no other way to preserve or make
whole, and repair the honor, glory of God, etc. Men that will not learn by the
Word, must be taught by works; if the Word will not prevail with you, to
forbear the profanation of his Ordinances, then his works come in. If you will
be so sensual and brutish, that you will see nothing to be sin, but what you
feel to be sin in God's hand upon you, you shall feel blows enough; A rod is
for the back of a fool. Take this with you, What ever you will not learn by
faith, you shall be taught by sense. God makes men feel those things to be
evil by sense, which by faith they would not believe to be evil. When the word
will not prevail with men to forbear profanation of any ordinance, or any sin,
then from word he goes to works; lays afflictions, judgments, punishments on
men. And happy it is if the works bring men again to the word, when Schola crucis
is Schola lucis, when God's house of correction is a school of instruction: So
says David, Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest and teach in thy law.
It was so you see with the Corinthians, the word did not prevail; God goes to
his works, inflicts punishments on them, sickness, weakness, death; and then
he comes to the word again: For this cause many are sick. And no doubt, but
word upon works, was more prevalent with them, then when it went alone.

Reason. God hates all sin; and the nearer a sin comes to God, the more he
hates it. Now this is near him, you dishonor his Name; his Ordinances are
precious, they are his name; and therefore God will not hold such guiltless,
etc. Thus you see I have showed you, that God will sanctify himself upon al
those who do not sanctify him in an ordinance: And I have showed you the
grounds and reasons of it; now to application.

Use 1. Oh! then take heed thou who art a profane person, a swearer, a
drunkard, and forbear, lest God make this true of thee this day, and raise his
glory out of thy ruins. Thou will not be warned by the word, look for works;
thou whom the examples of others will not make to beware, take heed, lest God
do here make thee an example. It was the third Captain's wisdom in the 2 Kings
1.13, 14. who, when he saw God's visible judgments upon the two former
Captains, he takes warning thereby, and avoids their sins; so you that are
profane, when you see and hear what God has threatened against prophaners of
this Ordinance; and what fearful judgments God has executed upon all
unworthy receivers, which are all Christless, all graceless persons; Oh! beware
of coming hither in thy sins. God's Word is true; As what he promises is sure
to come to pass; so what ever he threatens. And though he prolong and defer
the time of execution, yet your damnation sleeps not, as Peter says, 2 Pet.
3.7, 8, 9. verses. It shall surely come. If God should threaten to strike dead
every unworthy receiver, you would be afraid to come, and how would it make the
best of us to look about us, whether we are worthy receivers or not? But alas,
what is this threatening in comparison of the other, you eat and drink damnation
to your selves? This is as far above the other, as a temporal is below an
eternal; A punishment upon the body below the everlasting wrath of God, and
punishment of your souls. Better you were struck dead here, then reserved for
everlasting death hereafter. Thy body escapes here (and yet I cannot assure
thee of that; others, who were God's own people, were struck with death and
sickness; and I cannot assure thee that God will not destroy thee with the
bread in thy mouth, as he did the Israelites, with the Quails in theirs. God
has threatened, and we know not whether he will execute, yea, or no: God said,
I will not hold him guiltless that takes my Name in vain. Examples we have; but
other examples are worn out; who knows whether he will not give fresh
examples, and deal by thee as he did by Nadab, and Abihu in the Text, even in
the face of the whole congregation, destroy thee with fire from heaven; that
all may fear, thou went with them, but from fire to fire, from a destruction
by fire, to preservation in fire, from temporal to eternal burnings. But
suppose that God should forbear his stroke now, yet it is certain to come.
Quorum ultio reponitur in futurum.
And woe be to them, whose vengeance is reserved for another day. Ah, it will
come then with a witness, then with load enough, when the guilt of al thy
prophanations of this glorious ordinance; come together; and therefore beware,
beware as thou loves thy body; nay, thy soul, and that for ever, beware of
unworthy partaking, etc.

Use 2. If so, Oh! then look to it, you who go on in a way of profanation of
Gods Ordinances. God has said, he will be sanctified of them who draw near to
him. And do thou believe this? Is it true, or is it false? I know thou dare
not but say this is truth, God himself speaks it. Well then, this being a truth
what may thou expect who art a prophaner of his Ordinances? And to all thy
prophanations, as it was said of Herod, he added this, that he cast John in
prison; so you add this to all the rest, the profanation of this Ordinance of
the Lords Supper. Oh! this is a sin, for which God will not bear with thee. If
God would not bear with his own people, the Corinthians, who yet had grace,
were habitually disposed, were justified, sanctified, and wanted only actual
preparation and disposition, in the Ordinance, how shall he bear with thee thou
profane person, graceless person? If God deal thus with the green tree, what
shall become of the dry tree? If God deal thus with his own, what shall become
of thee? If thus with the bearing, what shall become of the barren tree? If
judgment begin at the house of God, where shall the wicked and sinners appear?
Answer me that if thou can. If God will be sanctified upon his sanctified
ones, what of thee? If God does punish the want of circumstances, what will he
do to thee, who wants the substance, the main requisite? But it may be thou
thinks there is no such matter, these are but Bugbears, etc. for thy part, thou
have come hither, and gone home, and found no hurt. And have thou so? Bless not
thy self in that, there is the more behind. A black and dismal shower of wrath
is sure to fall upon thee one day. This is true, God will be sanctified of them
that come nigh him. And this is true also, He who eats and drinks unworthily
is made guilty of the body and blood of Christ; nay, he eats and drinks
damnation to himself. And this is as true, he who eats and drinks in a
Christless condition, eats and drinks unworthily. And what do thou think will
be the consequents of such a sin? In stead of a drinker thou becomes a shedder
of the blood of Christ, as Judas, as Pilate, as Herod. Look upon the Jews, and
see what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ. It is the heaviest
curse in the world, to be guilty of that blood which should save you, pardon
you: shall that which should be a blood of pardon, become a blood of guilt? Oh!
what is it to be guilty of that blood, should take away guilt? If thou were
guilty of all the sins of men on earth, and damned in hell, the blood of Christ
could pardon thee, and take off that guilt. But what shall take off the guilt of
that that should take off guilt? Oh! see what a sin it is; and in the fear of
God, add not this to all your sin, to all your swearings, your prophanations,
drunkenness, add not this to all, to be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ; assure your selves, God will not care for your bodies, who have no
regard to the body of his Son; shall your blood be esteemed when the blood of
Christ is contemned? shall your lives be prized when the death of his Son is
slighted? nay, when you by this sin shall crucify Christ again? judge that.

Use 3. Well then, if the sin be so great, and the punishment which God has
threatened be so terrible, what care ought we to have, we do not profane this
Ordinance? and what care to look back into our lives, and see whether we have
not profaned this Ordinance. The one, to prevent sin not committed, and so to
prevent wrath; the other to repent of sin committed, and so to turn away wrath.
But you will say, how shall I know whether I have profaned this Ordinance? For
the answer of which, I refer yon to what I have said in the second Doctrine
(where I put the trial upon these three Generals: 1. the observing Gods order:
2. Gods rules: 3. Gods ends.) I shall now add three more to help to discover
whether you have been prophaners of this Ordinance yea or no.

1. When the Sacraments work no further good upon thee, thou have profaned
this Ordinance. I have told you, the Sacraments are not idle, empty things, but
operative, and efficacious toward them who are worthy receivers. Christ cannot
be fed on, but he must nourish the soul. A man may feed upon other meats and
get no nourishment, but he who feeds on this, he finds spiritual strength and
nourishment. Now then, when men come hither, and return as empty as they came,
as vile as before, there is no fruit can be seen in their lives and
conversations; here a man may suspect the Ordinance is profaned. When men were
filthy, and are filthy still, swearers, and are so still, drunkards, and remain
so still; this is an evident demonstration thou have been a prophaner of this
Ordinance: Indeed Gods people do not ever get the good they expect, never get
the good they desire. But yet some good is gotten, some more strength of Grace,
some more working out of lust, although for the present they cannot apprehend
it. But the other now, they get none, they come graceless hither, and go
graceless away: and it must needs be so, this is no Ordinance for the working
of grace in graceless persons, but for the nourishing of grace in those whom
God has wrought grace in, as I have showed at large.

So that is the first, when we get no good.

2. When a man is worse after then before, this is an evident sign he has
profaned this Ordinance. When a man is strengthened in a state of sin returns
with more violence to any particular sin; as you see Judas, the Devil entered
into him, he took fuller and stronger possession of him; and you shall see this
the ordinary fruit of profanation of this ordinance, men wax worse and worse,
proceeding from evil to evil. It may be, when first they came to receive,
they were fearful; for there is some natural tenderness of conscience in men,
and they are afraid to come to so great an Ordinance, without some kind of
preparation, and therefore it may be they did catch up a book the day before,
and say a Prayer more, carry themselves demurely. But afterward, when men are
grown up in the profanation of this ordinance, they can look upon all the
threats, upon all the judgments denounced against them in this Ordinance, and
never start at them, never tremble. And what is the Reason they trembled
before, and do not now, their condition is never the better, it may be far
worse. Why, here is the reason, the custom of profanation of this Ordinance,
has hardened them in their way, they now fear nothing, their heart is
fortified. They have sinned away those common principles, that natural
tenderness, that was once in them; Sin is an eating thing, it eats out the very
heart of every thing which is good in men. A man may not only sin away his moral
principles, but he may sin away the very principles of nature. Sin will never
leave till it has made all as vile as it self, Romans 1.26, 27. When men live in
the profanation of this Ordinance, they wax worse and worse. That man runs
violently on in sin, who sets out from the profanation of Gods Ordinances,
because he runs with the Devils strength, Satan has filled his heart with more
mischief. As the Saints do run more actively in the ways of God after, so the
wicked more violently in a way of sin. The profanation of this Ordinance does
strengthen men to further sin; either as, 1. One sin does dispose a man to
another, helps the birth of another.

2. Nay, and one sin does strengthen a man to the commission of another. As one
duty of godliness does dispose and enable to the performance of another: So one
sin does dispose and strengthen to the commission of another. The sin of
unworthy eating does strengthen to more sin; Such a man, he gets more heart to
sin: he that dares break through threatenings here to sin, will not stick to do
it in other cases. It causes God to give us up to blindness of mind, hardness
of heart, etc. which gives Satan further footing in men's hearts, to egg them
on to all munner of wickedness. You see it in Judas; and therefore, if thou
find thy self worse in life and conversation, there is a manifest sign thou
have profaned this Ordinance.

3. Sign of profanation.
When a man feeds upon nothing but the outward element, the Bread and Wine, and
not upon Christ in the promise, he prophanes this Ordinance. If thou feedst not
upon panem Christum, as well as panem Christi, the Bread which is the Lord, as
well as the Bread of the Lord, thou prophanest this Ordinance. A man may eat
Bread, and drink Wine in an ordinary way, and not sin; but he who eats Bread,
and drinks Wine in the way of an Ordinance, and does not feed upon Christ
himself, he is a prophaner of this Ordinance. Now thou can not feed upon
Christ in a Sacrament, till thou have fed on Christ in a promise. Thou can
not feed upon Christ sacramentally, till thou first feed upon Christ
spiritually. And have thou ever fed upon Christ in the promise? Did ever God
discover sin to thee, and humble thy soul for it? Did ever God reveal Christ to
thee, and bring thy heart to close with him? then thou have fed on Christ, and
may come. But he who never fed on Christ spiritually, can never taste him
sacramentally. Thou have no organ, no eye of faith to see Christ here, nor no
mouth of faith to taste him here, no lise to desire him, and therefore cannot
feed on him. And he who does not feed upon Christ here, is a prophaner of this
Ordinance. A man may feed upon Christ, and never taste of the Bread and Wine,
and yet have the same benefits, Joh. 6.53. a place which is spoken of the
spiritual feeding on Christ out of the use of the Sacrament. But a man cannot
feed upon the the Bread and Wine, and not feed upon Christ, but he prophanes
this Ordinance; Christ without these may be fed upon, but not these without
Christ. If thy body feed on these, and thy soul does not feed on Christ, thou
art a prophaner of this Ordinance. Well then, to sum up all in this, Would you
know whether you have profaned this Ordinance? Recapitution.


1. See if you have observed Gods order, etc. If thou have not observed Gods
order, that thou comes hither in a Christless, graceless condition,
unjustified, unsanctified; wants thou faith; wants thou repentance; wants thou
hunger and thirst; wants thou knowledge? thou art a prophaner of it. And alas,
of that little trial I have had in this last matter, viz. knowledge, I have
found great want. You would admire if I should tell you the senseless answers I
have had; I speak not of all, there are some who are but green in years, yet
are ripe in knowledge; but yet many who are grave in years extreme ignorant:
Ask them what a Sacrament is, they cannot tell; ask them for what end they come
to the Sacrament, they tell me to nourish their bodies; what God requires, they
know not: and such answers, that a man might have as much comfort to give the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to a child, as to such ignorant creatures. I am
sure there is less sin in one then the other, and there is not much more
knowledge. It is true indeed, if a man had never so much knowledge, if he could
tell me as much as any in the world, of the nature of God, of Christ, of the
Sacraments, etc. yet without Grace, this would not make him a worthy Receiver.
The Devil knows more then most men, for the speculative part; yet what is he
the better for that? But yet if a man be ignorant, he must needs be a
prophaner of the Ordinance. A man may have knowledge, and yet not have Grace,
but if he have no knowledge, he is certainly graceless. So the Wiseman says,
Without knowledge the mind is not good. We have a profane Proverb, He that
made us save us. But God answers that, in Isa. 27.11. Isa. 27.11.
Ye are a people of no understanding, therefore he that made you will not
save you, and he that formed you will show no mercy on you. And he threatens,
2 These. 1.8. 2 These. 1.8.
To come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of Christ; And therefore beware you who are ignorant
persons, of coming, you will profane this ordinance: and you who are graceless
persons, though you should know as much as all the men in the world, come not
here, if thou do, thou breaks Gods order, and so prophanest this Ordinance. 2.
If you have not observed Gods rules, examined your self, and excited and
stirred up your Graces.

3. If you have not observed Gods ends, etc. you will be prophaners of this
ordinance of God. And me thinks this should terrify you, who are profane
persons; sure thou have reason in thee though thou want grace: Do thou hear
what God says, He will be sanctified of them that come nigh him? Have thou
not heard, he that eats and drinks unworthily, is made guilty of the body and
blood of Christ? Does not God say, Who ever eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself? And have not I cleared to thee, all
Christless, graceless persons are unworthy Receivers? And yet will thou come?
Beware, lest God show some visible judgment on thee; Beware, lest God teach
thee by works, who wilt not learn by word: See what befell Nadab and Abihu
here, because they did not sanctify God: Read what befell the Corinthians;
read what befell the man in the Gospel, who came without his wedding garment:
Take him hence, and cast him into utter darkness, etc. Let former examples move
thee, Lege ex^mplum, ne exemplum fias.
lest God make thee an example. Think, God is the same God still, his Glory as
dear to him, his Ordinances as precious: As he is the same toward the Saints
in the ways of mercy, so thou may expect him the same to thee in the the ways
of judgment; And if this move thee not, if this will not persuade with thee to
forbear, I wash my hands of the guilt of the blood of thy soul, I have given
thee warning, and thy blood is upon thine own head; And I wish the guilt of the
blood of Christ be not upon thee too. Let me then beseech you, in the bowels
of love and compassion, as you love your souls, as you love your bodies, as you
would not be guilty of your own blood; Nay, as you would not be guilty of the
blood of Christ; as you would not eat and drink damnation to your selves; as
you would not provoke God to break in upon you, and inflict his severe
judgments on you, come not here: Come not here, thou ignorant person, thou
graceless, thou Christless person, thou swearer, thou drunkard, thou covetous
person; Nay, come not here, who ever you are, who are servants to any lust, who
live in any known sin, lest God make this good upon thee, which I have preached
to thee. That because thou do not sanctify God in this Ordinance, he will
sanctify himself on thee; because thou do not glorify him, he will raise
his glory out of thy ruins. But whilst I speak thus sadly to the bad, let me
not be a terror to the good. I would not break the bruised Reed, nor quench
the smoking Flax: As I would not give encouragement to graceless persons, so I
would not discourage the least work of grace in any: As I would not cherish
any false fire, unsound work; so I would not quench any spark of God's
kindling; have thou some work of God upon thy spirit? has God discovered to
thee sin and misery? has he humbled thee for it? has God revealed Christ to
thee, stirred thy heart with desires, after him; that riches without Christ,
relations, comforts, the world without Christ will not satisfy thee? all these
are like a Feast without an appetite, a Paradise without a tree of Life, too
low either for thee to feed upon, or to find comfort and satisfaction in them;
do thou seek after Christ, pursue Christ; do thou cast thy self in his arms
to save, at his feet to serve? why, such I would invite; Isa. 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters; here close with Christ, feed
on Christ; and to such I would say, Christ is properly and truly food for your
souls; and feeding on him your souls shall live, in grace here, in glory
hereafter.

FINIS.

