Englands rejoicing for the PARLIAMENTS RETVRNE. DECLARING THE KINGDOMS
Happiness in their Counsels, and their Justice in their Consultations against
Papists, Arminiasme, and Popish Superstition.

Composed by JOHN BOND, Cantabrid. St. John's Coll.



London, Printed by F. L. for T. Bates, and are to be sold at his shop in the
old Bail^y 1641.

England's rejoicing for the Parliaments return. DECLARING The Kingdoms
happiness in their Counsels, and their Justice in their Consultations against
Papists, Arminianisme and Popish superstition.
WElcome ye Stars of England, whose bright beams
Does us illuminate, with the full streams
Of Justice, In whose sacred Brow we scan
The height of equity; and truth of man.
Whose Splendour do so radiantly appear
Like fixed Stars within our Hemispheare
And if the exub'rance of a word may swell
So high, that Angels may be said to dwell
Within your counsels: Nothing sure can be
Distilled from you but mere Divinity.
But stay! why do my saucy pen transgress
Against modesty, in striving to express
Your Panygericke, which the hearts of men
Cannot conceive enough: How dare I then
Presume audaciously now to express
In you, renowned England's happiness?
Pardon (great worthies!) pardon my poor Muse
Which (while all other Poet's do refuse
This task) ambitious only is to be
In painting forth your sweet solemnity
In your recesse how every heart did pray,
Praying enquire, enquiring wish the day
Of your return and now you do fulfill
Their expectation, and God's holy will.
Me thinks I see each Subject strive to come
And then endeavor you to welcome home
Unto your sacred council; once begun,
And ever shining as the splendent Sun.
Blessed Astr^a ^aignes within your minds:
Within your hearts and constancy there finds
A pious habitacle: firm faith now show's
Your blessed intent, and piety your brow's
It Is your return, that makes our hearts to move
With great alacrity, and greater love.
It Is your return that makes men to rejoice
And caroll forth their joy's with heavenly voice
It Is your return, that causes us to singe
Encomiums as from the Muses spring.
It Is your return, that does infuse my Quill
With Poetry, as from Parnassus Hill.
And whatsoever we do, it is your return
That causes all our hearts in joy to burn.
For as Monopolers did heretofore
Triumph, yet by your Justice they deplore
Their sad disastruous fortune: and the while
Truth under your protection rightly smile
When Bishops did exult, and made the poor
Too servile, who their Lordships did adore
Those, who did strive to trample over the Crown
By your true Justice are all tumbled down.
And Judges likewise (by whose false command
Extortion reigned even throughout this land)
By your heav'n-guided counsels, and great power
Do most deservedly suspect the Tower.
But England do not labor any more
Of these incendiaries, as before.
Proceed, renowned Worthyes, then proceed
And what in action is, perfect in deed.
For (lo!) the Kingdom wholly does depend
On you: who do it piously defend.
Behold, the Pope does quake at your return,
And mourning fears, and fearing still does mourn
Which may he still continue, till he lies
Shipwreck, in mourning, and so mourning dies!
Behold! the Papists tremble, and do fear
Extremely, and so sink into despair.
Which may they sink into! For now I hope
No more respect shall be given to the Pope.
Behold! Armineans tumble every where
And now are struck with repercussive fear.
Which may they still be struck with! For I doubt
They Will be expelled, and banished without.
Behold! The Priests of Baal, Atheists
And Jesuits, with other Popish Priests
Lament their fortunes: for in you they see
Nothing but Justice, and true equity.
You have deliv'red us from all the hands
Of these, and more, yea from the Devils bands.
We will not therefore so ungrateful seem
Your sacred Justice e're to dis-esteeme:
But to extol, and celebrate your fames
And pious honors, as perpetual names,
Which never shall be out of memory
Razed, but kept unto eternity:
Witness those prayers, which we daily make,
For your security, and councell's s^ke.
Each man prepares his mirth, each man salutes
Your blessed return, and each man disputes
Of your renowned equity, which finds
An habitation in all several minds.
This land triumphs in you alone (great Peers.)
Who have absolved us from all our fears.
Oh let the Sunshine of your virtues then
Illustrate all the joyful hearts of men!
And let the influence of your great power
The Gospell's mortal enemies devour.
For your security we daily pray
That true Religion never may decay
But re-erected by your equity
May flourish to all perpetuity.
And that the Church of God may never more
Be dis-respected still as heretofore.
But governed by your consultations
May shine throughout all other Nations.
Thus do all things by you securely stand,
And thus all things do flourish in our land.
By you the branches of Relig'on grow,
By you the Rivers of the Gospel flow.
In you we do receive a blessed station,
In you we have a heavenly contemplation.
With you true Justice flourishes aright.
With you and good Relig'on shines bright.
From you this Island do receive a bliss
From you, a blessing, not a Judas kiss.
To you be therefore glory, and great praise
To you we yield the Olive, and the Bayse.
By, in, with, from you we receive all joy:
To you be Honor: which you shall enjoy.
Vestra Deus dirigat concilia.
FINIS.

