portrait of St. Athanasius S. ATHANAS. Patriar: Alex and Haeresis Ariance
Securis: Catholicae Religionis Propugnaculum.
T. Cross Sculp:


THE HISTORY OF Athanasius, WITH The RISE, GROWTH, and DOWNFALL OF THE ARIAN
HERESY

By NATHANIEL BACON Esquire

LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell, 1664.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aed. Sab. 23 Nov. 1662. Geo. Stradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. Gilb.
Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

THE PREFACE.
PLutarch writing concerning lives, said, That he did but touch upon matters of
action, because he wrote Lives, and not Histories; but in this Narrative I
cannot yoke my pen to that strict rule, because Athanasius his endowments
cannot well be discovered but by his actions and sufferings; nor they
considered without the concurrence of the actions of his contemporaries,
friends and enemies, fellowlabourers, and Confessors, with his Antagonists and
Persecutors; which necessarily draws me many times into a by-path concerning
Arianisme, to find out Athanasius, where the neglect of Writers have left him
out of mind.

I shall have much occasion to glance upon the Principles of Religion
concerning the Sacred Trinity, not meddling with the particular disputes which
would be voluminous; the clear light concerning the Blessed Trinity in Unity
upon these later ages; and lastly to leave a caveat to my dear Country to hold
these fundamentals concerning the Trinity, in constant adoration, especially in
these days, wherein ungodly rapes are so ordinarily committed upon them by the
conceits of seeming reason, and thereby the Holy Spouse of Christ divided into
small pieces, and scattered through the Nations.

The Contents.
CAP. 1. THe estate of the Roman Empire in the beginning of the fourth Century.
CAP. 2. Of Arius and the Arian Heresy in its Original. CAP. 3. Of Athanasius
his education, and his taking the Office of a Deacon. CAP. 4. Of the Council at
Nice, and the banishment of Arius. CAP. 5. Athanasius is elected Bishop of
Alexandria. The first complaint against him before the Emperor Constantine.
CAP. 6. The second complaint against Athanasius before the Emperor, and his
trial at the Council at Tyrus. CAP. 7. Athanasius his appeal to the Emperor
Constantine; Athanasius is banished, and Arius is accepted. CAP. 8. Constantine
will not be persuaded to recall Athanasius: The death of Arius. CAP. 9. The
death of Constantine: The Succession of his three Sons in the Empire: The
return of Athanasius to Alexandria. CAP. 10. The death of Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople, and the Succession of the Bishops there. CAP. 11. The Council
at Antioch, where Athanasius is banished ^ His escape from his enemies: The
first Arian Confession of Faith made at Antioch. CAP. 12. Athanasius is
acquitted by the Council at Rome: Constans the Emperor favors the Orthodox
Christians. CAP. 13. The Council at Sardica: The Schism by the Arian Council
at Philippopolis. CAP. 14. The second Return of Athanasius to Alexandria. The
death of the Emperor Constans. CAP. 15. The estate of Alexandria at Athanasius
his arrival. The third charge against him before Constantius: Athanasius his
second strange escape. CAP. 16. The entry of George the Arian Bishop into
Alexandria the second time. His cruel persecutions there. Athanasius escapes
into the wilderness. The Monks Profession. CAP. 17. The Council at Millain
intended against Athanasius, yet in vain. CAP. 18. The Council at Syrmium
against Photinus. The Arian Confession there made: whereby both Hossius and
Liberius are ensnared. CAP. 19. The Councils at Arminum and Seleucia: The Arian
Confession of Faith there. The schism between the Arians and Semi-Arians. CAP.
20. The Councils at Constantinople and at Anticoh. Constantius his death. CAP.
21. Julians Government. Athanasius his return to Alexandria. The Council there.
Athanasius his miraculous escape. Julian's death. CAP. 22. Jovinian's Reign and
death. Athanasius his return again to Alexandria. Another Council holden there.
CAP. 23. The Government of Valentinian and Valens, both of them declare for the
Nicene Faith. Diverse Councils in Order thereto. CAP. 24. Valens falls to
Arianisme. His persecution of the Orthodox. The last troubles of Athanasius,
and his fourth escape. CAP. 25. Valentinian his constancy to the Nicene Faith.
Ambrose is made Bishop of Millain. The Sects of the Anthropomorphites and
Messalians. CAP. 26. Athanasius his last return to Alexandria. His Death. His
Encomium. The issue of Arianisme. The desolation of the Eastern Churches.
The Life of ATHANASIUS.
CAP. I.
The State of the Government of the Roman Empire in the beginning of the fourth
Century.

BEfore I bring Athanasius upon the Stage, Sect. 1.
I must premise somewhat concerning the Stage it self; I mean the condition of
affairs of that Age wherein Athanasius was born, without which, many of the
ensuing occurrences will not be clearly understood by every Reader. The time of
Athanasius his birth was about the beginning of the fourth Century of years
after our Lord Jesus Christ's Incarnation; that Century being of remarkable
observation for great changes relating to the Church of God. For although the
Church had now out-reached the bounds of the Roman Empire, and gained the ends
of the Earth, subsisting immediately under the Wings of the Almighty God, and
as to all inferior and civil power independent; yet did it spread most within
the bounds of the Empire, where it grew in repute, even to the envy, if not
terror, of the Emperors themselves, who endeavored to keep it low by
persecution, until the time of Constantine the Great, in whose time the Church
did meet with the first great change, which was for the better.

For the Empire had hitherto been governed by heathens, Sect. 2.
who ruled by no Law, but that in their own breast, which was enmity to Christ's
Kingdom, as appeared in those ten famous, or rather infamous Persecutions; but
the Kingdom of Christ having within three hundred years, notwithstanding all
opposition, spread like leaven throughout the World; about the time of
Athanasius his birth had gained the day of Heathenisme, and possessed the
Imperial Crown, in the person of Constantine the Emperor, so as he that
formerly by the light of Nature, was bound to employ his power in the
maintaining of the honor of his gods then owned by him, is now much rather by
the Law of God (the rule of all Civil and Ecclesiastical power) bound to employ
the same in maintaining the tenor of the True Living God, and thereby is
become greater then the greatest of the Caesar's, honored with all the powers
of Government, Military, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and with that high trust of
protecting the Churches in holiness of Life, and purity of Doctrine and
Worship, according to the Gospel, by a divine right that no power on earth can
take away from the Christian Magistrate, nor acquit him of before God. This was
one change that these times produced in the power of the Magistrate.

A second change was in the government of the Church, Sect. 3.
for the watchlessness of professors over their own hearts, suffered pride to
bud and bring forth two evils, no less Devilish then their Mother. For first,
professors affecting the repute of extraordinary insight in mysteries of
Divinity, begin to fancy sublime doctrines, and to be tellers of news, of New
Lights; and others no less affecting curiosity, become their admirers and
followers: nor was there formerly any power on earth to give a stop to such
extravagancies; For excommunication was become but a harmless noise in repute
of many professors, because the defection was so great, that excommunication
turned not men into the state of heathens and publicans, but from a Church
strait laced, to a Church unbraced; and thus Heresies flowed in amain in the
third Century, more then formerly they had done: Which made that holy man Basil
to mourn exceedingly, and entering into a deep scrutiny for the Cause, could
find none other then, Propter unius magni very and solius omnium regni
contemptum, Proem. de Judic. Decirt. Ascet.
the contempt of Christ's Kingdom, men choosing rather contra Dominum imperare,
to be without rule, then to be under Gods Rule.

This in continuance bred a second evil no less dangerous for the Church,
Sect. 4.
then the other was derogatory to Gods honor, which was a tide of Schism. For
the first Churches in the Primitive times after the Apostolic Times expired,
were governed in their Atoms of Congregations gathered, not out of other
Christian Congregations, as now-a-dayes, but out of the heathens; and they at
the first consisted by the rule, partly of the written word, and partly of
Apostolical Tradition. And yet were those not independent, as now the gathered
Churches are; but in cases of difficulty they had recourse to association of
Councils, who did not only advise, but impose upon the Churches, and they also
conscientiously did submit to conclusions determined by such Councils. But in
after ages, when the Canon of the Scripture was completed, the rule then left
was the Scripture, Apostolical traditions and conclusions of Councils,
assembled upon occasion according to the ancient Custom; unto which the
Churches did still submit, so long as the same were according to the Word of
God.

But as touching the execution of such conclusions, Sect. 5.
the care was left by the Presbyters to some one of their number, who had
thereby the oversight of several Congregations within one Town or Precinct, as
the Congregations were more or fewer: and unto these Overseers about these
times the title of Bishop was given by way of eminency; although it seems to me
it was not strictly observed, till the Council at Sardica, whereof hereafter.

This Presbyter thus advanced, Sect. 6.
was ordinarily some Pastor in a principal City or Town, from whence the
Country received their first instruction in the profession of Religion; and
therefore the Church there might in some sense be styled, The Mother Church;
and he became so far entrusted by the Pastors and Congregations, derived
therefrom, as to be allowed to advise in ordinary emergencies; and in
continuance by acceptance amongst the people, gains such respect as his advice
becomes unquestionable, and at last Authoritative. For that advice which to the
wiser sort, such as the Pastors are, seems to be eminent, to the inferior sort
of the Congregation will soon attain the esteem of an Oracle.

Such was the government of the Churches in those days, Sect. 7.
so long as the Grace of God went along in preserving unity of the Churches in
their associations for council, which was till about the beginning of the
fourth Century. For though errors and heresies were even from the beginning of
the Primitive Times; yet they never prevailed to maintain a public Schism in
or against Councils, till about the beginning of Constantines Reign, at which
time heresies grew so boisterous as to put up head against Councils, and no
means now left to vindicate. the same, it pleased God for the maintaining of
Unity and Purity of the Doctrine of Religion, to raise up Constantine to own
the Orthodox Doctrine: Who accordingly endeavored to give a stop to the growth
of Heresy and Schism, though sometimes in an extraordinary way, crossing the
liberties, as well of such as were truly conscientious, as of others that were
but pretenders thereto; Soc. lib. 1 cap. 4. Epist. Constable. ad Athan. and Arian.
himself professing that he wondered at the madness of the Christians, who
herein fall short of the Morality of the Heathen Philosophers, who disagree in
multitudes of particular opinions, and yet esteem one another for their
Learning, without breach of Common Charity.

And Constantine began this work well, Sect. 8.
but in progress mistaking the right way to the end (as will appear hereafter)
he did not prevail no further then to give a check to the present Schism,
which nevertheless afterward taking more root, kept its possession in the
Churches, and still does, and will continue, so long as its original sin of
pride does or can peep forth; although the zeal and industry of the Civil power
may keep it very low. For as God has determined that every member of the
Church shall live in a continual war within himself; so also shall the Church
have Heresies and Schisms, that they which are approved, may be made manifest.
But above all the rest of the Schisms arising within the Church, wherewith it
has been tried, two especially have exceeded; the one befalling in the Eastern
Churches, which was that of Arius, who endeavored to pull Christ from his
Throne, by denying of his Divine Nature. The other befell in the West, I mean
that of the Papal Supremacy, with its appurtenances. The first was iniquity
barefaced, the second iniquity in a Mystery; the second was a complement of
the first, and the first the forerunner of the second; Athan. A. pol. 2. Soc.
lib. 1. cap. 3. Epist. Alexand.
and Arius himself therefore by Constantine and by the Orthodox Churches, in
his first rising, is called the forerunner of Antichrist.

CAP. II.
Of Arius and the Arian Heresy in its Original.

THe Arian Doctrine, though in the issue branched into many errors, Sect. 1.
yet all in the main tended against the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ; some of
that Sect plainly denying the same, others by implication, and being of more
moderate temper then the rest, seemed to make the difference but small; and
might well be reconciled by the change but of one letter of the Greek Alphabet,
which if taken from the word, (...)
signifies that Christ is of the same essence with the Father, which the
Orthodox did assert: (...)
But if put into the word, signifies that Christ is of like essence with the
Father, which the moderate Arians did maintain; but the Orthodox would neither
add one letter to their faith, nor would the Arian part with one letter from
theirs; and so the difference continued, and that so successfully on the Arian
part, that within the space of one thirty years, Basil complained that the
whole world was turned Arian.

This Heresy had its denomination from Arius; Sect. 2. Athan. Epist. ad Synod.
not that the opinions were originally his, for opinions of this nature were as
ancient as Ebion, and taken up by others after him; and they were received by
Arius from Artemas; and even when Arius was but young, that Leaven had gained
amongst many greater men then Arius was; nor did that Sect own the name of
Arius till Constantius his time, but more ordinarily are called by historians
Eusebians, from Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, who was their great patron in
Constantines time. Nor were themselves very confident in any of their Doctors
opinions, and therefore did endeavor to derive their doctrine from Antiquity,
Soc. lib. 6. cap. 12. Athan. Orat. cont. Arian.
and would have claimed Origin to be their Patron, but Athanasius and others
decryed that conceit. At the first peeping forth the Arian doctrine was very
odious to the Churches; and therefore the speedy growth thereof showed much of
divine wrath and judgment. At length it is baptized into the name of Arius;
either because he was the first that founded and gathered Churches upon that
Principle; or because he was the principal defender of that assertion by
disputes, and therein opposed the famous Council at Nice; the same being the
first general Council, and therefore the undertaking more notorious. And thus
the fame of these new or newly revived doctrines is pinned upon the fame of
Arius, and that, upon his parts and education.

This Arius was born, Sect. 3.
as Epiphanius says, in Libia, but most writers say in Alexandria, the chief
City in those days, of all the Land of Egypt, and of principal repute for
this, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 16.
that the first Christian Church of all those parts was planted there by the
Evangelist St. Mark: Where also was a College or School of great Antiquity and
fame for humane learning, and in that City Religion had so far prevailed, as
Epiphanius says, that in those days there were ten or more Churches builded
for the pure public worship of God; Epiphan. lib. 2. Tom. 2. Here Is. 68.
each of which had one or more Presbyters, who had oversight of the souls of
the people. And from that City the Gospel had been sent into several places of
Egypt, Libia, Thebais, Pentapolis and Amonica, who also had their several
respective Presbyters and Bishops. And that the Churches of Alexandria were
under the oversight of Presbyters, amongst whom one was had in chief repute,
who was called Bishop of Alexandria, who together with the Presbyters there,
had authority of government of those Churches, by Custom. And by like Custom
the Bishop had under his Survey the Churches, Presbyters, and Bishops of those
places or Countries formerly mentioned to be planted by emanation from
Alexandria.

And in the beginning of this fourth Century Peter was become Bishop of
Alexandria by election; Sect. 4.
a godly man doubtless he was, and of blameless life, and zealous for the
Gospel, and therein had suffered much; for he lived in the persecuting times of
Maximinus, who together with Licinius and other persecutors, striving for the
Empire against Constantine, grievously afflicted the Christian Churches in all
places where they came, and thereby many suffered great tortures, Niceph. lib.
8. cap. 11. Athan. Orat. cont. Arian. Epiphan. lib. 2. Tom. 2. Here Is. 68.
banishments, imprisonments, and cruel deaths. And amongst others, Meletus
Bishop of Lyro in Egypt, a man of that esteem (as Epiphanius observes) that he
was in repute chief of all Thebais; and was next to the Bishop of Alexandria:
this man was amongst others, imprisoned for the profession of the Gospel; and
as some others, so himself, to save his skin, became relapsed, and offered
incense to the Heathen Gods; and when the heat of persecution was past, he
assaied to join himself in communion with the Alexandrian Churches again, but
Peter the Bishop did not suddenly admit him thereunto: which Meletus took so to
heart, that himself with many more for his sake, made a separation from the
Alexandrian Church; and joined in private communion apart by themselves, and
from thenceforth style themselves the Church of Martyrs, and the Alexandrian
Church call themselves the Catholic Church; and these two parties so far
disown one another, that they refuse to join in prayer one with other. And thus
this Church of Martyrs bring into the Church the first ill president of the
peoples usurping Judicature in the government of the Church, and power to
determine matters concerning the same. And also are the first example of a
separation or schism merely upon that point of Church government, Athan. Apol.
2.
without any difference at all in any point of Doctrine: But the issue is yet
much worse, for from schism they grew into enmity, and join with the heathens
in raising persecution against the Alexandrian Churches, wherein Peter the good
Bishop of Alexandria died honorably a Martyr. Separation not well grounded on
pure Love to the Truth, will end in hatred and persecution of the same, if not
timely prevented.

This Schism of the Meletian Church of Martyrs thus begun, Sect. 5. Baron. An.
306. Nu'n. 44.
continued about six and thirty years, and mingling with the Arians, became
fast friends to them, and at length wholly Arian. For Arius had been now born
in Alexandria, and was educated at School at Antioch, Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 9.
where he attained a competency of humane learning, and having a natural
readiness of wit and languages, grew into fame for Philosophical disputes; and
then studied Divinity, rather to serve his repute, then to save his soul, and
therefore ever made that to stoop to his reason, and both it and that to
advance his fame. After that he was thus furnished, he returns to Alexandria,
and there behaved himself so well, as Peter the Bishop of Alexandria had made
him one of his Deacons; but he being acquainted with some of Meletus his
disciples, seemed so much to pity their separation, that he falls into dislike
of the Bishops austerity; and under that pretense separates himself also,
Theed. lib. 1. cap. 1, 2. Sozom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 14.
and becomes a member of Meletus his Church, and so continued till Peter's
Martyrdom. After whom Achillas being elected Bishop of Alexandria, Arius
returns and makes application to the Church of Alexandria, and was restored
into communion with them again, and so continued, till he became one of the
Presbyters there, and so continued there till Achillas died. And Alexander
being elected Bishop of Alexandria in his stead, there appeared some Marks of
competitorship in Arius, who failing of his expectation, became discontented,
and grew sick of the itch of disputing some principles of Religion, which
commonly he undertook in the concourse of people; according as by Nazianzen is
observed of Heretics, Mysticas questiones spectante vulgotractant, they debate
hard points in the presence of the vulgar, well knowing that they understand
little beyond common sense; less beyond common reason, and least of all in the
deep Mysteries of Religion; and so are the Heretic disputers in a manner sure
of the vote of the people before hand; especially in the principles concerning
the Holy Trinity, wherein Arius had not only the ignorance of the times to
favor him, but the corruption of nature, and the Devil and all to help against
the true understanding of them. And therefore its the less wonder if Arius had
soon gained seven hundred women, Epiphan. lib. 2. lib. 2. Tom. 2. Her. 69.
who adored virginity in a profession of holiness, besides seven Presbyters and
twelve Deacons, to be of his Sect, before that Alexander the Bishop did take
any notice thereof. At length Meletus finding some of his own Church tainted
with these new opinions, and that Arius was the Seeds-man, he discovered him to
Alexander, who thereupon endeavored to settle the minds of men by preaching
the truth, and thereby to obviate the further spreading of these errors Arius
cannot endure this, he tells the people that their Bishop does maintain the
Doctrine of Sabellius (although it was notoriously known to be a calumny) and
openly appears in opposition to the Bishop: So as now he sees it necessary to
call a Council Provincial; that is of such as well to justify himself and his
Doctrine against the aspersions of Arius, as to determine concerning Arius
himself.

This was the way indeed had it been well putsued, Sect. 6.
but in the manageing of this Council, Alexander who had the Directory, to
avoid suspicion of partiality, carried himself so calmely, Sozom. lib. 1. cap.
14.
as the Arian party were rather emboldened then discouraged. For although the
Council determined against the Arian tenets, and inhibited Arius fromfurther
publishing such rotten principles, yet when they were to subscribe their
conclusions, Arius and about ten others refuse to adjoyn their Subscriptions,
of which number five were Presbyters, and five were Deacons. Many of the people
nevertheless adhered to them principally for the sake of Arius, and not out of
any depth of understanding that they had in his principles. For Arius was a
person of a goodly stature, serious aspect, Epiphan. Ibid.
plausible carriage, winning behavior, smooth and flattering language,
arguments sufficient to lead about unstable souls, especially such as women
ordinarily are; and had Arius his life been as holy, and his carriage more
humble, he might also have led after him others that were better principled.
But he was vehemently suspected for uncleanness, and thereof taxed even by
Constantine himself upon occasion of his ordinary society with women, Soc. lib.
1. cap. 6. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 20.
whom he called his Virgins, and of his wanton book which he called his Thalia,
and which was condemned by the Council at Nice, and burnt by Constantines
command. Arius thus refusing to subscribe the determinations of the Alexandrian
Council, is together with his Accomplices ejected from their several places, and
from Communion with the Church; yet are they no whit discouraged thereby, but
rather encouraged: for now they are looked upon as Martyrs, persecuted
Ministers, sufferers for conscience; by many pitied, by more the more honored;
the people flock after Arius, admire him, vilify such as are not of his
opinion, as dull and unlearned, and at length swell into tumults and public
outrages, Eusebius. Vit. Constable. cap. 4.
not sparing the Emperors own station; and thus are they a Cordolium to
Christians, a sport to the heathens, and a derision and scorn in the public
Theaters.

The proceedings of this Council at Alexandria became famous, Sect. 7.
and Alexander the Bishop, to avoid false representations, by Letters to
several Churches, makes relation of the particulars, which Letters according to
the opinions of men, are diversely censured: And it being observed that the
Arian party nevertheless still gained, partly by their own influence, but more
through the ignorance of teachers not well grounded in such Mysteries,
Alexander the Bishop ordered that no Presbyter in Alexandria shall preach,
Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 11, 14. and lib. 7. cap. 19. Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 11.
but such as shall be specially licenced thereunto. Arius seeing the wind thus
against him, turns head and gets into Palestina; where he meets with more calm
weather, and there he gains liberty to gather Congregations, and to preach, as
he and his party had elsewhere done: Nevertheless they tell him that he must
submit to Alexander the Alexandrian Bishop, and gain Communion with him; and
this showed the Churches were under a rule beyond which they would not go,
although in compassion to Arius, they went too far. Yet is not Arius satisfied
with his liberty upon such terms, he repairs to Nicomedia, to Bishop Eusebius,
who had bin his acquaintance at School at Antioch, and relates to him how he
was dealt with at Alexandria. Eusebius shows him favor, and goes to the
Emperor Constantine then at Nicomedia, and acquainted him with the proceedings
of the Council at Alexandria in the worst manner that he could; as if it were a
ruled case, that the Civil Magistrate becoming once Christian, had authority in
the Councils of the Church. The Emperor hearkens to Eusebius, and thenceforth
Eusebius grows into repute of a Favorite and a Councellor to the Emperor in
Church Matters; and in all such cases men flock to him as to their Mediatory
Angel; and being thus lifted up, he thinks his word may prevail with Alexander
the Alexandrian Bishop, more then Alexanders religion; and therefore he writes
to him, and advises him to pass by the matter concerning Arius, and to
re-admit him and his party into Church Communion again; but unto other Churches
he writes to stir them up to with-stand the proceedings of the Alexandrian
Church. And amongst others he writes to the Meletians, which he might well have
spared, for they were more forward therein then himself. Hereby the Sectarian
party grew more strong, but not one iota more holy, for they proceeded upon the
principle of faction and not of conscience.

Now begins the glory of Constantines Christian government to wane, and fall
short of expectation, Sect. 8.
by the rising clouds of error; he sees it, and it vexes him at the heart.
Silvester also Bishop of Rome (to whom also the Emperor did give ear for his
advice in affairs of the Church) is no less afflicted at the news hereof; and
by his advice a general Council is called at Alexandria, whereunto he sends
Hossius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, with his Letters. This Bishop took his
journey by Constantinople, and finding the Emperout at Nicomedia, is received
by him courteously, and furnished with the Imperial Letters Authoritative, to
the Council at Alexandria, besides other Letters, amongst which was one written
to Alexander the Bishop and Arius to this purpose, telling them, That He took
notice of their difference, that the matters were misterious, not easy to be
explained to the people, much less to be understood by them. That their Faith
was one and the same: That their differences were parvae leviculae exiguae,
small petty trifles: That their question was a foolish question: That the peace
of the people ought to prevail with them, if not to think the same, yet to
abstain from public contests: That otherwise it would make his Reign
troublesome, and his life irksome. That he was coming to them, but was advised
and told that he could never endure to see, what is so grievous to him to hear.
He prays them to study peace and unity, and forbear further strifes, that he
may have cause of joy in his meeting with them. And thus the Emperor acted the
part either of a young Christian, that knew not the value of the Mystery of the
Holy Trinity; or of his favorite Eusebins, by whose spectacles he looked upon
the affairs of the Eastern Churches; or of a politic Emperor, that for
maintaining of peace would adventure his pen to declare that which was contrary
to what his mind did conceal. But all is one, though Hossius be thus instructed
and armed; though himself be a holy, learned and grave man; though so highly
esteemed of, as to be a Moderator in that Council at Alexandria; yet could he
not effect the great work that he came for. Athan. Apol. 2. Baron. An. 319.
Certain matters concerning Ischyras and Coluthus were determined. Coluthus
having acted as a Bishop, and was none, is reduced into the degree of a
Presbyter; and Ischyras bearing himself in the office of a Presbyter, is
declared a lay person. But as touching the difference between Alexander and
Arius; the latter was proud, the other stout; so as neither Sylvester Bishop of
Rome, nor Constantine the Emperor, nor Hossius his wisdom and zeal could
ought prevail, but Hossius returns without success in that matter.

CAP. III.
Of Athanasius his education and his taking the Office of a Deacon.

THus is the Scene fitted for Athanasius to enter upon, Sect. 1.
and to act his part as on a troublesome Sea, wherein the storm is but in its
rising through the vapouring tenets of Arius now blown abroad; about which time
Athanasius was now born at Alexandria also. For the Historians agree that he
was a boy when Alexander was Bishop of Alexandria. His first appearing to the
World they say was in this manner. Ruffin. Hiji. lib. 1. cap. 14. Soc. lib. 2.
cap. 11 Sozom lib. 2. cap. 16.
It was a custom observed by the Catholic Church of Alexandria, to hold a
yearly Solemnity of feasting and thanksgiving unto God upon that day of the
Month that their Bishop Peter suffered Martyrdom, and upon that occasion
assembled themselves in the public Church at Alexandria; and that Alexander
now Bishop of Alexandria, did on that day carry on the work of the public
worship of God, by prayer and preaching of the Word of God; which work being
accomplished in the public, they repaired to their several places of mutual
solace one with another; and that Alexander the Bishop being also come to the
place where he was to dine with the Elders and the chief men, and staying some
time till the company were come together, he chanced to look out at the window
toward the Sea side, and saw a company of boys playing together upon the
Shore, who it seems had been at the public Congregation, and had observed the
Bishops manner of Baptising, and were now in a sporting imitation of the Bishop
in those Ceremonies. The Bishop at the first observing nothing but what was
innocent sport and pastime, smiled thereat; but when he saw them intent upon a
work that seemed like that of Baptism, he called some of the Elders to the
window, pointed them to the boys in their pastime, and desired the boys should
be sent for; who being come, he asked them what they had been doing at the
Seaside. The boys at the first being abashed, were silent, till being further
urged by the Bishop, they answered, that Athanasius there present was chief
amongst them at the game, and that he had baptized some of them, who had not
formerly been initiated, and that he had made others of them Presbyters, and
others Deacons, to attend upon him in that service. Alexander further asked
them, what the Bishop of that play asked any of them, or did? and they answered
that he had asked of them certain questions, which together with their answers
they told the Bishop; and that Athanasius did give them further instructions,
how they should behave themselves for the future, and so told the Bishop the
whole matter. Alexander finding that the boys had proceeded so exactly in what
was done as touching the manner of the work, concluded with the Presbyters,
that the parties so baptized ought not to be re-baptised, but what they thought
further necessary to be done herein Alexander the Bishop did perform: and then
he sent for the parents of Athanasius, and of other the children that were
actors herein, and charged them to educate their children, and fit them for the
calling of a Minister: and more especially he charged Athanasius his Parents to
bring him up in learning, and to bring him from time to time to the Bishop,
that he might see to his proficiency; which was done accordingly. Baronius
conceives Athanasius to be now about twelve years old; Baron. An. 311. number. 63.
and the Historians farther there say, that Athanasius exceedingly profited in
learning, and was well grounded in Grammar and Philosophy, and (as Baronius
observes out of Severus) he was educated in the knowledge of the Law; yet
these kinds of learning he took up as it were by the way, and in subserviency
to his main end, Nazian. Encom. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 8.
which was the study of Divinity; in order whereunto he had such teachers as
were holy men, and approved by suffering for the truth even to Martyrdom. But
in the study of Divinity he was so industrious, especially in reading of the
Bible, that he had the Books both of the New and Old Testaments in memory
without book.

Alexander finding Athanasius his parts and endowments, Sect. 2. Nazian. Encom.
Soc. lib. 1. cap. 11.
takes him into his own family, and made him his Amanuensis; and so Athanasius
growing up to excellency of wisdom, learning, and piety, begins to be had in
great reputation of all men, yea even of Alexander himself, who disdained not
to become upon occasion Amanuensis to Athanasius, and made him one of the
Deacons of Alexandria.

This conjunction between Alexander and Athanasius engaged Athanasius into one
adventure with Alexander against the Arians; Sect. 3.
who now were grown into that height in the Empire, that the Emperor found it
not safe to enter the lists against it, being almost tired with fourteen years
war against his heathen antagonists for the Empire: during which time this
heresy had gained such a foundation, that though the Emperor might think
himself sufficient to deal with the persons of Alexander and Arius, Soc. lib.
1. cap. 5. Sozom, lib. 1. cap. 15.
yet the people now heated with the differences concerning these opinions, and
that concerning Easter Day (although as yet they held communion together) have
now gotten the ball on their foot and resolve to carry the same, some upon
grounds of judgment or opinion, others out of faction: so as now no course is
left but to endeavor to settle the minds of men by way of a general Council of
the Churches throughout the whole Empire. For as by the conviction of teachers,
the errors of the learners will soon pine away; so the joint conclusions of
many of such teachers assembled in Council, will soon put to naught the private
opinions of several single persons; because every one single wise man will
think the conclusions of many such joined in Council, more wisely determined
then he alone can do his own private opinion.

CAP. IV.
The Council of Nice and the banishment of Arius.

BUt the Devil and pride was more predominant then reason in this case, Sect. 1.
as the event showed. For Constantine the Emperor, though he knew it would
cost him vast expenses, yet not regarding that, he did call a Council of all
the Churches, and appointed the same to be holden at Nice a City of Bithinia,
unto which place assembled all the Bishops of the Empire, who had no reasonable
cause of absenting themselves, besides the Presbyters and other learned men.
The number of the Bishops were three hundred and eighteen, unto all of whom the
Emperor gave entertainment at his own cost; Eusebius. Vit Constable. cap 47.
and unto this Council, by special message Arius is enjoined to come. This
entertainment was much for the Emperors honor, being of so many and for so
long a time; for some Writers report that the Council lasted three years,
others less, but doubtless it did hold for a long time. And it was much more
for the honor of the Emperor and the Council, that there were so many holy men
amongst them, most or many of whom carried about them the marks of their
Religion, scars and mutilation of members and dismembrings, Trophies of their
Profession; every one of which carried efficacy with their determinations, and
brought honor to their persons even in the eyes of the Emperor himself when he
beheld them in their Assembly.

The Emperor at the first entry upon their work, Sect. 2. Sec. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Enseb. Vit. Constable. cap. 12.
made a short Speech, testifying his thankfulness to God for his victory over
all his enemies, and for the public peace of his Empire, and for the joyful
sight of them in their meeting; and exhorting them to preserve peace and unity
in the Church of God, and purity of Doctrine, and holiness of life: And
especially he commends two things in particular to their care; One for
establishing one practice of the Church in the observation of the Feast of
Easter, Eusebius. Vit. Constable. cap. 16, 17, 18.
upon one certain day. The other concerned the Arian doctrine. The first of
which the Council happily determined; and the same was confirmed by the
Emperors edict, although the acts of the Council now published, make little
mention thereof. But the second, concerning Arian doctrine, required much
dispute: For Arius appeared in the maintenance of his opinions: And Alexander
the Alexandrian Bishop principally opposed him, and with him Athanasius then
his Deacon: And they produced against him diverse of his blasphemous assertions
which he had uttered at the Council at Alexandria; which also are mentioned by
Athanasius. The most general whereof, comprehending others are as follows.

Athan. Dis^ut cont. A an.
That God was not always the Father. That the Son was not always the Son. That
the Son was made by God of nothing. That he was made God by participation of
the Deity. That He is not the Natural Son of God, but his Son by Grace. That
God foreknowing his Son to be good, gave Him that Glory which the Son afterward
merited. That the Son is not properly that wisdom or word, in which God created
the World: but there is another Word and wisdom, in which He made the Son, and
another proper wisdom or word in which God oreated the World. That Christ is
not the power of God, otherwise then as worms are said so to be. That the
Father cannot be known perfectly by the Son. That the Son does not perfectly
know his own essence. That God made not us for Christ, but Christ for us.
Athan. Epist. ad Synod.
That the Holy Ghost is a creature made and renaoves from place to place. That
the Substances of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are incommunicable each to
other. That the Trinity is not equal one with another in majesty and glory, but
one insinitely exceeds the other. Some of these the Council of Nice observed
out of Arius his book called Thalia, Sect. 3.
upon the reading thereof at the Council. Yet it may be observed that Arius
waved his opinion concerning the Holy Ghost, because the Nicene Council in the
Confession on of their Faith, as it was first published, so far as appears,
did not enlarge their sense concerning it; and besides, we find not that the
most rigid Arians did assert the same, but rather oppose them when as afterward
the Macedonians took them up. Upon these points therefore, that principally
concerned the Second Person, was the principal debate and as touching them
Athanasius was engaged against Arius in a solemn disputation, which is
published in Athanasius his Works; wherewith I shall not meddle further then to
set down the points in controversy, Athan. Disput. cont. Arian.
as I find them set down by Athanasius: wherein first Athanasius delivers to
Arius his own judgment in nature of a formal confession of his faith in these
words:

I believe in One God the Father Almighty, God always Father; and in God the
Word, the Only begotten Son of God; and that He does coexist with the Father;
and is of the same Substance of the Father; and is equal to the Father as
touching His Deity; that He is always present with the Father, in all places;
and contains all things in His Essence, and is contained of none, as also God
His Father is. And I believe in the Holy Spirit, that He is of the Substance of
the Father, and coeternal with the Father and the Son; and I affirm the Word
was in the Flesh. This Athanasius wrote in opposition to the Arian Doctrine,
Sect. 4.
and to offer to Arius occasion of declaring his full faith in writing, as to
each particular, which he did accordingly in manner following.

I believe in God Eternal, and in his Son, whom before all ages He as God
created, and made Him His Son; and whatsoever things the Son has, those when
He had them not, He received of God, and therefore He is not equal to the
Father, nor of the same dignity, but remains a creature, and is inferior to
the Glory of God, and inferior to Him, as touching the Power of God, I believe
in the Holy Ghost begotten of the Son. It shall not trouble me whether this
Disputation was in the presence of the public Council, or apart; Sect. 5.
for the more rigid sort of Arians from time to time did assert the same things
with Arius, and therefore there is the less question in the reality of Arius
his tenets; and that the particulars were debated at the Council may appear by
the result so particularly opposite to the Arian opinions: For the Council
agreed upon a collection of their conclusion into one Summary, in the nature of
the confession of their faith; Athan. Epist. ad Solet. Vit. Soc. lib. 1. cap.
5. Bosil Epist. 60. and 78.
which also was done by Hossius Bishop of Corduba, and published as a Directory
to the Doctrine of the Churches for future times. The same according to
Socrates, and with some transposition of words, not varying sense, is published
by Basil in this manner.

We believe in one God the Father Almighty, Creator of all things visible and
invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ Begotten of the Father, Only begotten;
that is to say of the Substance of the Father; God of God, Light of Light, very
God of very God, Begotten, not made; Consubstantial to the Father, by whom all
things are made both in the Heaven and in the Earth. Who for us men, and our
Salvation descended, is incarnate, is made man, suffered, arose again the third
day, Ascended into Heaven, shall come to judge the Living and the Dead. And in
the Holy Ghost.

Those therefore that shall affirm that time was when He was not, before He was
begotten; Or that He did come from Nothing; Or that He is begotten of other
Essence then of the Fathers Substance; Or that the Son of God is created, Or
that He may be altered or changed. Unto all such the Church denounces the
Anathema.

Then the Council proceeded against such as had been criminous; Sect. 6. Sozom.
lib. 1. cap. 23. Soc. lib. 1. cap. 6.
and deprived Meletus from all Episcopal Authority and power, yet left to him
the Name and Title of Bishop, and permitted him to continue still in his City
at Lyco. For though the Meletians made a matter of fact, and male
administration in government a Cause sufficient to ground their separation
upon; yet the Nicene Council determined it to be pertinax inscitia, Sozom. lib.
2. cap. 20.
a willful ignorance, and therefore did not continue or confirm that
separation; but taking away the Authority of Meletus and his Presbyters, until
confirmed again by the Alexandrian Churches, the people are enjoined to
communicare with the Alexandrians, which they did accordingly. But as touching
Arius, they did actually excommunicate and banish him.

They further proceeded to determine matters concerning the government of the
Church, Sect. 7.
by confirming the government by Provincial Councils, under the Pastors of the
Mother Churches Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons; each of them to enjoy the same
powers which Customary permission of the Churches had formerly allowed to them.
Nothing can I find that de nova was granted to them; but rather such power
which by corruption was encroached, was thereby regulated and restrained. And
thus for the future there seems hereby a door shut and barred against Schism
and heresy, so long as Provincial Councils and their members are true to
themselves or to the Church of God, and the Christian Magistrate will be
Christian indeed, to execute the Law as he ought to do.

For before the Council at Nice, Sect. 8.
the prudential agreement of Churches and Councils, in Associations, or apart
by themselves, bound no further then ingenuity or conscience did lead any party
or person, and under no worse penalty then Separation, or if you will
Excommunication, from this or that Church, which some might account a privilege
in those days as well as now; and what was the fruit of all? but Sects,
Schisms, Heresies, and the Spirits of Professors never satisfied, but still
lingering, as now adays after new opinions and liberty from being under Church
Government, which they call, Liberty of conscience. This sore the Nicene
Council well eyed, and seeing no other way in humane opinion to prevent the
worst; found it necessary to bind the Government of the Church under the Law of
the Christian Magistrate; and therefore having finished their conclusions,
tendered them to be confirmed by the Seal of the Imperial power, by which they
had assembled themselves, and under other penalties besides that of separation.
And hereby the Christian Magistrates power becomes incorporate into the
government of the Church in all cases where the Law of God determines not
otherwise, to enforce the determinations of the Church, as by the Law the
Magistrate is enabled to do. And therefore if any Congregation will independ,
or be at liberty from the power of the Christian Magistrate, in such cases they
do not only outlaw themselves, but upon their own principle allow every one of
their fellow members to consist with them, in no other manner then they did in
the Churches before Constantines Conversion, under a liberty to separate to any
schism or error, as they shall please; and as it were thrust out the Christian
Magistrate from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, and leave him to serve
other Gods, as Constantine did before his Conversion; which thing no Church or
Congregation of Christians, though never so schismatical, ever did, althouth
they held their principles of separation in as high account as any in these
days can pretend unto; until of later times the Anabaptists in Germany brought
that principle into the Church. But forbearing further digression herein, I
shall proceed with the subject in hand.

The determinations of the Nicene Council being thus concluded, Sect. 9.
the Bishops and members are called to subscribe the same; and amongst the
rest, seventeen of them are observed to decline their subscription, being
somewhat ensnared in the Arian Principles: and the conclusions of the Council
attested are presented to the Emperors consideration; who highly applauding the
same, declared that all such as had refused to subscribe thereto, Ruffin. lib.
1. cap. 5.
should be forthwith banished; whereupon eleven of those seventeen who were
dissenters do now submit, and do subscribe the same; though some were more
willing then others. And thus are the Church decrees now backed, not only with
the penalty of Ecclesiastical, but also with civil excommunication, Theod. lib.
1. c. 12.
which was accompanied also with loss of habitation and personal estate. But
nothing will prevail with Arius, nor with five others, amongst which were
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, Theogenis Bishop of Nice, Euzoius a Deacon of
Alexandria, who had been formerly excommunicated by the Synod at Alexandria,
and others are made Bishops in their steads. Nevertheless it was not long ere
some expedient was found for Arius his stay, or speedy return from banishment;
for he is found acquitted from banishment before Eusebius and Theogenis; Soz.
lib. 2. cap. 15.
but how, or upon what occasion Writers do not mention, yet it seems he was
restrained from returning to Alexandria. For they that mention his return
thither, make it to be about the last year of Constantines Empire, which was
about ten years after Arius his banishment. And that this favor was showed to
Arius, is evident from the supplication that Eusebius and Theognis made to the
Emperor; for therein they take notice of the favor done to Arius, who is the
principal in the matter sentenced by the Emperor and the Nicene Council; and
therefore they beseech the Emperors lenity as to themselves also. It may seem
also that Arius had gained that favor by retractation of his errors: Soc.
lib. 1. cap. 20.
For both Eusebius and Theognis made their retractations also, which they
presented to the Emperor, and the Bishops, wherein they do declare, That they
do consent to the Confession of the Faith, agreed upon by the Nicene Council,
and do promise that they will study the peace of the Church; and further more
they show the cause of their refusal to subscribe the Confession, was not that
they did disagree from the same faith with the Council, but because they could
not consent to the sentence against Arius, who had in private conference with
them declared that his judgment was other then what was apprehended by the
Council. And therefore they pray to be admitted to subscribe their consent to
the Confession of Faith, as it was agreed by the Council; Though not so much
(said they) to avoid the penalty of banishment, as that they might not lie
under the heavy burden of being reputed Heretics, being nevertheless willing
to submit to the determination of the Council. And they the rather beseech
this, because the Emperor and Bishops had permitted him who was deemed by them
the principal offender, to return and have courteous entertainment with them.

And this retractation thus presented, Sect. 11.
could not be long after the Council at Nice, because these Retractors are
admitted to return, and are sent home, restored to their Churches, and others
removed, who had been placed in their stead; and which is yet more strange, are
admitted into favor with the Emperor, and were the ringleaders in all the
troubles which Athanasius endured from his first entrance into his Episcopal
See at Alexandria, which was within half a year after the Council at Nice, and
wherein Athanasius continued all the time of Constantines government afterward,
as by the sequel will appear. So as though the Council at Nice ended with the
rout of Arius and his party, and renown of Alexander and Athanasius (who is now
become eminent amongst all the Churches) yet Arius and his followers are
rallied again by dissimulation: For who ever he be that will make a Schism,
and not upon a clear truth, will believe or not believe, according to the turn
of times.

Nevertheless this alaied not the spirit of Arius, Sect. 12.
Eusebius and Theognis; for they with others of their party to this novel
subscription never were quiet, till they had by indirect means gained into
their hands the original of the Synodical determinations, Sozom. lib. 2. cap.
20.
from him to whom the same was committed by the Emperor to be safely kept; and
having defaced their subscriptions, disposed of the same in that manner in the
conclusion, that it became utterly lost from the view of the Churches in future
times. These gilded Arians now thinking themselves at liberty from engagement,
cast off their Vail, and by their tongues and pens appear plain Arians, and
enter into open defiance against the Nicene Faith, which breaks forth into
Tumults against the Catholic Church. Forced and fained Retractations and
Subscriptions, do not only not bind the will thereto, but contrarily enrage
the (...)

Athanasius. But that as smoke also vanished away, when Athanasius came to
answer for himself: nor could Athanasius rationally submit himself to such an
Election in those times, especially when as it could be neither honorable for
him, nor safe so to do, if he had intended to keep a good conscience. But I
shall let that pass, for if the Election were once questioned, it became
unquestionable by being questioned, and shall take it for a concluded case,
that Athanasius after he had passed through all Ecclesiastical degrees, Nazian.
Encom.
is legally become Bishop of Alexandria, and thereby and by the Decree of the
Council at Nice, Conc. Nicen. can. 6.
has power in all the Churches of Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, according to
the ancient Canon. Athanasius his age at this time is not mentioned in any
Writer, unless conjectured by Baronius; but its agreed by all that it was
within six months after his return from the Council at Nice, Eusebius. Vit.
Constable. lib. 3. cap. 14.
which as Eusebius says, was holden in the twentieth year of Constantines
Empire: and Hierome says, That Athanasius was elected in the four and
twentieth of his Reign, and then the Council must continue three years, or
there is a mistake amongst Writers.

No sooner was this great trumpet of Truth (as Nazianzen calls Athanasius)
settled in his place at Alexandria, Sect. 3.
but Eusebius at Nicomedia, now in favor with the Emperor, and the great
Courtier of the times, strained his utmost endeavor to unsettle Athaniasius;
he often tells the Emperor how unfitting a man Athanasius was for such a
place, Soc lib. 1. cap. 18.
but the Emperor listens not thereto; then he resolves to try Athanasius his
mettle, and as if himself had been the Primate of the World, he writes to
Athanasius to admit Arius and his associates into their places, and into
communion with the Alexandrian Church again, or otherwise he must expect what
will follow. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 17.
But Athanasius neither persuaded by requests, nor scared by threats, returned
answer, that he could not admit into communion such as were excommunicated by
the Council; and hereupon ensues a public defiance by Eusebius against
Athanasius; he will neither endure Athanasius nor his doctrine; public
disputes and preachings are by him owned and patronized against the
determination of the Council: And thus the Arian Schism revives again. And
Eusebius fearing that Athanasius would make some sudden address after his
Election to the Emperor, and so win the Emperors favor: He, together with
Theognis and others of the Arian party, repair to the Emperor with Articles
against the election of Athanasius, as being unduly gained by combination
amongst a few. And in particular, that after the death of Alexander, fifty and
four of the Egyptian Bishops assembled for an election to be made of his
Successor, Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 16.
and when they had upon their oaths given their votes for one person;
nevertheless seven of that number, contrary to their oaths, separated from
the rest and elected Athanasius, and ordained him; and that thereupon many of
the Egyptian Churches, as well Ministers as people, refused communion with
Athanasius. They further more informed, that Athanasius was a pragmatical
fomenter of strifes and dissension amongst the Churches. But Athanasius was not
so dull as to neglect(...)

cured for them License from the Emperor, to have and hold Churches apart from
the Alexandrian Churches. And thus three mischiefs befall the Alexandrian
Churches at once: First, a schism licensed and tolerated by the authority of
the Christian Magistrate: Secondly, a usurpation of the Christian Magistrate
over the Churches, in determining matters Ecclesiastical, contrary to the
determinations of a general Council, wherein the Magistrate was bound by his
own Vote; and these are two sores to the Church unto this day. The third was
properly belonging unto that time, and those places, which was, a toleration of
the Arian Heresy under the Meletian wings. So as members of the Meletians they
may now hold Communion with those who are of Orthodox judgment, by authority,
who formerly were excommunicated by a general Council: And thus is the glory of
the Christian Magistrate in the Church suddenly eclipsed, by neglecting to rule
according to Law. Constantine saw the error by the troubles that ensued, but
saw not the cause in his own heart, he sends for Eusebius, and questions with
him concerning it; Soz. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Eusebius now dares justify the Arian Doctrine, and tells the Emperor
passionately, If my garment (said he) should be divided in my presence into
parts, I would never affirm both parts needs one effence: The Emperor tasting
the blasphemy, as passionately returned an answer of banishment both of
Eusebius, and Theognis: passionately, I said, for had it been from true zeal,
the banishment had longer continued. But upon the next occasion that Writers
mention, I find them both as busy again in pursuit of Athanasius, as ever they
were.

For the Meletians, but a while ago an abomination to Constantine, are so bold
upon this favor, Sect. 5.
that they profess before him their bitterness against the Churches of
Alexandria: For being encouraged by the Arians, they go to Constantinople with
Articles of complaint against Athanasius, where they meet with Eusebius and
Theognis, Soc. lib. 1. cap. 20.
who now also have gained three Bishops more into their society, viz. Maris
Bishop of Calcedon, and Valens, and Ursatius Bishops of Panonia; all of them
lovers of the Court more then their own flocks, all of them condemned by the
Council of Nice, and now constant and earnest Solicitors at the Court against
all such as were of the Orthodox Faith; and this might seem strange that
Constantines Court should harbor such guests, but that stranger things do
follow. For these five Bishops having this occasion, join together in the
countenancing of the Meletian Articles against Athanasius, and presenting of
them to the Emperor; They are as follows. First, That Athanasius is the
great fomenter of the troubles in the Egyptian Churches. Secondly, That
Athanasius endeavored to undermine the Emperors authority in Egypt, and to
advance his own, and to that purpose levied money of the people, and supplied
therewith Phylumenius the Emperors enemy in Egypt, who endeavored to raise
sedition and tumults in that Country. Thirdly, that Athanasius is an oppressor
of the people in Egypt, and exacteth from them linen garments or vestments for
the service of the Church at Alexandria. But whilst these things are thus
working at Constantinople, Athanasius not negligent of his own safety, upon
experience already had of the enemies skirmishes; expects the main battle will
come on, and therefore makes have to Constantinople, where he soon finds what
work was upon the Anvil; and presenting himself unto the Emperor, made it so
plain to the Emperor, that these Articles were pure forgeries, that the
Emperor made no difficulty to accept him graciously, and dismissed him with
his imperial Letters to the Church of Alexandria, letting them know of the
malice and falsehood of Athanasius his accusers: and that Athanasins his
integrity was so apparent, that the Emperor took great joy and delight in his
company, and found him a faithful servant of God; and therefore required the
Alexandrians to receive him with due honor, and demean themselves respectively
toward him; and to study to maintain love and unity one with another, and to
beware of those that endeavor to raise and nourish dissension and division
amongst themselves: And thus is Athanasius judicially declared the true Bishop
of Alexandria, and an honest man.

CAP. VI.
The second complaint against Athanasius before the Emperor: and his Trial at
the Council at Tyrus.

NO sooner is Athanasius come from one Trial at Constantinople, Sect. 1.
but another is making ready for him at Mareotis; Soc. lib. 1. cap. 20.
a part of Egypt, wherein are many Towns and Congregations of Christians, all
of them under the government of the Bishop of Alexandria, each of which having
a competent number of people, having a Presbyter: and amongst these was one
Coluthus, a man no less ambitious then was Arius, and therefore seldom was any
agreement between them two, (for it is a rare thing to meet with two ambitious
spirits to close) each of them had opinions which they peculiarly owned, and
each had his peculiar Church; only Coluthus had so far exceeded, as to be in
repute a Bishop, when as Arius was but a Presbyter; but by reason that the
Council at Alexandria had disepiscopated him, his sect soon wasted: yet amongst
them was one named Ischyras, a man that could thrive in no calling, and then
will needs turn Minister, and prevails with Coluthus to make him a Presbyter;
and so Coluthus made him as good a Presbyter, as he thereby made Coluthus a
Bishop; for the Council had determined against him also, but he would not be
thus determined upon; he conceited he was a Minister, and he resolves to
conceit himself to be so still; and being thus fitted, or rather unfitted, he
wanders about for a living; and coming to a small Village in Mareotis, where
the inhabitants were few, and those so poor, that they could not maintain a
Minister amongst them, but were necessitated to unite to a neighboring
Congregation; there he sits down, and gets into a poor house, gains the dweller
there to be his Disciple, and falls to teaching such principles as he had; and
in continuance gathered a Church, as he called it, as many do in these days,
upon as good principles as he, and with as little good success. For the news of
this new Apparition coming to Macarius, Presbyter of the neighboring Church, he
acquaints Athanasius therewith, who bids Macarius go and visit the place,
Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 24.
and tell Ischyras that Athanasius would speak with him, and with Macarius
another Presbyter is joined: both these entering into the house where Ischyras
was, found him sick in bed, and there they visited the Church, (for so I find
it ordinarily called in those ancient times, and neither steeple house, nor
meeting place) and upon inquiry, finding the particulars, they pitying the
condition of Ischyras, say not any thing to him, but tell his father of the
complaint against his son, and wish his father to advise his son not to
intermeddle any more with the Ministerial calling there, till further orders
from Athanasius: and so without any further ado they depart and acquaint
Athanasius what they had found and did. Epist. Synod. Alex. ad Epist. Affr.
But Ischyras recovering his health, and being told by his father what was said
to him by the two Presbyters, he concludes, that there was no abiding for him
in that place upon former terms, and that he must expect to answer for what he
had already done; he therefore betakes him to his heels, and away is gone for
Nicomedia, to Eusebius, the Arian Patron, and unto him bewails his sad
condition: That he being a poor Minister of the Gospel, had been shamefully
abused and wronged by Athanasius, his Church by him was profaned and vilified,
his Communion Table overthrown, his Sacramental Cup broken in pieces, his Bible
burnt, and himself threatened with persecution. Eusebius hears all, and receives
the man courteously, as a Minister of the Gospel, pities his condition, and
promises him his best furtherance; but he said it must be by the Emperors
authority and favor, which Eusebius doubted not of: but then Ischyras for his
part must be ready with proofs, to make good the matter of the complaint, which
if found true, would not only be for his relief, but even for his advancement
to a better preferment, and it may be to a Bishopric in due time.

Eusebius and his associates the Courtly Arian Bishops, Sect. 2.
think now they have enough wherewith to adventure once into the Emperors
presence, against Athanasius; and therefore repair unto the Emperor, and tell
him of strange complaints that daily come to them against Athanasius: That they
were many and of no mean degree: That the witnesses which will be produced to
prove the same, are not mean persons; and therefore they pray the Emperor that
a Synod may be called, and the matters tried there, and Athanasius heard in a
legal way. The Emperor might have much cause to suspect malice in this matter,
as well as he had found it formerly; yet in regard the information was by five
Bishops, all persons of no mean concernment, he hearkened to their Counsel; and
appointed a Council to be holden at Caesaria Palestina, Soc. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Theod. lib. 2. cap. 27, 28, 29.
a place picked out by Eusebius in the midst of a people overrun with
Arianisme both Pastors and People. This was sad news for Athanasius, who
hereby sees how the game is like to go concerning him, there being scarce four
Bishops of all that Country that were Orthodox: Athanasius therefore declining
to appear at Caesarea, gave his reason to the Emperor: This touched the
Emperor to the quick, as if his Authority therein had been slighted by
Athanasius; nevertheless concealing his displeasure, seemed to do him Justice,
and removed the Council from Caesarea to Tyrus, so the place is changed, but
not the persons. And there is a sting added in the tail of the Emperors
Letters, importing, That Athanasius must appear there at his peril; or if he do
not, the Emperor will send such as shall force him thereunto; and to make this
good, he appoints the Commander in chief of the Soldiers in that Country to
represent his person in that Council. This Commander the Histories say was no
friend to Athanasius, and it seems neither was he a friend to Religion or
Justice. For he officiously caused Macarius to be apprehended, and committed to
custody in chains before any cause appeared against him at the Council.
Athanasius now sees the Emperors countenance toward him to be changed; and
that he must be judged by the Arian party, and by a Council wholly under the
Moderatorship of the Soldiers; in which respect it could not be called a free
Council; yet he resolves to be present, Soc. lib. 1. cap. 20.
not so much fearing himself, as the violation of the Nicene Decrees, should
suffer prejudice. Nevertheless, he came not at the beginning, but delayed his
appearing, Sozomen says, thirty months, Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 24.
which I suppose must be accounted from the first sitting of the Council at
Caesarea, and by that delay gained the particulars in charge against him, and
was the better prepared to make his Defense.

The Council at Tyrus now assembled, Sect. 3.
the complaints against Athanasins come in thick and threefold; Sozom. lib. 2.
cap. 24.
for Calinicus and Ischyras, one of them a Meletian Bishop, and the other a
Meletian Presbyter routed, being formerly engaged by Eusebius, jointly with the
Arians, bring in their Articles against Athanasius. That he had contemptuously
thrown down the Communion Table, when Ischyras was in the time of
administration of the Sacrament. That he likewise brake the Communion Cup. That
he had unjustly imprisoned Ischyras diverse times by false accusations. That he
had unjustly ejected Calinicus from his Bishopric. That he had by violent
assault beaten diverse persons. That he procured his election to the Bishopric
of Alexandria by perjury: And many such reports are scattered before the
Council. And at length Athanasius comes into the Council, and they proceed
legally against him.

As touching the outrage in over-throwing the Communion Table, Sect. 4.
the witnesses that were produced, were such as Jews or Catecumeni, who after
full evidence given were asked where they stood when they saw that insolency
acted? They answered, that they were present in the place. That cannot be, was
replied; for none can be present at the administration, but the participants
only. Then the witnesses were asked, where Ischyras stood when the Table was
demolished? He was sick in bed they answered; then it was observed to the
Council that Ischyras could not be at that time in the work of administration
of the Sacrament. The witnesses were further asked who burnt the Bible? Athan.
Apol. 2.
they said, they knew nothing of any such matter. Ischyras was then asked
concerning his Church, who they were and how many? he said they were in number
seven. The Council not being satisfied with this evidence, yet would not
desist; but will make further inquiry by special Visitation; and appointed five
of their members to go to the place, and make exact inquisition into the
matter. Athanasius excepted against the Visitors as incompetent; they had been
his accusers already, shall they be witnesses, judges, and parties in the same
cause? but what ever Athanasius said, they account to no purpose; and to as
little purpose was what they did. For Ischyras by his Letter to Athanasius
afterward confessed to him, that what he said in all was fained and forced, and
that it was extorted from him by Heraclides, Athan. Apol. 2.
Isaak and Letois, three Meletian Bishops, by threats and cruel usage.

Yet are these but trifles in comparison of what follows, Sect. 5.
for after this came into the Council a common strumpet, who with a shameless
countenance charged Athanasius, that he being her guest, did ravish her:
Athanasius being silent, Timothius stepped forward and asked the woman, was I
ever at your house, or had I ever ought to do with you? She likewise turning
toward Timothius, said, were not you at my house at such a time? and did you
not then force me? hereat a noise is raised in the Council, some laughing,
others raging; and the strumpet is commanded forthwith to depart the place:
Nay, said Athanasius, she ought to be examined who suborned her hereunto, but
in the mean time the woman is gone: And other witnesses are brought in, who say
nothing to the former matters, but bring an uncouth charge, of a stranger
nature.

That Athanasius had murdered Arsenius, Sect. 6. Soc. lib. 1. cap. 20.
and cut off his right arm, which he preserved secretly in a chest for magical
uses, which being found, is produced now to the Council; and therewith a man's
arm is taken out of a chest and shown forht. Hereat a pretense of general
admiration seems to possess all at the strangeness of the thing; The thing is
accounted a brutish cruelty, and Athanasius as an enemy to Mankind. But that
the thing may be better understood, it must be remembered that Arsenius had been
formerly a Lecturer under Athanasius, and being guilty of somewhat, Ruffinus.
forthwith his conscience told him he deserved punishment; to avoid shame, gets
himself away, and abides amongst the Meletians, where he by them was kept in
obscurity, Athan. Apol. 2.
as was confessed by Pinnes the Presbyter, in his Letter to Athanasius, wherein
he confesses himself to be the chief actor. And Arsenius being thus in
obscurity, a report is raised that he is murdered by Athanasius, upon
displeasure conceived against him. Soc. lib. 1. cap. 21.
This report occasioned Athanasius to make a strict enquiry after Arsenius, and
probably discovered him to be alive, and as some say prevailed with him to come
to Tyrus; but others more probably conclude that God overruled his mind to
come thither of his own accord, either out of a mind affecting novelty, or
intending some other design, for he came privately and obscured himself in the
City of Tyrus, yet was he discovered in the evening to the Governor; and being
apprehended, he denied his name, but he being secured, notice is given thereof
to Athanasius privately. The next day when Arsenius his matter came to
consideration in the Council, and they were thus in amaze, Athanasius desires
to know if any one present knew Arsenius so perfectly as to affirm the arm
shown forth was his; whereupon diverse answered, that they knew Arsenius well,
yet do not know the arm produced to be his. And hereupon the party that was
apprehended was brought into the Council. And Athanasius seeing him, asked if
any man present knew this person now before them; and diverse there present
affirmed he is Arsenius. Then Athanasius stepping to him, turned aside his
outward garment, and discovered both his arms, saying, behold here are two
arms, as other men use to have; and if any man can show the place where the
other arm was cut off, he may search and show what he can; the clamor is now
raised greater then before, in which the principal witness against Athanasius,
by some named Acab, by others Johannes (both of them Meletian Bishops) being
self-confounded; takes his slight in the tumult and is gone.

Now is the Scene quite changed; before Athanasius was a Murderer, now he is a
conjurer and has deluded the Council with a phantasm or sprightish appearance
or shape of Arsenius, insomuch as Athanasius is now in danger of being torn in
pieces amongst them, had not the Civil Power rescued him, and carrying him out
from amongst them, advised him to make his escape by Sea.

^aphnutius an Egyptian Pishop in the beginning of this disquisition concerning
Athanasius before the Council; evidently perceiving their intention, Sect. 7.
Ruffin. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 17.
and the siding of the Soldiers with them against Athanasius, steps to Maximus
Bishop of Jerusalem (who had, like as himself, lost one eye and one leg in
witness bearing to the truth under Maxentius.) And taking Maximus by the hand,
lifted him up, saying, Maximus, You and I have been fellows in suffering, and
are equal sharers therein, each of us have lost one of our bodily eyes; but God
has given us a clearer light within us, then our outward eye can see: I cannot
endure that we should sit here any longer in the Councils of these wicked men,
here is no mind of Justice at all; and so going out with him, told him the
whole truth of Athanasius's carriage, by means whereof Maximus continued a
faithful friend to Athanasius as long as he lived. After him Potamon Bishop of
Heraclea, seeing Eusebius Bishop of Caesaria sitting as Director of the
Council, Epiphan. Lib. 2. Tom. 2. Her.
and siding against Athanasius, now standing as a Delinquent, was overcome with
grief, and said weeping, Do you Eusebius sit as Judge? and must innocent
Athanasius be judged by you? who can endure to see it? but tell me, were not
you in prison with me in the persecuting times? therein I lost one of my eyes
in bearing witness to the truth; but you can show no mutilation of any member,
nor mark of your confession. How did you escape out of prison? was it not by
doing that abomination, which you ought not to have done, or promising to do
the same? Athan. Apol 2.
And immediately he also departs the Council, and was followed by forty or more
of the Egyptian Bishops; for they saw it a vain thing for them to strive
against Dionisius, the Emperors Lieutenant there, and his Soldiers. Eusebius
hearing Potamons rebuke, was moved thereat, and said, Do you Potamon come
hither to persecute, you will do it much more in your own Country? and
thereupon he dissolved the meeting for that day: Sectaries muse as they use;
they say the Church will persecute, but the Church does know by experience that
the Sectaries do persecute. For after this the Council did meet again, and
proceeded in their work, they condemn Athanasius, excommunicate and banish him
never to return to Alexandria again. A strange example of a Christian Council
in the government of such an Emperor as Constantine is reported to be; and is
a sufficient evidence to all the World that the opinion that a Council cannot
err, is but a notion.

CHAP. VII.
Athanasius his appeal to the Emperor Constantine; Athanasius is banished, and
Ariusis accepted.

IT is nevertheless true, Sect. 1.
That the curse causeless shall not come: Athanasius is now in repute an
excommunicate banished Outlaw. Yet in the issue God will bring forth his
judgment as the light. He is enforced to flee for his liberty, and to seek his
reparation from the Emperor by way of appeal from the Council to his
definitive sentence, as the supreme power in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil. This is the first president of that kind that is found in story, (for
Constantine was the first Christian Emperor) and is commended to posterity by
the example of so worthy a man as Athanasius was, who was the first leader
herein. Nor was the Emperor scrupulous in admitting the appeal; however
himself was interested in the act of the Council, by the Presidency of his
Lieutenant there, but did appoint the matter to be heard before himself at
Constantinople. Neither did the Arian Bishops now in Council at Tyrus disclaim
the trial before the Emperor; for though they were the first president of a
schism in a general Council, yet they did not independ upon the supreme
Christian Magistrate; but sent their Procters to appear before the Emperor, to
justify their proceedings as well as they could. Soz. lib. 2. cap. 27.
But I must leave the appeal depending, till I glance upon some passages
between the Emperor and Arius which preceded the appearance of Athanasius
before the Council, and had their influence upon Athanasius afterward.

The Arian Party under the conduct of Eusebius, Sect. 2.
had made it their design ever since the Council at Nice, to gain back Arius to
Alexandria, and to restore him to communion with the Church there; for which
purpose a Presbyter of their own sect was made become familiarly acquainted
with Constantia the Emperors sister; Soz. lib. 2 cap. 26.
and having gained her favor, told her, that it was much for the Emperors
dishonor, that Arius should so long remain secluded from his Church at
Alexandria, upon such mistake, and by information of some that envied him for
the great opinion that the people have of him; all which will be made apparent,
if the Emperor would but admit him to speak for himself; and therefore he
prayed her to move the Emperor therein. It is supposed that Constantia did
this accordingly soon after, but it might be left out of mind: For afterward
Constantia falling sick of her last sickness, and the Emperor coming to visit
her, amongst other things she glanced upon the matter concerning Arius, and
therein spoke much in commendation of her Presbyter, and commended him to the
Emperors favor; telling him that her Presbyter was a man of parts, zealous of
the Emperors honor, and a very godly man: The Emperor taking this as her
last request (for she died soon after) did accordingly; for he sent for the
Presbyter, and commanded him to wait upon him. This act of the Emperor; though
but an act of love to his sister, and might seem of small importance; yet (as
the times then stood) proved the great hinge upon which the affairs of the
Empire in relation to the Church did turn. So dangerous a thing it is for them
in authority to entrust their favor unto any private relation, especially to a
woman whose affections many times are strong and predominate; and in the
general, are more skillful at making of fires then men are.

This new favorite that Constantine had so easily gained, crept up by degrees
into his bosom: Sect. 3. Soc. lib 1. cap. 19 20. Soz. lib 2. cap. 26.
and after that he found that he had gained possession within his Buttons, he
also adventured to tell the the Emperor, how much he was wounded in his repute
by the long restraint of Arius from Alexandria where he was in so great esteem;
especially upon mistaking grounds concerning his opinion, which is commonly
known to be in no manner contrary to the Nicene Faith, as was reported. And he
further told the Emperor, that if he would please to admit Arius into his
presence, Arius was very desirous to give the Emperor full satisfaction
therein. The Emperor was well pleased herewith, and told the Presbyter, That
if Arius be of the same judgment with the Nicene Council, the Emperor would
not only admit him into his presence, but he would restore him to his Church at
Alexandria: and for further assurance herein, the Emperor wrote his Letters to
Arius, signifying his pleasure, that Arius should come and speak with the
Emperor. Hereupon Arius with Eusebius come to Constantinople; Epiphan.
and being admitted into the Emperors presence, he asked Arius if he did agree
to the Nicene Faith? and they both answered that they did agree thereto, The
Emperor then required them to set down their faith in writing: which thing
they after also did, and presented the same as the faith of them and their
followers, to this purpose:

Soz. lib. 2 cap. 26.
We believe in one God, the Father Almighty: and in one Lord Jesus Christ, his
Son, begotten of him before all ages: True God; by whom all things are made in
Heaven and in Earth; who descended, and is incarnate, and suffered, and rose
again; and ascended into Heaven: and shall come again to judge both the quick
and the dead. And in the Holy Ghost: in the resurrection of the flesh: in
eternal life in the Kingdom of Heaven. In one Catholic Church of God,
extending throughout all the Earth. This Faith they said they received from the
Gospel; the Lord Jesus Christ saying to his Disciples, Go and teach all
nations, sanctifying them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; as
the whole Catholic Church and Scriptures do teach: in which (said they) we
wholly believe God is our Judge, both now, and at the last judgment. This
writing the Emperor perused, and asked Arius if he had ought more to say; and
whether from his heart he did truly own what he did profess? To which Arius
answered, that he had not ought more to say, nor has he written or said other,
or otherwise, then according to his judgment. The Emperor hereto replied, If
your faith be right, you have sworn truly; but if otherwise, know, that God
will be revenged on you for your perjury, and from Heaven reveal his Justice
upon you.

It seems the Emperor was not yet satisfied with the reality of these men,
Sect. 4.
and therefore will determine nothing herein, without Counsel, contrary to the
determinations of the Council at Tyrus, which is in his opinion meet for the
purpose. But a matter of piety comes in his way: he had built a famous Temple
upon Mount Calvary nigh to Jerusalem, and it being now finished he will repair
thither for the dedication of the same: And he writes to the Council at Tyrus,
Theod. lib. 1. c. 30.
to adjourn their meeting to Jerusalem, to assist him in that work: and they
are as forward therein as himself; For building of Churches, and a pompous
devotion, will solder well enough with Arianism, to overlay the same with the
gold of seeming holiness. And unto this Council at Jerusalem, Constantine
refers the matter concerning Arius, sending him thither with his Confession of
Faith by him subscribed; requiring them to examine him strictly concerning the
same, and if they find him and the Confession good, then to show him favor: So
is Athanasius his appeal deferred till the dedication be past, and he gone to
Alexandria. Sozom. lib. 2. c. 26.
But the Council being met at Jerusalem, acdording to the Emperors direction,
speedily take Arius his matter into consideration; and find him Orthodox, and
his Confession good, and acquit him from the censure of the Nicene Council, and
admit him to his Church at Alexandria. Hereof they give notice by Letters to
the Bishops and Presbyters of Egypt and Alexandria, telling them, that Arius
his faith was good, that the Emperor had so declared it upon the Councils
determination at Jerusalem, and that they had admitted Arius again to his
Church at Alexandria; and therefore prayed them to accept him into communion
with them, as before times they had done. And they further wrote to the
Emperor, and informed him what they had done concerning Arius, so as he now
stands right in the Emperors opinion, who granted to Arius also his Imperial
Letters directed to the Church at Alexandria, injoyning them to admit Arius
unto his Church and communion with themselves again. And thus a fault is
committed, whereof the Emperor may politically be acquitted, in that he
followed the advice of a Council: but in a Theological sense He stands
doubtful; for he could not but understand the principles of those persons who
were the prevailing part of the Council: but as touching the Council it self,
it neither was Theologically nor Politically innocent: For they that will err
at Tyrus, will also err at Jerusalem.

And now is Arius posting for Alexandria with all his Letters, Sect. 5.
who coming nigh the City, is met with; and enters the City like himself in
triumph, as a Conqueror rather then as a penitentiary; and hereupon tumults
are raised, and Arius is denied admittance into his Church; and Athanasius by
his Letters to the Emperor renders the reason, That the Catholic Church could
not communicate with heresy, nor the Alexandrians with one that was condemned
by the general Council at Nice, unless he did first retract his opinion, and
manifest repentance, and were thereupon restored by a General Council. But the
Emperor, however Christian he was, yet now apprehending his Authority again
flighted by Athanasius, was angry, and wrote to Athanasius, telling him, that
it is the Emperors express will and pleasure, that all such as shall desire to
be admitted into Church fellowship with the Church at Alexandria, shall have
free liberty to join therein, and be admitted thereto. And if Athanasius shall
refuse any that shall desire the same, the Emperor will forth-wish depose
Athanasius, and give his place to another that shall perform the Emperors will.

Said like an Emperor and not a Chirstian Magistrate that must govern by Law,
Sect. 6.
nor like a Parliament whose Vote must make a Law; had it been so, Athanasius
might have been somewhat blameable; but he being warranted by the determination
of the Council of Nice, in which the Emperors own Vote, as well as the Vote of
all the Churches of the Empire was concluded: And this Council at Jerusalem
but the fag end of a Courcil under force; and therefore not sufficient warrant
for what was done, Conslantine must bear the blame. And therefore in all this,
there can be no president of the Christian Magistrates, interest above the
Ecclesiastical, nor of the Ecclesiastical interest independent upon the
Christian Magistrate, in regard the general Councils were not purely
Ecclesiastical, but mixed of both interests, and so continued till the Mystery
of iniquity was fully settled in the Roman Chair, and the Civil Power turned out
of Doors.

This advantage of the Emperors displeasure at Athanasius is quickly espied by
the Arians, Sect. 7.
and they soon add fuel to the fire, and tell the Emperor, that so long as
Athanasius thus ruled at Alexandria, the Emperors government would be at a
stand in those parts; and therefore they urge the Emperor with the proceedings
of the Council at Tyrus; Soc. lib. 1. cap. 23. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 30.
and thereupon the cause comes to hearing before the Emperor. But the Proctors
for the Tyrian Council quite forgetting the case upon the Appeal, bring
accusations of crimes against Athanasius, which never formerly came to mention;
That Athanasius had threatened to stop the trade of Corn from Egypt to
Constantinople, and that the same will be proved by four Bishops, who were ear
witnesses thereof; And some other particulars, whereunto Athanasius could make
no other defense, then by bare denial of the matters, alleging that his
Authority was not so great, as to stop or open trade. But Athanasius observing
the Emperor somewhat difficult in hearing of him, he told the Emperor somewhat
plainly of his siding with the Heretics, Athan. Apol. 2.
Emicuit ibi Caesaris ira, says Athanasius; the Emperor was enraged thereat,
and forthwith without other cause or further inquiry into matters, he banished
Athanasius, and sent him. prisoner to the Bishop of Triers, where he remained
till the death of Constantine the Emperor.

CAP. VIII.
Constantine will not be persuaded to recall Athanasius: The Death of Anus.

THe banishment of Athanasius, Sect. 1. Baron. An. 336. number. 11.
and the receiving of Arius meeting together as at once, like an Earthquake,
shaked the whole Church of God on Earth, as if their Christian Magistrate were
turned Heathen again, or at least an heathenish Christian Arian; and the rather
because it proved not a fit of passion, but a lasting distemper, and by all the
means that could be used, incurable. For after the news hereof was blown
abroad, the Alexandrian Churches do not only by servent prayers to God night
and day, but by all the means that they could invent, importune the Emperor to
relent; They petition the Emperor themselves, many others do the like; the
Monks of the Wilderness are not behind: But above all that famous Monk Anthony
(whom all Christians honored, Athan. Apol. 2.
even Constantine himself and all his Sons and Courtiers) who wrote diverse
Letters to the Emperor in Athanasius his behalf, praying him to take heed of
the Meletians, for though their Doctrines were good, yet their practice was
scandalous, their informations calumnious, and showed little conscience of
truth (are there none like these men in these days?) But nothing will prevail,
the Emperor returns negatives to all; he tells the Alexandrians, that
themselves are pertinacious and turbulent, and commanded them, their Clerks and
Virgins, to be quiet, for he will not call home Athanasius, nor recede from
what he had done. That Athanasius was condemned by the Council, and was a
seditious and unquiet man. He told also Anthony the Monk, that he could not
disown the proceedings of the Council at Tire against Athanasius, that though
some might be his enemies, yet is it not to be believed that so many learned
men should so foully miscarry, as to condemn him without just cause. That
Athanasius is a turbulent man, and arrogant; with other passionate words, as in
the Letters do appear. And thus the matter is concluded against Athanasius upon
the Emperors passionate surmise; A distemper suiting rather with Dioclesian
then Constantines Profession. N^zian. E^com. Athan.
For a good man because himself is not prone to commit evil, is therefore not
prone to condemn another good man, without clear grounds, which Constantine
had not. Nevertheless my own pen also must beware how it touches deeper upon
the sincerity of Constantine then is meet. For Baronius takes much pains to
mollify the harshness of this act of Constantine (possibly from regard of the
honor of the Roman Church so highly extolled by Constantine as they report) as
if all had been done in policy to maintain the public peace, and in favor to
Athanasius in conveying him out of the way of the deadly pursuit of the
Meletians and Arians. And it is very true that Writers do affirm, Soz. lib. 3.
cap. 2.
that Constantine (the son of Constantine the Great) in his Letters to the
Chrurches of Alexandria upon his restoring of Athanasius (left under his power
by the death of his father) amongst other things says, That it was a favor in
Constantiue the Great to send Athanasius out of the way, unto the Bishop of
Triers, where he was well entertained and wanted nothing, and that in the mean
time the Sea of Alexandria was kept vacant for him; and that the Emperor had
therein an eye to the public peace. And it is no less true that Athanasius
himself, what ever he thought at the present time of his banishment concerning
the Emperors anger, yet afterward he was persuaded to conceive charitable,
Athan. Apol. 2.
or at least to speak charitably thereof. And therefore I must conjecture that
although this banishment might originally arise from a distemper of sudden
passion, yet afterward it was continued upon a prudential consideration.

For Constantine was angry on both sides, Sect. 2.
as may appear by his dealing with the Meletians; who having thus by the help
of the Arians traveled with iniquity and conceived mischief to the
Alexandrians, in the conclusion bring forth falsehood to themselves; for having
now getten the day, as they conceived, against the Alexandrian Churches, they
expect glorious times. And Arius is now posting in haste to Alexandria to get
possession, Soc. lib. 1. cap. 25. Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 28.
and as it seems is met in a triumphant manner by the Meletians, with their
Bishop John in the Vanne; and coming thus to Alexandria, the Arian party grow
rampant; and this meeting with an exasperated people at the banishment of their
Bishop, breaks forth into a tumult, and therein bloodshed ensues, and such a
havoc, as the news comes to Constantinople. And the Emperor sends for Arius
and the Meletian Bishop, who presenting themselves to the Emperor, they are
questioned as Authors of disturbance, and much of the blame resting upon the
insolency of the Meletians; and their Bishop (who was no less adored by the
Meletians than Athanasius was honored of the Alexandrians) would not be
dissuaded, Soz. lib. 2. cap. 29.
but forthwith banished him also; notwithstanding that he had the whole Arian
party to befriend him.

But as touching Arius he is saved, Sect. 3.
yet not fafe, for he cannot attain his end for all this; he is not permitted
to go to Alexandria, but must stay at Constantinople, where he had not
continued long before another Tumult is raised even there also. For Alexander
Bishop of Constantinople was a learned man, and no less zealous against the
Arians then was also Athanasius. And the general stream of the people of that
City were well mended also that way. And thought the Arian party there were but
few in comparison, yet the presence of their great Rabbi there made them gather
courage, and grew more bold then ordinarily they had been; and thereat distaste
is taken, and upon occasion an outrage follows. The Emperor awakened thereat,
sends for Arius, and asks him what the matter is, that wherever he goes
still Tumults follow him? and whether he does really agree with the Nicene
Faith? And again he professedly avoweth that he does fully agree thereto. The
Emperor commands him to set the same down in writing under his hand, which
he did in the Emperors presence: Soc. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Hereto the Emperor requires his oath to manifest that he is real in the same;
and he as readily makes oath, that what he had written, was according to the
truth, and that it was his real judgment and opinion. But the Historian says,
Theod. lib. 1. c. 14.
that (to save Arius from a plain lie and perjury) at the same time Arius had
his private opinion in his own sense under his own hand in writing, which then
he also kept under his arm when he made his oath; and that Arius swore in
relation to that, and not to what he subscribed in the Emperors presence. The
Emperor having this evidence of Arius, his subscription and oath, is now
satisfied; and will have him first to communicate with the Orthodox Church at
Constantinople, that he might be the better qualified for communion with the
Church at Alexandria. And accordingly he writes to Alexander the Bishop of
Constantinople to accept of Arius into Communion: Alexander laying aside all
further disputes, (by which hitherto he had mightily opposed the Arian party,
and by which he saw plainly there was no dealing now with the Emperor) betakes
himself wholly to prayer to God, wherein he continued fervently for diverse
days and nights; more especially upon the day next before that Lords day
wherein it is determined that Arius must be admitted to the Sacrament: The sum
of which Prayer, Soc. lib. 1. c. 25.
because Socrates reports it not with that caution that became him to do a
thing of that nature; I shall relate it out of Athanasius his own Copy after
this manner. Athan. Epist ad Serapion.


It must needs be thus, O Lord, that Arius must communicate with this people to
morrow; Let thy servant, O Lord, now depart in peace, and never see that day;
and destroy not thou the righteous with the wicked: but if thou will spare thy
Church (as Thou will spare it) remember the words of Eusebius, and give ^bt
over thine inheritance, O Lord, to destruction and contempt, and take Arius out
of the way. Least he being admitted into communion, Heresy should seem also to
be received into communion with the truth, and wickedness be accounted
Godliness. This Prayer reflecting upon the words of Eusebius, is to be intended
of him that was Bishop of Nicomedia, who now at Constantinople had the whole
conduct of the matter concerning Arius; Soz. lib. 2. cap. 28.
and who had sent a message to Alexander, that in case he would not admit Arius
in communion, Eusebius would banish Alexander from Constantinople, and put
another in that place that should do the work. But Eusebius for all his bravery
missed his expectation: for the Lords Day being come, about the twilight (for
it seems the Sacramental Supper was in those days celebrated in the evening)
Arius with the Emperors authority, marches forth in state out of the Emperors
Hall, with Eusebius, and other Bishops in his train, all of them being of the
Eusebian sect; and passing along the streets in pomp, (a strange manner of
address to the Sacrament) came to the common place of Market, or Judgment; in
which place a sudden fear falls upon Arius, and therewith he is surprised with
a Flux, which enforced him to return himself behind the common street and place
of Judgment, into an house appointed for such a purpose, and there suddenly his
spirit falls him; his excrements and blood run out, his belly breaks, his guts
fall out, his spleen and liver follows; and the people staying long in
expectation of him, and he not coming, they enter the place, and find that sad
spectacle of him lying in that manner dead. The news whereof spreads suddenly;
the company of his associats is confounded: Athan. Epist. ad Sarapion.
The Arians are smitten with terror and shame, many are converted, many more
formerly in a doubting way, are confirmed in the Truth; and the Emperor
himself amazed, reflecting upon what Arius had so lately done: and generally it
is concluded, that God has determined that no communion shall be between the
Arians, and the Orthodox Christians. And that place where this dreadful
example appeared thus, was for a long time after rendered famous, or rather
infamous thereby; many coming to see it, many more passing by it, point at it,
and no man daring to make use thereof after its generally accounted execrable:
and so continues for a long time, till at length a rich man, being an Arian,
purchased that house, and pulled it down, and built another house in the room
thereof to bury the menmorial of so formidable an example of Gods judgment in
forgetfulness; which nevertheless still remains in the Memorials of Fame.

CAP. IX.
The death of Constantine: The succession of his three Sons in the Empire: The
return of Athanasiusto Alexandria.

ARius thus out of the World, Sect. 1.
it might be expected that the quarrel concerning Athanasius might find the
easier composal, and that the Emperor Constantine will now be persuaded to
agree to his restoring to Alexandria; Sozom. lib. 2. cap. 29.
but notwithstanding the renewed applications made to the Emperor from the
Alexandrian Churches, yet the opposition continues still. Neither will Gods
judgments from Heaven, nor mediation on earth prevail against Constantines
Principles, whatever they were. For now that Arius is gone, Eusebius his
Champion does so much the more mightily lay about him in the Arian cause,
having also the other Bishops to second him, who once engaged, count it a
disparagement to be scared with the strangeness of Arius his death; and so the
Alexandrian Churches cannot prevail to have justice, no not from Constantine;
nor will he regain his honor of doing justice herein so long as he lives; and
yet he carries the matter so, as the Eusebians shall gain no ground thereby:
For least he should seem to favor the Heretics, he publishes an edict against
them, taking away their Churches, commanding their members to join themselves
in communion with the Orthodox Churches; forbiding also the meetings of the
Heretics, whether in public, or private; all which he might well do, and yet
little hurt to the Arian cause: For they are of the Meletian Churches, and so
in the repute of Constantine, Legal men; Soz. lib. 2. cap. 30.
they could own or disown Churches at pleasure, and therefore out of the dint
of the edict; and yet are as ill as the worst of those that are within the
compass of the edict. For all this therefore Constantine is not a declared
enemy to the Arians as yet; nor will he be till they prove unquiet: Nay they,
and they alone, as touching Church affairs, shall be his Counselors and
Courtiers, so long as they will let him have peace in his Throne, though they
turn the Lord Jesus Christ out of his Throne. And there were two things more
that befell in the Emperors life time, which do much countenance the truth
thereof. For first, (if his beloved Historian Eusebius Bishop of Caesaria may
be believed) Constantine received the Sacrament of Baptism, in nature of a
viaticum a little before his death, Eusebius. vit. Constable.
not by the administration of Alexander Bishop of his Imperial City, as might
have becomed an Emperor, but by the hands of Eusebius of Nicomedia, the patron
of the Arian party; and if so, the same was no good sign. But if Baronius his
relation may be believed, its much worse; for he proves, Baron. An.
according to his manner, that Constantine had been baptized by Sylvester
Bishop of Rome, and then if Eusebius also says true, he was rebaptized; and
that shows that he loved the Nicomedian water better then the Roman. But there
is a second sign of Constantines disposition, as ill, if not worse then the
former whereby he did (as much as in him did lie) stake the very Subsistence of
the Orthodox party at the cast of the Dice, which was the trust that still he
reposed in the Arian Presbyter commended to him by his Sister Constantia. For
he trusted him with the keeping of his last Will, and delivery thereof to his
Son Constantius after his Fathers death, as if Constantine intended therewith
to commend the Presbyter also to Constantius, as a man meet to be trusted by
him; and also to commend to Constantius whatsoever the Presbyter should bring
along with him; and what sad consequences ensued thereupon accordingly, will
appear afterward: yet if in all this his rule was that of policy, it must be
acknowledged he adventured somewhat too much to gain peace, and yet when all is
done, at the best he had but a troublesome Reign.

Against these sad symptoms of Constantines disposition, Sect. 2.
I must do him that right as to balance therewith two other, mentioned by
Writers, which seem to show that Constantines judgment in matters of Religion
was Orthodox. One of which was that he caused his three Sons Constantine,
Constantius, Eusebius. Vit. Constable. lib. 4. cap. 52. Ibid. cap. 32.
and Constans, to be trained up in Orthodox principles, two of which Sons held
constant their Profession. The second thing was his Oration to the Saints,
written by him, and published by Eusebius of Caesaria; wherein, especially in
the tenth Chapter of that Oration, he asserts the Deity of Christ. He might
therefore be well principled, but how far in his age might be drawn aside by
the flatteries of the Arians, may be conceived by what is written of him; for
it is evident that his policy sometimes did divide between his judgment and
affections; and upon that occasion that virtue that so much sounded in his name
and the names of his Sons appeared but dimly many times; for himself could
sometimes censure some as if they deserved never to be trusted, and again trust
them as if they never deserved censure; and that may seem to be the principal
cause of Eutropius his censure of him, that he was Primo Imperii tempore
Optimis Principibus, altimo mediis comparandus. Eutrop. Vit. Constable.
A man in his first time equal to the best of Princes, but in his later times
inferior; yet in the general stream of his government he showed himself wise,
courageous, and after his manner zealous in advancement of Gods Worship, though
in his later times more for the Ceremony, and scarce short of Superstition, the
ordinary fault of Christian Princes. He executed the greatest part of his will
before he made it; which was the disposing of his Empire amongst his three
Sons, and settling them therein, whiles he was yet alive. He made his second Son
Constantius his Execuor; yet bequeathed Athanasius to his eldest Son
Constantine to restore him to his place at Alexandria; so as it seems the
equity of Athanasius his case rested with Constantine, though he passed
Sentence against him. The certain time of the beginning of his Life and Reign,
and the continuance thereof are all uncertain, yet it is certain that he died;
but the most approved account by Historians is, that his Reign began about the
year of our Lord three hundred and six, and continued with Maximinus,
Maxentius, and Licinus, or one of them, till about the year three hundred
twenty and four, and thenceforth, until about three hundred thirty and seven he
reigned alone, and died in the sixty sixth year of his age.

After his death his three Sons succeed him in their several parts of the
Empire. Sect. 3.
Constantine the eldest had his lot in the western parts of the Empire, bounded
on the East by the unconquered parts of Germany, containing the British Isles,
Spain, France, Germany. Constans the youngest had Illiricum, Greece and
Afric, and it seems Italy. Constantius had Thracia, Constantinople, and
what was conquered in Asia. Constantine the eldest was like his Father in
affecting greatness, but not in success: For he thought he might be bold with
his youngest brother Constans, and endeavored to gain Italy from him, but
therein he lost his life in the field, and therewith that part of the Empire
dissolved to Constans by way of Conquest, after that his eldest brother had
reigned about three years. Constans also was a brave and a just man, till he
grew disabled for action by the Gowt, but then betaking himself to ease, he
contracted diseases, and grew into dislike of the people, and was murdered by
Magnentius, who had been his Subject, after he had reigned about seventeen
years. Both these Emperors continued friends to the Orthodox Christians during
their times; but they being dead, the whole Empire remained to Constantius; yet
could he not gain quiet possession without the Sword. For Magnentius had gotten
possession of Constans his part of the Empire, but he lost his life, or rather
cast it away in the quarrel with Constantius; which cost the Empire so much
blood, as for want of Soldiers, the Northern people had an easy entrance
opened to them into the Empire, to the utter ruin thereof in the conclusion.

The beginnings of the Raigns of these three Emperors are so differently
observed by Writers, as it makes the order of story concerning all affairs
perplexed, and amongst the rest of those affairs, concerning Athanasius. For
sometimes they reflect upon the death of Constantine the Father, as the
beginning of the Raigns of his Sons; and sometimes upon their several entries
upon their government in the lifetime of their Father; and they observe that
Constantine the Son began his Government in the tenth year of his Fathers
Reign, Eusebius. Vit. Constable. lib. 4. cap. 40. soc. lib. 1. cap. 25.
and Constantius in the twentieth year, and Constans in the thirtieth year;
which cannot well consist with the joint government of Maxentius, Maximinus,
and Licinus, together with Constantine the Father of these three, whose
beginning being also uncertain, I shall skip over this block, and account the
beginning of the Raigns of these three Emperors, from the death of their
Father, and have principal relation in the (prosecution thereof) to the Reign
of Constantius, because he was the chief in action in matters concerning
Athanasius, and was the survivor of them all.

The beginning of his Reign therefore will befall about the three hundred and
seven and thirtieth year after the Incarnation of Christ, Sect. 5.
at which time Constantine the Great is supposed to have died; by whose death
the propagation of the Nicene Faith is left in much hazard, in respect of
humane help, by reason principally of the difference in judgment in matters of
Religion, wherein Constantius differed from the other Emperors his brothers.
For many-headed Government never were, nor will be able to induce or propagate
true Religion, because truth is but one, and many heads are supposed to have
many minds, and many wills, and many temptations. And though Constantius, as
well as his brothers, was trained up in Orthodox Principles; Theod. lib. 2.
cap. 3.
yet the Arian Presbyter formerly mentioned, was too hard for him; for he
delivering to Constantius his Father Constantines Will, therewith delivered
himself, and Constantius took both, and delivered himself to the Presbyter; and
hereby the Arian poison insinuates into the Imperial blood, and gains the
throne that formerly had been but attendant thereupon. A cunning man doubtless
this Presbyter was, who being thus in favor with two Emperors successively,
did nevertheless thus cloud himself, kept at Court, do so much, and yet no
more, then a namelesse Presbyter all this while. And as cunning he was in his
working, gaining his interest by degrees; Soc. lib. 2. cap. 2.
first with the servants at the Court, then with the Empress, and then with
the Emperor, spreading this Arian infection as Leaven through the Imperial
Family, and from thence into the City of Constantinople. And thus as God had
formerly made use of the Imperial power to induce and propagate Religion, so
now the Devil makes use of the like power to propagate error, yet with this
difference, Gods will is done in both.

Constantius now come into power in the Eastern Empire, the Arian Bishops
Eusebius, Theognis, Sect. 6.
Maris, Vrsatius, and Valens, are at his elbow, and are still the great
Courtiers, and employ their utmost interest for the advancement of the Arian
Cause: for those Churchmen whose conscience will allow them to forsake their
pastoral charge, to live at the Court, that conscience will also allow them to
turn Apostates to any error that shall come into fashion there. And by this
means principally the Arian Heresy becomes now past a babe, and stands in need
no longer of their Meletian tutors. But the Meletian Churches stand rather in
need of their pupils assistance, and if themselves will thrive, they must not
only forgo their name, but their principles also, and turn Arians, or incur
the danger of their displeasure. But the condition of Athanasius becomes very
difficult; Soz lib. 2. cap. 21.
for though it was Constantines will that he should be restored to his Church
and place at Alexandria; and had given his Son Constantine charge concerning
the same, in regard that Athanasius, now at Triers, was under his dominion; yet
whether Alexandria was under the government of Constantius, and no part of
Afric left to the government of Constans, or how the government of the whole
Empire might be ordered jointly, I understand not; but it is evident, that
Constantius wrought much trouble to Athanasius after his return to Alexandria,
before Constantius was possessed of the whole Empire, and that he began therein
betimes. For Constantine the eldest Son delayed not to execute his Fathers
will, as touching Athanasius, in releasing him from his banishment, Soc. lib.
2. cap. 2.
but having sent for him, sends him to Alexandria with his Imperial Letters
commendatory; telling them, that they knew that his Father Constantine did not
banish Athanasius out of displeasure, but sent him out of the way of danger;
and that his Father when he died left it in charge to him that Athanasius
should be restored, and that in discharge of his trust, and in answering their
desires, he now did send Athanasius to them: And thus is Athanasius now come
with honor to Alexandria, after two years and four months absence. Nor did
Constantius in any manner then interpose that any History does mention; Soc.
lib. 2. cap. 35. Soz. lib. 3. cap. 2.
yet he had not been long there before Constantius began to appear in his
proper colors.

CAP. X.
The Death of Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, and the Succession of Bishops
there.

COnstantinople is now become the Imperial City, Sect. 1.
and the chief residence of Constantius, and Great Rome not so happy or
unhappy, as to be advanced to that honor; and the Bishops of Constantinople
hereby had great advantage of the Emperors neighborhood, so long as they were
both of one way in Religion. Alexander had been Bishop there now twenty years,
famous for learning and zeal in Religion; yet such was Constantines principles,
that Eusebius though an Arian, had his right ear, and did gain upon the
Orthodox: however Orthodox the Emperor Constantine was, after his death
unconstant Constantius possessed the Throne at Constantinople, who having given
up his very soul to his concealed Presbyter, portendeth a sad time to Alexander
the Bishop, to pass through in his old age. But God eased him of that care,
for his death draws nigh; and he perceiving it, sends for the Elders of his
Church, and tells them that he has no long time to continue with them, and
therefore advises with them as touching his Successor, and then nominating two,
Soz. lib. 3. cap. 3. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 4.
the one named Paulus the other Macedonius, he tells them that Paulus was more
suitable for Religion, and Macedonius more acceptable at the Emperors Court.
After he dying, the Church elected Paulus, trusting more to the love of God
then to the favor of the Emperor. And having prevailed with some Bishops then
at Constantinople, Paulus is admitted and ordained Bishop there, as by the
Canon of the Nicene Council they were enabled.

But Eusebius and the Arians are much troubled hereat, and informs
Constantius thereof, Sect. 2.
who is no less displeased thereupon then they, Soz. lib. 3. cap. 4. Soc. lib.
2. cap. 5.
and is soon persuaded to call a Council of Bishops more fit for his work; and
therein Eusebius by indirect means, according to his wont, prevailed to have
Paulus ejected, and himself elected Bishop of Constantinople, and is admitted
by the Council, and confirmed by the Emperor, a fit Bishop for his tooth; yet
he lasted not long, for within five years he also died, And the Church at
Constantinople press once more to obtain Paulus. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 9, 10.
But still the Arians are in greatest repute at Court, and in account the only
precious men, and they elect Macedonius: And then arises tumults amongst the
people, the ordinary effect of a Tolleration. And the Emperor then at the
Council at Antioch being informed thereof, sends Hermogenes a Commander, with a
force to quiet the City; but the tumults increase, Hermogenes is therein slain,
and his body dragged about the Streets, and his house burnt. The Emperor at
this news is startled, and hastens to the City: And after some time, when the
heat is past, Soc. lib. 2. cap. 16.
he made Macedonius Bishop of Constantinople; but in these stirs it lost the
lives of three thousand one hundred and fifty men slain in the City. A dear
purchase on all sides, for ere a year came about, the Arians fall out with him
also; because he went a step beyond them all in blasphemy; for he did not only
assert that Christ the Son of God is not co-essential with the Father, and that
he is a creature and was made; but that, The Holy Ghost the Third Person, is
also a creature, which Arius had seemed to decline; and hereof they complain to
the Emperor; who (for this cause, Theod. lib. 2 cap. 6. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 33.
Soz. lib. 4. cap. 20.
but more especially because Macedonius had removed the dead body of his Father
Constantine from the place where it was formerly buried, and for other causes)
deposed him by his own Authority: After whom it is said by Sozomen lib. 4. cap.
24. that Eudoxius was put in his place, but whether it be not spoken by way of
Anticipation, I cannot say, for at the Council of Sardica, which soon followed,
I find that Paulus was restored to his dignity as Bishop of Constantinople, and
so continued till the death of Constans; and then Constantius being sole
Emperor, banished Paulus to Cucusus, where he was murdered by the Arians. And
Macedonius is admitted again to his place at Constantinople, Soc. lib. 1. cap.
21, 22.
where he exercised such extreme cruelty against the Orthodox Christians, by
all manner of tortures, merely for their abstaining from Communion with him,
that their cries prevails even with Constantius himself, to depose him again.
Soz. lib. 4. cap. 2.
After which Macedonius forsakes the Arian principles, and became head of the
Macedonian Heresy, holding with the Orthodox as touching the Second Person in
Trinity, but retaining still his former opinion touching the Holy Ghost. Nor do
the Historians mention any Successor at Constantinople, till the time of the
Emperor Valens, who by his power did put in Eudoxius, who neither was good
Bishop nor good Christian, but a loose deceitful man: And in persecution of the
Orthodox Christians in his time, beyond all his companions, and so continued
until his death, after he had been ten years Bishop, both Valens the Emperor
and Athanasius being still alive.

I have made this digression touching the Bishops of Constantinople during the
life of Athanasius, Sect. 3.
for the better understanding of the affairs concerning him: For the Bishops of
Constantinople being, according to the Emperors humor, Arians, did either
lead or were led by the Emperors in all their transactions concerning the
Churches, and so chief enemies to Athanasius, during all their time. And by the
nigh conjunction with the Emperors, grown to that height, that though Rome
might about those times begin to put up head for the Supremacy, the Bishops of
Constantinople appeared as a check upon them, and might have given them the
mate, but that the Roman Bishops had the advantage of the Orthodox Bishops,
joining with them as assertors together with them of the doctrine of the Sacred
Trinity in Unity of the Godhead: Although it afterward appeared that the Roman
Bishops abused their principles to the gaining of Authority for themselves over
the consciences of the Orthodox Churches in the Conclusion.

Now as touching Athanasius his return to the Churches at Alexandria, Sect. 4.
it was so acceptable, and their joy so triumphant, as it occasioned the Arians
to envy thereat, and taking offense where no offense was given, Theod. lib. 2.
cap. 2. Soz. lib. 3. cap. 2.
they give offense themselves by raising tumults, and then charge the same upon
Athanasius, as if his coming to Alexandria was the cause of sedition, tumults,
and bloodshed, when as the true cause was their own envy and distempered
minds, at what they saw was come to pass. Now in what relation the City of
Alexandria and Egypt then stood, whether in subjection to Constantine,
Constantius, or Constans appears in no Writer that I can find: But the Arians
at Alexandria have recourse to Constantinople, with their complaints against
Athanasius, where they meet with Eusebius and Theognis, who glad of their
acquaintance, undertake to countenance the same before the Emperor.

CAP. XI.
The Council at Antioch, where Athanasiusis banished: His escape from his
enemies: The first Arian Confession of Faith is made at Antioch.

EUsebius now Bishop of Constantinople, Sect. 1.
having now gotten both Wind and Sun of Athanasius, brings in complaints
against Athanasius with full sail, and unlades them before the Emperor, who
easily believes any thing against Athanasius that has but a criminal sound:
and is soon resolved to call a Council at Antioch, Soc. lib. 2. cap. 5.
and try the matter before himself in full Council. Now had Athanasius holden
quiet possession of his Church at Alexandria, since his return, by the space of
four years; that is to say, during the life of Constantine the Son of the great
Constantine, and until the Council at Antioch; Ibid.
which as Socrates notes, was about five years after the death of Constantine
the Great. Soz. lib. 3. cap. 5.
So as now Athauasius his Patron being dead (for he was slain at Aquileia) the
influence from Constantius upon him was the more malevolent, but yet much worse
by the conjunction with Eusebius now Bishop of Constantinople; who having
gained the Imperial City, he writes his Letters to Julius Bishop of Rome,
Theod. lib. 2. c. 4.
letting him know of the complaints made against Athanasius; and that it was
the Emperors mind that the same should be tried before a Council, and that the
Emperor had summoned a Council to be holden at Antioch for the solemn
Consecrating of a Church there, which formerly was begun by Constantine the
Great, and now finished by Constantius. A fair pretense of building of
Churches: but most men understood them aright, that it was rather for the
pulling down of the Church of Christ by banishment of Athanasius, which is
generally known they threaten. And for this cause diverse of the Orthodox
Bishops come not at all; and others of them that are in their journey are
seized upon, and imprisoned by the way; and by that unjust means many escaped
strong temptations, which otherwise they had been exposed unto by their
presence at the Council. Sozom. lib. 3. c. 5.
Nevertheless there met at that Council one hundred Bishops saving one, and
amongst the rest Eusebius, now Bishop of Constantinople failed not; for
Athanasius is his designed morsel, without which his appetite cannot be
satisfied; yet its probable he missed his expectation: for if he were at the
beginning of the work, before he could swallow what he imagined was his own,
death took him out of the way, and carried him to his last account concerning
the Deity of the Son of God, Sozom. lib. 3. c. 6. Niceph. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 7.
and concerning the outrages done to the people of God. Nevertheless the
Council goes on, and Constantius himself sees to the chase, and Athanasius his
matter comes to consideration, although he neither was present, nor for ought
appears, was summoned. The Crimes laid to his charge; First, that without
Warrant or Order from any Council, Soc. lib. 2. cap. 5.
he returned from banishment, and possessed himself of the Church of
Alexandria. Secondly, That being come thither, he raised Tumults amongst the
people; wherein some are slain, others imprisoned, and other otherwise
punished. And lastly, for want of other matters, they revived the complaints
raised against him at the Council of Tyrus, and these are charged against him
anew. How unjustly these things are thus charged against Athanasius may thus
appear; The last charge concerning the matters at the Council at Tyrus, needed
no answer, for they were buried in their very birth, and their own evidence
failing, can never be revived. The second Article concerning Tumults, was by
the Apologetical Epistle of the Alexandrian Church declared to be false;
wherein they tell Constantius, that the Catholic Church uses no such weapons
in their warfare as death, imprisonment, bonds, or corporal punishments,
concerning which the civil Magistrate can give further account. And as to the
first charge, it was a wilful mistake; For Athanasius was not banished by the
Emperor in order to the sentence of the Council at Tyrus, which depended upon
appeal before him, but upon new matters originally arising before him; and
these being of a political consideration concerning the public peace; the
Emperor might as well restore Athanasius without the Council, as banish him
without the Council.

But Athanasius cast a block in the way of their whole proceedings: he saw
their intentions; Sect. 2.
for who saw them not? he therefore delays his appearing at Antioch, if he
were summoned, and left them to proceed without hearing of both parts. This
being understood by Constantius, he sends to apprehend Athanasius; but he being
aware thereof, withdrew himself out of the way, Soz. lib. 3. c. 5, 8.
and hid himself for the present, and afterward escaped away to Rome. Some
write that he was sent for by the Bishop of Rome upon the Letters of complaint
from Eusebius; Theod. lib. 2. c. 4
and both may be true; for after that Eusebius had sent his Letters, its said
that the Bishop of Rome answered the same by his Letters; and intimated, that
Athanasius could not with safety come for trial where so much prejudice was
against him; and therefore he tells Eusebius, that those matters against
Athanasius should be heard at Rome, where also a Council was to be holden, and
where order should be taken for Athanasius his appearing. And accordingly
Eusebius and the Antiochian Council in their reply to Julius his Letters did
agree thereto, and promised to send to Rome their charge against Athanasius,
with their Delegates to proceed against him. And this might be a ground for the
Bishop of Rome to send to Athanasius to come to Rome, and for the Bishop of
Rome at the Council there to hear the Cause, and for the Council at Antioch to
send their delegates thither; and yet no Supremacy hereby vested in the Bishop
of Rome over the Asian or Affrican Churches.

Thus escaped Athanasius to Rome, Sect. 3.
where he finds Paulus the banished Constantinopolitan Bishop waiting there
also for relief, as well as himself: But as yet whatever the Antiochian
Councils letters mention concerning Athanasius his Trial at Rome, they
proceeded nevertheless to banish him, the Emperor also confirming the same:
This was one illegality: Soc. lib. 2. cap. 8.
But a second ensued much worse, which was their sudden election of Gregory
Bishop of Alexandria in the room of Athanasius, who was a man altogether
unknown both to the Church and Province of Alexandria; and yet which was worst
of all, they being a Council, did send him and settle him with a force that
brought him in by blood. And all this done by a Vote procured as ill as all the
rest: Athan. Apol. 2. Epist. Jul. Ibid.
For whereas their Council consisted of one hundred Votes well nigh, yet they
could not find forty to agree in this Vote. Only the Emperors Vote
concurring, put all the rest to silence. But such as the work, such was the
issue, for Gregory continued there not long, before not only the Orthodox
Christians, but even the Arians also were weary of him; and for his cruel and
bloody entrance, and his imperious government, Soc. lib. 2. cap. 10. Soz. lib
3. cap. 6.
and gluttonish indulgence, thrust him out of his government, and put in George
of Capadocia in his place; and yet he also, nor St. George neither, as will
hereafter appear.

The Council at Antioch having thus done what they can against Athanasius,
Sect. 4.
have one thing more to do. For the Bishop of Rome had sorely taxed this
Council for siding with the Arians against the Nicene Council, unto which
nevertheless all the several members of this Council, or the most part of
them, had subscribed. This the Antiochian Council fear will stick upon them,
for their consciences told them that they had done somewhat that might deserve
such imputation; and that it would be a shame for so many learned men to be
relapsed in a Council, and so many reverend Bishops to be reputed disciples to
Arius, who was but a Presbyter, defamed in his doctrine, life and death. They
bethink themselves therefore of a declaration to the Churches, Soc. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
wherein they set forth, That they are not fallen from the Nicene Faith; neither
are they disciples of Arius, and in witness thereof, they there make
Confession of their Faith; A company of fickle hearted Bishops they were. They
are not fallen from the Nicene Faith, nor will they own it. They will have a
Confession of their own, and yet will own none: They frame a Confession and
publish it, and then like it not. By that time that they are warm in their work
of Confession, they repent of what they have confessed, and confess anew to
this purpose.

Soc lib. 2. cap. 7.
We believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of All things, And in one Lord
Jesus Christ, His Only begotten Son, God by whom all things are made; Begotten
before all things of the Father: God of God, Whole of Whole; Only of Only;
Perfect of Perfect; King of King; Lord of Lord; The Living Word, Wisdom, Life,
True Light; Way of Truth; Resurrection, Power, Door; That He cannot be
converted, nor changed; The Express Image of the Deity; Essence, Virtue,
Council, and Glory of the Father. The First Begotten of every Creature. Who was
in the beginning with God. The Word by whom all things are made, and in whom
all things consist; Who in the last days came from Heaven, is born of the
Virgin; Made Man, and the Mediator of God and Man: The Apostle of our Faith,
and Lord of Life, who suffered for us, arose for us the third day, and ascended
to Heaven; And sits at the right hand of the Father. And shall come with
glory and power to judge the Quick and the Dead. And in the Holy Ghost, which
gives comfort, sanctification and perfection to Believers. And the words
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost do exactly express the proper Person, Order and
Glory of every of them so named. That they are three in persons, but in consent
one.

If any man shall teach ought against the right and sound Faith of the
Scriptures, or that there is, or was a time or age before the Son of God was
made, Let him be accursed.

And if any man shall call the Son a creature, as one of the creatures; or a
branch, as one of the branches; Let him be accursed.

Many more words they are then in the Nicene Confession, and yet not enough;
They will seem to allow to Christ all that can be desired, and heap up many of
his titles, and might have out of the Text heaped many more. And for all this
they will not allow Christ all his excellencies. He shall be allowed to be
before all time, Soz. lib. 2. cap. 5.
but not coeternal with the Father. he shall be Lord of Lord, but not
consubstantial with the Father. If their meaning then be one and the same with
the Nicene Confession; why then do they differ in words? unless they intend
thereby that people should stick to no one form, but to take up any that shall
come to hand, and thereby swallow down error more unsensibly. Like to many in
these late Parliaments, wherein much endeavor has been for a form of Articles
of Faith that might be established by Law, but little or nothing could be
effected. The consciences of men have been so tender, that they cannot endure
any form of wholesome words; but like this Antiochian Council, they like the
Nicene Faith; and yet will have liberty to differ from it; they will publish
one, so as they be not bound thereto, but be at liberty to change.

The news of this new Antiochian Confession coming to Athanasius, Sect. 5.
made him the more earnest to assert the Nicene Confession; and being now to
make his defense before the Council at Rome, he as was usual in such cases,
declared the substance of his Faith before the Council, so compendiously, and
with such apt expressions, that the Council caused the same to be published,
for the further clearing forth of the Nicene Faith, which formerly had passed
abroad variously, in regard of the loss of the Original Copy of the Acts of
the Nicene Council; Basil, Epist.
yet it seems that Athanasius his Confession was somewhat more large then the
Nicene, in the doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost, to obviate the Macedonian
Heresy which sprang up of later times. But whether that Confession of
Athanasius had those particulars concerning the Catholic Church, the Communion
of Saints, and the estate after death, or whether they were added afterward I
know not; but they have been thus received by the Churches, and this Church of
England to this day.

Whatever more then this was done at the Antiochian Council, Sect. 6.
I shall not meddle with; but thus far Constantius has seemed to gain his
intentions, and yet he gained not his ends. For he now had taken up a
resolution to bring all the Eastern people into one Religion with himself. And
Eusebius told him this could never be done, so long as Athanasius stood thus in
his way; which in plainer words is, that Athanasius must be put to death before
the Emperor can accomplish his work. But God had otherwise determined. The
Antiochian Council could do little more then show their teeth; For Athanasius
is now out of their reach, and God finds other work for Constantius. Soc. lib.
2. cap. 7.
The news comes to him of the falling of the Franks in upon the borders of the
Empire, and he must look to that; and the Eastern parts of the Empire,
especially the City of Antioch, is grievously tossed by Earthquakes
successively renewing by the space of a whole year; and the Council there
assembled must look to that, and move and remove, and at length give over,
before they have done what they intended. And thus Athanasius is left to stand
or fall at the Council at Rome.

CAP. XII.
Athanasius acquitted by the Council at Rome. Constans the Emperor favors
the Orthodox Christians.

THe City of Rome has now the honor to be an Assylam, Sect. 1.
or a City of refuge, for the persecuted Bishops, who are fled from the rage of
Constantius his persecution, which so afflicted the hearts of the Western
Bishops, that a Council is called at Rome, Athan. Apol. Desuga.
many of the Eastern Bishops also being movers thereof; and upon the Summons no
less then three hundred Bishops met together. And there also Athanasius upon
his Summons appeared ready to make his Just Defense. And hereof notice is given
to them at Antioch, Vid. Epist. Jul.
and that the Council was ready for the hearing of the cause, if the cause on
their part was ready for them; and therefore desired them to send to Rome some
with authority from them at Antioch, to prosecute the matters in charge against
Athanasius. This Message from the Roman Council passed also under the shadow of
Constans his Imperial Letters to his brother Constantius to the same purpose.
Soc. lib. 2. cap. 24. Soz. lib. 3. cap. 9.
The Antiochian Council hereupon send four of their Members as Delegates, who
first made their application to the Emperor Constans, and endeavored to
vindicate the honor of the Antiochian Council in their proceedings against
Athanasius, as also as touching their doctrine; and as evidence thereof they
produced before the Emperor Constans a Confession of Faith which they pretend
to be the Confession made by them at the Council at Antioch; but in truth
framed by the Messengers themselves, more suitable to their present purpose:
For by their principles of tenderness and liberty of conscience, as the
Council did alter their Confession according to the occasion; so it seems might
these their representatives do the like, so as might best serve their own turn.
This Confession which they thus produced, though the value thereof be small, in
regard of the contrivers thereof and their aims in contriving the same; yet
seeing by comparing of the one with the other, the truth of their design,
though not their design of truth, will the better appear, I shall set down the
same.

We believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker and Worker of all things,
from whom all fatherhood of Heaven and Earth is named. And in his one begotten
Son Our Lord Jesus Christ, before all ages begotten of the Father, God of God,
Light of Light. By whom all things are made Visible and Invisible. Who is the
Word, Wisdom, Virtue, Life, true Light; Who in the last days is inearnate for
us, born of the Holy Virgin, Crucified, dead, and buried; On the third day he
arose again; Ascended into Heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father, And
at the end of ages shall come to judge both the Quick and the Dead, and to
render to every one according to his works, of whose Kingdom shall be no end,
but it shall remain for ever: For he shall sit at the right hand of the Father
to the end of this World, and in the future. And in the Holy Ghost, that is the
Comforter, whom the Father promised to the Apostles, and after His ascension
into Heaven, sent, that he should teach and inform them all things; by whom all
Believers souls shall be sanctified, who truly believe in Him. And the Church
determ nes all those to be fallen from it, who do say that the Son of God is of
nothing, or of other substance then the Father. Or that time was when He was
not.

So as these men will have the Emperor believe that the Council at Antioch do
adhere to the Nicene Faith, Sect. 2.
whiles they affirm that the Son is of no other substance then the Father; and
yet will not hold forth that he is coeternal with the Father. But the Emperor
Constans being fully informed in all particulars, and observing the unconstancy
and unsettled conclusions and principles of the Antiochian Council, that they
first agree upon one Confession of Faith, and then fall from that and take up a
second, and that their Delegates now wave that also and hold forth a third; he
dismissed them with their Faith to the Council at Rome; where when they
arrived, pretending to prosecute their charge against Athanasius, and finding
him prepared with his witnesses, and that the Emperor had none there to
represent his person as President; but that the Council was left to regular
proceedings. Athan. Epist. ad Solit. Vit.
The Delegates failed in their prosecution, and pretending frivolous excuses
departed home. Nevertheless the Council expected the return of them or some
others in their stead to prosecute their complaints, but after a years waiting,
finding their expectation vain, Soz. lib. ^. cap. 7.
they proceeded to examine the defense made by Athanasius; and upon perusal of
the Letters from the Alexandrian Churches, and hearing of Witnesses produced,
the Council acquit Athanasius, and restore him to his Church again. The like
they did also with others; by virtue whereof they repaired to their several
places, and possessed them again. Niceph. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 8. Tripart. Hist.
lib. 4. cap. 17. Soz. lib. 4. cap 8.
And some Writers affirm that Athanasius did return to Alexandria again upon
that account also: which if he did, it was not long ere he is informed that
Hilarious the Emperors Lieutenant had given order to his Soldiers for a
Randezvous; and thereupon, or upon other cause of suspicion, he provided for
himself accordingly. And the night following comes Hilarious to Alexandria, in
a dark stormy night, and being informed that Athanasius had hid himself in the
Church called Theona, he beset the same on all sides, and the soldiers breaking
in suddenly at once by the doors and windows on all sides, made as strict a
search as they could, but found nothing concerning Athanasius, and so returned
as they came: And the next news that is had of Athanasius, is that he is at
Rome again.

The Council at Rome having done what they could in the matter concerning
Athanasius, Sect. 3.
certify the same by their Letters to the Eastern Bishops; the penning of
which letters they leave to the Bishop of Rome, and so the Council is
dissolved. The Bishop of Rome accordingly wrote the Letters, and whither the
matter it self or the manner of writing was too poinant, or the Eastern Bishops
were already exasperated, I determine not; but they instead of writing an
answer, child, and tell the Bishop of Rome that he took too much upon him,
Soc. lib. 2. cap. 11. Niceph. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 8.
and that they will not abide his order. And thus (if Historians borrow not too
much from fancy) sprang the schism between the Eastern and the Western
Churches, upon the point of Supremacy; which also was not a little increased
from the diversity of the Civil interests, between Constans and Constantius,
who also were no less divided in their Principles in matters of Religion, which
did blow the sparks formerly hidden in the embers, into a flame of persecution.
Religion may be in danger in a government under one Head, but is never safe in
a government under many.

Athanasius now at Rome again, Sect. 4.
having formerly represented his condition to Constantius by an Apology made
and transmitted to him, yet could obtain no favor; he now after three years
waiting, sends that to the Emperor Constans; who by this time was no less then
his brother Constantius awakened with the loud peal that the Letters between
the Eastern and Western Bishops did ring in the world; and thereupon their
Councils advise them, for the safety of both their Empires, to unite together
against the common Enemy now upon their borders, and to lay aside animosities,
and compose the differences in matters concerning Religion by a general
Council. This season Athanasius chooses for his application to the Emperor
Constans, and by the Bishop of Rome's means gains access to the Emperor; to
whom he represented the many calumnies and injuries he daily suffered from the
Arians, Theod. lib. 2. c. 4.
and his unjust deprivation and banishment by the Council at Antioch; and that
they lay in wait continually to take away his life; and that they pursued him
not so much for any personal respects, as for the rooting up the Nicene Faith,
which he had hitherto asserted, and which also was asserted an owned by
Constantine the Great; and therefore Athanasius humbly besought Constans to
remember his fathers piety, in calling the Council at Nice for the vindicating
of the Truth; and that he would succeed his Father in undertaking the cause of
Religion and protection of the Orthodox Faith, and regard the persecuted estate
of himself, who was ready to justify against all the criminations that his
enemies can produce against him. Hereunto also the Bishop of Rome subjoyned his
request, that Constans would endeavor with his brother Constantius that a
general Council of the Bishops of both Empires might be jointly holden, for the
settling of the people of both Empires in peace and unity. And well it was that
there was some that studied the peace of the Church, so far as to be earnest
for a general Council; For possibly if such a thing should be now moved in
England, it would be answered, that its necessary for the Church to be under a
perpetual separation: as many hold it no less necessary that the Commonwealth
should be for ever kept from their liberty of a free and full Parliament.

Constans the Emperor now at Millain being thus importuned, Sect. 5.
determined to proceed therein accordingly. And because it appeared that the
Eastern Bishops began to interpose touching Supremacy; he writes therefore to
his brother Constantius, showing him the necessity of calling a general Council
of the Churches of both Empires, and importuning him to improve his authority
in calling the Eastern Bishops to appear at a Council to be holden at Sardica
in Illiria. This City was upon the confines of both Empires, yet more
commodious for those of the Eastern Empire, Soz. lib. 3. cap. 9.
whereunto the Emperor Constans had ordered summons for the Bishops of the
Western Empire to come at a time appointed: Constantius having received
Constans his Letters, made no difficulty therein, but forthwith issued forth
his Letters of summons also, according to Constans his Letters. After this
agreement Athanasius comes to Millain by express order from Constans; and there
in the presence of the Emperor and many others, Athan. Apol. ad Constant.
Athanasius declares the manner of his return from Triers to Alexandria, and
of his carriage at Alexandria, the complaints against him by the Arians, his
justification of himself, the proceedings of the Council at Antioch against
him, the manner of his escape, his Apology sent to Constantius to mollify his
displeasure against him, the Letters testimonial from the Alexandrian Churches,
and he offered to prove all by witnesses viva vocc. But the Emperor replied
that Athanasius shall have a full hearing before the General Council at
Sardica, and therefore willed him to prepare himself for his defense there.
Nevertheless Constans was unwilling those things should be opened before a
General Council, and therefore endeavored to prevail with Constantius, as well
in the behalf of Athanasius as others, for the restitution of them to their
several places in a private way; but the Arians were in the negative, and too
powerful, and thus there passed a year and six months before the day of the
meeting of the Council came.

CAP. XIII.
The Council at Sardica: The Schism by the Arian Council at Philippopolis.

THe Council being met at Sardica upon the day prefixed, Sect. 1.
which was about Six years after the Council called at Antioch, and about
eleven years after the death of Constantine the Great: Soc. lib. 2. cap. 16.
So as Athanasius has been absent from Alexandria at Rome Six years entirely,
or three years and three years, which makes up the six years spoken of by
writers, Soz. lib. 2. cap. 10.
allowing only a small time for Athanasius his return from the Council at Rome
to Alexandria, and his flight from thence back again to Rome upon the coming of
Hilarious. The first three years being spent in debate between the two Councils
at Antioch and Rome, and the other three years in the gaining of Constans and
Constantius, and the Councils meeting at Sardica; which being effected, there
are met three hundred of the Western Bishops; or as Baronius says, two hundred
and eighty four, Baron. Anno 346. number. 4. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 16.
and but seventy and six of the Eastern Bishops, although the place of meeting
did lie more convenient for them then for the Western Bishops. And amongst this
number of the Eastern Bishops, Ischyras formerly unworthy to be a Presbyter,
has obtained from the Arians the name and place of a Bishop. The Eastern
Bishops now absent, excuse their absence partly by infirmity of body; but more
of them were sick in their minds, and alledg want of time to prepare
themselves, imputing the fault to the Bishop of Rome, as if a year and a half
were not sufficient warning.

The Council being met, the Arian Party perceiving that the face of the Council
smiled not on them, Sect. 2. Athan. Apol. 2.
withdrew themselves to Philippopolis, a City about a days journey or more
distant from Sardica, and wrote a Letter to those at Sardica, desiring them
that they would exclude from their society, Soz. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Athanasius, Paulus, and other Bishops whom they at the Council at Antioch had
banished and excommunicated; Or otherwise, they had resolved that they could
not join in Council with them, nor could they come into the Church where all
ought to meet before they enter upon the work of Council. To this the Bishops
at Sardica answered, that for their parts they had never separated from
Communion with Athanasius, and others mentioned in their Letters; neither could
they causlesly; for as touching their excommunication at Antioch, it was
without hearing any defense, and that those matters had been re-examined by the
Council at Rome, who thereupon had acquitted Athanasius and the rest.
Nevertheless, if they at Philippopolis had ought to object against Athanasius,
or any of the rest, if they at Philippopolis would come to Sardica, they should
find Athanasius and the rest ready and prepared to vindicate themselves, and
give the Council satisfaction. But this will not satisfy those at
Philippopolis, and therefore they avow their departure and separation just, and
do proceed to sit in Council apart by themselves at Philippopolis, where they
assert and confirm all that they had done at Antioch against Athanasius and
others: and further, they let fly Excommunications thick as hail, against
Julius Bishop of Rome, (though he remained at Rome, and came not to Sardica,)
Hossius Bishop at Corduba, Protogenes Bishop of Sardica, being both directors
of the Council at Sardica, Sozom. lib. 3. c. 11.
and diverse other Bishops, and all this done without hearing or summons: And
having Constantius to befriend them, they cause Guards to be set upon the
Highways and passages to Sardica, and make stay of all Bishops going thither,
and to stop the returns of all coming from Sardica homeward; and like a troop
of the Devils Lifeguard, to apprehend Athanasius and his friends wherever
they should be found, and put them to death; Athan. Epist. ad. Solit. vit.
and to apprehend all such as were suspected to be opposers of the Arian Cause.
And hereupon many are taken, abused, whipped, imprisoned and banished; the
terror whereof made many fly into the Wilderness, and scared others into the
dissembling of their Faith and Profession.

Nevertheless the Council at Sardica kept close to their work, Sect. 3.
and having diverse of the Eastern Bishops still joining with them, they spare
those at Philippopolis as little as they are spared by them. They excommunicate
likewise the Philippopolitan (...)

(...) confess the Son is the power of the Father.

We confess the Word is of God the Father, and besides that, there is none.
That the Son is the Word, True God, the Wisdom, the Power, yet we call Him not
Son as other Sons are by Regeneration and Adoption.

We confess the Son is the only begotten, and the first begotten; but so the
only begotten, as that He ever is God, and was in the Father.

The Word first begotten we refer to the Manhood, He is different from all
creatures, because He is the first begotten of the dead: We confess one Deity
of the Father and the Son. And we say not that the Father is greater then the
Son, by reason of any diversity or difference of substance; but because the
Name Father is greater then the Name Son.

The interpretation of these words, I and my Father are One, that they are
meant by consent and agreement amongst themselves, we affirm is an assured
interpretation.

That opinion that as men fall out, and be afterward reconciled: So there may
befall difference, and then agreement between the Father Almighty and the Son:
We affirm is a foolish opinion.

We believe that the words, I and my Father are One, do signify the unity of
the Substance, which is together of the Father and the Son.

We believe that the Son does reign together with the Father without beginning
or ending, nor can his Kingdom be defined or determined by time. For that which
is eternal can neither begin to be, nor cease to be.

We believe and affirm the Comforter the Holy Ghost is promised and is sent to
us by God Himself; that he is not crucisied, but the Man born of the Virgin
Mary: For Man is mortal, but God is immortal.

We believe not that God in Man, but Man in God, did rise the third day, which
as a gift he offered to His Father free from sin and death.

We believe in the due time appointed He shall judge all, and for all things.

This was published by the Sardican Council in their Narrative of proceedings
which they sent into all parts; wherein they also showed their reasons why they
acquitted Athanasius and others; and the causless departure of the Arian
Bishops from their Council; and their obstinacy in refusal to join with them,
notwithstanding all means used to reclaim them. They further declared their
proceedings against Ischyras, and their grounds leading them therein. That he
had been a Bishop reputed amongst the Arians, being formerly by the Council at
Alexandria reduced to a lay man, and afterward proved scandalous; and that he
being a reputed Bishop, and yet having but one Congregation under his charge,
they had decreed that henceforth no man should be ordained Bishop of any small
Town, which might be instructed by one only Presbyter; so as it seems
hitherto in some places there is little difference between a Bishop and a
Presbyter, and that the chief work of a Bishop was teaching, so as if teaching
were in any Congregation, there was no need of a Bishop there.

The sad condition of those times of the Councils abovementioned show
demonstratively that it is never conducing to the peace of any Nation to grant
tolleration of contrary Principles in Religion, Sect. 5.
more then it is for the peace of any single persons conscience to be of a
doubtful mind; but to permit several Councils publicly holden at once, is
absolutely destructive thereto. These two Councils at Sardica and
Phillippopolis, thus out-facing one another, struck the second blow of the
fray, which lasted diverse ages, wherein much blood was lost; but in the
conclusion the Arians lost life and all. Henceforth is a perpetual separation
between the Eastern and the Western Churches: Soc. lib. 2. cap. 28.
No communion is allowed by them at the East beyond the confines of Thracia;
nor by them of the West beyong the confines of Illiria. Yet even in those times
such respect was had to common charity and the common good of Mankind, that a
place is agreed upon in the borders of both Empires to be holden as sacred;
wherein all persons of different opinions in matters of Religion, are permitted
to have free resort and to communicate together without scandal or breach of
charity, and this place is a blessed Mountain on the borders of Illiria and
Thracia, called Tisucis. How warrantable this was in matters so fundamental, is
not for me to determine; but do for my part think it a great part of the misery
of England, that amongst such as profess one and the same Unity in Trinity,
such differences should be concerning matters of Church Order, as neither time
nor place can be found for such a blessed privilege to take place as Christian
Communion is.

CAP. XIV.
The Second Return of Athanasius to Alexandria: The Death of the Emperor
Constans.

THe Council at Sardica thus ended, Sect. 1.
each man returns to his own home, who can find his way open thereunto. But as
touching Athanasius, because the Emperor Constans, by his Letters to his
brother Constantius, having endeavored to open as easy a way for him to
return to Alexandria, as he had done for others; but found the way more strait
for Athanasius then for all others; therefore he commands Athanasius to return
to Narsy, and from thence afterward to come to Aquileia under his own
protection; where after some consideration, the Emperor intends another trial
of Constantius by a more particular way: For he sends Letters to Constantius of
a more serious nature then the former, minding him how deeply both their
Honors are concerned in bringing the determinations of the Synod at Sardica to
effect the same, being called by their joint Authority; and he told him
moreover that he for his own part held himself so deeply concerned therein,
that he could not but use all means to see the Decrees of the Council executed,
and if any man, Soz. lib. 3. cap. 19.
yea Constantius himself, did interpose to hinder him, he must put the matter
to trial by the dint of Sword.

These Letters were sent with another transcript of the determinations of the
Council; Sect. 2. Theod. lib. 2. c. 9, 10.
and likewise, with Letters from the Council to Constantius, by the hands of
Euphrates and Vincentius two Bishops, both members of the Sardican Council; who
being arrived at Constantinople, and not finding the Emperor there, went
further for Antioch, and being in the way thereto, are discovered to Stephen
Bishop of Antioch, who had been one at the Council at Philippopolis; and he to
stop their purpose and to bring shame upon their cause, suborned a rude young
man named Onager, to bring a common strumpet into the Inn at Antioch that
night where Euphrates and Vincentius were lodged. And they laid their design
so cunningly, that immediately upon the entry of the strumpet into the room
where the two Bishops were lodged, a company should be ready to enter
forthwith after her, and find the strumpet and the Bishops together, and
charge the Bishops with fornication. And accordingly Onager acted his part so
well, that he brought the strumpet into the Chamber where Euphrates was lodged
and was in bed; Vincentius being also in bed in an inner Chamber; and the
company ready for that purpose soon after also entered the Chamber, and found
the strumpet in the same room where Euphrates lay in bed, and thereupon a
tumult is raised; Vincentius gets up, and the gates of the Inn are shut up,
yet Onager and some others made their escape; but seven of the conspirators are
taken together with the strumpet, and the next morning are carried before the
Judges, and the strumpet examined, said she was brought into the Inn and
directed into the Chamber by a young man; Athar. Epist. ad Solit. Vit.
after the youngest of the conspirators being examined, discovered Onager the
cause of all; and then Onager is examined, who answered that what he did was
done by the direction and instigation of Stephen the Bishop of Antioch; who
being examined, could not deny the same. And thereupon by the command of the
Judges Stephen is banished by the Bishops, and deposed from the Sea at Antioch,
without any Act of Council. Nor did the Arians save ought of their honor
thereby; for as they had put out Stephen for scandal, so they elect into his
room Leontius, a man no less filthy and unclean in conversation, and had, to
add to all the rese, castrated himself, that he might the more safely without
scandal keep company with a woman whom he pretended to be a Virgin. And yet is
this man good enough for the Arians ends. Which was to continue a succession of
persecuting Fishops at Antioch.

Nevertheless the foulness of this fact of Stephens was such, as it being
reported to Constantius, upon serious consideration had, that the Arians may
have dealt thus unhandsomely in many other matters, and with many other of the
Orthodox Christians, as with these Bishops, he is the rather inclined to
hearken to his brother Constans his proposal concerning Athanasius, and
accordingly at the coming of these two Bishops with the Letters from the
Council at Sardica, he speedily writes to all his Lieutenants to abstain from
further troubling the Orthodox Christians; and having taken the Emperor
Constans his Letters into consideration, Soz. lib. 3 cap. 19.
together with his Arian Bishops, to whom he communicated them, they are all of
opinion, that it is not safe to adventure their cause upon a Civil War;
especially at that instant, when as tidings came of the invading of the Eastern
borders of the Empire by the Persians. And thus after ten months, Baron. An.
348. number. 14.
by advise he writes his Letters to the Emperor Constans. Letting him
understand that Constantius was always forward to execute the Order of the
Council at Sardica, in the restitution of Athanasius; and that he had kept the
Church of Alexandria vacant now along time, expecting when Athanasius would
return, and that it was free for him to return when he pleased.

How the Church at Alexandria became void, Sect. 3.
will appear when Athanasius returns: for as yet he trusted not Constantius his
courtesy, but departed from Aquileia to Millain; where he had not been long
ere he was saluted with a Letter from Constantius to himself, therein pitying
Athanasius his long sufferings, and telling Athanasius that Constantius had
long since written to Athanasius to come to Constantinople, but that he
expected that Athanasius would long ere now have made application to him, for
Athanasius his restitution; but supposing Athanasius afraid of his displeasure,
did therefore abstain: And therefore Constantius now sends to Athanasius to
invite his coming to Constantinople, promising him full and speedy restitution;
and further telling him, that he had written to his Brother Constans to send
Athanasius away accordingly. Athanasius is at this news perplexed, as if too
good to be true; and supposing if Constantius his favor were real, he might as
well have sent Athanasius his Letters of free passage to Alexandria by Sea from
Italy, with his Letters of peaceable admittance to his Church, rather then to
put him to adventure himself through many of his enemies in so long and
dangerous a journey by Land. But whiles Athanasius is thus in demur what to do,
another Letter comes to him from Constantius, with Letters from diverse of his
friends at Constantinople, importuning his speedy coming away; and for his
accommodations by the way, directions are given. And soon after all this, a
third Letter comes from Constantius, by an express Messenger, a Presbyter of
Alexandria, who brings assurance of Constantius his real intentions for
Athanasius his good: and he eupon Athanasius goes to Rome, to advise with the
Bishop and others, who are all for his going to Constantinople And they furnish
him with Letters of recommendation to the Alexandrian Churches, Soc. lib. 2.
cap. 28.
and so they commend him to the blessing of Almighty God.

And accordingly Gods blessing did go along with him; for he passed to
Constantinople, where finding that the Emperor was gone to Antioch, he
likewise went thither after him: And at that time Leontius was Bishop of
Antioch; in which City were a great number of Orthodox Christians, unto whom
the Arians there would not allow any public Churches for their meeting, but
such of them as would be at the public worship, must go to the Arian
Congregations; Sozom. lib. 3. c. 19.
where Leontius nevertheless permitted them the liberty of their Consciences in
all cases, wherein the honor of the Son of God was concerned: And therefore
when they came to sing, Glory be to the Father, etc. and those that were Arians
did sing Glory be to the Father, they added thereto the words, In the Son;
thereby declaring the Son of God to be inferior to the Father: Those that were
Orthodox would add these words, And the Son, declaring thereby, that the same
Glory due to the Father, was also due to the Son. But when Athanasius was come,
he would not join with the Arian Congregations, but did hold communion with the
Orthodox, who were called Eustathians, in private houses. This being observed,
hastened Athanasius his dispatch with the Emperor; for it was not long ere he
had access into the Emperors presence, and received courteous entertainment
from him, and within a few days obtained his dismission; Soc. lib. 2. cap. 18.
for they saw plainly, that the Orthodox Party was much heartned by Athanasius
his presence, and that Athanasius improved his little time of abode with them
to the utmost for their spiritual benefit. The Emperor therefore sent for him
the sooner, and gave him Letters to the Alexandrian Churches, and to his
Governors of the Country, importing that it was his will that Athanasius
should be received and settled in his place in peace, and permitted so to
continue under the Emperors protection. And unto all the rest he added this
one extraordinary express of his favor; that he swore to him, that he would
never hearken to any slanderous complaints against Athanasius any more. And
Iastly, he made a public Edict, That all Acts and Orders against Athanasius,
or any of the Catholic Church, Athan. Epist. ad Solit. vit.
should be obliterated and made void, and that they all should be restored to
their former enjoyments. But when t Ahanasius was taking of his leave of the
Emperor, he said to Athanasius, Though you Athanasius are now restored to your
place by the Council, yet you are admitted and settled by my Authority; and
therefore seeing that in Alexandria are diverse who differ from you in judgment
concerning some points in Religion, it is my request that you will allow them
liberty of public meeting, at some one Church within your City. To which
Athanasius answered, Its very just, yea necessary, that I should obey your
Imperial Majesty; nor will I gainsay what your will is herein: But seeing also
that this City of Antioch has great multitudes therein, who cannot join with
others of different judgment from mine, in doctrines concerning the Holy
Trinity; I humbly beg for them the like favor, that they also may have a place
of public meeting at Antioch? This answer the Emperor disliked not, but
thought it reasonable: Nevertheless the Arians upon further consideration,
conceiving that they thereby should be greater loosers at Antioch, than gainers
at Alexandria, suffered that matter to pass in silence: Which being observed by
Leontius, he laying his hand upon his head (now white by reason of his age)
said, When this snow is melted away, there will appear much mud: intimating
thereby the persecution which would follow after his death, when as no further
toleration of the Orthodox Profession should be permitted. Soz. lib. 3. cap. 19.


Athanasius now departed from Antioch, Sect. 4.
proceeds in his journey toward Egypt, God making Athanasius his way round
about to be the nighest way to his own Honor; and though it was more for
Athanasius his labor, yet it was also more for his reward; For in all places
as he comes, he now teaches freely and authoritatively the Principles
concerning the Holy Trinity, exhorting the people to endeavor to be well
grounded therein, Soz. lib. 3. cap. 20.
and to beware of the Leven of the Arians; and in some places he ordained
Ministers, and so he came to Jerusalem: There he is received joyfully, for
Maximus the Bishop had continued his true friend ever since the Council at
Tyrus, and now had called a Council; to whom Athanasius declared the manner of
his entertainment by the Emperor, and his Testimonials and Letters; and then
as well enemies as friends come and yield to Athanasius the right hand of
fellowship. Nor did the fame of the Emperors favor spread only where
Athanasius came along, Soz. lib. 3. cap. 22. Soc. lib. 1. cap. 19.
but it went Northward, in so much as Vrsatius and Valens two Bishops of
Panonia, who in all the late transactions against Athanasius, were ever in the
Van, and amongst others were excommunicated at the Council at Sardica. These
men seeing now the tide turning, and the unconstancy of Constantius, under
pretense of remorse of Conscience for their error, make their retractations
after their manner, which they send to the Bishop of Rome, and to Athanasius;
with Letters of submission, and confessing their fault; acknowledging that all
their informations against him were false and feigned, and that they cannot
alledg any thing in excuse of themselves, but do humbly and earnestly beg
pardon, and to be received into Communion again, renouncing Arius and his
opinions, Soc. lib. 3. cap. 22 23.
as execrable and accursed. Enough it was to make any charitable Christian
believe, that they did really intend what they did pretend; but their work will
be manifest in its day. The Bishops also from all parts testify by their
Letters there joining with Athanasius; so as now the current from all parts
seems fair to bring Athanasius safe to the Haven: Nevertheless though thus nigh
the shore, he meets with another mighty wave before he can set his foot
thereon: For he is met by news of the death of his dear Lord the Emperor
Constans; and now is Athanasius involved amongst a thousand doubts, what shall
become of him? whither shall he go? what shall he do? for the Lions chain is
now broken, Constantius is now Lord alone, and may do what he will, and he will
do what the Arians will, and what will they not do? But God helped Athanasius
over this wave also; For Constantius informed hereof (either pitying the
condition of Athanasius, or which is more probable, remembering his own
invitation of Athanasius to put himself under his protection, his promises and
oaths for his assurance; and that it would be dishonorable to him to let the
world have occasion by the altering of his mind on the sudden, to expound all
that he had done was done through fear of Constans and deceitfully) writes
Letters to Athanasius full of encouragement, more then once, or twice, Athan.
Epist. ad Solit. vit.
assuring him of his favor, and real intentions of his good, and willing him
to make haste to Alexandria, without further dread of any danger; and thus at
length Athanasius arriveth at Alexandria.

CAP. XV.
The estate of Alexandria at Athanasius his Arrival. The third charge against
him before Constantius: and Athanasiushis second strange escape.

AThanasius now come to Alexandria, finds his See vacant: Sect. 1.
for Gregory who had been made Bishop of Alexandria in the place of Athanasius
by the Council of Antioch, was put out again as has been mentioned, and
translated to Antioch; where he was deposed again by the Council at Sardica,
and slain by the Citizens at Antioch. Bind. fol. 427.
And the Arian party at Alexandria had procured George of Capadocia to be
Bishop of Alexandria, a man fit for their turn, fierce and cruel against the
Orthodox; in whose days ensued a bloody persecution against them of the
Alexandrian Province, wherein none were spared that come within his reach,
whether Men, Women, Children, Theod. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Monks, Clerks, or Virgins; but pursued to the utmost, by imprisonment,
banishment, tortures, and deaths, in the most cruel manner that soldiers could
invent. And this Bishop thus fleshed, grew so insatiable and imperious, that
the Arians themselves grew afraid of him, and weary of his government; which he
observing, and that Constans began so stoutly to appear for Athanasius, he
suddenly flies from Alexandria, and leaves the place void for Athanasius; who
now comes in without interruption, with all manner of expressions of joy and
love to Athanasius, and thankfulness to God, and (to use Athanasius his own
expressions) his friends are glad; and of the rest, Athan. Epist. ad Solit. Vit.
some are ashamed, some hide themselves, some declare their repentance for
their former ways; saying, that what they did against Athanasius was done by
menace, compulsion and force; but especially the Presbyters and Egyptian
Churches rejoice not only to see their ancient friends again, but more for the
enjoyment of their former liberties, the Christians embracing one another, and
encouraging one another in holding forth constantly their profession; yea
amongst the more moderate sort of Arians, some come to Athanasius by night, and
acknowledge that though for some private respects they held outwardly communion
with the Arians, yet in their hearts they are ever for Athanasius, and his way.
After this public congratulation, Athanasius calls a Council of the
Alexandrian Churches, Soz. lib. 4. cap. 1.
and declares to them the proceedings and determinations of the Council at
Sardica, the Emperors entertainment of him, his several Letters to him, and
his Letters, and the Bishop of Romes Letters to the Churches, and to the people
of Alexandria, and to the Governors and people in all places as he came, and
his acceptance amongst them. And thus Athanasius is accepted and declared to be
settled in his place at Alexandria with peace and honor.

But this sunshine also continued not long, though it was longer then his
Arian enemies expected: Sect. 2.
For though Athanasius now seems bare of all shelter against the next blast of
Constantius his displeasure, which was soon raised by the Arians; yet could
they not find opportunity to storm Athanasius till Magnentius was taken out of
the way. For Constans being murdered by him, he proceeded to possess himself
of his Empire; and hence arose a Civil War in the Empire between Magnentius and
Constantius, which endured diverse years; during which time the pursuit of the
Arians against Athanasius was but faint, for Constantius had his hands full
elsewhere; but after that Magnentius was slain, and Constantius now possessed
of the whole Empire, he that before resolved to have all the Eastern Churches
of his religion, now will have all the World to be of his opinion; yet finding
many that stand in his way, the tempest arises anew, and powers in amain upon
East and West at once; and now the tall Cedars, the Bishops of Rome,
Alexandria, Constantinople, and all that are taller then the rest of their
Profession, must look to themselves; for Constantius is persuaded that these
once levelled, his way will be plain and easy.

For the news of Constans his death coming to Antioch, Sect. 3. Athan. Epist.
ad Solit. vit.
seeing the way was now more fair for Constantius to appear in his proper
colors, Leontius the Bishop there joined with the Eusebians, who all this
while had burned with despite at the prosperity of the Orthodox, and their
great increase. (For now above four hundred Bishops had declared themselves for
the Nicene Confession) and Leontius takes occasion to deal with Ursatius and
Valens to break their Communion with the Bishop of Rome and Athanasius, and to
renounce their former retractations, as done through fear of Constans his
displeasure; although it was notoriously known, that neither Constans nor any
of his Courtiers or Officers was privy to any such submission, but that the
same was done by private Letters, not by the act of any in power.
Nevertheless, They that will be false in the least point concerning God, will
not stick to be false with man in any thing. Ursatius and Valens make no bones
to go now to Constantius, and confess their mistakes in their late
transactions with the Bishop of Rome and Athanasius; yet seeing now their
errors, as they say, they resolve to go no longer in their errors, nor to
mislead others by their example; and therefore they tell Constantius that they
see plainly, that his clemency to Athanasius is so far from winning him, as it
is rather construed to be a justification of his doctrine, whereunto the
Emperor could not in his own conscience but acknowledge himself to be a
professed enemy. They said moreover that by the publishing of Constantius his
Letters in the behalf of Athanasius, there was befaln a general revolt of all
sorts to Athanasius his way, and that ere long the Emperor himself and all
that join with him will be reputed Heretics, and had in as great detestation
as now the Manichees are.

This made way for the first complaints that should be brought to them against
Athanasius, Sect. 4.
which, their patience being but small, would not wait long for; and therefore
by a trick they will make Athanasius banish himself. For which end they fancy,
or rather forge a Letter, supposed to be written to Constantius in Athanasius
his name, whereby he humbly craves leave that he might go into Italy to settle
some matters there that do await his coming; and this delivered to the
Emperor, they procure his dismission for Italy, in such a form, as the same
being sent to the Governor in Egypt, is taken to be in nature of a banishment;
and thereupon the Governor being willingly or unwillingly deceived, acquainted
Athanasius that it was the Emperors will that Athanasius should forthwith
prepare to be gone for Italy. Athanasius wondering hereat, told the Governor
that he could give no credit to such an Order, unless he saw the Warrant under
the Emperors own hand and seal, in regard of the favor that the Emperor had
expressed to him by his invitation, entertainment, his promises, and Oath, his
Letters both before and since Constans his death, his acceptance of Athanasius,
his Visits made to the Emperor so lately, once at Viminacum, again at
Caesaria, and lastly at Antioch; in all which the Emperor showed gracious
respects to him, without the least note of jealousy or suspicion had of him.
The Governor nevertheless was instant with Athanasius for his speedy
departure, telling him that he had the Emperors Warrant under his hand and
seal, but did not think it fit to produce the same. The people understanding
this, begin to interpose in such a manner, as the Governor was glad to agree
to suffer Athanasius to continue till he had further order.

Athanasius his enemies at the Court understanding hereof, Sect. 5.
see now that they must come upon the open stage, and therefore grow resolved
to article against Athanasius, though nothing prove true of all that they
charge him with. And because Constantius cannot in honor touch Athanasius for
any matter preceding the Council at Sardica, they frame their Articles of
matters pretended to be lately done by Athanasius. And they pray the Emperor
that a Council may be called at Antioch, and that Athanasius may be tried there
upon the matters in charge against him. And the Governor in Egypt knowing how
the wind did blow at the Court, steered also his Course accordingly; he saw
Athanasius would not move easily, and therefore he secretly stirs up the people
to rise up against him, and therein wanted not instruments both Arians and
Heathens, who yet not daring to work any public tumults, least the worst
should befall themselves, show their teeth as far as affronts and tricks of
scorn would do the work, the Governor in no manner rebuking them, but rather
giving encouragement therein, by making stop of that portion of corn, which by
the Ordinance of Constantine was wont yearly to be given to the Alexandrian
Bishop out of the Emperors own tribute of corn in that Country; Athan. Epist.
ad Solit. Vit.
and giving the same to the Arians, the Governor still justifying his actions
by authority from the Emperor.

These little clouds thus rising, makes Athanasius conceive that a storm was
following. And sent to the Court, where by friends he is informed of Articles
prepared against him, and that no less then Athanasius his blood would give
the Emperor satisfaction; and that the Emperor had agreed that Athanasius
should be tried at a Council at Antioch, which should be called for settling the
affairs of the Church. And the Articles against Athanasius were to this purpose.

That Athanasius had been an incendiary and promoter of all the jealousies and
differences between Constans and Constantius.

That after the death of Constans, Athanasius was an aider and incourager of
Magnentius to possess himself of the Western Empire, and to take up arms
against Constantius; and to that end did hold intelligence with Magnentius, as
is manifest by Athanasius his Letters to Magnentius, ready to be produced.

That Athanasius at his last coming to Alexandria raised tumults, wherein many
were slain, other imprisoned, some banished, others other ways punished.

That Athanasius opposed the Emperors Government, and refused to obey his
Orders.

Now was the Arian Schism boiled to its full height. For before the Council at
Sardica banishment of the Orthodox would satisfy the Arians; but now their
displeasure is become perfect hatred; nothing will satisfy but destruction of
the Orthodox, Soz. lib. 4. cap. 2.
and their not being. For before this Council at Antioch can take place, the
Emperor calls a Council at Constantinople, where Paulus the Bishop is again
banished and pursued by the Arians to Cucusus; where by the Governor he is
imprisoned, and endeavor is to starve him, but not able to accomplish their
ends that way, after six days waiting for his death, they strangle him. And
though Athanasius can expect no other then the like measure, if he fall into
their hands, yet is he not scared with a noise, he will expect what will be
moved at the Council against him.

The Council at Antioch being met, Sect. 6.
they proved but a few, and as some Writers observe not above thirty, yet
enough they were to do mischief. They fall upon the settlement of the affairs
of the Church at Antioch: For Leontius their Bishop had made Aetius one of
their Deacons; who being a subtle disputer, had gained a party amongst the
Arians, who delighted more in wrangling then in charity, and in disturbing of
other men's understandings more then in fixing of their own, Soz. lib. 6. cap.
26.
and he had a success suitable, which was not to be understood by others; but
to have repute of unknown reach, and of principles beyond the ordinary Arians,
and therefore different from them, though he be never so professedly theirs.
And thus Aetius is flattered by the people into that height that he is
separated, or otherwise separates himself, from the other Arians at Antioch;
and being so he stands out in maintaining the same, upon this account, that the
other Arians had holden communion with Arius, after it was notoriously known
that he had perjured, Soz. lib. 4. cap. 11.
by his submission before Constantine, contrary to his own conscience. And the
Arians now offended with Aetius, fall out also with Leontius for his sake, and
procure him to be banished; the Emperor being the more willing thereto,
because he had suffered dishonor by the advancement of him, who had been
scandalous for uncleanness; and not long after this Leontius died. After whose
death Eudoxus was gotten into the Sea at Antioch, and then endeavored to bring
in Aetius also; but the Arians would not endure him; and complain to the
Emperor, that Eudoxus was brought in without their liking or knowledge, and
that it will be the ruin of their City, because he endeavors to bring in
Aetius also. Soz. lib. 4. cap. 11.
The Emperor disclaimed from having any hand in Eudoxus his coming, and
disavowed Aetius and his doctrine, and forthwith banished him, and commanded
the Council to provide for the settlement of the doctrine, That the Son of God
is like to God the Father; but as touching Eudoxus he made no order.

And now must Athanasius look to himself, Sect. 7.
for the Articles of complaint against him, being presented to the Emperor,
his anger rises to that height, as he cannot stay till Athanasius appears,
but he forthwith sends Syrianus away with five thousand men to apprehend
Athanasius, Athan. Epist. ad Solit. Vit.
or to do somewhat that was worse. These come to Alexandria in the evening, at
which time the Church was at their holy Vigil, which they purposed to observe,
and spend that night in devotion, because the next day was the day appointed
for the receiving of the holy Sacrament of Communion. Syrianus informed
thereof, besets the Church round with his Soldiers; Athanasius informed
thereof, ordered the Deacon to read that, For his mercy endures for ever, and
the people to sing after him, during all which time the Soldiers without were
very quiet; and then Athanasius his care being how the people might best
escape, advised them to depart first, and leave him behind; but they would have
him out with them, which he refusing, the people throng out, and the soldiers
throng in, much blood is spilt, and the Monks and Clergy crowd out, drawing
Athanasius along with them through heaps of dead bodies, wherein no sex, nor
age, nor condition are spared. And thus Athanasius escaped in the throng,
unknown to his enemies, and after a manner unknown to himself; and bearing in
his mind that saying, Hide thy self for a little space, until the indignation
be overpast; he gets himself out of the way, as some say, into a Cave or dry
Well, where he continued without sight of the Sun, for a long while.

The escape of Athanasius once known, Sect. 8.
for his dead body cannot be found amongst the rest, and tidings thereof coming
to Constantius, his former kind Letters are now turned into fatal Decrees and
Declarations, his Promises to threats, his Oaths to nothing: his Edicts go
forth to all his Governors, Lievtenants, Deputies, Commanders, and Officers, to
let them know, that Athanasius is a banished Outlaw; and the like to the
Alexandrian Churches, commanding them to repute Athanasius as the Emperors
Enemy, and that no man shall harbor him, or conceal him. And now is the whole
world in Arms against this one man, great and small, watching for him; threats
against such as neglect to apprehend him, rewards to such as shall apprehend
him, or kill him: And thus in the opinion of all, he is looked upon as a dead
man; who nevertheless still comforts himself in that of the Psalmist, Though an
Host should come against me, Ruffinus. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 14.
my heart shall not fear; Though war should rise against me, in this will I be
confident: And he is well kept for all this; Athanasius though in banishment,
is quiet; but the Emperor though in his Throne, has no rest, day nor night;
wherever he turns himself, foreign wars, or civil broils continually haunts
him; in all which his Arian party cannot much boast of their gains; they have
their liberty to be as wicked as they will, but they bind their Estates, Blood
and Lives to serve him for the purchase. And in the mean time the Orthodox
Christians under an outward oppression, yet hold life and soul together, with a
free Conscience, till better things come.

The Council at Antioch not satisfied with Athanasius his escape, Sect. 9.
to show their spleen, and to curry favor with the Emperor in confirmng what
he has done, bar the door against Athanasius his return for the future; and
declare him excommunicate and banished, without hearing him, or his cause; and
send their Letters to all Churches, inhibiting communion with him by word, or
letter, or other message; and letting them know, that George of Cappadocia is
Bishop of Alexandria, and is ordered to return to his charge; and it vexes
them that they can reach no further. For Athanasius is now out of their reach,
where his life is safe; and therefore as far as they can, they pursue him with
revilings and reproaches for deserting his flock in the time of danger: So as
Athanasius has work enough to clear his good name, and save what he can, being
beaten thus to a retreat, by the fury of his enemies.

And therefore first he finds out means to convey Letters to the Emperor with
the best safety that he can; Sect. 10. Athan. Apol. ad Constan
wherein taking notice of the Emperors displeasure, and of certain matters of
crime laid to his charge, he answers the same severally. And first as
touching the tumults at Alexandria, he affirms that there were no such upon
his Arrival: that it is true there was a joyful Assembly, but no bitterness
nor displeasure amongst them, nor imprisonments or punishments, much less
bloodshed, death or banishments caused by them; but what was done in such
matters, was done by the Civil Magistrates upon misdemeanors committed before
his coming to Alexandria.

Secondly, That it never entered into his thought to imagine or contrive such
wickedness, as to stir up or maintain any difference or jealousy between the
Emperors Constans and Constantius; For he well knew it was a sin exceeding
hateful to God, to give the least encouragement to strife between brethren;
much more between them, being Governors of the people: That Constans was not
of so easy a belief, as to give any credit to informations against
Constantius. That although Athanasius was diverse times with Constans, yet never
in private, nor without diverse eminent persons then present, who can testify
what he said. And these person; Athanasius mentioned by name, and appealed to
them to testify what they knew concerning that matter.

Thirdly, That Athanasius never knew Magnentius, nor did he ever send unto him,
or received any letter or message from him: and therefore those letters
supposed to be sent to Magnentius by Athanasius, and to be ready to be
produced, are mere forgeries. That it is against all reason, to imagine that
Athanasius should hold any kind of intelligence with that Magnentius, who had
not only murdered the Patron of his own life, and Liege Lord, but the best
friend under God, that ever Athanasius had in the time of his necessity.
Athanasius further said, that during the whole time of the unhappy Civil wars
raised by Magnentius, Athanasius was so far from wishing a good success to
Magnentius, that contrarily he ever publicly prayed to God to aid and assist
Constantius against all his enemies; and the people also at the same time with
loud vociferations cried out, Lord help and aid Constantius.

Lastly, as touching Athanasius his disobedience to the Emperors Orders; he
knows not of any order, but what was mentioned to him by the Governor of
Egypt by word of mouth, without showing any in writing, and whereof Athanasius
had cause to doubt, in regard of the many late favors received by him from
Constantius. And therefore Athanasius told the Governor, if he had any such
order, it was unduly gained; as afterward he was informed it was framed upon
surmise of a Letter supposed to be written by Athanasius to the Empe^our
Constantius; whereas none such was ever written or sent by him. All which
Athanasius declared more at large in his Apology to Constantius, published
amongst other of Athanasius his works.

The other invective (by those at the Council at Antioch, and more specially by
Leontius; Sect. 11.
for it can deserve no better name than an invective) against Athanasius, for
his unworthy deserting his flock in the time of danger: Athan. Apol. De suga.
Athanasius made an Apology, as it is published amongst his other writings,
wherein he justifies himself as in case of Persecution; and the same he proves
by Scripture rules and examples, and tells his Detractors, that if it be a
matter of scandal in Athanasius to fly in such case, its much more scandalous
in them that by persecution enforced him thereunto.

CAP. XVI.
The Entry of George the Arian Bishop into Alexandria again the secondtime: His
cruel Persecutions there. Athanasiushis escape into the Wilderness. The Monks
profession.

AThanasius now gone, George of Cappadocia, formerly fled from Alexandria,
Sect. 1.
is now become George on Horseback, and like a Centaur returns with a strong
guard of Soldiers and Arians as his supporters; and if formerly he was acted by
one devil, he is now possessed by seven. Their first endeavors are to make all
sorts renounce the Nicene Faith; and coming in about Easter-time, Theod. lib.
2. c. 14. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 23.
he falls upon the stricter sort of Professors, and such as are most eminent,
as his first dish. The Governors, Officers, and others entrusted, are ready at
hand to execute the Emperors Orders; Ursatius and Valens attending at the
Court, follow the chase with full speed, encouraging those that are forward,
complaining of such as are backward, switching up such as are dull in the
chase. And thus at Alexandria all the former joy is turned to sorrow, peace to
tumult, mirth to mourning; nothing but tears, sighs, bewailings in every place,
to see Bishops, Presbyters, Monks, Virgins, Old men, Women and Children, some
seized upon and dragged to sentence, and from thence to executions; others
banished, traveling up and down from one City to another, and from one Nation
to another; others flying into the Wilderness amongst the wild beasts, to
escape the fury of Christian beasts; and which is worst of all, many revolting
and relapsing from the truth to Arianism: And yet in all this tempest the
Church of God lost nothing; for whiles men beheld these poor sufferers and
wanderers, wherever they go, their patience and constancy is admired, their
persons pitied, the Truth inquired after, and honored; the Persecuters and
their Religion are had in abomination.

Thus are the Christians at Alexandria destitute of these eminent Professors;
Sect. 2.
and yet they continue their private Meetings, and about the time of Pentecost
hold a more solemn assembly of Prayer, and holy Fast; which being told to the
Wolvish Bishop, he sends Sebastianus a cruel Manichee, with his band of
Soldiers; (For such as separate upon corrupt Principles, will make use of any
instrument to serve their turns) These Soldiers on the Lords day with their
weapons and swords drawn, assailed the poor Christians in their meeting, or so
many of them as were now left, for the time of public Prayer was now past; and
of those whom the sword spared, some were whipped, others otherwise tortured;
some, especially the women, brought to the fire and threatened to be burned, but
not so prevailing to make them renounce their faith, they were stripped and
whipped, and used despitefully; nor would they suffer relief to be administered
to them, nor the dead martyred to be buried by their friends: In this cruelty
they slew in Egypt thirty Bishops, or more, and banished fifteen others,
besides those that fled into unknown places, and a multitude of Presbyters, and
of those who were banished, sew escaped without maims and wounds, so as many
died in the way, and many more in the places of their confinement.

Amongst which thus fled, Sect. 3.
Athunasius must not be forgotten; for having served the Church of God in
Government, he must now serve the same in Banishment; and having made his
escape as has been mentioned, he is now pursued night and day, by such as
continually did lie in wait for his life. The particulars of his condition, and
in what places he was all the time of his absence from Alexandria, is
altogether left in doubt; and great pity it is that we have no more thereof
noted by writers. Zonaras says, that Constantius banished him into Britain;
which if so, proved a great mercy of God to our forefathers, who have derived
the doctrine of the Holy Trinity uncorrupted, and so has been maintained in
this Island even to this day, and long may it last: but I suppose Constantius
his thirst after Athanasius his blood, would not be so easily quenched by his
banishment; nor can it stand with Athanasius his being escaped into the
Wilderness, Soz. lib. 4. cap. 9.
and his being in a Cave for six years; which if true, probably was the first
six years after the Antiochian Council, when as the rage of his Enemies in
their first heat, would put them to the strictest search that they could make;
and Athanasius to the utmost shift that he could make. And this Cave might
probably be in Alexandria, for it was nigh the dwelling of one that he might
safely trust, and was acquainted with: It may be it was that choice Virgin so
commended by the Historian, for her exceeding care of preserving Athanasius so
secretly, Soz. lib. 5. cap. 6.
as she would trust none but her self with ministering to him in whatsoever he
wanted all the while, until her Maidservant by continual observation had
discovered it, and for hope of reward, told some of Athanasius his Enemies
thereof; who preparing to apprehend him, Athanasius the night before going,
suspecting his own safety in continuing there any longer, in the night time
escaped away: and when the Searchers the next day came to sieze their prey,
they found that he was not to be found; and suspecting themselves to be deluded
by the maid, they took her, and punished her for her service.

The next news that they hear of Athanasius, Sect. 4.
is, that he is somewhere in the Wilderness amongst the Monks: A people that in
their first original began, from persecution of the Church from without the
same by the heathens, and was then but a shift; but about the beginning of
Athanasius his time, was much increased by persecution of the Church from
within it self; and in continuance, was now grown into the honor of the
highest strain of profession, and became in fashion. For by reason of these
persecutions, some melancholic spirits dejected and distracted at the sad
apprehensions arising from the present troubles, and seeing no hope of redress,
chose rather to withdraw themselves from all secular affairs and common
society, then to live continually in such troubles: Nazian. Encom. Athan.
And (as Nazianzen says) gave themselves to a solitary life in Wildernesses,
and other places apart, to live to God more, and to the world less then other
men do, who are busied in earthly affairs every day. Amongst which people, he
says that in his days were several sorts; some being Hermits, wholly absent
themselves from all society, and enjoy communion with God alone, knowing
nothing of this world but solitariness. But others observe more the Law of
Charity, by communion and society together amongst themselves: These are
solitary also in their kind, and dead to the affairs of the world, and
whatsoever turnings and changes there are in civil affairs, yet live they
together in societies, and are busied in labor, reserving themselves
nevertheless for the worship of God as their main end; accounting the men of
the world imposters, and are a world to themselves, and do quicken the graces
of one another, by contemplating each others virtues, mutually comparing
themselves together, and emulating one another. Thus far Nazianzen. If
therefore the apparel and diet of these men were unhandsome, Soc. lib. 4. cap.
18.
mean, and in a manner sordid, its not to be wondered at, considering that they
looked on outward conveniences but as accidental to their main end, which was
quietness of mind; and therefore they abhorred idleness, and accounted such as
did not labor to be rather Cheaters then Monks. This was a life not very
suitable to flesh and blood, and yet in those days were many multitudes of
them, especially in the Egyptian Wildernesses: and though thus retired they
were, yet still remained they under the survey of the Bishops; Soz. lib. 6.
cap. 28.
For its noted that Serapion one of the Egyptian Bishops had under his alone
government ten thousand of them. They were also many of them learned men, and
principal asserters of the doctrine Orthodox against the Heretics in those
days; and their writings, continued to this age wherein we live, sufficiently
show it. And with these men Athanasius was not unacquainted, no not when he was
young; for even then he entered into acquaintance with that famous Authony the
Monk, and did exceedingly observe, or rather serve him; he was in account the
very founder of the Monastical life by way of profession in the Wilderness of
Egypt, and was a man of eminency for holiness, Athan. Vit. Anter.
not only in the Wilderness, but even in the Courts of Princes, and the
Emperor himself. And after that Athanasius was Bishop, he often delighted to
visit the Monks in their Cells, and to converse with them; and now in his
distress he has recourse to these, as to his securest refuge on Earth.

Nevertheless this was not all the work that God had to do, Sect. 5.
thus to gain a refuge for Athanasius in the Wilderness, nor is it all the end
that Athanasius aims at, thus to hide himself, for even in the Wilderness
there must be rule and government, and though men live as it were out of the
World, yet the Devil and their lusts follow them; so as though these Monks, to
avoid occasions, do avoid affairs, though they aim to draw nigh to God, yet
soon begin to forget themselves, and jarres and divisions befall them there: No
form of profession, no separation from Christian Congregations and Assemblies,
no nor from society in worldly affairs with mankind, will be a remedy against
schisms and errors. A Bishop therefore, or (if that word please not) an
Overseer is as necessary in the Wilderness as at Alexandria, to interpose,
advise, exhort, and by reproof to reduce men into ways of Reason and Religion.
And this proves to be Athanasius his work now he is in the Wilderness: For (to
take up the words of Nazianzen) Athanasius was a reconciler in all places where
he had to do, Nazian. Encom. Athan.
by his wisdom and example. And in the Wilderness now he labors to reduce
amity and unity between the Monks and Hermites; letting them know that the
holiest Monks stand in need of a Visitor or Overseer. And that in a Bishop, as
Athanasius was, may be an excellent temperature of a speculative tranquillity on
the one part, and of practical morality in political affairs on the other. And
that Monastical life consisted rather in gravity and constancy in Christian
conversation, then in solitariness or separation. And by this means Athanasius
gained such authority and respect amongst these Wilderness people, that what
he pleased was a Law to them, and what he disliked they accounted as forbidden
and execrable.

Whiles Athanasius is thus out of the way, Sect. 6.
men know not where nor which way; his enemies observe and examine all
travelers, watch such as go out or come into Alexandria, search the ships,
ransack the houses, make enquiry, bring disturbance amongst the brethren,
forage the Wilderness, where supposing they have a scent of him, they search
the Cells, examine the Monks, but they had as good ask the stones. They do so
highly honor Athanasius, that they will not admit of any parley with the
persecutors, but offer their necks rather to the sword, and if any of them meet
with any hardship for Athanasius his sake, they endure it with courage,
accounting it a high strain of their profession, even beyond their daily fasts
and watchings, and prostrations, and lying on the ground, which nevertheless
they held in a great account amongst them.

And yet is Athanasius many times put to extreme plunges. Sect. 7.
And is compelled to keep close and fly from one Cell to another, from thence
to the Hermites, and at last from the company of men to get amongst the wild
beasts; for the malice of man he sufficiently understood was implacable. Cui
enim parcerent Ariani qui nec animis suis pepercerunt. The Arians will not
spare Athanasius, who will not spare their own souls; Athan. Epist. ad Lucit.
yet there was means used to convey to him Letters, Messages, and necessaries.
But the pursuers are at length wearied, and return without their sport, yet
watches are set in all places, with such care and diligence, that Athanasius
dare not look abroad, and this he says so sadded his spirit, that, Nec
lachrimis cessaverit ab oculis nec gemitus ab animo, etc. he spent his time in
weeping and mourning, because he durst not go abroad to visit his brethren and
parents then alive; nor adventure to look into the fresh air; yet had he his
times of studying and writing Letters and Discourses of vindicating himself and
the truth; such as are his Epist. ad Solitariam Vitam agentes; his Apologies De
fuga sua, and another ad Constantium, and his second Apology, His Epistle ad
Serapion, concerning the Deity of the Holy Ghost; his Consolatory Letter to the
Holy Virgins, and other discourses, whereof all ages ever since have reaped the
benefit; God hereby making his Wilderness our Paradise, and the loss of
Alexandria our gain; yet was that good man so far sensible of his condition, as
to endeavor by all means to regain his liberty, and sometimes its in his
purpose to come in and cast himself at Constantius his feet for mercy, and one
time was so fully resolved, as to do it forthwith, but even at the same time
news comes of a new fire kindled in Constantius his breast, that burst out with
great fury against the Western Bishops; Athan. Apol. ad Constan.
an unmeet time this is for Athanasius to adventure, and therefore he now
rather keeps himself more concealed then ever; yet do not his friends at
Alexandria give over, they still by all the friends they can make to gain
access into Constantius his favor in behalf of Athanasius, but still receive
the repulse; his rage swells the more, the more he is sought to. He commands
the Alexandrians to submit and be silent, he tells them that Athanasius is an
impostor, a conjurer, a wicked wretch, a cheator, worthy to die a thousand
deaths, and many such disgraceful reproaches, like an Emperor he heaped upon
him. And thus brave Athanasius at once suffered in his good name, his body, and
mind, yet with a pure conscience he maintains the field.

CAP. XVII.
The Council at Millain intended against Athanasius, yet in vain.

BUt the Arians think Athanasius quite routed and gone, Sect. 1.
and all their care is to entrench and fortify themselves against his return;
for so long as he is alive, they fear he will retreat and face about again. And
therefore supposing that Constantius is able to sway a General Council, they
prevail with him to call a General Council at Millain, for they mean to beat
the Bishop of Rome and the Western Bishops upon their own dunghill, Theod.
lib. 2. c. 15. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 29.
and expecting that the Bishop of Rome will be personally there, they resolve
to assault him in the midst of his strength. This Bishop now was Liberius, for
Julius was lately dead; and Liberius a new intrant, Soz. lib. 4. cap. 8.
is suspected by the Arians to be a dangerous man, and must be reclaimed at the
first, before he takes deeper root, and do more hurt. The Council being
assembled, many of them out of the East, but about three hundred out of the
West, the Eastern Bishops propound that a Decree might be made for the
confirming of the banishment of Athanasius, never to return to Alexandria
again. But the Western Bishops no whit abashed at the boldness of the Eastern
Bishops, Paulinus Bishop of Triers, Eusebius Bishop of Vercellis, and Dionisius
Bishop of Alba told the Eastern Bishops plainly, that the proceedings of the
Eastern Bishops against Athanasius had been altogether unjust. That none of the
crimes charged against Athanasius were ever proved, nor he ever allowed liberty
to answer for himself; and that its notoriously known to all the World, that
what had been done against Athanasius, whether at the Council at Tyrus, or at
the Council at Antioch, was not done to find out and favor the truth, but to
oppress it. And which is yet worse, it is evident that this their proposal
beginning against Athanasius, will end in the subversion of the determinations
of the Council at Nice, which the Western Bishops resolved they would never
yield unto; and thereupon they dismiss the Council. The Emperor Constantius
finding himself neither feared nor loved, but contrarily that they are not
afraid to declare in the public Council, that his government was wicked and
unjust, he forthwith, without hearing of them, banishes diverse of them. Athan.
Epist. ad Solit. Vit
Hossius the old Bishop of Corduba, being one of the Council, a man of great
learning, wisdom, and sharpness of wit, a grave man, now about a hundred
years old, and highly reverenced of all, wrote a Letter to the Emperor,
Beseeching him to hearken to the advice of his servant, now grown old in
experience of the contrivances of the enemies of the Church, even the Arians
whom he had well known and observed in their course, even from their first
budding forth; and that he ever found them such, as that he cannot but in
faithfulness unto him, beseech him to beware of their ways and Councils,
which cannot endure the light; and therefore would not appear at the Sardican
Council, which was called by the Emperors own Authority, whereto also they
were summoned; and where their criminations against Athanasius were found and
declared malicious deceitful forgeries. And therefore it will not be for the
Emperors Honor, nor peace of conscience, to decline the advice of his Council
of so many Bishops fearing God and approving themselves faithful to his
Imperial Majesty: Nor to engage his power and authority in the defense of those
dangerous and abominable errors of Arius; Much less will it be safe for him
to adventure so deeply in the pursuit of Athanasius, without hearing of his
cause; and first of all if he take into consideration his former Letters,
Messages, Promises, Oath, and public Edicts. And as it becomes Hossius in
faithfulness to mind the Emperor hereof; so also will it not be unbecoming the
Emperor to take it in good part; and therefore he prayed the Emperor to
remember that he is a mortal man, and to fear the Day of Judgment, and to be
sure that he keep a good conscience against that Dreadful Day.

But Constantius used to be humoured by the flatteries of the Arian Bishops,
Sect. 2.
and lifted up by the glorious titles that they give him; and especially by
that new invented Title of Eternal Emperor, which he brooked very well, (and
yet could be contented to deny the Son of God to be Eternal) could not endure
this bitter pill of plain dealing from Hossius, but his anger rises and
forthwith he banishes Hossius also. And then he sends Eusebius an Eunuch, that
waited on him, to Liberius Bishop of Rome, to draw him off from the Orthodox
Profession, and to gain him to subscribe to Athanasius his Banishment; and
accordingly Eusebius used all his craft by exhortations, promises, tenders of
reward, threats of the Emperors displeasure, and danger that would follow; but
all in vain: Liberius is deaf to all. Then the Emperor sent for Liberius to
come to him, and being come, this parley ensued, which I shall rather Relate
then Translate.

Constable. We have thought meet Liberius, Sect. 3.
in regard that you are a Christian, that you should be Bishop of Rome, and we
have sent to you to require you forthwith to renounce communion with
Athanasius and all his opinions: For the Synod has declared him excommunicate,
and the whole world goes that way.


Liber. Sir, The judgments of the Church ought to be according to justice; and
therefore let Athanasius be brought to trial according to the Orders of the
Church, for he ought not to be condemned by those who never heard him speak for
himself.


Constable. The whole world has condemned his wickedness, but that he deludeth
all men.


Liber. The Bishops who have sentenced him, have done they know not what, but
have been drawn to do what they did for fear of man, desire of glory, and avoid
reproach.


Constable. What fear, what glory, what reproach?


Liber. Whoever loves not the Glory of God, but preferres your favor, O
Emperor, above it, and condemn a man that they never saw, is unworthy of the
name of a Christian.


Constable. True, but Athanasius was convicted, and was present at the Council of
Tyrus, which was a general Council.


Liber. No Sir, he was not present when they passed the sentence, nor did they
sentence him till he was departed.


Eusebius the Eunuch, The Synod had declared Athanasius to be fallen from the
Faith.


Liber. That Synod did appoint five persons to enquire further evidence against
Athanasius, who went for that end to Mareotis. Two of which, viz. Theognis and
Theodorus are now dead, the other three, viz. Maris, Valens, and Ursatius, at
the Council at Sardica confessed that the evidence at Mareotis against
Athanasius was forged. Whom then shall we believe? those that condemned
Athanasius, and then acknowledged their error? or those that now would
condemn him without further evidence?


Epictetus a Bishop, Speaking to the Emperor, said that Liberius did speak,
not so much from any desire that he had of Justice, but that it might be told
at Rome that he had put the Emperor to silence.


Constable. What are you Liberius, that you alone will side with Athanasius? and
trouble the peace of the world in this manner?


Liber. My being the only man, O Emperor, cannot weaken the word of Truth:
For there was a time when but three persons withstood a public Edict.


Eusebius the Eunuch, Do you Liberius compare the Emperor Constantius to
Nebuchadonozer?


Liber. No Sir, but you can without reason condemn a man that never appeared
before you. Call to mind I beseech you, and consider the general consent of the
Council at Nice, and call home the Bishops and others banished, and if they
shall appear troublers of the Church, let matters appear at a General Council
at Alexandria; and let Justice be done.


Epictetus. There will be searcely found carriages enough for such a company so
far.


Liber. Every Church may send their Bishop by Sea, if that be the nighest way,
and carriages may be for the rest.


Constable. That which is done, must not be undone; the sentence is already past
against Athanasius, and yet you alone will stand to maintain communion with
that wicked man.


Liber. A Judge must not pass sentence out of private spleen against any man,
nor without hearing of him.


Constable. He has troubled all men, but especially my self; he was not satisfied
with my brother Constantines death, but did what he could to set stnife between
my brother Constans and my self, and I endured it: I never was more glad of any
victory against my enemy, then I am that Athanasius, that wicked man, is now
removed out of my way.


Liber. Do not, O Emperor, revenge your self upon Bishops, they should be
encouraged for the preserving of holiness. Restore them to their places, and if
they be found agreeing to the Nicene Faith, let them consider with a lawful
Council, for the maintaining of the public Unity, and suffer not an innocent
person to be oppressed.


Constable. Do you Liberius what I order; Subscribe your consent with the rest of
the Bishops, and then return you to Rome with all my heart.


Liber. I have bidden adieu to my brethren at Rome, the Laws of the Church are
dearer to me, then is my dwelling at Rome.


Constable. You shall have three days to consider whether you will live at Rome,
or where you will, but you must subscribe.


Liber. Neither three days, not three months, can change my principles; send
me whether you please.


Constable. Then I order that Liberius shall after two days be required to
subscribe, and if he shall then refuse, I command that he be banished to Berea
in Thracia, and let him have five hundred shillings for the charge of his
journey.


Liber. I pray you let the five hundred shillings be given to the soldiers,
for they need it.


The Empress. Let five hundred shilling more be given to Liberius from me.


Liber. Carry that also to the Empercur, toward his expedition, but if that
needs not, he may please to give it to Auxentius and Epictetus, for they need
it.


Eusebius the Eunuch importunately urged Liberius to take the money.


Liber. You have wasted the Churches, Eusebius, and now will you give alms? go
first and be a Christian.


And thus after two days Liberius went into banishment. Sect. 4.
And about the same time also Hilarious Bishop of Poictiers was also banished
for plain and wholesome Counsel given to the Emperor, but mistaken by him. And
now are the Arians Lords alone, and might sit down and enjoy their liberty. But
yet not so, For where error is the principle, there is no rest but a continual
progress from one to more, and from more to many more. And besides the
subordinate natural birth that Arianisme brought forth, there sprung also
diverse bastard errors, whereof some tended to dis-inherit the very Arian
principles and turn them out of doors. Soz. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Of which number about this time arose that of the Photinians, so named from
Photinus, who had his principles from Marcellus, whose disciple he had been.
The principal points which he taught were, That God is One and Alone, and not
subsisting in Persons. That Christ is a man, begotten by a man, and not from
eternity. That the Holy Ghost is God, and no distinct Person. Which if so, then
the Arian principles are destroyed; and the Arians must vail their Bonnet to
Photinus, take up his name, and lay aside their own.

CAP. XVIII.
The Council at Syrmium against Photinus. The Arian Confession there made,
whereby both Hossius and Liberius are ensnared.

THe Emperor was at Syrmium, Sect. 1. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 24 25.26. Soz. lib. 4.
cap. 5.
when as Photinus began to act his part, and it incensed him not a little, that
such innovations durst put up head in his own presence; and therefore he is
easily induced to call a Council there, whereas Photinns was at that time
Bishop. The Arians furthered him also therein, being as earnest therein as
himself, and procured the Emperor also to send for Hossius, whom once gained,
they hoped to gain many more; and he came, though unwillingly, as he had cause.
In the transaction thereof the Arians dealt cunningly: For they made a
Confession of Faith, that on the one side aimed to strike Photinus in the right
vein; and which also on the other side may go down with Hossius and others of
his way, and yet must be safe for the Arians to approve. For the Council
consisted most of such. And this Confession is thus framed.

We believe in one God, Father Almighty, the Maker and Framer of all things; of
whom all the Father-hood in Heaven and Earth is named. And in his only
begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, before all ages begotten of the Father. God
of God, Light of Light, by whom all things are made which are in Heaven and in
Earth, visible and invisible: Who is the Word, Wisdom, True Light and Life. Who
in these last days is made Man for us, born of the Holy Virgin, crucified,
dead, and who arose from the dead the third day, and ascended into Heaven; sits
at the right hand of God the Father; and shall come at the end of the World to
judge the Living and the Dead, and to render to every man according to his
works, of whose Kingdom there is no end, but remains for ever. For He shall
sit at the right hand of the Father, not only whilst this World last, but also
in the World to come. And in the Holy Ghost, that is the Comforter; whom the
Lord promised to send after his Ascension unto his Disciples, that He might
teach them, and mind them all things, and did send Him; by whom the souls of
such as sincerely believe in Him are sanctified.

1. Those therefore that affirm that the Son is of things which are not, or of
any other substance then of God the Father. Or that there was time or age when
He was not; are accursed. 2. So if any man affirm that the Father and the Son
are two Gods. 3. Or that Christ was God before all ages, and therewith does not
confess that the Son of God with the Father made all things. 4. Or that the
Son of God or any part of Him is begotten of Mary. 5. Or that the Son is born
of Mary according to foreknowledge, and not before all ages begotten of the
Father, and was with God; and that by Him all things were made. 6. Or that the
substance of God may be dilated or contracted. 7. Or that the essence of God
dilated, makes the Son, or shall call the Son as it were the dildting of His
Essence. 8. Or shall call the Son, the Word of God in the mind of the Father
seated, or the Word brought forth. 9. Or that God Man is begotten of the Virgin
Mary, understanding thereby that God is begotten. 10. Or that shall expound
these words [besides Me there is no God] to exclude thereby the only begotten,
who is God from everlasting. 11. Or shall expound those words [the Word was
made Flesh] to be transmutation into Flesh. 12. Or by crucifying the only
begotten Son of God, shall understand that the Son of God did undergo passion,
destruction, change, diminution, or annihilation. 13. Or that shall expound
these words [Let us make man, etc.] as spoken from God the Father to himself
and not to God the Son. 14. Or that shall affirm that Jacob wrastled with God
as God, or with God the Father, and not with the Son as Man. 15. Or shall
expound those words [the Lord gained from the Lord] not of the Father and the
Son; but the Father rained from Himself. 16. Or that shall expound those forms
of speech, [God the Father, or God the Son, or God of God] to determine two
Gods thereby. 17. Or when he says, Lord of Lords, shall thereby understand two
Gods. For we do not place the Son in the same degree with the Father, but we
make Him subject to the Father. 18. Or shall affirm the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit to be one Person. 19. Or that calling the Holy Ghost the Comforter,
shall intend thereby God begotten. 20. Or that shall call any the Comforter,
besides whom the Son of God has so called. 21. Or that shall affirm the Holy
Ghost to be part of the Father and the Son. 22. Or that the Son as one of the
Creatures is made by the will of the Father. 23. Or that the Son is begotten
without the will of the Father. 24. Or that Jesus Christ the Son of God is not
from Eternity, but to be the Son, and Christ only, when he was born of Mary,
and began then to be God, as Samosetanus said.
This Confession thus framed, as on the one side it does not assert that the
Son is consubstantial with the Father, so on the other side it says not in so
many words that he is like to the Father. So being as it were silent in the
point of similitude, they hoped both the Orthodox and the Arian would subscribe
thereto, and agree in the condemning of Photinus, if he should prove obstinate.

Besides this Confession thus framed, Sect. 2.
there were two other Confessions offered, which were suffered to pass abroad;
but which of all these was offered to Photinus to subscribe, appears not by
the History; but it appears that Photinus resused to subscribe, and unde took
to desend his opinions by dispute; yet not satisfying the Council, they
declared him excommunicated, and banished him; and accordingly he retired
himself all his days. Nevertheless he published a discourse against all
Heresies. For even Heretics will condemn Heresies.

Of these two other Confessions one is wholly concealed by the Historians, Sect.
3.
only they say that therein that the words Substance and Consubstantial were
not only omitted, but expressly forbidden to be used either in teaching or
disputation. For the way to bring in Heresy, is to do it by degrees, they
first conceal the words that do difference truth from crrour, and then
afterward foist in words that may lead in their errors. But this is not all;
for in the same Confession thus concealed, they affirm, That the Father is
greater then the Son in Honor, Dignity, and Deity, and in the Name Father. And
that the Father is without beginning; and that the Generation of the Son is
known only to the Father. But as touching the third Confession, although it be
not concealed; yet it seems it was reserved to be owned by another Council, as
not so fitting for the present purpose, where such diverse Confessions were
propounded, and the members each of them abounding in their own several senses,
might by multiplying debates break off without concluding against Photinus, and
so evaporate into nothing.

Photinus thus dispatched, Sect. 4.
Hossius comes upon the stage, and is required to subscribe, but he acquainted
with these debates, refused their offer; which being told the Emperor, and the
whole credit of their proceedings at the Council depending much thereupon, they
use all fair means they can invent to gain him to their bent; but not
prevailing, they fall to imperial commands, from thence to threats, and from
threats to blows, and lastly by tortures they compel the good old man to
subscribe the Confession, but could not prevail with him to subscribe to their
proceedings against Athanasius; Athan. Apol. ^.
at last seeing they could not gain all, they seem contented in what was done,
and they dismiss him to his Bishopric again. And then they call for Liberius,
now famous for his stout defense of Athanasius before the Emperor: him they
tell what others had done, and how that famous Hossius had agreed to their
proceedings, and showed to him his subscription; and accordingly they require
Liberius to do the like. Liberius hereupon showed himself the successor of St.
Peter too much, in that though he said formerly three days, nor three months
could change his reason, yet it seems three years did: For the History mentions
not otherwise, Baron. An. 357. number. 46.
but that he submitted to whatsoever they demanded of him. But Hossius was much
troubled for what he had done, and living not long after, made his last Will,
and therein protested against the Emperors cruelty and enforcement of his
Subscription, uttterly renouncing all the Arian opinions, and died Orthodox.
Albeit there are not wanting some that make sad conjectures concerning him, yet
Athanasius bears him witness, that his infirmity herein was ( Seni
imbecilitate, and exilii tadio) caused by the weakness of old age, and the
misery he had endured in his bainshment, Athan. Epist. ad Solit. Vit.
and that thereby he was (inpar verberibus) unable to endure tortures; and so
he gave place for a time, yet a famous and worthy man he is in Athanasius his
esteem. And as for Liberius, Baronius assures us, that after he subscribed,
and returned to Rome, where he was formerly exceedingly beloved, there were
many that took scandal at him, and made a schism in his Church, diverse of them
going along with Felix, who had been Bishop in his absence, and never would
communicate with Liberius so long as Felix, lived; But after his death, they
(upon many testimonies of Liberius his repentance) submitted to join with him
again.

The falls of these two great lights of the Church (though thus cleared to all)
shaked the Orthodox Christians exceedingly, and made many to stagger at the
first news thereof, and may serve to mind, especially old Professors, (as
Baronius does) often to use that prayer of the Psalmist, And now when I am old
and gray headed, O Lord forsake me not; more especially in this instant of
apostasy wherein we now live.

Thus the Council at Syrmium has done somewhat toward the advancement of the
Arian Cause, yet upon cool consideration, casting up their accounts, they find
little gains from their Confessions; what they have gotten, they gained by
scratching, and when they have it, they may put it in their eyes and see not
one whit the worse: Nay they begin to think themselves loosers, and in the
conclusion are sorry for what they have done. Somewhat is found in their
Confession, which can hardly be defended from being contradictory to some other
clause therein; and thereupon to amend their error, they apply themselves to
the Emperor, to gain his Proclamation to call in all the Copies of their
Confession that passed abroad; which the Emperor does, with a penalty for such
as shall refuse, or neglect to bring in such Copies as they have; but all in
vain, the recalling them in, makes them scatter the more abroad, and the error
made more notorious; and in conclusion to repair their credit, they publish to
the world the confession of their Confession, That somewhat was done per
simultatem, Nazian. Encom. Athen.
and Veteratorie, by guile and cheat to overreach; and it may be all that they
did was so done. For if such as separate upon unwarrantable grounds may come to
cheat in the confession of their Faith, they will much more do it in the
profession of their life: But for all this, the Arians are neither satisfied in
what they have done, nor in what they have undone; they therefore have another
confession of Faith in the Bank, which they reserve for another Council to hold
forth, for they cannot pass it at Syrmium, and therefore they will have one
Council more, yea they will have many more; hoping at length that the Orthodox
Bishops will either be weary of coming to their Councils, and find excuses of
absence; or if they come, that the Emperors presence will so appal them, that
they will be so wise as to keep silence, and suffer the game to go for the
Arians without contradiction.

CAP. XIX.
The Councils at Arminum and Seleucie. The Arian Confession of Faith there. The
Schism between the Artans, and the Semi-Arians.

HItherto the Arians are against the person of Athanasius immediately, Sect. 1.
but henceforth more bold, during the remainder of Constantius his reign they
directly face, and endeavor to outface the doctrine of the Council at Nice.
Soc. lib. 2. cap. 29. Thend. lib. 2 c. 18.20. Sor. lib. 4. cap. 15.
And for this purpose, the Emperor calls another general Council at Arminum in
Italy, where the Assembly was so great, for there were night four hundred
Bishops, that the Arians fearing that they should be shamefully overmatched,
complain to the Emperor that Arminum is too far for the Eastern ^ishops to
come unto, and therefore advise the Emperor that there may be two Councils
holden at once, one in the East, and anoin the West; Bin. Council. fol. 479.
which they did the rather hoping thereby to divide the Orthodox party, and
distract their Councils the more. And the Emperor accordingly appointed the
Eastern Bishops to meet at Nicomedia, and that the Western Bishops should still
hold their meeting at Arminum. The meeting at Nicomedia, was first designed to
be at Nice, but the Bishops liked not thereof: Possibly the name of the place
reslected upon their Consciences, and therefore it was agreed to be at
Nicomedia; it was agreed by them, but God agreed not thereto; for before their
meeting there, an Earthquake meets there, the houses falling in several places,
they are fiered by their own Hearths, and then fire others; so as between the
fire and the Earthquake, the whole City is consumed, few of the people
escaping, because they knew not whither to turn themselves. Hereupon the
meeting of the Council that should have been there, is determined to be at
Nice; but it was otherwise determined by God; for even thither the Earthquake
comes, and interposed their meeting, to the amazement of the Bishops, who knew
not whither to go: At last, Thood. lib. 2. c. 26. A han. Epist. de Synod. Soz.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
Seleucia a City of Isanria, is thought upon; and so at last, these two
Councils are settled, about the two and and twentieth year of Constantius his
Reign: although some make it to be two years later. Whether the Eastern Bishops
were entertained at the Emperors charge, I find not; but its said that the
Western Bishops at Arminum, refused the Emperors entertainment, and served at
their own charges all of them, saving two Bishops that came from Britain, Bin.
479.
who were poor, and therefore had the Emperors allowance.

The Councils being both of them thus settled to their work, Sect. 2.
the Emperor prescribes them rules for the ordering of their proceedings,
amongst which these espcially are mentioned. That they should from time to time
certify the Emperor their proceedings by ten of the members of each Council.
Secondly, that neither of the said Councils should intermeddle with the
proceedings of each other. Lastly, that they should first proceed concerning
the settling of the Doctrine and Faith, and then against criminal offenders. The
Council met at Arminum, begins accordingly with the Doctrine. And first Vsatius
and Valeus, Acasius and Eudoxius, with the rest of the Ariah party, propound to
the consideration of the Synod to agree in one Confession of Faith, Athan.
Epist. de Synod.
which once done would facilitate a way to all other their proceedings; and in
order thereto they produce a Confession of Faith, formerly framed at the
Council at Syrmium, and which they reserved to be considered and confirmed by
another Council, and then established by the Imperial power. This Confession
thus produced, they said was already concluded at Syrmium, but it was now
produced to be by this Council affirmed without any debate. And that then this
Council at Arminum should do well to disanul all other Forms or Confession of
Faith, and make them void. This Confession thus produced, I shall recite it as
I find it in Socrates; because it more suiteth in the Preface to the Copy that
Athanasius had, then does that mentioned by Baronius.

This Catholic Faith (in the presence of Our Lord Constantius Flavius,
Eusebius and Hyratus being Consuls) at Syrmium the eleventh of the Calends of
June, was published.
We believe in one only and true God, the Father Almighty, Maker and Worker of
all things: And in one only begotten Son of God, who was before all ages, and
before all beginning, and before all time which can be conceived, and before
all intelligible Notion, begotten of God the Father without all passion; by
whom as well all generations, as all things are made; the one begotten alone of
the Father, alone begotten, God of God, like to the Father who begat Him,
according to the Scriptures. Whose generation none knows but the Father alone
who begat Him. This his only begotten Son we know by the will of the Father,
came from Heaven to take away sin; He was born of the Virgin Mary, conversed
with disciples, according to His Fathers will fulfilled all order, was
crucified, suffered death, descended to Hell, fulfilled all things there; at
whose preserce the porters of Hell trembled; the third day he arose again, and
again conversed with His disciples, and after forty days ascended to Heaven,
to sit on the right hand of the Father. And shall come at the last day in the
Fathers glory to render to every one according to his works. And in the Holy
Spirit (which 'the only begotten Son of God Jesus Christ promised to send to
man) the Comforter.

The word Substance, when we speak of God, we take away, and forbid to be used;
yet we affirm the Son in all things to be like the Father.

This is first time that I find that point concerning our Savior Christ
descending to Hell to be mentioned in the public Confession of the Faith;
Sect. 3.
the credit whereof, as also of other points of this Confession which were in
controversy in those times, does not a little depend upon the patrons of this
Confession Vrsatius and Valens, they not only being Arians, but relapsed
Arians, and had entertainment by the Council at Arminum accordingly; for the
Orthodox Bishops there assembled exceeding the Arians in number by much, did
according as the Arians propounded; they would neither debate the particulars
thereof, not the whole, but told the Arians that they came not thither to seek a
nev faith, but to assert the old faith determined and agreed by the Council at
Nice, and to convince all gainsayers, and all such as would innovate, as was
evident, they who produced this new Confession intended to do. They further
told the Ariam, that themselves resolved to adhere to the Nicene Faith which
they had received, and would agree to nothing more or less then that. And that
they would hold to the very words Substance and Consubstantial. And thereupon
the Council at Arminum proceeded to depose and banish the Atian Bishops who had
produced and insisted upon this new Confession; and then they framed a
Narrative of what they had done, and sent it by ten Bishops, members of their
Assembly, to Constantius, wherein they told the Emperor plainly that they
would not recede from the Nicene Faith, no not a nails breadth. But the Arian
Messengers more swift of foot, first gained into Constantius his presence, and
possessed him with prejudice; so as the other Messengers could gain no
admittance nor audience, whom I must leave in expectation, till something from
the Council at Seleucia come up in equal front with those from Arminum.

The Council at Seleucia did meet to the number of about one hundred and fifty
Bishops, Sect. 4.
where though no earthquake was, as at Nice and Nicomedia, yet there befell that
which was as ill for the Arian party, or rather much worse. For though they
were generally Arians, and not very spiritual, yet were men of spirit, and such
as the Emperor thought would want an Overseer to keep them in peace. And
therefore he appointed Leonas and Laurentius, two Commanders of the Army, to
see to the maintaining of the peace; and these men having both authority and
power, did what they were authorized to do, and more also, as it afterward
proved. For upon the meeting of the Council at Seleucia, it soon appeared that
as Arian as they were, yet they were not all alike Arian; some differed from
others, Bin. Conc.
and in this Council contrary to one another: Some were Arians, some
Semi-Arians, these were in principles like to Arius, but could not ondure to be
reputed Arius, his disciples. And they did acknowledge the divine substance in
the Son of God, yet would not retain the word Consubstantial; and therefore
rejected the Nicene Faith for the only sake of that word. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 31.
And of this sort was Basil Bishop of Ancira, Macedonius, Eustacius, and
others. But others there were who would not allow of any divine substance in
Christ, or any likeness in him with the Father, and therefore are called
Arians by way of Emphasis; and of this number were Acasius Bishop of Caesaria,
Eudoxius Bishop of Antioch, George Bishop of Alexandria, Ursatius Bishop of
Tyrus, and others.

These Bishops thus met at Seleucia, Sect. 5.
first are at variance about the manner of their proceedings. The Acasians
would first proceed against Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, and others complained
of as criminous. But Basil and others insist upon the Emperor^ order, therefore
would begin with matters concerning the doctrine of Faith, and in this
difference the Council was so divided, that they never reunited afterward; but
yet the major part carried their proceedings according to the Emperors order,
first beginning with the doctrine of Faith. Then the Acasians move that the
Confession of Faith by the Council at Nice, ought first be abrogated and taken
out of the way, before the Council could be free to conclude any matters
concerning the same. But the Semi-Arians like not that, resolving to hold to
the Nicene Faith, only they would have some explanation or alteration of that
word Consubstantial. After long debate, Sylvanus one of the Semi-Arians moved
that the Confession of Faith made by the Council at Antioch, might be taken
into consideration. And the next day the Semi-Arians prevailed to have it read,
as it is formerly set down, and after long debate the Council carried it that
the same should be confirmed and subscribed, and whiles the same was thus
passing at the Council, they caused the doors to be shut, to avoid
interruption. Acasius seeing the doors shut, told them that things done thus in
secret are suspicious; and desired that they would delay that work, in regard
that himself and others had in readiness another Confession of Faith, which he
produced, and desired that the same might be read, which could not then be
obtained.

But on the third day, Sect. 6.
Macedonius joining with the Semi-Arians were so strong, that the Acasians
withdrew themselves, and departed from the Council. But on the fourth day
Leonas appointed by the Emperor to preserve the peace, interposed, and
stretched his Authority so far, as he prevailed to have the Acasian Confession
read in the Council; and thereupon the debate is renewed in the Council, for
the framing of a new Confession, but that whole day was also fruitlesly spent,
and nothing could be concluded, and so the Council dissolved for that day also:
The next day the Council met again, but the Acasians came not, then are they
often called one by one, but none appearing, the Council proceeds against them
as deserters, and banish them, and elect Ananias Bishop of Antioch, in the room
of Eudoxius. Thereupon the Acasians apprehend Aminus, and deliver him to Leonas
by whom he is banished. Soldiers may be good at keeping off fisty cuffs, but
not schisms, and of the twain are better for peace, then truth: These Arians
thus divided from the Church, divide amongst themselves; for if separation be
from a rule, and not to a rule, it is divisibilis in semper divisibiles,
without all; and especially if it be so unhappy as to have a quiet Toleration:
But the news of this Schism coming to Constantius, he resolves to have the
hearing thereof before himself, yet not in the presence of the Seleucian
Council, but by their Delegates, ten of each party to attend him for that
purpose.

During these Transactions at Seleucia, Sect. 7.
the Messengers of the Council at Arminum, having attended long upon the
Emperors leisure, at length obtains audience, and the Emperor upon the reading
of the Letter from Arminum, writes another Letter to the Council, importing
that the matter of their Letter, and required time to advise upon it; and that
the Emperor was now intent upon an expedition against the Barbarians, and
after his return he will give them further satisfaction, and in the mean time
his will is that they shall continue sitting in Council, till they receive
further order from him. To this Letter the Council returned answer that they
cannot undo what they have done, nor disclaim their principles. And therefore
again beseech him to confirm what they have done; and to grant them leave to
depart to their Churches before Winter comes on, many of them being aged, and
having far to go. But the Emperor still makes delays; so as many of the
Bishops depart from the Council, without the Emperors leave, only a few who
lived in the adjacent parts to Arminum stayed.

During this tergiversation, Sect. 8.
the Arian Delegates from the Arian party at the Council at Arminum, had
prevailed with the Emperor to take their Confession of Faith into
consideration at a petty Council, called for that and the like purposes at Nice
in Thracia, where upon small consideration, this Confession of Faith contrived
at Syrmium, and proposed at Arminum, is soon determined and confirmed; and the
Emperor thus strengthened in his Faith, first imposes it upon the Orthodox
Delegates sent from Arminum, and compelled them by force to subscribe thereto;
and then the Emperor sent it to the Council at Arminum to be subscribed and
confirmed by them; but it is immediately delivered to the Emperors Lieutenant
in Italy, ^rsatius and Valens accompanying it, who are commanded to see the
same put in execution, and that such as shall refuse to subscribe thereunto,
shall be forthwith banished; which work was so pleasing unto these two
Bishops, that they see the same executed to the utmost, with all rigor upon
this small remnant of the Council that continued at Arminum, and in all other
places, so far as the Emperors power could reach, by means whereof as many of
them were banished, so there wanted not some that did subscribe the same.

CAP. XX.
The Councils at Constantinople and at Antioch: Constantiushis Death.

COnstantius has one work more to do, Sect. 1.
wherein he must have the help of another Council. The thing is to cure the
wound made amongst the Arians by the Seleucian Schism, and for this cause a
Council is called at Constantinople, of the neighboring Bishops of Thracia and
Bythinia, wherein the Emperor did what possibly he could to make up the
breach, by commending both and blaming both, yet can he not prevail; and
therefore he lastly takes off the heads of both, and removes such as he
apprehends to be of greatest authority on either part, and banished on the one
part Eudoxius and Aetius, who were Arians of the highest size, and on the other
part Basil Bishop of Ancyra and others; the first was done in justice for
maintaining that the Son of God is unlike the Father, which was contrary to the
doctrine of the Syrmian Faith, now the Emperors Faith. The later was done in
anger for personal respects. However in the main the Emperor seemed to carry
himself equally, because he spared neither party. But the Council at
Constantinople seeing the Emperors endeavor unsuccesseful, they take up
another course, and hope to find out a Confession of Faith, that may seem to
hold forth the truth, and yet not dis-affirm either the Emperors Confession at
Syrmium, nor that of the Acasians, nor of the Semi-Arians, but consist with
all; and this they more easily and readily compose, because they make the
Emperors Confession their groundwork, and over-lay the same with a varnish of
other words, not apparently altering the substance, but explaining it in manner
following. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 32.


We believe in one God the Father Almighty, from whom are all things. And in
the only begotten Son of God, begotten of God before all ages, and before all
beginning; by whom all things are made, visible and invisible, the alone only
begotten of the Father, alone begotten God of God, like to the Father which
begat him according to the Scriptures; whose generation no man knows, but the
Father only which begat him. We know this only begotten Son of God to be sent
from the Father, to have deseended from Heaven, as it is written, and conversed
with Disciples; and having fulfilled all order, according to his Fathers will,
to be crucified, dead and buried; to have descended into Hell, at whom the
Devils trembled; to have risen from the dead the third day, conversed with his
Disciples, and after forty days taken up into Henven, to sit on the right hand
of the Father. That he shall come at the last day of the Resurrection with the
glory of his Father, that he may render to every one according to his Works.
And in the Holy Ghost, whom the only begotten Son of God, Christ the Lord and
our God promised, that he would send to Mankind: The Comforter, as it is
written, the Spirit of Truth, which he sent when He was taken up into Heaven.

The word [Substance] we utterly disallow and take away.

The word Subsistence of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, ought likewise not to
be mentioned.

We affirm that the Son is like to the Father.

And thus the Arians produce many forms contrary to the Nicene Confession,
Sect. 2.
to the end, that if they gain not the day for their principles to settle in
the minds of men, yet at least their minds may be possessed with many notions,
and unsettled in the Nicene Doctrine. And that these notions may seem more
solid, they are countenanced by Councils, whose pride would never suffer them
to stoop to the truth, nor to the same expressions of one and the same error.
And these Councils are holden many of them at the same place or places of the
same name where formerly Orthodox Councils were holden, as at Nice, Sardica,
and Arminum, that the common people might be confounded the more in their right
understandings of the determination of their principles. Nevertheless the
Arian wound still bleeds fresh: Manasse is against Ephraim, and both against
Judah. The Acasians are angry both with the Semi-Arians and Orthodox, but the
Semi-Arians are stark mad against the Orthodox; Soc. lib. 2. cap. 30.
Macedonius the Leader of the Semi-Arians spares none that comes within his
Ecclesiastical Power, and will not communicate with him, and where his
Ecclesiastical Power falls short, the soldiers help him with fire and sword.

But the Orthodox will not satisfy them; Sect. 3.
the Novatians also stand in their way, though they communicate not with the
Orthodox, yet they will not communicate with Macedonius, and therefore he heaps
on them all the insolences that the soldiers can devise, with that extremity,
that the Novatians can endure no longer, but take arms in their own defense,
and in a plain battle in the field win a victory, with the effusion of much
blood, both of the Emperors soldiers and their Arian associates. Hereat the
Emperor is troubled, if his soldiers cannot prevail against a tumultuary
party, how shall they stand against a formed army of enemies? but the Arian
party is extremely vexed, and both Emperor and Arian fall upon Macedonius, and
banish him from Constantinople; and so that See void once more of Macedonius,
Eudoxius gets into his room after his wonted manner, no man knows how; for the
Emperor disowned his election: Nevertheless once in, Soz. lib. 4. cap. 25.
he seeks the peoples approbation, and to show his deep reach into matters of
divinity, strained his wit into a higher pitch of blasphemy then any formerly
had attained; he tells the people what they never heard before: Namely, That
God the Father is impious, and that God the Son is pious; and whiles men are
wondering at the strangeness of the doctrine, he opens the riddle, and tells
them, That God the Father did not worship any one, but God the Son worshipped
the Father. Hereat, says the Writer, the people laughed, which is no less
strange; but They that feed upon Heresy, will make no bones of Blasphemy.
Otherwise both Bishop and people had more cause to weep. However the Emperor
is so well satisfied in him, as he did not only not depose him, but showed so
much respect either to him or others of his persuasion, as to condescend that
they of Arius his highest form should hold another Council at Antioch.

But the Novatians having approved themselves thus good soldiers against the
Macedonian party, Sect. 4
bethink of strengthening themselves, by growing in amity with the Orthodox, as
they were now baptized in enmity with the Semi-Arians: For though they still
hold to their principles concerning the observation of Easter, and
non-communion with such as had relapsed, and such as after Baptism had
committed mortal sin, as they termed it, in all which they were in the
negative, yet in other points more fundamemal, Soc. lib. 2. cap. 30. Soz. lib.
4. cap. 19.
they were so grounded that they loved the Orthodox above all others, they
would join in prayer with them, they would pray for them, and would even die
for them, and were requited with the like observance from the Orthodox to them
again; yet could not these come full home to one another in all the Public
Ordinances, to communicate together.

The Acasians or Eudoxians also labor to fortify their party, Sect. 5.
and therefore as unanimously as they can, they assemble at the Council now
called at Antioch; yet the Semi-Arians come thither also; more in number, but
inferior to the other Arians in power, who being more potent at the Court, and
the other discountenanced, did rule all at this Council, and put in and out as
they pleased; Eudoxius is confirmed Bishop of Constantinople, and Meletus made
Bishop of Antioch; although in him as well as others, they were mistaken. Soc.
lib. 2. cap. 34. Theod. lib. 2. c. 31. Soz. lib. 4. cap. 27.
For Meletus was Bishop of Sebastia, one of excellent parts of learning,
eloquence, and prudence, and of an excellent plausible carriage, which added a
luster to all the rest. On this man the Eudoxians look, as one that may win
many to them. For the people admired him; and accordingly at Antioch they
flocked to hear him. But upon a day as he was preaching to the people, toward
the conclusion of his Sermon, his zeal growing more then ordinarily, he brake
forh into a clear asserting of the Nicene Doctrine, which being observed by one
of his Arian Auditors, who was as furious, as Meletus was zealous, the Arian
steps to Meletus, and with his hand stops Meletus his mouth. Meletus
notwithstanding stretching forth his hand extended three fingers, and then
closing them together, pointed out one finger alone; the people understanding
his meaning, a tumult is raised; the Arian escapes away, and Meletus declared
himself for the Nicene Faith more plainly; the Arians are ashamed, and Meletus
is again deposed and banished: Hereupon ensues a Schism at Antioch amongst the
Arians; for many follow Meletus, and separate themselves; and holding their
meetings in private houses, would neither communicate with the other Arians,
nor with the Orthodox, nor they with them; and so they maintained a Schism in
the Arian Church at Antioch, upon mere personal respects, as it seems, like
unto the Meletians Schism in the Alexandrian Church. I say this at Antioch was
a Schism in the Arian Church, and not in the Catholic or Orthodox Church; for
these Meletians at Antioch were never members of the Orthodox Churches; nor
could they be, themselves being under a Bishop called by Arians, and baptized
with Arian Baptism, Soc. lib. 3. cap. 34. Athan. Orat. 3. cont. Arian. Soc.
lib. 5. cap. 9. Ruffin. H st. lib. 2. cap. 30.
which by the Orthodox was accounted a nullity, and by Athanasius so declared
to be; nor could they be, their love to Meletus was so ardent: For though
Paulinus was propounded to them as one indifferent, and beyond all exception,
and of so blameless a life as it did put to silence the very enmity of the
Emperor, who after banished Meletus and spared Paulinus; yet would not the
Meletians comply with Paulinus; and were encouraged therein by Meletus, Soc.
lib. 5. cap. 5.
who for the peace of the Churches sake might have shown more self-denial then
he did. And thus this Schism continued at Antioch (do what any man can) for
the space of eighty years, Theod. lib. 3. c. 5
even until death removed the exception of Arian Bishop and Arian Baptism out
of the way.

This was one fruit of the Antiochian Council although sore against their
wills; but they endeavor to rally again, by endeavoring to compose a
Confession of Faith, not to reconcile the Semi-Arians, but to discriminate
them, and that may fully reach Arius his heretical sense, if not overreach the
same: Soz. lib. 4. cap. 28. Soc. lib. 2. cap. 35.
Yet the Council of Constantinople shall be their model, because its owned by
the Emperor, but they will make it hold forth, That the Son of God is unlike
the Father, not only in substance, but in will. And that the Son has his
beginning from Nothing. And if Writers say true, they gained the Emperor to be
a favourer of those opinions also, and so they bring it into the Council to
pass the same, but still the major part would not agree thereto, and so the
Council is dissolved; and though they cannot carry it out with multitude, yet
they bear it out as the Faith Imperial, and as the Faith of Great men, such as
the Great Masters Eudoxius, Ennomius, Acasius, and Aetius, and to be observed
by all that expect preferment.

For now the Semi-Arians are underneath, Sect. 7.
and (as those usually do who separate from principles of pride) falling into
discontent go from bad to worse, deny the Deity of the Holy Ghost; gain the
Donatists to join with them, and thus the Macedonian Heresy becomes
considerable, and like to cope with the Arian, and grew so exceedingly in Asia
and Africa, as Serapion the Egyptian Bishop bewails the same exceedingly in
his Epistle to Athanasius; who thereupon enters the List in defense of the
Deity of the Third Person also, Athan. Epist.ad Serapion.
as he had done in defense of the Second, and writes a Discourse to Serapion
for the vindicating of that truth also; which is dated out of the Wilderness,
where it seems Athanasius still is, even now at the conclusion almost of
Constantius his life.

Thus a Christian Emperor and Christian Arians, Sect. 8.
bring ruin to a Christian Empire. The Bishops of the West are havocked in all
places. Some fly for fear, others hide for fear, others subscribe for fear,
others for want of understanding, some for both, and some are banished, the
Eastern parts generally corrupted, so as in ten Provinces of Asia, Bin. 476.
scarce three Bishops remain, that acknowledge any Deity in Christ at all. The
Western parts but Semi-Arians at the worst, in regard the Emperor had imposed
on them the Syrmian Confession, which in honor he could not repeal, although
the Eudoxian Confession possessed now his heart. But there were many Bishops
who flatly held forth the Nicene Confession, amongst whom was Hillary Bishop of
Poictiers in France, who being once banished by the Emperor, is again restored
by unknown means, and is permitted to be quiet sine exilii indulgentia, as its
said, without the favor of banishment; and he writing of these times, says,
that since the Council at Nice, Annuas and Menstruas de Deo fides decernimus,
decretis penitemus, penitentes defendimus, defendentes Anathematizamus, aut in
nostris aliena, aut in alienis nostra damnamus, and mordentes invicem jam
absumpti sumus: We have our Faith for a year, and some for a month; we decree
and dedecree, we dedecree and redecree, we bless and curse, we condemn the
Faith of others, and yet believe it our selves, and so condemn our own Faith
in other men; and thus biting one another, we are devoured by our selves. For
its very likely that in those days, as in these, several opinions bred several
practices, and those uncharitable censures amongst those that were weak:
Nevertheless the more advised Christians were more moderate, still reputing
honest men honest men, though weak, and not able to discern the subtilty of the
times. That they were induced through infirmity to submit and subscribe to this
Confession, B^sil. Epist. 86.
because they did not (as they said) see any thing therein that was evidently
false or unsound: That the peace of the Church was at the last cast: That
whatever gloss the Arians put upon the words, they nevertheless did and do
adhere to the Nicene Faith. And this made Nazianzen to bewail Athanasius his
absence in the Wilderness in such a storm of temptation.

But Constantius is now come to his last year, Sect. 9.
having been so unhappy as to own the name and fame of Arius, who was disowned
by Constantius his father, who had found him troublesome to his government
while he lived, and saw his end so dreadful when he died. Him nevertheless
after his sad death Constantius advanced to be reputed the Doctor of the World,
and was contented to be his Disciple; for though he was educated in better
principles, yet is taught first by Eusebius to disown the Word Con-substantial,
then by Macedonius to believe, That the Son of God is like to the Father;
Athan. Epist. de Synod.
and lastly by Eudoxius to eat his own words, and to affirm Him to be unlike
the Father. And denying the Eternity of the Son of God, to take the same unto
himself under that Title of Eternal Emperor which they gave him. And thus
instead of being exceeding great he is become odious to all good men, abhorred
by his own soldiers, who in an expedition under Julian against the Barbarians,
renounce Constantius, and lift up Julian. And then Constantius is loathed by
himself; he seeing his honor buried before he dies, becomes a tormentor to
himself by jealousies, fears, vexations, and thus brings on a sever, and that
death; whiles he is dying, his conscience revives, accusing and condemning
himself for three things: Nazian. Encom. Athan.
For putting to death his Nephew Gallus, who was a good man; and for electing
Julian to be his Successor, who was neither good man nor good Christian: And
lastly, for maintaining new doctrines of Religion; and in this confession death
takes him away, in the five and twentieth year of his Reign, about the year
Three hundred sixty and one after the Incarnation.

CAP. XXI.
Julians Government, Athanasius his return to Alexandria. The Council there.
Athanasius his third miraculous escape. JuliansDeath.

COnstantius now thus sadly dying, Sect. 1.
Julian in the head of his Army, and designed by Constantius to be his
Successor, has nothing further to do, Amian.
then to take up the Imperial Crown and put it on. His victorious success in
the Wars, his brave courage, his learning, wit, and other natural endowments,
and his good education concurring with all the rest, do seem to point him out
to all the Empire to give him their best entertainment. Its true he did delight
to hear the disputes of the Heathen Philosophers; Athan. Epist. de Synod.
and they no less to dispute against the foolishness of the Gospel, as they
accounted it, yet was he a Christian and baptized; and though it was done by
Eurocus an Arian, and filled with the spirit of Arius; yet Julian held his
Profession, and studied the Scriptures, Amian. lib. 21.
and therein became so eminent for knowledge, as he becomes a Preacher, and so
far to countenance holiness, as to undertake the profession of a Monk. And
thus accomplished, Commander, Theod. lib. 3 c. 2. Soz. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Conqueror and Preacher, may well challenge the first place of esteem amongst
all, and to be the most meet person in the World to manage a Christian Empire,
to defend it against enemies from abroad, and the difference of the Church from
within. For as yet Julian was unbyassed to either Arian or Orthodox, and there
was cause, for in the issue it appeared that he was an enemy to them both; and
had no more religion then what served to make him the most exquisite Persecuter
of Christianity of all that sat in the Throne. For he was not led by passion,
but by sober hatred, not against Professors so much as Profession; and therein
was very cunning; for his greatest strife was against the principles of truth
in their practice. And the best that can be said of him, is, that he was the
last persecuting Emperor, and continued but a while.

And yet it seems he was not so ill, Sect. 2.
but the times were as ill; for even the best of them, even those who should be
as the salt of the earth, had lost their savor; I mean their teachers,
concerning whom Nazianzen has this observation of those times; whether
speaking of the general stream of the whole, or only of the Arian teachers, I
determine not, Nazian. Encom. Athan.
but he says they were such as Nullos labores noque erumnas virtutis Causa
pertulerunt, discipuli simul Magistrique pietatis designuntur aliosque ante
purgant quam ipsi purgati fuerunt; heri sacrilegi, hodie Sacerdotes, heri extra
sancta, hodie sanctorum arbitri ac antistites, etc. They never did not suffered
much for good Cause; but even now learners, and in a moment teachers; teachers
of others to be good, before themselves are good; but yesterday sacrilegious,
to day sacred; yesterday profane, to day who but they? old sinners, young
saints, getting others goods by extortion, but godliness by oppression; more
honored for their Mastership then for their merit; and so he proceeded in his
elegant manner to decypher the vanity of these teachers, amongst whom it seems
Julian is the chief; being the first president that I find of a preaching
soldier becoming a heathen persecutor.

In his entry upon the Empire, Sect. 3.
his principles led him neither to displease Infidels nor Christians; his
affections led him to the one, his reason to the other, and so he grants an
universal toleration. The Temples of all sorts are opened, as well Christian as
Heathen, as well Orthodox as Arian; the banished both Orthodox and others are
permitted to return and enjoy their places; Soz. lib. 5. cap. 5. Soc. lib. 3.
cap. 1.
and by command of public Edict the estates of all such as are banished are
restored; and especial command that the Orthodox shall not be urged to the
Heathen Sacrifices; nor shall any dare to offer them violence, nor vex them
with reproach. In this condition of affairs it befell that George the Arian,
Alexandrian Bishop, having wasted his zeal or rather madness against the
Orthodox, started another game in his chase, and after it he goes with more
haste then good speed; Soz. lib. 5. cap. 7.
for taking occasion to show his despite against the Heathen Temples, he
thereby vexed the Gentiles in that manner, that they taking advantage of this
Interim of Julians coming to the Throne, rose in a tumult, seize upon Bishop
George, and tie him to a Camels tail, and dragge him through the streets of
Alexandria, and then they burn both Bishop and Camel in one fire. Soc. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
And this outrage being related to Julian, he is very calm at it; and the
actors in this Tragedy instead of being well hanged, are well chidden for their
pains; and thus at once God rendered to this Bishop a recompense for all his
villainies done to the Orthodox, and thereby made way for Athanasius his return
to Alexandria without control.

Julian is all this while in his journey toward Constantinople, Sect. 4.
and by the way bethinks himself on what foot to stand before he ascends the
same; and in Illiria as he comes, Baron. An. 361.
he renounces his Baptism and Christian Communion; for it seems he knew his
Army regarded none more then other; yet he being come to Constantinople, so
managed the matter, that notwithstanding his profession, the first part of his
reign was a riddle: For he spared none, yet seemed to favor all: He put
Eusebius the Eunuch to a signal death, besides many other Arian Courtiers, who
had been ringleaders in the Arian dance of persecution; and thus have they
also their reward as well as George of Alexandria. And yet Julian sends for
Aetius from banishment, who nevertheless was as deep in the Arian way as any
other, and this man returned to Constantinople, is outwardly favored by him.
And although it is known by all that Julian is none of the Orthodox Christians,
yet by an especial Letter of high commendations he sends for Basil the Great
from banishment, and invites him to come unto him. He likewise sends for Zeno
the famous Phisician from banishment, who though Orthodox, yet must be nigh
him, as if he meant to trust him with his life. And which is yet much more
strange; Amian. lib. 22.
he endeavors to reconcile the differences between the Christian Bishops, as
if his care should be to maintain Religion in Unity and Peace, which is as high
a strain as any Christian Emperor reached at. And yet at the same time he
sacrificed to Idols. The meaning of all which at length appears to be this,
that hereby he endeavored to ingratiate himself with the people, by
discountenancing such as were most favored by Constantius; Soz. lib. 5. cap. 5.
and seemingly favoring such as Constantius most hated.

In all the various turnings of Julian in his way, Sect. 5.
Athanasius seems to be quite out of mind; but he not intending to stay for
particular invitation, Hieron. adv. Lucif.
having news of the death of Constantius, he secretly returns from the
Wilderness to Alexandria, yet concealed himself till he saw some issue; and
after finding the way laid open by the Emperors general Edict, and the wind
blowing fair, and the season calm, he suddenly discloseth himself, and entering
his Church, is received with joy and well-come, no enemy appearing, no
inclination to any umults. For now the Arians can claim no more favor from
Julian then the Orthodox: And the Gentiles and all are bound by the Emperors
Edicts. Besides Athanasius is known to be a man of peace and good government;
and under whom the City of Alexandria had received great blessings, by increase
of Trade, and Wealth, confluence of people from all parts for Learning and
Religion, and so by his coming a flourishing time is expected, and all is quiet.

Athanasius observing the coast so clear, Sect. 6.
forthwith calls a Council at Alexandria, whereunto not only the banished
Bishops of Egypt, but from all parts, both of Asia and Africa, yea even from
Rome, do assemble themselves, especially for Athanasius his sake, on whom, as
the Sun breaking through a dark cloud, all men's eyes are fixed for directions
of the Churches in this their sad condition. For the persecutions under
Constantius, instead of driving the Orthodox together, drove them asunder,
whiles some by complying yielded too far to the Arians; others stoutly
withstanding the Arians, too severely not only censured all that had been of
that way, but all others who through weakness had obscured their Profession,
and were not so forward in the opposing of the Arians as themselves; and not
only censured them, but separated from them, yea and from such as retained a
charitable opinion of such their infirm brethren; this was an universal sore,
and required a suitable plaster from a general Council, such as this at
Alexandria; which through the mercy of God proved a healing Council. Soc. lib.
3. cap. 4, 5.
The Council therefore being met; first brought the broken bones of the Church
together, and bound them up by a Decree, That all such as had relapsed to the
Arians, through infirmity, shall upon repentance be received to Communion and
to their places. By which Decree, said Hierome, Satanae faucibus ereptus est
mundus: The World was rescued out of the Devils Jaws. Such a Parliament God in
his mercy give to these Nations, after all the sad distractions, under which
they now do groan.

Secondly, in the Doctrine concerning the Holy Trinity there appearing a
difference between the Greek and Latin Churches, in words only expressing the
same thing in substance, wherein they both did agree, Nazian. Encom. Athan.
Athanasius composed the matter so, as having gained them both to subscribe to
the same thing in substance, and to be contented to lay aside the use of those
words that maintained the difference, and to use no other words then those that
are in the Scriptures, unless in case of disputes about errors that are or
shall arise.

Then the Council determined against the error of Eudoxius, who denied the
similitude between the Father and the Son; and also against the errors of the
Macedonians; Soc. lib. 3. cap. 36.
and against the errors of the Apollinarians, who observing the differences
between the Arians and Semi-Arians, separated from them both, and took up an
opinion, That the Son of God assumed the body of Man without a soul, and after
being convinced of that error, yielded that He had the Soul of a Man, but had
not the mind of a Man, and that His Godhead supplied instead thereof, and yet
they did still maintain the Consubstantiality of the Persons of the Godhead.

They took also into consideration the multiplicity of Confessions of Faith
scattered abroad; Sect. 7.
and concluded to lay all aside, but the Nicene Faith only; and herein they
did disown that Confession of the Faith, said to be made at the Council at
Sardica, wherein both Athanasius and many others of this Council were present,
and would not agree to any Confession distinct from the Nicene Faith.

Lastly, Athanasius at this Council recited his Apology for his flight into the
Wilderness, and retiring himself from Alexandria, which his Arian enemies, by
way of scandalous imputation, called a diserting of his place and trust.

Then they sent a Declaration of the conclusions of this Council to the
Churches, and amongst the rest to Basil the Great, which came very opportunely
to him, who was now beset with harsh censures of such as were more austere
against his compliance with such as were penitent for their relapse to the
Arians through the dread of persecution. And Basil having received. Athanasius
his Letters, holds them forth as a Buckler against such detractors; telling
them that herein he did follow the direction of the Fathers of the Church,
signisied to him by Letters from that blessed Father Athanasius of Alexandria,
wherein he says that all the Bishops of Macedonia and Acaia did agree
unanimously herein: Basil. Epist. 75. ad Neocesar.
And that Basil could not but submit to the determination of so worthy a man as
Athanasius was.

The Alexandrian Council now ended, Sect. 8.
Athanasius betakes himself wholly to his Ministry, wherein he had such
success as multitudes are converted, and amongst others there were some of the
Gentile Priests and their Families; Julian being informed hereof, dealt more
moderately then did Constantius: For as if he would be glad that Athanasius
should make his escape, he lets him know his faults. Soz. lib. 5 cap. 14.
That Athanasius had been banished, and had not only returned to Alexandria,
which he might do, but had possessed himself of his Church and Government of
the alexandrian Churches without the Emperors Warrant, which he ought not to
have done; and so he left Athanasius to judge of the issue; but the Emperor
concealed the main sore, Theod. lib. 4 c. 9.
which was the Conversion of the Gentiles and their Priests. And Athanasius
understood his own condition well enough, and that the Emperor loved no
Apologies of Christians, and that its no season now to demur or think to hide
himself in Alexandria in any secret manner. He therefore prepares himself for
his departure in an open manner, Soc. lib. 3. cap. 12.
that Alexandria might not fare the worse for his supposed absconding there: at
his departure the Conjurers and Witches rejoice above the rest, for they say
that so long as Athanasius is in Alexandria, their arts avail them not at all.
But the Churches mourn, and flocking to him, bewail their own condition,
beseeching him not to leave them, promising they would find out means to
pacify the Emperor, although they considered not that the Devil must be first
pleased, or else the Emperor would not. But Athanasius beholding the people so
perplexed, said to them, Be of good courage my brethren, it is but a small
cloud, the storm will soon be over; and so having commended the care of the
Churches to his most trusty friends, Soz. lib. 5. cap. 14.
he speedily gets into a Vessel upon the River, and away is gone up the same
toward the Country of Thebais or the Wilderness.

He is no sooner gone, but the Alexandrians discover by the Governors enquiry
after him, and his preparations to follow him, that nothing less then death is
intended, and thereupon send speedily after, Athanasius, to inform him
thereof; and the Governor making what haste he can, gets into a boat with an
Executioner, and follows after as fast as he can also; for he was afraid to
adventure to put Athanasius to death in Alexandria, for fear of the people. The
Governor thus gone, the people some pursue him with prayers for Athanasius,
others with fears, many feed themselves with hopes they shall never be troubled
with him any more, and many give him over as a dead man, and themselves to
sorrow and lamentations. And Athanasius though never so speedy in his escape,
is told that danger of death follows him hard behind. His company hereupon
advises him to land and escape into the Wilderness; but he perceiving them so
perplexed, said unto them, Why are you so fearful, my Sons, let us return and
meet the Executioner; They shall know that he that defends us is greater then
he that pursues us; and accordingly the Vessel turns head into the midst of
the stream, and is soon within view of their pursuers. The Governor espying
the Vessel wherein Athanasius was (and nothing less suspecting then that it
was the same Vessel which they pursued, or that Athanasius would thus
voluntarily thrust himself into danger) called to the Vessel as it speedily
glanced down the middle of the River, if they did see Athanasius, and they
answered that they saw him but even now a little above upon the River; the
Governor thereupon speeded the more earnestly after, but in vain, for
Athanasius his Vessel is soon arrived where he hid himself, so as none of his
enemies could ever find him out during the Reign of Julian, do what either the
wit or labor of man, or skill of Conjurers, or Devils malice can do.

The Alexandrians informed of the escape of Athanasius from this eminent
danger, Sect. 9.
labor by Mediatorship to mollify Julians malicious heart toward him; but
are answered, as by an Heathen Emperor, with rebukes and blasphemies; and
which is yet worse, the Emperor missing his prey, which he accounted so surely
his own, breaks all his former rules of persecuting by policy, and falls to
right down blows, letting loose the Gentiles and his Governors upon the
Christians, wherein neither Arian nor Orthodox is spared from imprisonment,
banishment, tortures, and what not? And complaints being made thereof to the
Emperor, Soc. lib. 3. cap. 12.
he answers, That their Religion teaches them to suffer patiently. But the
Emperor finding that his Army is not fatisfied in his way of rigor against
the Christians, not only purges the Government from all good Governors; but
more especially his Army from all Commanders that like not his proceedings. For
an Army within doors, is like a sore in a diseased body, if well ordered, it
consumes the humors, if otherwise it infects and wastes the spirits, and
endangers the whole. And thus it befell in Julians time, as he was, Soc. lib. 3.
cap. 11.
so must be his Army, Christians will not down with him, nor Christians abide
with them. Jovinian, Valentinian and Valens, amongst other chief Commanders in
the Army are Christians, who choose rather to forsake their places of command in
the Army, and their livelihood therewith, then to lay down their Christian
Warfare and Religion, by burning incense to the Heathen Gods, whereunto they
were enjoined by the Emperor; and yet are they no loosers thereby in the
conclusion; for God hereby not only spared them from the Persian Sword, but
reserved them for better service; whiles in the mean time his displeasure lay
heavy upon the Army, as appeared afterward.

Yet does not Julian satisfy himself with the wickedness wrought by him while
he lives; Sect. 10.
but he will do what he can to perpetuate it to posterity, when he is dead; he
will not endure that the Christians children should be trained up, no not in
humane Learning. For well he saw that Athanasius and the Christians were so
well studied in the principles of Philosophy, Soc. lib. 3. cap. 14.
that they beat the Gentiles at their own weapons; and made Philosophy an
Instrument to serve Divinity, as a weapon against Gentilisme; and that the
College at Alexandria abounded with Scholars from all Nations flocking
thither, and was famous not only for humane Learning, but especially for
education of youth in the principles of Religion under that famous Doctor
Athanasius (under whose influence Gregory Nazianzen, Theod. lib. 4. c. 8.
amongst others now was a student there.) And therefore the Emperor sends
forth Edicts amongst other places to Alexandria, strictly inhibiting all manner
of instruction of the children of Christians in any humane Literature. Its very
true that humane Learning adds no strength to the Gospel, yet as to natural men
of parts it adds light, and renders them more capable of conviction of the
weakness of the principles of nature, and prepare them for better grounds;
which also slide more gently into their understanding, when they see the
correspondency between the principles of Religion and Philosophy explained. And
therefore it is a matter of wonderment to see men that would be eminent for
Religion in these days to be enemies to a Learned Ministry.

I might add more concerning Julians cunning against Religion and Teachers,
Sect. 11. Theod. lib. 4. cap. 4.
in taking away their Maintenance, thereby destroying not Presbyters, but the
Presbytery; but I am not to mind a History of Julian, but Athanasius his cloud,
which is now indeed passing over apace. For the Persians after the death of
Constantius, had renewed their claim to the Roman Confines, and are now drawn
down to the borders; and Julian is in all haste called to an expedition against
them, and therefore must leave to pursue the Christians till another time;
Nazian. 2. Orat. in Julian.
for he made a solemn protestation that after his expedition finished, he
would utterly root out Christianity; and then he goes to consult his Gods about
the success of his Voyage; and receives an answer from his Oracle, which
according to its construction was either a plain lie, or the sense so doubtful,
as might be taken one or other way. And however the Emperor is answered
according to his desire, That he should have the better against the enemy. And
thus armed sufficiently as he thinks, enters the battle, and beats the enemy
to a confused retreat; so far his Gods said somewhat toward the truth; but
this is not all: For Julian that he might pursue the chase more speedily,
throws off his armor, Amian
and being forgetful of the Rule, To overcome is glorious, but to exceed
therein is odious; he will have all or nothing, and in the heat of his pursuit
did meet, or rather was met by an arrow or dart that pierced through his arm
and entered his side, Soc. lib. 3. cap. 18. Ibid. cap. 25.
and endeavoring with his other hand to draw it out, receives another wound,
and therewith fell from his horse, and receiving his blood gushing from his
wound into his hand, threw it up into the air, confessing the judgment of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and his Victory upon himself, though even then under that
blasphemous Name of Galilean; and so he died as he lived, an enslaved Rebel and
Enemy to God. And (if Nazianzen be rightly informed) his body was carried away
in a tempest, Nazian. Encom. Athan.
without Lamentation and without Burial. Notwithstanding some Historians make
the same, or somewhat in the stead thereof, to have an honorable Burial.

CAP. XXII.
Jovinians Reign and Death. Athanasius his third Return to Alexandria, and
another Council holden there.

THe rage of Constantius toward his latter end against the Orthodox, Sect. 1.
succeeded by the hatred of Julian against Christianity, made Religion to take
flight into the Wilderness, and now the Monkish Life is still advanced from a
Profession to be in fashion. But Julian now out of the way, the times do
change, and Religion peeps forth of the Wilderness into the World again,
having a fair gleame from the Army. For that now upon the death of their
Emperor, beaten to a retreat, and entrenched; they must have another Emperor,
or all is lost; no Successor was designed by Julian, either being confident of
his return, or knowing none so wicked as himself to succeed him. The Soldiers
in this exigency pitch their Election upon Jovinian, who though none of the
Family of the Caesar's, yet was of a Noble Family, a valiant man, and
successeful in the Wars, and had formerly been one of the Tribunes, Soc. lib. 3
cap. 11. cap. 19. Theod. lib. 4. c. 1. Soz. lib 6. cap. 3.
but disclaimed the place for the sake of his conscience; and yet was made one
of the Captains, although he desired to lay down arms. This man (the Soldiers
lifting up in triumph as the Custom was) refused the honor, telling them he
was a Christian, and could not rule over Gentiles. But the Soldiers would
admit of no denial, Ruffin. Hist. lib. 2 cap. 1.
and told him that he must undertake the service, and that themselves would be
Christians also. For Soldiers ordinarily shift their Religion according to the
fancy of their chief Commander. Jovinian seeing the danger that they were all
of them in, resolves to do what he can to save the Army, now engaged far into
the enemies Country, and must fight for their bread, and yet could get none by
fighting; and therefore he submitting to his Election, makes peace with the
Persians upon the best conditions that he can, though not such as he would, and
thereby gained liberty for a quiet return homeward, although with the loss of
some Territories by surrender.

The first thing observable that appears done by Jovinian in his return
home-ward, Sect. 2
was his restoring the banished Orthodox Christians to their several Counties,
Estates, and Places. And now is Athanasius his cloud quite gone, and the sky
now clear, invites Athanasius to forsake his harbor, and make his Voyage for
Alexandria, which he does with all speed he can, and is entertained not as in
the times of Constantius and Julian, wherein it was imputed as a crime to
rejoice in the advancement of good men, but like unto the times of Jovinian;
wherein it was an honor to honor such as are worthy of all honor: Nazian.
Encom. Athan.
For he is met by a multitude prepared by expectation, men of all sorts, great
and small, from Alexandria and all the Coasts of Egypt, in so great a number,
as a good Observer said, If Constantius had been present, he could not believe
so great a number would have appeared, no nor at the presence of great
Athanasius, had not his eyes seen it, and yet he saw not the bounds of the
multitude. But when Athanasius came into view, then began the acclamations and
universal shoutings, and continued all the way, some feeding themselves with
the very sight of him, others with the hearing of his voice, others that his
shadow reached them, others with his discourse; and so he comes with joy, is
received with joy, and all return home with joy, which fully recompensed all
their grief at his depature; and then all is in peace, no opposition from the
Arians, no competitor for his place. For Julian the Emperor cared not to
supply vacancies in any Church, but sought rather to destroy all.

Jovinian in his return now come to Antioch, Sect. 3.
receives addresses from several parts, and amongst the rest Athanasius
presents himself before him, and is courteously received: The Arians of
Alexandria likewise repair to him with Lucius their Presbyter, whom they had
designed to be Bishop of Alexandria, and by friends, whereof they had store at
Antioch, gained access to the Emperor as he was horsing for the Field; and
they told Jovinian that they were Christians of Alexandria, and came to desire
his favor, that they might have a Bishop set over them. The Emperor answered
that Athanasius their Bishop was yet alive. They replied that he was deposed
and banished. The Emperor turning his horse rode on, and they followed him,
and upon occasion of the Emperors stop, they tell the Emperor that Athanasius
had been banished by Constantine the Great, and after by Constantius, and after
that by Julian. Jovinian answered he knew all this, and he well knew how, and
why, but all those things are past: The Arians moved that they had other
matters of late to object against him. The Emperor told the Arians that they
were many persons, he could not hear them all, choose you therefore said he one
or two in the name of all the rest, and let them attend upon me, and I will
hear them. The Arians thereto replied that they were contented that any one
should be their Bishop, but Athanasius. The Emperor answered, And why shall
Athanasius be excepted? I have heard that he is an honest able learned man, and
one that teaches the truth faithfully. He will do it (said the Arians) with
his mouth, but deceit is in his heart: The Emperor said what have you to do
with his heart? Let God alone, meddle with that, do you hear what he says:
Then one of them told the Emperor that one of Athanasius his disciples, under
color of Athanasius his name, had bereaved him of his house. The Emperor
answered, what is that to Athanasius? the Law is open. A Greek then present,
told the Emperor that himself had cause to complain against Athanasius. The
Emperor answered, You are a Greek, what have you to do with Athanasius? Then
the Arians brought Lucius to the Emperor, and prayed him that Lucius might be
their Bishop. The Emperor understanding their design, called for Athanasius,
and commanded him to return to Alexandria, and teach and govern the Egyptian
Churches as he should find most meet, and so the Emperor departed, and
Athanasius also to Alexandria.

Athanasius had not been long at Alexandria, Sect. 4.
before a Letter came to him from the Emperor Jovinian, Theod. lib. 4. cap. 3.
requiring an account from him concerning the Nicene Faith in relation to the
opinion of Arius; for answer whereunto Athanasius calls another Council at
Alexandria, of the Bishops of Egypt, and Lybia, and Thebais wherein the
Emperors Letters are read; and they concluded to attend upon the Emperor by
special Messengers, with their Answer to the Emperor Letters: Wherein they
possess the Emperor with the true state of the Arian Doctrine, and of the state
of the Orthodox Churches, even as contrarily the Arians had possessed
Constantius with their opinions before the Orthodox could make their case known
to him. And in their Letters they give Jovinian humble thanks for their
pre-admittance, and his desire to be informed from them of the principles of
Religion; as touching which, they tell him, that the true Faith is set down in
the Holy Scriptures, which is the Word of God; and that the Faith confessed by
the Nicene Council is contained in the Scriptures: Which was unquestioned, till
of later times, Arius and his Disciples had brought into the Church dangerous
Errors; teaching, That the Son of God had his being of nothing, and was made,
and was mutable; and that hereby many were seduced from the Orthodox Faith; and
that for the preventing of further mischief, the Nicene Fathers proceeded to
condemn such opinions, and to condemn and excommunicate the Patrons and
Assertors of such doctrines: And that for the settling of the Churches in the
Truth, they had also composed a Form of Confession of Faith to be received and
holden by all the Churches; whereunto men of corrupt judgments refusing to
submit, some of them plainly oppose it by denial: Others seem to agree in
words, but in truth by false glosses, abuse the sense, to the overthrowing of
the true Doctrine, concerning the Son of God, and also concerning the Holy
Ghost: And therefore the Council at Alexandria, judge it most meet to commend
to the Imperial consideration (to be received and believed) the Nicene Faith,
which they publish, as follows:

We believe in one God the Father almighty, maker of all things, visible and
invisible; and in one God Christ begotten of God, the only begotten of the
Father, that is, of the Fathers substance, God of God, Light of Light, true God
of true God, begotten not made, co-essential with the Father, by whom all
things celestial and terrestrial are made, who descended for us men, and for
our salvation took flesh, and humanity to himself, suffered, and rose again the
third day; ascended into Heaven, and shall come to judge the living and the
dead; and in the Holy Ghost.

Those therefore who affirm, that once it was when the Son of God was not, and
that before he was begotten he was not.

And that he was made of nothing, or of other substance or essence.

And was made mutable or variable,

Are excommunicate.

For the Nicene Council does not say, That the Son is like to the Father, nor
simply the like of God, but that he is true God of true God, and that he is
co-essential, because he is the natural and true Son of the natural and true
Father; neither did the Council separate the Holy Spirit from the Father and
the Son; but together with both, did glorify in one Faith of the Holy Trinity,
because it is one Deity in Holy Trinity. This is the substance of the Letter
which the Council at Alexandria sent to the Emperor Jovinian, and wherewith the
Emperor settled his resolution to establish the same by his Authority, and to
lay aside other Confessions presented to him.

The Macedonians and Semi-Arians likewise call a Council, Sect. 5.
and they move the Emperor to banish the Acasians, and others of the highest
strain of Arians, and under color thereof would pretend themselves Orthodox:
But the Emperor knew them, and gives them a short Answer, He hates such as
maintain contention, He loves and honors such as are for peace and union. The
Acasians perceive the Emperors inclination, and fearing to be ground to
nothing, between these two Millstones, the Semi-Arians and the Orthodox: They
therefore held a Council at Antioch under Meletus, who now is returned and
settled Bishop there: And in this Council they dis-own their former Opinions,
and hold forth themselves to be in conjunction with the Nicene Faith, and that
the Son is consubstantial with the Father, and begotten of the Substance of the
Father, and nevertheless is the same breath, glance at a similitude, of the Son
to the Father as touching his substance; and which is yet more they will
condemn Arius for saying, That Christ is come from nothing; and the Eunomians
for affirming, That the Son is unlike the Father; and these being thus
represented to the Emperor, (though herein they worshipped not God, but the
purple Robe) they likewise are restored to their Churches again: Opinions taken
up upon pretense of Conscience, and not substantially grounded on the Word of
God, and all Schisms upon such foundations, are blown away by the breath of a
resolved Governor: And therefore though Jovinian never lived to come to see his
Imperial City, nor was scarce possessed of the Throne, yet in his way thereto
he conquered more to the Church of God then Constantins, Constantius and
Julian, could all of them while they lived, gain to the Empire, although they
ruled threescore years between them.

The Emperor thus having determined concerning the ordering of the Churches,
Sect. 6.
whiles he is yet but in the way to Constantinople, proceeds to reform or
rather re-reform his army; for it having been Julians army, Ruffin. lib. 2. c.
1. Theod. lib. 4. c. 1. Soz. lib. 6. cap. 3.
it may well be supposed that it needed it, and yet not very much neither, for
when Jovinian comes to the trial of them, they tell him that their old
soldiers were Constantine's, their younger were very few that in heart were of
Julian's way. And that as soldiers they are to be servants to the Wars, let
the Religion of the Magistrate be what it will. Nevertheless Jovinian recalls
all such Soldiers and Commanders who formerly laid down their arms and
livelihood rather then they would part with a good conscience. But as touching
the people, he will trouble no man for faith, but will respect all such as are
desirous to maintain the public peace. More then this I find not of Jovinian's
actions conducing to the matter in hand, his time being but short, and his work
rather a progress to his Imperial City, then a Government; he died before he
could arrive at Constantinople, about eight months after his Election,
concerning whom I shall only add this note which I find in a Writer: That God
sometimes for the punishment of sin shows forth a likelihood of much good to a
people, and after snatches the same away before they can say they have it.
Jovinian died lamented, and commended by such as were good, and as much
discommended by such as were bad, and hence arises the different sense of
Writers concerning him.

CAP. XXIII.
The Government of Valentinian and Valens. Both of them declare for the Nicene
Fait. Diverse Councils in order thereto.

THe Roman Army though now out of danger of a Foraign Enemy, Sect. 1.
and being almost at Constantinople, yet are so regardful of their own honor
and safety, as they speedily elect another Emperor to succeed, and will not
come into the City headless. And by an extraordinary providence they pitch
again upon one of the Christian Orthodox Faith, Soz. lib. 2. cap. 6. Zonar.
^om. 3. sol. 88.
who neither was present, nor minded such thing; albeit its likely Jovinian had
sent to him amongst others, when he reformed the Army. I say it was a strange
providence, for what other could move such a body, as a headless Army, trained
up under such an one as Constantius for five and twenty years together, to make
choice of such a Head.

This man thus elected, was Valentinian, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 1.
originally a soldier of Panonia, trained up under Constantine the Great in
the Army; and carrying himself bravely, had attained the honor of command of a
Brigade in the Army, and was also become one of the Tribunes, when it was
lately formed for the Persian Expedition. And Julian then entering upon his
Voyage, and going into the Heathen Temple to consult his gods, as formerly was
mentioned, Valentinian according to the duty of his place attending upon the
Emperor, Theod. lib 4. c. 16. Soz. lib. 6. cap. 6.
passed into the Temple before the Emperor; and at the door was saluted by the
Priest with an Olive water sprinkle, as others had been, according to the
manner, and some of the Water falling upon Valentinian, he shook it off with
indignation, and gave the Priest a box on the ear for his labor; which the
Emperor observing, said nothing, but took the next opportunity to charge him
with unfaithfulness and breach of trust, and banished him the Army, and sent
him prisoner into a Castle, not mentioning at all his carriage at the Temple
door; for it was Julian's rule not to punish for matter of conscience, least
they should have the honor of suffering as Martyis, which thing Julian liked
not. Theod. lib. 4. c. 15.
This Valentinian thus quite out of sight, is not quite out of mind, but now is
called out of Prison to reign (for he is never out of the way to preferment,
that is in Gods way) and being come, is invested with the imperial Robe and
Ornaments. Which done, the soldiers desire yet further to elect an associate
to him, for his assistance in the government of the Empire. But Valentinian
told them, That they had thought Him meet to be their Emperor, and it belonged
only to Himself to consider of a Consort, and not to them; and therefore
required them to lay aside their thoughts concerning it, Himself would do what
becomes an Emperor in such case. And herewith the soldiers are contented.
Thus God rendered to Valentinian an hundredfold for his Constancy to Religion,
Ruffin. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 2.
He lost his Tribunes place, and gained an Empire.

Valentinian now settled in the Empire, Sect. 2.
declared his intent to march toward Constantinople, the next day, and calling
together the chief Commanders of his Army, as if he intended to do all things
by their advice; he asked them whom he should elect to be his Consort in the
Empire; and all keeping silence for a time, Amian. lib. 28.
at length Dagalaiphus Lieutenant General of the Horse, answered, If you love
your own relations, O Emperor, you have a brother; but if you love the
Commonwealth, seek whom you can find: The spirit of Valentinian startled
hereat, yet concealing himself, he horsed for Nicomedia, where he mad^ his
brother Valens Master of his Horse, and one of the Tribunes of the Army, and
then full of thoughts concerning the answer of Dagalaiphus, he advanced toward
Constantinople, and is joyfully received; and at the length he elects his
brother Valens his Consort in the Empire, assigning to him the care of the
Eastern parts, and reserving the Western to himself. Now though Valentinian
might seem to be swayed herein by the natural affection of a brother, yet for
ought the World then knew he was a very meet man for the service; for he was a
bred soldier and valiant, and withal religious, and had been a Confessor even
to banishment, as well as his brother the Emperor; and it may be suffered for
his brothers sake the more displeasure. And accordingly Valens continued to
hold forth a good profession, when he entered upon the affairs of the Empire,
and advanced such to be nigh to him as had been sufferers for the truth, and
amongst others sent for Caesarius Nazianzen's brother, from banishment, took
him to be nigh himself, and was much led by his counsel; and the Churches both
East and West enjoyed much peace, and Religion prospered, and many Gentiles
were daily added to the Faith. But when as Valentinian was in preparation to
depart to the Western parts, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 4 Soz. lib 6. cap. 7.
and to leave Constantinople, the Macedonians and Semi-Arians begin to bestir
themselves; and they repair to Valentinian, and request liberty to hold a
Council for the settling of union and agreement in the principles of Religion;
but as the matter proved, it was intended for the overthrow of the Eudoxian
Faith, which they endeavored to settle at the Councils at Constantinople and
Antioch; and that the Semi-Arian principles might be the more stablished. But
the Emperor Valentinian not liking their persons, and suspecting their
intensions, declined their request, because he would not seem to countenance
either way. And therefore he told them that he was a lay person, and had no
insight into their opinions, and therefore he leaves them to such ways as
conduce most for peace. This answer the Semi-Arians take to be in nature of
connivance, and cared for no more, seeing they cannot gain a plain concession.
They therefore appointed a Council to be ^olden at Lampsack, where after two
months sitting, they conclude against the Eudoxians, That the Son of God is
like to the Father in Substance; and condemning the Eudoxian Confession, they
establish their own made at Antioch, and confirmed at Seleucia, and hereof they
give notice by Letters to all their Churches.

The Eudoxians labored to put a stop to these their proceedings, Sect. 3.
but could not; they labored to gain Valens the Emperor to appear against the
Council at Lampsack, but he said that he had much employment both against
foraign enemies, and also against domestic insurrections, and could not attend
such matters as they moved him unto. Contrarily, the Macedonians perceiving
that the Eudoxians made application to the Emperor Valens, and fearing that
the interest of Eudoxins with Valens might prevail with him in the conclusion:
They know no other way for the present then to apply themselves to Valentinian;
Soc. lib. 4. cap. 11. Soz. lib. 6. c. 10, 11, 12.
but being conscious to themselves, that they should find little favor from
him, so long as they appeared enemies to the Orthodox, they suddenly strike
sail, and pretend the Nicene Faith, and desire to be admitted into Communion
with the Orthodox Churches. And to that end they send three Bishops their
Delegates (amongst whom Eustathius was one) to Liberius Bishop of Rome,
charging them to submit in their name to Liberius his judgment, and not to
differ in any thing from it, as touching the Arian points; and professedly to
hold forth their submission to the Nicene Faith. And with these Messengers they
likewise send Letters signed by them to the same purpose. These Messengers
being come to Rome, offer themselves and their Letters to Liberius; but he
withdrawing himself from them, refused conference with them, or to accept the
Letters, alleging that they from whom they came were excommunicated, and
therefore ^e could not correspond with them. But Eustathius and the other
Messengers replied, that themselves, and they from whom they were Delegated,
were become penitent, and acknowledged such a likeness between the Father and
the Son, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 11.
as was in all things, and nothing different from Consubstantiality. Then
Liberius desired them to set down their judgments in writing, which they did,
so fully declaring both affirmatively according to the Doctrine of the Nicene
Faith, and also negatively condemning the Doctrine of Arius and his Disciples,
and of the Patropassians, Marcionists, Photinians, Maroellians, and
Samosatenians, that nothing could be further desired, and thereto they
subscribed their Names.

Liberius therefore and the Western Bishops having no further to object against
these men, cannot refuse to accept them into Communion, and thereof they grant
their Letters Testimonial to all the Churches; with which these Asian
Messengers depart into Sicilia, where an other Council was holden; and upon
showing the Letters from Liberius and other Bishops at Rome, being testimonial
as to the Messengers, and a copy of the answer of the Bishops at Rome to the
Letters from the Asian Bishops, and of the Confession of Faith signed by the
Delegates; they obtained the like acceptance at Sicilia; and receive like
Letters to the Asian Churches from them of Sicilia. These Messengers thus
accepted, they return; and then these Penitentiaries send their Letters of
request to all the Orthodox Churches, to hold a Council at Tarsus for the
establishing the Churches in the Nicene Faith. And being informed of a Council
to be holden at Illiricum, by the joint order both of Valentinian and Valens,
Sect. 4.
they send their Delegates thither.

For the Emperor Valentinian being informed of the differences in Asia
concerning Religion newly reviving, Theod. (...). 4. c. 7, 8, 9.
joins with Valens, and he with him in the calling of a Council to be holden at
Illiricum, where after long debate, they conclude according to the Nicene
Faith, That the Holy Trinity is Consubstantial, and the same is declared to all
the Asian Churches; which Letters they send by Messengers of their own,
purposely directed, that they might bring certain news whether the Asian
Churches did indeed agree to them in Doctrine, as by Eustathius they had been
represented. For as yet they did not give much credit to Eustathius, in regard
he had shown himself a fickle man, having been often in trouble for his
Profession, and as often changed it. But the Messengers upon their return
confirmed what Eustathius had reported concerning the Asian Churches. And thus
the Acts and Conclusions of this Council are confirmed by both Valentinian and
Valens, by their Public Edict, and in all places to be publicly taught and
owned, with further command, that all such person: as are otherwaye; minded,
should cease to trouble such teachers who do teach according to the said
conclusions, which they also do transmit, in this manner set forth.

We confess (following the Great Orthodox Council,) That the Son is
Co-essential to the Father; not understanding the Word Co-essential, as some of
late have done, who have subscribed deceitfully; and others that follow those
who have holden forth only a similitude by the Word Consubstantial: For such
do wickedly make the Son of God a Creature. But we are of the same opinion with
the Roman and French Churches, That the Essence of the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost is one and the same in Three Persons, that is, in three perfect
Subsistances.

We confess also according to the Nicene Faith, that, That Co-essential Son of
God took flesh of the Virgin Mary, and dwelt amongst men; and that He fulfilled
for us the whole Work of His Offices, in his Birth, Passion, Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven, and shall again return apparently in the Flesh, and
render to every man according to his Work in the Day of Judgment, showing his
Divine Power; God who assumed Flesh, and not Man who assumed God.

All such who hold contrary hereto, Let him be Anathema. And all such as shall
say, That the Son was not before He was begotten, but was in the Father in
potentia, before He was actually begotten. For the Son with the Father is
begotten with an Eternal Generation.

The Council at last did also admit Eustathius and the Asian Delegates into
Communion, Sect. 5. Baroe. An. 365. number. 17.
and gave them Letters Testimonial to the Asian Churches, and other Letters
exhorting them to continue constant in the truth, with which they departed, and
went to another Council called at Tiana, where with other Bishops Gregory
Nazianzen was, unto whom these Delegates producing all the Letters Testimonial
and Writings missive, they are received with great joy, although Basil the
great was not yet satisfied to give much confidence to Eustathius his
Profession, nor to the Confession of those Penitentiaries. The Council at Tiana
nevertheless signify the compliance of these Delegates (and their Churches) to
all the Churches, and do order that the several Testimonials shall be read in
the several Churches, desiring them also that they would admit those Churches,
thus making application, into Communion, and declare the same by their Letters
Certificatory. And lastly, Soz. lib. 6. cap. 12.
That they would meet at the Council intended to be holden at Tarsus, to
establish a perfect Union.

CAP. XXIV.
Valens falls to Arianisme. His Persecution of the Orthodox. The last
Troubles of Athanasius, and his fourth Escape.

WHat some Writers mention concerning Valens his dissatisfaction with those at
the Council at Lampsack, Sect. 1.
as if he were then an engaged Arian with Eudoxius, seems inconsistent with
what is generally agreed, that at the Council at Illiricum he did join with
Valentinian against the Arians. If therefore any displeasure was in Valens
against the Council, it might be rather for their holding a Council there
without his consent. Nevertheless whatever his former Profession was, the time
at length comes when as he appears to all, not only an Arian, but an
Eudoxian Arian, although it is probable that he gained to that pitch by
degrees. The first cause of his defection is said to be his Wife, Theod. lib.
4. cap. 12.
for though Emperors commanded in the field, we find that in their Empires
they were much advised by their Wives, who were the Daughters of Eve, and many
times showed more will than wisdom. This the Arians knew well enough, and
first gained the Empress to be theirs, and then had a more ready way for the
Emperors favor, which was evidently theirs, when as News being brought of the
Goths falling in upon Thracia. For then the Emperor betakes himself not only
to arms for his bodily safety, but he will be spiritually armed also with a
Baptism or a Re-Baptisme; some say his Wife also persuaded him to that, having
so fitting an instrument for that work as Eudoxius was. For his conscience was
so large, that he did it and did it to the purpose, Soz. lib. 6. cap. 6.
even into a perpetual hatred of the Orthodox Christians; and it was
accordingly effectual, to that end till he died. Thus Valens that once laid
down his All to save his Religion, now lays down his Religion to save nothing;
for this piece of armor of Baptism was not of proof against the Goths, as
after will appear. Gregory Nazianzen hearing hereof, said, Surrexit nubecula,
grandin^ plena, pernities Calamitosa Christi cultor pariter and osor, qui post
persecutionem persecutor suit, and post Apostatam, non quidem Apostata, sed nil
mellus Christianus Christi nomen prae se ferens Christum mentiebatur. A Cloud
arises with raging hail, a dreadful plague, a Worshipper of Christ, and yet a
hater of Christ, once persecuted, now a persecutor. A Successor of an Apostate
and no Apostate, yet no better, professing Christ, and yet denying Christ.

And henceforth Eudoxius is looked upon as Valens his Ghostly Father, Sect. 2.
he gives the rule, and Valens is the Executioner; and first he gives a stop to
the Council at Tarsus, partly by Letters hortatory, partly minatory; and next
that he falls to persecution, and wanting work amongst the Orthodox (for in
Thracia, Bythinia and He lespont, multitudes of Towns for the East, greatest
part of his Reign, had neither Ministers nor Churches, and those which had any
Ministers, they are all fled to places of more quiet habitation) they fall next
upon the Macedonians and Semi-Arians, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 9.
and having enforced them and the Novatians, and all the Orthodox to forsake
Constantinople, they are now Lords alone, and yet are not quiet, but falling
out with one another. Eudoxius will have Eunomius, (who is as wicked an Arian
as himself, and by diseases had contracted as foul an outside as he was
within) to admit Aetius (who had been Eudoxius his Tutor) into Communion with
his Congregation. But Eunomius refused, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 12.
in regard that Eudoxius his (ongregation accounted Aetius not to be sound in
their way, although Eudoxius otherwise conceited of him; hereupon Eudoxius
takes offense, and separates from Eunomius. But Eudoxius is called off, for
Valens is now making his Progress to Antioch, which proved a Progress of, or
for persecution, and that work cannot go well, unless Eudoxius eye be thereon.
The Emperor now in his way, the poor Christians from remote parts having sent
their Ministers to the number of fourscore, to petition the Emperor for
favor, at Nicomedia they obtain Audience, but had none but dilatory answers,
Soc. lib. 4. cap. 13.
till by the Governor they were all apprehended and put into a Ship, wherein
they entered, expecting banishment; but it proved far otherwise, for the
Governor being commanded to put them to death, durst not do it on land for
fear of the people; and therefore after the Ship was launched into the open
Sea, the Sailors set fire on the Ship, and themselves escaped by Boat, and the
Ship carried by the Wind and Current along the Hellespont, from the Gulf
Astacius until it came on ground at Dacibiza, and so consumed with all that was
therein.

The Emperors Progress continued, breathing out slaughter as he went, Sect. 3.
but coming to Cappadocia, he is told of Basil the Great, who was then Bishop
there, and that he was a stout Defender of the Orthodox. The Emperor therefore
would not enter into the Lists with him himself, lest he should receive the
foil; but appoints the Governor, who assaied Basil first by promises of the
Emperors favor, assuring him that the Emperor had him in high esteem
already, and was loath to admit of hard thoughts concerning him. But Basil
answered that such arguments might prevail with young men; Theod. lib. 4. c. 29.
for his own part he was resolved so far as he was able not to suffer one
syllable of Divine Truth to be endangered, and yet he accounted highly of the
Emperors favor; Soz. lib. 6. cap. 16.
the Governor then threatened him with death. But Basil told him his body was
weak, and would easily suffer that, and that he was willing to make trial what
he could suffer, if the Governor would be willing to put him thereto. The
Governor told him he was mad, and gave him time to considered it till the next
day. Basil replied, if I be mad, I would (...) might be ever thus mad, to
mo^^oy and today shall one. The next day the Governor (...); him obstinate,
threatened him with Banishment. Basil answered it moves me nothing; I have
nothing to loose besides an old rent coat and a few books; I live in this World
as a traveller, always expecting to be gone. The Governor tells the Emperor
that he can gain nothing, Basil will not yield an inch. The Emperor hereupon
will not stay in Cappadocia, but goes to Caesaria, where by the way his beloved
Son falls sick, and thereupon the Emperors conscience is not well; and
therefore Basil is sent for, who being come, is told that the Emperors Son is
fallen sick, and that it would be very acceptable, if he would go and visit him,
and pray for him; but it must be done so as that the Emperor must not be seen
to be the first mover herein. A man may be persuaded that Holiness only will
help at a dead lift, and nevertheless remain an enemy thereto, and yet a
professing Christian all the while. Basil therefore desiring first to cure the
disease of the Emperors own heart, goes to him, and beseeches him to restore
peace to the Churches, and to take order that his Son may be baptized by some
holy man, and he will do well, but Valens liked not the bargain: Basil went
away, and the Emperor will have his Son baptized by Arians, and so his Son
died; hereat the Emperor is perplexed, and as some say fell sick, and Basil
again is sent for, and being come, the Emperor relented as to him, but as to
the cause he is the same man still that he was.

The Emperors Progress holds on to Antioch, Sect. 4.
where the rage against the Orthodox is so great, that the Christians forsake
their dwellings in the Towns, and get into the woods and place remote, and
there hold their meetings; which being told the Emperor, he commands the
Governor to suppress their meetings; and publishes his Edicts upon pain of
death forbidding such assemblies. But the Christians still meet
notwithstanding, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 14.
which being told the Governor, he marches with his horsemen into the fields
to scatter them; and by the way overtaking a woman carrying her little son with
her in great haste, asked her whither she was going so hastily? To the field,
Sir, said she, where the people of God are met. The Governor said to her, Do
not you know that the Governor will be there to put to death all such as he
shall find there assembled, contrary to the Emperors Commandments. Yes, Sir,
said the woman, and I make what haste I can, least I should come too late, and
fail of my serving God by Martyrdom. The Governor then asked her. Wherefore
do you then carry your little child? Sir, said she, even that it also may meet
with the same measure that I meet with, and receive the like reward. The
Governor hereat astonished, returned and acquainted the Emperor what he had
done and found; and was assured that the people were there all of them ready
and resolved to die; and told the Emperor that if his commands should be
executed, it would prove such a butchery as would dishonor him before all the
world. And hereupon he desists from further cruelty, having already exceeded so
far, as the River Orontes, on which Antioch was seated, blushed at the bloody
massacre of dead bodies slain and cast therein.

I say he desisted; Sect. 5.
for he was necessitated thereunto by sudden News come that the Goths had
invaded the Empire, Soz. lib. 6. cap. 12.
and are come as far as Adrianople. And so the Emperor must now return to look
to his own Freehold. His mind is nevertheless as good or ill as ever it was,
and what he cannot see done, he must betrust to his Governors in their
respective Countries, and these commands are extended as far as to Alexandria;
where Athanasius is all this while feeding of his flock, where also was the
main Butt at which all Eudoxius his Councils aimed. And by virtue hereof all
meetings are forbidden at Alexandria under like penalties. And the Governors
are likewise commanded to banish all the Bishops formerly banished by
Constantius, and who had returned to their Churches in Julians time. And this
was as much to say that Athanasius must now look to himself. For this Edict was
backed with threats of severe proceedings against all Governors who should be
found remiss, or negligent, or indulgent. And accordingly the Governor of
Egypt spares none, but especially forgets not Athanasius; and commands from the
Governor are sent to him forthwith to prepare to be gone. But the Alexandrians
were provided what to do, for the noise of this tempest roared long before it
came. And the Alexandrians are soon come together to advise about an answer,
and with one accord tell the Governor, that he ought seriously to advise what
he did, before he did determine ought against Athanasius. For the Governor
must know that Athanasius is not within the compass of the Emperors Edict;
for that though he was banished by Constantine, yet was he also restored by
Constantius; and when Julian restored all others, yet he banished Athanasius,
and that he was restored by Jovinian. The Governor heard all this, yet was not
satisfied. But the people resolving to make good their conclusion, told the
Governor plainly they would not part with Athanasius upon so easy terms, as
they had an interest in him, they would maintain it, and therewith made a
proffer of a general Insurrection. The Governor startled hereat, and fearing a
revolt; he told the people he would consider further of the matter, and receive
further directions from the Emperor, before he would intermeddle further
herein. And in the mean time Athanasius has the Governors assurance that he
shall continue at Alexandria without disturbance. And thereupon the Tumult is
quieted.

Whether the Governor informed the Emperor hereof or not, Sect. 6.
I do not find. But ere long time passed, the Governors mind is to visit
Alexandria; this either was told Athanasius, or else he suspects the matter
upon some grounds of probability; and therefore to prevent the worst, without
acquainting any one, but whom he needs must, he secretly and suddenly withdrew
himself, God knows whither, and there he hid himself. By this time the
Governors purposes are ripe for execution, and he comes suddenly in the night
to Alexandria, the weather dark and stormy, but himself the greatest storm,
and entering the City, with a strong guard of soldiers besets the house of
Athanasius on all sides, and at once breaking in at the doors and windows,
makes a strict search throughout the same from the top to the bottom, and yet
all in vain; what more? they must return fretting and grudging that they are
not satisfied, as they came feeding themselves with hope of their desired prey;
and then they trouble themselves at the manner of his escape, some suspecting
treachery in their own councils; others that Athanasius is a conjurer, and had
revelations from the Devil. The people on the other side as much wondered as
they, some conclude that he had Revelations from God, who doubtless was the
principal Worker in his escape. Others conclude that Athanasius was not led by
jealousy of the Governor, so much, as of the people, whose inclinations he
saw were mutinous, and if any death or bloodshed should ensue thereupon, it
might be wholly imputed to him, and that therefore he resolving not to be party
in any such motions, withdrew himself. But the greatest wonder on all hands is
what should become of him, of whom they can find neither scent nor footsteps,
neither in the Wilderness nor City, neither amongst enemies nor friends. And
no marvel if it be true that all this while he was hidden in his fathers
Monument, for the space of four months, as one free amongst the dead; for who
would seek for the living amongst the dead? nor is it altogether impossible, if
the largeness of the Egyptian Monuments be considered, and that though for the
most part it might be the place of his ordinary retirement, yet he might find
opportune times to look abroad for the fresh air. But whiles thus Athanasius
lies hid, his people mindful of their promised endeavor to pacify the
Emperors displeasure, they send to Constantinople, where now Valens the
Emperor was earnest in preparation for his expedition against the Goths; but
the Messengers prevailed nevertheless to have their suit made known to the
Emperor, who was not now so angry as formerly; because Eudoxius the fomentor
of all this bitter progress of persecution was lately dead, Soz. lib. 6. cap.
13.
and was gone to give up his account to God of his eleven years bloody design
against the Alexandrian Churches.

CAP. XXV.
Valentinian his Constancy to the Nicene Faith. Ambrose is made Bishop of
Millain.The Sects of the Anthropomorphites and Messalians.

AS Valens the Emperor was thus destroying the Churches in the Eastern Empire;
Sect. 1.
so Valextinian advanced the Church of God in the West. And by some it was
thought that they both erred in their several Governments, the more because
they yielded too much power to the Clergy on both parts, by means whereof the
one was more cruel unto the Orthodox, and the other not so regardful of their
defense, as esteeming himself a lay person, and the less concerned to
intermeddle in Church Matters. And yet he would have done better then he did,
but that he was unequally yoked with an Arian wife, who was no less mad
against the Orthodox, then her Sister Valens was, and that appeared in her
upholding of Auxentius in the Sea at Millain, which was become the Imperial
City of the West; Soz. (...) cap. 2
and Rome left to the Bishop there to order it without control. For Auxentius
having been Bishop of Millain a long time, was an earnest Arian, and did nor
only maintain, That the Son of God is unlike unto the Father, but that the
Holy Ghost is also unlike the Father; and for this cause Athanasius had stirred
up the Bishop of Rome to excommunicate him; yet do what they could, they could
never prevail with Valentinian to banish him; (for though his will was good,
Ruffin^ Hist. l^^ cap. 1.
yet his wife was better at the will then he, though her will was worse.) But
he still continued at Millain to his dying day. And after his death troubles
ensued about his Successor, and the matter coming before Valentinian, Theod^ 4.
cap. Soc. lib. cap. 2^
he called the Bishops together, and told them that they could not be ignorant
what manner of man was fitting for such a place as the Sea of Millain, where
his Imperial residence was; and that he must be such a man whose doctrine and
life must match one another. And by that means the people might the better
learn to serve God and live in obedience under him, and in peace with each
other; and therefore advised them to proceed to the election of such an one,
having respect also that he must be such an one whom the Emperor might rest
upon for advice, exhortation and reproof. The Bishops answered that they would
be glad to understand the Emperors mind more particularly, by nominating the
man. But the Emperor refused, alleging it was their work to determine the
nomination. The Bishops go to their work, but the heat grew so great,
especially from the people of the Arian part, that a tumult ensues, (as is
usual in all popular elections, especially where Church matters are concerned)
and Ambrose the Governor of Millain under the Emperor hearing thereof, comes
suddenly into the Church, and commands them to be careful to observe good
order, and carry themselves gravely and soberly, as becomes their places, and
the work they were about. They having heard him speak, think him a man very
meet for the place, and forthwith proceeded to the work, and elected him to be
their Bishop of Millain. But he opposed it, telling them that he was not so
much as one of their members, much less capable of such a place, as to be a
Bishop; yet all is in vain, for they proceeded immediately to baptize him,
which he submitted unto, for he had been hitherto but one of the Catecumeni;
although he had been an ancient disciple, and had been familiar with Origin,
and served him as his Amanuensis, and had suffered persecution for Christ's
cause under Maximinus, and upon that account had not only been a Professor,
but a Confessor about five and fifty years, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 27.
and yet not baptized till now. For it seems that the times were so troublesome
as that men were not over forward to take up that Honorable Badge of Baptism,
although they were capable; for even children of Believers were baptized by a
known custom in the Church before Origens time (if we may believe him) and by
tradition from the Apostolic Age. Ambrose baptized thus willingly, is
nevertheless absolutely resolved against their Episcopal Election, so as the
matter comes before the Emperor, who wondering at the conclusion, but more at
the unanimity thereof, says its Gods work, and confirms the Election without
further debate, Theod. lib. 4. c. 7.
and so Ambrose is ordained, and the Emperor himself giving public thanks to
God.

This way that Valentinian took in seeming to be rather ruled in Church
matters, then to rule, was wisely contrived by him; considering that if he had
led on the work, his wife would have led him, for she was a passionate Arian,
and seeing she cannot now stop this election of Ambrose, she nevertheless
resolves perfect enmity against him, and accordingly maintained it all her
days; and by her wivish and womanish solicitations so hampered Valentinian in
his proceedings, that he can neither appear to stop his brother Valenses rage
against the Orthodox in the East, as he would have done; nor proceed against
the Arians in the West, as he should have done: Valentinian nevertheless did
somewhat in both particulars, and would have done more, but that he had to do
with a willful wife, and a despiteful brother; and thus the Churches in the
East must still suffer Persecution, and in the West a kind of Tolleration,
which is next door thereto, until God shall otherwise provide.

A fit time this was for increase of Sects and Schisms, Sect. 2.
the Arian pride of calling the Holy Trinity into question, bread a new error
worse then any of the former (if one error against the Trinity may be worse
then another) which was called the Sect of the Anthropomorphites; for whereas
formerly some would have the Son of God to be like the Father in all respects,
and others that the Son was like the Father in qualifications, and in the
Divine Nature; and others, that he was unlike the Father in all respects; and
some that God is unlike himself; and others that the Son of God assumed the
body of a man without a soul; and others that he had the body and soul of man,
but not the mind of man; and others that the Son of God is pure man and not
God. Now these Anthropomorphites will have the likeness of God and the
likensse of man to be one and the same thing; thereby confounding the
substances of both, by a strange Exposition of those words, Theod. lib. 4. c.
20.
Let us make man in our own Image; whereby they will have God to be in the
Image of man, and think themselves to have herein attained a high strain of
understanding in this Divine Mystery above all others. Thus professing
themselves wise, they become fools.

Another Sect also arose about these times, whom I call not Heretics. For they
held forth the Doctrine of the Trinity and other Doctrines fundamental; and
these were called Messalians, or as now adays Enthysiasts, a praying people,
who fancied themselves directed by immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
giving much respect to dreams, laying aside bodily labor, holding their
conceits prophetical, and yet did not (as the Quakers now-adayes) either
separate from the public Congregations; or make disturbance in them, but
attended on them quietly, although they held them but as Tolerable things,
doing neither good nor hurt; although they professedly hold it not forth in
plain words. They esteem Baptism useless, but highly extol prayer, which if
daily used, they think themselves thereby guarded against all Temptations; for
they say thereby the Devil is put to flight; and that then the Holy Ghost comes
down sensibly and manifests himself, and yet nevertheless invisibly; and that
hereby their body is freed from trouble, and their mind from all ill
inclinations; so as there is no more need of fasting to tame the body, or of
teaching and instruction; and that they are safe against fleshly temptations,
and shall foresee things to come, and behold the Trinity with their eyes.

But these two Sects came to no great esteem amongst the Professors in any
Religion; the former being so apparently grounded in ignorance, was opposed by
both the Nicenian and Arian, for it was destructive to the principles of both.
And the later as ill founded, viz. upon a mere solitary Melancholic Fancy,
that no other man could conceit, but such as were inthralled therewith; and
therefore the Orthodox Bishops no less then the Arian, did both of them within
their several precincts, find means to quench in a short space both those
brands of contention, and soon effected it.

CAP. XXVI.
Athanasius his last return to Alexandria. His Death. His Encomium. The Issue
of Arianisme. The Desolation of the Eastern Churches.

THe News concerning the posture of the people at Alexandria in relation to the
Governors, Soct. 1.
endeavor to banish or else destroy Athanasius, coming to the Emperors
notice, finds him under a load of business concerning his expedition against
the Goths; and not a little troubled about his Successor before he enters into
that service; for he is told of one that he knows not, whose Name begins with
three Letters T. H. E. and hereupon his jealousy arises against all that are
named Theodor, ^^c. lib. 4. cap. 15. Soz. lib. 6. cap. 35.
Theodoret, Theodosius, Theodatus, Theodulus, and all whose Names sound that
way; and as many of these as he can get into his own power, he kills without
mercy, not remembering that Maxim, No man can kill his Successor; and it was
verified in him; for he missed of that Great Theodosius which succeeded him,
although he slew his Father. And though he had upon this ground taken many (as
he supposed) out of his way, yet his mind is not quiet; he is afraid still his
Successor is behind him, and of the Goths who are before him; and in all places
of his Empire, the differences about Religion increase daily, do what he can;
so as he has neither peace within nor without; and thus involved with
troubles, he meets with Themistius the Philosopher, who discoursing with him
concerning his troubles, amongft other things told Valens, That the differences
in Religion concerning God ought not to trouble him overmuch, in regard the
opinions amongst them were but few, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 27. Soz. lib. 6. cap. 36.
in comparison with the differences amongst the Philosophers concerning God,
which are above three hundred. And that God permitted these different opinions,
to convince them of their own ignorance, and that they might learn thereby the
more to adore His unsearchable Greatness; and this with other passages of
discourse, more settled Valens his mind, then all the disputes of his Arian
Bishops could; and yet neither one or other could search his wound to the
bottom. He finds that the Goths have tasted so much of the sweetness of
Thracia, as they will not draw off upon easy terms; and that its necessary to
leave his people quiet at home, and to speak them fair; and therefore he tacks
about, and relents toward Athanasius, and resoves to steer a more even course
in the cross currents of opinions in Religion, to please the people till the
waves be more calm. Some think that the Emperors conscience was touched with
the excellency of Athanasius his person, Soz. lib. 6. cap. 12.
as also of the excellencies of the persons of some others; and therefore in
all these flames of persecutions, he spared not only him, but diverse others of
chief note; such as were Basil the Great, Paulinus, Epiphanius, Hillary,
Nazianzen, Soc. lib. 4. cap. 16.
and others; and more particularly after some demur about the affairs at
Alexandria he sent his Letters of Grace to Athanasius, declaring that by his
Edicts he meaned not any hurt to him, and requiring him to return to the Church
as Alexandria again.

And thus Athanasius appears again in Alexandria, Sect. 2.
and remains there in peace during the rest of his days; which was about two
or three years, during all which time the Alexandrian Churches had rest for his
sake, when as the Arian rages continued in other places. And although it might
well consist with Athanasius his age to retire his mind to a contemplative life
after all these turmoils thus long endured, and that it might be judged
discretion for him so to do; yet according to the strength of his weak body,
his spirit still moves outward, and he acts as far as he can in the public
care of the Churches, by holding correspondency with the Bishop of Ronie, with
Basil, Nazianzen, and others, and wrote Letters of advice to the Affrican
Churches, endeavoring to vindicate the Nicene Faith, and confirm them therein;
and therein he tells them that he had prevailed with the Bishop of Rome (whom
he calls his brother) to depose Auxentius Bishop of Millain. ^^than. ^^ist. ad
^ffrican.
He also wrote other Letters at the instance of Basil to the Asian Churches,
with which he also sent Peter (who afterward succeeded Athanasius in
Alexandria) by whose endeavor and advice of Athanasius, many of the Orthodox
Christians by persecution scattered abroad, were reunited, and such who
through weakness had been ensnared by the Arian power, were again reduced into
Church Communion, upon renewing of their Profession of the Nicene Faith;
besides Athanasius wrote diverse other Epistles, extant amongst his other Works
upon the like Subject. All which do sufficiently manifest, that he held
constant to the Death that Doctrine which in his Life he had so stoutly
vindicated. And doubtless there were diverse other actions of Athanasius, which
(if God had so seen meet) might have been worthy to be recorded, which are by
the Historians buried in silence, either for want of information at such a
distance, or as things not so regardable, in regard they no ways concerned his
Sufferings; as if when he ceased to suffer, he ceased to live; and therefore I
can add no more.

Nevertheless I must add this, that before Athanasius died, he had the honor
to outlive all his persecutors, Constantius, Julian, Arius, Aetius, Eusebius,
Macedonius, Eudoxius, Vrsatius, Valens, Erontius, besides George and Gregory,
Athanasius his Corrivals in Alexandria, and diverse of the Governors in Egypt
and Alexandria. And in a manner became the Conqueror of the rage and malice of
his enemies that remained alive, who were even weary of their own hatred. God
also witnessing from Heaven his displeasure against that generation, by
stupendous Inundations, Earthquakes, Stormy Tempests of Thunder, Wind, and
Hail, Pestilences, hideous Famines, in all which innumerable multitudes of
people perished: And which was worst of all, the dreadful Plague of Ignorance
invaded the common sort of Professors; in comparison whereof Athanasius his
private troubles scarce touched him; for he said of them, Mihi nulla est cura.
I regard them not, for I know, yea am assured, that for such as do suffer, a
reward is promised by God.

Thus lived and died Great Athanasius in a good old age, ^ect. 3. ^azian.
^ncom. ^^than.
and was gathered to his Fathers the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs; more honored by tears at his departure out of this World, then by all
the Acclamations of the people at his several returns from banishment to
Alexandria; but most of all in his Tomb, the minds and hearts of all good and
learned men in the perpetuity of an honorable Name, and not a little in this
Encomium framed by so worthy a man as Gregory Nazianzen was.

Athanasius was the first second to the Apostles; a Pillar to hold forth the
Mystery of Godliness against spiritual wickednesses in high places, meek and
gentle, ^azian. ^acom. ^^han.
seldom or never angry, and for that cause not unacceptable to his enemies,
yet of a bravs spirit, especially in danger; free from ambition, yet of
excellent parts, ^^sil. Epist. ^^ 51.
both for learning and prudence; compassionate, yet not passionate; constant to
his principles, yet of a reconciling spirit; wise to observe occasions, and
ready to improve them; vigilant in his place at Alexandria, and not idle, no
not in the Wilderness; his Doctrine accepted of by the Churches, and his
Confession of the Faith a Rule of theirs, even till this day; His Personage was
comely, his Countenance Angelical; his Gesture affable and courteous, yet
grave: He was active like a Bishop, holy as a Monk, yet not austere. His speech
was proper, short and acute, his delivery pleasing. His praises were esteemed,
because advised; his reproofs regarded, because without Gall; And it was part
of his happiness, that he was at his entry the only Great Champion of the
Truth; but at his departure, that he left diverse, viz. Gregory Nazianzen,
Basil, Gregory Nissen, Ambrose, Epiphanius, Hillary, and Cyril were in his
time, and Augustine not far behind. Two of these, viz. Nazianzen and Basil, were
not only beholders of his light, but admirers. So as though the fourth Century
grew dark with errors, yet it had many brave Stars, whose light remains
still Orient, notwithstanding the brightness of this day that we all pretend
unto.

Athanasins now dead, Sect. 4.
Arianisme now lords it alone at Alexandria; and persecution breaks in like a
Torrent, no man can stand before it; Soz. lib. 6. cap. 19, 20.
the Churches in the City and Country are swallowed up; the flood stops not
there, but breaks even as it were out of the World into the Wilderness amongst
the Monks, where finding a shore beyond which it cannot go, it rages most of
all, and so continued, till the Goths paid the debt of the people of God, by
the death of the Emperor Valeus, somewhat like that of Julian, saving that
after his wounds received in the battle, with much ado he gained into a Town
for succor, Soz. lib. c. cap. 41.
and there together with the Town was by the pursuing Goths burnt alive.

Thus the Goths gave a deadly wound to the Arian interest in the Eastern
Empire. Sect. 5.
For Gratian succeeded Valentinian in the West, and being Just and Orthodox,
advanced and established brave Theodosius in the East, who was no less
Orthodox and Just then himself; and from whom the Succession in the East was
continued for the space of one hundred and twenty years, in a continual race of
Emperors, whereof not one would protect the Arians, and some of them utterly
rejected them, even until the time of the Emperor Anastatius. But the Goths in
some measure gave Arianisme a salve; for as they had gained in Valens his time
the Arian Doctrine, ^z. lib. 6. ^p. 37.
or rather were gained by it; so now the Hunnes having invaded the Goths, and
turned them out of doors, Arianisme (being now discountenanced by the Eastern
Emperors) like a Renegado shrowding it self under the Gothaick Wings, ^^vagr.
^ist. lib. 2. ^p. 1. and ^.4. c. 14.
shisted from place to place with them, casting their spawn as they went in all
Countries even to Spain, Italy, and Rome it self. And after them the Vandels
following in their Voyage into Afric, meet with these wandering opinions by
^^e way, and carry them along with them, as the Dannites did their Religion
from the house of Mica; and thus for the space of eighty years both Goths and
Vandals, like Soldiers of the Devils Brigade, havoc and spoil not only the
dwellings and estates, but even the consciences and souls of the famous West
and Affrican Churches, with all manner of Tyranny; in the heat whereof the
Eastern Churches also after a long time of rest meet now with as ill measure
under Anastatius an Eutychian Emperor, during the continuance of his Reign.

A sad age this was now grown; being nigh the expiring of the fourth Century,
wherein the Church of God finds no refuge from the rage of persecution, no not
in the Wilderness, nor in any Nation under Heaven. For the Kings of Italy,
Spain, and France, are Arians, and the Affrican Kings likewise. The Franks,
British, and German Kings are Pagans, and the people generally, although God
had his Church amongst them. The Eastern Churches are all under an Apostate
Emperor, who commonly are worse for their Apostasy, then those that never
owned the truth. And yet God found out such hiding places, that his Church was
not destroyed nor diminished thereby, but rather increased; for within twenty
years we find mention of six Councils at Rome, Bin. Conc.
and five Councils more in other places of the West; and in the East Anastatius
the Apostate Emperor dying, the Government falls to Justinus, under whom the
Churches recovered their former liberty as long as the Empire it self lasted.
And Justinian his Successor, by his Captains Bellisarius and Narses both freed
Afric from the Vandals, Evag. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 16, 20, 23.
and Italy from the Goths and set the Orthodox Churches at liberty. After which
the Eastern Empire coming to Phocas, he advanced the Roman See above all the
Churches, and the influence of that See for the space of a hundred years
following blasted the Arians; till the Francks gaining the Imperial power in
the West under the Line of Charlemaine, and after them the Saxon and German
Emperors, to whom the Western Empire devolved from the Francks; all of them as
Sons of the Church of Rome, joined their Civil Power with his Ecclesiastical
Power, in suppressing the Arians in all places. So as from the time of
Justinian the Emperor, the Arian interest is scarce mentioned in Story. One
chief cause whereof was the want of countenance from the Civil Power.

A second cause hereof, Sect. 6.
and yet the more principal, was the preaching of the Gospel. For although that
was in no great favor generally with the Civil Power, yet the bare tolleration
of the same permitted it to work out its own way; and as the Emperor Valens
had propagated Arianisme amongst the Goths on the one side, so on the other
after he was dead, the Eastern Churches by the advice of Chrysostom from the
East, Theod. lib. 5. c. 31.
and the British and other Churches from the West (after the tide of the Goths
was past) sent preachers of the Orthodox Doctrine amongst those Northern and
Eastern Nations, by means whereof the Gospel coming amongst others to the
Burgundians, then oppressed by the Hunnes, they received it, Nancler. Hist.
Vit. 2. Genesis 17.
and by marriage of one of their Ladies to Clodoveus, one of the Line of the
Franks it came to Charlemain; and thus the conquered conquering the Conqueror,
even the Arian Kings themselves convinced by the Gospel, proved real friends to
the Orthodox Churches, and others not convinced, yet for their own peace sake,
are contented to connive at the liberty of the same.

A third cause of the subversion of the Arian Schism was their own divisions.
Sect. 7. Soz. lib. 7. cap. 20.
For besides the several Sects thereof in the life time of Athanasius, Eunomius
one of highest esteem amongst them, dying soon after, his disciples are divided
in their opinions; Soc. lib. 5. cap. 22, 23
some affirming with Eunomius, That the Son of God is unlike the Father, and
others reaching a strain beyond that, affirm, That God is not always like
Himself; and hereupon one Schism more arises. Another Schism after this
appeared upon slighter grounds; for one of the Members of their Church being
esteemed to have more excellent parts then the Eunomian Bishop had, Soz. lib.
7. cap. 17.
the Bishop (fearing his light would be darkened) takes occasion of displeasure
at him, and excommunicated him; the excommunicate member hereupon gains a Sect,
and maintains another Schism. A third Schism further grows up upon another
difference in opinion; for some of them teach, That God was not to be called
Father, before Christ was born; these are also excommunicated by others, and
gather into another Congregation. And thus Sects multiply and maintain Schism
with that asperity that they spare not one another so far as their power can
extend: Separation upon unwarrantable grounds, can breed naught else but
Schism, and he that seeks comfort therein, will be deceived thereby.

Lastly, Arianisme received no small blow from other Heresies that would not
consist with it, Sect. 8.
and all of them gathering Churches out of the Arian Churches; as they had
formerly robbed the Orthodox Churches, to make up their own: Such were the
Pricillianists, Pelagians, Nestorians, Eutychians besides other petit Sects
bred up under them. And last of all, and above all the rest, came two grand
Sects, the one in the East and the other in the West; and these two devoured
all the rest. That in the West was the Papal power in the Roman See, which came
precariously, and by a kind of cheat, about the beginning of the Sixth Century,
at which time the Roman Bishop had obtained of the Emperor of the East to be
the Universal Bishop, and thereby gained a high feat in the consciences of men,
Plat. Vit. Bonifac. 3.
and whiles they are highly esteemed for their service against Arius, in
defense of the Godhead of the Son of God, they cunningly slip themselves into
co-partnership with the Son of God in all his Offices, and were countenanced by
the Imperial Power, till they had subdued both Emperor and all under
themselves. The other Sect arose in the Eastern Churches, about twenty years
after the former, in the Reign of Heraclius, who succeeded Phocas, but this
comes in with a force; Zonar. Tom. 3. in Vit. Herac.
and swallowed up not only the seven famous Churches of Asia, but all other
Chuches both of Asia and Africa, bringing with them a rabble of doctrines
gathered out of all religions, all of them patronized by Mahomet, and purposely
contrived by the Devil, not only against the Natures and Offices of Christ,
but against the Trinity. These first made way into the Empire by the Sarazens
Sword, Naucler. Vol. 2. Con. 22. and 34.
and held the power there by the space of six or seven hundred years. And after
them they obtained the power of the Turkish Sword, which conquered not only
what the Sarazens had in Asia and Africa, but gained also a great part of
Europe, and swallowing up the Christian Churches in those places, left scarcely
the Name of Christianity remaining; saving about eight or nine poor Sects of
Christians, who live in miserable slavery under them. And thus the once famous
Eastern Churches have made a sad and lamentable account of their Progress from
Unity to Separation, from thence to Schism, so to Enmity, thence to
Persecution, and lastly to Heathenisme. And the Christian Magistrate in a
restless Tolleration, from an Imperial Power to a miserable servitude.

-- En que discordia civeis Perduxit miseros!
En queis consevimus agros!
FINIS.
The Table.
A.
A Casius an Arian Bishop, cap. 19. Aetius an Arian Deacon, a subtle disputer,
works a Schism, and is banished, cap. 15. sec. 6. c. 20. s. 1. Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, his Death, c. 2. s. 5. etc. Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople, his power against Arius, c. 8. s. 3. His death, c. 10. s. 1.
Ambrose Bishop of Millain, c. 25. s. 1. Anthropomorphites, c. 25. s. 2. Arius
his Original, and his defection, c. 2. s. 1. etc. He gathers Congregations, s.
7. His errors at the Nicene Council, c. 3. s. 2. His banishment, c. 4. s. 9.
His return upon submission, s. 10. He is admitted into Constantines p^osince,
c. 7. s. 3. and by him referred to the Council at Tyrus, and is acquitted, s. 4
5. He comes to Alexandria, c. 8. s. 2. is urged to a new submission, and dies
miserably, s. 3. Arians pretend the Nicene Faith, c. 22. s. 5. c. 23. s. 3.
Athanisme in the change of one letter, c. 2. s. 1. the Original thereof, s. 2.
the ruin thereof, c. 26. s. 5, etc. Arsenius supposed murdered by Athanasius,
c. 6. s. 6. Athanasius his Original, c. 3. s. 1, etc. Bishop of Alexandria, c.
5. s. 2. Articles against him, s. 3. other articles, s. 5. c. 6, s. 2, 3.
referred to the Council at Tyrus, s. 4, 5, 6. His appeal to Constantine, c. 7.
s. 1. He is banished by him, s. 6, 7. His return to Alexandria, c. 9. s. 6. He
is again accused before the Council at Antioch, c. 11. s. 1. is banished the
second time, escapes to Rome, and there makes his confession of his Faith, s.
2. etc. He is acquitted, and returns to Alexandria, and again in danger escapes
to Rome, c. 12. s. 2. he appeals to the Emperonr Constans, s. 4. is acquitted
at Sardica, and returns homeward, c. 14. s. 3. he will not communicate with the
Arians at Antiuch, ibid. be comes to Alexandria, c 15. s. 1. Endeavor is to
banish him again, but the people defend him, s. 4. Articles again are against
him, s. 5. He escapes miraculousty, s. 7. his Apology, s. 10. gets into a Cave,
c. 16. s. 3. from thence into the wilderness, s. 4. he maker agreement between
the Monks and Hermits, s. 5. Constantius will not be appeased, s. 7. Athanasius
returns to Alexanandria under Julian, c. 21. s. 5. Julian seeks his death; his
miraoulous escape, s. 8. He returns to Alexandria under Jovinian, c 22. s. 3.
commends the Nicene Faith to Jovinian, s. 4. He is persecuted by Valens, and
escapes by favor of the people, c. 24 s. 5. he retires himself from danger. s.
6. His last return to Alexandria; his death and Encomium, c. 26. s. 1, 2, 3.
B.
BAnishment a penalty for disobeying Orders of a General Council, c. 4. s. 9.
Basil the Great returns from banishment in Julian's Reign, c. 21. s. 4. a
moderate man, s. 7. not easily induced to give credit to the Semi-Arians
pretensions c. 23. s. 5. his stout answer to Valens. c. 24. s. 3. Bishops over
many Congregations c. 1. s. 5, 6. Bishop of Alexandria his interest, c. 2. s.
3. Bishops Provincial, c. 4. s. 7, 8.
C.
CAlinicus a Meletian Egyptian Bishop, c. 5. s. 4. Coluthus dis-episcopated, c.
2 s. 8. His practice against Athanasius, c. 6. s. 1. Constantine his Letter to
Alexander and Arius, c. 2. s. 8. He calls the Council at Nice, c. 4. s. 1. He
banisheth Arius, and he banisheth Athanasius, c. 7. s. 7. will not recall his
sentence against him, c. 8. s. 1. though he had recalled Arius, c. 4. s. 10.
and commanded the Bishop of Constantinople to admit Arius into Communion, c. 8
s. 3. Constantines principles obscured his later end. c. 9. s. 1, 2.
Constantine, Constans, and Constantius, succeeded in the Empire, c. 9. s. 3.
the bounds of their several Empires, s. 4, 5. Constantine the son released
Athanasius from banishment, and sent him to Alexandria, c. 9. s. 6. Constantine
the son's death, c. 11. s. 1. Constans a friend to Athanasius, and urges
Constantius in behalf of Athanasius, c. 12. s. 4, 5. prevails to have a
General Council at Sardica, and maintains their determinations, and dies, c.
14 s. 1.4. Constantius his first principles, c. 9. s. 5. he turns Arian, c.
10. s. 1 banisheth Athanasius, c. 11. s. 3. favors the Arian Council at
Philippopolis, c. 13. s. 2. grants liberty to Athanasius to return to
Alexandria, c. 14. s. 3. Contrary to his Oath he persecuteth Athanasius, c. 15
s. 7. by calling many Councils and persecution, he endeavors to destroy the
Nicene Faith, c. 17, 18, 19, 20. His persecutions most violent toward his end,
c. 20. s. 8. and his faith changing often from ill to worse. He dies sadly, s.
9. Confession of the Orthodox Faith at Nice, by Athanasius, c. 4. s. 3. by the
Council there, s. 5. explained by the Council at Sardica, c. 23. s. 4. the
Original Copy of the Nicene Faith lost, c. 4. s. 12. The Nicene Faith is
commended by Athanasius and the Council of Alexandria to Jovinian c. 22. s. 4.
Confession of Arius his Faith, c. 4. s. 4. The Arian Faith at Antioch, c. 11.
s. 4. another by their Delegates, c. 12. s. 1. another at Syrmium, c. 18. s. 1.
another at Seleucia, c. 19. s. 2. another at Constantinople, c. 20. s. 1.
Confessions of the Arian Faith variable, c. 18. s. 2, 5. c. 20. s. 2.
Confession of the Arian Faith at Syrmium confessed to be made to deceive, c.
18. s. 5. imposed upon the Orthodox at Arminum, but withstood, c. 19. s. 2, 3.
Constantinople in a tumult, they kill Hermogenes, c. 20. s. 2. they are a check
to the Supremacy of Rome, c. 10. s. 3. Council Orthodox at Alexandria, c. 2. s.
5, etc. at Nice, c. 4. s. 5. at Antioch Arian, c. 11. s. 1, etc. at Rome
Orthodox, c. 12. s. 1. another at Sadiea, c. 13. s. 1. at Philippopolis Arian,
s. 2. at Millain Orthodox, c. 17. s. 1. at Syrmium Arian, c. 18. s. 1. at
Constantinople Arian, c. 20. s. 1. at Arminum Orthodox, c. 19. s 1. at Antioch
Arian, c. 20. s. 5, 6. At Alexandria Orthodox and healing Council, c. 21. s. 6.
another at Alexandria Orthodex, c. 22. s. 2. at Illiticum Orthodox, c. 23. s 4.
at Tyana, c. 23. s. 5.
E.
EArthquakes afflict the Eastern Empire, c. 11. s. 6. c. 29. s. 1. Eudoxius
Bishop of Antioch by indirect means, c. 15. s. 6. after Bishop of
Constantinople, his blasphemy, c. 20. s. 3. Eunomius an Arian Bishop banished,
c. 20. s. 1. vid. c. 21. s. 2. Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, maintainer of
Arius, c. 2. s. 6, 7. banished. c. 4. s. 9. returns into favor with
Constantine, s. 11. his death, c. 10. s. 2. c. 11. s. 4. Euzoius a Deacon
banished, c. 4. s. 9.
G.
GEorge of Capadocia, Bishop of Alexandria, c. 15. s. 1. flies thence, ibid.
returns by order of the Antiochian Council, s. 9. his cruel persecution of
the Orthodox, c. 16. s. 1, 2. his death, c. 21. s. 3. Gregory Bishop of
Alexandria by the Artiochian Council, c. 11. s. 3. is put out again, ibid. is
translated to Antioch, and is put to death, c. 25. s. 1.
H.
Heretics love disputes on difficult points, in the presence of the vulgar, c.
2. s. 5. Hillary Bishop of Poictiers, a slout maintainer of the Orthodox, is
banished, and again restored by Constantius, c. 20. s. 8. Hossius Bishop of
Corduba, President at the Council at Alexandria, c. 2. s. 8. and at the Council
at Sardica, c. 13. s. 2. his Letter of advice to Constantius, c. 17. s. 1. is
banished, s. 2. is ensnared, and dies penitent, c. 28. s. 4.
I.
JOhn Bishop of Lico, in the room of Meletus, c. 5. s. 4. Jovinian Emperor, c.
22. s. 1. calls home the banished Christians, s. 2. his debate with the Arians
concerning Athanasius, s. 3. sends to him concerning the Nicene Faith, s. 4.
is for unity and peace, s. 5. reforms the army and dies, s. 6. Ischyras
dis-presbyterised, c. 2. s. 8. renewed Presbyter, c. 5. s. 4. flies to Eusebius,
c. 6. s. 1. Julian Emperor, his qualities, c. 21. s. 1. a preacher and Monk,
s. 1, 2. turns Gentile and persecutor, s. 3, 4. purges his army, s. 9. forbids
learning to the Chrstians children, s. 10. and also maintenance to the (...)
His wretched end, s. 11.
L.
LIberius Bishop of Rome; his conference with Constantius, c. 17. s. 3. is
banished, s. 4. is ensnared, c. 18. s. 4. is afterward penitent, ibid. Leonas a
soldier President at the Seleucian Council, and over-ruleth it, c. 19. s. 6.
Leontius Bishop of Antioch in the room of Steven c. 14. s. 2. tollerateth mixed
Congregations of Orthodex and Arians, s. 3. persuades Ursatius and Valens to
renounce their retractations, c. 15. s. 3. is banished and dies, s. 6.
M.
MAcedonius Bishop of Constantinople, c. 10. s. 2. is deposed and restored
again, ibid. joyneth with the Semi-Arians at Seleucia, c. 19. s. 6. banished
from Constantinople, c. 20. s. 3. becomes head of the Macedonian Heresy. s.
7. Magnentius slaies Constans, and is slain, c. 15. s. 2. Meletus Bishop of
Lico, c. 3. s. 4. makes a schism, s. 5. he is deposed, c. 4. s. 2. and dies
in schism, c. 5. s. 4. Meletians in Egypt, join with the Arians, c. 5. s. 4.
call themselves the Church of Martyrs, c. 3. s. 5. They turn Arians, c. 9. s 6.
(...) diposed makes a schism amongst the Agians, c. 20. s. 5. Messalians, c.
25. s. 2. Monks their Original and Profession, c. 16. s. 4. they conceal
Athanasius, s. 6.
N.
NOn-Residents will maintain that Doctrine that is most in fushion, c. s. 6.
Novatians defend themselves by force, and have the Victory against the Arians,
c. 20 s. 3. incline to the Orthodox, s. 4.
P.
PAphnusius defends Athanasius, c. 6. s. 7. Paulus Bishop of Constantinople
deposed by Constantius, and murdered, c. 10. s. 1, 2. c. 15. s. 5. Peter
Bishop of Alexandria Martyr, c. 2. s. 4. Photinus his heresy, c. 17. s. 4. is
banished, c. 18. s. 3. Potamon his defense of Athanafius, c. 6. s. 7. Presbyter
not named, a great instrument for the Arians, by his favor with the Emperors,
c. 7. s. 23.
R.
REligion in danger under many-headed Governments, c. 12. s. 3. Retractations
and engagements imposed, breaks all bonds, but makes none, c. 4. s. 12.
S.
Schism the Original, c. 1. s. 3. it may be kept down, but not rooted up, s.
8. easily suppressed by a resolved Goveroour, c. 22. s. 5. Schism between the
Arians and Semi-Arians, c. 19. s. 4. they banish one another, s. 6. Steven
Bishop of Antioch deposed, c. 14. s. 2.
T.
THeognis Bishop of Nice banished, c. 4 s. 9. Teachers maught, c. 21. s. 2.
Tisueis, a Mountain of communion, c. 13. s. 5. Tollerations fatal, c. 13. s. 5.
V.
VAlens and Ursatius Bishops, enemies to Athanasius, make their submission, c.
14. s. 4. after that they renounce what they had done, c. 15. s. 1. Valentinian
his education, is made Emperor, c. 23. s. 5. His Arian wife interrupted his
proceedings; nevertheless he is constant to the Nicent Faith, c. 25. s. 1.
Valens associated in the Empire with Valentinian, his principles good at the
first, but turns Arian and violent persecutor, c. 24 s. 1. his bloody
progress to Antioch, s. 2, 3, 4. is afraid of an unknown Successor, and his
cruelty thereupon, c. 26 s. 1. his death, s. 4.
The End of the Table.

