The Papists Oath of Secrecy, Administered to those who Engage in the present
Plot: Discovered by Mr. Robert Bolron, since his Conversion from the Romish
Religion, (to whom William Rushton, A Popish Priest had given it, 2d. Febr.
1676/7. at Barmbow-Hall in Yorkshire, out of whose Breviary he then Transcribed
it.)
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
I Robert Bolron, being in the Presence of Almighty God, the Blessed Mary ever
Virgin, the blessed Michael the Archangel, the Blessed St. John Baptist, the
Holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and all the Saints in Heaven, and to you
my Ghostly Father; Do declare, and in my Heart believe the Pope, Christ's Vicar
General, to be the True, and only Head of CHRIST'S CHURCH here on Earth, and
that by Virtue of the Keys of Binding and Loosing, given his Holiness by our
SAVIOR CHRIST, he has Power to Depose all Heretical KINGS and PRINCES, and
cause them to be Killed. Therefore, to the utmost of my Power, I will defend
this Doctrine, and his Holinesses Rights, against all Usurpers whatever;
especially against the now pretended KING of England, in regard that he has
Broke his Vows with his Holinesses Agents beyond Seas, and not performed his
Promises in bringing into England, the Holy Roman Catholic Religion.

I do Renounce, and Disown any Allegiance as due to the said pretended KING of
England, or Obedience to any of his Inferior Officers and Magistrates; but do
believe the Protestant Doctrine to be Heretical and Damnable, and that all are
Damned which do not Forsake the same; and to the best of my power, will help
his Holinesses Agents here in England, to Extirpate and Root Out the said
Protestant Doctrine, and to Destroy the said pretended KING of England, and all
such of his Subjects, as will not Adhere to the Holy See of Rome, and the
Religion there Professed.

I further do promise and declare, That I will keep Secret and Private, and not
Divulge directly or indirectly, by Word, Writing, or Circumstance, whatever
shall be proposed, given in charge, or discovered to me, by You my Ghostly
Father, or any Other Engaged in the promoting of this Pious and Holy Design;
and that I will be Active, and not Desist from the Carrying of it on: And that
no hopes of Rewards, Threats or Punishments, shall make me Discover the rest
concerned in so Pious a Work; And if Discovered, shall never Confess any
Accessaries with my self concerned in this Design.

All which I do Swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Blessed Sacrament,
which I now purpose to Receive, to perform, and on my part, to keep Inviolable:
And do call all the Angels and Saints in Heaven, to Witness my real Intention
to keep This Oath.

In Testimony whereof, I do Receive this most Holy and Blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist.

Jovis 16th. die Decembris, 1680.
ORdered, That Mr. Robert Bolron have Liberty from This House, to Print and
Publish the said OATH OF SECRECY and LETANY.

William Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

Both which Oath of Secrecy, and Letany of Intercession for England, with the
manner of taking the same; as also a Copy from an Original Paper found, and
Subscribed by Two and Forty Jesuits, at a Consult about the Plot, which was
found in the Closet of Edward Cottam a Jesuit, in the House of Richard
Sherbourne of Stonyburst, in the County of Lancaster Esquire together with other
Informations touching the Plot, Carried on in the North; and somewhat in
Relation to the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, Price Sixpence. Likewise,

An Abstract of several Examinations taken upon Oath, in the County of
Monmouth, and Hereford, by John Arnold, and John Scudamore Esquires, and
Reported to the House of Commons, by Sir John Trevor, Price Sixpence.

The Informations of William Lewis Gentleman, Delivered at the Bar of the House
of Commons, Confirming the Popish Plot, the Justice of the Executions of Grove,
Pickering, and the Jesuits, Discovering also the Papists Design of throwing
the Guilt of the whole Plot, on His Majesty's Protestant Subjects called
Presbyterians, Price Twelve-Pence.

The Trial of John Giles, for a Barbarous and Inhumane Attempt, to Assassinate
and Murder, John Arnold Esquire one of the Justices of Peace, for the County of
Monmouth, and now a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, Price
Eighteen-Pence.

The Narrative of Signior Francisco de Faria, Interpreter, and Secretary of
Languages, unto the late Portugal Ambassador, Containing matters relating to
the Plot in general, and several particulars, viz. The Evil Practices of the
said Ambassador, the Design against His Majesty's Life, the Murder of Justice
Arnold, the Saving of Sir George Wakeman, the Endeavors to Save the Jesuits,
to Destroy the Duke of Buckingham, and the Earl of Shaftsbury, with other very
Considerable Matters, Price Twelve-Pence.

The Informations of Hubert Bourke, and John Macnamara, of the Plot in Ireland,
for the Delivering up of that Kingdom to the French King, and to Establish
therein the Popish Religion, and to Massacree the Protestants, Price of each
Twelve-Pence.

All Printed by Order of Parliament, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1680.


