ONEALE AND COLONEL BRVNSLOW, Chief of the Rebels in Ireland; their
Apprehension at Grohoyne in the Province of Munster; With the terrible Battle
then Fought.

Written in a Letter directed to the Bishop of ARMAGH from a Doctor of
Divinity, Resident in Dublin.

As also a Description of the taking of a Ship upon the Coasts of Barbary,
bound with Letters of commendations to the King of Spain; and to desire aid
against the Protestants.

depiction of ship at sea

LONDON Printed for Andrew Coe and Marmaduke Boat.

1642.

THE MANNER OF Apprehending of Oneale, the Arch-Rebell of Ireland, and Colonel
Brunslow; expressed in a Letter to the Bishop of ARMAGH.
Right Reverend and beloved Father in God;
THave thought good, after a great deal of Intelligence of our miseries, to
present one Cordial, being the only hopes of our happy ensuing fortunes, and
the general progredient of the Rebels overthrow, whose cancred spleen is
turned into as much fear of the just vengeance of the Almighty, for their
insulting pride and bloody massacring of his people. I will abreviate my
description as much as I may, and thus begin:

At Grahayne and Burderdah, being two small Villages upon the Plain, adjoining
to the Forest of Morpetenter, in the County of Munster, Oncale with his
following Regiments having been dispersed by the Scots in the last Battle
repaired thither, in respect of the convenience of the place for Skirmish, as
also the neernesse of the Wood for a present Refuge. Intelligence being given
to Sir Simon Harcourt of their abode, and knowing they must of necessity be
unprovided, by reason of their so late flight; He put forward with five
thousand men, whom he disposed of (after his arrival) in manner following.

First, He placed (...) Forest, to hinder their sight (...) hundred of his
best men, well horst, to ransacke in the vallyes, thereby to procure the Irish
to follow them; with the residue he resolved to give an unexpected onset upon
the Enemy. This plott accordingly prevailed; for they no sooner perceived the
Horsemen, but they forthwith sent eight hundred of their best men, well
provided after them; our men seeming to fly, whilst they followed; Oneale
with the residue of his men, all out of order, stood beholding of this
delightful prospect, hooting and making such a clamor, that our men came upon
them unawares, slaying many, some being taken prisoners, amongst the rest
Oneale and Brunslow, with diverse of their Officers, and those that fled, being
many slain by, the Amhush. Much joy we have with us at this great overthrow.
Oneale and Brunslow are now prisoners in Dublin; and our comfort is much
increased. Thus having given you the true Relation of this Novell; Desiring
your prayers for us as we for you, I rest

Yours in all humility, ED WARD BOND.

Certain News from the Coasts of BARBARY.
AMbrosius Christopher an expert Mariner, and well skilled in Sea* fights,
setting sail the 28, day of February for the Isles of the Ganaries, about nine
of the clock in the morning, after that they had sailed three days with a very
prosperous gaile, and were not far now from their wished Harbor, descried not
above a League before them a little Galley, which seeing the English colors
waving upon the topmasts, presently endeavored with all her Oars to secure
her self by flight. The master of the ship having no evil intention, yet
seeing a ship flee before she was chased, could not but wonder what the matter
should be; and as the common Proverb is, A flier must needs have a follower:
he left off his own necessary journie, and presently hoysing up all his sails
made after her, but she going a great deal more swiftly than he, by reason that
the ship had only a side wind, and that not strong enough neither, he was
forced to send a swifter messenger after her: so discharging two Pieces from
the chase, he had so good fortune that one took away a great piece of her
stern, the other did break her orelap presently. She after such a shroud
message let down her Ancher and stayed still. So the Master of the ship
presently sent out his long boat for her well manned, and brought her up; being
asked from whence they came, and whither they were bound, answered that they
came from Ireland, and were going for Spain. Being asked by whose instigation
they fled, showed the Captain of the ship: The master asking him the reason why
he had caused the Galley to fly two or three times, he would answer nothing,
being as it seems sworn to the Rebels to do their business faithfully: But
being threatened with the Rack if he would not confess, at last he told that he
had Letters from the Earl of Tyron, to the King and Peers of Spain: the Master
presently desired to see them, but he drawing them out of his pocket, would
have thrown them into the Sea, had not they struck against one of the ropes,
and fallen back again into the ship, he thinking them irrecoverable if they
fell into the Sea. When the ship was now under sail, the Master taking them up,
and reading them found this to be the superscription. The united Lords of
Ireland to the King and Peers of Spain, with all health.



The Copy of the Letter.
MOst excellent Prince, and you Nobles of the Kingdom of Spain, you know very
well what a hard task we have in hand, having undertaken to wrest the Kingdom
of Ireland out of the hands of the Englishmen, who for many years have kept it
very strongly: neither are ye ignorant (unless all our Letters have been
intercepted, what good success our proceedings have had hitherto; having
almost opened to you an entry to that Kingdom, which heretofore has so
strongly opposed, and having made free passage for any of your Forces into
Ireland, our name also becoming terrible not here only, but also in England.
It does concern you many ways to aid us in this enterprise, and to have no
less hand in it than we: it being first for the Religion that we fight; next
for a Kingdom, if it shall please you only to take it, or help us in taking of
it. We after it is overcome desiring nothing more than to be subject to the
King of Spain, and to enjoy our lands, which by the tyranny of the English
men are snatched out of our hands. We therefore lacking nothing but Ammunition
and victualling, for we have abundance of men, and more then we can furnish
with Arms, insomuch that when we receive an overthrow, we are a great deal
more sorry for our loss of Arms than of men. Next may it please you to send us
some provision of Corn, and Beans, and Pease, for our Soldiers; for we have
abundance here of Beeves and Mutton. So expecting help, and ever still praying
for your Majesty's and your Kingdoms happiness, I rest

From before Dublin at our Camp, Febr. 26. Yours to command, John Tyron.


The apprehension of Don Pedro De's Valdres.
NO sooner had the King of Spain received intelligence from Ireland, but
immediately he dispatches from his Court one Don Pedro des Valdres, a man very
famous not long since in Germany and elsewhere, with Letters to strengthen the
hope of the Rebels, and to promise them aid. But mark also how he was
apprehended, for coming from Castile in a tall ship, he was encountered by a
ship of Ipswich, being not above 200. in burden. This Don Pedro being a hot
fellow, and a continual Enemy to the English Nation, as he has showed
himself in many places before, would needs the one bout with her: the master of
the ship being a man of a good spirit, did not refuse to hazard his ship and
himself for the honor of his Country. In which action he behaved himself so
bravely, that he took the ship and Don Pedro in it, being dangerously wounded:
He had about him Letters of great consequence. Don Pedro died of his wound not
long after. The rest that were in the ship are carried to Ipswich, to stay
there whilst they hear from the Parliament.

FINIS.

