A RELATION OF THE FEARFVL ESTATE OF Francis Spira, In the year 1548. Compiled
by Natth. Bacon, Esquire.

The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14. 14.
LONDON. Printed by I. L. for Christoph. Meredith, at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1649.

A RELATION of the fearful estate of Francis SPIRA.
IN the year 1548. when the glorious Sun of the Gospel was but newly risen in
Europe; in the days of the reign of Edward, the Sixth of that name, King of
ENGLAND: In the Territory, and under the Jurisdiction of the City of Venice,
being the very border of Italy, in the town of Cittadella, lived one Francis
Spira, a Civil Lawyer, an Advocate of great rank and esteem, being of known
learning, and eloquence; of great experience; of carriage circumspect and
severe; his speech grave and composed; his countenance sharp and austere;
every way befitting that authority whereunto he was advanced; endowed with
outward blessings, of wife, and eleven children, and wealth in abundance: what
his worst parts were, I have no other warrant then his own words, which (if not
tainted overmuch with the bitterness of a desperate mind, and bearing the
countenance rather of passion, then of sober confession) may seem to add a
period to all further commendations.

I was (says he) excessively covetous of money, and accordingly I applied my
self to get by injustice, corrupting justice by deceit, inventing tricks to
delude justice: good causes I either defended deceitfully, or sold them to the
adversary perfidiously; ill causes I maintained with all my might; I wittingly
opposed the known truth, and the trust commuted unto me, I either betrayed or
perverted. Thus having worn out forty four years, or there abouts, and the
news of the new, or rather newly revived opinions of Luther coming into those
parts, represented an object of novelty unto him; who being as desirous to
know, as he was famous for knowledge; suffered not these wandering opinions to
pass unexamined; but searching into the Scriptures, and into all books of
Controversy that he could get, both old and new; and finding more then fame or
opinion, he began to taste their nature so well, as he entertains, loves, and
ownes them at length; and with such zeal, as he became a professor, yea a
teacher of them; first to his wife, children, and family; and after to his
friends, and familiar acquaintance; and in comparison, seemed to neglect all
other affairs; intending ever to press this main point, that We must wholly,
and only depend one the free, and unchangeable love of God in the death of
Christ, as the only sure way to salvation: and this was the sum of all his
discourse: and this continued for the space of six years, or thereabouts; even
so long as this fire could keep it self within private walls; but at length,
it brake forth into public meetings; so as the whole Province of Padua dawned
by the luster thereof. The Clergy finding the trade of their pardons to decay;
and their Purgatory to wax cold, began to be stir themselves; glosing their
actions, first, with calumnious aspersions upon the whole profession; then more
plainly striking at Spira with grievous accusation. And to effect their
purpose, some promise labor, others favor, some advice, others maintenance;
all join to divide, either his soul from his body, or both from God.

Now was John Casa, the Popes Legate, resident at Venice, being by birth a
Florentine; and one that wanted neither malice against those of this way, nor
craftiness to effect his malicious purposes; To him these men repair with
outcries against Spira; that he was the man that condemned the received rites
of the Church; deluded the Ecclesiastical power, and scandalized the policy
thereof; one of no mean rank; being a man of Account and authority, and
thereunto, learned in the Scriptures, elegant in speech; and in one word, a
dangerous Lutheran; having also many disciples, and therefore not to be
despised.

At this began the Legate to cast his eye on the terrible alteration that
lately had happened in Germany; where, by the means of one only Luther, the
Romish Religion had suffered such a blow, as that it could neither be cured by
dissimulation, nor defended by power; but the Clergy must either mend their
manners, or lose their dignities: on the other side, when he saw how propense
the common people, inhabiting in the bordering countries of Italy, were to
entertain those new opinions, he now thought it no time to dispute, or
persuade; but with speed repairs to the Senate, and procures authority from
them to send for Spira.

Spira by this time had considered with himself of the nature of his carriage,
how evident and notorious it was, and therefore subject to be envied by such,
as neither liked his person nor religion; he perceived that his opinions were
neither retired nor speculative, but such as aimed at the overthrow of at the
Romish Faction, and a change of policy; wherein at the best, he could expect
but a bloody victory; and that his enemies wanted neither power nor occasion,
to call him to account in public: when he must either Apostatize, and
shamefully give his former life, yea his own conscience, the lie, or endure the
utmost malice of his deadly enemies; or forsake his wife, children, friends
goods, authority; yea, his dear Country; and betake himself to a foreign
people there to endure a thousand miseries, that do continually wait upon a
voluntary exile. Being thus distracted, and tossed in the restless waves of
doubt, without guide to trust to, or haven to fly to for succor; on the
sudden, Gods Spirit assisting, he felt a calm, and began to discourse with
himself, in this manner.

Why wandrest thou thus in uncertainties, unhappy man? cast away fear, put on
thy shield, the shield of faith; Where is thy wonted courage, thy goodness, thy
constancy? remember that Christ's glory lies at the stake: suffer thou without
fear, and he will defend thee, he will tell thee what thou shall answer; he can
beat down all danger, bring thee out of prison, raise thee from the dead;
consider Peter in the dungeon, the Martyrs in the fire; if thou make a good
confession, thou may indeed go to prison, or death but an eternal reward in
heaven remains for thee; What have thou in this world comparable to Eternal
life, to everlasting happiness? if thou do otherwise, think of the scandal;
(common people live by example, thinking what ever is done, is well done;) fear
the loss of peace and joy, fear hell, death, and eternal wrath; or if thy flesh
be so strong, as to cause thee to doubt of the issue, fly thy Country; get
thee away, though never so far, rather then deny the Lord of life.

Now was Spira in reasonable quiet, being resolved to yield to these weighty
reasons; yet holding it wisdom to examine all things, he consults also with
flesh and blood; thus the battle does renew, and the flesh begins in this
manner: Be well advised, fond man; consider reasons on both sides, and then
judge: how can thou thus overweene thine own sufficiency, as thou neither
regardest the examples of thy Progenitors, nor the judgment of the whole
Church; do thou not consider, what misery this thy rashness will bring thee
unto? thou shall lose all thy substance, gotten with so much care and travail;
thou shall undergo the most exquisite torments that malice it self can devise;
thou shall be counted an heretic of all: and to close up all, thou shall die
shamefully. What think thou of the loathsome stinking dungeon, the bloody
axe, the burning faggot? are they delightful? Be wise at length, and keep thy
life and honor; thou may live to do much good to good men, as God commands
thee; thou may be an ornament to thy Country; and put case, thy Countries
loss would be of small esteem with thee; Will thou bring thy friends also into
danger? thou have begotten children, will thou now cut their throats, and
inhumanely butcher them, which may in time bring honor to their Country,
glory to God, help and furtherance to his Church? go to the Legate, weak man,
freely confess thy fault, and help all these miseries. Thus did the cares of
this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the good Seed that was
formerly sown; so as fearing, he faints, and yields unto the allurements of
this present world; and being thus blinded, he goes to the Legate at Venice,
and salutes him with this news.

Having for these diverse years entertained an opinion concerning some Articles
of faith, contrary to the Orthodox, and received judgment of the Church; and
uttered many things against the authority of the Church of Rome, and the
universal Bishop: I humbly acknowledge my fault and Error, and my folly in
misleading others: I therefore yield my self in all obedience, to the Supreme
Bishop, into the Bosom of the Church of Rome; never to depart again from the
traditions and decrees of the holy See: I am heartily sorry for what is past;
and I humbly beg pardon for so great an offense.

The Legate perceiving Spira to faint, he pursues him to the utmost; he causes
a recitation of all his Errors to be drawn in writing, together with the
Confession annexed to it, and commands Spira to subscribe his name there, which
accordingly he did; then the Legate commands him to return to his own Town;
and there to declare this Confession of his, and to acknowledge the whole
Doctrine of the Church of Rome to be holy, and true, and to abjure the Opinions
of Luther, and other such Teachers, as false, and heretical: Man knows the
beginning of sin, but who bounds the issues thereof? Spira having once lost
footing, goes down a maine, he cannot stay, nor gainsay the Legate; but
promises to accomplish his whole will and pleasure: he soon addresseth himself
for his Journey: and being onward in the way, be thinks himself of the large
spoils he had brought away, from the Conflict with the Legate: what glorious
testimony he had given of his great faith, and constancy in Christ's cause: and
to be plain, how impiously he had denied Christ, and his Gospel at Venice; and
what he promised to do further in his own Country; and thus partly with fear,
and partly with shame being confounded, he thought he heard a voice speaking
unto him, in this manner.

Spira, What do thou here? whither go thou? have thou, unhappy man, given
thy handwriting to the Legate at Venice? yet see thou do not seal it in thy
own country. Die thou indeed think eternal life so mean, as that thou
preferrest this present life before it? do thou well in preferring wife and
children before Christ? is the windy applause of the people, better indeed then
the glory of God; and the possession of this worlds good more dear to thee,
then the salvation of thine own Soul? is the small use of a moment of time more
desirable, then eternal wrath is dreadful? Think with thy self, what Christ
endured for thy sake; is it not equal, thou should suffer somewhat for him?
Remember, man, that the sufferings of this present life, are not comparable to
the glory that shall be revealed: if thou suffer with him, thou shall also
reign with him: thou can not answer for what thou have already done;
nevertheless, the gate of mercy is not quite shut: take heed that thou heapest
not sin upon sin, lest thou repent when it will be too late.

Now was Spira in a wilderness of doubt, not knowing which way to turn him, nor
what to do: yet being arrived in his own Country, and amongst his friends, with
shame enough he relates what he had done, and what he had further promised to
do; and how the terror of God on the one side and the terror of this world on
the other side, did continually rack him; and therefore he desired of them
advice in this so doubtful a case: his friends upon small deliberation
answered; that it was requisite he should take heed that he did not in any wise
betray his wife and children, and all his friends into danger, seeing that by
so small a matter as the reciting of a little Schedule, which might be done in
less space then half an hour, he might both free himself from present danger,
and preserve many that depended upon him: adding moreover, that he could get no
Credit in relenting from that which he had already in greatest part performed
before the Legate at Venice, and that in the perfect accomplishing thereof,
little or no discredit could arise, more then what by the former action
already he had sustained: on the other side, if he did not perform his promise
made to the Legate, he could neither discharge himself of the shame which he
had already incurred; nor avoid far more heavy and insupportable injuries, then
probably he should have endured, if he had persisted obstinately in his former
Opinions.

This was the last blow of the battle: and Spira utterly overcome, goes to
the Praetor, and profers to perform his promise made to the Legate, who in the
mean time, had taken order to have all things ready, and had sent the
instrument of abjuration signed by Spira, to the Praetor, by the hands of a
certain Priest. All that night the miserable man ware out with restless cares,
without any minute of rest; the next morning being come, he gets up, and being
ready, he desperately enters into the public Congregation, where Mass being
finished, in the presence of friends and enemies, and of the whole Assembly;
being by estimation near two thousand people; yea, and of Heaven it self, he
recites that infamous abjuration, word for word, as it was written: it being
done, he was fined at thirty pieces of gold, which he presently paid: five
whereof were given to the Priest that brought the abjuration: the other twenty
five were employed toward the making of a Shryne to put the Eucharist in; then
was he sent home, restored to his Dignities, goods, wife, and children: No
sooner was he departed, but he thought he heard a direful voice saying to him;
Thou wicked wretch, thou have denied me, thou have renounced the covenant of
thy obedience, thou have broken thy vow, hence Apostate, bear with thee the
sentence of thy eternal damnation: he trembling and quaking in body and mind,
fell down in a swoune; relief was at hand for the body, but from that time
forward, he never found any peace or ease of his mind; but continuing in
uncessant torments, he professed that he was captived under the revenging hand
of the great God: that he heard continually that fearful sentence of Christ
that just Judge: that he knew he was utterly undone: that he could neither hope
for grace, nor Christ's intercession with God the Father in his behalf: thus was
his fault ever heavy on his heart, and ever his Judgment before his eyes.

Now began his friends some of them, to repent too late of their rash counsel;
others not looking so high as the Judgment of God, laid all the blame upon his
Melancholicke constitution; that overshadowing his judgment, wrought in him a
kind of madness: every one censured as his fancy led him, yet for remedy all
agreed in this, to use both the wholesome help of Physicians, and the pious
adveic of Divines, and therefore thought it meet to convey him to Padua, an
University of note, where plenty of all manner of means was to be had: this
they accordingly did, both with his wife, children, and whole family; others
also of his friends accompanying him: and being arrived at the house of one
James Ardin, in Saint Leonards Parish, they sent for three Physicians of most
note, who upon due observation of the effects, and of other Symptoms of his
disease, and some private conference one with another, amongst themselves,
returned their verdict in this manner, viz. That they could not discern that
his body was afflicted with any danger or distemper originally from it self, by
reason of the overruling of any humor; but that this Malady of his did arise
from some grief, or passion of his mind, which being over burdened, did so
oppress the spirits, as they wantting free passage, stirred up many ill
humors, whereof the body of man is full; and these ascending up into the
brain, troubled the fancy; shadowed the seat of the judgment, and so
corrupted it: this was the state of his disease, and that outward part that was
visible to the eye of nature; this they endeavored to reform by purgatio^,
either to consume, or at least to divert the course of those humors from the
brain; but all their skill effected nothing, which Spira noting said: Alas
poor men, how far wide are you? do you think that this disease is to be cured
by potions? believe me there must be another manner of medicine, it is neither
plasters, nor drugges, that can help a fainting soul cast down with sense of
sin, and the wrath of God; to is only Christ that must be the Physician, and
the Gospel the soul Antidote.

The Physicians easily believed him after they had understood the whole truth
of the matter, and therefore they wished him to seek some spiritual comfort. By
this time the fame of this man was spread over all Padua, and the neighbor
Country; partly for that he was a man of Esteem: partly because as the
disease, so the occasion was especially remarkable; for this was not done in a
corner: so as daily there came multitudes of all sorts to see him: some out of
curiosity only to see and discourse: some out of a pious desire to try all
means that might reduce him to comfort again, or at least to benefit
themselves, by such a spectacle of misery, and of the justice of God. Amongst
these, Paulus Vergerius Bishop of Iustinopolis, and Matheus Gribauldus, deserve
especially to be named, as the most principal laborers for this man's comfort.
They find him now about fifty years of age, neither affected with the dotage of
old age, nor with the unconstant headstrong passion of youth, but in the
strength of his experience and judgment; in a burning heat, calling
excessively for drink; yet his understanding active, quick of apprehension,
witty in discourse above his ordinary manner, and judiciously opposite: his
friends labored him by all fair means to receive some nourishment, which he
obstinately gainsaying, they forcibly infused some liquid sustenance into his
mouth, most of which he spit out again; exceedingly chafing and in this
fretting mood of his, said: As it is true that all things work for the best to
those that love God; so to the wicked all are contrary: for whereas a plentiful
offspring is the blessing of God, and his reward, being a stay to the weak
estate of their aged parents; to me they are a cause of bitterness and
vexation; they do strive to make me tire out this misery; I would fain be at an
end; I deserve not this dealing at their hands; O that I were gone from hence,
that somebody would let out this weary Soul.

His friends saluted him, and asked him, what he conceived to be the cause of
his disease; forthwith he brake out into a lamentable discourse of the passages
formerly related, and that with such passionate Elocution, that he caused many
to weep, and most to tremble. They contrarily, to comfort him, propounded many
of Gods promises recorded in the Scripture; and many examples of Gods mercy: My
sin (said he) is greater then the mercy of God.. Nay, answered they, the mercy
of God is above all sin; God would have all men to be saved: It Is true (quoth
he) he would have all that he has elected, to be saved; he would not have
damned reprobates to be saved; I am one of that number; I know it, for I
willingly, and against my knowledge denied Christ; and I feel that he hardens,
and will not suffer me to hope.

After some silence, one asked him whether he did not believe that Doctrine to
be true, for which he was accused before the Legate? he answered; I did believe
it when I denied it, but now I neither believe that, nor the Doctrine of the
Roman Church; I believe nothing, I have no faith, no trust, no hope; I am a
Reprobate like Cain, or Judas, who casting away all hope of mercy, fell into
despair; and my friends do me great wrong, that they suffer me not to go to
the place of unbelievers, as I justly deserve.

Here they began sharply to rebuke him; requiring, and charging him that in any
wife he did not violate the mercy of God; to which he answered: The mercy of
God is exceeding large, and exends to all the elect; but not to me, or any like
to me, who are sealed up to wrath: I tell you I deserve it, my own conscience
condemns me; what needs any other Judge? Christ came (said they) to take away
sin, and calling for a book, they read unto him the passion of Christ; and
coming to his nayling to the Cross, Spira said: This indeed is comfortable to
such as are elected, but as for me wretch, they are nothing but grief and
torment, because I contemned them. Thus roaring for grief, and tossing himself
up and down upon the bed as he lay, he entreated them to read no more: As
Gribauldus was coming to see him, Vergerius said to Spira, dear Sir, here is
Doctor Gribauldus, a godly and faithful friend of yours, come to see you: He
is welcome (said he) but he shall find me ill: Gribauldus replied, Sir, this
is but an illusion of the devil, who does what he can to vex you; but turn you
to God with your whole heart, and he is ready to show you mercy; the earth you
know is full of his mercy; it is he that has said, that as often as a sinner
repents of his sin, he will remember his sins no more. Consider this in the
example of Peter that was Christ's familiar, and an Apostle; and yet denied him
thrice with an oath, and yet God was merciful unto him: consider the thief that
spent his whole life in wickedness, and for all that, did not God graciously
respect him in the last minute of his life? Is the Lords hand now shortened that
it cannot save? to this Spira answered; If Peter grieved and repented, Luke
21.61.
it was because Christ beheld him with a merciful eye; and in that he was
pardoned, it was not because he wept, but because God was gracious to him: but
God respects not me, and therefore I am a reprobate: I feel no comfort can
enter into my heart, there is place there but only for torments and vexings of
spirit: I tell you my case is properly mine own; no man ever was in the like
plight, and therefore my estate is fearful.

Then roaring out in the bitterness of his spirit, said: It Is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God: the violence of his passion and
action suitable, did amaze many of the beholders; insomuch as some of them said
with a whispering voice that he was possessed; he overhearing it, said: do you
doubt it? I have a whole Legion of devils that take up their dwellings within
me, and possess me as their own; and justly too, for I have denied Christ.
Whether did you that willingly or not? (said they.) That Is nothing to the
purpose (said Spira:) Christ says, Mat. 10.33.
whosoever denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father which is in
Heaven: Christ will not be denied, no not in word; and therefore it is enough,
though in heart I never denied him.

They observing his distemper to arise from the sense and horror of the pains
of hell, asked him whether he thought there were worse pains then what he
endured for the present; he said, that he knew there were far worse pains then
those that he then suffered: for the wicked shall rise to their judgment, but
they shall not stand in judgment: this I tremble to think of: yet do I desire
nothing more, then that I might come to that place, where I may be sure to
feel the worst, and to be freed from fear of worse to come.

I but you are to consider (said one) that those opinions for which you were
accused before the Legate, were impious; and therefore you are not to think you
denied Christ, but rather that you confessed him, acknowledging the infallible
truth of the Catholic Church. Truly (said he) when I did deny those opinions,
I did think them to be true, and yet I did deny them.

Go to (said others;) now then believe that they are true. Now I cannot (said
he;) God will not suffer me to believe them, nor trust in his mercy: What
would you have me do? I would feign attain to this power, but cannot, though I
should presently be burnt for it. But why do you (said the other) esteem this
so grievous a sin, when as the learned Legate constrained you to it, which he
surely would not have done, if your former opinions had not been Erroneous: no,
good Francis, the devil besets thee, let not therefore the grievousness of thy
sin, (if any such be) amaze thee. You say right, (replied he;) the devil has
possessed me, and God has left me to his power; for I find, I can neither
believe the Gospel, nor trust in Gods mercy; I have sinned against the Holy
Ghost; and God by his immutable decree, has bound me over to perpetual
punishment, without any hope of pardon; Romans 9.11. and Romans 4.
It Is true that the greatness of sin, or the multitude of them, cannot bind
Gods mercy: all those many sins that in the former part of my life I have
committed, then did not so much trouble me, for I trusted that God would not
lay them to my charge: but now having sinned against the Holy Ghost, God has
taken away from me all power of repentance; and now brings all my sins to
remembrance, Jam. 2, 10.
and thus guilty of one, guilty of all. And therefore it is no matter whether my
sins be great or small, few or many; they are such as Christ's blood, nor Gods
mercy belongs to me: Romans 9.18.
God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he hardneth;
this is it that gnawes my heart, he has hardened me; and I find that he daily
more and more does harden me, and therefore I am out of hope; I feel it, and
therefore cannot but despair: I tell you, there was never such a monster as I
am; never was any man alive a spectacle of so exceeding misery. I knew that
justification is to be expected by Christ, and I denied and abjured it* to the
end I might keep this frail life from adversity, and my children from
poverty; and now behold, how bitter this life is to me; and God only knows,
what shall become of this my family; but surely no good is likely to betide it,
but rather daily worse and worse; and such a ruin at the length, as that one
stone shall not be left on another.

But why should you (said Gribauldus) conceit so deeply of your sin, seeing you
can not but know, that many have denied Christ, yet never fell into despair?
Well (said he) I can see no ground of comfort for such, neither can I warrant
them from Gods revenging hand in wrath; though it pleases God yet to suffer
such to be in peace: and besides, there will a time of danger come, and then
they shall be thoroughly tried: and if it were not so, yet God is just in making
me an Example to others; and I cannot justly complain: there is no punishment
so great, but I have deserved it, for this so heinous offense: I assure you it
is no small matter to deny Christ, and yet it is more ordinary then commonly
men do conceive of: it is not a denial made before a Magistrate as it is with
me; for as often as a Christian does dissemble the known truth; as often as he
approves of false worship, by presenting himself at it, so often as he has
not things worthy of his calling, or such things as are unworthy of his
calling, so often he denies Christ: thus did I, and therefore am justly
punished for it.

Your estate (quoth Gribauldus) is not so strange, as you make it; Job was so
far gone, that he complained God had set him as a mark against him: and David
that was a man after Gods own heart, complained often that God had forsaken
him, and was become his enemy; yet both received comfort again: comfort your
self therefore, God will come at length, though he now seem far off.

O Brother (answered Spira) I believe all this; the devils believe and tremble;
but David was ever elected and dearly beloved of God; and though he fell, yet
God took not ut^erly away his holy Spirit; and therefore was heard when he
prayed, Lord take not thy holy Spirit from me: but I am in another case, being
ever accursed from the presence of God: neither can I pray as he did, because
his holy Spirit is quite gone, and cannot be recalled; and therefore I know I
shall live in continual hardness so long as I live: O that I might feel but the
lest sense of the love of God to me, though but for one small moment, as I now
feel his heavy wrath that burns like the torments of hell within me, and
afflicts my Conscience with pangs unutterable; verily desperation is hell it
self.

Here Gribauldus said, I do verily believe, Spira, that God having so severely
chastised you in this life, corrects you in mercy here, that he may spare you
hereafter, and that he has mercy sealed up for you in time to come.

Nay (said Spira) hence do I know that I am a Reprobate, because he afflicts
me with hardness of heart: O that my body had suffe^ed all my life long, so
that he would be pleased to release my soul, and e^se my Conscience, this
burthe^ed Conscience.

Gribauldus being desirous to ease his mind from the continual meditation of
his sin; as also to sound how for the present he stood affected to the Romish
Church; asked him what he thought became of the souls of men so soon as they
departed out of the body; to which he answered.

Although this be not so fully revealed in Scripture; yet I verily believe that
the souls of the Elect go presently to the Kingdom of glory; and not that
they sleep with the body, as some do imagine.

Very well, said one of the spectators, why do the Scriptures then say, that
God brings down to hell, and raises up; seeing it cannot be meant of the
estate of the soul after death, which as thou say, either goes to heaven
without change, or to hell without redemption: it must be understood of the
estate of the soul in this life; like that wherein thou art at this present:
and oftentimes we see that God suffers men to fall into the jaws of despair,
and yet raises them up again; and therefore despair not, but hope; it shall be
even thus with thee in his good time.

This is the work (quoth Spira) this the labor; for I tell you, when I ^t
Venice did first abjure my profession, and so, as it were, drew an Indenture,
the spirit of God often admonisht me; and when at Cittadella, I did, as it
were, set to my seal; the Spirit of God often suggested to me, do not write
Spira, do not seal; yet I resisted the Holy Ghost, and did both; and at that
very present I did evidently feel a wound inflicted in my very will; so
although I can say, I would believe, yet can I not say, I will believe, God
has denied me the power of will; and it befalls me in this my miserable
estate, as with one that is fast in irons, and his friends coming to see him,
do pity his estate, and do persuade him to shake off his fetters, and to come
out of his bonds, which God knows he would fain do, but cannot: this is my very
case; you persuade me to believe: how fain would I do it, but cannot? O now I
cannot. Then violently grasping his hands together, and raising himself up:
Behold (said he) I am strong, yet by little and little I decay and consume, and
my servants would fain preserve this weary life; but at length the will of God
must be done, Psalm. 32.11.
and I shall perish miserably as I deserve: rejoice ye righteous in the Lord;
blessed are you whose hearts the Lord has mollified.

Then after some pause; It Is wonderful, I earnestly desire to pray to God with
my heart, yet I cannot; I see my damnation, and I know my remedy is only in
Christ, yet I cannot set my self to lay hold on it; such are the punishments of
the damned: they confess what I confess, they repent of their loss of heaven;
they envy the Elect; yet their repentance does them no good, for the) cannot
mend their ways.

As he was thus speaking, he observed diverse flies that came about him, and
some lighted on him: Behold, (said he) non also Signifies the god of flies.
Beelzebub comes to his banquet, you shall shortly see my end, and in me an
example to many of the Justice, and Judgment of God.

About this time came in two Bishops, with diverse Scholars of the University,
one of them being Paulus Vergerius* having observed Spira more then any other;
being continually conversant with him; told him his estate was such, as rather
stood in need of prayer them advice; and the refore desired him to pray with
him in the Lords Prayer; Spira consented, and he began.

Our Father which art in heaven, then breaking forth in to teards, he stopped;
but they said, it is well, your grief is a good sign: I bewail (said he) my
misery, for I perceive I am forsaken of God, and cannot call to him from my
heart, as I was wont to do; yet let us go on, said Vergerius.

Thy kingdom come:) O Lord (said Sprit) bring me also into this kingdom; I
beseech thee shut me not out. Then coming to those words, Give us this day
our daily bread; headded; O Lord I have enough and abundance to feed this
carkeise of mine; but there is another bread, I humbly beg the bread of thy
grace; without which, I know I am but a dead man.

Lead us not into temptation;) seeing Lord that I am brought into temptation,
help me Lord that I may escape; the enemy has overcome, help me, I beseech
thee, to overcome this cruel Tyrant.

These things he spoke with a mournful voice, the tears trickling down
abundantly; and expressing such affection and passion, as turned the bowels of
those there present, with grief and compunction; they then turning to Spira,
said; You know that none can call Christ Jesus the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost:
you must therefore think of your self, according to that soft affection, which
you express in your prayers, inferring thereby that God has not wholly cast
you off, or bereaved you of his Spirit utterly.

Psalm. 109.7.
I perceive (said Spira) that I call on him to my eternal damnation: for I tell
you again, it is a new and unheard of example that you find in me: If Judas
(said they) had but outlived his days, which by nature he might have done; he
might have repented, and Christ would have received him to mercy; and yet he
sinned most grievously against his Master, which did so esteem of him, as to
honor him with the dignity of an Apostle, and did maintain and feed him: He
answered, Christ did also feed and honor me, neither yet is my fault one jot
less then that of his; because it is not more honor to be personally present
with Christ in the flesh, then to be in his presence now, by illumination of
his holy Spirit: and besides, I deny that ever Judas could have repented, how
long soever he had lived; for grace was quite taken from him, as it is now from
me.

O Spira (said they) you know you are in a Spiritual desertion; you must
therefore not believe what Satan suggests; he was ever a Liar from the
beginning, and a mere Impostour, and will cast a thousand lying fancies into
your mind, to beguile you withal; you must rather believe those whom you judge
to be in a good estate, and more able to discern of you then your self; believe
us, and we tell you that God will be merciful unto you.

O here is the knot (said Spira;) I would I could believe; but I cannot.

Then he began to reckon up what fearful dreams and visions he was continually
troubled withal; that he saw the devils come flocking into his Chamber, and
about his bed, terrifying him with strange noyses that these were not fancies,
but that he saw them as really, as the standers by; and that besides these
outward terrors, he felt continually, a racking torture of his mind, and a
continual butchery of his Conscience, being the very proper pangs of the
damned wights in hell.

Cast way these fancies (said Gribauldus;) these are but illusions; humble your
self in the presence of God, and praise him.

The dead praise not the Lord (answered he) nor they that go down into the
pit: Psalm. 6.5.
we that are drowned in despair, are dead and already gone down into the pit:
what hell can there be worse then desperat^on; or what greater punishment? the
gnawing wo^m, unquenchable fire, horror, confusion, and (which is wo^se then
all) desperation it self continual^y ^o^tures me; and now I count my present
estate worse, then if my soul (separated from my body) were with Judas and the
rest of the damned; and therefore, I now desire rather to be there, then thus
to l^ve in the body.

One being present, repeated certain words out of the Psalms: If thy Children
forsake my Law, Psa. 89.30.
and walk not in my Judgments; I will visit their transgressions with rods,
and their iniquities with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness I will not
utterly take from them, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: mark this, O Spira,
my Covenant I will not break.

These promises (said Spira) belong only to the Elect, which if tempted, may
fall into sin; but are again lifted up and recovered out: Pro. 24.16. Psalm.
37.24.
as the Prophet says, though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for
the Lord upholdeth him: therefore Peter could rise, for he was Elected; but the
reprobate when they fall, cannot rise again, as appears in Cain, Saul, and
Judas: God deals one way with the Elect, and another way with Reprobates.

The next day he prayed with them in the Latin tongue, and that with excellent
affection, as outwardly appeared; blessed be God (said Vergerius;) these are no
signs of eternal reprobation: you must not, O Spira, seek out the secret
counsels of Gods election and reprobation; for no man can know, so long as he
lives, whether by his good or bad deeds, Eccles. 9.1.

Psalm. 88.14.


he be worthy of Gods love or anger: do you not know that the Prophet David
complained, that God had cast off his Soul.

I know all this (quoth Spira) I know the mercies of God are infinite, and do
surpass the sins of the whole world, and that they are effectual to all that
believe, but this faith, and this hope, is the gift of God: O that he would
give it me; but it is as impossible as to drink up the sea at a draught: As
for that of Solomon, if he had ever tried that which I feel by woeful
experience, he would never have spoken as he did; but the truth is, never had
mortal man such an evident experience of Gods anger and hatred against him, as
I have: you that are in a good estate, think repentance and faith to be works
of great facility: and therefore you think it an easy matter to persuade a
man to believe; the whole need not the Physician; and he that is well, can soon
give counsel to such as are ill; but this is the hell to me, my heart is
hardened, I cannot believe: many are called, but few are chosen.

Upon what ground (said they) do you conceive so ill an opinion of your self?

I once did know God to be my Father, not only by creation, but by
regeneration; I knew him by his beloved Son, the author and finisher of our
Salvation; I could pray to him, and hope for pardon of sins from him; I had a
taste of his sweetness, peace and comfort: now contrarily, I know God not as a
Father, but as an enemies; what more? my heart hates God, and seeks to get
above him: I have nothing else to fly to but terror and despair.

Belike you think then (said they) that those who have the earnest and first
fruits of Gods Spirit, may notwithstanding fall away.

The judgments of God are a deep abiss (said he) we are soon drowned if we
enter into them; Psalm. 36.6. Romans 11.33. 1. Cor 10.12.
he that thinks he stands, let him take heed lest he fall: as for my self, I
know I am fallen back; and that I once did know the truth; though it may be not
so thoroughly: I know not what else to say, Psalm. 50.12.
but that I am one of that number, which God has threatened to tear in pieces.

Say not so (answered they;) for God may come, though at the last hour; keep
hold therefore, at the least by hope.

This (quoth he) is my case, I tell you I cannot, God has deprived me of
hope; this brings terror to my mind, and pines this body which now is so week,
as it cannot perform the several offices thereof: Romans 8.16.
for as the Elect have the Spirit testifying that they are the sons of God so
the Reprobates, even while they live, do often feel a worm in their
conscience, whereby they are condemned already; and therefore as soon as I
perceived this wound inflicted on my mind and will, I knew that I wanted the
gifts of saving grace, and that I was utterly undone; 1. Cor. 11.33.
God chasteneth his children with temporary afflictions, that they may come as
gold out of the fire; Romans 12.28.
but punishes the wicked with blindness in their understandings, and hardness
of heart; and woe be to such, John. 18.42.
from whom God takes his holy Spirit.

Here one rebuked him, and told him, he gave too much credit to sense, that
he was not to believe himself, but rather him that was in a good state, and I
testify to you (said he) that God will be merciful to you.

Nay (answered he) for because I am in this ill estate, therefore can I believe
nothing but what is contrary to my salvation and comfort; but you that are so
confident of your good estate; look that it be true, for it is no such small
matter to be assured of sincerity; a man had need be exceeding strongly
grounded in the truth, before he can be able to affirm such a matter as you now
do: It is not the performance of a few outward duties, but a mighty constant
labor, with all intention of heart and affection; with full desire and
endeavor, continually to set forth Gods glory: there must be neither fear of
Legates, Inquisitors, Prisons, nor any death whatsoever; many think themselves
happy that are not: it is not every one that says, Lord, Lord, Mat. 7 22.
that shall go to heaven.

They came another day, and found him with his eyes shut, as if he had been
drouzie, and very loath to discourse; at which time there came in also a grave
man from Cittadella, who demanded of Spira, if he knew him, or not; he lifting
up his eyelids, and not suddenly remembering him, the man said to him; I am
Presbyter Antonie Fontamia: I was with you at Venice, some eight weeks since: O
cursed day (said Spira) O cursed day: O that I had never gone thither; would
God I had then died.

Afterward came in a Priest called, Bernardinus Sardoneus, bringing with him a
book of Exorcismes, to conjure this devil; whom when Spira saw, shaking his
head he said:

I am verily persuaded indeed, tnat God has left me to thh power of the
devils; but such they are, is are not to be found in your Letany; neither will
they be cast out by spells: The Priest proceeding in his intended purpose; with
a strange uncouth gesture and a loud voice, adjured the spirit to come into
Spira's tongue, and to answer: Spira deriding his fruitless labor, with a
sigh, turned from him: A Bishop being there present, said to Spira; brother,
God has put virtue into the word and Sacraments; and we have used the one
means, and find not that effect which we desire; shall we try the efficacy of
the Sacraments? surely if you take it, as a true Christian ought to receive the
body and blood of Christ, it will prove a sovereign medicine for your sick soul.

This I cannot do (answered he;) for they that have no right to the promises,
have no right to the seals: 1 Cor. 11.33.
the Eu^harist was appointed only for believers: if we have not faith, we eat
and drink judgment to our selves; I received it about a month since, but I did
not well in so doing; for I took it by constraint, and so I took it to my
deeper condemnation.

Here Vergerius began to importune him earnestly to beware, that he did not
wilfully resist grace, and put himself out of Heaven; charging him vehemently,
by all the love that was between them; by the love which he bare to his
children, yea, to his own soul; that he would set himself, seriously to return
to that faith and hope, which once he had in the death of Christ; with many
such like words: Spira having heard much of the like matter formerly; and being
somewhat moved, said, You do but repeat, Vergerius: what should I hope? why
should I believe? God has taken faith from me; show me then whither I shall
go; show me a Haven whereto I shall retire: you tell me of Gods mercy, when as
God has cast me off: you tell me of Christ's intersession, I have denied him:
you command me to believe, I say I cannot: you bring me no comfort: your
command is as impossible for me to ob^y, as to k^ep the Moral Law: if you
should persuade one to love God, with all his heart, soul and strength; and God
gives him not the power, can he perform your desire? does not the Church teach
us to sing; direct us, O Lord, to love thy Commandments? hypocrites say that
they love God with all their heart, but they lie: for my part, I will not lie,
but tell you plainly; such is my case, that though you should never so much
importune me to hope or believe, though I desire it, yet I cannot: for God (as
a punishment of my wickedness) has taken away from me all his saving graces;
faith, hope, and all: I am not the man therefore that you take me for: belike
you think I delight in this estate; if I could conceive but the least spark of
hope of a better estate hereafter, I would not refuse to endure the most heav^e
w^ight of the wrath of that great God; yea, for twenty thousand years, so that
I might at length attain to the end of that misery, which I now know will be
eternal: but I tell you, my will is wounded: who longs more to believe, then I
do? but all the groundwork of my hope is quite gone; for if the testimonies
of holy Scripture be true, (as they are most certainly true) is not this as
true: whosoever denies me before men, him (says Christ) will I deny before my
Father which is in heaven? is not this properly my case, as if it had purposely
been intended against this very person of mine? and I pray you, what shall
become of such as Christ denies; seeing there is no other Name under heaven,
whereby you look to be saved? what says Saint Paul to the Hebrews? it is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, Heb. 6.
and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, if they fall away, to be renewed to repentance: what can be more plain
against me? Is not that Scripture also; and 10.26.
if we sin wilfullly after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin; but a certain looking for of judgment: the
Scripture speaks of me, Saint Paul me^hes me; 1 Pet. 2.21.
Saint Peter tell me, it had been better I had not known the way of
rightteousness, then after I have known, to turn from the holy Commandment: it
had been better I had not known, and yet then my condemnation had be most
certain: do you not see evidently, that I have w^lfully denied the known truth;
may justly expect not only damnation, but worse, if worse may be imagined? God
will have me undergo the just punishment of my sin, and make me an example of
his wrath for your sakes.

The company present, admired his discourse, so grievously accusing himself of
his fore-past life; so gravely and wisely dilating, concerning the judgments of
God, that they then were convinced, that it was not frenzy or madness, that
had possessed him: and being as it were, in admiration of his estate, Spira
proceeded again in this manner. Take heed to your selves, it is no light or
easy matter to be a Christian; it is not Baptism, or reading of the
Scriptures, or boasting of faith in Christ (though even these are good) that
can prove one to be an absolute Christian: you know what I said before, there
must be a conformity in life; a Christian must be strong, unconquerable, not
carrying an obscure profession, but resolute; expressing the Image of Christ,
and holding out against all opposition, to the last breath: he must give all
diligence, by righteousness, and holiness, to make his calling and election
sure: many there are that snatch at the promises in the Gospel, as if they
undoubtedly did belong to them; and yet they remain sluggish, and careless,
and being flattered by the things of this present world, they pass in their
course in quietness and security, as if they were the only happy men; whom
nevertheless the Lord in his providence has ordained to eternal wrath; as you
may see in Saint Lukes Rich man: thus it was with me, Luke 16.
therefore take heed.

Then came one of his Nephews, and offered him some sustenance, which he
disdainfully refusing, so moved the young man's choler, that he charged him with
hypocrisy and dissimulation, or frenzy; to whom Spira gravely answering, said:

You may interpret the matter as you will; but I am sure, I am not only the
Actor, but the argument, and matter of the Tragedy; I would it were frenzy,
either fained or true; for if it were fained, I could put it off at pleasure;
if it were a real frenzy, yet there were some hope left of Gods mercy,
whereas now there is none: for I know that God has pronounced me an enemy,
and guilty of high Treason against his Majesty; I am a castaway, a vassaile
of wrath: yet dare you call it dissembling and frenzy; and can mock at the
formidable example of the heavy wrath of God, that should teach you fear and
terror: But it is natural to the flesh, either out of malice or ignorance, to
speak perversely of the Works of God: The natural man discerns not of the
things that are of God, because they are spiritually discerned.

How can this be (said Gribauldus) that you can thus excellently discourse of
the judgments of God, and of the graces of his holy Spirit, that you find the
want of them, and earnestly desire them; and yet you think you are utterly
deprived of them.

Take this for certain (said he) I want the main grace of all, and that which
is absolutely necessary; and God does many times ex^ort most true and strange
testimonies of his Majesty's justice and mercy; yea, out of the mouths of very
reprobates; Matt. 27.4.
for even Judas, after he had betrayed his Master, was constrained to confess
his sin, and to justify the innocence of Christ; and therefore if I do the
like, it is no new or strange matter: God has taken faith from me, and left me
other common gifts, for my deeper condemnation: By how much the more I remember
what I had, and hear others discourse of what they have, by so much the more is
my torment, in that I know what I want, and how there is no way to be relieved.

Thus spoke he, the tears all the while trickling down; professing that his
pangs were such, as that the damned wights in hell endure not the like misery;
that his estate was worse then that of Cain or Judas, and therefore he desired
to die. Revel. 9.6.
Yet behold (says he) the Scriptures are accomplished in me; they shall desire
to die, and death shall fly from them: And verily, he seemed exceedingly to
fear, left his life should be drawn out to a longer thread; and finding no ease
or rest, ever and anon, cried out, O miserable wretch, O miserable wretch; then
turning to the Company, he besought them in this manner.

O Brethren, take a diligent heed to your life; make more account of the gifts
of Gods Spirit then I have done; learn to beware my misery; think not you are
assured Christians, because you understand something of the Gospel; take heed
you grow not secure on that ground; be constant and immovable in the
maintenance of your profession: Confess even until death, if you be called
thereto; He that loves father, mother, brothers, Luke 9.61.
sisters, sons, daughters, kindred, houses, lands, more then Christ, is not
worthy of him.

These words (said they) do not found like the words of a wicked Reprobate.

I do but herein imitate (said Spira) the rich Glutton in the Gospel, who
though in hell, yet was careful, that his brethren should not come to that
place of torment; and I say to you Brethren, take heed of this miserable estate
wherein I am.

Then turning himself to certain young men that were present, he desired them
to conceive him aright. I do not speak this to derogate from the certainty of
saving faith, and the promises of the Gospel, for they are most sure; but take
heed of relying on that faith that works not a holy and unblameable life,
worthy of a believer; credit me, it will fail, I have tried it: I presumed I
had gotten the right faith; I preached it to others, I had all places of
Scripture in memory that might support it: I thought my self sure, and in the
mean time living impiously and carelessly; behold, now the judgments of God have
overtaken me; not to correction, but to condemnation: And now you would have me
to believe, but it will not be; for I feel too late, that good things belong
only to such as are good; whose sins are covered with Christ's death and blood,
as with a vail, and guarded with his righteous merits from the flood of Gods
wrath, even as with a mighty wall, lest miserable mortals should be swallowed
up with greatness of their sins: But as for me, I have, as it were, wilfully
with mine hands pulled down this Rampire; behind which I might have rested in
safety; and now are the swelling waters come even to my soul, and I am cast
away.

One of his familiar friends chanced to say, That certainly he was overcome
with melancholy; which being overheard, Spira answered,

Well, be it so, seeing you will needs have it so; for thus also is Gods wrath
manifested against me, in that he has taken from me the use of mine
Understanding and Reason, so as I can neither rightly esteem and judge of my
distemper, nor hope of remedy; You see Brethren, what a dangerous thing it is,
to stop or stay in things that concern Gods glory; especially to dissemble upon
any terms: What a fearful thing is it, to be near and almost a Christian?
never was the like example to this of mine; and therefore, if you be wise, you
will seriously consider thereof. O that God would let loose his hand from me;
that it were with me now, as in times past, I would scorn the threats of the
most cruel Tyrants, bear torments with invincible resolution, and glory in the
outward profession of Christ, till I wear choked in the flame, and my body
consumed to ashes.

You say, you are desperate, O Spira (said they,) why then do you not strive
with some weapon or other, violently to make an end of your life, as desperate
men use to do? Let me have a sword (said Spira,) why what would you do with it
(quoth they?) I cannot tell you (said he) what this mind would move me to,
upon occasion, nor what I would do.

They perceiving small effect of all this their labor, but rather that he grew
worse: For the avoiding of concourse of people; for every day seldom fewer then
twenty continued with him, and to stop the course of fame, which was
continually blown abroad of him; they consult to carry him back again into his
own Country; and those his friends that came to comfort him, began to take
their leaves of him: Vergerius amongst the rest, required that at their parting
they might pray together with him: Spira hardly consented, and as unwillingly
performed: For he said, My heart is estranged from God, I cannot call him
Father from my heart; all good motions are now quite gone, my heart is full of
malediction, hatred, and blasphemy against God: I find I grew more and more
hardened in heart, and cannot stoop nor help my self: Your Prayers for me shall
turn to your own benefit, they can do me no good.

Vergerius came to take his leave of him, whom Spira embracing, said, Although
I know that nothing can bring any benefit to me a Reprobate; but that every
thing shall tend to my deeper condemnation: yet I give you most hearty thanks,
for your kind office of love and good will; and the Lord return it unto you,
with a plentiful increase of all good.

The next day being brought down to his intended journey, by the way looking
round about him with a ghastly look, he saw a knife lying on a Table, to which
he running hastily, snatched hold of, as intending to mischief himself; but his
friends laying hold of him, stopped him in his purpose: whereupon with
indignation, he said, I would I were above God, for I know he will have no
mercy on me.

Thus went he homewards, often saying, that he envyed the condition of Cain and
Judas: He lay about eight weeks in this case, in a continual burning, neither
desiring, nor receiving any thing but by force, and that without disgestion: so
spent, that he appeared a perfect Anatomy; expressing to the view, nothing but
sinews and bones: vehemently raging for drink; ever pining, yet fearful to live
long: dreadful of Hell, yet coveting death: in a continual torment, yet his own
tormentor: And thus consuming himself with grief and horror, impatience and
despair, like a living man in hell; he represented an extraordinary example of
the justice and power of God. And thus (as far as appears) within a few days
after his arrival at his own home, he departed this present life: Yet an
occasion to make us remember, That secret things belong unto the Lord our God;
but charity to man, to teach him to hope all things.

EXtraordinary Examples of Divine Justice, God never intended for a nine days
wonder; else would he, when he exemplified Lots wise, have turned her into a
statue of melting snow, not of lasting salt; which stood, as Josephus tells us,
till his age, after the destruction of Jerusalem; and as some Travelers
report, till at this day: ut quoddam hominibus praestares condimentium, quo
sapiant unde illud caveatur exemplum: Aug. de. civic. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 30 for
a season against corruption, a preservative against Apostasy. This Tragedy,
when fresh and new, was the conversion, and confirmation of sundry Worthies:
Vergerius, a daily spectator thereof, forsaking a rich Bishoprike of
Iustinopolie, and tents of Antichrist, went to Basil, and dyed a worthy
Protestant: many Nations had Eyewitnesses of their own Students, then in the
University of Padua, who penned the Story, the Copies whereof are frequently
revived; our English ones were very defective, and now worn out of shops and
hands; sundry Manuscripts of this abroad, imperfect; which moved me to compare
this labor of a worthy Gentleman (who faithfully translated it out of Italian,
French and Dutch letters) with the Latin of Coelius Secundus, Curio, Mattheus*
Gribaldus, professors of the Civil Law in Padua: Sigesmond Gelous a
Transilvanian, Henricus Scotus, all daily visitors of Spira, and find it accord
with them. Touching Spira's person, I find most learned writers do incline to
the right and hopeful hand; moved by his sweet, humble, and charitable
speeches; some few desperate ones excepted, that fell from him in some little
agonies, which kept him fasting and watching about six months space eating
nothing but what was forced down his throat. The sum of Calvin's and Borrhaus
their counsels (who writ largely of the use of this pattern) is, that all learn
to take heed of backsliding, which God soul abhors, and not to dally with
Conscience, and hell on earth, if justly incensed; more to be feared then the
Spanish Inquisition, or all the Strappadoes and torments in the world; and to
take heed of Spira's principal Errors; which were, to dispute with Satan
over-busily in time of weakness; especially to reason, and conclude from
present sense, to Gods past Reprobation, and future Damnation; both which is
hard, if possible, for any man to determine in his own, much more in others
cases: so commending thee to his grace, who is able to establish thee to the
end; I bid thee farewell, and hope well, while the space of Grace lasts; Dum
spiras, spera; so may thou take good and no hurt, by the reading of this
terrible Example.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Tho: Wykes. R: P: Episc: Land: Cap: domest.
Decmb. 2. 1637.

