A GUIDE TO HEAVEN.

Containing the MARROW OF THE Holy Fathers, AND Ancient Philosophers.

Written in Latin by John Bona, a Cistercian Abbot: and in English, by T. V. a
Benedictine Monk.

Printed in the Year 1672.

modern bookplate Ex libris Bibliothecce Domesticce (...) TOWNELEY de Towneley
(...) Lancastren^i Armigeri Anno Aetatis: 73 Anno Domini 1702


A PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Am here to tell you two things, Courteous Reader, in the Frontispiece of
this little Book: For in the first place, I fear lest some will accuse me of
Impudence and Rashness, saying, How presumest thou to lead men to Heaven, who
art totally tied to the Earth? Or with what Confidence can thou undertake to
describe Virtue to others, who thy self do not practice it? Moreover, what
New Thing do thou bring us in this thy Composition? Surely thou fastidiously
and rudely repeatest the same Old Matter, which has been already Learnedly and
Elegantly treated of, by almost a numberless number of Writers; and by a proud
Lie, make Ostentation of other men's Riches, as if they were thy own.

By these and such like expressions, some will perchance strive to undervalue
my endeavors: But first of all, I will excuse my self with that Prudent man's
saying; I take upon me the property of a Whetstone, which although it self
cannot cut, can sharpen the Iron. Then I will make use of another Wise man's
Words; I am not so presumptuous, as being my self Sick, to undertake the Cure
of others; but as one lying in the same Hospital, I discourse with you
concerning our common Distemper, and communicate my Remedies. Do you therefore
so hear me, as if I talked with my self; for I admit you into my secrecy. I
here profess my self a learning Disciple, instructing my own self, and not a
teaching Master: for these are done mutually, and whilst men Teach, they Learn.

As to what is objected in the second place, I can no otherwise answer it, than
by ingenuously acknowledging, that here is little of my own, much of others. I
have heaped many things together, either which I learned by my own Experience,
or which I perceived would profit me, as I perused the Writings of the Holy
Fathers, and of the Ancient Philosophers. But after the manner of Bees, I
reduced the several Sweets into one Savor, intermixing some things in the
proper Words of the Authors, and adding the rest in my own style, which I
desired should be facile, and devoid of ornament: for I here teach to Do, not
to Speak.

You have then in this small Volume, a certain Abridgment and Breviate, of all
the Moral Institutions delivered by the Holy Fathers, in order to live well and
happily. You have the best Resolves of Seneca, Epictetus, Antoninus, and the
rest of the Sages. And I thought good to set down in brief such wholesome
Admonitions, as I found efficacious in the Cure of my own Maladies, omitting
the citation of the places from whence I collected them. These are the Souls
Remedies, not the Wits Recreations; nor do I here intend pleasure, but profit.
The sick Person questions not who mingled his Potion, or where the Ingredients
were gathered, so long as they cure his distemper. I have omitted many things
which I could have produced; many which I might have more subtily explicated:
but it is better to have a few Precepts of Wisdom in a readiness for present
use, then to learn many, and not to have them at hand for your daily practice.
He has learned much, who knows, how much is enough for his Salvation.

God Grant, that this my labor, such as it is, may be highly profitable to
all, but chiefly to my self; lest my Sayings, not seconded by my Actions, may
make me ashamed.

ERRATA.
Page 10. l. 15. add him.

Page 46. l. 19. broke.

Page 159. l. 7. another.

Page 159. l. 8. there is, read there.

Page 159. l. 11. apprehend, read reprehend.

Page 159. l. 18. Wisman, read Wise man.

A GUIDE TO HEAVEN. CONTAINING The Marrow of the Holy Fathers, and of the
Ancient Philosophers.
CHAP. I. Of Man's last End. What an Evil it is, to swerve from it. The Means
and Method to come to it.
1. MY design is, to direct you, (whosoever you are that read this) to Heaven;
to that good (I say) which being obtained, you can desire no more. This is the
main Mark and Butt, at which all men's Vows are by a natural propension
levelled. All have a will to be happy: but through the fault of the first
Parent, many becoming purblind, have left the true and prime good, and
unfruitfully applied themselves to the pursuit of false and sophisticated
Objects. And these mistaken persons, fancying the chief Good to consist in
wanting Nothing, have given this Name to Riches; others, placing the chief Good
in greatest Power, strive either to King it themselves, or to get near to them
who Govern. And some there are, who descending to sordid matters, imagine it
the highest happiness to wallow in pleasures, measuring the possession of the
Supreme Good, by the Ell of Carnal delights, and Gluttony: So basely do these
men judge of Beatitude. Thus laboring in vain, and wandering as it were in a
labyrinth, by how the swiftlier they hasten to Good, by so much the farther
they are from it; in this most unhappy, because they know not their unhappiness.

2. This is the thing, miserable man, which involves thee in great evils, that
thou indeed desire to live happily, and to dye happily; but art foolish and
blind in seeing what true happiness is, and how it may be had, vainly seeking
it by many bywayes. Whatsoever thou do, whatsoever thou desire, whatsoever
thou endeavourest is against thee. For thou eyest not that immense Good,
wherein thy Will should rest, because there is nothing above the highest: but
thou roamest abroad without design, like the Ants creeping up and down amongst
the Shrubs, climbing up to the top, and then descending empty to the bottom.
God the maker of all things, created thee of Nothing, that thou should love
him only, serve him only, with thy whole intention, with thy whole affection:
As it is necessary for him to be, so it is necessary he should be thy last End.
Think seriously how great a part of thy life thou give to him, to whom thou
should give the whole. Thy Studies and Counsels err, if they are not to him
directed. As the end of thy Journey is the place to which thou tendest, whither
being arrived thou reposest; so the end of thy life is God, to whom thou art to
referr whatsoever thou think, whatsoever thou speak, whatsoever thou
actest, till he being obtained, all thy tendencies are completed. Whatsoever
withdraws thee from this thy last End, draws thee to eternal destruction.

3. As in a Sea-voyage, if perchance the Ship stopping, thou leapest overboard
to refresh thy self on the shore, and there in the mean time gatherest Shells
or Bullrushes; yet thy mind will still be solicitously attentive to the Ship,
lest the Governor should call thee away; for then quitting all, thou must
speedily repair to the Vessel: Even so thou must behave thy self in thy Life:
Having thy Mind evermore fixed upon God, thou art to use external things in
such sort, as never to let them touch thy heart, nor divert thy attendency to
thy proposed End: They serve thee, that thou may serve God. Otherwise falling
from the Divine Unity, thou art scattered abroad amongst many not necessary
things, and worshippest as many Idols, as there are creatures which thou
adherest to, with a disordered affection. These are thy Gods, to whom by a foul
Sacrilege thou sacrificest not an Ox, not a Goat, but thy self, and thy
Salvation. The law of Love permits not any thing to be beloved with God, but
only in God, and for God. It Is the highest damage, to deflect from the
chiefest Good, and adhere to the Creatures.

4. That which the Prince of Physicians pronounces of impure Bodies, By how
much the more they are nourished, by so much the more they are endamaged, is to
be said also of Souls: For they who begin to pass from a bad custom to a better
condition, must first vomit up the Venom of their wicked life, and then ingest
into their purified Minds, the solid Aliments of Virtues. And this Purgation is
thus to be performed: All committed sins are to be expiated; all affections
toward them are to be banished; all vicious Customs are to be eradicated; all
evil Propensions and immoderate Appetites, are to be subjected to the Empire of
Reason: The Flesh is to be chastised: Corporal Necessities are to be reduced to
a just moderation: The Tongue and Senses are to be bridled: whatsoever may put
a stop or delay to the speedy ascending to the mountain top of Virtue, must be
totally exterminated. What dreadest thou, and why do thou fancy the way
showed thee to Felicity, to be so full of difficulties? Thou may make thy
self happy; he supplying thee with strength, who is thy Beginning and thy End.
But thou must go forth of thy self, that thou may get to him. Thou will be to
him so much the nearer, by how much thou art from thy self more remote.

5. The first thing thou art to propose to thy self, is, What thou desire,
and Whither thou tendest; Then the way is to be considered, by which thou may
obtain that chief Good; and in thy journey thou will understand what progress
thou daily make. Take a serious survey of thy Conscience, and opening thy dim
eyes, see impartially what thou art, and what thou ought to be. 'Twill be
too late to discover the deceit, when thou can not avoid it. Learn by what
Remedy the madness of Cupidities is tamed; with what Bridle the cruelty of Fear
is curbed. Practice the contempt of earthly things, and depart freely from what
thou can not long possess. Leave all, before thou art left by all; that when
death shall come, it may find nothing in thee, which it can destroy: But be
sure to employ thy chief care upon thy Soul, and let not that which is first in
excellency, be the last in thy solicitude; What avails it for a man to gain the
whole world, and suffer shipwreck of his Soul? There Is no Gain, where there is
a loss of Salvation.

CHAP. II. Who so desires to live well, must make choice of an Instructor. What
manner of man this ought to be. The Duties of a Disciple.
1. NOthing is more necessary to one beginning to serve God, than to permit
himself to be governed and directed by a discreet Master. For who adventures
upon an unknown Journey, without a Guide? Who can learn a difficult Trade,
without a Teacher? Thou shall find very few, who without any ones help, have
raised up themselves to the height of Virtue. What ought generally to be done
by all, may be communicated to persons who are absent, and transmitted to
posterity by Writings: but when and how each particular thing is to be
practiced, cannot be directed at a distance; deliberation must be made with the
things themselves. A Physician cannot by Letter prescribe to his Patient the
just measure of his Diet, and time of taking his Potion: the Vein must be
touched, and the Pulse felt. So also in curing the Souls maladies, there are
certain Symptoms which cannot be perceived but by one present. St. Paul, the
designed Doctor of the Gentiles, after he was converted by Christ, was directed
to Ananias, that he might learn from him the way of life. Thou have undertaken
a hard and laborious task, to conquer the perversity of Nature, to wrestle with
Spiritual wickednesses, and to bring thy self to Virtue, amidst so many
impeding obstacles: it therefore behooves thee to call in some charitable
Neighbor to thy aid, who may lend thee his helping hand, who may show thee the
dangers, who may discover the deceits, and in the doubtful day of battle
instruct thee how to gain the victory. But whom (say thou) must I call in to
my help? Surely a man both Faithful and Prudent; one who is both willing and
able to assist thee; one whose presence thou reverencest, not dreadest; one who
will not chastise thy failings, but redress them; one whose life is more
approved on by the Eyes, than by the Ears. He commands ill, who commands and
acts not.

2. Make choice of him for thy Helper, who will not flatter thee; who intrudes
not into vulgar conversation; who frequents not the Rich men's Feasts, nor the
Princes Courts; who has in his Life and Manners some such thing as the
Goldsmith has in his moneys, so that he can say, show me any Coin, I can
discern it; bring before me any Affection, I will judge and censure it: who
like a well-experienc'd Physician, can discover internal discases, and apply
proper Remedies to redress all the Souls distempers. Let him be such a one, as
can by a subtle scrutiny discern the secrets of all Spirits, distinguish
between Virtues and Vices, accommodate himself to every ones manners, dive into
all the Recesses of thy Interior, is free from all depraved affection, aiming
only at thy Spiritual advancement. One (I say) who in the Spirit of Meekness
knows how to instruct and allure, how to detect and elude all the Devils crafts
and stratagems; and finally, one to whom thou needst not be ashamed to lay open
all the secrets of thy heart and soul. It Is a great part of thy Happiness, to
find out such a Friend.

3. With him discourse willingly; and commit to his prudent examination, and
discussion, whatsoever thou have within thee of perverse propension, and not
only whatsoever thou do amiss, but also whatsoever good thou performest, and
whatsoever thou conceitest to be communicated unto thee from Heaven. Entreat
him earnestly, that if he observes in thee any turbulent affection, he will
vouchsafe to show it unto thee; and that he will please to do it frequently and
freely, not dissembling thy Vices, out of shamefacedness or fear of reproving
thee. But if he denies to see in thee any thing worthy his severer censure,
beware lest thou thereupon fancy thy self inculpable: For he is silent, either
as apprehending thy hatred, or as despairing of thy amendment. Then do thou
urge him with greater instance and vehemence; and show by thy actions, how much
thou desire to profit by his reprehensions. Begin to depose with thy
imperfections, and compose thy Life according to his Prescript. Rejoice that he
reviles thy impiety; and depart always from him either sound, or in the way to
it. Amongst so many maladies, it is something to have a Will to be cured.

4. These are the mutual offices, of the Teacher and of the Learner, that the
one should have a will to profit, the other a desire to practice: That the
Instructor should not profit, scarcely any thing can hinder, but the
refractoriness of the Disciple, who may want patience to learn, or a capacity
to be cured. For some there are, who relying upon their own prudence, refuse to
follow any other man's dictamen: All these things (say they) which you
inculcate, I know already: What avails it then to tell me what is before
manifest? Yes, very much: For thou sometimes know, but do not attend,
reflect, consider. This new Admonition intends not to inform thy Understanding,
but to excite thy Memory. The Mind oft-times dissembles things which are
apparent, and therefore the knowledge of things most known, must be often
suggested unto it: For Virtue is crected when it is touched and pressed. A filly
shamefacedness withholds some; which is surely a Childish Vice, and unworthy a
man: Others, as if they were frantic, suppress their inward maladies by a
pertinacious silence, and grow angry at the Physician who goes about to cure
them. This noxious taciturnity, proceeds undoubtedly from the persuasion of the
Internal Enemy, hoping to hurt so long as he lurks undiscovered. And surely
thou blushest not to expose thy bodily wounds to the open view of such
beholders as may cure them; but thou industriously coverest thy Souls Ulcers,
as if to conceal them, were to cancel them; and yet it can hardly be avoided,
but that notwithstanding thy endeavors to the contrary, they will betray
themselves. Who so covers his wound, can never be cured.

5. Does the Physician injure thee, if he shows thee thy infirmity? If he tells
thee, Thou art dangerously sick, Thou have a Fever, Thou must this day abstain
from such and such food, this day thou must drink water: This plain dealing is
esteemed a favor, and thanks are given him for his freedom. But if any one
tells thee, Thy Appetites are exorbitant, Thy Opinions are vain, Thy Affections
are immoderate, thou presently exclaimest, O affront not to be endured! Unhappy
man! what damage or detriment does this zealous Admonisher and Instructor
bring unto thee? That surely, which a Looking-glass does to a deformed Face: It
shows thee what thou art. Correct then what he reproves, amend thy manners,
scour off thy filthiness. Thou may easily, if thou will, render thy self to
all beholders eyes, irreprehensible.

CHAP. III. Of Purgation from sin. All affection to sin is to be laid aside,
and Vice is to be rooted out. No remedy is more efficacious against Vice, than
the consideration of Death and Eternity.
1. MAn deviates from his last end, when he commits Sin, which is the cause of
all Evils. From this seed, springs all that torments us: with this Poison the
whole world is infected. It lies closely hidden whilst it is doing, but when
it is done, thou will understand how bad it is. Some there were, who joined the
bodies of dead men to the living, to torment them with the stench: A like
punishment befalls sinners; their torment is fast tied to them, they know not
wither to fly from it: Unless thou will endure something that thou may not do
evil, thou will endure much because thou have done it. A bad action is scarcely
conceived, and presently it becomes the Parent of its own punishment. From
thence Death derives its birth, from thence Hellfire is enkindled. The
Conscience is therefore to be cleansed from all crimes, by Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction. Nor are the more grievous faults only to be
avoided, but the very least and lightest, which though they bring not Death,
yet by degrees they dissolve the strength, and insensibly dispose to mortal
impiety: And what is the difference in a Shipwreck, whether the Vessel is
overwhelmed with one wave, or whether the water soaking in drop after drop, and
carelessly let alone, fills it at last, and sinks it to the bottom? And these
give by so much a greater blemish to our manners, by how much they might more
easily have been avoided. The weaker the Enemy is, the greater is the shame to
be overcome by him.

2. Thou will never be able to plant Virtues in thy mind, and to re-establish
thy self in thy former state of Liberty, unless thou put off all affection
toward Sin, although the very least: lest thy body being in the wilderness,
thy mind should be in Egypt. It fares ill with thee, if after thou have
dismissed all injuries, after thou have abandoned all beastly loves, thou yet
give ear to bad discourses, and art yet delighted with earthly beauties. For
the evil habits of Vices, which still remain, though the fault is remitted,
must be entirely rooted out, as being the bad progeny of thy former
prevarication. If thou only loppest off the Branches, the Root will again put
forth new Scions of Iniquity. Thou say, thou will cut off Vices: It Is false,
for thou shuttest not the door against them, but only put it too. Thou
say, thou art offended at the foulness of thy former life; I believe it, for
who is not offended at it? Bad men both love and hate their Vices; yea, they
detest them even when they do them: But what avails it to reject them in words,
and in deeds to embrace them? No man has a Conscience so seared, but that he
sometimes loathes his Vices, and yet he soon after shakes hands with them. But
he who is truly converted to God, applies the Hatchet to the Root, and pares
away the smallest hairs of his Vices: And then reflecting upon his frailty, he
industriously shuns all occasion of sinning; and at every object of evil, he
tremblingly leaps back and abhorrs it.

3. Why do thou vainly trifle, and opposest the infirmity of Nature to God,
commanding the extermination of Vices? None better knows the measure of thy
forces, than he who freely bestowed them: Why then do thou not presently
obey, since not the Commanders profit, but thy own is intended? O blind, and
impious temerity! Thou dare cast dirt in Gods face, by affirming that to be
hard which he enjoins; as if he should impose Precepts upon thee, which thou
can not perform, and seem by commanding thee, not to have intended thy
Salvation, but thy punishment: Such is man's perversity, to deserve ill of God,
and to feign to himself labor in his Precepts. But if thou will make trial of
thy strength, thou shall find thy self able to do more then thou imaginedst:
Not because the contest is difficult, thou dare not; but because thou dare
not, the contest seems difficult: Many things which before seemed terrible,
have by use been made easy and familiar. Begin and do not undervalue thy self.
God deserts not his Soldiers. Thou shall have as much strength as thou
desire.

4. Thou will easily vanquish all Vices, if thou believe every Day to be the
last of thy Life. What is it that fastens thee to this world? it is that thou
seldom considerest how soon thou must leave it. Dead Carcasses pass daily to
the Graves before thy eyes, which force thee, who forgettest thy Mortality, to
look upon Death: And yet thou, amidst these frequent Funerals, think of
nothing less, than thine own departure: Thou beholdest nothing more commonly,
and forgettest nothing more easily: But the day will come which will separate
thee from the fellowship of thy stinking Belly: This cloud will then be
dispersed; and thou will then perceive thou livedst in darkness, when thou
beholdest the light. Produce, if thou can, of so many elapsed years, one only
day to witness thy sincere Virtue, which was not blemished with some defect:
Thy Younger Age was spent amongst Play-games, Nutts, and Nifles; thy Youthful
days amongst Lusts and Fopperies; thy Manly time amongst greater crimes, and
wickednesses: and after all the Years, which have flowed from thy Cradle to thy
gray Hairs, nothing now remains but the sad fruits of Iniquity. Ah! what
straits will thou be in, when what is past will shame thee, and what is to come
will affright thee? What will thy Riches then profit thee, got with such sweat,
kept with such solicitude? What fleshly and filthy Pleasures, what the vain and
empty Names of Honors and Dignities, what Purple Robes, Scepters, and Crowns?
O, were it permitted to return to thy Childish Innocence, and to begin the
spinning of a new Thread, how much better would thou behave thy self? But
these vows and wishes are unseasonable in that fatal moment. If thou will make
use of time, begin even now: and forsake such things, as thou will then wish
thou had forsaken. It Is a small matter to renounce momentary trifles, for the
obtaining of eternal Treasures.

5. Ask, if thou please, of a dying person, what he thinks of his past life:
thou shall hardly find one, who has not then a far different opinion of
Riches, Dignities, and Worldly Vanities, then he had whilst he was healthy: At
that time all things are weighed in a more equal Balance, and are judged of as
they truly are. Thus their over-late wisdom may turn to thy great profit, if
thou will learn by other men's Errors to correct thy own. Thou may now sail
safely, why stayest thou till the weather grows tempestuous? Thou may during
the calm, withdraw thy self from calamity, why do thou reserve thy self for
extreme danger? Precaution is too late when thou art drowned, and Prudence is
to no purpose when thou art already perished. The greatest and holiest Men,
having put away all impediments, and bid adieu to themselves and to the whole
world, made it their only study, during the remainder of their Earthly
Pilgrimage, to learn how to live and how to dye: and yet many of them
professing their ignorance, departed this life; so difficult a matter it is to
understand this Art. And will thou delay till Old Age the laying hold of
wholesome Counsels, and there begin thy life, where few have produced theirs?
It Is a great Folly to begin then to live, when we must necessarily cease to
live.

6. Whither do thou throw thy self, unwary man? Do thou believe thus, and
do thou thus live? Thy time is the passing-by of a shadow, thy life is a
Point, and can any thing be less than a Point? Scarcely born, thou ceasest to
be. Stop one only day, forbid one only hour from flowing, command time to make
only a short stay: Vain is thy endeavor; for it will sooner snatch thee along
with it, then cease to run most swiftly to the destruction of thee and all
other things whasoever. And do thou prefer this moment before Eternity which
has no period? O Folly! O Phrensey! thou omittest not to get for thy Body,
which is quickly to perish, what appertains to it, and there is no end of thy
acquisition: but for thy Soul, which never dies, thou make no provision for
the future, as if it were none of thine? Thy Body languishes, and thou art
ready to undergo any danger to cure it: Thy Soul languishes, and thou
neglectest it, and art insensible of its sickness? When was it told thee, Hoise
thy sails lest thou perish, and thou delayedst to do it? Take this bitter
Physic, and thou refusedst? God enjoins easy things, that thou may live for
ever, and will thou not obey? Had thou a Lawsuit, all thy thoughts, all thy
discourses would be employed about it, nor would thou omit any means, whereby
the Judge might be moved to give sentence on thy side: and the last Judgment
drawing near, upon which an Eternity depends, do thou laugh, do thou
trifle, do thou sin, being to perish eternally? Ah! leave at last to be mad,
and getting forth of the Puddle of thy impieties, put thy self daily in such a
posture, as if thou were arrived at the last end of thy life. This is true
Philosophy; to lead this soul out of the body with all possible security.

7. Let this be thy business, this thy Cessation, this thy Labor, this thy
Rest, to withdraw thy self from Time and drown thy self in Eternity. That
stands always fixed and unmovable, which is asserted into the rights of
Eternity. The covetous Glutton after so many Ages, demands still a drop of
water, and he shall vainly ask it with a perpetual bellowing. Eternity is an
evermore present duration, never to be named without a sigh and horror: It Is a
Wheel always turning: It Is a continued, unterminated, and still commencing
Beginning. The serious thought of it, mixes Wormwood with the Worlds delights;
and dejects astonished, and (as it were) Planet-strucken men with deadly
sorrow. This tames the stubborn Soul, and from the vain cares in which it lies
slumbring, rowses it up to Virtue: This seasons hunger and thirst, makes all
labor seem easy, all sorrow sweet, all punishment pleasant, and all
difficulties of short durance. Let the vast spaces of Heaven, as they are every
where immensely extended, be filled with Numerical Notes; who besides God
himself, will be found able to express this almost Infinite series of Numbers?
Yet these innumerable Numbers are not so much as the Beginning of Eternity. Let
so many Years, so many Ages slide away, as there are Unites in all those
Numbers, nothing yet is cut off from Eternity. Those most unfortunate Mortals,
who lie perpetually frying in Hellfire, are not yet arrived at the beginning
of this astonishing Eternity. If thou tremblest not at this Consideration, if
thou fallest not upon a ferious amendment of thy life, thou surely out-viest
the hardest Flint in obduracy.

CHAP. IV. Of Gluttony. Its Evils. Its Remedies. The signs of its being
conquered.
1. THe first War thou art to wage, is against the vice of Gluttony, which
furnishes matter to the rest. Gluttony gave a beginning to the death both of
our Bodies and Souls: For our first Parents by eating the forbidden Apple, slew
all men before they begot them. Now the Enemies of Souls make use of the same
Bait, that by weakening all our vigor, they may worry us, and trample on us.
Hence spring Stupidity, Tepidity, Tediousness: hence Scurrility, Loquacity,
Dissolution: hence Vneleanness, Brawls, Contentions: hence dullness of mind,
drowsiness of spirit, destruction of all virtue: hence profusion, poverty, a
long chain of diseases, and death it self, hastened by an over-heavy burden of
undigested victuals. There are few infirm persons, whom Gluttony drove not to
their diseases: For if the Body abounds not with bad humors, engendered by the
excess of meat and drink, although it may be attempted by a sickness, yet it
cannot be subdued by it. Gluttony kills more than the Sword.

2. O the base servitude of the Belly! O insatiable Cupidity! Nature has given
thee no great body, and thou exceedest the greediness of the greatest and most
gluttonous Animals. A Bull is fed with the herbage of a few Acres: one Wood
nourishes many Elephants: but the World seems little to thee; whatsoever flies
in the Air, whatsoever swims in the Sea, whatsoever runs in the Forests, do
not satisfy thy ravenous appetite. Cast an eye into Noblemens Kitchens, and
contemplate the Cooks running busily up and down amongst those many fires; look
upon the sweating numbers of Men and Maidservants; consider the slaughters of
the Fowl, and the Sawces swimming in Wine; observe with what industry they
order the Plates, with what art they marshal the Messes, place the Dishes, and
execute their respective employments: You would scarcely believe it were to
feed one only Family, that the Wine of so many Consuls and Kingdoms is drawn
out, that the Table is furnished with so great magnificency. I do not advise
thee to withdraw nouriture from thy Belly: It is froward, it may not be
contradicted, it stands in need of daily sustenance: But a subtle and deceitful
snare of Concupiscence lies here concealed, which frequently fetters the Soul,
and upon pretense of Necessity, provides Fuel to foment Pleasure. Will thou
know with how little Hunger is extinguished? Count thy self, measure thy body,
consult thy stomach. Thou will find that not to be necessary, which exceeds the
measure. A little suffices Nature, nothing satisfies Luxury.

3. Hunger is not ambitious, but is content to leave off, not caring wherein it
ceases. The momentary judgment of the Pallat being past, the precious relishes
no better than that which is common, and good cheap. If thou art hungry, thou
must eat; if thirsty, thou must drink: but whether the Bread is made of
ordinary Corn, or of the finest Flower; whether the Water is fetched from the
next Fountain, or refreshed with cooling Snow, Nature is not at all concerned.
This one thing she commands, that Hunger be appeased, that Thirst be quenched;
Fishes, caught in the upper and lower Sea; sought in the Lakes and Rivers;
Birds, brought down from Heaven; Beasts, surprised in the Woods and Forests;
several sorts of Tastpleasing Wines; and all the curious seasonings of Apicius,
are the torments of unhappy Luxury. Epicurus commends a sober Diet, even for
pleasures sake. Nothing is so dainty, which satiety renders not insipid:
nothing so unsavory, which hunger makes not delicious. Would thou be freed
from all superfluous care of Meat and Drink? Consider thy end. Thou must
shortly dye, and this Body pampered with such variety of curiosities, must
serve for food to filthy Worms. Ponder for what Guests thou preparest a Feast;
and so nurture thy Flesh, as not to oppress thy Mind. Make use of such meat as
may easily be had, and every where met withal, without impoverishing thy
Patrimony, or prejudicing thy Health. A mannerly and welltutor'd Belly, is a
great part of Liberty. We understood not how many things are superfluous, till
they began to be wanting. The Body stands in need of nourishment, not of
Junkets or Dainties.

4. But there is no cause to praise thy self, if thou only despisest
superfluities. Then thou art praiseworthy, when thou contemnest necessaries:
when thou can persuade thy self, that brown Bread, and Wine weakened with
Water suffice for thy sustenance; when thou have learned, that Herbs were not
provided only for Beasts, but for men also. Then I admire thee, when in taking
thy Refection, thou intendest the bare necessity of Nature, the only reparation
of thy Forces, the sole glory of God: when thou come unwillingly to the
Table, and take thy meat as sick persons take a Medicine: when thou strivest
to curb and moderate (since thou can not totally hinder) the pleasure of thy
Taste: when it is irksome to thee to admit any thing which is extraordinary, by
reason of thy infirmity: when finally, thou have obtained perfect purity both
of Mind and Body. For the proof of Abstinence, consists not in the attenuation
of the Body, but in the perfection of Chastity.

CHAP. V. Of Luxury. How foul a vice it is. How easy is the Relapse into it,
and how it may be avoided. The Pleasure of the Mind, which is solid, is to be
sought after.
1. NO Vice is filthier then this, nor of which we may be more ashamed. The
very Name of it is not without ignominy, as the Apostle intimated, when he
commanded, that such matters should not so much as be named amongst us. Hence
proceeds that shamefacedness, which seizes upon ingenuous and modest persons,
if they suspect, that having committed any such crime of Uncleanness, it is
come to the knowledge of others. Hence it is, that some conceal the slippery
Errors of their Youth, from the Minister of Christ in the Tribunal of Penance;
choosing rather to undergo eternal torments with eternal disgrace after their
Death, than the imaginary infamy of this Vice in their Lifetime. He that is
mir'd in this Puddle, scarcely gets loose from it. His Salvation is desperate,
who is infected with this disease. For what can hurmane forces here do? No one
can be Continent, unless God gives it.

2. The first Remedy therefore of this Malady, is fervent Prayer to the Divine
Majesty; that he, who only has the power, will please to purisie and preserve
thee. Then thou art to repress all impure imaginations in their very first
access, with such speed, as thou would shake off a burning Coal from thy
Garment. The Castle is ready to be delivered up, when the Governor gives way
to discourse with the Enemy. All occasion of Evil is also to be cut off,
proceeding from Idleness, from Gluttony, from all impure Objects, from the
Society and Conversation of bad people; nor is there any thing to be neglected
in this wrestling conflict. There are certain Relics of this Vice, remaining
even in Just men, which must be entirely rooted out: There lies hid a certain
hissing Serpent, there are certain petty-affections, which although not
absolutely evil, yet they are Preludiums to Sin; to which, (if thou do not
presently break them off) thy bewitched fancy will insensibly adhere. Thou will
never become Great, if thou slightest these small things. Great matters take
their beginnings from little occasions.

3. Above all, thou must beware, lest an overgreat Confidence in thy self
deceives thee: Whosoever fears not, is already fallen. How many, and how great
Men, after Confessions and Conquests, after Signs and Wonders, have suffered
Shipwreck, by the unwary aspect of a Woman? I produce not here the so often
spoken of Examples of Samson, David, and Solomon: There are others more recent
and daily. And were there none abroad, thou have within thy own breast enough
to blush at, enough to teach thee not to be highly Wise, but to Fear. Is it not
an extreme madness, amongst so many documents of all Ages and Nations, yet to
presume, and not to shun the danger? But this is evermore the incredulity of
Humane obstinacy, never to give credit to other men's fallings, till he sees
himself perishing. God made the Woman to be Man's helper; but by the Serpents
cunning, she acts the person of an Enemy. There Is nothing in her but what
strikes, what scorches, what murders. There Is no Hyaena, no Basilisk can be
compared with her Voice and Eyes. Ah, fly from her sight, avoid her discourse,
whosoever thou art that desire thy own Salvation. She retains her old custom,
always driving Man out of Paradise.

4. It Is a common thing here to pretend many excuses of Necessity, of Custom,
of Pure Intention: But great Evils lurk under the show of Good: For from thence
burst out hurtful liberties, unwary speeches, light behaviors, a neglect of
modesty, frequent gifts, and certain merriments; by all which purity is by
degrees laid aside, and at last all shame is quite put off. These things
increase by internals; and he who blushingly abhorred the bare footsteps of a
Woman, now beholds her lascivious eyes, and her discovered breast with a
constant countenance; and the blandishing poison working within him, he first
suffers the damage, before he was sensible of the danger. Thus the eye of
Reason begins by little and little to grow dim, and afterward becomes totally
blinded. Thus the Soul formed for Heaven, is fastened to the Earth, unmindful of
God, forgetful of its own good, till the flame of Concupiscence is at last
swallowed up in the Fire, which is to burn for all Eternity. O wretches! whose
loathsome and momentary pleasures, have so sad and lamentable an end! I think
they are all drunk with the juice of Sardonian Herbs; they dye, and they laugh.

5. What seek thou, Fond Man, devoid of counsel at home, and despising that
of others abroad! Pleasures? God has laid up eternal Pleasures for thee in
Heaven. Will thou have the deceitful ones of this world, and be excluded from
the Eternal? Where Is thy Reason, where thy Prudence? Look into Heaven, and
contemplate all its most blessed Inhabitants. They heretofore mingled their
Bread with Ashes, their Drink with Tears. Thou might have seen them in the
world oppressed on every side with anguishes, drowned always in Tears,
evermore watchful in Prayer, separated from all earthly joy and pleasure: They
made their way to Heaven by Gibbets, Swords, and Crosses. Then cast an eye into
Hell, and take a view of that desperate crew of the damned, lying there buried
in that dark dungeon of perpetually burning fires. These heretofore embracing
the worlds false Joys, and following their fleshly delights, now too late
acknowledge how pernicious were all their pleasures. Contemplate seriously
these things; and if thou believe, be afraid. That which delights, is
momentary; that which torments, eternal.

6. But if pleasure is the thing thou lookst for even in this life: why do
thou not rather embrace that which is pure, solid, substantial, permanent,
proceeding from a well composed mind, that so thou may take delight in what
is truly thy own? The Pleasure of the Flesh is soft, frail, farded, evermore
moistened with Wine and Ointments, and dreading to be published. Its station,
the Stews, Taverns, and such places as fear the Censor. If it outwardly shines,
it is within most miserable. When it begins, it is gone: and in the very use of
it, it perishes. Whereas the peaceable, sublime, unconquerable pleasure of the
Mind, is always secure and permanent, neither accompanied with satiety, nor
followed with Repentance. No shame waits on it, no sorrow pursues it, nor does
it ever forsake its possessor. If thou desire to enjoy this, all Carnal
allurements must be conquered. For true Pleasure consists in despising all
Pleasure.

CHAP. VI. Of Avarice. Its malice is sharply reproved. The comparison between a
Poor and a Rich person. The deceit and vanity of Riches.
1. THis is the greatest imposture of Avarice, which thou art to foreknow, that
thou may not be cheated: It hides it self; nor shall thou find any one who
will confess himself to be Covetous. That man gathers riches together, that he
may make a provision for himself and his Children: This man, that he may have
wherewithal to help the Poor in their necessity: Another, that he may redeem
his sins by Works of Charity. But none of these distribute their heaps of Gold;
on the contrary, they make new additions daily unto the former, and whilst time
is spent in these acquisitions, their Life slides away, for the support whereof
these Riches were intended. As the water which the sick person beholds running
down the River, does not at all quench his thirst, unless he puts his Mouth to
it and swallows it: So nothing can satiate a Covetous man, because his Mind, in
which Avarice resideth, can never be filled with his Gold and Treasures. A mind
capable of God, can be filled with nothing but God.

2. Let all the Riches of the whole Earth, O Govetous man, be cast into thy
clutches; let fortune raise thee far above Solomon's plenty; hide the ground
with Marble, the walls with Gold, the roofs with precious Stones; do not only
possess, but trample upon Riches: Add to this, all manner of Statua's,
Pictures, and whatsoever Art has invented to please Luxury: Thou will learn
from these to covet more. Natural desires have limits, but they which spring
from an erroneous opinion, are Infinite. What matters it how much thou have in
thy Coffers, how much in thy Barns, if thou computest not what is gotten, but
what is to be gotten? He wants the whole world, whose Cupidity the world does
not satisfy. Would to God thou would consider how great Evils Riches bring
with them, how great Goods they bereave thee of: thou would undoubtedly see
the truth of that Apostolical sentence, Covetousness is the root of all Evils:
Thence spring Couzenages, thence arise Wars, thence are hath'd Treasons. Take
away Avarice, and there is no Discord: banish Covetousness, and Ambition ceases.
This fills the Land with Thievel, the Sea with Pirates, the Towns with Tumults,
the Houses with Deceits, the Tribunals with Injustice. There is a certain
affinity and vicinity, almost in the very Name of Vitia and Divitiae, Vice and
Avarice.

3. Compare together, if you please, the Poor, and the Richman: observe both
their countenances. This, being brim-full of solicitudes, betrays by his
froward Aspect, the sadness of his mind: the other, shows by his calm and
serene looks, the sincere joy of his Soul. This man's felicity, amidst the
griefs which gnaw his heart, is only (as it were) plated over: the other man's
mind, free from sorrow, enjoys the solid pleasures of inward tranquillity. This
being still anxious to get, and fearful to lose, is exposed to all the
injuries of Fortune; and the more he has, the more he desires: the other being
rich in his poverty, and seeking only what is sufficient, fears nothing,
because he has nothing that adheres to him, nothing that can be taken from
him. What pleasant days does the Poor man lead? what peaceable nights? whereas
the Rich man being sick in mind, bears his disease always about him, and is
encompassed with Thorns, wheresoever he goes. That slumber is deadly, which
renders one insensible of sharp pricks.

4. Listen, thou wretch, who art insatiably Covetous: although thy Houses are
stately; although thou possessest vast hoards of Money; although thou have
extended thy Purchases farther than the Ocean extends its waters: yet the day
will come, yes, the day decreed from all Eternity will come, when all these
things, together with thy Life, will infallibly be taken from thee: they will
be gone, they will perish, and thou will perish with them. Then at last thou will understand what contemptible things thou admiredst, and how like thou were
to Children, who highly prize every Play-game: They are delighted with little
Pibbles found upon the shore, as having in them something of variety; and thou
runnest mad in the inquest of Ingots of Gold, and Oriental Stones; playing the
Child and Fool, at a dearer rate. I do not tell thee, thou art to have no
Riches at all, if God has made thee wealthy; but that thou enrich not thy self
with what is wrested from others, that they be not gotten by injuring of any
one, by any sordid gain, by superfluous care and solicitude: That thou admit
them into thy House, not into thy Heart; being ready to want them when God will
have it so. He is truly Rich, who wants not Riches. Expect not till a Thies or
some Accident bereaves thee of thy wealth; but do thou prevent all such
misfortunes, by robbing thy self (and bearing a mind indifferent to all
exterior things) of whatsoever others can take from thee. Thou will be thine
own, if these things are not thine.

5 Learn to lay aside all Pomp, and to regulate thy Habit and Diet, not by the
example of others, but by the morals of Christianity Poverty may raise it self
to Plenty, by calling in the assistance of Frugality. Nature desires little,
being content not to be Hungry, not to be Thirsty, not to be Cold. Thou may
dwell out of a Marble Palace; thou may be clothed though not in Silks. Can
thou not quench thy thirst, unless the Cup be made of precious Gems, or
Crystal, that so thou may both drink and fear together? Will not a knife cut
Bread, if the Haft thereof is not Ivory or Agath? Will not an Earthen Basin
receive the filth of thy washed hands? Or will not the Candle afford light,
unless it stands in the Goldsmiths work? He is a slave to Gold, who thinks
himself adorned by it. How much were it more laudable to love true Riches,
which render their owners better, of which no crossness of Fortune, nor Death
it self can bereave them? Why dreadest thou Poverty, bearing about thee a whole
Kingdom in thy heart? The Kingdom of God is within thee. Far be it from thee to
be greedy of any other Good. Seek thy own Good. No one is Good but God alone.
Let him be thy possession and thy Kingdom, in whom alone all Good things, all
rich Treasures are found. To whom God is All, the World is Nothing.

6. Whatsoever appears Neat and Great in the World, is vain, frivolous,
nothing. Why admirest thou to see a man brave it in Gold and Purple, and
attended by a numerous troop of Servants? This is but a pompous Ostentation.
All these things are showed, not possessed: and whilst they please, they pass
away. I learn not this in the Philosophers Schools; I have it not from the
Cross of Christ, nor from Gods eternal Wisdom; but from the World, from the
very Bondslaves of Vanity. Hearken to Haman, a person elevated in wealth, in
power, in honor, above all the mortals of his time. He summons Auditors
together, and plainly tells them, That all things are nothing. I think my self
to have Nothing, (says he) and he adds the cause: So long as I shall see
Mordocheus sitting at the gate of the Kings Palace. O Mockery! O Blindness! I
have often read, and heard, that all things are Nothing, being compared to
those Good things, whereof Virtue is the Parent, and Eternity the Nurse; but
here they are more vehemently depressed, where in the presence of Nothing they
seem to be Nothing. Wherefore thou do Nothing, if thou despisest Nothing.
Something which is in thy self, must be despised. Cupidity is to be curbed, and
kept as it were in chains and fetters, that thou may accustom thy self to
court Poverty, and to measure things by the use of them. Thou will easily
despise all, if thou always think of Dying.

CHAP. VII. Of Anger. The Character of an Angry person. The Effects, Causes,
Remedies of Anger.
1. I Am angry at Anger. This only Anger is just, being against a rabid and
execrable Monster, against a most implacable and turbulent affection; which if
it once invades and seizes upon a man, it scarcely leaves in him any footsteps
of humane Nature. Anger is a short madness, without power over it self; it
thirsts after Arms, Blood and Revenge; it forgets all Decorum, is unmindful of
all civility and friendship, and rushes headlong into all sorts of dangers,
that it may hurt another, much like to Ruins, which themselves are broken in
pieces, upon that which they oppress. All comeliness leaves the Choleric
person: his Eyes flame and sparkle, his Veins swell, his Hair stands on end,
his Lips shake; he grindes his Teeth, foams at Mouth, and stretches forth his
Neck to belch forth his rage and fury. No other Passion so much discomposes the
whole man: the Face is deformed, the Forehead wrinkled, the Head is tossed, the
Feet falter, the Hands clap, and all the Body moves hither and thither with an
unbecoming jactation. Add to all this the threatening Gestures, the beating of
the Breast, the stamping on the Ground, the tearing of their Hair, the rending
of their Garments, and the boiling of the Blood from the bottom of the entrails
into the Countenance. What a Mind, think thou, is there within, when as the
exterior Image appears so ugly? Such as the Poets feigned the Infernal
Monsters to be, Flaming with Fire, begirt with Serpents, and making a hideous
noise with their horrid bellowings: Such is the guise of an Angry person;
filthy, bloody, burning, cruel, and degenerating into a savage and beastial
fury. Other Vices may be concealed and covertly cherished: Anger puts it self
forward and flies in the Face, and like Fire seizes upon all: And by how much
the more studiously thou desire to cover it, it breaks out by so much the
more violently. He whom Anger possesses, neither knows any Mean, nor endures
any Curb.

2. So likewise other Vices are contained within certain bounds and limits; but
Anger leaves nothing untouched, nothing unattempted: Our Anger falls upon
Heaven it self. Hence are those horrid Blasphemies, hence those Complaints
against God, hence those Controversies, set on fool by impious wretches,
concerning the Divine Providence. Nor are we Angry with them alone, whom we
conceive have injured us; but we are also offended upon a fancy of future
injury; and he, who as we persuade our selves (most commonly by a false
surmise) will do us wrong, has already done it: So ingenious we are in Vices.
Oftentimes we know not with whom we are Angry; yet we are in a Rage: And if all
others, upon whom to vent our Splenatick violence, are absent, we turn it upon
our selves. And that thou may know, that this Passion springs not only from
injuries; such things feel sometimes the fury of our indignation, as can
neither offend nor affront us. Thus we cut Garments, we throw down Vessels, we
mangle Pens, we tear Paper, when they serve not our use according to our Will.
Thus an overturned Glass, a Table unhandsomely covered, the skreeking noise of
an unwarily drawn Stool or Chair, and many other things, which neither have
deserved our Anger, nor feel it. Thus a refractory Horse, a barking Dog, an
importune Fly, a Gnat buzzing about our cars and biting us, excite our Cheller,
and are punished for our impatience. See how mad thou art: Thou inflictest
punishment upon senceless Creatures and brute Beasts, whereas it were more meet
thou should be severely chastised for thy Frenzy.

3. If thou will now behold the damages, and sad effects of Anger; no Plague
ever cost mankind dearer. Thou shall see Slaughters and Saccages of Towns and
Cities, and utter destructions of whole Nations. Thou shall see a Hand-made
Pestilence, in a vast heap of murdered bodies, from which run streams of blood,
discoloring the Rivers. Look upon the Foundations now scarcely visible of the
most Noble Cities: Anger overturned them. Behold the Solitudes now emptied of
all Inhabitants: Anger exhausted them. Contemplate the fair Houses consumed
with Fire, the Fountains infected with Poison, the Families extinguished with
Sword, and Famine: Anger did all this mischief. Thou may say, It Is a meeting
of Wild-Beasts, not of Men; but that they agree amongst themselves, these tear
one another in pieces. This Evil moreover accompanies this Vice, that it
bereaves Man of the likeness he has with God, whose works are peaceable. It
blinds the understanding, so that it sees not the Truth; nor yields to the
advice of others: It puzzles and perverts all the faculties of the Soul; and
although it extremely hurts the whole Man, yet it is hardly believed that
there is any harm in it: So glorious a thing it is in the esteem of the vulgar,
to be Angry. But it is better we should descend to the Remedies, whereby this
bad affection may, if it cannot be entirely cancelled, at least be constrained
to submit to the Empire of Reason, and to a fit Moderation.

4. The first and best Remedy against Anger, is to despise its first
irritations, and to resist its very least beginnings: for when the tempest is
once raised, 'twill prove a difficult matter to return to a calm. It will do
what it self pleases, not what thou permittest. When the Enemy is gotten within
the Gates, he receives no Laws from the Captive City. It Is easier not to admit
things which are pernicious, than to moderate them after their admittance. The
Superior part of the World, and that which is nearest to the Stars, is neither
driven into a Cloud, nor forced into a Tempest, but remains free from all
tumult; These lower things are those which Thunder: So a man of a high and
elevated Mind, being evermore quiet and composed, and settled in a peaceable
station, suppresses within himself all such evils as provoke to Anger, and
gives very little liberty to his words: as well knowing, that to be Angry,
takes not away the Evil, but aggravates it: as Birds, whilst they tremblingly
flutter their wings to shake off the Birdlime, besmear all their Feathers; So
all Anger adds to its own Torment. Anger hurts more than the Injury. He that is
Angry with another, conceives that he contemns him; but he that judges
impartially of himself, does not revenge it, because he does not feel it.
Revenge is a confession of Grief. He has no great Soul, who bites him again
that bites him.

5. When thou hear what the Slanderer has said of thee, reflect presently
not what is fit for him to hear, but what is proper for thee to speak. Thou
ought not to give so much power to another perversity, as to trouble thy
Serenity. God, who can do all things, endures so many wicked men; thou who art
worst of all, can thou not suffer one? It Is ridiculous that thou correctest
not thy own Malice, which is in thy power to do; and would correct that of
others, which is out of thy power? If thou art guilty of so many Crimes, what
thou now suffer is Nothing in comparison of Hell, which thou deservest. Who
art thou, that it should be such a heinous offense to hurt thy Ears? He commits
a sin; but to thee what has happened? That surely which was decreed from all
Eternity for thy good. Listen to what God says; If you forgive, I will also
forgive you. Do thou not awaken at this Thunderclap? Thou sleep not; but
thou art dead. Thou must give pardon to the faults of others, that thou may
obtain it for thy own.

6. Suspieion is to be banished out of thy mind, the most fallacious incitement
to Anger. That man did not courteously salute me; this person quickly break of
the begun discourse; his countenance showed an aversion from me. Nor will there
be wanting Arguments, and Conjectures, as we are evermore credulous in that
which is evil. The major part of the Injury, proceeds from the fault of the
Interpreter: and therefore Simplicity is necessary, and a favorable estimation
of all passages. Plead thou against thy self the cause of him that is absent;
and suspect that crime which is in question, because what we unwillingly hear,
we willingly believe, and are Angry before we Judge. Time is evermore to be
given, leisure lays the Truth open. Were thou to judge of a small matter, thou
would not pronounce Sentence without a Witness; and condemnest thou thy
Friend before thou hear him? To give presently credit to what is reported,
is the part of an imprudent man. Many men lie, that they may deceive; many,
because they are deceived. He that tells a thing privately, almost tells it
not. What is more unjust than secretly to believe, openly to be Angry? Finally,
it is not expedient to see all, to hear all. He receives no Injury, who knows it
not.

7. When thou art assured that any one speaks ill of thee, question thy own
Conscience whether thou spak'st not first of him: Then think of how many thou
have spoken. The respect thou bear to thy self, will render thee more
moderate, if thou consultest thy self. For why pardonest thou not another
Luxury, who deniedst nothing to thy own Sensuality? Why do thou persecute
Liars. thy self having been a Perjurer? Why thy self being Perfidious, do
thou so severely exact Fidelity from others? Why take thou leave to talk of
others, and wilt not give it to be thy self talked of? Let not only what thou
endurest, but what thou have done, succor thee. Thou will find in thy own
Bosom, whatsoever thou reprehendest in another. We are all bad, and a common
fault must be winked at. If thou have done no such thing, thou may do it. He
that stands, let him take heed lest he fall.

8. What new thing is it, if an Enemy hurts, a Friend offends, a Son swerves
from his duty, a Servant commits a fault? All these things are as usual, as a
Rose in the Spring, an Apple in Summer. As one who walks hastily through the
most frequented Streets of a City, must needs slip sometimes, be hindered
somewhere, and be somewhere dirtied: so in the uncompos'd and vagabond course
of this life, there happen many complaints, many impediments. Why art thou in
wrath, when thou suffer an injury from a wicked man? He did what belonged to
him; and do thou, if thou art Good, play the part of a good man, endeavoring
to make him Good. But this is not done by Revenge, but by Patience and
Benefits: whereby if thou make him not Good, thou will at least render him
Quiet: if neither, thou will undoubtedly make thy self better. He detracted
from thy fame, he is vehemently bent against thee. What art thou here to do? I
do not believe it: If he said any such thing, he spoke it as deceived by error,
with no evil mind; with an upright zeal, with a desire to profit me; or surely
I had offended him. This Injury is not equivalent to what thou formerly did
him. I committed the fault, I am guilty, it is fit I should yield to Justice.
But I am impugned gratis, and not deserving it. What then? I will imitate
Christ, and say with the Prophet; I was dumb, and would not open my mouth,
because you, O Lord, did it. Other men's sayings, or doings, will not be evil to
thee, although they are indeed Evil, unless thou make ill use of them. They
are such, as is the use of them.

9. What Is the Cause of thy being offended? Opinion. Take away the Opinion of
thy harm, and nothing will hurt thee. There Is nothing that touches the Mind, or
moves it, or enters into it: it is it alone that moves it self; and according to
the judgment it gives, such are the things which happen. Nothing will hurt
thee, unless thou hurtest thy self. But he (say thou) who persecutes me, is a
bad Man. Expect, he will pay to some other the punishment he owes thee; yea, he
has already ready punished himself, because he has committed a Sin. But he is
indu'd with Reason, why does he not amend? And thou who art indu'd with Reason,
why do thou not correct thy own Impatience? Why overcomest thou not Evil with
Good? Other men's faults are in thy Eyes, thy own upon thy Back. But go too,
whosoever thou art who fanciest Revenge to be so sweet a thing; leave is given
thee to take this thy desired Revenge, yet upon these most just terms, that
thou begin with the greater. Let the order of the Injury, prescribe the manner
of thy Revenge. Thine own Anger is the greatest of thy Enemies; this most
offends thee; from this begin thy Revenge. Adversaries are not to be sought in
the Streets, when as the greatest lurks in thy own house. Plato, being incensed
against his Servant, stayed his hand, lifted up to strike him, saying; I would
beat thee, but that I am Angry: He would first chastise his own Anger, before
he corrected his Servant; judging a passionate Master more worthy of
punishment, than a negligent Servant. The better a Man is, the more he
restrains his Passion.

10. Judges, and they who preside over the people, must sometimes both show and
execute their Anger; yet so, as not to permit it to prevent their Reason, but
to wait upon it as a Handmaid Criminals are to be corrected and chastised, but
without Anger. If a Good man were bound to be Angry at all Bad deeds, he should
pass his whole life in Anger: For what Moment would pass, in which he would not
find Things fit to be reprehended? He would faint, should he force Anger from
himself, as often as just cause would require it. Remaining therefore in
himself quiet and impartial to all offenders, he is to behave himself toward
them, as a Physician toward his Lunatic Patients. As thou art not moved at
the Heats and Colds, which are induced by the Seasons, performing their natural
courses: So neither oughtst thou be Angry at the Injuries, which proceed from
wicked men according to their perverse nature. Sick persons are intemperate,
nothing that is sound is to be expected from them. It Is a sufficiently cruel
Revenge against a Contumelious Enemy, to take no Revenge at all against him. He
hurts that he may grieve thee; if thou griev'st not, he will grieve, seeing
himself frustrated of the pleasure of his Injury: So surely the fruit of the
inferred Injury, consists in the feeling and indignation of him who suffers it.
Affronts, if thou art angry at them, appear; if contemned, they vanish. But,
say thou, it is a bad matter to be undervalued, and not to repair ones wounded
honor: Yes, but it is worse to fear to be undervalued, for no one fears it, but
he that deserves it. A wise man looks not upon what men judge ugly and
disgraceful: nothing is to him ugly but Sin. I am slighted, say thou, and
contemned by such a one? Let him look to it. I will henceforth take care not to
do or speak any thing deserving his contempt. Such a one hates me? Well, I will
strive to be pleasing and affable to all. Thus Invincible Patience, worsts and
wearies the Malice of wicked men; and imitates God, whose property is to
Pardon, who is most meek and patient, and who conquers our Crimes by his
Benefits. It Is a greater Generosity, not to take notice of an Injury, than to
pardon it.

CHAP. VIII. Of Envy and Sloth. The Description, and the Cure of both.
1. ENvy is its own Executioner, raging first against its owners Bowels, before
it falls foul upon its neighbors Goods. Punishment follows other Vices, but it
precedes this: For an Envious wretch turns another man's Felicity to his own
Torment, and pines away as his Neighbor grows fat. He both sins and is
punished together, who is infected with this Plague. Other Vices are contrary
to some one or other certain good; this is opposite to all goodness, perverting
the nature of all things. It Is contrary to the Divine goodness, whose property
is to communicate all its goodness: It Is contrary to the state of the Blessed,
who enjoy the happiness of others as their own: It Is contrary to Christian
Charity, which rejoices at the good even of Enemies: It Is finally contrary to
the Law of Nature, which commands us to wish all our own Good to others. As the
Eye infected with the Disease called by Physicians Ophthalmia, (Inflammation) is
offended with all glittering Objects; so the Envious is afflicted at the sight
of others Virtue and Charity. Envy is so named, because it too much pries into
the Excellency of another.

2. Satan envies, but Men, not his Companions: whereas thou being a Man,
enviest Men, which the Devil himself does not. This surely is the property of a
mean Spirit, and of one who in his own Judgment, abjects himself to baseness;
for thou would not envy others, but that thou judge him better than thy
self, and above thee. Will thou be free from Envy? Despise the lading Goods of
this world, and love the Eternal. The Love of Eternity, is the Death of Envy.
He cannot envy Mortal goods to others; who covets only the Immortal. What
Prince ever envyed the Cobbler, or the Botcher? A Mind busied about sublimer
matters, descends not to such meannesses. Is It not enough to be tormented with
thine own miseries, which are so many, unless thou be also troubled with
another prosperity? Thou will never be happy, if another more happy
contristates thee. Do imagine, that the good things thou enviest can be taken
from their possessors, and transferred to thee? Thy Neighbor has Riches,
flourishes with Knowledge, is eminent in Dignity. All these shall be thine, if
thou will love him. He abounds with all Goods, who loves them in others.

3. To Envy I join Sloth, because they both are Sadness: that for another
Good, this for its own. They both belong to little Spirits, for Envy kills the
little one: and Sloth is the Vice of a languishing mind, grown weary of
spiritual goods, and thereupon terrified with the greatness and difficulty of
acquiring them, never enterprises any thing worthy a Man. The Sloathful person
will, and will not, he is always variable and unconstant, grievous to himself,
troublesome to others, and out of a continual irksomeness of himself, sits
brooding upon his own punishment. He is like a Top, which is indeed driven
round, but rids no ground, and is so moved by the Scourges force, as not to
stir far from the same place. Thou will perceive he would have done something,
but that he did it not. All his operation is inspid, and like lukewarm water,
provoking Vomit not only to men, but to God himself. It Is vain for thee to hope
for health, unless shaking off this sluggishness, thou assumest a generous
courage, and forcest thy self with sharper spurs to undertake greater matters.
As the Bird is made to fly, so Man is born to labor. And were there no labor
to be undertaken for God, the World imposes sufficient pains upon every one.
How does that man toil to obtain wealth? How much does this man suffer to gain
Honor? Vices are prized at a high rate. But if thou purchasest perishable
Goods with so much sweat, why usest thou not a like industry to get a most
happy Eternity? Ah! Let it shame thee to be sluggish in a matter of so great
moment. Very short is the Labor, eternal the Reward. Nothing is so hard and
difficult, which man's industry, with Gods help, may not compass. Dare
valiantly, and the Hobgoblins of difficulties will disappear. Whatsoever the
Mind commanded it self, it obtained it. Do what thou can, and thou will be
able to do all things. God helps the Endeavourer.

CHAP. IX. Of Pride, Ambition, and Vainglory. The image of a Proud man. The
Vanity of Dignities, and their Dangers. The Evils of Hautiness, and the Cure of
it.
1. PRide, Ambition, and Vainglory, are Vices near of kin; from whence, as
from the Ocean, flow the Rivers of all Evils. For when a man proposes to
himself his own Excellency for his End, he directs all thither; slighting the
Divine worship, and neglecting his respects to men. If he can have no access to
Glory, but by Wickedness; by Wickedness he will climb to it; and will open his
way to his intended Honors, by frauds and deceits, and by the ruin and
destruction of his Neighbor. The Proud man is odious to God, and insufferable
to all Mankind: He bends all his studies and endeavors to obtain men's praises
and applauses. He thinks himself worthy of higher honor, and pleases himself
in that thought. He rashly sets upon things above his forces; thrusts himself
uninvited into all manner of businesses; impudently extols himself upon all
occasions; and arrogantly despises all others. He cunningly feigns Humility,
hoping thereby to avoid the suspicion of being Ambitious. When he is frustrated
of his design, he fills all men's ears with his complaints, and excites brawls
and heart-burnings. His behavior toward Inferiors is harsh and imperious;
toward Superiors fawning, nor is there any Slave more observant and obsequious
than he is. The Good that is in him, if there is any, he attributes not to God,
as he ought, but arrogates it to himself. He affects to seem knowing in all
things; and he subtlely discourses of the highest matters, (of which he is
ignorant) as from his own experience. He curiously pries into the actions of
others, rashly censures them, severely condemns them, exaggerating their
crimes, extenuating their praises. In his talk, and gate, there appears a
certain hautiness, and a contempt of others. He hates Correction, refuses
Counsel, yields to no advice. He fancies he has such perfections as he wants;
and those he has, he feigns to be greater than they are. He grows angry and
discontented, if he is not preferred before others, as the more worthy, if he
suspects himself and his sayings neglected. His Heart is tossed with perpetual
motions; for since Honor, which he aims at, is in the power of others, he must
of necessity be continually agitated with turbulent affections. The beginning
of all Sin, is Pride.

2. If thou art wise, place in an equal Balance all that thy heart can desire
upon Earth, Kingdoms, Empires, and in brief, the whole World, and compare them
with the least parcel of Eternal Felicity; and thou will find, that this, will
weigh down that vast mass of pomps and pleasures, which will appear light as a
Leaf which is tossed to and fro with a puff of wind. Rowse up thy self
therefore to eternal good things, and render thy self worthy of Heaven, to
which thou art designed. Shake off the proud fancies of thy own Excellency, and
measure thy self by the things which are truly good. If Caesar had adopted thee
for his Son, who could have endured thy Supercilious carriage? But now thou art
Gods Son, Redeemed with Christ's precious Blood; why reflectest thou not upon
thy Origin? Why debasest thou thy self to things altogether unbeseeming thy
noble birth? Thy Father calls thee to the command over Heaven and the Stars; to
a possession which will endure for ever. Here put on thy lofty looks, be proud
of this promise, from this Father brag of thy Nobility, conform thy life to his
likeness. This is the way, which leads to true Glory.

3. What are Scepters, what Crowns? Glittering Shackles, shining miseries;
which if fully known to men, they would never fall out for the Throne. There
would be more Kingdoms than Kings. A great Fortune, is a great Slavery. They
whom the Vulgar think happy, think far otherwise of themselves; for their
happiness is heavy, which renders them burdensome to the people. Then they
praise a gentle retreat, and the man who is his own Master. Then the Splendour
is hateful to them, which before they admired. Then with astonishment, and
trembling, they philosophize of the Vanity of all earthly things. Then they are
apprehensive of Death, and Gods dreadful Judgments, before whom, their Dignity
sought with so much diligence, obtained with so much difficulty, bought at so
dear a rate, will nothing at all avail them. Do thou therefore so lead thy
life, that thou may stand secure before that Tribunal. He that is here
humbled, shall there be exalted.

4. Thou ravest, if thou conceivest thou shall be safe and quiet, when thou
can get high Dignities: for then, what was formerly lawful, will be unlawful:
there is less liberty in great places. The higher thou art, the more thy Vices
will appear. He cannot lie hidden, who sits on the top. If before thou were
quiet, thy quiet is now cancelled. No corner will be free to thy self: No day
at thy own disposal. The fall from an elevated place is great. It Is vain to
seek for peace, where all have found danger and disquiet, and many a miserable
end of their lives. The Royal Tables are not furnished with secure Dainties,
Poison is drunk in Golden Goblets. How many Kings have purpled their Throne
with their own blood? The high station is slippery, all things hang there, and
threaten a Fall. It Is safer to tread in the plain pathway. As great as is the
number of admirers and applauders, so great is the number of Enviers. What
multitudes of underminers and oppugners? How unsecure and suspected are all
things? Faith is not to be given to a Servant, not to a Friend, not to a Son,
not to a Brother. But no Treachery enters into the house which lies flat on the
ground. He lives secure, who lies secret. He fears no man, whom no man fears.

5. Should thou see a Horse or a Dog assume the principality over the other
Individuals of his own Species, would thou not laugh? Yet thou more deservest
to be laughed at, if thou extollest thy self above other men, because thou art
wealthier than others, or more powerful. What art thou proud of, earth, and
ashes? No man can glory but in his own proper good: And what is thy Good, if
thou have all from God? Nothing is thine but Sin. And if thou have received
all, render all the glory to the Giver. Is one Horse preferred before another,
because he has more Hay and Provender; because his Bridle is gilt, and his
Trappings gorgeous? No surely, but because he is swifter. So a Man, unless he
is a Fool, seeks no Glory from that which is without him. But I am better,
say thou, and more Noble than the rest. If thou say so, thou art unworthy
of all honor; because none are worthily honored but good men, who contemn all
honor and glory. True Nobility knows not what it is to be extolled; and where
there is real Splendour, there also is Modesty. The greatest Glory of High
persons, is to humble themselves to the Lowest.

6. Mark the weakness of thy Condition, measure thy little Body, thou will
there observe many things for which thou may well be depressed, nothing for
which thou can be extolled. Scorn not the Geometricians and Philosophers, all
the Earth is a Point. How miserably do thou err, if thou placest Kingdoms in
a Point, and dividest Governments? In a little thing, no man is Great. This
Earth which thou proudly pressest with thy seet, will shortly press thee; nor
shall thou possess any more of it, than will serve to cover thy cold and rotten
members. Go now, and in this Nothing, build great and immortal monuments. Here
give vent to thy furious passions and haughty insolences: afford here to thy
appotites and cupidities their full scope; here array Armies, and wage Wars.
When thou have been mad long enough, thou will know (when it is too late) how
empty were the names of Dignities, how vain and deceitful the titles of
Honors. Whatsoever shines here with such seeming splendour, is Glass; whilst it
glitters, it breaks. Great Trees are a long time growing, but cut down in an
hour.

7. Thou have prevented a great provocation to Pride, if thou keep thy self
closely concealed. No man pretends to show his Pride and loftiness to his own
Eyes, or to the view of a few and familiar Friends; but he exposes the magazine
of his Vices to please the multitude of Spectators. Who puts on gay Clothes,
which he would have no one see? Who sets forth Dainties in a Golden dish, in
secret? Who being all alone, exposes the pomp of his Luxury, under the shadow
of a Countrey-tree? Ambition desires the public Stage; nor does it any where
more freely make ostentation of its forces, than amidst men's applauses. The
Be, if she has gathered Honey; the Horse, if he has run his Race; the Tree,
if it has produced its Fruit, seek nothing farther: Man, looks for applause,
loves to be pointed at with the Finger, and to have it said of him, This is he.
But if thou attentively observest who they are, from whose mouths thou
expectest these praises, thou will easily contemn all such applauses of the
Vulgar people. They are both vain and variable; Men, who (thy self will say.)
are sometimes mad; who condemn themselves every hour of frenzy, and
frequently reprove their own Councels. The life of them who praise, and of him
who is praised, is but short, and it is done in a corner of the Earth, which is
but a Point: and even there also, all do not consent to thee, nor any one to
himself. But it is a brave thing to be praised by Posterity: Yes, by such as
thou have never seen, nor ever shall see. Why does it not grieve thee, that
thou were not praised by them who lived in the Ages before thee? But fancy them
to be immortal who will hereafter remember thee, and that thy future fame shall
be perpetuated: what will this avail thee, when thou art dead? what does it
avail thee, now thou art alive? One may often be praised where he is not, and
punished where he is. The true value of each thing is in it self; neither is it
better, if praised, nor worse, if it wants praise. The Sun, if it has no
beholders, does it therefore lose any part of its Light? Is the Figg deprived
of its sweetness, the Flower of its beauty, the Gemme of its brightness, unless
their perfections are praised and admired? It Is a great argument of a high and
heroic mind, to slight men's praises, and to content himself with himself. Thou
losest thy praises if thou look for them: for what in thee is praiseworthy?
How great is thy Frailty? how much thy Misery? how uncertain thy Salvation?
Should thou persorm all that thou art obliged, thou art still an unprofitable
Servant: but with what Face dare thou averr, that thou have done all to which
thou were obliged? Fear therefore, that thou art not within, what thou art said
to be without: and reflect, whether that is not praised in thee, for which thou
art displeasing to thy self. Render to God what thou have received from him, to
Be, to Live, to Understand: nothing will be left thee, but Sin. Since therefore
thou art Nothing; of Nothing thou can not glory. Thou will begin to be
Something, when thou shall know thou art Nothing.

CHAP. X. Of the Government of the Body. Of the Custody of the Senses. How far
the Body is to be indulged. The liberty of the Eyes, is to be curbed. The
excess in Apparel, condemned.
1. KEep close to this found and wholesome form of Life, to give to thy Body so
much as is enough to preserve thy Health. It is to be harshly treated, lest it
should not well obey thy mind. It is to be indulged, not served. Let Food
assuage Hunger, Drink quench Thirst, Clothes keep from Cold, a House shelter
from the injuries of the Weather: as for other things, which useless industry
has added as it were for ornament, avoid and dread them; for by them deceits
are prepared against thy Soul. Thou art Greater, and designed for Greater
matters than to be a base slave to thy Body; which surely thou ought no
otherwise to look upon, than as a Prison of thy Mind, and a Fetter of thy
Liberty. An honest and prudent man, provides for it, not as if he lived for it,
but because he cannot live without it. The Body is the Instrument of the Soul:
And what Artist, neglecting his Trade, spends his time in whetting his Tools.
It Is the property of a dull spirit, to be employed in the Bodies services.

2. Since by the windows of the Senses Death enters into the Soul, strive to
lead them from the Earthly life to the Heavenly, and wean them by little and
little from an over-serious attention to the work they are upon, that they may
not too greedily immerse themselves in the delights of worldly Objects. The
Senses ought to serve, not command. The license of the Eyes is in the first
place to be chastised; for they being very quick in their action, and speedily
transmitting the Images of many things to the Fantasy, and from thence to the
Mind, will sow the feeds of grievous sins in the Appetite, if they be not
strongly barrocaded. If the purity of the interior Eye, accompanies the
rectitude of the exterior; thou will every where find the footsteps of God:
and when, thou have learned to worship God in his Creatures, thou will sweetly
raise up thy mind from them to the Contemplation of his Divine Majesty. A
trick'd-up Woman, is an elaborate Luxury; never fix thy sight upon her, for
thou will perish. Frequent not Comedies, Balls, Dances, Stage Plays; for they
dissipate the mind, and so possess it with vain solicitudes, that it cannot
crect it self to Heaven. When the Eye erres, the Affection will be faulty.

3. The Hearing is the sense of Discipline, by which, as by the Gate, the
notions of Truth and Wisdom enter into the Mind. Hedge thy Ears therefore with
a provident circumspection, lest Falsehoods instead of Truths, and Folly instead
of Wisdom should break into the Storehouse of thy Heart. Shut them against
Slanders, shut them against Murmurers, shut them against Toys, Idle talk, and
every thing which conduces nothing to thy Souls profit. As one who has heard
a Consort of Music, bears away with him that sweet Modulation in his Ears,
even after he is departed from the place where he heard it: So a bad Discourse,
although it hurts not presently, yet it leaves seeds in the Mind, which stick
longer, and by intervals return. Thou shall by so much the more frequently hear
God speaking in thy interior, by how much the less frequently thou hear the
talk of men. All Odoriferous Perfumes made by Art, belong to effeminate
persons; wherefore rejecting all sophisticated Odours, endeavor by thy holy
conversation to exhale the sweet fragrancy of Virtues. Thou shall check thy
Taste, by Abstinence and Sobriety: Thy Touch, by Hair-cloaths, Disciplines,
uneasy Lodgings, and other asperities. It Is better to afflict the Body and
preserve it; than by hurtful blandishments to destroy both Body and Soul
eternally.

4. Since the inward state of the Soul, is most commonly manifested by the
outward Dress and Clothing of the Body; remove far from thee such things as
are the usual marks of a depraved and unsettled Mind. Those Heathens, who in old
times were reputed Wisemen, would not permit their Disciples to put forth so
much as a Finger without some reason: I enact not of thee so strict a
rectitude; but I wish (and I here declare it) that thou would abstain from
loud Laughter, from Scurrility, from dissolute Behavior, from gesticulations
of Hands, from an overhasty gate; to the end, nothing may appear in thee which
may give offense to the beholders; not the sordidness of thy Garments, not the
wrinkles of thy Forehead, not the incomposition of thy Manners, not any signs
of Contempt, or of a Mind, averse from the Company, not any thing which may
beget a loathsomness or distaste. Many things which may be honestly done, may
not honestly be seen.

5. Man was created Naked, and was not ashamed; for his unknown nakedness could
not make him blush: But after he had sinned, and cast off the Cloak of
Innocence which sufficiently covered him, an outward Garment was necessary to
veil his shame: What was then inflicted as a Punishment, is now made use of as
a Prerogative of Dignity. Garments are fought after, not to cover but to adorn,
and such as may please the Eyes and Lusts of others. The Habit is the Index of
the Mind: To be overcurious in Clothes, and to compose the countenance out of
a Box, and by a Looking-glass, is a Womanish Vice. The outward dress will
confound thee, if thou will reflect what it covers. He who has within, the
ornaments of Virtues; values not the external garnishments of his attire.
Virtue rejoices to be showed without any colored disguise; whatsoever thou
addest to it, is less than it. It Is one of men's vain Errors, to be fine in
Apparel, filthy in Mind. Some load themselves with Chains, but because their
Fetters are made of Gold, they fear not the infamy of Servitude. Some others
are not fettered with Gold, but fastened to it; for by Wounds it is fixed to
their Ears, at which there oftentimes hangs a whole Patrimony: and those which
in times past were the names of Punishments, are now of Ambition. There are not
a few, who spending their time between the Comb and the Looking-glass, are more
solicitous to make their Heads handsome, than to save their Souls. And the
depraved judgments of foolish people has so far prevailed, that they fancy
themselves adorned by such things, as they ought to tread under their feet. Let
thy Attire therefore be without Art, not for Pomp, but for Necessity; beneath
Pride, above Beggary; and in brief, accommodated to the condition of thy life
and calling. Although thou deckest thy self with Gold and Margarites, without
Christ's beauty thou art deformed. This is the graceful dress which is never out
of fashion, and which adorns not thy Flesh, which is to dye shortly; but thy
Soul, which is to last for an eternity. It Is a mad kind of Ambition, to cover a
Dunghill with Gold.

CHAP. XI. Of the Custody of the Tongue. Of how great moment it is, and how
difficile. What is to be observed in speaking; what to be avoided. How the bad
Tongues of others, are to be endured.
1. TO manage the Tongue, is a matter of so great moment, that it ought to be
kept more charily than the Apple of the Eye; For life and death is in the hands
of the Tongue. He that cannot bridle it, may be compared to an open City, which
has no Walls to fence it. But it can hardly be tamed, without Gods special
assistance. A Man can tame a Lion, he can tame a Bull, he can tame a Bear; but
not his own Tongue: for Loquacity is an inborn brat of humane nature, egging
him on to vent by his Tongue, whatsoever he desires and conceives in his mind.
Moreover the Tongue neighbors to the Brain, and the Mouth to the Fantasy; so
that what the Fantasy thinks, is presently derived to the Mouth, and driven
out by Words. Nature has taught thee, how necessary the custody of thy Tongue
is, when she guarded it with a double Bulwark, of the Teeth, and of the Lips.
But as the Odor of an Ointment evaporates, if the mouth of the Pix is not
stopped; so the Mouths door being left wide open, all the Minds vigor is
dissipated. He attend ill to himself, who attends not continually to his Tongue.

2. Be cautious in all thy Discourses; and carefully suppress that immoderate
Itch, which urges many to blurt out rashly their scarcely conceived opinion,
without examination, without election. Avoid Duplicity and Dissimulation; and
deliver simply the sense of thy Mind, without all Coverture and Ambiguity. God
has given thee the faculty of Speaking, that therewith thou should heartily
tell the things as they truly are. Being to speak, consult thy self, whether
any immoderate affection broyls within thee, and permit nothing to thy Tongue,
till that commotion is appeased; otherwise thou will pour forth what thou will
afterward repent. Thou will easily hold thy peace, if no perturbations clamor
in thy Heart; if there is in thy Soul a solitude and serenity. There cannot be
one color to the Words, another to the Mind. If the Mind is sound, if
temperate, if composed; the Speech will also be sober: that being vitiated,
this will be infected. What manner of man one is, his Speech will declare.

3. Let there pass no idle discourse. As thou chusest what meat thou eatest, so
make choice of what words thou utterest. Thou examinest the Meat which is to go
into thy mouth, why not the Word which is to go out of it, which oftentimes
raises greater Tragedies in thy House, than thy Meat does in thy Stomach?
Accustom thy self to speak much with thy self, little with others. Prudent men
have frequently repented their Speaking, never their Silence. Garrulity is the
Vice of Children and of Women, who have less Reason than Men. There Is nothing
of Virtue in that person, out of whose Mouth proceed only vain and unprofitable
Words. Did thou love God, were thou studious of thy Salvation; all thy
Discourses would be of God, of Virtue, of Perfection. Love cannot lie, it
cannot be concealed. Every one is profuse toward that he loves; and what is in
his Mind, recurrs most frequently to his Tongue. Thou therefore less willingly
discoursest of Divine things, because thou have not yet washed away the Dregs
of Vices: besides, thy seldom Reading and Meditating of such things as
appertain to thy Salvation, leaves thee unfurnished with matter, though thou
had a mind to it. Out of the Hearts abundance the Mouth speaks.

4. Men's ordinary talk, when they meet together, is of other persons lives,
manners, actions. Every man has as many Judges, as there are Heads in the
City. There Is scarcely any one who has Eyes at home: The major part of us is
purblind in discerning our own Vices, sharp-sighted to censure those of our
Neighbors. We admit their Reproaches into our open doors, there is hardly a
chink left open to receive their Praises. This Vice, by how much it is more
common, by so much it is more carefully to be avoided. Thou have enough to do
with thy own Crimes; carp at them, and correct them. Secret ones, whether thy
own or others, divulge not abroad. Many have fallen into great perplexities, by
having imprudently entrusted their secrets to indiscreet people. Whether thou
tellest it to one, or to more, it is the same thing. A word slips easily from
one to another, and from him to all. This easiness proceeds chiefly from an
overlong protracted discourse; whereupon, a certain pleasure of talking
insensibly stealing in, and affecting the mind after the manner of Drunkenness,
leaves there nothing so sacred and secret, which breaks not forth. He lays open
to thee his secrets, and thou having received this pledge of his Faith,
communicatest thine in like manner to him: but thou perchance, concealest what
thou have heard, he relates it to all he meets; so that every one seeming to be
openly ignorant, all privately know it. You would say, that Tongues fly
privately by all men's Ears, till at last the secret overflows, and becomes a
common Rumor. Whatsoever Evil is under Heaven, the Tongue either brought forth
or promoted. Make therefore a Balance for thy Words, and a Bridle for thy
Mouth: And speak nothing, which had better been kept in silence. The sparing of
Words, is more laudable than of Money. He that is prodigal of his Money, whilst
he hurts himself, helps others; he that is prodigal of his Words, hurts both
himself and others. He approaches near the Divinity, who can hear much, and
speak little.

5. Nothing is inaccessible to the Tongue. The Princes of the Earth are not
exempt from Criminations, though power has placed them beyond the fear of the
Sword. There are none so excellent in Sanctity, as that their innocence has
preserved them from Censure. Christ himself, when he lived amongst men, escaped
not the scourge of the Tongue. By these Examples, raise up thy Patience.
Slander is the Spur of Virtue; it is a Curb, which keeps thee from swerving out
of the right path. There Is not a more capital enemy to Vice than Censure: for
when thou art ill spoken of, thou art taught what thou art to take heed of.
Will thou avoid the bites of a venomous Tongue? Contemn it. Thou will receive
no Wound if thou holdst thy peace; attributing more to the judgment of good
men, than to the insolence of a Slanderer. It matters but little what others
think of thee: there is a more certain and more uncorrupted witness within thee,
in thy own Soul: Interrogate thy own Conscience, and give credit to it. What is
baser, than to depend upon the report of foolish people, and to place the
esteem we have of our selves, in the judgments of others? Whatsoever others say
of thee, it behooves thee to be good. If any one should defame a sweet and clear
Fountain, will it therefore cease to drill out its pure streams? And if any one
casts dirt into it, will it not soon wash it out and dissipate it? So neither
ought thou to trouble the peaceable state of thy Mind, although bad men
asperse and calumniate thee. It Is too mean an esteem of ones self, to be moved
at every flying Report. Children strike the Faces of their Parents, the Infant
has discomposed his Mothers hair, he has bitten her Nipples, he has scratched
her Cheeks, and spit upon her Bosom; and none of this is esteemed a contumely,
because he that did it cannot contemn any one: the same mind therefore which
Parents have toward their Children, do thou have toward them who calumniate
thee. If thou once yieldest to trouble thy self at the injury, thou will honor
him that did it. For thou must necessarily rejoice to have the esteem of him,
from whom thou take contempt so hainously. And this is the Vice of a Mind
contracting it self, and descending. Thou will always be unhappy, if thou
think thou can be despised.

CHAP. XII. Of the internal Senses. The use of Opinions. The Mind is to be
stored with good thoughts. Of restraining the Sensitive Appetite: and of its
depraved Affections. Several Precepts to that purpose.
1. UPon this the chief Hinge of Wisdom turns, That no Opinion be introduced
into thy Mind, which is inconsequent to Nature or Reason. Wherefore rejecting
them all, thou art to exercise thy self against the Motions of thy Fantasy,
as the Logicians do against captious Sophistries. My Son is dead? This is not
in thy power; It is no Evil. Such a Father disinherited his Son? This also,
since it is out of our power, is not Evil. But he took such a thing ill? That Is
in our power, and therefore Evil. He took it courageously? That Is in our power,
and consequently Good. If thou accustomest thy self to these things, thou will
reap profit by it. My Friend is led away into Prison. What has happened?
Nothing, but that he is in Prison. But every one adds of his own, that he is
ill dealt with. Correct the Opinion, and all is at quiet. As we tie up a
furious person, that he may do no harm to others; so the Fantasy is to be
restrained, that it may not overwhelm the Mind with false Opinions. This like
an untamed Beast, gets loose, and licentiously wanders wheresoever it pleases;
it is a Pratler, a Runagate, impatient of quiet, glad of new things, and not
knowing any Moderation. Thou art therefore to employ all thy diligence in this
study, how thou may lay hold on it, bind it, and fix it to one thing; that so
thy thoughts and the decrees of thy Mind may not always be pinned upon
Opinion. Whatsoever is without thy Mind, does not at all belong to thee.

2. Whatsoever offers it self to thee to be thought on, examine it thoroughly;
that so thou may dispute with thy self, what the Nature of that thing is, as
it is naked and separated from all others, what its properties, what its end,
what circumstances, what profit; whether or no it concerns thee, and is in thy
power: otherwise give it no access, but resist it as much as thou can. God is
intimately present, most clearly beholding the darkest secrets of thy heart;
nor is there any thing so concealed, which lies not open to his all-seeing
Eyes: Look then, that thou reyolve not in thy Mind any such thing, as thou
would be ashamed to mention before an honest man. Let thy Thoughts be quiet,
simple, pure, and free from all Malice. Let them be such, that if thou were
suddenly asked what thou think, thou can without blushing lay open what
lies hid in thy Heart. Be ashamed to think, what thou art ashamed to speak.
Thou will banish evil Thoughts, if thou art always busied with good.

3. Nothing is more hurtful to a Soul, nothing more contrary, than the
Inferior Brutal, and Sensitive Appetite. This is the source of all
Wickednesses and Imperfections. Let this Enemy, whom thou art always to fear,
always to fight against, be subdued. Here no rest must be taken, no respite
given. The Conflict must be without end, and without measure; because the
Adversary has neither end nor measure. The Enemy lurks within thee; yea, thou
thy self art an Enemy to thy self, more potent than the Army of Xerxes. Keep
thy Soul from thy self. It Is a greater valor to invade thy self, than Cities;
to get the Victory over thy self, than over all other things. I require not,
that thou should totally destroy all depraved affections, and reduce them to
nothing; but that thou learn to govern them. Reason has done enough, if it
bridles and moderates them. The Stoics were over-harsh, in defaming all
affections as Evil. The Housholdstuff of Nature is neither evil nor
unnecessary. He takes away all Virtue, who takes away all Affections. There Is
no Conquest, where there is no Combat.

4. This strife is indeed very difficult, and the Battle doubtful: for
Affections are born with us, and Reason follows many years after, when they
have already got the Dominion, and the Will without resistance yields them
Obedience, being deluded with the vain show of good: till Reason in success of
time, and Experience getting strength, begin to know their right of governing,
and to resist the tyranny of the Affections: And surely the first motions of
Nature cannot be amended; but yet thou art to look to thy self with great
vigilance, and when first thou perceivest thy self troubled, thou art presently
to restrain that commotion with the bridle of Reason. It Is easier to resist
beginnings, than to govern an impetuosity. Thou will attain to great
tranquillity of Mind in a short time, if thou castest an eye upon all chances
before they happen, that so the Enemy may find thee prepared. It Is too late to
furnish the Mind with Remedies, after the Dangers. Learn to do little, and
speak little; for if of the many things thou speak and do, thou take
away what is not necessary, thou will find fewer perturbations in thy Mind. And
say not, this is a small matter: For that which is the beginning of Virtue and
Perfection, is very great, though it seems but little.

5. The Old man drawing his Origin from the infected seed of the sinner Adam,
is to be considered as a certain Tree, having for its Root, Self-love; for its
Trunk, a Propension to Evil; for its Branches, Perturbations; for its Leaves,
Vicious Habits; for its Fruits, Works, Words, and Thoughts, which are contrary
to the Divine Law. Wherefore, to hinder the Branches of bad Affections from
breaking forth into Leaves and Fruits, apply the Axe to the Root, and extirpate
that worst Love of thy self. If thou take this away, thou have with one
stroke cut off the whole vicious Offspring of thy Inferior Appetite. And thou will take it away, and root it out, if thou contemnest thy self: if thou truly
believe thy self to be one of those thousands, who are indu'd with no
singular dowry and perfection; and that thou art destitute of all knowledge and
virtue: if thou fear not to displease men, and to be by them scorned, and
despised: if thou art willing to want all sorts of comforts and conveniences.
Thou will preserve thy self, if thou well hate thy self: thou will lose thy
self, if thou ill love thy self.

CHAP. XIII. Of Love. Its Nature, Causes, Effects. Its Remedies. Something
added of Hatred.
1. LOve is a complacency in that which is Good: to wit, that first impression,
wherewith the Appetite is affected, when the known Good pleases it. By this,
the whole World coheres together; and this being brought under, which holds the
prime place amongst the Affections, the whole troop of the rest will easily be
quelled. The Love which is good, tends thither from whence it had its
beginning: It goes to Good, because it proceeds from the Sovereign Good.
Discuss thy Life, and weigh thy Heart in the Balance of a strict Examination.
Observe what Love is there predominant: for that which weighs down in the Scale
of Love, is to thee a God; that is the Idol thou worshippest. Therefore God has
commanded thee to love him with thy whole Heart, to prevent thereby the
Affections of thy Mind; because whatsoever thou Love with thy whole Heart,
that is the thing thou adorest as God.

2. Besides Goodness and Beauty, a certain sympathy and agreement of minds and
manners, excites Love: as also outward Modesty, Industry, Nobility, Learning,
quickness of Wit, and other such like Ornaments of Body and Mind. Love it self
is the Lodestone of Love; to which if Benefits are added, he is then
constrained to return Love, who would not bestow it. There are moreover some
things, naturally provoking Love: for they who have clearer Spirits, a warmer
Heart, a more subtle Blood, and are of an easy and meek Disposition, are more
prone to Love.

3. Great is the power of Love: It transforms the Lover, into the thing
Beloved. Love is a certain going out of it self, a certain Pilgrimage from it
self, a certain voluntary Death. He who Loves is absent from himself, he thinks
not of himself, he provides nothing, he does nothing: and unless he is received
by his beloved, he is no where. O how unhappily does he love, who loves not
God! for he cannot be in the beloved, who loves earthly Objects, which cannot
satiate the Soul, as being subject to Vanity and Death: But he that loves God,
is in God; and ceasing to live in himself, lives in him, in whom all things
live, who is our Center, and our unchangeable Good. Humane love is violent and
bitter; the Divine is evermore humble and peaceable. Jealousy torments that,
but this has no Rivals: that fears lest another should love; this wishes all
would love. wherefore, if thou love thy self, love God; for that thou love
him, is thy own profit, not his. Man may be altered, and perish; thou never
losest God, unless thou leavest him.

4. That the love which thou perchance bear thy Companion, may be sincere;
lay aside all humane causes of Wit, Jocundness, Likeness; and seek only them
which consist in Piety and Sanctity. The Love which they call Platonical, is
the bane of Virtue, whereby they feign, that from the beholding Corporal
Comeliness, the Soul is raised to the contemplation of the Divine Beauty. The
steadfast eying of a sair Face, excites the Concupiscence to touch it; and that
which goes out by the Eyes, whether it is Light, or a certain Flux, melts the
Man, and destroys him. It Is better the Feet should slip, than the Eyes. But the
Remedies of Love are of great difficulty, because when it is chastised, it more
eagerly presses on, and unless thou resistest its beginnings, it so insensibly
creeps in, that thou will first feel thy self to Love, before thou had any
design of Loving. But if thou absolutely repugnest to the beginnings, the cure
will be easily compassed. The Mind also must be busied about other matters,
which being accompanied with care, will remove the memory of the thing beloved.
Then all mention of the person affected is to be avoided, because nothing more
easily returns than Love; which if it has once seized on thee, it will so
pertinaciously vex thee, as that it will not be removed but by the lingering
Remedy of time and absence; that is, till it being tired, expires. Shame has
cured many, when they saw themselves pointed at, and become the common talk of
the people; and withal considered the foulness of the thing, full of disgrace,
full of danger, and subject to future Repentance. It has profited others, to
enquire attentively into the Evils and inconveniences of the thing beloved,
which might diminish its amiableness and beauty. Lastly, a conversion of our
Love to God, to Virtue, to eternal Objects, that is, to things which are truly
Lovely, will much conduce to the cure; that so a good Love may expel the bad,
and the generous mind of man may grow ashamed to debase it self to the vile
love of the earth. Bad loves, infect good manners.

5. Nature has bound all things together with a certain Love-Chain. This
drives and couples the dances of the Stars in Heaven, the flocks of Birds in
the Air, the Herds of Oxen in the Meadows, the Droves of Cattle in the
Mountains, the companies of Wild Beasts in the Woods. This Sacred Bond is
broken only by Hatred: for as Love tends to Union, so Hatred aims at Division
and Dissension. They are most subject to this bad affection, who are sluggish,
timorous, and suspicious, and apprehensive of loss on every side. There are
moreover some men so born, that they hate all others, like that horrid sort of
Fowls, which hate even their own darkness. If thou meetest with any of this
Note, do not hate them, but pity them. As in wrestling, thou watchfully look
to thy Playmate without any anger; so in all thy Life, decline from him without
hatred, who is contrary to thy disposition. And thou will hinder hatred, by
exciting thy mind to love, upon the consideration of some good in the hateful
object. There will be no place for hatred in thee, if thou interpretest all
things in the best sense. Then, Hatred is to be applied to the things which
truly deserve it; which are the deformity of Sin, and eternal Damnation. If
thou turnest it to any thing else, thou hurtest not the thing thou hate, but
thy self. For if thou art commanded to love even thy Enemies, whom can thou
justly hate? Thou must pass out of the priviledg'd City, to find one against
whom thou may practice thy hatred. That Evil is without the nature of things,
against which only hatred may lawfully be exercised: But if thou must needs
hate a man, let it be none but thy self: For no one can hurt thee so much, as
thou do thy self.

CHAP. XIV. Of Desire, and Flight. What is to be Desired, what to be Fled from.
1. HAppy he, who is subject to God: who desires nothing earnestly; who
accommodates himself to things as they occurr; who says, God will have me to be
safe, he will have me to be sick; he will have me to be rich, or poor; he will
have me to pass from hence, or to stay here: I am prepared for either. If thou
once say, When shall I go thither? When shall I get that thing? Thou will be
miserable. For if thou covetest that which is without thee, thou will be
tormented with perpetual anxiety, and as in an orbicular Machine, thou will
always pursue, never possess. In thy own Power are thy own Opinions, Thoughts,
Affections, Actions; without thy Power are the Body, Riches, Glory, Dignities,
and whatsoever thy self does not. Those can neither be prohibited by any one,
nor hindered: These are aliens, and subject to impediments. Wherefore do not at
all desire those, or at least so desire them, as considering them to depend
upon the arbitriment of others, and that they cannot long continue with thee,
because their condition so requires. No external thing is to be desired; For
the Figure of this World passes away. Look within: within is a Fountain of
Good, always distilling, if thou always diggest.

2. In this one thing was placed the wisdom of some ancient Philosophers, who
being exempt from the Empire of Fortune, amidst the sharpest torments of their
Bodies, disputed with their blessed Minds about Felicity. For contemplating the
limits of that Power which God has given to Man, they became fully persuaded,
that nothing besides their own thoughts and affections belonged unto
themselves. And thereupon, by the use of this meditation, they got such an
absolute dominion over them, and so well governed the motions of their minds,
that not without some reason, they boasted themselves to be the only Rich, the
only Powerful, the only Happy men. But an assiduous exercitation is necessary
to learn this lesson of despising the things which are without thee, as not at
all belonging to thee. If thou can come to this, thou will never grieve at
the want of external things; as thou grievest not, that thou art not King of
the Tartars, or that thou art destitute of wings to fly withal. What is
without us, is nothing to us.

3. With this Bridle, Desires are to be curbed; which unless thou moderatest,
thy unsatiable mind will never be satisfied with whatsoever thou affordest it;
all will but irritate, not end its Cupidity. No moisture suffices him, whose
bowels are inflamed with a burning heat; for that is not a Thirst, but a
Disease: So it befalls them who recall not their desires to Reason, which has
certain bounds; but leave them to Vice, and Looseness, whose limits are immense
and incomprehensible. Thou will feel no incommodities, nor will thou want any
thing thou desire, if thou conteinest thy self within the measure of Nature:
if thou exceedest this measure, thou will be poor, even amidst the greatest
plenty. To Cupidity, nothing is enough; to Nature, few things are sufficient.

4. Remember so to behave thy self in thy Life, as thou would at a Feast. If
Dainties are carried about, and come to thee, put forth thy hand modestly and
take a share of them. If he who bears them passes by thee, detain him not. If
he is not yet come up to thee, extend not thy appetite to things afar off, but
stay till he is present. If thou stand thus affected toward Riches, toward
Dignities, and the rest of things which are without, thou will be worthy to
feast with the Saints; and thou will enjoy such a serenity of mind, as will
raise thee above all Chances. But if moreover thou will slight and refuse the
things which are offered, thou shall not only be a Guest of the Saints, but a
Partner in their Felicity, and wilt begin to fore-tast upon Earth, that
happiness which they enjoy in Heaven. It Is in thy own power to make thy self
happy, by desiring nothing which is without thee. Who is blessed and happy? He,
who has what he will. He has whatsoever he will, who wills nothing but what
he may.

5. We shun and abhor many things as hurtful, which are indeed profitable. For
it falls out for the most part, that they are contrary to the Mind. That which
hurts, instructs. Death, Exile, Poverty, Disgrace, Labor, Sickness, and the
rest of the same kind, which are not in thy Power, belong not unto thee. To
these therefore thou art not to oppose Flight, not detestation; but a Neglect
of the Opinion conceived of them. Socrates fitly named all these things,
Goblins: For as Goblins affright Children, whereas nothing is in them horrible
but their outward show: So it happens in things, which thou art wont to
apprehend, not as they are, but as they appear. What is Death? A Hob-Goblin.
Observe how sweet it was, not only to the Saints, and persons of high virtue
and perfection, but to Socrates, and to other Heathen Sages. What then is so
terrible in Death? Opinion. The Fear of Death is horrible, not Death it self.
The same thou will find in other things, which thou art wont to abominate.
Correct Opinion, and thou will perceive there is nothing besides Sin, which thou
art to abhor.

CHAP. XV. Of Joy, and of Sadness. How a good man ought to rejoice. He who
fore-sees all things, is not contristated. Several Antidotes against Grief.
1. THou art so to rejoice, as that Modesty may appear in the midst of thy
Mirth; and that thy Mind be not so dissolved, but thou can freely, if it be
needful, pass from gladness to sadness. Christ our Lord, the best Esteemer of
things, calls not Laughers blessed, but Mourners. For it very much mis-becomes
a Christian man, who professes to look after eternal things, amongst so many
dangers of Soul and Body, amongst so many most just causes of Sadness, to
delight in vain Laughter after the manner of Fools, and to rejoice excessively
at perishing trifles. Earthly pleasure fleets away, and what we call Joys, are
oftentimes the beginnings of Sadness. True Joy springs only from a clear
Conscience. No one can be said to have solid Joy, but he who is Just, Valiant,
Temperate. That Joy may never be wanting to thy mind, see that it be born at
home. And it will be there born, if it is within thy self. Other Rejoycings are
light, they fill not the Breast; nor does he always rejoice, who laughs.
Sincere joy is a severe thing: It springs from a good Conscience, from honest
Councels, from upright Actions, from a contempt of Pleasures, and from the
peaceable tenor of an unspotted Life. This is the true Law of Virtue; that
thou may truly Rejoice, thou must a long time Mourn.

2. Sadness, detests the Evil which is present, (either really, or in the
apprehension) with a certain trouble and disquiet. But it is our usual custom to
be troubled for the most part not at things, but at the Opinion of things.
Search not therefore overnarrowly into things, not into thy Servants, not into
thy Fields, not into thy Moneys, not into thy Affairs: rather consider what thy
Opinion is of them. That thou art disgraced, that thou art robbed, that thou
art beaten, is not in thy power: but to think rightly of these things, that
they are not Evils, but sometimes profitable, is in thy power: Thou will never
grieve, if pulling away thy thought from the present trouble, thou there
placest it where true Joys are to be found. To a good man, nothing happens
amiss, not because he does not feel it, but because he overcomes it. For he
looks upon all Adversity, as an occasion of exercising his Patience, as an
instrument of the Divine Grace, as the way to an everlasting Glory. A good man
may be said to be miserable, but he cannot be so.

3. Whatsoever may be, do thou forefee as if it will be. Thus thou will abate
the violence of all Evils, which bring no new thing to them who are prepared;
but will prove grievous to them who expect nothing but prosperity. What will thou do if an accident should bereave thee of one half of what thou have? What
if of All? What if thy House falls? if thy Friends forsake thee? if thy Fame is
endangered? if by calumny thou art cast down from thy Dignity? A Disease,
Captivity, Ruin, Fire, nothing of these is sudden to a Wise man. He communes
with himself of future Misfortunes, and mitigates the Sorrow by meditating long
upon it, which others do by long sustaining it. That may happen to any one,
which happens to any one. What Riches are there, which Hunger and Beggary
follow not at the back? What Dignity, which is not accompanied with Infamy, and
extreme Contempt? What Kingdom, for which Destruction is not prepared? Has not
this Age of ours seen an unparalled Example, of a Royal Head cut off by the
Sword of the Hangman; and this by command of his own Subjects? Nor are these
things far distant from one another: the moment of an hour is between Plenty
and Poverty, between the Palace and the Cottage, between the Throne and the
Axe. Know then that every Condition is changable, and whatsoever befalls any
man, may also befall thee. He easily bears adverse Fortune, who always expects
it.

4. Virtue rouses not it self, when the life proceeds with a prosperous course;
Then it appears how great it is, when Patience manifests what it can do. We are
made a Spectacle (says the Apostle) to God, to Angels, and to Men. And behold
a Spectacle worthy of Gods aspect: behold a Pair fit to be presented to the
Divine Majesty; a Valiant man oppressed with Adversity, triumphing over himself
and over all his Calamity. A calm Sea and a prosperous Gale, show not the Art
of the Pilot. Who so is not tempted, what knows he? Some one says, I am
unhappy, to whom this sad misfortune befell. But I say, thou art happy, because
thou have the opportunity to try thy self: For the same thing might have befaln
any one; but to accept of it without grief, was not for every one. Be not
therefore dejected in sinister events; but rather on the contrary take firm
footing, and sustain whatsoever burden falls from above upon thee. For the
first violence being broken, thou will see nothing horrible in these things,
besides Opinions. Such things as have their force from Nature, retain the same
in all men: but many suffer Poverty, Disgrace, Reproach, and the rest which the
Vulgar call Evils, with much patience, many do not so much as feel them; it is
not therefore natural to grieve at these things, but it proceeds from a
perverse Opinion. Why do thou lie to thy self? Thou may render all Calamity
casie, by enduring it. All Grief is light, if Opinion adds no weight to it. Do
not thou make thy Evils more grievous unto thee, by thy impatience. Every one
is as miserable, as he esteems himself.

5. All Sickness lessens at length by delay, and though the pain is most
violent, yet time either takes it away, or weakens it. Will thou therefore
expect the day, in which thy Grief will cease whether thou will or no; or will thou thy self put an end to it? Why preventest thou not that with Council,
which time will bring about? Although thou keep thy sorrow, yet it will
slide out of thy custody. For nothing is sooner hated than Sadness, which when
it is new finds a Comforter, when grown old is deric^^d. Now if Calamity is
overcome by Grief, let every day be spent in lamentation, let sadness consume
the nights without sleep, let the hands fall upon the breast, and let sorrow
exercise upon it self all sorts of cruelty: But if Cries are bootless, if no
tears or complaints can mitigate Adversity: Learn to rule thy self, and with
invincible Constancy resist all Calamity. He is a pitiful Governor of a Ship,
who loses his skill in every Storm, and permits his tottering Boat to the fury
of the Tempest. But he deserves praise, even in a Shipwreck, whom the Sea
overwhelms, whilst he holds the Helm, and wrestles with the Waves.

CHAP. XVI. Of Hope, and of Despair. How we are to moderate them both.
1. VAin and false is that Hope, and the mere Dream of a man broad awake, which
is not placed in God, by whose sole beck all difficulties may be overcome. Why
art thou vexed with the expectation of a future event, and extendest thy
thoughts to things a far off? Thou will hope nothing, if thou desire nothing,
if thou despisest all Earthly things. No one hopes what he contemns. Although
thy hopes should never deceive thee, although they tend to things easily
obtained; yet so long as any hope hankers within thee, thou will be solicitous,
uncertain of thy self, and full of doubts and anxieties. As thou runnest not
with thy Feet into uncooth and uneven Paths; so neither art thou to roam with
thy Mind upon such things, as are not within the reach of thy own power. It Is a
misery to have that wanting to the Will, which is hoped for.

2. The Mind is frequently to be admonished to look upon all things which are
without thee, and about thee, as perishable, and hanging by a slender Thread.
Why forgettest thou thy own Condition? Thou art born Mortal: Nothing is
promised thee of this Day; nothing of this Hour. Death stands at thy back:
whatsoever thou have is but borrowed: the use of it is thine, so long as it
pleases the supreme Arbiter of all things. When he calls, all is to be rendered
up without complaint. It Is the part of a perverse Debtor, to injure his
Creditor. There Is nothing therefore under the Sun, which thou ought to hope
for. That only is a true Hope, which is rightly conceived of the true and chief
Good.

3. Despair is caused by Sloathfulness, Dejection of mind, an overgreat
apprehension of Difficulties, a faulty Diffidence of ones self, and of the
defect of his own Forces and Industry. It Is conquered, by exciting the Mind to
imitate their Example, who being in far greater anguishes, generously overcame
all Obstacles. Begin and drive on thy self, for God helps them who do what they
can; and thou will find that most easy, which seemed most hard, if the false
Opinion concerning it is deposed. Whatsoever happens to thee, that all was
designed from Eternity. Now, that either falls out as thou by Nature art
disposed to endure it, or otherwise: if the first, despair not, but bear it: if
otherwise, yet do not despair; for whatsoever it is, it will soon have an end,
and make an end of thee. That Is light which thou can bear; short, which thou
can not. But remember, that it is in thy own Power to render many things
tolerable, if thou will apprehend them as profitable and convenient. Calamity
is the occasion of Virtue.

CHAP. XVII. Of Fear. How Vain it is, and how to be Vanquished. Boldness to be
avoided. Something again of Anger.
1. MAny there are, who when there is no present Evil, nor any assuredly to
come, do nevertheless rage and run about, and either feign a Misfortune to
themselves, or increase it. Humane cruelty has not invented so many torments,
as a Mind endures which is ever anxious of the future, which is over-solicitous
to preserve his present Goods, and over-apprehensive of future dangers. Many
things which would not be Evils, are so because we fear them. What profits it
thee to be troubled before the time: and by a vain providence to meet thy own
Miseries? Must thou needs be now miserable, because thou may be so hereafter?
It Is the part of a Fool, to give up his reason to other men's relations; and
when no apparent signs foretell the Mischief, to be terrified with false
imaginations. Oftentimes thou being deceived with a sinister conjecture,
wrestest a Word of doubtful signification, to the worst sense. Sometimes thou
conceivest the offense of a Nobleman to be greater than indeed it is; and
think, not how far forth he is angry, but what he may do being angry. But
these Fears are vain; and therefore trouble more, because vain. For true things
have their measure; but what comes from uncertainty, is left to the conjecture
and liberty of the timorous Mind. It little differs, whether thou endurest
adverse fortune, or expectest it; but only there is a measure of grieving, none
of fearing. Thou grievest for as much as thou know has happened, thou fear
for as much as may happen.

2. If thou will put off all Fears; propose, that whatsoever thou dreadest lest
it should come, will certainly come; then measure that Evil with thy self, and
tax thy Fear; thou will soon perceive that the thing thou fear, is not in it
self great, but in thy Opinion. Can any harsher misfortune befall thee, than to
be thrust into Banishment, cast into Prison? Can thy Body dread any thing more,
than to be burnt to death? Discuss these particulars, and reduce them to thy
true Fear: thou will find many, even Infidels who contemned all these things.
Stephen amongst the Stones, prayed to God with (...) Mind. Lawrence triumphs in
the Flames, and insults over the Tyrant. The Virgin Apollonia casts her self
into the prepared Fire. Anaxarchus smiles in the Mortar, being beaten to pieces
with Iron Malls. Socrates cheerfully drinks a health to Critias, out of his
poisoned Cup. Why dreadest thou Flames and Fires, and the frowning looks of the
Executioners who encompass thee? Under all that pomp, which affrights Fools,
Death lies hid, which so many Boys and Girls have with joyful minds embraced.
Take away tumults from things, put off their vizards, restore to every thing
its own Countenance, thou will see nothing terrible in them, besides the terror
it self. That happens to us greater Children, which does to little ones: They,
if they see them whom they love, with whom they live, with whom they play,
personated and disguised, are affrighted: But thou more silly than Children,
art arrived at that height of Folly, as not only to be vexed at grief, but with
the Panick Fear of it.

3. Lead thy Mind from the private to the Common Cause. Think thou have a frail
and mortal Body, subject to many Diseases, and at last to Death: And say to thy
self, I knew long since that many adverse verse Accidents hung over my Head:
What therefore do I now dread? I shall be Sick? The Sickness of my Body, will
conduce to the Health of my Soul. I shall be reduced to Poverty? My Life will
be safer and more quiet. I shall lose my Riches? And with them many Cares, and
perpetual Danger. I shall suffer Disgrace? If the cause is just, I will
execrate it; if unjust, I will comfort my self with my own Conscience. I shall
be frustrated in my expectation of the thing I hoped for? Neither do Kings
obtain all they desire. I shall be sent into Banishment? I will go of my own
accord, and make it a Pilgrimage. I shall become Blind? The occasions of many
Cupidities will be cut off. Men will speak ill of me? They will do what I
deserve, and what they are wont. I shall Dye? Upon this Condition I entered to
go forth. But I shall Dye in a Foreign Nation? No Land is Foreign to him, who
has here no permanent City. I shall Dye before my time? None but a Madman
complains to be freed from his Fetters before the time, and to be released out
of Prison. Death, Exile, Grief, are not punishments to be dreaded; for they are
but the tributes of our Mortality. It Is a Folly to fear the things thou can
not avoid.

4. Beware of overmuch Boldness, and do not rashly set upon any thing above
thy strength; for none are sooner oppressed, than they who presume too much of
themselves. Small are our Forces without Gods help, from whom proceeds all our
sufficiency. Boldness springs from the great value we put upon our own Virtue,
from a contempt of our Adversaries, from a precipitate Wit, and from the little
practice and experience we have in the transaction of affairs. He is least
forward, who is most prudent: For he measures his own strength; diligently
casting about what he can do, and considering what he shall be unable to
compass. Audacious persons, when they meet with greater difficulties than they
before apprehended, flag and fall back; acknowledging (when too late) how
uncertain men's providence are, how vain their imaginations. The beginning of
future Calamity, is unwary Security.

5. Anger will never get the Mastery over thee, if thou take away the Opinion
of the esteemed Injury. Thou thy self art the Ringleader of all the crimes
thou committest. Thou bring upon thy self all the Mischiefs which befall
thee. Why do thou charge others with the cause of thy perturbations, if thou
thy self drivest them on headlong? No one is hurt, but by himself. What Nurses
say to Children, Do not cry, and thou shall have it; thou may more rightly
say to thy boiling Mind, Be not Angry, Do not strive and clamor, and what thou
intendest will be better brought to pass. Appoint certain Days, in which thou
proposest, not to fall into Anger, what occasion soever urges thee: then try
thy self for one or two Months after the same manner: thou will find in
process of time, that thou have so far profited, as to laugh at all such
things, which before provoked thee to Anger. Pleasing manners are not so
grateful and agreeable to any of them with whom one lives and converses, as
they are to himself who is induced with them. A peaceable and pacified Mind
has this Happiness: It is always joyful, it evermore triumphs.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Powers of the Rational Soul. The Understanding is to be
restrained from Curiosity. To what Study one should chiefly apply himself. How
bad a thing it is to enquire into other men's Manners. The Judgments of others,
are to be contemned. Of the denial of our Will.
1. GOd has given thee the faculty of Understanding, that thou might know
him, and by knowing him Love him: but Sin has maimed this Faculty with a
double Wound; with Ignorance, and with Blindness. For thou errest in the Notion
of Truth; and art for the most part ignorant what is to be done or to be
avoided. Now with what care a City is to be kept in the time of a raging
Pestilence, or a Castle being besieged by an Enemy, lest some unknown person
should creep in; with so great and far greater diligence we must watch, lest
our Understanding should lie open to any bad thing suggested to it by the
Senses. For the Senses represent the Species of things, the Understanding
admits them, and having judged them, proposes them to the Will. But the Senses
offer both good and bad, and it belongs to the Mind either to embrace or
exclude them.

2. In the first place, the Understanding is to be contained from Curiosity.
Why distractest thou thy Mind, made for solid Wisdom and for God himself, with
vain trifles? As he that tastes Woolf-bane, to find out its quality, perishes
before he feels the savor of it; So they who dive into matters which belong
not to them, undo themselves before they know what they desired. To know that
which profits not, is the next to Ignorance. Who so desires to be truly Wise,
does not learn for his Opinion, but for his Life: nor does he seek in knowledge
the delight of his mind, but the remedy. Would thou gladly know the force of
the Stars? Thou will show thy self foolish, if after thou have found that out,
thou art ignorant of thy own weakness. Will thou speak well and elegantly? It Is
much better thou would learn to hold thy peace. Desire thou to know new
things? What is newer, than to renew thy self? Learn that. Thou will confute
other men's errors? Why correctest thou not thy own? It delights thee to run
over Histories, and to know the deeds of others? Well, if in the mean while
thou art not ignorant of what thou thy self art to do. Thou would accord the
differences of them who are at strife? And why not thy own tumultuous
affections? Did thou not seek after what is superfluous, thou would easily
find what is necessary. Now that knowledge is necessary, which makes thee
rather Good than Learned.

3. Why do thou trouble and torment thy self with such Questions, as would
for the most part better be despised than solved? Why labourest thou with
pertinacious study to learn such things, which if thou knewst them, ought to be
forgotten? But as the intemperance of other things, so also that of Learning
vexes us. There Is no end of Books. Libraries are furnished, more for Ornament,
and to please Spectators, than for the use of Readers. Thou will scarcely be
able to read the Indexes of Books in thy whole life time, although thou
should live many years. Amongst these, many are pernicious; many unworthy to
be read; many vain and frivolous, which after thou have long perused, thou will
be never the wiser. Thou may salute many of them (as it were) from the
Threshold, lest thou may imagine some great and secret good lies concealed
within them. But thou art to stick close to a few, and those choice ones. We
want few Books, to inform a good mind.

4. O the vain thoughts of Mortals! We tire our selves in turning over Books
and Papers, and extend our Wit to many Arts and Sciences, as if we were to live
many Ages: but we neglect the care of eternal Life, which is not acquired by
the skill in Sciences, but by the practice of Virtues. What profits it to
enquire into the Acts of Foreign Kings, and to describe in large Volumes what
the people did and suffered? How much better would it be for thee to extinguish
thy own Evils, than to explicate those of other men to posterity? Geometry
teaches thee to measure Fields; let it rather teach thee to measure what is
sufficient for thy self. Arithmetic teaches thee to number, and to count thy
Incomes; let it rather teach thee to contemn them, and to be willing to lose
the things which are acquired with so great solicitude. Music shows thee how
Voices agree together; let it show thee how thy Mind may agree with it self,
and how thy Senses and Reason may not make a discording sound. It informs thee
which are the flat, which the sharp Moods and Notes; let it instruct thee not
to be extolled in prosperity, not to be dejected in adversity. These and other
things will be profitably known, when thou know thy self. Thou know
nothing at all, notwithstanding that thou knewst all things, if thou know not
thy self.

5. It Is an infamous and sordid Vice to pry into the actions of others, to
enquire into their manners, and rashly to interpret all things. For who art
thou, that thou should presume to judge another Servant? It Is to his Lord,
that be must stand or fall. He who has reserved all judgment to himself, is to
judge all. With what face dare thou invade the Divine Tribunal? Look to thy
self, and search into the secrets of thy own Conscience; See what evils are
there, what good is there wanting, and turn not thy Eyes upon other men's lives
and actions. Thou will find a sufficient plenty of bad weeds to be pulled out
of thy own ground; Faults, which thou may boldly fall upon with a severe
censure. There Is scarcely any thing so justly done, but that a depraved spirit
may wrest it to an ill sense. Heretics abuse the very Gospels; The Jews
calumniated Christ's actions. As Bodies of a melancholic and malevolent
humor, turn all the food they eat into Choler; so an ill-dispos'd Soul,
mis-interprets all it sees, all it hears. A good or bad Intention, makes things
oftentimes good or bad: but this is known to him alone, who searches the reins
and the heart. If another persons doings can by no means be defended; what is
that to thee? Art thou not ashamed to bring filthy things out of corners, and
expose them to public view? Why do thou not observe thy self, who art worse
than others? Practice thy Slanderous tongue against thy self, detract thy self
to thy self, accuse thy own crimes, judge them, condemn them. Thou will avoid
Gods Judgment, if thou art a severe Self-censurer.

6. As we are commonly very ingenious in observing the actions of others,
seeking thereby to be esteemed prudent: so we easily suspect that others in
like sort think and speak ill of us; and that we are to them odious and
despicable. That thou may quell this, cut off in the first place all desire
of pleasing Men, and of being by them highly esteemed: then endeavor to cast
away the very thought of knowing what others think or speak of thee: especially
since it often happens, that they do not so much as once think of thee, whom
thou fanciest to speak ill of thee and observe thee. Say to thy self with the
Apostle; If I pleased men, I were not Christ's Servant. Say to others; It Is
little to me, that I am judged by you, or by the day of man. Thou art truly
such, as thou art with God. The Opinion and Talk of men adds nothing to thy
goodness, takes nothing from thy malice. It Is better to be Good, then so
esteemed.

7. Nothing will fall out contrary to thy Will, if thou totally denyest it, and
transformest it into the Divine Will. Thus thou will enjoy a solid Peace of
Mind, thus thou will attain to a true tranquillity. Thou will live as thou
please, if thou will learn to will what thou ought. And thou ought to
will what God will. This is the only felicity of this Life, to will, that
whatsoever is done may be so done as God will, and not as we our selves will.
God leads thee on to the End, whereto thou were eternally designed, by
sweetnesses and bitternesses, by prosperities and adversities. Obey the Divine
Providence, and follow with Alacrity: for should thou resist, yet thou must
follow, and thou would be wicked. God leads the Willing, draws the Unwilling.

CHAP. XIX. Of the state of Proficients. Several helps to Proficiency. The
value and use of Time. The Presence of God, Necessary.
1. IF thou desire to be Good, first believe that thou art Bad. Thou will
never profit, if thou leavest off the desire to profit. To have no will to go
onwards, is to go backwards. Persevere therefore as thou have begun, and make
what haste thou can, to the end thou may quickly enjoy a quiet and composed
Mind. It Is an argument of a Mind changed into a better Condition, if thou see
thy Crimes, which before thou knew not. So we are wont to congratulate sick
persons, when they are sensible that they are sick. Do not easily give credit
to thy self; but discuss and observe thy self, and take a trial of thy
Proficiency from the firmness of thy Mind, and the diminution of thy
Cupidities. Thou may esteem thy self to be in the Form of Proficients, when
thou shall have obtained an absolute power over thy self. It Is an inestimable
good to possess ones self, and to be one. A good man, is always the same; a
bad man, always another.

2. Thou may, if thou will, in one day climb to the top of Sanctity, if
averting thy whole Heart from Creatures, thou convertest it to thy Creator.
Now, whether thou leadest a life inwardly with God, thou will know by these
signs: If transitory things displease thee, if solitude delights thee, if thou
aimest at what is most perfect, if thou valuest not men's Judgments and
Opinions. Moreover the continual Meditation of Christ's Life and Passion, will
afford thee a great help to attain to all Virtue. He is the Book of Life, in
which alone, as in a rich and well stored Library, thou will find whatsoever
appertains to Salvation, although all other Books with their Authors perished.
But it suffices not to know and meditate Christ, unless thou also imitatest
him, and so live, as he taught by his Word and Example. Crooked things cannot
be corrected, but by the Rule.

3. One said excellently well, That they who will profit, ought so to live, as
if they were perpetually under cure. For many things are continually to be
observed, which put a stop to one hastening to the Citadel of Perfection; as,
when thou love thy self or any creature inordinately; when thou stand so
affected to external things, as that thou would be troubled at their being
lost or taken away from thee; when thou too much seek thy own ease and
content in Meat, Drink, Talk, wandering abroad; when thou embusiest thy self
more then is necessary in temporal affairs; when thou pertinaciously adherest
to thy own judgment and opinion; when thou observest not Gods inward motions,
and refusest to listen to him, speaking in thy interior by his secret
Inspirations. These are the chief Impediments which detain thee in thy journey;
which thou art to remove with all vigilance and diligence, and set thy self
manfully to thy work. Let Virtue animate thee in all thou undertakest; let the
most perfect End encourage thee to proceed with promptitude and alacrity; let a
pure Intention comfort thee in thy progress: and so apply thy self to the work,
as that it may fully equal the prenotion thou have of its perfection.
Proficiency consists not in the multitude of Exercises, but in doing those
perfectly which thou daily performest. For praise is not so much due to the
deed, as to the manner of doing it.

4. The Days fly, Time hastens, and what is past, no man can recall, and give
it back to thee. Thou do not live, but thou art to live; for thy life looks
always on the Morrow. So thy Life slides away, whilst thou art studying to
prepare instruments to preserve it: and in the mean while Old age steals upon
thee, Death seizes on thee, and finds thee unprepared. As men journeying
together, and deceiving the time with mutual Colloquies, arrive at their
journeys end before they apprehended themselves near it: even so the continued
journey of this Life, in which thou marchest on, both sleeping and waking, in
the same track, will not appear what it is to thee being employed and
distracted, till thou arrivest at the end of it. Why then do thou stay, why
do thou idle? Put a Value upon Time, make use of it speedily: prize highly
this Day, yea this Hour, for the loss of it is irreparable. Thou suffer not
thy Inheritance to be invaded by any one; if a small contention arises about
the Limits, thou runnest presently to Arms and Lawsuits: but thou permittest
thy Life and Time to be taken away by any one; being most prodigal of that
thing, of which thou may only honestly be Covetous. Compute thy Age, call thy
past years to a just account, although thou should add to them an hundred
more, thou will find thou have yet fewer then thou numberest. For how much of
these has Sleep, Gluttony, Friends, and idle ramblings abroad snatched from
thee? How much has lain without use? How much has slipped away from thee
doing nothing, or worse then nothing, whilst thou were insensible of thy loss?
Thou will understand how little is left thee of the whole, and confess that
Death takes thee before thy time. Thou frequently complainest of the days past
and gone, which thou have unadvisedly lost: why endeavourest thou not so to
spend the time present, that when it is also gone, thou may say, I see not
how I could better have employed it? Each single day is only present, and that
also by Moments. Why losest thou this day, which is thine; and disposest of the
day to come, which is none of thine? The greatest impediment of living, is
Delay. Live to day, it is late to live to morrow.

5. Look evermore upon God, in each thought, word, and work, excluding all
other Ends whatsoever: and follow his only Will. He never swerves from the
right path, who chooses God for his Guide. Thy affairs will be in a good
condition, if thou directest all thou do to Gods Glory; and so performest
each particular action, as if he were thy Spectator, who sees all things,
sustains all things, provides for all things. Thou can never shun his Sight;
for he is present not only to thy words and actions, but to thy most inward
cogitations. When thou have shut the doors, and sit in Darkness, do not
fancy thy self to be alone, God is with thee. His presence should render thy
secret more sacred. To him nothing is shut. In him we live, move, and are. Eat
and Drink before him; Walk with him; Talk with him of all thy affairs; Raise to
him thy whole Life and Conversation. Render thy self a worthy Object for him to
fix his Eyes upon, and whom he may always amiably behold. There Is a great
necessity of being good imposed upon thee, since thou actest before the Eyes of
an all-seeing Judge. So live, as if there were none in the world, but God and
thy self: Whatsoever, howsoever his Providence shall dispose of thee, embrace
it willingly, whether it be adverse or prosperous. Thou seek God, what
matters it whether thou come to him by this or by that way? And he grant,
that thou may at last come to him.

CHAP. XX. Of the Good of Solitude. Evil Society is to be shunned. What, and
how many the Worlds Vices are. The study of a Proficient is the acquisition of
Virtues. Certain Signs of Virtue's being obtained.
1. It Is a great argument of a Mind well composed, and cleansed from depraved
Affections, that it can dwell with it self. As God, who with himself alone is
blessed, remains always in himself; so thou will come nearest to Gods
Felicity, if thou can learn to remain with thy self. And surely if thou will,
thou needst never be Solitary, if thou will never be separated from Christ. Now
if thou have an Itch of talking, talk with thy self; but beware thou talk not
with an Evil person. Would thou know with what Colloquies thou may
entertain thy self? With such as men most willingly talk of with others: speak
ill of thy self, to thy self. Lay open thy Vices, and chastise whatsoever thou
find in thy self worthy of punishment. Some Vice or other will never be
wanting, which will require to be cured. Hide thy self in a peaceable vacancy,
but hide also thy vacancy. To Glory in Solitude, is a sloathful Ambition. And
that thy Solitude may be both pleasing and profitable to thee, join an internal
recollection to thy Corporeal abstraction. Withdraw thy self from vain
occupations, and depart not only from men, but also from such things as do not
concern thee. Be free from every Creature, and exclude their images out of thy
Heart. Cast off all solicitudes concerning frail and transitory things, all
impertinencies of thoughts; and attend to thy self, and to God alone, in the
secret recess of thy Heart. In this Silence of Mind, in this Oblivion of all
things, and in this Nakedness, consists the Hearts true rest and tranquillity.
Fly hither, here hide thy self, aim always at this: for God is there found,
where all Creatures are forsaken.

2. If thou will be Good, shun the company of the Bad. Nothing is so pernicious
to good manners, as to commit ones self to the people. Thou shall never carry
back the manners thou broughtest in. A mind which is tender and facile, cannot
bear the violence of Vices, ushered in with so many attendants. We easily pass
to the major Part. A Table-Companion who is delicate, mollifies by little and
little: A Rich Neighbor irritates the Cupidity. Thou may perish, by one
example of Luxury or Avarice. Parents draw to badness, Associates draw,
Servants draw. All things are full of Dangers, full of Snares, and Deceits. As
soon as we are brought forth into Light, we are presently surrounded with all
manner of depravedness, and perverse Opinions. There Is scarcely any one in the
world, who either commends not some Vice, or impresses it not; or infects not
some ignorant person with it. Thou containest thy self sometimes within thy own
Closet, separated from the Market and Commerce of Men: Oh, how sweet and
desirable is this retreat! All things within are calm, all things quiet,
without a Cloud, without a Tempest. One comes by chance and calls thee abroad;
thou followest him. Others join themselves, a Company is made up, you march
away together, Sin is committed by some one or other excess; and thou who
wentst forth good, returnest very bad. But thou perceivest not the Wounds of
thy Soul, till thou art again in thy solitude. Go back therefore into thy self
as soon as thou can, lest the multitude infect thy mind with its Vices and
Errors. That Mind is most joyful, which is distracted with fewest Objects.

3. Fancy to thy self, that thou art translated for a short time to the top of
a high Mountain: Take from thence a view of this wretched World; and thou will
learn to hate it, and love to retire out of it into thy Solitude. Thou will
behold the ways beset with Thieves; the Seas infested by Pirates; Kingdoms
molested with Wars; the Fields flowing with Humane Blood, and every where Vice
and Wickedness abounding. Thou will see such things done in secret by lewd
persons, which surely cannot please the very Actors themselves. Thou will find
things so unworthy, so unbeseeming, that no one would doubt but that the doers
of them are Mad, were there only a few which did otherwise: but the multitude
of mad people, patronizes them from being so reputed. Amongst the Laws
themselves crimes are committed; nor is Innocence there out of danger, where it
is defended. The Guiltless perishes, the Guilty is pardoned; and the Crime
seems a less matter than the Absolution. There Is no fear of the Laws, for that
which may be redeemed is not dreaded. The Tongues of Slanderers are bitter, the
Mouths of Flatterers are fraudulent; there Hatred rages, here Falsehood
deceives. One lies soaked in Wine; another absorp'd with Sluggishness.
Insatiable Avarice detains this man, and Ambition depending always upon the
opinion of others, tires that man. Look into the Marketplace, swarming with
people; thou wilt say, there are so many Vices as men. All offend against their
Neighbor, by Injuries; against God, by Contempt; against things, by Abusing
them. They gather all things together against themselves in judgment, being
guilty of all. And how can thou securely keep thy footing, and have recourse
to thy self, amongst so many Vices urging on every side; which as soon as thou
desire to arise and lift up thy Eyes, depress and drown thee? It Is a hard
matter for any one to be innocent, where Troops of bad men reign: for if they
cannot alter thee, they will at least hinder thee. There is one way to a stable
tranquillity, which is, to withdraw thy self from so many evils, and retreat
into a station, where free from all contagion, thou may securely behold the
worlds raging Pestilence. That Mind is unconquerable, which has forsaken
external things, and attending to himself alone, contents himself in his own
Castle. To such a one, the World is a Prison, and Solitude is a Paradise.

4. It Is a vain thing to sequester thy self from Men, unless thou forcest thy
Mind to be attentive to it self, and to be diligent in the exercise of Virtues.
Man has nothing that is Good, if Virtue is wanting: There Is no rest, no
felicity, but from Virtue. There are three things, which mutually correspond
with each other in the Universe: amongst all and above all, God; amongst
sensible things, Light; amongst the perfections of the Mind, Virtue. God is the
Light and Virtue of all things: Light is the Virtue of the World, and the Image
of God: Virtue is the Light of the Soul, by which we are named, and are the
Children of God. Thou art to approach this with a purged Mind, if thou desire
to arrive at the expected height of perfection. For Virtue is the perfection of
Man, the restorer of innocence, full of all joy and sweetness. It Is the
supplement of Nature, which of it self is unable to get the supernatural good.
It facilitates good works, it makes us live uprightly; by it we, who are (as it
were) blind, are illuminated, by it we resist Sim by it we are stored with
merits, by it we deserve eternal life. In this study, it is in the first place
necessary thou should foreknow the Nature and Acts of each Virtue; because
no one loves what he knows not. Then thou art never to cease from the Act and
Exercise; and if occasions are wanting, thou art to imitate the Soldiers, who
in the midst of Peace, prepare themselves by feigned Skirmishes to future
Battles. Imagine that most enormous Crimes are laid to thy Charge, think thy
self reviled with all sorts of Reproaches, fancy that thou art violently
bereaft of all thou possessest, and exercise thy Patience, as if it were truly
so. Thou will not tremble when the thing it self happens, if thou thus
exercisest thy self before it happens. The Soldier brings a great courage to
the Battle, who has often dipped his Sword in blood.

5. The Habits of Virtues are not acquired without long exercise. And whether
thou have gotten any one of them, thou may guess by these signs: to wit, If
thou feel the Vices opposite to Virtue to be extinguished, or for the most
part suppressed. If thou find, that the motions of bad affections will
endure to be curbed by the bridle of Reason, and that thou can easily compel
them to obey thy Mind. If thou exercisest acts of Virtue without difficulty,
yea, and with delight. If thou valuest not the sayings of Tepid persons, and
with a full liberty of spirit, rousest up thy self to perform those things
which displease the Imperfect. If thou abhorrest with a certain connatural
loathsomness those bad acts, to which thou were before habitually inclined. If
thou seem not to be delighted (no, not so much as in thy Dream) with any
filthy thing, or that thou approvest not any unjust thing. If thou strivest to
imitate those things which thou praisest and admirest in others; and abstainest
from those which thou reprehendest. If thou think no fault to be little, and
studiously avoidest and observest every imperfection, be it never so small. If
when thou see or hear that thy equals flourish with Riches and Dignities,
thou neither enviest them, nor art troubled at it. If thou ingenuously
acknowledgest thy errors, desiring to be by all corrected and reprehended. If
being content with the testimony of thy own Conscience, thou reservest and
hidest thy good works within thy self: for the Reward of a thing that is well
done, is to have done it. If finally, thou applyest thy self to the study of
Virtue without intermission: for true Virtue never flags, but is evermore in
Action.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Theological Virtues. Faith is to be approved by Works.
Confidence is to be placed in God alone. Motives to love God. The love of our
Neighbors is manifested by Benefits. An Exhortation to Alms-deeds.
1. THe Groundwork of all other Virtues, and the foundation of the whole
Christian Life, is Faith; without which no one can please God. This is the
wisdom, which has tamed the World; to which we must firmly adhere, rejecting
all inquisition and curiosity. Believe then, and act accordingly: for Faith
without Works is dead. Thy Sayings and thy Profession brag of Faith: take heed
that thy Life and Manners preach not Infidelity. Thou believe the Gospel, why
obeyest thou not the Gospel? Thou believe an eternal Life, why preferrest
thou this short time, before unending Eternity? What profits it to believe true
and good things, if thon art false, and actest bad things? It can hardly be
persuaded, that he believes well, who lives ill. For he truly believes, who
practices what he professes.

2. Whereas it is most certain, that all things are disposed and governed by
Gods Providence; in so much as not a Sparrow alights from the Air, nor a Leaf
falls from a Tree without his permission and will: do thou therefore deliver up
to him thy whole self, with a generous Mind, and a great Confidence, nothing at
all doubting, but that thou shall receive fit assistance for the management of
all thy affairs. Know that all humane helps and advices are deceitful and
uncertain; and suffer thy self to be governed and guided by God without any
anxiety. Although things unexpected happen, whereby the whole order of thy
actions and counsels, may seem to be quite cut off and destroyed; (as with
Diseases, with false Accusations, or with other more grievous Accidents) yet be
not dejected; but fortifying thy self with Divine Hope, leave all to his
disposal: For by these chances, by these disasters, the Divine Wisdom leads
thee to that End, which from all Eternity he designed for thee. He feels not
present Evils, who hopes for future Goods. So much a man can, and so much he
has, as he Hopes and Believes.

3. Charity, the Form and Queen of all Virtues, beholds both God and the
Neighbor. And surely God is to be beloved with thy whole Heart, with thy whole
Soul, with thy whole Strength, above all that is amiable, purely for himself,
and for his own infinite goodness. That thou Art, that thou Live, that thou
Movest, that thou Feel, that thou Understand, is the Grace and Favor of
God. He Redeemed thee from the Bondage of the Devil: he has ennobled thy Soul
with innumerable Prerogatives: he has prepared for thee an eternal Life, no
Merits of thine preceding. Heaven, Earth, Air, Water, and all that is in them,
cry daily to thee, to render to him thy greatest Love, who for thee created
them. Why roamest thou abroad to seek thy Souls good? Love that One, which is
all Good. Seek that Simple Good, which is the Sovereign Good, then which
nothing can be imagined greater, nothing more Lovely. It Is Love alone, which
enables thee to repay, though not equally, a mutual return to thy Creator. But
Love is not Idle, nor does it seek it self; It works great matters, if it is.
No Difficulty is inaccessible to Love. A true Lover may dye, but he cannot be
conquered.

4. Nature has ingraffed Love in all men, and made them sociable: for we are
all members of the great Body, called to the same Faith, to the same Glory. He
Loves not God, who Loves not his Brother. Now, the Acts of Affection toward
our Neighbors, are; to conferr Benefits upon all, to profit all, to prevent
all with love and officiousness. Thou art therefore to bestow Benefits upon the
needy, with a prompt and joyful Mind; without delay, unless it be in the
shamefacedness of the Receiver. Let it suffice thee for the affording of thy
remedy to such as suffer by any sad disaster, that thou know their indigency.
I crave, is a troublesome and burdensome word: if thou forestallest and
preventest the desire of thy Friend, before thou art asked, thou multipliest
thy Gift. He had it not gratis, who when he had asked it, received it. If thou
could not prevent him, cut off many words of the Asker, that thou may not
seem to be entreated: and make it appear by thy promptitude in giving, that
thou would have done it, though it had not been demanded. Then join good
Words to good Deeds, and intermix no sad thing with thy Benefit, not a seeming
unwillingness, not a slowness, not an exprobation, not finally any vain
boasting. The thing it self will speak, though thou holdst thy peace; and he
who beholds in secret, will reward thee.

5. Amongst the Acts of Christian Benevolence, Almsdeeds hold the chief
place; for thereby Faith is proved, Sins are redeemed, Heaven is purchased.
Take heed therefore of despising a poor man, since though himself is poor, he
can make thee Rich. Thou art sold by thy Sins, redeem thy self with thy Money:
Make of the instruments of Avarice, a means to obtain Mercy. A Player,
provoking thee to laughter, goes away rewarded; shall Christ promising thee the
Kingdom of Heaven get nothing? Thou payest Tribute to the Prince whether thou will or no, even although thou receivest no fruit from thy Fields; and will thou refuse a bit of Bread, out of what thou have over and above, to Christ thy
King? Take heed, lest sparing thy Money, thou becomest guilty of spilling thy
Brothers blood. If thou have not succored him, thou have slain him. Thou
think how well others may live after thee; thou think not how ill thy
self may dye. It Is better something of thy Patrimony should be wanting to thy
Heirs, then thou to thy self in thy Salvation. Look into thy Accounts: Observe,
what in thy Eternal Country, what here thou possessest. Of all thy Goods and
Chattels, thou will find that only in Death, which thou have sent before thee
into Heaven, by the hands of the Poor. Reproach thy Infidelity. The Enemy may
invade thy House, but Heaven he cannot.

CHAP. XXII. Of Prudence. Its Necessity and Difficulty. The Duty of a Prudent
man.
1. AS no Work can well be brought to perfection by Architects, without the
Line and the Level; so neither by us, without Prudence. This is the Square of
other Virtues, the right Rule of our Actions, the Eye of the Soul, the Art of
living. That Life cannot be pleasant, from which Prudence is absent. All
confess this Art to be of greatest difficulty: And it is also obscure. The
Difficulty arises from this, that it embraces within the compass of its
consideration, all things as well in general as in particular. And also, that
there is no certain state of humane things; which being always variable,
contingent, and depending upon diverse Circumstances, it is not for every ones
Wit, to settle in them a certain Rule, and to join together and mingle such
things by a certain uniform temper, which are oftentimes repugnant in
themselves. Now the Obscurity proceeds from that darkness, wherein the Causes
of doing things are involved. The Tops indeed appear, but their Foundations lie
hid. The Divine Decree of the prosperous or unsuccessful event of things, lies
also concealed; so that few have this Virtue. Few can foresee what in any
affair is most expedient.

2. Use and Remembrance beget Prudence. For the single things which it governs,
are made known to man by Use and Experience. Thou will be safe, if thou give
credit to thy own and others experiment, and put not thy self upon such
high matters, where thou must tremble, and from whence thou must fall. But that
thou may prudently dispose all things, thou art first to look into thy self;
then, into the affairs thou undertakest; next, into them for whom or with whom
thou art to act. And thou art to take an exact estimate of thy self, lest thou
seem to thy self more able then thou art. One fell, out of a confidence in
his Eloquence; another, burdened his Patrimony with more then it could bear; a
third, oppressed his weak Body with a laborious Office. In the next place, thou
art to weigh the things thou undertakest, and compare together thy own forces,
and the things which are to be done. The Loads which are bigger then the
Bearer, beat him down. Thou art also to put thy hand to such things, which thou
either may or hopest to make an end of. Afterward, a choice of the men is
also to be made; whether they are worthy upon whom thou should bestow a part
of thy Life: their Manners are to be examined, lest thou should hurt thy
self, whilst thou studiest to profit others. Lastly, it is to be considered,
whether thy nature is proper to bring about these things, and thou art to
incline that way to which the strength of thy Wit carries thee. Where there is
a reluctance in Nature, the Labor comes to nothing.

3. A Prudent man enterprises nothing, so long as his Mind is agitated with any
perturbation; for a Spirit which is shaken and deluded with the enchantments of
a depraved affection, cannot discern what is true and honest. Also
Precipitation is a great enemy to Prudence, and has drawn many into grievous
and inextricable Mischances. Therefore a Wise man does nothing Rashly, and
submits his own Judgment to the Counsel of others. Men's thoughts are timorous,
their Providence unconstant, the issue of their affairs dubious, and their
experiences fallacious. There is safety, where are many Councels. It belongs
also to a Prudent man, to lay the thing nakedly open, and to look acutely into
it, as it is without color and covering, which are wont to deceive the unwary.
Set aside Money, Fame, Dignity: search into the thing it self; inquire what it
is, not what it is called. It Is the part of a Fool, to be cheated with images
and shadows. Then thou art to spy, as from a Watchtower, whatsoever may fall
out; lest thou may be afterward forced to pronounce that fond word, I did
not think it. A long Consultation is to be adhibited, a mature judgment, and a
subtle examination, lest some bad circumstance may vitiate the action, lest
Prudence may degenerate into Craftiness, and lest in so near a Neighborhood of
the true and counterfeit Good, thou may not embrace Vice for Virtue. Thy
Election being at last made, cut off all delay, and fall presently to execute
what thou have decreed. There Is no place for lingering in good Counsel, which
cannot be praised till it is performed.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Justice, and of Religion. The Acts of Both. What Penance is,
and wherein it consists.
1. Justice the highest Virtue, ordained for others, not for it self,
transfuses all it has into its Neighbors, asking nothing but the use of it
self. This averts men from mutual injuries, and settles the whole World in
peace. This is a certain tacit Convention of Nature, and the tie of humane
Society, nor can there be any thing praiseworthy without it. A Just man hurts
no one, he Challenges not what is another, he profits all, he thinks and
speaks well of all, he gives to every one his due, he hinders not another
good. If he presides, he commands just things, he suffers all to have access to
him, he preferrs the good of his Subjects before his own profit; he restrains
Vices by punishments, he encourages the virtuous by rewards, and thus retains
all in their duties. If he is an Underling, he preserves Concord, he obeys the
Laws, and the precepts of his Superiors; and resting content with his own
condition, he desires neither Offices nor Dignities, nor thrusts himself into
things not belonging unto him. He is Just for justice sake, for he knows no
greater reward of a Just action, than to be Just.

2. Religion, the most excellent of the Moral Virtues, looks immediately upon
God, and upon his worship and honor. Now, the first Worship is to believe and
acknowledge him; then, to render to him his own Majesty, his own Goodness. It Is
but little to know God, which the Devils do, who hate him: love is moreover
exacted, consisting in these things, (which would to God they were as well
accomplished as known.) Thou know that God is he, who presides over the
World, who preserves Mankind, who rules all things: thou confessest him the
only Powerful, the only Good, the only Immense: thou expectest from him, as
from thy Sovereign Good, and thy last End, everlasting Beatitude. Why then do
thou not (as thou ought) worship him? Why yieldest thou not to him the
highest Veneration? Why do thou prefer a vile clod of Earth before him? Vain
is thy Religion, unless thou prov'st it by thy doings. Will thou be truly
Religious? Walk before God, and be perfect. He sufficiently worships him, who
imitates him. True Religion ties thee to God, God to thee. Keep it untouched
from Negligence, from Errors, from Sin. It Is a great Folly to preach Faith with
the Tongue, Infidelity with the Manners. Men of this note were long since
derided by the most famous Philosopher amongst the Heathens: There Is nothing
(says he) more glorious than the Christians, when they talk: nothing more
wretched, when they act.

3. Penance is the repairer of the Divine Rights violation; which inclines to a
Detestation of Sin, with an efficacious Will to satisfy God who is thereby
offended. For this is Penance, to detest Sins past, to expiate them, to consent
no more unto them. That which pleased, is past: that which Reproaches, which
Racks, which Damns, remains. What avails it to hide thy former filthiness? No
Criminal, himself being his own Judge, is absolved. Nature has appointed a
certain Tribunal in the very Mind of Man; where every one is the Accuser,
Witness, and Judge of his own Wickedness. Compel thy Senses to be every day
here present, to render an Account. Plead thy Cause at thy own Bar, and argue
as much as thou can against thy self. Spend the whole day in this scrutiny:
and measure exactly all thy sayings, all thy doings, and thy very thoughts,
hiding nothing, passing by nothing. If thou acknowledgest thy impiety, God
pardons it; if thou confessest it, he cures it. What matters it that no one
knows thy crime, since thou know it? Do fancy that it is better to be damned
in secret, than openly to be absolved? Wheresoever thou lie concealed, thy
Conscience is with thee, thou can not fly from it. Thou art most miserable,
if thou despisest it.

4. Life is divided into three Times, what is, what was, and what is to come.
The present is momentary, ending before it is come: the future is not yet: but
the past days will be all present when thou command, and will permit
themselves to be looked in to as often as thou please. Fear not thy Memory, nor
be ashamed to retort it back upon what is past, and to upbraid thy self with
thy own Errors. By how much more frequently thou shall do it, by so much the
sooner thou will be amended. Take Revenge upon thy self; and do not again
admit, what it grieveth thee to have committed. Many men being delivered from
Shipwreck, bid for evermore adieu both to Sea and Ship, and honor Gods benefit
by the perpetual memory of the danger. I desire thou also may have this good
Solicitude, not to adventure to try again, what thou have once dreaded. Thou
have escaped a very great danger, do not expose thy self any more to it. God
has spared as often as thou have sinned: take heed thou growest not therefore
worse, because God is so good. If thou sometimes think what thou art to do;
why not rather what thou have done? For the Council of the future, is taken
from the past. Many would come to Wisdom, did they not think they were come
already. Unless thou daily amendest, thou will daily grow worse.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Piety and Observance. Obedience is commended, and also
Gratitude. How a Benefit is to be Received and Repayed.
1. NO force of Words can express, how laudable a thing it is, when a man can
say, I have yielded to my Parents, and always obeyed them: I have ever
submitted to their Command, whether easy or harsh: I have behaved my self
toward my Country, as beseem'd a faithful Citizen: I have never ceased to do
good to my Brethren and Kindred: I have endeavored to outvie all men in
Benefits. These surely are the Offices of Piety, by which we give due respect
to our Country, Parents, Brethren, and Friends. And what Piety performs to
them, Observance performs toward Prelates, Princes, Masters, and others who
any way excel us in Dignity, Wisdom, Age, Religion, and Sanctity. To such, we
are wont to arise, to bare the Head, to give way, to fall down at their knees,
to kiss their hands or garments, to show all sort of Honor, according to each
Countries custom. Now, thou will perform all these External Ceremonies with an
open and reverend Mind, if there precedes in thy Understanding a high esteem of
their quality. For from hence there will spring up in thy Will a certain awful
Fear, which will incline thee to avoid an overgreat familiarity with them, and
make thee as it were to leap back from their Greatness, to thy own Littleness.
All power is from God. Whatsoever honor thou give to thy Betters, will be
within their due, if in them thou considerest God.

2. As our Calamity sprung from the Disobedience of our first Parent; so we are
reduced to Felicity by the Obedience of Gods Son, if we also render our selves
Obedient. Obedience is the perfection of all things, and a most firm connection
of them to their beginning: for by an admirable Circle it draws all things to
and fro, from God into God. Christ commended this Virtue above the rest, who
lest he should lose it, lost his Life. This is said to be better than
Sacrifice, because by it we offer up the Sacrifice of our own proper Will. The
Edict of a Superior, is to be received as a Voice sent from Heaven; without
enquiring the Cause or Motive of the Command. He knows not how to Judge, who
has perfectly learned to Obey. Let the Superior warn me, let the Law command
me what I am to do; I dispute not; I excuse not, but I simply and speedily
Obey: being prepared to execute all things, whether easy or hard, with a like
cheerfulness and promptitude. There Is but one thing in which thou may be
refractory and stubborn, to wit, If any one withdraws thee from Good, and
forces thee to infringe Gods Law. All other commands, thou art constantly and
without contradiction to put in execution.

3. Gratitude, looks upon a Debt which is due for a received Benefit. And
surely nothing is to be more regarded, than the esteem of a Benefit, if not
from the greatness of the thing, at least from the bestowers Mind and
Affection. Then a continual Mindfulness of the good turn is necessary. He
cannot return thanks, who remembers not the courtesy; and he who remembers it,
even then pays it. This requires not riches, not industry, not felicity; every
one has it in a readiness. Howsoever abilities may be wanting, yet a Will
cannot, wherewith thou may repay even Kings themselves. When thou receivest a
Benefit from any one, receive it joyfully, and profess thy joy, that it may be
manifest to the Donor, and that so he may reap the fruit of his Gift. It Is a
just cause of Joy, to see a Friend joyful, a more just to have made him so.
Who so receives a Benefit gratefully, willingly, graciously, has paid the
first pension for it. He never had a Will to be grateful, who cast the Benefit
so far from him, as that it was out of his sight. He who extolls it, who
professes himself unable to render thanks, has already rendered them. He who
receives it disdainfully and negligently, seems to set a small value upon it.
He who scarcely makes show to be sensible of it, hardly moves his lips, is more
ungrateful, than if he held his peace. A good man, when he receives a Benefit,
thinks presently of restoring it. For what is so contrary to ones duty, as not
to restore what one has received? Nor is the Restitution to be made in an
equal measure, but in a larger; as the Earth renders the received Seed with a
more plentiful Harvest. Yet beware you make not an overspeedy return of thy
Gratitude. Some, when any small Token is sent them, unseasonably return
another; thereby testifying they are nothing indebted. This is a kind of
rejecting the Gift, when thou suddenly blottest out its memory by another Gift.

CHAP. XXV. Of Truth, and the Use of it. Simplicity is praised. Acts of
Fidelity.
1. LEt Truth be found in all thy discourses, gestures, writings, and other
external Signs. A Lying lip, does not become a Christian man. It Is a Womanish
and base Vice, to shut up one thing in the Breast, and utter another with the
Mouth. A generous man tells things simply as they are, without exaggerations,
without amplifications; he deceives not, dissembles not, and avoids all idle
circumstances and coverings of words. Simple Truth loves simple words. It
desires to be seen naked, because it is Innocent. But he who lies or deceives,
obscures the matter with a double meaning, that it may remain concealed. He who
speaks ill, as well as he who does ill, hates the Light. Beware therefore that
thy Speech be not as thy Clothing is, one for the City, another for the
Campaigne, that there be not an ostentation of Truth in thy Tongue, an
occultation of it in thy Heart. Nature has a horror against this Vice. Look
upon Children, not yet arrived at the use of Reason: They object a Lie to their
Play-mates, amongst their first approaches; and although out of a certain
levity they admit them, yet by an inborn rectitude of judgment, they condemn
them. In which, we are to admire Gods Providence, in inserting such Virtues in
the Mind, without which humane life and society cannot subsist. Now a Lie, is
of all Vices most pernicious to man's life. For if thou abominatest all falsehood
of speech, as a thing unworthy an heroic mind; why fear thou not to be thy
self a Lie, and to live a Lie? It Is a great matter to act One Man.

2. Simplicity, a Virtue little known to men, is of so great dignity, that God
himself is greatly delighted therewith: for With the Simple is his
communication. He being most Simple and Entire, will have the Souls to be
Simple which come to him. Now, he is Simple, who is not divided into various
things; who without duplicity and hypocrisy, shows himself such a one
exteriourly, as interiourly he is; who heartily and sincerely acknowledges his
own defects, when occasion is offered; who is a Child in malice, and detests
all Political manner of proceeding; who (not excluding the circumspection of
Prudence) conceives all to be sincere, and suspects no evil of any one: who
refuses not to seem to be a Fool amongst Men, that he may be Wise in the sight
of God: who preserving himself free from all multiplicity, performs all things
with a Simple intention to please God. Why (O unhappy Craftiness!) art thou
troubled about many things? One thing is necessary, that is, to get to him who
is one, and most Simple. Thou will never arrive at the Mark, if thou marchest
in a double Pathway.

3. Fidelity is to be embraced amongst the greatest and chiefest goods of
Mankind: For take this away, and thou take away the use of Commerce,
Friendships are dissolved, Covenants are broken, the whole Commonwealth is
confounded. Yet this also is a rare Virtue, and almost unknown to the world. So
many Witnesses adhibited to Contracts, so many strengthening of Bargains, so
many cautious Conditions; do every where accuse man's Perfidiousness: Yet all
this industrious wariness can hardly suffice, to make the Contracts firm and
indisputable. So sordid are many Men, that Gain is to them more sacred than
Fidelity. O Confession of public fraud and wickedness, disgraceful to
Mankind! We give credit to no one without a Witness, without a Surety; and we
conceive Faith will be more safely kept in written Instruments, than in the
Chapel of man's Heart. But a Faithful person constantly performs whatsoever he
promised; carefully conceals whatsoever is committed to his secrecy; keeps his
pledged Faith even to Enemies, and preferrs it before Kingdoms, and Life it
self. He indeed promises slowly, because he knows that speedy Repentance waits
upon hasty Promises: but if he has once passed his Promise, he fails not, he
violates it not, unless the state of Affairs chance to be changed, or that he
may fall into the danger of Sin by his performance. That Promise obliges no
man, which cannot be fulfilled without wickedness.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Friendship. With what Offices it is to be entertained. Certain
Precepts appertaining to mutual Conversation.
1. NOthing is more necessary to man's life, than Friendship, nothing more
commodious, nothing more pleasant. Friendship, is a mutual Benevolence, of two
persons, founded in Virtue, and joined to a communication of Goods. How great a
Good is this, where Breasts are prepared into which every secret may safely
descend, whose Conscience thou fear less than thy own, whose Company eases
thy Solitude, whose Counsels strengthen thy Resolutions, whose Cheerfulness
disperses thy Sadness, whose very Presence delights and glads thy Heart? What
is sweeter, than to have a man to whom thou fear not to confess what thou
have committed, whom to meet withal may be part of thy Cure? Certain
diminutive Animals, when they bite are not felt, so slender and couzening is
their force; yet the ensuing swelling shows the morsure: The same will befall
thee in the Conversation of a good Friend; thou will not feel how and when he
profits thee, thou will find he has profited thee. But there can be no true
Friendship, unless there intervenes a Reciprocal Love: To love is more
principal than to be beloved; and therefore Benevolence is established for the
Foundation, Return of Love for the Concomitant. That also is true Friendship,
and coupled with the Glue of Christ, which is not grounded upon any private
interest and profit, not upon the sole corporal presence, not upon lying
obsequiousness, not upon deceitful flattery; but which is contracted in the
fear of God, and to improve our selves in the study of Divine Learning. There
can be no solid Friendship in Evil.

2. Great caution is to be used in choosing a Friend: according to that common
saying, Many Bushels of Salt must be eaten together, to make Friendship
complete. But four qualities are chiefly requisite to him, with whom thou
desire to join in Friendship. Faith, that most difficult thing, the bare
shadow whereof is now only found upon Earth, that thou may safely commit to
him thy self and thy concerns. Intention, that Friendship may have an honest
end, and that so divine a thing may not degenerate into filthiness. Discretion,
that thou may know what thou art to perform, and what to expect. Patience,
that thy Mind may be prepared to suffer for thy Friend all occurring
Adversities. When thou have experienced him to be thus qualified, thou art
moreover to search in what manner he has used his former Friends. For, thou
may hope, he will be such a one to thee, as he has proved himself to have
been to others. A faithful Friend is a living Treasure, to be with great care
preserved, and with great grief, if he perishes, to be lamented. Happy art
thou, if thou have met with such a one, who loves thee, not thy Riches, not thy
Table, not thy Wit; who will correct thee when thou errest, raise thee when
thou fallest, warn thee as thou runnest. Thou will not find one like him, under
the large Canopy of Heaven: There are many who are called Friends, but very few
who truly are so. No one loves another gratis. Who so has regard to himself,
who so proposes external things for his end, can be no true Friend. He will so
long love thee, as he shall find thee beneficial to him. The Table being taken
away, he will fail thee, and will end as he began. True Friendship, for the
most part, is there wanting, where it is believed most to abound.

3. As a Physician being to Cure his dearly beloved Patient, spares neither the
Iron nor the Fire: so art thou to carry thy self toward thy Friend, standing
in need of Correction, freely, boldly, constantly, neglecting nothing,
dissembling nothing. It Is a damnable Obsequiousness, by which Vices are
cherished. But let thy Admonition be secret, let it be accompanied with all
manner of sweetness, let it be free from all bitterness of expressions.
Deliberate long, whether thou art to admit any one into thy Friendship: when
it is resolved upon, receive him with thy whole Heart, and talk with him as
freely as with thy self. Thou ought surely to lead such a Life, as to commit
nothing to thy self, which thou may not commit to thy Enemy: But because some
things intervene which custom has made secrets, cast all such cares, all such
thoughts into thy Friends bosom. Some, tell such things as are to be entrusted
only with Friends, to all they meet; and thrust that which afflicts them into
every ones Ears: others are apprehensive of their nearest Friends Conscience,
and suppress within their own breasts all their secrets; so wary, that if it
might be, they would not believe themselves. Both is a Vice, to believe All,
and to believe None: but the one is more honest, the other more secure. Now if
thou desire to talk with all men without danger, thou shall easily compass
it; Not by hiding what thou have done, but by doing nothing which thou desire
should be hidden.

4. Affability, is nearly allied to Friendship, which moderates humane nature.
In this, Modesty is to be observed, and silence. It becomes a Prudent man to
hear many things, but to speak few. It Is Vicious to desire rather to be known,
than to know; to be known to others, rather than to know others; to spread
abroad unprofitably ones own wares, rather than to buy other men's. Thou art to
accustom thy self to the incompos'd words and manners of them with whom thou
live; and because many men speak many things which are false, foolish,
childish, and impertinent to the matter; these thou art prudently to dissemble.
It Is an argument of an abject and effeminate Spirit, to be willing to converse
only with such as give way, applaud, and flatter. Speak sparingly of thy self,
and of thy own affairs; stick not pertinaciously to thy own opinion, and
abstain from lofty words, which may savor of Authority and Mastery. When thou
meetest with any thing which is against Decorum, interrogate thy self whether
thou art guilty of any such Vice. Pick always something for thy own profit, out
of all thou see and hear. It fares well with thee, if by another crime
thou correctest thy own.

5. When there is occurs any unusual, unexpected, exotic thing, which is
contrary to thy Countries custom; do not presently apprehend it: for it is the
sign of a light mind, to wonder at and deride strange things, and to be a slave
to ones own ways. Things are to be esteemed as they are, not as they seem. The
Vulgar judge all things by their newness, artifice, rarity, difficulty, report,
and outward pomp and appearance: A wisman, looks upon the intrinsic value and
goodness of the thing, and slights all such things as the frantic multitude
admires. Whatsoever shall happen, it is in thy power to make thy profit of it.
Do not thou therefore straiten thy self, and limit thy incom. It Is lawful for
thee to put on a Vizard, and to imitate the Actors of a Fable: they when they
Weep, do not Grieve; when they Purchase, do not Possess; they command without
power, reprove without revenge, chide without anger; for they Act the life of
another man: Would to God thou also would so behave thy self in thy society
with others, without affection and propriety. The World is a great Theater, in
which are as many Actors as men. Let it be thy care, as near as thou can, to
be a Spectator, not an Actor of the Fable. They who exhibit the Play upon the
Stage, take pains: they who behold it, laugh and are delighted.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Liberality. What it is, and how to be exercised. Wherein it
differs from Magnificency.
1. I Call not him Liberal, who is angry at his Money; who neither knows to
give nor to keep; who bestows not, but throws away. He is Liberal, who gives
rightly, and rationally, and according to the measure of his Means, bestows as
much as is convenient, when and to whom it is proper, regarding not his own but
another good and profit. Liberalety is a virtue distributing benefits,
exercised in the bestowing and acceptance of Moneys; but bestowing and
acceptance of Moneys; but bestowing is principally intended, because it is
better to give than receive. Now, the Will suffices, when the Faculty to give
is wanting: yea, this is chiefly considered, that thou not only do good, but
that thou have a Will to do it. No one gives thanks to the Rivers or Sea, for
suffering the Ships to swim upon them: nor to the Trees, for producing Fruits;
nor to the Wind, for affording a prosperous Gale: for although all these are
Benefits, yet the Will of benefiting is wanting to them. Moreover, that which
is to be given to any one, receives its value from the speediness of the
performance. Some there are, who bestowing their Gift, corrupt all the grace of
it, by turning away their face, by wrinkling their forehead, by deferring it to
a future day. Thus they tire their Friend with delay, they torment him with
expectation: and whereas it is the property of a willing Giver, to give
quickly, he who did it not till after a long time, did it not with a willing
mind. All Bounty makes have, and the Gift is grateful which meets us.

2. No one can lead a happy life, who looks only on himself, who converts all
things to his own Commodity. Thou must live to another, if thou desire to
live to thy self. Why sparest thou as it were thy own? Thou art a Factor. All
thou keep in thy Iron Coffers, the things sucked from the blood of others
which thou defendest, are none of thine. They were deposited with thee, and now
they belong to another Lord. Either an Enemy, or a Successor of an hostile
mind, will invade them. Do thou ask how thou may make them thy own? By
giving them. What is the thing wherein thou fanciest thy self Rich? A House,
Money, Land: If thou giv'st it to thy Neighbor, 'twill be a Benefit, 'twill be
a Virtue, which will remain with thee for ever. Then Money is precious, when by
the use of giving, it ceases to be possessed.

3. Because great things cannot be done with small charges; as Liberality
governs moderate expenses, so Magnificence rules the great and sumptuous
layings out. These two Virtues, in the rest alike, differ in this; that the
former appears in little things, the other only in great and excellent. He who
has a mean fortune, may be Liberal; but he only can be praised for
Magnificence, whose wealth is considerable. Magnificence is properly seen in
the admirableness of the work. For if any one bestows a high-priz'd Jewel to
the use of Gods Servants; he is to be esteemed rather exceedingly Liberal, than
Magnificent: but if with the price of that Jewel he builds a Chapel, a Church,
or some other gorgeous and wonderful monument or work, he will be called
Magnificent. Now, by the name of Works upon which great Costs may be employed,
those are understood which appertain to the Worship of God, to the Profit of
the people, to the Public joy, and to the honorable performance of certain
Offices of Man. In these a Decorum is to be observed, both in respect of the
Worker, and also of the Faculties. He is not Magnificent, who profuses more
than he possesses; who runs himself and his Relations into Debt, that he may
obtain the praise of Magnificence. He is truly Liberal and Magnificent, who
withdraws from himself what he gives and spends.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Fortitude. Its Offices. That Death is to be contemned by a
Valiant man.
1. THe Minds of men are soft, and Nature is weak, which therefore must be
armed with Fortitude, lest terrified with dangers we should recede from
Honesty. Fortitude has a double Office; one, and the chief, to endure Labors
and Dangers: the other, to set upon them when it is fitting. A Valiant man
thrusts not himself rashly into Evils, but when they come, he constantly
suffers them: he desires not dreadful things, but he despises them: he is there
lifted high, where others are depressed: there he stands up, where others lie
down: no disgrace, no repulse, no exile, no injury daunts him: not a Prison,
not Torments, not Death it self terrifies him: he dashes against his greatness
all sorrow, all sickness, all trouble: he permits not himself to be wrested
from what is right, by any Threats, or Entreaties: he loses not his Courage,
although many obstacles impede his well begun enterprises: he faints not under
the burden, nor struggles with the Office he has once undertaken, but
persists till he has perfected it: he stands upright, under any weight: no
Force, no Power, no Terror makes him less: he neither throws down his Virtue,
nor hides it, when Dangers on all sides surround him. He evermore considers
whither he goes, not what he endures.

2. As one sailing with a prosperous Gale, furnishes himself with several helps
wherewith to entertain the Tempest: so it will behove thee, whilst Fortune is
favorable, to seek safeguards to shelter thee against its future frowardness.
Feign to thy self, that whatsoever finister chance can happen, is already fallen
upon thee, Shipwreck, Banishment, Wounds, Torments, Diseases, Disgraces,
Contempt: and behave thy self in such sort, as if thou were now in the very
midst of these miseries; that exercised by this Preludium, thou may say in
any future event, I have had these things already in my mind, I have foreseen
them, and have despised them. It Is decreed from Eternity what thou shall
rejoice at, for what thou shall weep: and although each man's Life seems to be
distinguished with great variety; all comes to one sum: We received perishable
things, our selves being to perish. Why art thou Angry? At what complainest
thou? Although all things perish, nothing of thine perishes: It Is better to
give what God demands back, than to be forced to pay it. Epicurus himself
professes, that a Wise man may be happy even in his Torments: Were he in the
Belly of Phalaris's Bull, says he, he will say, How pleasant is this? How
little does it concern me? Surely a great word, but not incredible to us, who
have extant amongst us so many examples of Martyrs, whose Constancy in their
torments, whose Alacrity in their fiery trials was so great, that they seemed
to have no feeling of their sufferings. To him who loves God, all Punishments
are Pleasures.

3. The excellency of Fortitude, appears no where more illustriously, than in
the danger of Death. It Is a difficult thing to persuade the Mind to a contempt
of Life, with which most men are so enamoured, that they esteem nothing more
happy, nothing more precious: But if thou art Wise, as thou oughtst to be, thou will cease to account Death amongst Evils, which surely is the end of Evils,
and the beginning of Life. Thou art therefore to go forth with a willing mind,
being to return again. Death has no invincible Necessity: so that to fear it,
is the part of a Madman: for things which are doubtful, are dreaded; but
things which are assured, are expected. Consider that Children, and people fallen
from their Wits, fear not Death: It Is a pitiful thing, that Reason should not
afford thee so much security, as Foolishness gives them. Life was given thee,
with the exception of Death: He would not have Lived, who will not Dye.

4. Nature has gratified us, in that it has granted us for a certain time the
use of its Objects to be looked upon: that time being now expired, we must
depart. What Wise man, at his last gasp, if his Life were again given him,
would be willing to re-enter the Prison of his Mothers womb, to resume the
follies of Infancy, the fears of Childhood, the dangers of Youth, the cares of
Virility, the labors of Old Age? No one has lived so happily, as that it
would please him to be born again. Observe therefore whither thou go, and
from what thou departest: The cause of thy fear, is the emptiness of good
works, which thou beginnest to desire at the end of thy life: otherwise thou
would not tremble, standing upon the threshold of Eternal Felicity. It were
a punishment for a just man to be born, unless Death followed.

5. No one received Death cheerfully, but he who for a long time before
disposed himself for it. Render it familiar to thee by freequent reflections,
that when it comes thou may with alacrity entertain it. Not the Days, not
the Years, make thee to have lived long enough; but a Mind glad to go forth,
and to fly back to its beginning. He has lived long, who dies well. He dies
well, who has lived well. Will thou prepare for thy self a peaceable Death:
Accustom thy self to despise all things. He cannot fear Death, who has already
deprived himself of more then Death can bereave him. Will thou make thy life
pleasant? Cast off all solicitude concerning it: Stand prepared for any kind of
Death; let it be to thee indifferent whether a Sword or a Fever cuts off thy
Life: and so dispose it, that thou may daily say, I have Lived. He Lives
securely, and Dies cheerfully, who every day carries himself out to his burial,
to whom it is granted when his Life is ended. Thou can not Live well, unless
thou Die daily.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Magnanimity. The Description of a Magnanimous Man.
1. MAgnanimity. sounds some great thing in its very name; it is a high Virtue,
whose strongest force tends evermore to great matters. Without this, all the
endeavors of the other Virtues fall down to nothing: For since in practicing
them, many difficulties occur, the mind is to be erected, and emboldned to
proceed against them; nor ought it to desist, till having broken through all
interposed obstacles, it generously gets the possession of the proposed Good.
This Magnanimity performs, which evermore inclines man to high and heroic
actions, and supported by Gods Assistance, securely and promptly sets upon all
sorts of difficulties. Something is to be attempted, if thou will be any thing.
A great matter cannot be achieved with little labor, Man is a great thing,
when he is truly a Man.

2. A great mind aspires always to great things; and contemns all those things
as little, which the Vulgar look on as greatest. He performs works which
deserve high honor; but as for the honor it self, he neither seeks it when it is
denied, nor, scorns it when it is offered, unless Gods honor and Obedience
otherwise require. He does nothing for Ostentation, all for Conscience; and
expects the reward of his well done action not from the Peoples applause, but
from the deed it self. He stands always aloft, eminent, invincible, like to
himself in all accidents and occasions: nor does he thrust himself into higher
places, content with his own Greatness. He Is above all, being the Lord of all,
and therefore he submits himself to no one; He craves nothing, because out of
himself he wants nothing. There Is nothing that can terrify him, or make him
crouch. He puts himself forward, and is willing to be looked on, not out of
Vanity, but in consideration of the degree in which he lives, and of the Gifts
of God wherewith he is endowed. Yet with all these things his profound Humility
stands unshaken before God, because he renders back to him all the Good, all
the glory, as certainly knowing that he of himself has nothing, can do
nothing, is nothing. This is to know the ends of Virtue, to have an humble
esteem of ones self and of ones own proceedings; and yet with modesty to admit
the Honors done unto them. Glory is to follow, not to be affected.

3. He receives into his open Breast all the Darts of opposition without
reluctance, that he may get up to the highest eminency of Virtue. With men of
mean and low condition, he converses with modesty and moderation: before
Princes and Rich people, he neither falls down nor Flatters; nor does he permit
his own liberty to be oppressed by their Power. Such things as deserve hatred
or love, he openly hates, openly loves; and such things as ought plainly to be
said or done he freely speaks and acts, because he neither Fears nor hopes for
any thing. He does the same as other men, but not in the same manner; and
therefore he dissembles amongst the Vulgar people, and does not easily intermix
himself with them. He remembers no Injuries; and in those which must
necessarily be endured, he is neither a Complainer, nor an Entreater. He
praises few, nor does he desire praise, but to do things praiseworthy. He
lives not at the beck of another man, unless it be of his Friend and of his
Superior; nor is he apt to admire things, because nothing seems to him Great or
New. In every Accident he being safe in himself, is moved with no events of
things. He has a slow motion, a grave voice, and a constant and sober speech:
for he makes no have who looks after few things; and he contends not
vehemently, who is content with himself.

CHAP. XXX. Of Patience. The Occasions and Effects of it. The signs of perfect
Patience. An Admonition and Instruction to Endure all Adversity. The Necessity
of Perseverance.
1. PAtience is a Virtue, whereby we suffer the Evils of this world with an
equal and indifferent Mind. And because these Evils are many, it has many
Names, according to the variety of the Evils which it is to sustain. It is
properly named Patience, when it Valiantly receives Injuries: Equanimity, when
it is employed in bearing the loss of External Goods: Longanimity, when it
fortifies the breast against the delay of the thing which is expected:
Constancy, when it arms the Will to endure all other Evils whatsoever, our own
or our Neighbors, private or public. There Is no Virtue which has more
frequent occasions to be exercised. For so many Troops of Evils rush in upon
us, so many Adversaries besiege us, that Man's life is rightly said to be a
Warfare upon Earth. There scarcely slides by us any moment, in which we are not
to fight stoutly. Where outward Enemies are wanting, every one is to himself
sufficiently troublesome. From our selves and in our selves spring up such
things, as will both afflict and exercise us. From Weeping we begin our lives,
unskilled in all things but Tears. This we first learn, to this we apply our
selves even till Death. Many are found, who have not laughed; None, who never
Wept. Patience therefore is necessary, to arm the breast, to strengthen the
Spirit, to perfect Virtues. No one can tell what he is worth, till he is tried
by Tribulations. He is not Prudent, who is not Patient.

2. It goes ill with that man, who never had the experience of adverse Fortune.
Physicians say, there is nothing more to be feared than an over healthy
constitution of body: and a too quiet Calm is suspected by Mariners. If
Calamity scourges and tares thee, it is not a Cruelty but a Combat. Unless thou
Fightest, thou will not Conquer: unless thou Conquerest thou will not Triumph.
Now, If Christ was to suffer, and so to enter into his Glory: Will thou presume
to be made partaker of another felicity without any Tribulation. Thou errest
most grossly, if thou feignest to thy self any other way to go to Heaven. The
Sacraments of Virtue are these, to do good and to suffer Evil. The signs of
thy having already obtained Patience, are, to bear contentedly other men's
Evils; Not to murmur at Gods Chastisements; Not to shun the Conversation of
them who bring afflictions upon thee, Amongst contempts to keep thy self from
Hatredi, To ascribe to the Divine will whatsoever afflicts thee; To be silent
in Evils; to love them who bring Evils upon thee; to complain to God alone of
the Injuries thou endurest, and to offer thy self to him, as one prepared to
suffer all Miseries with joy and thanksgiving. Finally he is acknowledged to be
truly patient, who is not angry at his Neighbors imperfections.

3. In the loss of External Goods, it is a great Comfort to reflect upon their
unfaithful condition. Whatsoever thou possessest, whatsoever thou love,
retains a natural fleetingness: it is with thee, but it is not thine. Do not
mock thy self with a desire of an imaginary stability. Nothing is firm to an
infirm person; nothing is eternal to a frail Creature, besides Virtue: This is
the one immortal thing which belongs to mortals; the rest bring their Deaths
along with them. Put therefore all thou have in such a place, as that there may
be a great distance between them and thee. Nothing is taken from a Good man,
because he possesses nothing as his own. Why lamentest thou the loss of a
little Money, the burial of a Son, the burning of a House: but at the loss of
Modesty, of Fortitude, of Virtue, thou weepest not? Those things are neither
Good, nor Thine: but these are both good, and thy own. If thou grievest, when
thou losest them, thou show thy self worthy of the loss. Thou would
conceive thy self to have lost nothing, if thou loved'st nothing inordinately.
External things trouble not a Wise Man; because they touch him not.

4. When thou enterprisest any Work, consider all its adjuncts; thou will find
many things which may trouble thy Mind, if not foreseen. Thou Call a Boy? He
perchance is not ready at hand, or does not what thou desire. Thou go to
give a visit to some one? It may be he is close shut up, the Doors are made
fast against thee, he within neglects thee. Foresee these accidents and all
will fall out prosperously. He, this day refused to admit me, whereas he
admitted others; He showed an aversion from my discourse: He placed me in the
lowest seat: These are the complaints of a sickly mind. He observes no such
things, who is not affected to them, who knows all such things are the Tributes
of this Life. It Is best to endure, what thou can not amend. If thou art
offended at the Malice or Impudence of any one; think whether it is a likely
matter that there should be no impious or impudent persons in the World. But if
this cannot be imagined, what new thing has now happened, if a bad man after his
manner does amiss? See whether thou thy self art not rather to be reprehended,
who fore-sawest not that he would thus offend. The World was ever constant to
it self; there are Vices where are Men.

5. When thou art afflicted, attend not to what thou suffer, but to what
thou have done. If thou will speak truth to thy self, thou will confess thou
art worthy of more severe punishments. It Is God, from whom all things come. He
chastises thee, that he may cure thee, that he may exercise thee, that he may
harden thee and prepare thee for himself. He reserves them for future pains,
whom he seems now to indulge. From whence can I discern what courage thou have
against Poverty, if thou flowest with Riches? How can I come to know thy
constancy against disgraces and the peoples hatred, if thou art grown old
amidst their Applauses? I have heard thee giving Comfort to others in their
tribulations; I desire to hear thee comforting thy self, and commanding thy
self not to be grieved. If thou give both Thanks and a Reward to thy
Physician, burning and cutting thy Members; why do thou not acquiesce to the
Medicine which God administers? It Is a madness to think those are Damages,
which are Remedies. If Poverty, if Sickness, and the rest which thou call
Evils, could contend in words with thee; they would insult over thee, and say:
Why, O Man, art thou so much against me? Art thou through my fault deprived of
any good? of Prudence, of Justice, of Fortitude? May thou not with me enjoy a
cheerful mind? Those things will be good which thou fanciest are Evil, if thou will courageously show thy self to be above them. It Is a great Evil, not to be
able to endure Evil.

6. In other men's Cases, thou may sometimes dissemble thy Constancy, but
never in thy own. Let thy Tears accompany the afflicted weepers, not for the
Tears sake. Descend and stoop down to the afflicted, that thou may raise them
up. No one can lift him up who lies on the ground, unless he bows low to his
assistance. But because all things have a double handle, the one tolerable,
the other intolerable; if any one has done thee an Injury, take not thy hold
on that part, in which the Injury is done, for this is the handle in which he
cannot be endured: but consider him as redeemed with the same Blood of Christ,
and called to the same Glory? So thou will lay hold on him on the side in which
he is tolerable. And because Friendship has a very small voice in giving free
Reprehensions, always endeavor to hear Truth from thy Adversary. He being
perpetually watchful, prys into thy actions; and thy miscarriages will more
easily deceive thy self than him. He will traduce thee to thy Neighbors, and
in the Streets, and being incensed against thee, will lay open the disease of
thy Mind, which thou either concealest or neglectest. Strive to make thy profit
from him: He more attentively watches over himself, who knows he has an
Adversary always ready to censure him.

7. Perseverance is the Crown and Consummation of all Virtues. A Reward is
promised to Beginners, but it is given to Perseverers. Wherefore before all
things take care of this, that thou be constant to thy self. Nothing which is
in its passage, is so profitable. Thou slidest back again, if thou strivest not
to go onward: and if thou beginnest to stand, thou sinkest down. Appoint what
thou will, and persevere in it till thy end. It Is the property of an unconstant
Mind, to assume daily new Exercises, to seek oftentimes new dwellings. It does
not behove thee to be in another place, but to be another Man. The Tree which
is often transplanted, dwindles away at last: and the frequent change of
Remedies, hinders the Health. If the Apostle, the Vessel of Election, not
looking upon what he had already done, but what he ought to do, judged that he
had in no sort comprehended: what will thou do, who may wish that in thy End,
thou might be compared to his Beginning? The desire of Learning cannot be
satisfied, the love of Riches is insatiable, the thirst after Honors is not to
be quenched. Things which are shortly to have an end, are sought after without
End: and if thou have had only a light taste of the Divine Wisdom, will thou
imagine thy self presently full? He invites thee to perfection after another
manner, who said, Be ye Perfect, as your Heavenly Father is Perfect. This Mark
is proposed to thee, to give thee to understand, that there is always a place
above thee, for the increase of thy Virtue.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Temperance How much shamefacedness conduces to it. Of
Abstinence, and of Chastity.
1. TEmperance rules the pleasures which are taken in Tasting and Touching: it
hates and drives away all such pleasures as are superfluous, and admits only
such as are necessary, as far forth as right Reason permits. This Rule of
Temperance is Infallible; To take mere Necessity for its measure in what
belongs to the Body; and never to admit Pleasures for Pleasures sake. By this
Virtue it is brought to pass, that thou do not degenerate from a Man into a
Beast. To it, Modesty very much contributes, which is the Bridle of bad
manners, the Badge of a good disposition, the Guardian of Purity, the Witness
of Innocence. If this has gotten the possession of thy Mind, it will teach
thee to fear all Filthiness, to abstain from all unlawful Actions, to
reverence Gods Commandments, to stand always in an apprehension of thy own
frailty, and to be evermore in love with that intelligible Beauty, which
appears chiefly in the works of Temperance. And thou will then perceive thy
self to be modest, when thou tremblest at the very name of Intemperance; when
thy Chamber-walls cover thee, and do not hide thee, with which many conceive
themselves to be encompassed, not that they may live more safely, but that they
may Sin more secretly. But to what purpose do thou shut up thy self, to avoid
the Eyes and Ears of Men? God is always with thee, who every where beholds
thee: Thy Conscience is with thee, which every where accuses thee.

2. Abstinence and Sobriety, moderate the use of Meat and Drink; but that which
concerns the Touch, is ruled by Chastity and Pudicity. And surely it is a matter
of very great difficulty, not to be drawn beyond the bounds of Necessity, in
the use of Food. The Belly has no Ears to admit commands: It demands, calls
and exacts a daily tribute. But with how little it may be put off, with how
small a stipend it may be satisfied, few consider. We force Nature to serve
Vices; and we irritate Hunger and Thirst, which may easily be appeased with
natural Remedies, by various Sawces and Seasonings. Chastity is also hard to be
preserved amongst so many provocations of Lust, unless it is held in with the
Fear of God, with a Flight from all Occasions, with a careful custody of the
Senses, and with a great reverence toward ones self. He who fears not himself,
cannot fear others. Will thou be Chaste? Contain thy Eyes, lest thou may love
unwillingly, what thou have behold unwarily. Why admirest thou the fleeting and
false beauty of the Creature? Expect a little while, and it will be no more.
Ugly Wrinkles will furrow the smooth Forehead, a sad Cloud will orecover the
sparkles of the Eyes, a scurvy Mossiness will cover the Ivory of the Teeth.
Avoid also the company of the Bad, fly from all Effeminateness, tame thy Flesh
with Fastings, and treat it rigorously; He is lost, who too tenderly loves his
Sepulcher.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Meekness, and Clemency. The Offices and Excellency of them
both.
1. TO mitigate the violence of Anger, Meekness is necessary; lest thou
should transgress the bounds of what is right, either on one side or the
other. Anger is the Dart of Nature, which thou may lawfully make use of, when
thy Office obliges thee to reprove and chastise Offenders: and when Discretion
dictates, that thy own or another injury is to be in due manner repressed;
least impunity should give increase to the licentiousness of the wicked. He is
equally cruel who pardons all, and who pardons none at all. Now, when Justice
so requiring, the guilty are to be punished; be thou then Mindful of Meekness
and Clemency. Punish as it were unwillingly; and be thou such a one toward
Offenders, as God has been to thee. As he supported thee that he might make
thee better: So do thou support them that they may be corrected. Thou despisest
the Physician, if thou despairest of the Patient. The Sick man's cure is as
easy, as is the Prudence and Benignity of the Physician. A Meek man appears as
a Rock in the Sea of Anger, dissolving the Waves which dash against him; being
not always content with punishment, but sometimes with penitence. The Savior
of the World exclaims to the collected multitude of Mankind; Come ye all and
learn of me, not to cure the Sice, not to cleanse the Leapers, not to restore
light to the blind, or life to the Dead. But what? Learn (says he) of me, to
be Mcek. He seems to have reduced all the treasures of his Wisdom and Science,
that we should Learn of him the Lesson of Meekness. So Excellent a thing is
Meekness.

2. As Meekness Moderates Anger, so Clemency tempers Punishment. That belongs
to All; this to Princes and Superiors. Its Office is, to mitigate the
punishments which the Laws exact, not for Fear, Gain, Friendship, or out of any
other such like Motive; but out of a gentleness of Mind. There Is no need to
delve into the sides of Mountains, and build Castles in the high Tops of Hills:
Clemency will render the Prince safe in the open plain. This is an unexpugnable
Fortress, which secures his Empire. A bad Prince is hated, because he is
feared; and he will be feared because he is hated. Now the subjects hate him
they fear, and would willingly have him perish whom they hate. He is Master of
the Kings Life, who is a contemner of his own Life. He vainly strengthens
himself with power, who is not guarded with the good will of his people. Many
punishments are shameful to a Prince, as many Funerals are to a Physician. If a
King keeps back his strength; if he looks down from above upon all injuries and
offenses with contempt; if he sacrifices some to the anger of others, none to
his own: then he shows himself to be truly a King. It Is the part of a
Magnanimous man, to be pleasing and peaceable.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Modesty. The Double Office of Studiosity. What Rule is to be
observed in Mirth.
1. MOdesty wonderfully adorns the rest of the Minds Dowries. It Is the sorm of
Honesty, and the Curb of Viees. Though thou say not a Word, thy Habit and
Gesture will speak what thou art. An Argument of Virtue may be taken from the
least things. The Countenance, the Laughter, the Gate, the Glaunce of the Eyes,
show oftentimes what a man is. Live so, as that all men may know thou belongest
to the fellowship of Angels. Observe a decorum in all the Motions of thy
Members, in thy behavior, in thy Voice, in thy Looks, that nothing may appear
Effeminate and remiss, nothing that is harsh and clownish. True Modesty flows
from the Mind into the Body, from the inward gravity of Manners into the
outward carriage; that so the mind may behold abroad as it were, its own
household stuff. A Modest Man is the lively Image of God: for his sole Aspect
composes the beholders. And what a good is this, to be seen and to profit? It
belongs also to Modesty, not to exceed the condition of thy State, in Garments,
in Movables, in the Ornaments of thy house, and in the multitude of
Attendants. These are the Impediments of thy Mind, wherewith not thou, but the
things without thee, are garnished. Why therefore do thou joy in thy Evil?
Why admirest thou vain things, and gloriest in the multitude of impediments?
Thou may rightly call this troop of Servants which environ thee on every
side, an Hostile Army, from which thou can scarcely be secure. They will know
what thou do, not what thou Command. There Is nothing more humble then
their Ingress, nothing more insolent then their Progress, nothing more odious
then their Egress.

2. Studiosity has two Offices; One is to temperate and moderate the appetite
of knowing, which for the most part is greater then justly it ought to be: The
other is, to shake off sluggishness, and to excite the Minds industry to learn
things necessary. Nature has given man a curious Wit, and being conscious of
her Art and Beauty, has brought us forth to be Spectators of her works; for
she would lose the fruit of her self, if she should show only to a solitude,
such great, such glorious such curious Products. But we abuse Natures goods, by
diving subtly into such things, as were better unknown, He is not Wise who
knows many things, but who knows what makes to his purpose. Those Things are
first to be learned, which belong to thy Salvation: nor do I debar thee from
reading the rest, so thou referrest to Manners whatsoever thou read. But see
whether the reading of many Books, savor not something of evagation and
instability. Thou art to dwell upon certain Wits, and be nourished by them, if
thou desire to draw from them what may stick fast in thy Mind. Various
Reading pleases, but it is the Certain which profits.

3. A Relaxation is sometimes to be granted to the Mind; and Rest is to be
intermixed with labor; for that cannot long continue which wants convenient
repose. The makers of Laws appointed certain days, in which the People should
meet together in public for their recreation, to repair their forces. Now
there are diverse actions which contribute to this Relaxation of Mind: As
walking in a pleasant and open Field, where in the free Air, the Mind may raise
it self to Heaven, and the Members get new vigor. A Country Recess, remote
from the smoke and noise of Cities; Hawking or Hunting, and such Divertisments
as misbecome not thy condition, and Fishing which is more innocent: Studies
which are more calm and pleasant: A consort of Music, and some honest Play:
Finally, harmless Jests, and facetiousness, which must be evermore free from
the least injury and undecency. Some there are, who are too severe, who are
men-haters, and who sit brooding upon their own darkness, never permitting a
merry word to be wrested out of their Mouths: Others, addicted overmuch to
Jesting, seldom apply themselves to serious thoughts, and never withdraw
themselves from the people. Now these extremes are to be interwoven and
alternated; for Solitude will beget a desire of Company, and Frequency, of thy
self; and so one will be a Remedy to the other. Remission will cure the hatred
of labor, and labor the tediousness of Remission. S^^^ also there are, who
not knowing how to dispense their own forces, exercise an immoderate Empire
over themselves. The Mean is wanting to them. They can neither tell when to
remit their Studies nor when to retake them. When they settle themselves to
Labor, the Days are joined to the Nights; nor do they desist, till themselves
are destroyed. Again, when they give way to Recreations, they so ingulph
themselves, as that they can scarcely be brought back to their former Customs.
Wherefore an Interval is so to be afforded to the Mind, that it may be remitted
not Resolved. To this end, Eutrapely, that is, Festivity, and civil Mirth, is
very necessary, which is to prescribe certain Limits, not to be transgressed
without a crime. The Best things become bad, if the Mean is exceeded.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Humility. Wherein it consists, Of Self-knowledge. The
Character of a truly humble Man.
1. FRom Christ comes Humility. He promulgated it by his Word, taught it by his
Example. This, after the Theological and Intellectual Virtues, has the prime
place amongst the rest; for it removes Pride, which is the Root of all Evil.
This renders us amiable to God, because with the Humble is his Discourse.
Without this, which is the Foundation of Virtues, whatsoever Superstructure is
raised in the Spiritual Edifice, will neither be solid nor stable Now although
it is very Name seems to betoken some base and mean thing, yet it is the Virtue
of the Magnanimous, and of the Perfect, and raises up the Mind to high matters.
It enterprises illustrious actions, without danger of being puffed up, heroic
actions without apprehension of difficulties, continuing always stout,
courageous, and unalterable. Humility, does not (as the Vulgar Imagine) consist
in a self-despisal and abjection; but in that moderate appetition of Glory and
Honor, which both avoids Excess, and recedes from Defect. The Humble man
desires Glory as the stipend of Virtue, with a mind directly intent, upon the
Action, not for Ostentation, but for Virtue alone, and as much as it demands.
Unlawful is all Honor, which Virtue brings not forth. But because an humble
man, being of a discerning Spirit, is an impartial Judge of himself, he is
averse from almost all Honor; both because he knows how little it is that he
contributes of his own to the works of Virtue: and also because he fears lest
out of a desire of due Honor, he may condescend to admit that which is not
due. It Is most safe to despise Honor; for the amplisies it who refuses it, he
increases it who contemn it.

2. Thou art therefore not Humble, because thou know not thy self. There Is
no Country so remote, of which thou will more easily believe a false Relation.
What is Man? A weak and frail Body of it self unarmed, wanting the help of
others, and cast out to all the injuries of times. A lump of Dirt, a filthy
animal, prone to all Evil, and of so perverted and depraved a disposition, that
it preferrs earthly things before the Heavenly, transistory before the eternal.
Every living Man is an universal Vanity. No Animal has a Life more frail, a
Madness more fierce, a Fear more confused, a Lust more violent. Whence then
this Pride, O thou Miserable Creature; and of others the most unhappy? Look
upon thy own wretehedness, and if there remains any spark of Reason in thee,
reflect upon thy own baseness and unworthiness. Then thou will be perfectly
Humble, when thou have perfectly learned Selfknowledg.

3. A truly Humble man totally despises himself; nor is he willing to be
reputed Humble, but of no account: he referr's to God all the honor which is
due to himself, and distrusts himself in all things: He rejoices in being
contemned; in this only proved, that he Sleights humane praises. He considers
himself according to what he has of himself, and others according to what they
have of God, and so comparing himself with them, he judges himself the very
worst of all: for this is the Genius of Humility to compare ones own Evils with
the Goods of others; from whence even he who is most Perfect, may without a
Lie, esteem himself more Imperfect then others. Furthermore, a truly Humble Man
subjects himself with all Obedience to his Superiors, performs not his own
desires, discovers freely his defects, sustains patiently all injuries,
embraces joyfully the meanest things, avoids carefully all singularity,
abstains always from much talking, desires still to lie concealed and unknown,
places all things beneath himself, and himself beneath all, and shuts up
himself within his own Nothing. He is shame-fac'd and circumspect: He speaks
not but when necessity urges him, and then modestly, being willing rather to
weep then to Laugh. He shows the Humility of his Heart, in his Body, in his
Eyes six'd on the ground, in his grave and composed gate, in his cast-down
Countenance, like a guilty person ready to be summoned before Gods dreadful
Tribunal: Conscious of the Crimes he has committed, uncertain of Grace, and
fearful of his Salvation; and therefore not daring to lift up his Eyes to
Heaven, he stands aloof off with the Publican, imploring with fervent Prayer,
pardon for his Offenses. Finally, he dreads all his own doings, he despises all
earthly things, he tramples upon all worldly Pomps and Vanities. For he thinks
the whole world to be Nothing, who believes himself to be Nothing.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the state of the Perfect. The Image of a Perfect man. The End
of a Perfect Life, it Union with God.
1. HE is faid to be Perfect, to whom nothing is wanting. And what can be
wanting to him, who being purged from Sin, cleans'd from Vices, and adorned
with Virtues, intimately adheres to his God, and becomes one Spirit with him
for evermore? This is the top of Christian Perfection, the last End to which
thou art to aspire. For whereas every thing is then judged to be perfect, when
it is joined to its End, and God is thy End; thou art then necessarily
perfected, when perfectly adhering to God, thou returnest to him from whom thou
had thy beginning. But no one is thus perfect, without Gods special Help. And
because there are few found amongst Mortals, who dispose the superior part of
their Mind to receive Gods singular illapses and inlocutions, therefore there
are so few Perfect. Each Age has produced few of them.

2. Thou may call him a Perfect man, whom thou see undaunted in Dangers,
untouched with Cupidities, happy in Adversity, content in Disgraces, quiet
amidst Tempests, Laughing at whatsoever others Fear and Desire, passing by all
things as Little, shining with no good but his own, evermore free, always
constant to himself, still like himself, erected, elevated, empty of himself,
and full of God: from whom no Violence can force his Goods, who turns Evil into
Good, who is frustrated of nothing, who is hurt by no Accident: who puts a
value upon things, not from men's Opinion, but the things of Nature: who being
eminent above all, casts himself into the whole World, and extends his
contemplation into all its proceedings, himself remaining peaceable and
unshaken: who for the major part of him, dwells perpetually there from whence
he descended. As the Sunbeams, although they touch the Earth, yet are there
from whence they are darted: So a Perfect man converses indeed with us, but he
is absent in his better part, and adheres always to his End. His mind is such
as the state of the World is above the Moon; there is a perpetual Calm. He is
ignorant of any defect of things; he knows not what a various Mind is; all ages
serve him; he views all things round about, equally as the Sun does, and
rejecting all multiplicity, he quietly reposes in the most simple Unity. He
desires nothing, he seeks for nothing out of himself, having no need to call in
that Felicity from a far off, which he bears about him enclosed within his own
Heart. He works for God alone, he lives to God alone, being always ready to
depart. Apply this Line and Level to thy Life, and thou will understand how far
thou art from Perfection.

3. This is a greater and higher matter, than thou can reach, unless he draws
thee upward, who said, without me, you can do nothing. And moreover, there are
precedent dispositions which are necessary. The End of a perfect Life, is an
intimate Union with God. And since he dwells in an unaccessible Light, thou will never get to him, unless thou drivest away from thee the darkness of the
Creatures. Man cannot be made partaker of the Divine Nature, except he
transcends himself and all created things in Mind and Affection. Every
Adhesion, even the least, to any thing whatsoever, is like to the little Fish
Remera, which if it bites the Keel of the Ship, stops it, and detains it in the
middle of its course. It happens no otherwise to many Souls, which like Ships
fraught with Heavenly: Riches, would happily sail to the Haven of blessed
Union, were they not detained by some Vicious Affection. God is one, and most
Simple; A Soul can never be fit for Union, unless it becomes One, and most
Simple.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A Preface to the Reader.

Chap. 1. Of Man's last End. What an Evil it is to swerve from it. The Means and
Method to come to it. Page 1. Chap. 2. Who so desires to live well, must make
choice of an Instructor. What manner of man this ought to be. The Duties of a
Disciple. Page 7 Chap. 3. Of Purgation from Sin. All Affection to Sin is to be
laid aside, and Vice rooted out. No Remedy is more efficacious against Vice,
than the consideration of Death and Eternity. Page 13 Chap. 4. Of Gluttony. Its
Evils. Its Remedies. The Signs of its being conquered. Page 22 Chap. 5. Of
Luxury. How foul a Vice it is. How ensie the Relapse into it, and how to be
avoided. Page 27 Chap. 6. Of Avarice. Its Malice is sharply reproved. The
Comparison between a Poor, and a Rich man. The deceit and vanity of Riches.
Page 33 Chap. 7. Of Anger. The Character of an Angry person. The Effects,
Gauses, Remedies of Anger. Page 40 Chap. 8. Of Envy and Sloth. The Description
and Cure of Both. Page 53 Chap. 9. Of Pride, Ambition, and Vainglory. The Image
of a Proud man. The Vanity of Dignities, and their Dangers. The Evils of
Hautiness, and the Cure of it. Page 57 Chap. 10. Of the Government of the Body.
Of the Custody of the Senses. How far the Body is to be Indillged, etc. Page 67
Chap. 11. Of the Custody of the Tongue. Of how great moment it is, and how
difficile. What is to be observed in Speaking, what to be avoided. How the bad
Tongues of others, are to be endured. Page 73 Chap. 12. Of the Internal Senses.
The Use of Opinions. The Mind is to be stered with good Thoughts. Of
restraining the Sensitive Appetite: and of its depraved Affections. Several
Precepts to that purpose. Page 80 Chap. 13. Of Love. Its Nature, Causes,
Effects, Remedies. Something added of Hatred. Page 85 Chap. 14. Of Desire, and
of Flight. What is to be desired, what to be fled from. Page 91 Chap. 15. Of
Joy, and of Sadness. How a good man ought to rejoice. He who foresees all
things, is not contristated. Several Antidotes against Grief. Page 96 Chap. 16.
Of Hope, and Despair. How we are to mederate them both. Page 102 Chap. 17. Of
Fear: How vain it is, and how to be vanquished. Boldness to be awided.
Something again of Anger. Page 105 Chap. 18. Of the Powers of the Rational
Soul. The Understanding is to be restrained from Curiosity. To what Study one
should chiefly apply himself. How bad a thing it is to enquire into other men's
Manners. The Judgments of others, are to be contemned. Of the denial of our
Will. Page 111 Chap. 19. Of the State of Proficients. Several Helps to
Proficiency. The value and use of Time. The Presence of God, Necessary. Page
118 Chap. 20. Of the good of Solitude. Evil Seciety to be shunned. What, and how
many the Worlds Vices are. The study of a Preficient, is the acquisition of
Virtues. Certain Signs of Virtue's being obtained. Page 124 Chap. 21. Of the
Theological Virtues; Faith is to be approved by Works. Confidence is to be
placed in God alone. Motives to love God. The love of our Neighbor is
manifested by Benefits. An Exhortation to Alms-deeds. Page 132 Chap. 22. Of
Prudence. Its Necessity, and Difficulty. The Duty of a Prudent man. Page 137
Chap. 23. Of Justice, and of Religion. The Acts of both. What Penance is, and
wherein it consists. Page 141 Chap. 24. Of Piety and Observance. Obedience is
commended, and also Gratitude. How a Benefit is to be Received and Repayed.
Page 146 Chap. 25. Of Truth, and the Use of it. Simplicity is praised. Acts of
Fidelity. Page 150 Chap. 26. Of Friendship. With what Offices it is to be
entertained. Certain Precepts appertaining to mutual Conversation. Page 154
Chap. 27. Of Liberality. What it is, and how to be exercised. Wherein it
differs from Magnificency. Page 160 Chap. 28. Of Fortitude. Its Offices. That
Death is to be contemned by a Valiant man. Page 164 Chap. 29. Of Magnanimity.
The Description of a Magnanimous Man. Page 169 Chap. 30. Of Patience. The
Occasions and Effects of it. The signs of perfect Patience. An Admonition and
Instruction to Endure all Adversities. The Necessity of Perseverance. Page 172
Chap. 31. Of Temperance. How much shamefacedness conduces to it. Of Abstinece,
and of Chastity. Page 182 Chap. 32. Of Meekness and Clemency. The Offices and
Excellency of them both. Page 185 Chap. 33. Of Modesty. The double Office of
Studiosity. What Rule is to be observed in Mirth. Page 188 Chap. 34. Of
Humility. Wherein it consists. Of Self-knowledge. The Character of a truly
Humble man. Page 193 Chap. 35. Of the state of the Perfect. The Image of a
Perfect man. The End of a Perfect Life, is Union with God. Page 198

