A PLAIN and EASY RULE TO RIGGE ANY SHIP BY The LENGTH of his MASTS, and YARDS.

Without any further Trouble.

LONDON, Printed for William Fisher at the Postern-Gate near Tower Hill. 1664.

A Plain and Easy RULE to RIGGE any SHIP by the Length of his MASTS and YARDS,
without any further Trouble.
For the Spritsail-Yard.
Halliards THree times the length of the Yard.

Lifts Three times the length of the Yard.

Clulines Two times the length of the Yard.

Braces Two times the length of the Fore-yard.

Buntlines Two times the length of the Yard.

Sheets Three times the length of the Yard.

Pennants One third of the Yard.

For the Spritsail-Top-mast.
Shroudes Most be the length of the Mast from the Heel to the Crostrees.

Halliards Three times the length of the Mast.

Lifts Three times the length of the Mast.

Clulines Two times the length of the Spritsail Yard.

Braces Two times the length of the Spritsail Yard.

Cranlines Two times the length of the Topsail yard.

For the Foremast.
Pennants Of the length of the Shroudes.

Shroudes Of the Mast.

Stay One time the length of the Mast wanting

Lifts Three times the length of the Shroudes.

Clugarnets Three times the length of the Shroudes.

Buntlines Two times the length of the Mast from the Deck to the Crostrees.

Leechlines Two times the length of the Main Yard.

Braces Two times the length of the Main Yard.

Foresheets 2 and times the length of the Main Yard.

Jeeres Four times the length of the Mast from the Deck to the Crostrees.

Buntlines Two times the length of the Main Yard.

Topsailsheets Two times the length of the Main Yard.

For the Fore-Topmast-Rigging.
Pennants Of the Shroudes.

Shroudes One time the length of the Mast from the Crostrees to the feed hole.

Burtons One time the length of the Foreyard.

Lifts 2 and times the length of the Foreyard.

Clulines Three times the length of the Foreyard.

Braces 2 and times the length of the Foreyard.

Bowlines 2 and times the length of the Foreyard.

Leechline Two times the length of the Foretopsail Yard.

Tie One time the length of the Topmast.

Runner 1 and time the length of the Foreyard.

Halliards Three times the length of the Foreyard.

Stay 1 and the length of the Mast.

Backstays 1 and the length of the Foreyard.

Buntlines Two times the length of the Foreyard.

The Fore-Top-gallant-Rigging.
Shroudes One time the length of the Mast from the Crostrees to the feed hole.

Stay 1 and times the length of the Foreyard.

Lifts Three times the length of the Mast.

Braces 2 and times the length of the Foreyard.

Bowlines 2 and times the length of the Foreyard.

Halliards 2 and times the length of the Foreyard.

For the Main-Mast-Rigging.
Pennants Of the Shroudes.

Shroudes Of the Mast.

Stay The length of the Mast.

Jeers Four times the length of the Mast from the Deck to the Crostrees.

Lifts Three times the length of the Main yard

Braces 2 and times the length of the Main yard.

Bowlines One time the length of the Main yard.

Clugarnet 2 and times the length of the Main yeard

Buntlines Four times the length of the Mast for Falls and Leges.

Leechlines Two times the length of the Main yard.

Tacks One time the length of the Main yard.

Runners One time the length of the Main yard.

Tacklefals Three times the length of the Runners,

Sheets 2 and the length of the Main yard.

Eknave-line. Two times the length from the Crosstrees to the Deck.

Topsail-sheets. Two times the length of the Main yard.

The Main-Top Mast Rigging.
Pennants Of the Shrouds.

Shroudes One time the length of the Mast.

Stay 1 and times the length of the Mast.

Braces 2 and the length of the Yard.

Burtons Of the Main Yard.

Lifts 2 and 1/^; of the length of the Main yard.

Buntlines Two times the length of the Main yard.

Clulines Three times the length of the Main yard

Tie One time the length of the top mastShroud.

Runners One time the length of the Main yard.

Halliards Three times the length of the Main yard.

Leechlines Two times the length of the topsail yard.

Buntlines Two times the length from the Deck to the Hounds.

Top-rope One time the length of the main shrouds

Topropefal Two times the length of the Main Mast.

Pennants for Braces One third of the topsail yard.

Backstays 1 and the length of the Main yard.

For the Main-Top-gallant-Mast-Rigging.
Shroudes Once the length of the Mast from the Cross-trees to the heel.

Stay 1 and the length of the Main yard.

Lifts Three times the length of the top gallant Mast.

Braces Two times the length of the Main yard.

Bowlines Two times the length of the main yard.

Tie The length of the mast.

Halliards 2 and times the length of the main yard.

Top-rope Two times the length of the main yard.

Rigging for the Mizoen Mast.
Halliards Four times the length of the mast from the Deck to the Cross-trees.

Braytles Two times the length of the mast from the Deck to the Cross-trees.

Sheet One time the length of the Yard.

Tack Three Fathomes length.

Shroudes One time the length of the mast from the Deck to the Cross-trees.

Pennants Of the Shroud.

Burtenfal One time the length of the main yard.

Stay One time the length of the mast

Bowlines One time the length of the Crossjack yard

Rigging for the Mizoen-Top-Mast.
Pennants Of the Shroud.

Shroudes The length of the mast from the Crosstrees to the Heel.

Stay 1 and the length of the mast.

Lifts Three times the length of the mast.

Braces 1 and the length of the Mizoen yard.

Bowlines 1 and the length of the Crossjack yard.

crosjack braces 2 and the length of the Crossjack yard.

Sheets 2 and the length of the Crossjack yard.

Clulines 2 and the length of the Crossjack yard.

Halliards 1 and the length of the Mizoen yard.

Tie One time the length of the topmast from the Cross-trees to the Heel.

FINIS.

