KKnow all men by these Presents, That we (...) are holden and firmly bounden
unto Captain Abraham Roberts of London, Mariner; Commander of the good Ship
Resolution now bound for the East Indies, in the sum of (...) hundred pounds of
good and lawful Money of England, to be paid unto the said Captain Abraham
Roberts his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, to the which payment well
and truly to be made, we bind us, and either of us by himself, in the whole,
and for the whole, our and either of our Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
firmly by these Presents. Sealed with our Seals.

Dated the (...) day of (...) in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand six
hundred ninety (...)
WHereas the abovementioned Captain Abraham Roberts has entertained the
above-bounden (...) to go and serve as a (...) out and home in the said Ship in
the now intended Voyage to the East Indies, according to an Agreement of
Charter-Party, between the Governor and Company of Merchants of London Trading
to East India, of the one Part, and the Owners and Commander of the said Ship
on the other part, and from thence to return back again into the Port of
London, at and for the Salary of (...) by the Month, accounting the twelfth
part of a whole year to the Month: Of which Sallary or Wages the said (...)
has already received Impressed beforehand, the sum of (...) and the rest he the
said (...) his Executors, or Administrators, is to have and receive at such
time as the said Ship does come out of the East Indies, and be discharged of
her Goods and Merchandises within the Port of London, into the East India
Companies Warehouses, and the whole Freight received for the same and not
before, any Rule or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. Now therefore the
Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the said (...) shall and do at
all times, from henceforth, and from time to time, during the said Voyage,
duly and honestly, to the best of his power and skill, perform his Service and
Duty in the said Ship, according to his said place and Office, or such other
Place or Office as he is or shall be assigned to in the said Ship, and do not
absent himself from the said Service in his said Employment, as he is or shall
be assigned unto, until his Voyage shall be ended; Namely, that the Merchandise
of the Governor and Company aforesaid, shall be discharged in the said Port of
London, out of the said Ship into the said Companies Warehouses. And further,
if the said (...) do during his Employment aforesaid, honestly, civilly and
courteously behave and demean himself toward the said Commander, and to those
empowered by him, and likewise from time to time, give and render to the
Commander of the said Ship, or those entrusted by him, a just and true Account
of all such Goods, Moneys, Stores and Provisions as are or shall be committed
into his Charge and Custody, and shall during his said Employment, observe all
such Rules as the said Commander and his Owners are obliged to in their
Charter-party aforesaid, Viz. shall not during his said Employment, by himself,
or any other for his use, or for the use of himself or any other, but the
Company only, bring, transport, carry or load, or cause to be brought,
transported, carried, or laden upon, or in the said Ship, either Outward bound
to the Indies, or in the Indies, or Homewards, any Treasure, Goods or
Merchandise, of the Quality here-under-mentioned, any Gold or Silver in Coin or
Bullion, Brass, Copper, or Iron Ordnance, Muskets, or small Firearms,
Iron-Shot, Gunpowder, or Granado-shells,; any sorts of Iron wrought or
unwrought, or in Bars, or otherwise; any Woollen Cloth, Cloth-Rashes, woollen
or worsted Stuffs, Bays, Lead wrought or unwrought, white or red Lead,
Quicksilver, Vermilion, Coral, Amber, Coral Beads, large branched polished
Coral, Crystal and Flint-Glasses; Cochenele, Elephants Teeth, Brimstone,
Allom, Copper, Pewter, Tyn wrought or unwrought. And Homewards, or in the
East Indies, any sorts of Goods or Merchandises made of Cotton or Silk, or mixed
with Cotton or Silk, of what denomination soever; or any Indico, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Cardamons, Cotton-yarn, Benjamin, Nutmegs, Saltpeter, Pepper black
or white, Long Pepper, Cassia Lignum, or Cinnamon de Matt, Tramboon Cinnamon,
Mace, Lacks of any sort, Cowries, Green-Ginger, Turmerick, Colored Ginghams,
or Raw Silk of Bengal, or any sort of Raw Silk, Aloes Succatrina, Camphire,
Myrrh, Tincal, Red-wooll, or Carmania Wool, Coho-seeds, China Roots, Mu^k in
Cod or out of Cod, Diamond, Diamond Boart or Sinal, any sorts of Skins,
Leather, or Hides, dressed or undrest. Sugar of any sort, Sandal or Sappan wood,
Red Earth, Tutenage, Bettellees, or any of them, but such as shall be laden for
Account of the Governor and Company, and also observe and keep all such other
Rules as in the said Charter-party are Expressed. And if the said (...) shall
in every thing be Obedient to the said Commander, and do nothing to the
Prejudice or Damage of the said Owners and Commander, Then this Obligation to
be void and of none Effect, or else to stand and remain in full Force and
Virtue. And if it shall appear that the said (...) has entered himself, or
that he is already or should be pressed into their Majesty's Service, it shall in
no wise hinder the Captain aforesaid, from recovering the Damages he sustained
by the Non performance of this Obligation.

Sealed and Delivered in the presence of (...)

