A JOURNAL OF MEDITATIONS For every day in the Year.

Gathered out of diverse Authors.

Written first in Latin by N. B. and newly translated into English by E. M. in
the Year of our Lord, 1669.

Every day will I bless thee, and will praise thy name, for ever, and for ever,
and ever.

Ps. 144.2. Anno Dom. MDCLXIX.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THe general use of Mental Prayer through the Christian World, next to the
influence of the Divine Spirit, who is the principal Cause and Author of all
that is good, owes very much to the pious labors of those, who in Written
Books and Volumes, have treated at large of this holy Exercise, of its nature,
excellency, and advantages; and have delivered rules and precepts for the due
performance of it; and withal have suggested ample matter of Meditation,
digested into points, and set down in order and method: By which means this
principal part of Devotion, though something difficult in its self, without the
special unction of the Holy Ghost has been wonderfully facilitated, and made
familiar to all: Neither are we in England destitute of these helps, having in
our own language Luiz de Puentes, Luiz Granada's, and Vincentio Bruno's
Meditations, and some others, whose pious labors have proved singularly
beneficial to the Christian World. Yet in regard these Authors are either large
in themselves, or have not that set and ready distribution for each day in the
year, which would be a riddance of a continual trouble in seeking out, and
contriving Meditations suitable to the current time and day; and because many
there are, who, though desirous to employ themselves daily in this Exercise,
yet have not either will, or leisure to spend much time therein, or convenience
to have always about them larger Volumes; I thought it would not prove a
superfluous labor to adjoyn to the former helps some more compendious and
methodical supply; which I hope will be so performed by this short Journal,
that young beginners may find what help they desire without tediousness, and
others that have had more practice in Mental Prayer, and desire to employ more
time therein, may not want matter to work upon, and dilate themselves more at
large, both in discourse and affection.

The Author of this Journal is of our own Nation, and yet living, though buried
to the World, whose modesty enjoins me to a concealment of his name: But in
regard the reputation of my Author may be of concern to the benefit of my
Reader, I think my self bound to let the world know that his singular virtue
and abilities have first placed, and since fixed him these last twenty years in
an eminent employment, and one of greatest trust in the state and profession he
lives in. He wrote this Book thirty years since in Latin, for the benefit of
a private Community, of whose spiritual advancement, then committed to his
charge he was zealous. This work, though never yet set forth to the public
view of the world in Print, has a sufficient approbation from the general
esteem of all those that have made use of it.

Some persons of known virtue, literature, and authority, have procured
themselves Copies, and make use of no other in their daily exercise of Mental
Prayer. Others have taken the pains to Transcribe it for their constant use;
and both these, and several others have wished to see it published in English,
for the more general benefit of our Nation. The matter is solid, and for the
most part grounded on Divine Scripture, and fitly accommodated to the use and
practice of the Church, which in several parts of the year does represent unto
us the several Mysteries of our Saviors Incarnation, his Infancy, Life and
Doctrine, his Passion and Death, Resurrection and Ascension. The Method is
pla^^ and easy, laying down in order each days Meditation, and requiring no
further trouble, than the going continually on with them; or if you chance to
make any interruption for weeks or days, you need but turn to the week and day
you are in, according to the Ecclesiastical account, which every Calendar will
tell you.

As concerning the Translation, I have been faithful in my trust, keeping touch
all along with the sense of the Original: What alterations I have made, I was
necessitated unto, by reason of the matter, which being in many places applied
by the Author to the particular Community, for which he wrote, required some
change for the more general use of all; and I was authorized therein by an
express, and large Commission from the Author; which notwithstanding I have
used sparingly. As for the Version of the Scripture-Text, I have carefully
sought out each Citation, and even scrupulously followed every where the Rhemes
Testament, reverencing and preferring the public authority of those learned
and grave Authors, before that of any private person, much more of my own
Judgment and opinion. I have also for the readier use and satisfaction of such
as may have occasion, or desire to see the Citations in the Text it self, noted
every where not only the Chapter, but Verse also, and by this diligent search
have corrected very many false quotations, caused by the several transcriptions
of Copies. As for the Citations of Holy Fathers and other Authors, not having
convenience of Books to look them out, I have left them as I found them.

Having thus (Christian Reader) given you some account of this Journal, and its
Translation, I leave it in your hands, and recommend it to your serious
perusal. If perhaps your necessary occasions and employments, or little
practice, or apprehension of difficulty in the exercize of Mental Prayer,
permit not any longer or more studious Meditation, at least take the pains to
read every day one of these pages, and for the space of a quarter of an hour,
either sitting or walking, only to re^^ect or ruminate upon what you have
read, applying what you may, to your self, and thinking what may serve for your
own practice. I hope, after some acquaintance, you will receive that
satisfaction, which I proposed to my self in the first undertaking of the Work;
and that by means thereof, and the assistance of Gods Holy Grace, you will come
to reap th^se admirable fruits of Mental Prayer, consisting in the knowledge of
your self, and of your duty to God; of the malice and damages of Sin; of the
Miseries and Vanities of the World; of the practice of all manner of Christian
perfection; but chiefly in the eminent knowledge and love of God, and of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with the infinite treasures comprehended in the Mysteries of
his Life, Passion and Resurrection, wherein consists the height of all our
perfection in this life, Joh. 17.3.
and the accomplishment of all our happiness in the next, according to that of
the Apostle, This is Life everlasting, that they know thee the only true God,
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ; To whom with the Father, and Holy Ghost,
be all praise, honor, and glory, now, and for ever. Amen.

Your Servant in Christ, E. M.

The Preface or INTRODUCTION.
Of the Method of the Work, and of such things as are necessary for all
Meditation.
OUr chief intent in this Journal, is to suggest certain brief heads or points
of Meditation, for the benefit of such as being desirous to spend some short
time daily in the exercise of Mental Prayer, have not leisure to peruse, nor
convenience to have still about them larger Volumes.

We have assigned to every day in the year its peculiar Meditation; wherefore
if at any time there chance to be more Meditations, than days that year; As for
example, before Advent, or Christmas, or then there are weeks after Epiphany,
or Pentecost, those that are over and above, are to be omitted that year.

As to the Method, we have for the most part followed the Abridgement of F.
Lewis of Puente his Meditations. Wherefore we have taken our beginning from the
Purgative way, employing the Month of November in the consideration of our End,
of Sin, of Death, of Judgment, of Purgatory, and of Hell; yet so, that it be
free for every one either to assume these for this Month, or to continue on
according to the day and week after Pentecost, which he is in, till Advent.
Front Advent to Septuagesme Sunday (to conform our selves, what we can, to the
use and practice of the Church) we treat of the Incarnation, Nativity, and
Infancy of Christ, which appertain to the Illuminative way. From Septuagesme to
Easter, we comtemplate the Passion: Thence again we treat of the several
Apparitions of our Lord, of Gods divine benefits, and of other Mysteries proper
to feasts which occur at that time: All which appertain to the Unitive way. And
lastly, from the third Sunday after Pentecost, we prosecute the rest of our
Saviors Life and Preaching, till November.

Upon every Sunday and Solemn Feast, that has a determinate fixed place in
this our distribution, we have endeavored to comply with the general devotion
toward the Blessed Sacrament, and therefore have instituted on those days a
Meditation of Holy Communion; taking out of the Gospel of the day (excepting
the Sundays of November, the which, as such, have no certain Gospel) some
consideration, under which we may consider Christ in the Eucharist, much after
the manner wherein Antonius Molina, Alvarez de Paez, and others consider him;
now as a King, now as a Guest, Spouse, Physician, etc.

To these Meditations we have prefixed a congruous Reflection, that is, some
Versicle taken out of Scripture, for every one to entertain his thoughts
withal, while he awaketh from sleep, and clotheth himself; that he may the
better be disposed to entertain him, whom he is to receive that day.

Although our intended brevity will not admit of any long discourse, yet we
cannot omit to say something briefly in this place concerning Meditation, for
the necessary information of those who are less conversant in this Exercise.
If any desire further instruction in this point, they may receive full
satisfaction by reading F. Puente his Introduction to Mental Prayer, which is
the entrance to his Book of Meditations.

Of Meditation.
Meditation is nothing else but an exercise of the Interior Powers of our
Soul, viz. Memory, Understanding, and Will; whereby we consider God, and the
Mysteries of our Faith, entertaining our selves in affectuous discourses with
his Divine Majesty; begging of him his gifts, and negotiating with him the main
affair of our salvation and perfection. In Meditation there are four principal
parts.

The first, is the exercise of our Memory, whereby after we have placed our
selves in the presence of God, we set before us the Mystery whereon we intend
to Meditate, divided into points, exercising our selves in lively acts of Faith
concerning the same Mystery, without which all our Meditation will be cold and
languishing, according to that saying of the Prophet, If you will not believe,
Isai 7.9. Septuag.
you shall not understand.

The second, is the exercise of our Understanding, which goes through the
matter proposed, bending its forces to penetrate and comprehend it, with all
its causes, properties, effects, and circumstances; and framing thence such
discourses and reasons as may convince us of the truths we Meditate on, which
being represented to the Will, may move it to congruous affections.

The third consists in the motion of the Will, conformably to what the
Understanding had suggested unto it, so as to produce several acts and
affections, some in order to one self, others in order to God; as of Love,
Confidence, Gratitude, Sorrow, Hatred, Confusion, Desire of our spiritual
progress, etc. which are the proper effects and end of Meditation.

The fourth consists in demanding of God such things, as by Meditation we
understand to be necessary for us, which we perform by presenting our request
by some Colloquie to the Blessed Trinity, either severally to one, or more
Person; or generally to all, as the present matter may require, or our
affection suggest.

In all Meditation are necessary certain Preambles, which do help, and as it
were open the way, and entrance into the matter we are about to contemplate.
We should have assigned proper Preambles to each Meditation, but because that
could not stand with our intended brevity, we have thought fit to set down in
this place something of them in general.

Of Preambles.
In all Meditation are necessary at least two Preambles. The first is called
Composition of place. The second is the imploring of Divine Light or Grace.

Composition of Place, is nothing but a certain imaginary representation of the
Persons, Places, and other objects which we are to meditate on, as if we did
see them with our eyes. For example, If your Meditation be of our Lords
Nativity, for the first Preamble imagine your self to see the Cave, or Stable
lying open to the Winds; the Crib, or Manger, wherein the Blessed Infant lies;
the Blessed Virgin, and St. Joseph standing by, and the like. If your
Meditation be of Death, set before your eyes a sick man lying on his death bed,
given over by the Physicians, oppressed with grief and pain; if it be of Hell,
imagine some frightful, and hideous dungeon, dark, stinking, darting out fiery
flames, etc. and so of others.

But if your Meditation be not of any corporeal thing, or subject to sense: As
for example, of the Attributes of God, of the grievousness of Sin, and the
like; and there occur not any fitter, or more proper Preamble, for a general
Preamble in all such matters, imagine your self before the Throne of the Divine
Majesty as a poor beggar asking an alms, to wit, that by his grace you may
employ that half hour, or hour, in the contemplation of things conducing to
your salvation.

The second Preamble is generally every where the same, to wit, the imploring
of Divine Light and grace, that you may come to understand, and love as you
ought the good, and detest and avoid the evil which you are to meditate on,
according to the diversity of the matter.

Entering therefore into Meditation, place your self first with all humility in
the presence of God, imagining that Christ expects you there, ready to give you
audience; then kneeling down with profound reverence, say that short
Preparatory prayer of the Church, Prevent we beseech thee, O Lord, our actions,
by thy Spirit assisting us, and in h^ping forward prosecute them, that all our
prayer and work may begin always from thee, and begun, by thee may be ended.
Through Christ our Lord, Amen, or some other like: Then make use of the first
Preamble of Composition of Place; and that being done, beg of Almighty God
grace suitable to the subject of your present Meditation. After this enter upon
the points or matter of your Meditation, which must be prepared before hand,
and discourse upon them with your understanding, examining with your self who,
what, where, by what means, wherefore, in what manner, when, and other general
circumstances that offer themselves, and in all of them procure, now and then,
to stir up your will by pious Affections and Colloquies, as often as there
shall be occasion: in which Affections and Colloquies, because the chief fruit
of prayer does consist, therefore we will treat of them in this place more at
large.

Of Colloquies.
Colloquies are to be made as well through the whole course, as at the end of
Meditation; to wit, as often as the will is stirred up to love or hate; to
prosecute, or to fly what is set before it, according as it is informed by the
understanding of the goodness, or malice of the object: And because we may
diverse ways conceive God in relation to our selves, therefore the Colloquies
are to be made, sometimes as of a Subject to his Prince, sometimes as of a
Child to his Father; at other times again as of the Spouse to her Beloved, of
Friend to Friend, of a Criminal to his Judge, etc. now begging something, now
admiring, now offering, now congratulating, now, condoling, as the present
matter shall require. And because there are many kinds of these affections, it
will not be amiss in this place to rehearse some of them in particular in an
Alphabetical order. The Colloquie therefore may be framed by way of,

I. ACOVSATION, Accusing your self for having been cause, 1 Paral. 21.17.
of Christ's sufferings, or of other evils, saying with David, Am not I he that
commanded? etc. It is I that have sinned, it is I that have done the evil, etc.
Lord my God, let thy hand be turned, I beseech thee, upon me; and the like. II.
ADMIRATION, Wondering at the Goodness, Wisdom, Power, and other like
Attributes of God. O Lord, our Lord, Psalm 8.2.
how marvelous is thy Name? O Lord of Hosts, who is like to thee? Thou art
mighty, O Lord, Psalm 88.9.
and thy truth round about thee; or the like. III. AFFIRMATION, Affirming, for
example, that God is just, great, and dreadful; that they are happy that serve
him, and the like. Psalm. 118.137. Psalm. 46.3. Psa. 64.^.
Thou art Just, O Lord, and thy Judgment is right. Because our Lord is high,
terrible, a great King over all the earth. Blessed is he whom thou have chosen,
and taken, he shall dwell in thy Courts. IV. BENEDICTION, Blessing God for
hearing our prayers, for having redeemed us, and for other benefits, which he
has bestowed upon us; and inviting all creatures to do the same. Blessed be
God, who has not removed my prayer, Ps. 65.20. Luc. ^^.66.
and his mercy from me, etc. Blessed be our Lord God of Israel, because he has
visited, and wrought the redemption of his people. All works of our Lord, Dan.
3.57.
bless ye our Lord, praise and superexalt him for ever. V. COMMINATION, or
threatening woe to your self, unless you mend, unless you obey Gods call, etc.
Unless you will be converted, Psalm. 7.13.
he shall shake his Sword, be has bent his bow, and prepared it, etc.
Understand these things, Psa. 49.22.
you that forget God, least sometime he take you violently, and there be none
to deliver you. VI. COMPASSION for Christ's labors and sufferings. I am sorry
for thee my Brother Jonathas, 2 Reg. 1.26. 2 Reg 18.33. Rod. de. Pas. c. 8.
exceeding beautiful, and amiable. Who would grant me that I might dye for
thee? I will not live without wound (says Saint Bonaventure) because I see
thee full of wound. VII. COMPLAINT, Piously complaining as if God had left you.
Psalm. 1.1.
How long, O Lord, will thou forget me unto the end? how long do thou turn
away thy face from me? Where are thine old mercies, Ps. 8850. Ps. 8^15.
O Lord, etc. Why do thou, O Lord, reject my prayer? VIII. COMPVNCTION and
GRIEF, for that by your sins you have been cause of Christ's sufferings, and of
the scourges wherewith God does chastize the world. J^^. 1.12. Psalm. 50.5.
Take me up, and east me into the Sea, for I know that for me this tempest is
upon you. I do know mine iniquity, and my sin is before me always. IX.
CONFESSION, Acknowledging the Benefits of God, Eccli. 51.1
and your own Infirmity. I will confess to thee, O Lord King, and will praise
thee God my Savior. I will confess to thy Name, because thou art become my
helper, Psalm. 37.4.
and protector. There is no health is my flesh, etc. my bones have no peace at
the face of my st^s. X. CONGRATVLATION with Christ for his victory over death,
with the Blessed Virgin for the glory of her Son, and for her own Election. Let
us sing to our Lord, Erod. 15.1 Judith. 15.^0. Ecclesia in Missa.
for he is gloriously magnified, etc. Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou the
joy of Israel, thou the honor of our people, etc. We give thee thanks for thy
great glory. XI. CONSVLTATION, Consulting between our Lord and your self, what
you are to do for him, what to return for his beneftis. Job 7.20. Ps. 115.3.
What shall I do to thee, O Keeper of men? What shall I render to our Lord for
all things that he has rendered to me? XII. DESIRE of heavenly and everlasting
goods. How beloved are thy Tabernacles, Psalm. 83.2.
O Lord of Hosts? My soul coveteth and faints unto the Courts of our Lord.
Psalm. 41.2.
Even as the Heart defireth after the Fountains of waters, so does my soul
desire after thee, O God. I desire thee a thousand times, Bern. (...) Jub.
my Jesus, when will you come? when will you make me joyful? when will you give
me my fill of you? XIII. DETESTATION, Abominating your own sins, and
sluggishness. Psalm. 118.163. Psalm. 25.2. Ps. 72.25.
I have hated iniquity, and abhorred it. I have hated the Church of the
Malignant, and with the impious I will not sit. What is to me in Heaven, and
besides thee what would I upon the earth? XIV. DOUBT, Demanding of your self
what you ought to do, and what will become of you, seeing all are to be so
rigorously judged. Psalm. 138.7. Psalm. 88.49.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit, and whither shall I fly from thy face? who
is the man that shall live, and shall not see death? shall deliver his soul
from the hand of hell? and the like. XV. EXHORTATION, Exciting your self to
delight in God alone, to open your self unto him, to put your whole trust in
him. Psalm. 36.4, 5.
Be delighted in our Lord, and he will give thee the petitions of thy heart.
Reveal thy way to our Lord, and hope in him, and he will do it. Cast thy care
upon our Lord, Ps. 54.23.
and he will nourish thee. XVI. FAITH and CONFIDENCE, in the goodness of God,
and that by his grace you will overcome all difficulties and temptations, etc.
Our Lord is my Illumination, Psalm. 26.1. Ps. 102.9. Ps. 17.30.
and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? He will not be angry always, neither will
he threaten for ever. In thee I shall be delivered from temptation, and in my
God I shall go over the wall. XVII. GLADNESS or JOY for the propagation of
Gods glory, for the greatness of his Majesty, and perfections, and for the
fulfilling of his Divine Will. Be joyful in our Lord, and rejoice ye Just, Ps.
31.11. Isa. 61.10.
and glory all ye right of heart. Rejoicing I will rejoice in our Lord, and my
soul shall be joyful in my God, because he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, etc. XVIII. GRATIVDE and THANKSGIVING for benefits received. Ps.
102.2. Apoc. 11.17.
My soul bless thou our Lord, and forget not all his retributions. We thank
thee Lord God Omnipotent, which art, which wast, and which shall come. XIX.
HVMILIATION, Acknowledging your self a sinner, a wretch, a worm, your own
infirmity, rejoicing therein as occasion of merit, and humility. Psalm. 21.7.
Psalm. 43.7. Psalm. 118.17.
I am a worm, and no man, a reproach of men, and outcast of the people. I will
not hope in my Bow, and my Sword will not save me, etc. It is good for me, that
thou have humbled me, that I may learn thy justifications. XX. IMITATION,
exciting your self to follow our Lord, Exo. 25.40 Ephesians. 5.1. To. 13.14.
and tread his footsteps. Look, and do according to the pattern. Be a follower
of God as a most dear Child. Do you on our Lord Jesus Christ. I will follow
thee whither soever thou go, Luc. 9.57. XXI. INVITATION, Inviting our Lord
to visit, help, and save you. Ps. 43.23. Ps. 79.15.
Arise, why sleep thou O Lord? Arise, and expel us not to the end. O God of
Hosts return, regard from Heaven, and see, and visit this Vineyard. XXII. LOVE,
Professing your self to love God above all things. Jo. 21.16. Psalm. 17.2. Ps.
30.24.
Lord thou know that I love thee. I will love thee, O Lord, my strength: And
exhorting all men to do the same. Love our Lord all ye his Saints. XXIII.
NARRATION, Recounting what God has done for you, or others, or what you have
done for him. Our Lord rules me, Psalm. 22.2.
and nothing shall be wanting to me, in place of pasture, there he has placed
me. In thee our Fathers have hoped, they hoped, Psalm. 21.5. Ps. 39.11.
and thou did deliver them. Thy Justice I have not hid in my heart. Thy
truth, and thy salvation I have spoken. XXIV. OBLATION, Offering your self to
God, to serve him, to obey him in all things, and to suffer for him. O Lord, I
am thy servant, Ps. 115.7. Ps. 72.23. Ps. 37.18.
I am thy servant, and the Son of thy Handmaid. As a Beast I am become with
thee, and I always with thee. I am ready for scourges, and my sorrow is in my
sight always. XXV. OBSECRATION, Earnestly imploring the Divine Aid, and such
spiritual graces as you stand most in need of. Help us, Psalm. 78.9.
O God our Savior, and for the glory of thy Name, O Lord, deliver us. Turn
thee, O Lord, and deliver my Soul, Psalm. 6.5.
save me for thy mercy. XXVI. PETITION, Craving to be heard, illuminated, Ps.
38.13.
directed, preserved, and the like. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and my petition,
with thine ears receive my tears. Psalm. 69.2. Psalm. 5.9. Psalm. 24.5.
O God intend unto my help, Lord make have to help me. Direct my way in thy
fight. Direct me in thy truth, and teach me. Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of
the sinner, etc. Psalm. 139.5. XXVII. PRAISE, Extolling the Power, Wisdom, and
Mercy of our Lord; and inviting all creatures to do the same. Ps. 146.5.
Great is our Lord, and great is his strength, and of his wisdom there is no
number. Luc. 1.46. Ps. 148.1.
My foul does magnify our Lord. Praise ye our Lord from the Heavens, Praise ye
him in the high places, Praise ye him all his Angels. XXVIII. PREFERRING,
Having a greater esteem and concern for heavenly and divine objects, than for
the earthly and trausitory things of this world. Psa. 83.11.
Better is one day in thy Courts above thousands. I have chosen to be an object
in the house of my God, rather than to dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners.
Psa. 36.16.
Better is a little to the just, above much riches of sinners. XXIX.
PROSOPOPEIA, Imagining to your self that God does speak unto you reproving your
negligence, Jer. 2.21. Isa. 5.2. Three. 4.1. Jer. 3.12.
or exhorting you to fervor. How art thou turned unto me into that which is
depraved, O strange Vineyard! I looked that it should yield grape, and it
yielded wild grapes. How is the gold darkened, the best color changed? Return,
O rebellious Israel, (soul) and I will not turn away my face from you. XXX.
PVRPOSE, Purposing to serve God better, to resist temptations, and to propagate
his glory. Psalm. 38.2.
I will keep my ways that I offend not in my tongue. I will pursue mine
enemies, Ps. 17.38. Ps. 21.23.
and overtake them, and will not return till they fail. I will declare thy name
to my brethren, in the midst of the Church I will praise thee. XXXI.
RENVNCIATION or ABNEGATION, Denying your own will, and renouncing all honor
and glory, as due to God alone. Luc. 22.42 Ps. 113.9. Mat. 8.8.
Not my will, but thine be done. Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy Name
give the glory. Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof.
XXXII. REPREHENSION, Rebuking your self for being slothful, irresolute, a lover
of toys, etc. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? Prove. 6.9. Pro. 1.22.
Psalm. 12.2.
When will thou rise out of thy sleep? How long do you love infancy, and as
fools covet things which are hurtful to your self? How long shall I put
counsels in my soul? XXXIII. RESIGNATION, Resigning your self to the will of
God, Lord, not as I will, Mat. 26.39 Mat. 6.9. Job 1.21.
but as thou. Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. As it has pleased
our Lord, so is it done: The Name of our Lord be blessed. XXXIV. SOLACE or
ENCOVRAGEMENT, Animating your self to expect our Lord, to trust in him, and the
like. Expect our Lord, Ps. 26.14. Psalm. 42.5.
do manfully, and let thy heart take courage, and expect thou our Lord. Why art
thou sorrowful, O my soul? and why do thou trouble me? Hope in God; because
yet will I confess to him. XXXV. SOLICITATION, As it were urging God to give
you speedy aid. God, my God, Psalm. 21.2.
have respect to me; why have thou forsaken me? Incline thine ear to me, Psalm.
30.3. Ps. 43.23.
make have to deliver me. Arise, why sleep thou, O Lord? Arise, and expel
us not to the end. XXXVI. ZEAL, Defiring that the glory of God may be
propagated, Psalm. 78.1. Ps. 73.10.
and his enemies humbled. O God, the Gentiles are come into thine inheritance,
they have polluted thy holy Temple. How long, O God, shall the enemy upbraid,
Psalm. 67.2.
the adversary provoke thy Name for ever. Let God arise, and let his enemies be
dispersed.
These, or other like affections you may make use of for your Colloquies; and
these, or other such Versicles taken out of Scripture, may perhaps help you to
enter with greater facility into your Colloquies, which afterward you may
prosecute more at large, as your affection shall suggest, and the Unction of
the Divine Spirit shall teach you.

Manual.
And although it be expedient, as has been said, to break into these
Colloquies, at any time during the Meditation, yet this same is to be done with
more earnest endeavor, and exactness in the end; sometimes calling upon the
Eternal Father, sometimes upon the Son, at other times upon the Holy Ghost:
Sometimes also upon the Blessed Virgin, our Angel Guardian, the Saints our
Patrons, imploring their aid and intercession, giving thanks, etc. as the
present matter shall require. Unto this Colloquy is to be joined some Vocal
Prayer, as the Pater Noster, if the Colloquy be directed to God the Father;
Anima Christi sanctifica me, The Soul of Christ sanctify me, if to the Son;
Veni Creator, if to the Holy Ghost; Ave Maria, or some like to the Blessed
Virgin, or to the Saints.

It is a commendable practice of many, having ended their Meditation, to note
down in brief, in some little book for that end, their good purposes, and the
chief lights which God communicated unto them in their prayer, lest otherwise
they come to be fruitless: for as it suffices not for the bringing forth of
fruit, that good seed be cast into the ground, unless it be kept, and fostered
in the bosom of the earth, so neither will it be available for our souls
spiritual good only to have heard the voice or word of God in prayer: But (as
Christ says) Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it, Luke
11.28.

The Morning Entertainment. O God, my God, to thee I watch from the morning
light.
On the Feast of All Saints.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ in the Eucharist as God, and Head of all Saints.
Ps. 62.2.
I Magin your self among the Blessed companies of Saints in Heaven,
contemplating the divine face of God; and consider 1. How great is the Glory,
Riches, Beauty, and Majesty of that infinite Essence. Thousands of thousands
minister to him, and ten thousand hundred thousands assist him, says Daniel.
Dan. 7.10. Think how great is his Power. All things whatsoever our Lord would,
he has do^^ in heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in all the depths. How great
his Wisdom. Great is our Lord, Ps. 134.6,
and great is his strength, and of his wisdom there is no number. How great his
Immensity, which is higher th^n heaven, Ps. 146.5. Job. 11.8.
de^pe^ then hell, longer then the earth, and broader then the sea. And so of
his other divine Attributes.

Prove. 8.31
Consider 2. This so great a Majesty, and Head of all the Saints whose memory
you celebrate this day, disdaineth not to enter the cottage of your soul; and
even desires it himself, according to that: My delights (are) to be with the
children of men; not for that he stands in need of you, who are but dust and
ashes; but to enrich your poverty with his infinite treasures. Think therefore
with your self what you are, and who he is, and cry out with the Prophet, What
is man that thou art mindful of him? Ps. 8.5.
or the so^ of man, that thou visitest him?

Amos 4.12.
Consider 3. You must diligently prepare your soul against the coming of so
great a Guest; according to that: Be prepared to meet thy God O Israel.
Wherefore cleanse it first with the greatest purity that possibly you are able;
and not only from Mortal, but also from all Venial Sin: For, Blessed are the
clean of heart, Matt. 5.8.
(says Christ) for they shall see God. Then enkindle in your self an ardent
love; that so you may deserve to keep him long with you, according to that; If
any love me, etc. we will come to him, Jo. 14.23.
and will make abode with him.

Morn. Ent. To day I shall dine with the King. Esth. 5.12. Note.
The first Sunday after All Saints.
Of Holy Communion. Consider Christ in the Eucharist as King.
This and the other Meditations on the Sundays of this Month, are to be placed
between Week and Week, as they come in their turn.

Ps. 2.6.
COnsider. 1. Christ is truly a King; the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and
not only of one Province, or parcel of earth, but of all Heaven and Earth, of
Men and Angels. I am appointed King by him over Sion, etc. and not for a time
only, as other Kings upon earth, but for ever, and evermore. Exodus 15.18.
Wherefore all duties, services, and tribute, which Subjects owe to their King,
are much more due from you to Christ. See whether you have performed them
hitherto, or no.

1 Paral. 29.1.
Consider 2. What you would do if some earthly Prince were to come to your
house; how carefully would you have it swept, cleansed, adorned, and set in
order; lest there should be any thing that might offend the Prince's eye: How
much more ought the house of your Soul to be adorned, which the King of Heaven
will vouchsafe this day to enter in the Holy Eucharist: for as David says, The
habitation is not prepared for man, but for God. And if those women mentioned
in Esther prepared themselves a whole year to appear but once before the King
Assuerus, Esth. 2.12.
For six months they were anointed with oil of myrtle, (says the Scripture)
and other six months they used certain paintings and sweet spices, how much
greater care ought to be taken to appear worthily before Christ our Lord?

Ps. 44.11.
Consider 3. In regard you are poor, and have not any thing in your Soul fit to
entertain such a Royal Guest, beseech him to send beforehand, as great Princes
are wont to do, furniture and provision worthy of himself. Besides, if you
desire to be gracious in his sight, you must put off all carnal and worldly
affection, and with all submission hearken to his interior inspirations:
Incline thine ear, and forget thy people, and the house of thy father, (says
the Royal Prophet) and the king will covet thy beauty.

Morn. Ent. I will arise, and go to my father. Luc. 15.17
The second Sunday after All Saints.
Of Holy Communion. Consider Christ as your Father.
Is. 40.15.
COnsider 1. Almighty God, although he be infinitely powerful and rich, and in
respect of whom all creatures are as a drop of bucket, and as a moment of a
balance, yet he disdaineth not to be called, and to be truly our Father: and
what is more, Call none father to your self upon earth, Mat. 23.9.
(says Christ) for one is your father, he that is in heaven. And Christ
himself by a special title would be styled by the Prophet Father of the world
to come; Is. 9.6.
and not content with that, he also takes upon him something more then the
affection even of a mother; for, if she should forget her infant, yet will not
I (faith he) forget thee. Is. 49.15.
Ponder how excellently Christ performs both these offices, not only
begetting us to a spiritual life, but also feeding and nourishing us with his
own precious body and blood.

Ps. 102.13
Consider 2. How you, like the prodigal child, have foolishly left so loving and
so rich a father, and gone after the swine of this world; yet he is still ready
to receive you again, and clothe you with the first robe: for as a father has
compassion of his children, (says David) so has our Lord compassion on them
that fear him, because he has known our making. He expects you to day in the
Eucharist with open arms to embrace you, and to give you his blessing, so you
do but worthily dispose your self.

Luc. 15.18
Consider 3. The best disposition will be. 1. An humble begging of pardon.
Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee. 2. A firm resolution of
never more going from him, but striving with all your endeavor to imitate the
perfection of your heavenly Father, according to that of the Apostle: Ephesians.
5.1.
Be ye followers of God as most dear children. Wherefore with a filial
confidence represent unto your Father when he comes all your necessities; Luc.
11.13
for if fathers know bow to give good gifts to their children, how much more
will your Father from Heaven give a good Spirit to them that ask him?

Who shall give to me thee my brother sucking the breasts of my mother, that I
may find thee without and kiss thee? Cant. 8.1. Heb. 2.11.
The third Sunday after All Saints.
Of Holy Communion. Consider Christ as your Brother.
Matt. 28.10.
COnsider 1. Christ, to make us the more sensible of his love toward us, took
upon him not only the name of Father, but also that of a Brother; that so by a
certain equality, which is wont to be between brothers, he might the more
familiarly insinuate himself unto us; for the which cause he is not ashamed
(says the Apostle) to call us brethren, saying, I will declare thy name to my
brethren: and after his resurrection, Go, tell my brethren, (says he) that
they go into Galiles. Think what an honor it is to be brother to so great a
Prince. And if the brother that is helped of brother is (as the Wiseman says)
as a strong city, Prove. 18.19.
what comfort and help may you expect from such a brother?

Genesis 37.28.
Consider 2. Your unhumane dealing with Christ, who have sold him, not for
twenty pieces of silver, as did the sons of Jacob their brother Joseph, but
perhaps for some slight, or filthy pleasure: And even like another Cain, you
have murdered this Brother Abel of yours by your sins, Genesis 4.8.
and nailed him on the Cross: And yet he forgetting and forgiving all, invites
you to himself, Genesis 45.4. and 18.
saying with Joseph I am Joseph your brother, etc. fear not, Come to me, and I
will give you all the good things of Egypt, that you may eat the marrow of the
land; and what is the marrow of the land, but his precious Body and Blood The
corn of the elect, Zach. 9.17.
and wine springing Virgins?

Consider 3. How you are to go meet this Brother of yours. Imitate Jacob who
went with presents to meet his enraged brother Esau. Genesis 33.10. Ps. 50.19.
Genesis 42.21.
Let your presents be 1. A contrite, and humbled heart, which he will not
despise. 2. A firm purpose of not sinning any more against your brother. 3. A
desire of imitating his virtues; that by the likeness of your life and
behavior to his, he may appear to be what truly he is, Romans 8.29
the firstborn in many brethren.

The master is come, and calls thee. Jo. 11.28.
The fourth Sunday after All Saints.
Of Holy Communion. Consider Christ as your Master.
Is. 5.20.
COnsider 1. What ignorance men are in, especially of heavenly things, and
appertaining to their Salvation. We often call evil good, and good evil,
putting darkness light, and light darkness. We commonly make Virtues of our
Vices, and Virtue we hate as folly: Therefore the Wisdom of the Eternal Father
came down from Heaven, to be unto us a Master, to teach us the way of truth.
You call me Master and Lord, Jo. 13.13.
(says he) and you do well, for I am so.

Colos. 2.3.
Consider 2. How willingly you ought to hearken to this Master, in whom be all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid. The prime incitement of learning
(says St. Ambrose) is the excellency of the Master. Ambr. l. 2. de Virg.
What more excellent then Christ our Lord, who is Truth it self, and can
neither deceive, nor be deceived? The Queen of the South, Matt. 12.42.
etc. came from the ends of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
behold, more then Solomon here; and here in the Eucharist he is ready to teach
you the Science of Saints, and of Salvation, if you come rightly disposed.

Sap. 1.4.
Consider 3. There is required due preparation on your part, that you may
deserve to hear with profit the Wisdom of this heavenly Master; for he will
have his Scholars to be, 1. Pure from all sin; Because wisdom will not enter
into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins. 2. Humble and
little in their own eyes. Thou have hid these things from the wise, and
prudent, Matt. 11.25.
and have revealed them to little ones. 3. Well mortified, and taken off from
worldly things. Whom shall he teach knowledge, and whom shall he make to
understand the thing heard? If. 28.9.
Them that are weaned from the milk, that are plucked away from the breasts.
See therefore you be thus disposed when you go to him.

Of Man's last End. The first Part.
Prove. 16.^
COnsider 1. What you were some hundred years ago: just nothing, and so you
would have remained for ever; but that it pleased God to take you out of your
nothing; and whereas he could have joined to your first or original matter
infinite other forms, he would endow you with a rational one, and place you in
this world among men. But to what end? Not to disport, or play; not to eat and
drink; not to seek after honors and vanities of this life; nor finally to end
your days like brute beasts. Our Lord has wrought all things for himself; that
you might serve and worship him in this world, and so at last attain to life
everlasting.

Consider 2. The excellency of this end. All other living creatures are created
stooping down to their food, and carry about them souls that are to end with
time: Man alone is elevated to that sublinie end of praising, and serving his
Creator, and after a short and holy life, to be crowned with immortal glory.
With good reason David full of admiration breaks forth into those words: What
is man that thou art mindful of him? Thou have minished him little less then
Angels; with glory and honor thou have crowned him, Ps. 8.5.
and have appointed him over the works of thy hands.

Ps. 33.2.
Consider 3. How much you are obliged to your Creator for so great a benefit;
and withal, how justly he requires of you that you direct your whole life to
this only end of his divine praise and service. This therefore ought to be the
only aim of all your actions, and even your thoughts; viz. to honor God, and
serve him alone. Wherefore say with the Prophet, I will bless our Lord at all
time, his praise always in my mouth. You are born for Heaven, see you
degenerate not: See you carry not (says St. Bernard) in a straight and upright
body, Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 24.
a crooked soul; that is, deformedly bent upon earthly things.

Of Man's last End. The second Part.
COnsider 1. Seeing your end in this life is to praise and serve God alone, and
seeing that in whatsoever kind, the end is the measure or square of all such
things as appertain thereunto, it follows evidently that you are to make use
of all other creatures, so far forth as they conduce to his service and honor;
and contrariwise to avoid them, if they any way withdraw you from the same.
Wherefore you are not to desire riches, honors, conveniences of this life, nor
even learning or health, otherwise then they may help you the better to serve
God. For as that holy man said well, Tho. a Kemp. de Imit. l. 1. c. 2.
Better is the humble countreyman that serves God, then the proud Philosopher
who neglecting himself considers the course of the heavens.

Ps. 107.2. Matt. 26.39. and 42.
Consider 2. And examine your self in particular whether you have any disordered
affection to the things above mentioned: See whether you be ready to suffer
poverty, reproach, sickness, and death it self, if God thereby might be the
more glorified in you. Offer your self to your Creator with indifferency to all
things, so far as they make to his greater glory. Say with the Prophet: My
heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready; and with Christ our Lord: Not as I
will, but as thou. Thy will be done.

Agg. 1.6.
Consider 3. How foolishly they do, who have any other end then God in their
actions, who employ their labors in purchasing honors, riches, renown,
pleasures, and the like; No otherwise do these, then would he who being to sail
to the East should steer his course to the West, and so never come to his
journeys end. Of such it is rightly said by the Prophet, You have sowed much
and brought in little; you have eaten, and have not been filled; you have drunk
and have not been inebriated. Lastly, They lead their days in wealth, Job. 21.13
and in a moment they go down to hell.

Of Man's duty toward God. 1. Part.
Ps. 36.27.
COnsider 1. The whole duty of man toward God is comprised in that short
sentence, Decline from evil, and do good. These are the two principal points of
a Christian life; they are the two wings whereby we must fly up to Heaven; the
two arms wherewith we are to lay fast hold on the Kingdom of God. In respect of
the first part, man's life in the holy Scripture is said to be a warfare upon
earth; Job. 7.1.
and Christians are termed Soldiers, carefully standing upon their guard, for
resisting the suggestions and temptations of sin.

Job. 9.28.
Consider 2. In this Warfare we are to strive against Sin even unto death; never
giving over, or thinking our selves secure; but always standing in arms with
watchful care and fear. Job, notwithstanding all his Integrity, discussed and
feared every the least of his actions. David, a man according to Gods own
heart, Ps. 76.7.
did every night brush, or sweep his spirit. St. John Baptist, that was
sanctified in his mothers womb, Him. ad Mat. de S. Joh. Bapt.
led an austere, retired life; that he might not, as the Church sings of him,
stain his life with a light slip of his tongue. S. Paul, though confirmed in
Grace, and rapt to the third Heaven, could say of himself, So I fight, not as
it were beating the air, 1 Cor. 9.27.
but I chastise my body, and bring it into servitude. Think not therefore much
of any pains, for the avoiding of sin.

Tob. 4.6.
Consider 3. We must not only withstand the actual committing of sin, but also
the consent of mind. Beware thou consent not to sin at any time: and resist all
delectation, and suggestion; for (as St. Gregory says) In suggestion is the
seed of sin, Greg. ad Interr. lib. Aug. Cantuar.
in delectation the nourishment, in consent the perfection. Examine your self
what vigilance and caution you hold over your thoughts, words, and actions; how
you avoid occasions of danger; and how you resist the suggestions of the Flesh,
the World, and the Devil. Take up your Weapons with the holy Saints of Fasting,
Prayer, and Mortification of your flesh, that you may also with them be crowned
with a glorious Victory.

Of Man's Duty toward God. 2. Part.
Matt. 13.44.
COnsider 1. The other part of Man's Duty is to labor in the exercise of good
works, thereby to please and serve God. Wherefore Heaven is sometimes proposed
unto us as a rich jewel; sometimes as a treasure hidden in a field, which we
are to seek out with some pain and labor, and to purchase with the sale of all
we have; sometimes again as a goal or prize, 1 Cor. 9.24.
which we are to gain by running on in the race of Virtue and Perfection; and
almost every where as the Reward and Crown of Virtuous Actions. See therefore
you play the industrious Merchant, and by the continual exercise of good works
heap up to your self treasures in Heaven. Matt. 6.20.


1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
Consider 2. The several Motives which you have to labor in the pursuit and
increase of Virtue. 1. The will of God. This is the will of God, your
Sanctification: And, Be you perfect, as also your heavenly Father is perfect.
Mat. 5.48.
2. The name of a Christian whose profession is Sanctity, and therefore
Christians are called by the Apostle An Elect Generation, a Kingly Priesthood,
a Holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
etc. 3. The Examples of Saints of both Sexes, and of all conditions and
callings; whereby the great St. Augustine encouraged himself, saying, Cannot
you do, what such and such, to wit, young Youths and tender Virgins have done
before you? 4. The greatness of the reward. Be glad and rejoice, Matt. 5.12.
for your reward is very great in Heaven.

Consider 3. The many helps which God has afforded you for your Spiritual
Profit. 1. His Divine Word declared unto you in Holy Scripture, in Sermons, in
pious Books, which inform your Understanding, and inflame your Will toward
Virtue. 2. The assistance of divine Grace always ready at hand to begin,
prosecute, and perfect any good work. 3. The holy Sacraments instituted by
Christ to beget us to a Spiritual Life, and to maintain, nourish, and
strengthen us in the same. 4. The Life, Merits, and Passion of our Savior, Jo.
14.6. Tit. 2.14.
who is our way, verity, and life: And, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us, etc. and cleanse to himself a people acceptable, a pursuer of good
works.

Of the Impediments of our End and Duty: Or, of SIN; and first, Of the Sin of
Lucifer and his Angels.
WE must first take away the Impediments which draw us from our End and Duty,
and then procure the supplies of Virtue to attain it. Now the only let which
debarreth us from God, is Sin; the which how detestable it is unto him, and how
greatly deserving punishment, you may learn by the fall, first of Lucifer, then
of Adam.

Ezech. 28.12.
Consider therefore 1. In what glory Lucifer with the other Angels was created;
for, of him is understood that of Ezechiel. Thou the signet of similitude, full
of wisdom, and perfect of beauty; thou wast in the delicacies of the Paradise
of God: Every precious stone thy covering, Sardius, Topatius, etc. These
precious stones, or ornaments, were, 1. Pure Spirituality, without any
admixture of a body. 2. Immortality. 3. Wonderful Subtlety of Wit and
Understanding. 4. An universal knowledge of all inferior things. 5. Might and
power above all other creatures. 6. Free Will, and command over his own acts.
7. Eminent Sanctity proceeding from the gifts of Grace. 8. He was an Inhabitant
of the Impyreal Heaven.

2 Pet. 2.4.
Consider 2. How in a moment he lost and obscured all these gifts of Nature and
Grace, elevating himself by pride above himself, and (as all Sinners do)
affecting what was unlawful for him. See how he was immediately after his Sin
cast down headlong into Hell with his Companions, without hopes of mercy.
Ponder those words of St. Peter: If God spared not Angels sinning, but with
ropes of Hell being drawn into Hell, delivered them to be tormented, etc. how
much more us miserable wretches?

Consider 3. and apply these things to your self. See 1. What gifts and
benefits you have received of God. 2. How you have abused them even against God
himself. 3. The Angels sin was but one, yours innumerable, in thought, word,
and deed. Admire, lament, implore mercy, etc.

Of the Sin of our first Parents in Paradise.
COnsider 1. The most happy state wherein Adam was created by God. 1. He was
created to the similitude of God himself, and endowed with Free Will. 2. He was
then Immortal, and not subject to any miseries. 3. He had an infused knowledge
of all natural things. 4. He was plentifully stored with the gifts of divine
Grace. 5. His inferior appetite was perfectly subject to Reason, by means of
Original Justice. 6. Nothing could be added to the delights of Paradise wherein
he was placed; nothing more could be wished. 7. And lastly, from a Paradise on
earth he was to pass immediately to that of Heaven, not by death, but by
transmigration. How happy had his posterity been, if they might have continued
in that blessed state?

Genesis 3.19.
Consider 2. How being forbidden to eat of one certain tree, notwithstanding, by
the persuasion of the Devil, and the enticements of his Wife, he transgressed
the command of God, and was thereupon despoiled of the ornaments of Grace, and
stricken with that dreadful sentence; Dust thou art, and into dust thou shall
return. What miseries has this one man's sin brought unto us all? and yet this
transgression at the first sight seems but small, and in a light matter.

Eccli. 5.8, 9.
Consider 3. How much heavier judgment and punishment do you deserve at Gods
hands, who have so often, and for such trifles transgressed his Law? You should
long since have been cast, not as Adam out of Paradise, but out of the world,
who have so often provoked the Lord of the world; and yet he has expected you
hitherto, to do penance. Do it therefore out of hand, and slack not to be
converted to our Lord, and defer not from day to day; for his wrath shall come
suddenly, (says Ecclesiasticus) and in the time of vengeance he will destroy
thee

Of the Grievousness of Mortal Sin, For the Punishments due unto it. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. God is most Just in inflicting punishments, which notwithstanding
he always does below our deserts, (as the Divines speak) though on the
contrary, his rewards are above our merits. Ponder therefore the greatness of
the offense, by the grievousnesse of the punishment due to every Sin. Enter
with your imagination into Hell, and consider attentively what God has
prepared there even for one Mortal Sin. Contemplate those fiery furnaces, those
torrents of Sulphur, the gnashing of teeth, and howling of the damned, and the
like: and reflect that all this is to last for ever, without any hopes of
releasement. And which of you (says Isaie) can dwell with everlasting beats?
Is. 33.14.


Matt. 10.28.
Consider 2. What a folly it were to offend a Prince, by whom you knew you were
to be most cruelly tortured upon the rack? How much more then to offend God?
that can destroy both soul and body into Hell: And if so great punishment be
due to one Mortal Sin, though even that comes short of its deserts, what an
excess of torments will be due to your many sins? Look back upon the days of
your youth, and think what had become of you if you had died immediately after
such or such a Sin; and acknowledge so many distinct favors of God toward
you, as you have committed sins, after which you were not cast presently into
Hell. Say therefore with the Prophet. I will confess to thee, Ps. 85.12, 13.
O Lord my God, etc. because thy mercy is great upon me, and thou have
delivered my soul out of the lower hell.

Consider 3. How much you are bound to so patient a Lord, that has so long
expected you to do penance. Take heed lest patience abused turn into fury.
Wherefore humbly crave pardon for what is past, and purpose amendment for the
future.

Of the Grievousness of Mortal Sin, By reason of the Dignity of the Person
offended. 2. Part.
Job. 26.11
COnsider 1. The greater the dignity is of the Person offended, the greater is
the offense; Whence, greater is his crime that wounds his King, or Father,
then his that hurts only some one of the common sort. Wherefore ponder who he
is whom you have so often provoked by your sins. 1. He is God of infinite
Majesty, at whose beck the pillars of Heaven tremble, and dread. 2. He is
omnipotent, able to destroy you in a moment, and chastize you a thousand ways.
3. He is every where present, Jer. 32.19.
Whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the children of Adam: And yet you
have the impudency to do that before his eyes, which you would be ashamed to do
in the sight of men.

Deuteronomy. 32.6. and 18.
Consider 2. The many titles of his goodness toward you; for, these also do
aggravate the Sin. 1. He has created you of nothing, preserved you hitherto as
a Father, and governed you as a Tutor. 2. He has drawn you out of the jaws of
Hell, and redeemed you with his precious Blood. 3. He it is that sanctifies you
even to this day, strengthening you with the holy Sacraments, preventing you
with his Inspirations, and drawing you on, a thousand ways, toward the Crown
of Glory: And could you sind in your heart so often and so foully to abuse such
a Benefactor? These things do thou render to our Lord, thou foolish and
unwise people? Is not he thy Father that has possessed thee, and made, and
created thee? God that begat thee thou have forsaken, and have forgotten our
Lord thy Creator.

Romans 2.5.
Consider 3. How greatly you ought to be ashamed of such an ingratitude, and to
be grieved for having offended so great a Majesty: Abuse not the treasures of
so infinite a goodness, patience, and longanimity; but speedily do penance,
lest otherwise thou heap to thy self wrath (as the Apostle says) in the day of
wrath.

Of the Grievousness of Mortal Sin, By reason of the baseness of the Offender.
3. Part
COnsider 1. It would be judged a great offense if one Prince should strike
another; but much less then if a Subject should strike his Sovereign; for, the
offense is proportioned to the Inequality that is between ^he offender, and
person offended: And what greater inequality can there be, then between God and
you? Think therefore what you are that dare reproach the Lord of hosts, and in
his sight commit enormous crimes; as if there were no power in Heaven to punish
you. As to your body you are a contemptible worm crept out of the slime of the
earth, Grass, flower of the field; Ps. 102.15 Jac. 4.14. Genesis 3.19. Bern. in
for. hon. vit.
a vapor appearing for a little while. ^ast thou art, and into dust thou shall
return. And as St. Bernard does elegantly express. You were unclean seed, you
are a vessel, or sack of dung, you will be meat for worms. Why therefore is
earth and ashes proud?

Consider 2. As to your Soul, what are you? Created of nothing, and to nothing
you would return, if God did not preserve you; without whom you cannot so much
as move a finger. 2. You are conceived in Sin, born and bred in Sin; nor is
there any Sin so heinous which you would not commit, if Gods Grace did not keep
you back. 3. As to knowledge, how little is it that you know? and how many
things are there that you understand not? As to power and ability, how little
is it that you are able to do? and how innumerable are the things above your
reach?

Sap. 11.23.
Consider 3. What are you now compared to all men in the world? What to the
whole multitudes of Angels? And what are all these again in respect of Almighty
God? As the least weight of the balance, so is the round world before thee, and
as a dray of the dew before day, that falls upon the carth. And yet, vile
Miscreant that you are, you have had the boldness so often most impudently to
provoke a Lord of such dread and majesty to indignation against you. Do
penance, and sin no more.

Of the Grievousness of Mortal Sin, By reason of the Vileness of the Object.
4. Part.
Is. 40.17.
COnsider 1. It would aggravate the fault, if one should leave a friend, or do
him some notorious injury for a slight and frivolous matter: For example,
should cut his brothers throat for a Tennis-ball. The whole world in respect of
God is as nothing, and a vain thing as Isaie says. He would therefore highly
injure God, who is his Supreme and Everlasting Good, that should but once leave
him, though it were to gain the whole world; but much more, he that should
contemn him for trifles. Whence himself as one amazed complains of this
contempt by his Prophet. Jer. 2.12.
Be astonished O heavens upon this, and O gates thereof be ye desolate
exceedingly, etc. for two evils has my people done. Me they have forsaken the
fountain of living water, and have dug to themselves cesterns, broken
cesterns that are not able to hold waters. Ponder how fitly God is termed an
endless Fountain flowing with all manner of good; and all things of this world
leaking and broken cesterns: they seem to have something in them, but in truth,
do not hold water.

Consider 2. In particular, for what trifles you have often forsaken God;
perhaps that you might please men, enjoy some short pleasure, satisfy you
passion or greedy appetite, gain some vain reputation, and the like. Esau did
foolishly in selling his Birthright for a mess of pottage; but Judas did worse
in selling Christ for thirty silver pieces; Worst of all the Jews, in
preferring the Miscreant and Murderer Barabbas before Christ. Yet these you do
imitate, as often as you prefer some short pleasure, or evil action before God
himself, and your own right to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Consider 3. How you ought to be sorry for your sins past, and wary for the
future. St. Cyprian says well. How greatly we have sinned, Cypr. Ser. de lap.
Eccli. 2.23.
so greatly let us bewail. We have a good Lord, and according to his greatness,
(as Ecclesiasticus says) so also his mercy is with him.

Of the Grievousness of Mortal Sin, For the Damages and bad Consequences it
brigheth. 5 Part.
Prove. 14.34.
COnsider 1. All men naturally fly from things that are hurtful: Now there is
nothing in the whole world so pernicious as Sin; Whence Solomon: Sin makes
peoples miserable. And, He that shall offend in one point shall lose many good
things. Eccles. 9.18.
Ponder therefore the damages which it brings with it, and first in this life,
in which 1. It obscureth the understanding, and by false persuasions withdraws
it from the truth. 2. It alienates the Will from the Supreme and Sovereign
Good, to that which is only counterfeited, and makes it even have a loathing
of Spiritual things. 3. It makes Reason a slave to brutish Appetites. 4. It
depraveth all the Senses with unlawful delights. 5 It depriveth the whole man
of the friendship and protection of God. 6. It robs him of Habitual Grace,
and the ornaments of Virtue; and of a child of God makes him a slave of the
Devil, an Ulcer and Sinck of all filth and abomination.

1 Cor. 2.9.
Consider 2. As to the other life. 1. It depriveth man of the vision of God and
those joys which eye has not seen, nor ear has heard. 2. It excludes him
from the company of the holy Saints and Angels, and that for ever. 3. It makes
him liable to everlasting fire, without any hopes of releasement. 4. It places
him in a most loathsome dungeon, and among the detestable crew of the damned,
under the cruel tyranny of the Devil, from which no power is able to deliver
him.

Eccli. 21.2.
Consider 3. And add to all this, that every one by sinning does trample under
feet the precious Blood of Christ shed for our sins; turns Gods gifts into so
many weapons against himself; and even destroys God himself (as much as lies
in him) and in a manner contristates the Saints and the Blessed Virgin; hurts
men by his wicked example; and lastly makes a triumph of himself for the
Devils. With good reason then cries out Ecclesiasticus. As from the face of a
serpent slye from sins, etc. The teeth of a lion, the teeth thereof killing the
souls of men.

Of flying Venial Sins, As disposing to Mortal. 1 Part.
COnsider 1. He that thoroughly hates Mortal Sin, must also endeavor what he
can to avoid Venial; otherwise He that contemns small things, Eccli. 19.1. S.
Tho. 1a. 2ae. q. 86. a. 3.
shall fall by little and little. For Venial Sins dispose unto Mortal. 1. In
regard of the matter, or object, which being for the most part the same in
both, affords an easy passage from the lesser that is of custom, to a greater
transgression. 2. By reason of our own forces, which are much weakened by
frequent Venial Sins; Whence it is that we are presently cast to the ground at
the rising of any strong temptation, according to that. Eccles. 10.18.
In slothfulness the roof of the house shall go to ruin, and in the infirmity
of hands the house shall drop through. 3. In regard of the exterior assistance
of God, which he does often substract for Venial Sins, such especially as are
more voluntary; for he deserves little help that is sparing of his own
endeavors. 2 Cor. 9.6.
He that sows sparingly, sparingly also shall reap.

Is. 40.6.
Consider 2. What caution that man uses that has straw, hay, or gunpowder
lodged in his house, lest any sparkle of fire should light thereon. All flesh
is grass, (or hay) and no gunpowder takes fire sooner then does Concupiscence.
Look upon holy David, through an unwary glance of his eyes miserably fallen
first into Adultery, then into Murder. Take heed therefore of the least
sparkle, resist the beginnings, and dash the little ones against the rock, Ps.
136.9.
that is, bad motions while they are but little.

Consider 3. From slight wounds not looked unto in time, and festered, proceed
malignant fevers in the body, and death it self. The same happereth to the
Soul by Venial Sin. Wherefore look into all your actions; and see wherein you
are wont more frequently to receive a wound; and arm your self in time.
Endeavor to the utmost of your power to refrain not only from evil it self,
but also from all appearance of evil, as the Apostle admonishes. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.


Of flying Venial Sins, For the Damages they bring with them. 2. Part.
COnsider 1. We ought to avoid Venial Sins, not only for that they dispose to
Mortal, but also for their own proper deformity; for (as Saint Augustine says)
they are like scabs in the body, Aug. l. 50. Hom. and Ser. 41. de Sanctis.
and do so deface the beauty of the Soul, that she becomes thereby in disgrace
with her heavenly Spouse. Think with your self, if you were to pass through
dirty ways in a pure white and precious garment, what care you would take to
keep it clean: Souls invested with Habitual Grace are whiter then snow, purer
then milk, fairer then the Saphyre. Thren. 4.7.
With how much more care then are we to preserve them without spot, or blemish,
through the foul ways of this life.

Eccles. 10.1.
Consider 2. Other damages which these Sins, especially if frequent, bring with
them. 1. They diminish the fervor of Charity, like cold water cast into a
vessel of warm 2. They keep back the Soul in her progress, as a burden does
him that walks. 3. They take off from the merit of good works, as dying flies
(do from) the sweetness of ointment. 4. They are an Impediment to Prayer, and
Devotion. 5. They abate the efficacy of the Sacraments. 6. They hinder the
increase both of Grace in this life, and Glory in the next. 7 They are pleasing
to the Devils, displeasing to the Angels. 8. They make God himself to have a
loathing of us, according to that. Apoc. 3.15.16.
I would thou were either cold or hot. But because thou art lukewarm, I will
begin to vomit thee out of my mouth.

Deuteronomy. 18.13.
Consider 3. It follows hence, that it is not lawful, for the conversion of
the whole world, to commit one single Venial Sin: And although all are to avoid
the same, yet chiefly such as have consecrated themselves to God, of whom he
exacteth perfect purity. Therefore he enjoyneth every one of his Levites. You
shall be perfect without spot before the Lord thy God. Examine your life and
actions, and do your best to live without spot, or blemish.

Of flying Venial Sins, For the Punishments due unto them. 3. Part.
Ps. 118.137.
COnsider 1. That of David. Thou art just O Lord, and thy judgment is right.
And yet he has inflicted most heavy punishments for sins, by the judgment of
most, only Venial; that thence you might understand the grievousnesse of them.
Number. 12.10.
1. He struck Mary Sister to Moses with a horrible leprosy, for lightly
murmuring against her brother, notwithstanding his earnest intercession for her
pardon. 2. Two Sons of Aaron, Levit. 10.2 Cornel. ibid.
for casting into their thuribles in haste other then sanctified fire, he
struck suddenly dead in the sight of the whole people. Number. 15.35. Salian. ibid.
3. He commanded to be stoned to death a poor man that had gathered up a few
sticks on the Sabbath day. Lastly, he took Moses out of this life, before he
could enter the Land of Promise, which notwithstanding he most ardently
desired; and this for some diffidence (as the Holy Fathers expound it) in
striking the rock. Compare these, and the like examples with your actions, and
you will find you have often deserved more.

Consider 2. God has ordained more severe punishments for Venial Sins, after
death, in Purgatory. That Purgatory Fire (says St. Augustine) will be more
unsufferable then what pain soever can be seen, Aug. Ser. 41. de Sanctis.
felt, or even understood in this life. There all debts will be exacted to the
last farthing; neither will there be place for any other satisfaction then by
sufferance. Is. 33.14.
And which of you (says Isaie) can dwell with devouring fire? Such as will be
there.

Aug. sup.
Consider 3. Seeing you would not endure now to lie in flames, but for a quarter
of an hour, although it were to gain the whole world, how reasonable were it to
make satisfaction at present by Penance, for what is past, and to be wary for
the future; and if through humane frailty you be not able to avoid all, avoid
at least the greater, and diminish, what you can, the number; that so that
Purgatory Fire (as St. Augustine speaks) may find little or nothing in you
to consume.

Of the Remedies against Sin. The Memory of the last Things.
Of DEATH. 1. Part. How certain it is, and with all how uncertain.
Heb. 9.27.
COnsider 1. Death is inevitable. It is appointed to men (says the Apostle) to
dye once. Nothing is more certain, or evident to sense. All that have gone
before us, Princes, Emperors, Bishops, Popes have dyed at last; neither could
any one hitherto, of what power or dignity soever, escape, or put it off. Job.
14.5.
Thou have appointed his limits which cannot be passed, says Job. Wherefore
thou also infallibly must once come to it.

Marc. 13.35.
Consider 2. As for the time, place, and manner of Death, nothing more
uncertain. How many sudden accidents have you heard, read, or even beheld with
your own eyes? How many has death unexpectedly stolen upon, while they were
eating, sleeping, laughing, or playing? And when is to be your turn? What if at
this instant? Would you be ready for it? Wherefore Christ does often and in
most weighty terms inculcate unto us, that we should be ready at all hours.
Watch ye therefore, for you know not when the Lord of the house comes; at
even, or at midnight, or at cock-crowing, or in the morning.

Eccles. 11.3.
Consider 3. Death is but once to be undergone; and if it has gone ill, there
is no amends or recovery to be made; if once ill, so it will ever be; if once
well, it will also be well for you for all eternity. If the tree shall fall to
the South (says the Wiseman) or to the North, in what place soever it shall
fall, there shall it lie. Neither will there be any more time or place for
Penance. Procure therefore by living well, that whenever your time comes of
falling, it be to the right side. See in what state you are at present, and
whether there be any thing in you, which you would not on your deathbed; and
think often with your self, that to perish once, is to be lost for ever.

Of Death. 2. Part.
How terrible it is.
Ps. 108.18
COnsider 1. The miserable state of a dying man, lying on his deathbed, given
over by his Physician, and hastening to his last agony. Consider the many
griefs and anguishes that surround him on every side. 1. From the memory of
things past; for then will come to his mind the sins he has committed; the
loss of so much precious time spent in vanities; together with the neglect of
many helps afforded him by Almighty God toward his Salvation. Then perhaps one
hours space of longer penance will be earnestly wished for, but not afforded
him, who while he was in his jollities and pleasures, neglected many. He would
not blessing, (says David) and it shall be far from him. Oh with what sighs
will sinners at that hour cry out, Sap. 5.8.
and say. What has pride availed us? or what commodity has the vaunting of
riches brought to us?

Consider 2. The grief of mind for leaving the present enjoyments of this life:
Aug. Ser. de Inno. c. 3.
for as St. Augustine says, That is not left without grief, which is possessed
with delight. Notwithstanding, at that hour are to be left all friends and
kindred, pleasures, delights, and riches, without any hopes of evermore
recovering them. 1 Timothy 6.7
We brought nothing (says the Apostle) into this World; doubtless neither can
we take away any thing. Whereupon Ecclesiasticus. Eccli. 41.1
O death how bitter is thy memory to a man that has peace in his riches? Cast
off therefore in time all affection to worldly things, that you may hereafter
part without grief.

Eccles. 9.1
Consider 3. The anguish and perplexity of mind proceeding from the uncertainty
of things to come. The final sentence of everlasting doom draws near. Man
knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred. The Devil will be at hand
to tempt, and cast you into despair. Think what you would then wish your self
to have done in your life time, and do it now while you have opportunity.

Of Death. 3. Part.
Of the Horror of the Corpse.
COnsider 1. What a thing that body is after death, which in our life time we
cherish, pamper, and adorn with so much care. 1. It lies destitute of all
sense and motion; it sees nothing, hears nothing; neither can it so much as
put off the worms that lie devouring it. 2. It looks pale, and deformed; and
for the intolerable stench proceeding from the corruption that issues out of
it, strikes horror even into the dearest friends. Wherefore with reason,
Blessed Francis Borgia, In vita Borg. l. 1. c. 7. Psalm. 4.3.
having beheld the Corpse of a famous Empress of his time, now rotten in her
grave, is said to have cried out. How long shall we love vanity, and seek after
lying? How long, neglecting solid truths, shall we hunt after shadows? All
things moulter away with death, and from mirth soon pass into tears.

Eccli. 10.13. Is. 14.11.
Consider 2. The Garments, Bed, and Habitation of the dead body. It is stripped
of whatsoever ornaments it had; for its garments, it is wrapped up in a
Winding Sheet; for its bed, it is cast on the ground; for its habitation it is
confined to a pit seven foot long; and lastly given over to the worms and
serpents, to be torn and consumed by them. When a man shall die (says
Ecclesiasticus) he shall inherit serpents, and beasts, and worms. And Isaie:
Under thee shall the moth be strawed, and worms shall be thy covering. O what
an habitation! What companions!

Eccli. 38.23.
Consider 3. How profitable and necessary it is, often to call to mind this last
end of your body, lest you should have a greater care and love for that which
is to be devoured by worms, then of your Soul that is to live for an Eternity.
From this forgetfulness of death proceed all our Evils. Wherefore whenever
you see a dead Corpse, or Scull, imagine that of Ecclesiasticus to be spoken to
you. Be mindful of my judgment, for such will also be thine; to me yesterday,
and to thee to day. Wherefore be ever preparing your self, and live as one that
is a dying. S. Hieron. Corn. in Eccli. c. 7.
For, He will easily contemn all things, that always imagines himself a dying
man.

Of preparing against Death, For those that are in Health. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. With what diligence men are wont to prepare themselves for a long
Voyage; for example to the Indies; and if they are but to cross the Sea, how
carefully do they watch the wind, and provide lest the time of embarking find
them unprepared: We ought to be much more sollicitous for our departure out of
this life, whence we are to go into an everlasting happiness, or misery.
Therefore Christ does often inculcate to us. Be ready, Luc. 12.40
for at the hour you think not of, the Son of man will come; and the like.

Consider 2. The Preparation consists chiefly in this point, that the Soul at
her departure (whenever it shall happen) be found free from all Mortal, and,
as much as may be, also from Venial Sin; so that it may have no hinderance in
going strait to Heaven. Wherefore examine your self; see whether you be
conscious of any thing that may stop your passage to Heaven, if you were now to
dye; and put your self in that state, which you would wish your self to dye in;
Aug. l. de genesis con. Man. c. 28.
and strive to persever therein, for you may chance to dye suddenly; and few
become better in time of sickness. The Sinner (as St. Augustine says) has
also this punishment inflicted upon him, that when he comes to dye, he is
unmindful of himself, who while he lived, was forgetful of God. Wherefore while
you are in health, neglect not your self.

Consider 3. What things in particular are wont to cause much comfort to dying
persons. Such are, to have suffered much for Christ, to have been given to the
mortification of the flesh, and abnegation of self-will, to have been devout to
the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, and the like. Wherefore apply your self
vigorously even now to these things. Cass. l. 5. c. 28.
Happy was that holy man who could say on his deathbed, I have never done my
own will, neither have I taught any one what I have not first practiced my self.

Of preparing against Death. For the Sick. 2. Part.
Tob. 12.13.
COnsider 1. Sickness is usually the Messenger of Death. Therefore let a man
foresee what may be expedient for him against the time of Sickness, that so he
may make a more secure and happy end. Let him then in, the first place
acknowledge that Sickness and Pain are gifts of a most loving Father, and sent
him either to take away the rust of Sin, or for trial of his Virtue, and
increase of Glory, according to that saying. Because thou wast acceptable to
God, it was necessary temptation should prove thee. And therefore let him also
give God thanks, that by means of Sickness he has both warning and time to
dispose himself for Death.

Consider 2. What the Sick man is chiefly to do in order to the disposing
himself. 1. To cleanse himself of all Sin by Confession, (if he can General) 2.
To offer himself to God, wholly resigned for life, or death, as it shall best
please him. 3. To foresee such occasions, wherein perhaps he may come to
suffer, either through the vexation of his sickness, or by carelessness of his
tenders, and animate himself to suffer all with courage. 4. To procure good
Books to be often read to him. 5. Now and then to inflame himself with
Jaculatory Prayers. 6. Often to call to mind Christ's Passion. 7. Diligently to
recommend himself to the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints his Patrons. 8. To make
now and then acts of Faith, Hope, Charity, Contrition, and other such like.

Consider 3. Danger increasing, he is timely to demand the last Sacraments,
that so he may receive them with greater devotion. Then let him dilate his
heart toward the happy meeting of his Spouse. Behold the Bridegroom comes, go
ye forth to meet him. Matt. 25.6.
Let him yield himself up wholly to his Lord God, saying with Christ; Luc.
23.46 Ps. 141.8.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit: or with David, Bring forth my soul
out of prison to confess to thy Name.

Of the Particular Judgment. 1. Part.
2 Cor. 5.10.
COnsider 1. At the hour of Death all men are to be judged, That every one may
receive the proper things of the body, according as he has done, either good
or evil. Ponder the terror of this Judgment. First in respect of the Persons
that are to be Actors in it. He that is to sit Judge, is infinitely Wise, whom
you cannot deceive; infinitely Powerful, whom you cannot resist; infinitely
Just, who cannot be wrought to favor; and lastly of Supreme Authority, from
whom you cannot appeal. The Devils will be at hand as Accusers; and if we have
deserved evil, even our own Angel-Guardians: There also our own Conscience will
stand witness against us. Before all these the poor Soul is to appear, without
any attendance of Servants, or support of Friends, despoiled of whatsoever she
had in this world, accompanied only with her own works: These alone, whether
good or evil, will follow her to an everlasting reward, or punishment: For
their works follow them. Apoc. 14.13.


Eccles. 12.14. Mat. 12.36.
Consider 2. The terror of this Judgment in regard of the strict account.
There will be made a process of our whole life; every action though never so
much hidden, and secret, will be brought to a most strict examination. All
things that are done God will bring into judgment, even every idle word. The
severe Judge will exact an account not only of evils committed, but also of
the good neglected: He will also weigh the good actions themselves, and see
whether they be full, and performed with due intention, and exactness. I
(says he by David) will judge Justices. Ps. 74.3. Soph. 1.12
And by Sophonias. I will search Jerusalem with lamps; and if Jerusalem and the
Saints, how much more Babylon and Sinners?

Eccli. 18.20.
Consider 3. And ask your self this question: What shall I, miserable wretch,
say for my self at that time? For prevention, take the advice of
Ecclesiasticus. Before sickness take medicine, and before judgment examine thy
self, and in the sight of God thou shall find propitiation. While you have
time do good.

Of the Particular Judgment. 2. Part.
COnsider 1. The miserable condition of a sinful Soul, when at her trial she
shall be found to come short in her accounts, and guilty of deadly sin. For
then she is to be degraded, as Priests are wont in disgrace and ignominy,
having their sacred Vestments taken off from them, so to be delivered over to
Secular Power. 1. Will be taken from her the gift of Faith, for that she did
not lead a life conformable. 2. Will be taken also from her the gift of Hope,
for having neglected the means afforded her for the attaining her chiefest
Good. 3. She shall be deprived of all Supernatural Favors and Graces (if she
had any) and of Moral Virtues, which she made not right use of. 4. Natural
Sciences shall remain for her greater punishment, for having preferred them
before the knowledge of Salvation. 5. The Character of Baptism shall also
remain, and whatsoever other she had, for her greater ignominy, that it may
appear from what she is fallen, and that she may be upbraided by the Infidels
reproaching her with that scoff, Luc. 14.30
This man began to build, and he could not finish it. Finally then will be
fulfilled in her that of Ezechiel. Ezech. 23.26. and 29.
And they shall strip thee of thy garments, and shall take away the vessels of
thy glory, etc. and shall let thee go naked, and full of ignominy.

Mat. 25.41
Consider 2. The terror of the final Sentence, that will be thundered out
against the wicked. Get ye away from me you cursed into fire everlasting, etc.
O what a plight and horror will the Soul be in at that time, the Devils
hurrying her presently away to everlasting torments? But no remedy then to
avoid it. As yet you may, if you be wise.

Ibid. v. 21
Consider 3. On the contrary the happy condition of the Just, that will be found
innocent in that Judgment. Unto such it will be said. Because thou have been
faithful over a few things, I will place thee over many things: Enter into the
joy of thy Lord. Think what a joy that will be. If you aspire to their lot,
imitate their life.

Of the General Judgment. 1. Part.
Jo. 5.22.
COnsider 1. The causes of the General Judgment. 1. To manifest the Glory and
Power of Christ, unto whom the Father has given all judgment, that all may
honor the Son, etc. and that he who came visibly to save all men, might also
visibly and publicly come to judge all, that the wicked may see and behold
whom they have crucified. 2. That the Just might have right and honor door
them, and the wicked due punishment, and God justified in his judgments, who
for the most part permits the Just to be afflicted while they live, and the
wicked to live in all prosperity. 3. That the bodies also may receive due
reward, or punishment, as they have been instruments of Virtue or Vice to the
Souls.

Mat. 24.6. Luc. 21.11.
Consider 2. The terror of the Judgment, by the foregoing signs. There shall be
great earthquakes, and pistilences, and famines, and terrors from Heaven. The
Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall down from Heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be moved: or as St.
Peter says, 2. Pet. 3.12
The Heavens burning shall he resolved. The Sea shall roar in a horrid manner,
the Earth tremble, and be all on fire. Malach. 4.1.
Behold the day shall come (says Malachy) kindled as a furnace, and all the
proud, and all that do impiety, shall be stubble, and the day coming shall
inflame them, etc. Take heed therefore you prove not stubble in that fiery day.

Luc. 23.30
Consider 3. The Angel shall sound forth his dreadful trumpet, the dead shall
rise, and take their bodies; but with how different a countenance, the just
from the wicked? How will these inveigh against their bodies, for whose sake
and pleasure they committed so many sins in their life time? They shall say to
the mountains, fall upon us, and to the hills, cover us. But then there will be
no means to escape. How much will it be wished for at that time, above all the
Crowns, and Scepters of the world, to have lived in the Grace of God. Think
therefore often of this: Whether I eat or drink, or do any thing else, (says
St. Jerome) that dreadful voice does ever so^ad in my ears, Hieron. Reg. Mon.
c. 30
Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

Of the General Judgment. 2. Part.
Luc. 21.27.
COnsider 1. The terror of the Judgment increased by the appearance of the
Judge. Then they shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud with great power
and majesty. An innumerable company of Angels shall stand about him ready to
execute, whatsoever he shall decree. Mat. 24.30
Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then shall all
tribes of the earth bewail, to wit the enemies of Christ's Cross. A Throne
shall be set for the Judge in a bright Cloud, and Seats round about for the
Blessed Virgin and the Apostles. From the Judge's countenance shall issue forth
darts of love toward his friends, but of fire and indignation against the
reprobate. Dan. 7.10.
A fire and swift stream came forth from his face, (says Daniel) Who would not
wish then to have been a friend in his life time of so dreadful a Judge.

Mat. 13.49
Consider 2. The Angels shall go forth, and shall separate the evil from among
the just. These shall be placed at the right hand of the Judge, as sheep: The
other on the lest, as goats, in contempt and ignominy. Ponder the untimely
repentance of the wicked, especially when they shall see the Just above them;
Whom sometime they had in derision and in a parable of reproach. We senseless
esteemed their life madness, Sap. 5.3, etc.
etc. Behold how they are counted among the children of God. Then will be
exacted a most strict account of every particular; and what perhaps you are now
ashamed to open to your Confessor will then be known to the whole world. Be
careful now to blot out by Penance what you would not then have known to your
shame and ignominy.

Mat. 25.34
Consider 3. The just Sentence of the Judge. He will say to the Saints, Come ye
blessed of my Father, possess you the kingdom prepared for you, etc. To the
wicked, Ibid. v. 41.
Get you away from me you cursed into fire everlasting. Ponder the greatness
both of the reward, and of the punishment, and choose which you had rather; it
is now put into your own hands; afterward it will not; Eccles. 9.10.
Wherefore while you have time whatsoever thy hand is able to do, work it
instantly, for neither work, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge, shall be in
Hell whither thou do hasten.

Of Hell. 1. Part.
Apoc. 19.20.
COnsider 1. Hell is the dungeon of the damned, full of all misery, and void of
all good. Invent the cruellest pains and torments that you can imagine, they
would all be but a flea-bite in comparison of Hell. The place it self shall be
(as S. John says) a pool of fire, burning also with brimstone; Wherefore it
will be 1. Hideously obscure, without light, even above the Egyptian darkness.
2. Excessively strait for the infinite number of bodies, that will there be
packed together. 3. Infinitely loathsome and stinking, by reason of the soot,
smoke, stench of brimstone, and filthiness of the bodies. 4. Ever shut up
without any convenience of breathing, Job 10.22
or air. 5. Where (as Job says) is the shadow of death, and no order, but
everlasting horror inhabiteth.

Apoc. 20.10.
Consider 2. The quality of the pains. 1. For being continual without
intermission, for they shall he tormented (as St. John says) day and night,
for ever and ever. 2. For the grievousnesse of them, being most sharp and
vehement, without any the least relaxation. Whence the rich Glutton in the
Gospel could not obtain so much as one drop of water to cool his tongue. 3. For
the diversity and contrariety of them, which makes to their greater torment,
expressed by that of Job. Job 24.19
Let him pass from snow waters, to exceeding heat. 4. For the company or
society, which will be with the Devils, and cursed Souls, that are obdurated in
the hatred of God; and with serpents, vipers, and dragons. Job 20.16 and 18.
He shall suck the head of asps, and the vipers tongue shall kill him, etc. He
shall be punished for all things that he did, and yet not be consumed.

Apoc. 9.6. Marc. 9.43
Consider 3. The everlasting durance of all this, which after millions of years
shall begin afresh, as if nothing had ever been; and shall last for ever.
Because 1. The Soul is immortal. They shall desire to dye, and death shall fly
from them. 2. The place never to be destroyed. 3. The fire unquenchable. 4.
Their sin by obstinacy irrevocable, and consequently their worm dies not.
Ibid. 44.
Lastly Gods decree is unchangeable, because in Hell there is no redemption.

Of Hell. 2. Part.
Sap. 11.17
COnsider 1. That saying of the Wiseman, By what things a man sins, by the
same also he is tormented. And because we offend God by all the Senses of the
body, therefore the damned in hell shall be tormented in them all. 1. The Sight
shall be tormented with hideous shapes of the Devils, horrid representations of
sins past, and with the view of their cursed company, which it will detest with
mortal hatred. 2. The Hearing with continual blasphemies, grashing of teeth,
curses and howlings. 3. The Smell, with brimstone, pitch, and intolerable
stench of the body. 4. The Taste with ravenous hunger, unquenchable thirst,
and insufferable bitterness of the fiery brimstone. 5. The Sense of Feeling
with most sharp torments all the body over; for the Sinner shall be (as the
Prophet says) as stubble to the fire. Malach. 4.1. Is. 33.14.
Which of you (says another) can dwell with devouring fire? which of you shall
dwell with everlasting heats? Imagine the same, in proportion, of the
Understanding, Memory, Will, and other powers.

Consider 2. Heavier then all this will be the pain of loss, as the Divines
call it, for that the greater the good is that is lost, the greater likewise is
the grief it causes. And the damned to their greater torment shall know the
greatness of the Happiness which they have forfeited by Sin. This Happiness
is God himself, and the clear sight and enjoyment of him; The blessed Company
of Saints, perpetual Tranquillity and Peace, peaceful Delight, delightful
Satiety, and the like. And yet we can find in our hearts to let all this go,
and besides incur everlasting torments for some short and trifling pleasure.

Consider 3. What you are to do to escape Hell. You must use all your endeavor
to avoid Sin, which leads thither. And if you would not for the whole world
lie broiling on a gridiron but for an hour, how much more ought you to be
aversed from sin. Let us therefore bewail our sins (as a certain holy man said)
before we come thither, where our tears will serve for nothing but to scorch
and burn our bodies.

Of Purgatory. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. As Hell is ordained for punishment of Mortal Sin, so is Purgatory
for Venial. And here likewise Sinners suffer for a time pain both of Sense, and
Loss. Ponder therefore the grievousnesse of the pains of Sense. 1. In regard
of the place, which is also under ground, dark and joining to Hell. 2. For the
nature and condition of the Fire, which is of the same kind and activity (as
Divines teach) with that of Hell. 3. For the excess of torment: for (as St.
Augustine says) that purging fire is more grievous then what pain soever we
can see, feel, Aug. Ser. 41. de Sanctis.
or even imagine in this world. 4. For the long durance; for although those
torments be not everlasting, yet to very many they last for many years, and to
some even till the day of Judgment; as appears by diverse very credible and
authentic Histories. Is. 33.14.
Who can dwell with devouring fire?

Prove. 13.12.
Consider 2. The pain of Loss, which the Souls sustain here for the delay of
the Beatifical Vision, which they most ardently long for. Hope that is deferred
afflicts the soul: Much more the hopes of so great a happiness as is the
seeing and enjoying of God. Think if you were promised a Kingdom, what a
longing condition you would be in, till you were in possession: with much
greater desire are the Souls there inflamed, and they grieve the more, for that
so great a good is deferred for their own carelessness and negligence in this
life.

Aug. sup.
Consider 3. How much it imports you both to shun to the utmost of your power
Venial Sins, and withal to satisfy fully for Mortal Sins though confessed and
forgiven; lest you come to be cast into this purging Fire: for (as Saint
Augustine above cited says) He that will not now put so much as one finger
into the fire, must necessarily dread to be tormented then, whole body and
soul, though but for a short time.

Of Purgatory. 2. Part.
COnsider 1. For how light causes, as we read in Histories, many have been sent
to Purgatory: Some for not bowing their head in the Quire at Gloria Patri;
others for desiring too earnestly holy Orders: Some again for Vanity in
argumenting: Others for curiosity in Apparel: S. Severin himself, at whose
Sepulcher miracles were wrought, for not reciting the Divine Office in its due
time: And Paschasius Deacon for some inordinate affection in the election of
the Pope, and that out of error and ignorance, Greg. l. 4. Dial. c. 40.
(as Saint Gregory witnesses.) Compare now these small defects with yours, and
you will find that you have deserved a much heavier judgment. Wherefore
humbly ask pardon, and say with the Psalmist. Ps. 6.1. and 2.
Lord rebuke me not in thy fury, nor chastise me in thy wrath. Have mercy on me
Lord, because I am weak.

Consider 2. Our merciful Lord has afforded us many means to satisfy for our
sins in this life, and to escape Purgatory. These are, Receiving the
Sacraments, offering the Divine Sacrifice; Indulgences, Fasting, Alms, Prayers,
Tears, chastising the body, patient suffering of hunger and thirst, sickness,
and the like. God is content with a little in this life, and is soon appeased
by means of our poor services; but in the other life he will severely exact the
whole debt of punishment, even to the last farthing. Wherefore while you have
time, Mat. 5.27. Eccli. 14.14.
do good. Be not defrauded of thy good day, (as Ecclesiasticus admonishes) and
let not a little portion of a good gift overpass thee.

Mat. 5.7.
Consider 3. Among other means one of the most efficacious to escape or at least
to mitigate our pains in Purgatory, is to pray much for the dead while we live;
for our merciful Lord permits that afterward we receive the same measure
that we used to others here. And The merciful (as he says himself) shall
obtain mercy.

Morn. Ent. Behold our Lord is come in his holy thousands to do judgment. Jude
14. Luc. 21.25
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as Judge.
COnsider 1. What is read this day in the Gospel, that Christ is to be the
Universal Judge of all men, whose judgment we ought greatly to stand in fear
of. 1. By reason of his Supreme Authority, from whom none can appeal. 2. For
the rigor of his Justice, which no entreaties, nor bribes will be able to
corrupt. 3. For his infinite Wisdom, from which nothing can be concealed. 4.
For that he will be not only Judge, but also the plaintiff or party offended.

Consider 2. What a favor it would be, if the Judge himself should in a
friendly manner come to some Criminal in prison, and teach him a way how he may
escape, and come off with security of life in his Trial. The same will Christ
do to you this day. Wherefore receive him at his coming with great love, and
gratitude; and now, while you may, endeavor by earnest prayers to gain him,
against that dreadful day, when there will be no more place for prayers.

Ps. 142.2.
Consider 3. Hence you must have a great care, that there be nothing in your
Soul that may displease the eyes of your Judge when he comes. He will search
the inmost corners of your heart. Cleanse therefore diligently all things
against his coming. Say humbly with the Prophet, Enter not into judgment with
thy servant O Lord; But rather in the bowels of thy mercy visit us now O Orient
arising from high, Eccl. in Off. Boeth. apud S. Tho. Opusc. de Sacr. c. 2.
etc. Wherefore Boethius says well in these words, We have a great necessity
of living well, seeing we do all things before the eyes of the Judge that sees
all. Think well on this; and Before judgment prepare thee Justice.

Of imitating the Life of Christ our Lord. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. For two reasons Christ our Lord came from the bosom of his
eternal Father into the World, as the holy Fathers every where do teach. 1. To
redeem us from sin. 2. To give us example of living by his own manner of life.
His life therefore ought to be the square, pattern, and mirror of ours; to the
end that squaring our actions conformably to his, we may come by his steps to
arrive at last also to his glory.

Eccli. 23.38.
Consider 2. How glorious a thing it is to follow such an example. It is great
glory (says Ecclesiasticus) to follow our Lord. By following of men, whosoever
they are, you may err; because they are men, apt both to be deceived
themselves, and to deceive others. By following Christ you cannot miss,
because he is the way; you cannot be deceived, because he is truth; you cannot
perish, because he is life: The Way in Example, Bern. Ser. 2. de Ascen.
(says St. Bernard) Truth in Promise, Life in Reward. Lastly he commands
nothing, which he does not first do himself. So that he may say with Gedeon
What you shall see me do, Jud. 7.17.
do ye.

1 Cor. 3.19.
Consider 3. How foolishly you have hitherto done in directing your actions by
any other rule then the life of Christ. All other rules are crooked and naught;
and The wisdom of this world (according to which perchance you govern your
self) is foolishness with God. Ask pardon for this folly, and beseech our Lord
to accept of you, and admit you into the number of his followers.

Of imitating the Life of Christ. 2. Part.
Tit. 1.16.
COnsider 1. The followers of Christ are of three different sorts: Some by name
only, and from the teeth outward; they say they are Christians, and know
Christ; But in their works they deny him. They defile themselves with continual
sins, and in their works crucify Christ anew. These are but equivocally termed
Christians; for indeed they follow not Christ, but the Devil. Think how often
you have been such. Repent, and take heed for the future.

Mat. 19.21
Consider 2. Others there are who indeed follow Christ, but afar off, as St.
Peter did when Christ was taken; who perhaps for that cause, as some observe,
came to fall and deny his Master: for, any example or pattern that it may have
influence must be duly applied, and at a right distance. So, many follow
Christ, but coldly: They purpose to keep the Commandments, but care not to
extend themselves (with the Apostle) to things of greater perfection. When it
is said to such as these, Go sell the things that thou have, etc. and come
follow me; They go away sad, like the young man in the Gospel. See whether you
be one of these.

2 Cor. 6.8. Phil. 3.8.
Consider 3. Others finally there are, who with a generous resolution strive to
follow Christ even to the Cross. By honor, and dishonor, by infamy and good
fame, and with the Apostle do esteem all things as dung, that they may gain
Christ. Lastly they endeavor to conform themselves in all things to the model
of his life. See among whom you choose to rank your self; and know that in what
proportion you are like unto Christ in this life, you will also be hereafter in
glory.

Of the divine Decree concerning Christ's Incarnation. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. The state which the whole world was in. Part of the Angels had
fallen; All mankind also had sinned. The wicked Angels leaving the Blessed in
Heaven, were cast into Hell. Mankind lived in banishment out of Paradise, shut
out of Heaven, made slave of the Devil and enemy to God, and lay wallowing from
one sin into another, to be cast at length headlong into Hell fire: neither did
there appear any means possible of appeasing the Divine Justice, being no pure
creature could make is any satifaction.

Ps. 39.7, 8.
Contemplate 2. The three divine Persons in Heaven, out of commiseration,
consulting of a remedy. See how the Second Person, being there could not
otherwise any satisfaction be made to the divine Justice, freely offered
himself to his Eternal Father, saying those words of David, Sacrifice and
Oblation thou would not, etc. Then, said I, behold I come. Admire in the Son
this voluntary Oblation of himself; admire in the Father his most gracious
acceptance. O inestimable effect of Charity! To redeem his slave, he refused
not to deliver up his only Son. Give thanks to both, with the Holy Ghost, and
offer what you are able in gratitude.

Ps. 93.17.
Consider 3. What would have become of you, had not Christ thus interposed
himself. You would have lain for ever in the filth of sin, destinated according
to your deserts to the flames of Hell. So that you may with all truth say, But
that our Lord has helped me, within very little my soul had dwelt in Hell.
Learn hence to esteem the greatness of the Benefit; and seeing God has thus
bestowed himself upon you, give your self up wholly to him, Ps. 107.2.
and say My heart is ready O God, my heart is ready.

Of the divine Decree concerning Christ's Incarnation. 2. Part.
Genesis 3.5. Phil. 2.7.
COnsider 1. The admirable perfections of God, discovered in this Decree. And
first his infinite Wisdom, whereby he would cure our maladies by their
contraries. Man sinned through Pride, vainly coveting a likeness with God. You
shall be as Gods. God would cure this sore by exinaniting himself, taking the
form of a servant, and made into the similitude of men. Detest Pride which has
brought so much evil into the world, and imitate the example which Christ has
given you, of Humility.

Jo. 3.16.
Consider 2. His unspeakable Charity. So God loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son: Even the Son himself so loved it, as to give himself for
it. But Who? and for whom? The God of Majesty for a most vile and ungrateful
Slave. Love therefore so loving a Lord with your whole heart, with all your
soul, and with all your strength; and seeing you cannot sufficiently love him,
endeavor according to your state and calling to draw as many as you can into
your company, in the joint love and service of him.

Consider 3. His infinite Goodness in communicating himself to man, in the
highest degree possible; His mercy whereby he would take upon him our miseries
to relieve us; His Justice, which that he might satisfy to the utmost rigor,
he made our whole debt his own. Lastly his Power in joining two extremes of
infinite distance from one another, God and Man; Creator and Creature. O
admirable conjunction! Ps. 97.1, and 2.
Sing ye to our Lord a new song, because he has done mavelous things. Our
Lord has made known his salvation, in the sight of the Gentiles he has
revealed his Justice.

Of the Election of the Mother to the Word Incarnate. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. The Incarnation being decreed as to the substance, the Eternal
Word might have taken the perfect body of a man, such as he framed for Adam,
without infringing the rigor of Justice, which he desired to satisfy.
Notwithstanding he chose to be born of a Mother 1. So to honor both Sexes; Man
in his own Person; Woman by taking flesh and blood of Her. 2. That in her we
might also have a Mother, and Advocatrix to her Son, our Judge. 3. That being
thus made a sucking Infant, and subject to his Mother, he might give us example
of humility and subjection. Reflect how in all things he chooses the worst, and
most repugnant to sense. See, and imitate.

Prove. 8.23
Consider 2. How the Word made choice of this individual Mother, not for any
merits of hers, which then were none at all, but to the end she might have
merits. Therefore he bestowed upon her the fullness of Grace and Virtue; that
so she might be made sit to be the Mother of God. Congratulate with her for
this her Election and Predestination from all Eternity. From eternity I was
ordained, and of old, before the earth was made. Offer your self to be her
Client for ever, and with all earnestness implore her aid and protection.

Ps. 4.3.
Consider 3. The Eternal Word would not have for his Mother any rich Personage,
or Princess, but one that was poor, and of mean condition in the world,
thereby to confound our pride and vanity, that seek and hunt greedily after
such things as make a show and noise in the world. Ye sons of men how long are
you of heavy heart? Why love you vanity, and seek lying? Learn to contemn the
judgments of the world, and to esteem those things only great, as are such in
the sight of God; and know, that much worth and virtue often lies under a
contemptible disguise.

Of the Election of the Mother to the Word Incarnate. And of her Prerogatives.
2. Part.
3 Reg. 10.18.
COnsider 1. It was fitting that the Eternal Word should honor his Mother, and
raise her above the common condition of Mortals, by special Privileges. King
Solomon made a great Throne of Ivory, and covered it with Gold exceeding
yellow, etc. There was not such a work made in all Kingdoms. How much more
sitting was it, that the King of Heaven should adorn his Throne, or
Bedchamber, where he was to lie for nine months together?

Consider 2. Several of her Privileges. 1. Sanctity, and that the greatest of
any pure creature, communicated unto her from the first moment of her
Conception; for it was not fit that the Mother of God should ever, even for one
single moment, be under the slavery of the Devil. 2. Suppression of
Concupiscence. 3. Confirmation in Grace, so as never to forfeit it by Mortal
Sin, or even to suffer the least diminution of its fervor by Venial. 4.
Continual progress in the same, by heroic acts of Virtue, whereby it was
increased to an infinite proportion. 5. The use of reason from the first
moment. 6. To conceive, and remain a Virgin. 7. To be in childbirth without
pain. 8. To be a Mother, and delivered of her Son without detriment of her
Virginal Integrity. 9. To be a Mart, a Sea, Suar. c. 2.3. p. d. 18. sec. 4.
and Ocean of all manner of Grace, so as to surpass the perfections of all the
Saints put together.

S. Bern.
Consider 3. Her admirable Titles, in being after an especial manner Daughter to
the Eternal Father, Mother to the only begotten Son, Spouse to the Holy Ghost,
and Sovereign Queen of Men and Angels. She is also styled the Mother of Mercy,
the Advocatrix of Mankind, and Refuge of Sinners. Think what a Refuge, and
Protection you have in such a Mother. Commend your self earnestly to her, for
such is his will, who will have us have all by Mary.

I will look toward our Lord, I will expect God my Savior. Mich. 7.7. Mat.
11.3.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the expectation of the Gentiles.
Genesis 49.10. Agg. 2.8.
COnsider 1. What is said to day in the Gospel. Art thou he that art to come, or
look we for another? Christ is the expectation of the Gentiles, as is said in
Genesis. And the same shall be the expectation of qhe Gentiles; and by Prophet:
The desired of all Nations shall come; And with good reason; for that he was to
bring light to them that sat in darkness, and shadow of death, sight to the
blind, going to the lame, hearing to the deaf, as we have in this days Gospel,
Mat. 1.21.
and finally Salvation to all. For, He shall save his people from their sins.

Is. 12.2.
Consider 2. This same Messiah, and expectation of the Gentiles, will come unto
you, this day, in the Eucharist, to save you, to free you from your iniquities,
to cure your infirmities, and to heap upon you the gifts of his Grace, and
Virtues. O what a benefit is this! Behold, God is my Savior, (says Isaie) I
will do confidently, and will not fear. Do you also confidently, disclosing,
and giving your self up wholly unto him.

Consider 3. Against his coming you must exercise your self beforehand in
fervent desires, and many longing sighs after him; for therefore he is called
the expectation of the Gentiles, Genesis sup. v. 10. and 26. Ps. 39.1.
and the desire of the eternal hills, that is, of the holy Patriarchs and
Prophets. Hence David. Expecting I expected our Lord, and he has attended to
me. Expect him therefore with an ardent desire: Prepare, and cleanse the
Jodging of your Soul, lest otherwise being defiled, and polluted with sin, you
offend his pure eyes, and bring upon your self a curse for a blessing. Genesis
27.12.


Of the Annunciation of the B. Virgin; And first of sending the Angel.
Luc. 1.26.
THe Angel was sent of God into a City of Galilee called Nazareth to a Virgin,
etc. Consider 1. What an Embassage this is. Never was there in the world any
thing so Solemn. He that sends, is the God of Majesty, the most holy and
divine Trinity. The Messenger is Gabriel the Archangel, which is as much as to
say, Fortitude or strength; to signify, that what Message he brought, though
it might seem never so difficult or impossible, must be fulfilled. See how
promptly he takes, and executes the charge imposed upon him; and imitate in
like occasions.

Jo. 1.46.
Consider 2. To whom he is sent What man if he had seen such an Ambassador
dispatched immediately from God himself, coming down from Heaven into this
lower world, would not have thought him sent to some great Monarch? and yet he
is sent to a City of no account, From Nazareth can there be any good? to a
little Cottage, and to a poor Virgin espoused to a Carpenter. Be ashamed that
you should so miserably love, and seek after such things as appear great and
specious in the sight of the world. Correct this affection in your self, and
know that you are in a gross error.

Consider 3. The substance of the Embassy was to require the Virgins consent
to be Mother of God. God has right to exact any thing of his Creature, yet he
will have our duties toward him to be voluntary. He that created you without
you (says St. Augustine) will not save you without you. Oh how often does God
send unto you invisible Angels, his holy Inspirations, to gain your good will,
that he may be conceived spiritually in your heart, and you refuse him? Ask
pardon, and To day if you shall hear his voice, Ps. 94.8.
harden not your heart.

Luc. 1.28, etc.
Of the Angels Salutation,
ANd the Angel being entered in, etc. Consider 1. The grave comportment of the
Angel, the modesty of his countenance, and his reverence toward the Virgin;
and learn to carry your self like an Angel in your conversation with men, but
much more with God, in prayer. Hail full of Grace, by excellency, and above all
other pure creatures. Think what you are full of, whether of Grace and Virtue,
or not rather of. Pride, Vanity, Self-love, etc. Our Lord is with thee, by a
special presence, and effects of his Grace; and she again with him, in her
thoughts, desires, and affections. O what a happy communication! Examine your
actions and affections, and see how much or little they are with God.

Consider 2. The Person of the Virgin; what she did, and what she thought at
that time; she was alone, praying in her chamber, (as the holy Fathers teach)
that you might learn to entertain your self with God, and in solitude, if you
desire to be visited by him. She was troubled at his saying, to wit, at her own
praises which the Angel uttered, and which whosoever is truly humble refuses,
as not belonging to him, but to God alone. She thought what manner of
Salutation this should be, most prudently examining every thing with her self,
lest she might be deluded. O that Eve had so carefully weighed the Serpents
words!

Consider 3. How different are your proceedings, who perhaps in every occasion
seek your own praises, and applaud your self when you hear them spoken of by
others; and not content to be commended by other men's mouths, you do it by your
own. When you hear such things as are pleasing to sense, you think not with
your self what manner of proposition this should be, but you presently set your
heart upon it, and seek to obtain it. Wherefore first prudently sound the
bottom of the water, or whatsoever affair, before you enter upon it, and as the
Wiseman advises Let thine ^ydids go before thy steps. Prove. 4.25


Luc. 1.30, etc.
Of the Delivery of the Message.
Esth. 2.17.
FEar not Mary, etc. Behold thou shult conceive in thy womb, etc. Consider 1.
How the Angel takes away all fear from the Virgin; it being the property of a
good Spirit to bring peace, and security to the Soul. Fear not Mary, for thou
have found grace with God; for true joy and security is only to be found in the
Grace of God, not in the pleasures of the world, wherein perhaps you seek it
most. This grace the Virgin found above all other creatures; so that it may be
said of her what was said of Esther. The King loved her more then all the
women, and she had grace and mercy before him, above all the women.

Coloss. 2.9.
Consider 2. The message he comes to bring. Thou shall bear a Son, and thou
shall call his name Jesus, that is, Savior. He shall be great, by Nature, as
being God; by Office, for that he is to be Mediator between God and man; in
Gifts, for that in him is to dwell the fullness of the Godhead corporally. He
shall be the Son (not adoptive, as all the Just are, but natural) of the most
High. He shall have the Seat of David his father, but in a more eminent degree.
And he shall reign in the house of Jacob, that is, in the Church of the
faithful, for ever. Rejoice for the happy news of your Savior, and
congratulate with the Mother for the greatness of her Son.

Consider 3. With St. Bernard these words. Bern. hom. 4
He shall reign in the house of Jacob. And see that you be a Jacob: Supplant,
and cast the Devil out of your heart; wrestle with your own vicious
inclinations, and concupiscences. Romans 6.12
Let not sin reign in your mortal body, that our Lord Jesus may reign in the
house of your Soul, and that for ever. Say with the same St. Bernard, Bern, sup.
I have no other King then my Lord Jesus.

Luc. 1.34, etc.
Of the Blessed Virgins Reply.
2 Cor. 4.7.
HOw shall this be done? etc. Consider 1. How the Blessed Virgin who had
hitherto been silent, began at last to speak in defense of her Virginity, which
she would not forfeit to be Mother of God. O admirable Purity! In this Virtue
she was truly singular, and without example. Learn hence, 1. Both to speak, and
to be silent, in their due times and circumstances. 2. Not to be taken off from
your good purposes, and obligations, upon any account, without examining well
how it may be done. 3. To be cautious and nice in point of Chastity, and not to
cast your self in danger, under pretense of what good soever, knowing that we
have this treasure (of Chastity) in carthen vessels.

Consider 2. The Holy Ghost shall come upon the; and the power of the most High
shall overshadow thee. Ponder the excellency of Virginity, whereof our Lord was
so great a lover, that whereas he took upon him all our other miseries, yet he
would not be conceived but of a Virgin; and in favor of her love also to the
same, the divine Spirit of Purity it self wrought in her this mysterious
Conception; whereby her Son, who as God proceeded wholly from his Father, as
man became entirely hers, receiving from her alone what other children take
from both parents. Beseech our Lord to come also upon you by his holy Grace and
with his shoulders to overshadow you, especially in the day of battle, Ps.
90.4. Ps. 139.8.
against the heat of Concupiscence, and vicious appetites.

Ps. 112.9.
Consider 3. Behold Elizabeth thy cousen, etc. She who was barren becomes
fruitful, that you should know there is nothing impossible to God. Therefore,
although you have hitherto been fruitless of good works, yet by the divine
Grace and your own concurrence you may come to be father of many, and that not
only in your self, but also in your neighbor, according to the condition and
calling you are in. Therefore even now begin to cooperate with Gods Grace; for
he will not be wanting, who makes the barren woman to dwell in a house, a
joyful mother of children.

Of the Virgins Consent.
COnsider 1. How earnestly the Angel and the whole Court of Heaven expected the
Virgins consent. Ber. hom. 4 super missus
O Lady (says St. Bernard) speak the word which Heaven, and Earth, and the
lower world expect from you. At length she gives her consent. Behold the
handmaid of our Lord. Admire her singular humility, who being saluted Mother of
God, would still keep the name of handmaid. This is that humility which our
Lord regarded, as she says in her Canticle Magnificat, and loved so much in
her: Put on the same humility in your life and actions, if you desire the Holy
Ghost should dwell in you: for he sends forth fountains in the valleys. Ps.
103.10
He waters the humble with the fountains of his Grace, but leaves the
mountains, that is, the high and proud ones dry.

Ps. 115.7.
Consider 2. The name of handmaid, or slave, though it be contemptible among
men, yet in relation to God is honorable; for we are truly his, by the several
titles of Creation, Conservation, and Redemption: To him alone we ought to
labor, and to direct all things to his glory, as did this blessed handmaid of
his. Offer your self therefore to God as a perpetual bond-slave; and say with
the Psalmist. O Lord, because I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son
of thy handmaid, the B. Virgin Mary.

Mat. 26.39
Consider 3. The admirable Obedience and Resignation of the B. Virgin in
conforming her will to Gods divine pleasure. Be it done to me according to thy
word, etc. Think how grateful this answer was to God, and to men, and Angels.
Imitate her in resigning your will wholly into the hands of God, and say in
every thing Be it done to me (O Lord) according to thy word, not to my will.
And Not as I will, but as thou. Think how joyful the Angel was for having
obtained her consent, and for the happy success of his Embassage; and how he
returned without delay into Heaven, full of admiration of the mystery of the
Incarnation, and of the Virtues and Excellencies of the Virgin.

Of the Accomplishment of the Incarnation
Ps. 18.6, 7
COnsider 1. How the B. Virgin having given her consent, immediately the Eternal
Word, As a Bridegroom coming forth of his bride-chamber to celebrate (...)
N^pt^^^ w^^^ humane nature, Rejoiced as a giant to (...) the way to unite unto
himself our flesh, and to begin the work of our Redemption. Whence, having
presently framed a perfect body out of the most pure blood of the B. Virgin,
and created a rational Soul, he vouchsafed to unite his Divinity to them both.
Jo. 1.14.
And thus the word was made flesh, and dwelt in us: Think with what joy of the
Angels in Heaven, of the Saints in Limbus, of God himself, and particularly of
the B. Virgin, now Mother of God.

Heb. 2.17.
Consider 2. What manner of body the Eternal Word took upon him in the Virgins
Womb: He might have assumed an Immortal one; and a Glorious Body had been but
his due, in regard of the Beatifical Vision; But he took upon him mortal flesh,
and that of a little infant. 1. That he might in all things be like unto his
brethren. 2. To oblige us to love him the more tenderly. 3. To take from us all
fear, and make us come with confidence unto him. 4. To give us example of
Humility, Patience, and Mortification, in enduring nine months straight
imprisonment in his Mothers Womb. And 5. That he might, as the Criminal, pay in
his flesh what were not his, but our debts. Humble your self you that are dust,
while you see the Lord of Majesty thus reduced in a manner to nothing for your
sake.

Ps. 39.8.
Consider 3. What the divine Infant did in the first instant of his Conception;
how he offered himself, and his whole life and actions to his Eternal Father,
as a Holocaust, and Sacrifice for our sins; saying Behold I come, and how the
Eternal Father was pleased in this his new born Son; saying, Thou art my Son, I
this day have begotten thee. Ps. 2.7.
To day the Heavens did truly flow with honey, while true Peace descended upon
the Earth. Mercy and Truth have met each other, Ps. 14.11, etc.
Justice and Peace have kissed. Truth is risen out of the Earth, and Justice
has looked down from Heaven.

Draw me, we will run after thee in the odor of thine ointments. Cant. 1.4 Jo.
1.19.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Anointed of our Lord.
Cant. 1.3. Ps. 44.8.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel, How the Pharisees sent to St.
John, to demand whether he were Christ; whereas this name agrees with none but
our Lord Jesus, who properly is Christ, or the Anointed of our Lord: and that
by a triple Unction, as King, as Prophet, as High Priest. Oil poured out is thy
name, (says the Spouse) And David. Thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Where ever he goes, he carries with him a most
sweet sent of Virtues. And who would not run in the odor of his precious
ointments?

Ps. 44.9.
Consider 2. This same Anointed of our Lord will come to day unto you, in the
Eucharist, to make you partaker of his sweet Ointments: for, Myrrh, and Aloes,
and Cassia from thy garments, that is, from the Sacramental Forms which cover
him as garments; hence he will anoint you with a threefold Unction. 1. With the
Unction of Mercy, blotting out your sins. 2. With the Unction of Fortitude,
strengthening you against your Spiritual Conflicts. 3. With the Unction of
Wisdom, instructing, and enlightening your Understanding: For, His Unction
teaches you (says St. John) of all things. 1 Jo. 2.27.


Ps. 131.17
Consider 3. You must prepare your self against Christ's coming. I have prepared
(says David) a lamp to my Christ. Which the holy Doctors expound of John
Baptist; for he was the lamp burning, and shining. Jo. 5.35.
Prepare also in the same manner the lamp of your Soul, cleansing it from filth
of sin, and giving it brightness and luster proceeding from good works; that
you may both burn inwardly with love; and shine forth to others by example.

Of the Visitation of the B. Virgin. And first of her Journey to Elizabeth.
Luc. 1.39.

COnsider 1. The Word Incarnate as soon as he was conceived hastened to
fanctifie his Precursor; that so he might presently begin the Office of a
Savior. He could have done this where he was, and at that distance; but he
inspired his Mother to go to Elizabeth's house, that she who was to be a
Mediatrix between us and her Son, might in some sort concur to the first
Sanctification which he wrought. And she, now full with God, readily follows
the divine impulse, and willingly embraces the occasion of doing a good
office. Learn of both to be zealous in helping others, and not to let slip any
occasion of exercising Charity.

And Mary rising up went unto the hilly country with speed. Consider the
promptness of her Obedience to the divine Inspirations. Neither the
difficulties, nor unpleasantnesse of a long journey, nor her own tenderness,
nor the quality of being now Mother of God, could take her off; but she
presently puts her self upon the way. This sudden departure of hers was not out
of vain complement or ceremony, nor of curiosity, nor of doubt in what the
Angel had assured her, but out of pure zeal of pleasing God, and helping her
neighbor. Observe her singular modesty, recollection, and devotion wherewith
she entertaineth the Son of God, whom she carries in her womb; and learn hence
how to demean your self, while you yet carry within your breast the same Son of
God in the Sacrament.

Consider 3. It is proper for them that are full of the divine Spirit to tend
toward the Mount of Perfection; to despise the world, and to aspire to things
above, Genesis 19.17. Ambr. in Luc.
and to Heaven it self. Save thy self in the mountain, said the Angel to Lot.
Besides, they do it with speed and servour: for (as St. Ambrose says) the
Grace of the Holy Ghost knows no lingering delays. See whether in your
thoughts, and desires, you do not cleave to these inferior things, and whether
you do not go slowly and coldly on toward the mount of Perfection.

Of the Blessed Virgins Entrance into the house of Elizabeth. Luc. 1.44.

COnsider 1. Mary being entered into the house of Elizabeth, saluteth first
though greater in dignity. So it becomes every one to prevent each other in
Civility and Charity. Think with what modesty, and in what terms she delivered
her self: happily in those Hail, Our Lord With thee. There passed no empty
Complements, nor worldly Ceremonies between them; but hearty expressions of
mutual joy. At the voice of Mary the Eternal Word sanctifies his Precursor,
cleanses him of Original Sin, enricheth him with the gifts of Grace and
Sanctity, bestows upon him the use of reason, and makes him sensible, even
then, of the Mystery of the Incarnation, and of his own happiness. As the
voice of thy Salutation sounded in my ears, the Infant in my Womb did leap for
joy.

Consider 2. How Elizabeth also at the voice of Mary was replenished with the
Holy Ghost, endowed with the gift of Prophecy, and cried out with a loud
voice, and said Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy
Womb. Learn hence how beneficial is the Mediation of the Blessed Virgin, by
whose means the Eternal Word wrought such admirable effects in the Infant, and
his Mother; and that we all partake of the fullness of Mary's Grace and
Blessings. Salute her with the Spirit of Elizabeth: acknowledge and extol her
Excellency, proceeding from the divine Fruit of her Womb: For By their fruits
you shall know them. Mat. 7.16.


Consider 3. Those other words of Elizabeth. Whence is this to me that the
Mother of my Lord does come to me? Humility does ever accompany the divine
Spirit and his gifts. Observe how by divine Inspiration she styles her Mother
of God, which the Holy Church acknowledges as her chief title. Happily St.
John might use the like expressions toward his Sanctifier, and like affections
pass between the Infants from Womb to Womb, as did between the two Mothers.
Learn from the Infant and his Mother how to entertain your Lord when he comes
to you in the B. Sacrament.

Of the Canticle Magnificat.
COnsider 1. Elizabeth having uttered these great praises, the B. Virgin brake
ferth into that admirable Canticle Magnificat. Observe how she returns not
the like again in complement, as is the fashion of the world; nor yet out of a
dissembling pretense of humility does she deny them, as most do in like
occasions; but ascribes all to God, nothing to her self. Learn hence, that it
is not the virtue of humility to deny, or dissemble the natural of supernatural
gifts we have, but 1. To acknowledge them as proceeding from the mere goodness
of God, not from our selves, or our own deserts. 2. To give God all the praise
and honor, usutping nothing thereof to our selves.

Prove. 2.14.
Consider 2. Two principal documents we are taught in this Canticle. First to
rejoice, and delight in God alone, and in things appertaining to our Salvation;
not in the vanities and pleasures, nor in the praises and favor of the World;
for, God alone it is, who has done great things to the Blessed Virgin, and
daily does to his Church: He alone is powerful, he alone holy, extending his
mercy from generation to generations to them that fear him; not to them that
contemn and provoke him by their sins. Examine wherein you are wont to be most
delighted, and see you be not one of those that rejoice in most wicked things.

Bernard.
Consider 3. The other document, which is the admirable virtue and efficacy of
humility; and this, 1. In the person of the Blessed Virgin, in whom it was the
foundation or cause of all her blessings. Because he has regarded the humility
of his handmaid, for behold from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed. 2. In relation to all in general. He deposes the mighty from their
seat, and exalts the humble, the hungry he fills with good things, and the
rich he sends away empty. Wherefore if you would be looked upon, and favored
by God, if you desire to be exalted, if you wish to be replenished with
heavenly gifts, purchase humility, love to be unknown, and not regarded.

Of the B. Virgins Stay with Elizabeth.
COnsider 1. The B. Virgin being led by Elizabeth into the inner rooms saluteth
Zachary; who, no doubt, received special comfort, and singular favors at the
presence of the divine Infant and his Mother: Yet he, who at his Mothers first
Salutation, made the other Infant to leap for joy, would not at this other,
restore speech unto the father: This was a favor reserved for the honor of
his Precursor, at his birth. Learn hence to reverence the divine Providence in
the dispensing of his favors, and not to prescribe to God the time or manner
of affording his succor, but patiently to expect with Zachary his divine
pleasure.

Ambr. in Luc.
Consider 2. The Virgin remained in the house of Zachary about the space of
three months, conversing with them with all humility and charity, assisting
and serving them in what she could even in the meanest domestical offices.
Think how holy was the conversation of that blessed company, what fervent
discourses, and always of God: how greatly Elizabeth and others profited by the
company of Mary: For If at the first entrance (says St. Ambrose) so great was
the profit, that at Mary's Salutation the Infant leaped, and his Mother was
replenished with the Holy Ghost, what do we think Mary's presence added, by the
benefit of so long a time? Hence love to converse with the good, and withal
procure that others also may be the better for your company and conversation.

2 Reg. 6.11.
Consider 3 That which is said in the second of Kings. The Ark of our Lord
dwelt, in the house of Obededom three months, and our Lord blessed Obededom,
and all his house. How much more, may we think, he did bless the house of
Zachary, wherein the living Ark of our Lord, and Mother of God, dwelt so long?
The like blessing will he pour forth upon your house, when he comes to you in
the Holy Eucharist, if you receive him as you ought.

Luc. 1.6.
Of the Nativity of St. John Baptist. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. The Sanctity of St. John's Parents. They were both just, walking in
all the commandments, and justifications of our Lord, without blame. Here
detest the perverseness of Heretics, that hold all Gods commandments
impossible: learn to observe all, not only Precepts, but also Justifications,
or Councels, and whatsoever else appertains to the perfection of your Calling;
that you may both be just in the sight of God, and so deserve the blessing of a
Son John; (that is of divine Grace) and be without blame in your life, and
conversation with men.

Consider 2. How God did honor the Birth of his Precursor. 1. In sending the
same Angel Gabriel to denounce his, and his own Sons Birth. 2. In the manner of
the Annunciation, which was more Solemn then that which was made to the Virgin:
This being delivered to the High Priest, in the Temple, and Sancta Sanctorum,
in time of public Sacrifice, all the people being in expectation and wonder.
3. In imposing the name himself, by the Angel, which we do not read he did to
any other then his Son; and this not an empty name, but full of mystery, making
good in effect what it did signify in outward sound.

Consider 3. The dignity of St. John's office, expressed in those words of the
Angel. He shall go before him, bearing witness, and preaching Christ by word
of mouth, and example of life. In the Spirit and Virtue of Elias; that is, with
an undaunted courage and zeal, which be showed throughout the whole course of
his life; in the Wilderness, at the ri^er Jordan, in Cities, in Herod's Court,
in Prison, and Death it self. To prepare unto the Lord a perfect people by his
Baptism, preaching of Penance, and the austerity and rigor of his life.
Think whether this be not in some part also your Vocation, and accordingly
excite your self to imitate the Sanctity of Saint John.

Luc. 1.57.
Of the Nativity af St. John Baptist. 2. Part.
Ps, 36.3.
COnsider 1. Elizabeth's full time was come to be delivered, and she bare a Son.
Ponder the Joy of the Parents, and whole house, and the Congratulations of
their Neighbors and Kinsfolks for her delivery of a Son, after so many years
unfruitfulness, and expectation. No less is the joy of the Saints and Angels,
and comfort of a Soul, when it is fruitful of good works, and brings to
effect what it conceives by virtue of divine Inspirations. Be not dismayed if
you do not presently attain the Virtue, or overcome not the Vice, which you
desire: Keep still in heart; for God is wont to defer his gifts and favors,
the more to inflame our desires. Hope, therefore, in God, and do good, and he
will give thee the petitions of thy heart.

Consider 2. John is his name, which signifies Grace; for no Saint whatsoever,
after Christ and the B. Virgin, did so abound with the gifts of Grace: For, he
was by Office and purity of life an Angel, in Spirit Elias, more then a
Propeht, Sanctified in his mothers womb, and one, then whom (as Christ himself
witnessed) none among the born of women ever rose greater. Reverence this Saint
so singularly beloved, and so near allied to our Lord, and endeavor to imitate
his heroic Virtues.

Consider 3. What happens at his Birth. 1. The Mother by divine Inspiration
gives him his name. 2. The father writing the same in a Table, forthwith his
mouth was opened, and his tongue, and he spoke blessing God. 3. He was
replenished with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, etc. Observe here, how by
Penance and due submission a man rises greater then he fell: 4. They all
marvelled, and fear came upon all their neighbors. 5. All that had heard these
things, laid them up in their heart, saying; What an one, trow ye, shall this
child be? for the hand of our Lord was with him. Do you likewise lay these
things up in your heart by serious Meditation, and beg that the hand of our
Lord may also be with you.

Zacheus, come down in haste because this day I must abide in thy house. Luc.
19.5.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Guest of your Soul.
Apoc. 3.20
COnsider 1. How Christ although he be the Lord of Glory, and Majesty, whom
thousands of millions attend on in heaven, is notwithstanding wonderfully
desirous to make himself your guest, and to lodge in your Soul. Whence in the
Apocalypse he says. I stand at the door and knock, if any one shall open unto
me the gate, I will enter in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. O
what a favor is this? Who are you? and who is he?

Luc. 3.4.
Consider 2. What is said this day in the Gospel. Prepare the way of our Lord,
make straight his paths. You must make ready the room of your heart, that it
may be fit to entertain so great a guest. He is content, and well pleased with
what is mean, so it be but cleanly; and therefore he would not take flesh, but
in the Virgins purest womb, nor be laid, but in a new Sepulcher, and wrapped
in a pure clean Winding Sheet. He is highly taken with Humility, and as much
offended with Pride, and Self-conceit. If you be a valley, you shall be filled
up, (as it is said to day in the Gospel) but if you be a hill, or mountain, you
shall be humbled, and taken down. Meet him then, prostrating your self before
him, and crying out from the bottom of your heart. Lu^. 7.6.
Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof, etc.

Genesis 18.3, etc. 4 Reg. 4.8. Luc. 10.38 Prove. 23.26.
Consider 3. With what prompt observance, and hearty welcome, anciently they did
entertain their guests; Abraham the three Angels; the Sunamite woman the
Prophet Elizeus; Martha Christ himself. Do you the like; and the best you have
set before him; that is, present him your whole heart. My son (says he) give
me thy heart. See it be all of a piece, whole and entire, not divided either by
selflove, or inordinate affection to things of this world.

Mat. 1.18.
Of our Blessed Ladies Virginity revealed to St. Joseph. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. The singular Sanctity of St. Joseph answerable to so high an
office, though God had not as yet revealed unto him the Mystery of the
Incarnation, for a proof both of his and the Virgins Virtue: Wherefore
perceiving her to be grown big after her return from Elizabeth, he was startled
at it, and began to be troubled in mind, doubtful what he should do to keep
himself blameless. Thus God is wont to try his servants, though but for a
time; Ps. 54.23.
for he will not give fluctuation (says David) to the Just for ever.

Consider 2. The many Virtues of the holy man in this perplexity of mind.
Patience in supporting, and not divulging the matter: Charity in not
reproaching her: Prudence in taking mature deliberation with himself of what
were fit to be done. Do you the like when any thing happens amiss in your
brother: beware of rash judgment: follow that of St. Bernard. Ber. ser. 10. in
Cant.
Excuse the intention, if you cannot the fact; take it for a mistake, judge it
a^ surprise, think it a chance.

Is. 24.16.
Consider 3. The admirable Virtues of the B. Virgin in this surprise of Joseph.
She alleges nothing in her own defense, though easily she might. Her honor
was in question in a matter of the highest concern; notwithstanding she
chooses rather to be silent, and to commit the matter to God, then to publish
any thing that might turn to her own praise. My secret to me. You, perhaps, do
not so, but presently blab out whatsoever makes to your commendation, and
though you be in fault make a thousand excuses one upon the other in your sins.
Ps. 140.4.


Mat. 1.20.
Of our Blessed Ladies Virginity revealed to St. Joseph. 2. Part.
BEhold the Angel of our Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph. Consider 1. The sum
of the Angels Message. 1. He honors Jos^ph with the title of being son of
David. 2. He takes away all fear and trouble of mind. 3. He justifies the
Virgin. 4. He informs him of the Mystery of the Incarnation. Ponder here how
God was not wanting in due time to these holy persons, but when all humane
means failed, sent them succor from heaven. Admire the divine Providence,
which though it seems to leave us for a while, yet will not abandon us for good
and all: For a moment, Is. 54.7.
a little while (says he) have I forsaken thee, and in great mercies will I
gather thee.

Consider 2. What excess of joy St. Joseph was in, when he understood of the
Mystery of the Incarnation, the Innocence of his Spouse, and her election to be
Mother of God; where he understood himself to be assumed to that eminent
dignity of being not only Guardian and Spouse to the Mother, but also the
reputed father of the Son of God, and as father, to give him the name of Jesus.
Think how he condemned himself as one rashly jealous. Congratulate with him for
this honor, and reverence with singular devotion him, whom both Mother and Son
so highly favored.

Cant. 5.2. and 2.11.
Consider 3. The Angel disappearing, probably St. Joseph impatient of delay,
went forthwith to his most innocent Spouse, knocked at her chamber door, where
she likely was watching in heavenly contemplation, and used those wo^ds of the
Canticles. Open to me my sister, my love, my beautiful one, for winter is now
past, the rain is gone and departed. Then he asked pardon with tears, and
recounted to her the whole passage of the Angels Vision. Think what joy there
was between them. Learn to put your trust in God in like accidents, who after a
tempest makes a calm, T^b. 3.22.
and after tears and weeping pours in joyfulnesse.

Of the Expectation of the Virgins Delivery. 1. Part.
Luc. 12.50
COnsider 1. The Infant Christ shut up in his Mothers womb, did earnestly long
for the coming of that hour, wherein he was to appear in the World, to perfect
the work of our Salvation; so as even then to say, I have to be baptized with a
Baptism, and how am I straitened till it be dispatched? He contained himself
notwithstanding for nine whole months, neither would he dispense one day with
himself in that tedious and painful Enclosure, but embraced it as a fit
occasion of suffering for us, of which nature he would omit nothing that came
in his way. What man in his wits (according to flesh and blood) would suffer
himself to be so long shut up in such a prison, though it were to gain the
world. Be ashamed then to complain of small inconveniences, when God himself
suffered so great for you.

Cant. 8.1.
Consider 2. The expectation on the behalf of the Mother now near her time, and
most desirous to enjoy the sight of her Son, whom she knew to be God of God,
and Man of her own nature and substance. She did probably apply to him, and her
self those words of the Canticles. Who shall give to me thee my Son, that I may
find thee without and kiss thee? In the mean while she exercised most ardent
affections of love, and conformity to the divine will, both as to the time,
place, and conveniences of her Delivery, casting her self and all her care upon
God, 1 Pet. 5.7.
(as St. Peter admonishes us) for that he has care of us. Do you the same in
all your affairs, and examine wherein you are deficient.

Consider 3. How well the divine Infant did requite the long harbor his Mother
gave him in her Womb. If at his first entrance in his Conception, he bestowed
upon her such extraordinary grace and favors, how did he increase them, during
his nine months abode? Illuminating her Understanding with an infused light
and knowledge of the Mysteries of Faith, and inflaming her will with more then
Seraphick Affections of divine Love? He was no burden, nor pain, nor the least
trouble unto her, but a most welcome guest, an ease and comfort in all
occasions. He would be so in proportion likewise to you in the Sacrament, if
you would give him entertainment, and not pour your self forth presently upon
other affairs.

Of the Expectation of the Virgins Delivery. 2. Part.
Is. 4^.8.
COnsider 1. The Expectation on the behalf of the Fathers in Limbo, praying
continually, and crying out, Drop dew ye heavens from above, and let the clouds
rain the Just, be the earth opened, and bud forth a Savior. They longed to be
set free, that they might presently enjoy the Beatifical Vision. Therefore they
said, Be manifest before Ephraim, Ps. 79.3. and 4.
Benjamin and Manasses; show thy face and we shall be saved. Quicken your dull
heart with these inflamed desires. Ber. ser. 2. in Cant.
Be ashamed (says St. Bernard) that the exhibition of this benefit does not
cause in thee a joy answerable to that inflamed desire which the bare promise
enkindled in the hearts of the ancient Saints.

Ps. 38.8.
Consider 2. What expectation every devout Soul ought to be in of having Christ
Spiritually born in it self by Grace. What is my expectation, (said David) is
it not our Lord? Wherefore we must employ all the saculties of our Soul. 1. Our
Memory and Understanding in a serious and attentive consideration of his
admirable Virtues and Perfections. 2. Our Will in ardent affections of love,
and desire of expressing in our selves what we behold in him; that, according
to the Apostle, Beholding the glory of our Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.
we may be transformed into the same image.

Gal. 4.19.
Consider 3. We must not content our selves with bare affections and desires,
for by these we only conceive Christ, not bring him forth, but we must also
with the Apostle Travel (as women in labor) in the exercise of Christian
Perfection, till Christ be formed in us, laboring to bring to light the good
desires, which by divine Inspiration we have conceived; otherwise they will but
torment (...) conscience, and prove at last our ruin, as it often happens to
mothers when they miscarry; for, as the Wiseman says, Prove. 21.25.
Desires kill the slothful. Wherefore encourage your self, and inflame your
heart by means of those Antiphons the Church uses these days, Eccles^^* (...)
Officio Advent.
saying, O wisdom which have issued forth of the mouth of the Highest, etc. O
Adonal; and the like.

Of the B. Virgins Journey to Bethlehem.
Luc. 2.1.
THere came forth an Edict from Caesar Augustus, etc. Consider 1. The wonderful
disposition of the divine Providence. Christ could have been born where, at
what time, and with what ease and convenience he had pleased; he would
notwithstanding debar himself of all; and disposed it so, that it should happen
to be in the Winter, and that Cesars Edict should send his Parents far from
home; that he might miss even of those small conveniences wherewith he might
in some sort have been provided at Nazareth. Rem. 11.33.
O depth of the riches of the wisdom, and of the knowledge of God! Go now, you
that seek so greedily after your own ear and pleasures. Either God is
deceived, ^ern. de nativ. for. 3.
or the world in an error, (says St. Bernard) because their dictamen^ are
quite contrary to one another.

Cant. 2.9. and 16.
Consider 2. St. Joseph's and the B. Virgins Obedience to the Edict, with their
own great inconvenience, taking a long journey of near about a hundred miles.
Look upon the Travelers, see with what modesty, patience, and conformity to
Gods will they carry themselves in all things: Think what sweet discourses the
Virgin holds with her Son. My beloved to me, and I to him, etc. Behold he
stands behind our wall, looking through the windows, looking forth by the
grates: For, All things are naked and open to his eyes. Heb. 4.13
Out of every thing gather something for your self.

Jo. 1.1^
Consider 3. When they were come to Bethlehem, they went about all the Innes,
but could find no entertainment. Good God! there was place for the refuse of
men, but no room to be found for the Son of God! He came into his own, and his
own received him not. See how patiently they bear this repulse, and betake
themselves to a cave, or open and ruined stall. Imitate, and love to be set
behind all. O how true was that, The foxes have holes, and the fowls of the air
nests, but the Son of man has not where to repose his head. Think now often
you have denied him entertainment, while your heart was wholly taken up, and
full of worldly vanities.

If any be a little one, let him come to me. Prove. 9.4. Is. 9.6.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as a little one.
Luc. 2.12.
COnsider 1. What is said by Isaie. A little child (is) born to us, and a son
is given to us. And in the Gospel. You shall find the Infant swadled in
clothes. Thus the Lord of Majesty delights in the name of a little one; and
that he might be such, brought himself in a manner to nothing. See how little
he is in his Crib, Is. 40.12.
Who pondereth the Heavens with a span, who poiseth with three fingers the huge
greatness of the Earth.

Gal. 2.20.
Consider 2. This little one will come to be Spiritually born this day in your
heart by Holy Communion, if you prepare him a Crib in Bethleem, that is, in the
house of Bread. He appeared to men first in flesh; now he will communicate
himself anew unto you in bread, to impart unto you by this living Bread his own
divine, and immortal life. Go then to this divine Mystery so, that he may be
born anew in your heart; which will certainly be, if you begin to lead a life
conformable to his; if you love nothing but what he loved; that you may say
with the Apostle: I live, now not I, but Christ lives in me.

Matt. 18.3.
Consider 3. That you may enjoy this little one, you must become such an one
your self. For unless you become as little children, you shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Provide therefore for this little one a Crib, or place
of repose in your Soul, swathe him with the bands of Charity, defend him from
the cold of a frozen heart. 1 Reg. 15.17.
Lastly, Be little in your own eyes, that you may deserve to be made Chief in
the Tribes, that is, great among the Saints. The Secrets of his Wisdom he
reveals to the little ones. Mat. 11.25 Ps. 18.8.
The testimony of our Lord is faithful, (says David) giving wisdom to little
ones.

Of our Saviors Birth. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. The Blessed Virgin being in the Cave or Stable at Bethleem, and
perceiving her time to draw near, retired her self as much as the place would
permit, and being in Spirit wholly fixed upon God by most high contemplation,
behold on a sudden brings forth into the world the Eternal Light. The Blessed
Infant issues forth without breach of his Mothers Virginal Enclosure, as
afterward he rose from his Monument, though shut and made fast up: And, as the
great Master of Humility, at his first entrance into the world casts himself
on the bare ground. What feeling had the Virgin at that time? What affections
of reverence toward her God, of love toward her Son? See how she takes him up
in her lap, kisses him, wraps him in swathing bands, lays him in the manger
between the beasts, that by their warm breath he might in some manner be
defended against the cold. See how she adoreth, and gives him thanks for his
coming into the world, and making choice of her to be his Mother; How St.
Joseph also performs his part; And out of all draw something for your own
benefit.

Heb. 1.6.
Consider 2. What joy was then in heaven. How well pleased was the heavenly
Father at this new sight. And when again he brings in the first-begotten into
the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God adore him. See how the
Angels fall prostrate on their faces, and adore him, saying Holy, Holy, Holy,
etc. And to the Blessed Virgin, In Breviar. ad Matut.
O Blessed Mother of God whose womb remaining untouched brought forth the
Savior of the World. Rejoice and congratulate with both, and adore your new
born Savior.

Is. 1.3.
Consider. 3. Then was fulfilled that of Isaie; The Ox has known his owner, and
the Ass his masters Crib: but Israel has not known me, and my people has not
understood. S. Bonav.
See how these silly creatures by divine instinct, prostrating themselves adore
their Creator. Corn. in Is. c. 1.
See whether you be not one of those Israelites, and do not yet know your Lord,
being more insensible then the very bruit beasts themselves. 1 Jo. 2.4.
For he that says he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, is a lier.

Of our Saviors Birth. 2. Part.
I Magine your self in the Cave or Stable at Bethleem; and fixing your eyes on
the B. Infant lying in the manger, ponder these general Circumstances. Who?
What? Where? By what means? Why? How? and When?

Ames 4. 13. Job. 26.11
Who is this Infant? The only begotten Son of God, and true God of God. Our
Lord God of hosts is his name. The pillars of heaven tremble, and dread at his
beck. Infinitely powerful, infinitely wise; immense, eternal, incomprehensible,
etc.

What? He lies as one helpless; He suffers extremity of cold; He is wrapped
in poor swaddling clouts; He cries and sheddeth rears as other Infarts.

Ps. 21.7.
Where? Far from his own country and home; in a stable, in a manger; between
two silly beasts; as A worm, and no man, a reproach of men, and outcast of the
people.

With what means, or conveniences? Destitute of all, without bed or bedding,
without fire, without all manner of accommodation; no servants, or attendants;
having none about him but his poor Parents, by whose care and labor he was
maintained.

Why? For your sake, for love of you, to give you example, In Offic. Nativ.
Domini. Is. 53.7.
To restore lost man to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ps. 18.6.
How? Not forced, but of his own free election. He was offered because himself
would. Cheerfully, and with joy: Therefore entering into the world He has
rejoiced as a Grant to run the way, though rough and painful.

Act. 1.7.
When? In the very depth of Winter, at midnight, a time the most inconvenient of
all other; and yet both times and moments are all in his power. Be astonished,
give thanks, return love, imitate, etc. And if you receive to day this Blessed
Infant into the Crib of your heart, be careful to entertain him well.

Of our Saviors Birth. 3. Part.
Tit. 3.4.
COnsider 1. The admirable Virtues which are resplendent in this Mystery. 1. The
infinite Goodness and Benignity of God. His Power appeared in the first
Creation of the World, Providence in the Government; but after all, in this
mystery as St. Paul says, Appeared the Benignity and Kindness toward man of
our Savior God. He was made man, that he might the better be known by man;
born in poverty and want, that he might the more endear himself unto us; In an
open stable, to be the more easily found; He lies in a manger to encourage the
poor; his hands are bound, that you need not fear to approach; he concealeth
his power, to take away terror; he puteth on meekness, to win you to himself,
etc.

2 Cor. 8.9.
Consider 2. His extreme Poverty, and love thereof, expressed in this Mystery.
He made choice of a poor humble Maid for his Mother, and of a Carpenter for his
reputed father. He was born out of house and home, and in a stable, lodged not
in any bed of his own, but in a manger upon straw and hay without sheets or
blankets, only wrapped up in a few clouts; and all this, being the Lord of all
things. For you (says the Apostle) he was made poor, whereas he was rich, that
by his poverty you might be rich. If you be wise therefore be rich by imitating
his poverty.

If. 53.3. Ps. 72.23.
Consider 3. The incomparable example of his admirable Humility, who being by
nature God equal to the Father, abased himself to the despicable condition of a
slave, and that the very vilest of them, and the most abject of men; Nay he is
become for us as a beast, even lying amongst them, that so he might be with us,
without any regard to his honor, which you are so miserably fond of. Be
confounded, for that being but a worm, you will be looked upon, and regarded
above others.

Of the Message sent to the Shepherds. 1. Part.
Luc. 14.11 Luc. 2.8.
COnsider 1. Christ having humbled himself so low as the Manger, God his Father
would honor him, and make him known to the Shepherds by Angels, and to the
Sages by a Star; because He that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Ponder the
words of the Evangelist. And there were in the same country Shepherds
watching, and keeping the night-watches over their flock; and behold an Angel
of our Lord stood beside them, and the brightness of God did shine round about
them.

Consider 2. Christ would not be made known to the Wisemen about Bethleem,
because they were proud; nor to the rich, because they were covetous; nor to
the noble, because they were given to pleasures; but to Shepherds, that is, men
that were poor, humble, laborious, vigilant and careful in their office. Be you
therefore such an one, and be watchful over your self, that you may deserve to
be visited with divine illustrations.

Consider 3. Such a Shepherd or Pastor was St. Thomas, whose Feast you
celebrate this day; and therefore the Gospel of the good Shepherd is applied
unto him. For the same reason, Christ manifested himself unto him after a
special manner, toward an eminent degree of Sanctity in this life; and is now
seen, and enjoyed by him in the other, to an equal proportion of Glory. See his
Zeal for the Church of God; his Constancy in adversity, and Piety in
Prosperity; and do your utmost to imitate him. And if you be to receive to day
Christ the chief Pastor, in the Holy Eucharist, beseech him to instruct you
how to feed and govern according to his, and St. Thomas his example, the flock
committed to your charge; which in the first place is your own Soul, with all
its powers, faculties, and senses; then, those that are under your charge, that
by virtue of his divine illustrations you may your self be enlightened all
over, and with all be a light to others both by word and example: For as St.
Gregory says. Greg. Ep. 32. l. 7.
The flame or fire of the Shepherd is the light of the flock.

Of the Message sent to the Shepherds. 2. Part.
Luc. 2.10, 11.
COnsider 1. Those words of the Angel, I evangelize to you great joy, etc.
because this day is born to you a Savior, etc. The joys of the world are
either base, or vain: The only true and solid content is of God, and of things
appertaining to our eternal Salvation: and this joy (as our Savior says) no
man shall take from you. Jo. 16.22.
Think therefore what cause you have to rejoice for the Birth of this Savior,
Mat. 1.21.
who saves his people from their sins, from the power and slavery of the
Devil, from hell and damnation; and bestows upon them all manner of Spiritual
Blessings, Grace, Virtue, and Life everlasting: And this to you, as much as to
all the world besides, and even this day and at all times that you will your
self. Say therefore with the Prophet, Habac. 3.18.
I will joy in our Lord, and will rejoice in God my Jesus.

Consider 2. And this shall be a sign to you. You shall find the Infant
swadled in clothes, and laid in a manger. Good God what signs are these of the
Messiah, Lord, and Savior of the world? Infancy, clouts, and manger? Who would
not have expected he should have heard of Courts, Thrones, Purple robes, etc.
Try whether you can find such signs of Poverty, and Humility in your heart;
that thence you may come to know whether or no Christ be as yet spiritually
born within you.

Consider 3. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly
Army praising God, etc. O what heavenly Music was then heard! O with what
Angelical Harmony was then first entoned Gloria in excelsis Deo. Glory in the
highest to God. Learn hence to praise and glorify God in all things. And in
earth peace to men of good will. Hence also learn that peace both interior and
exterior, with God, and our Neighbor is a peculiar gift of Christ. For, Ps.
71.7,
There shall arise in those days Justice, and abundance of Peace. O how much is
this Peace to be wished for? Yet it is not bestowed, but upon men of good will,
that is, rightly subordinate to God: For, Is. 48.22.
There is no peace to the impious, says our Lord.

Luc. 2.15.
Of the Shepherds Adoring.
2 Reg. 23.15.
COnsider 1. Let us go over to Bethleem, etc. See their prompt Obedience. With
the same readiness ought you likewise to obey divine Inspirations. And they
came with speed, that you may learn to be fervorous in the Service of God: For
(as St. Ambrose says) no body seeks Christ slothfully. Go you also, and that
frequently over to Bethleem, considering the Mysteries that were there
exhibited for your Salvation. Say with David. O that some man would give me
drink of the water out of the Cestern that is in Bethleem! The Cestern is the
Cave, the Water is Christ, Jer. 2.13. Eccli. 1.5.
who is the Fountain of Living Water; and the Fountain of Wisdom.

Consider 2, And they sound Mary, and Joseph, and the Infant, etc. Whence you
may learn that the readiest way to find Christ, is by means of the B. Virgin,
and the Intercession of Saints. See with what Spiritual Joy the Shepherds
adore, what Presents they offer; How afterward they return again, and recount
to others what had passed Glo^ifying, and praising God in all things that they
had seen and heard. And out of all gather something for your self.

Consider 3. But Mary kept all these words, etc. Observe four several sorts of
persons then in Bethleem. 1. Some passing by did see the Shepherds and the
Crib, but not finding any thing extraordinary, went on their ways without any
further notice, or feeling. 2. Others heard, and admired what the Shepherds
related unto them, but being busied with other affairs, thought no more of it.
3. The Shepherds themselves adored also, and with a lively faith, but returned
afterward to their own, uncertain with what event. 4. Only the B. Virgin and
St. Joseph insisted upon the Mystery, pondering each particular, and bearing
them constantly in mind. Think what rank you are of, or would wish to be.

Behold thy Savior comes. Is. 62.11. O God save me in thy name. Ps. 53.3.
Luc. 2.27.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as he is Jesus, or Savior.
Ps. 129.7
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel, to wit, that in his Circumcision
His Name was called Jesus, that is, Savior: and with reason, for that to day
he sheddeth his first blood, as the earnest penny of our Redemption, being to
pay the remainder of our Ransom on Mount Calvary; so as to make good that of
the Psalmist. And with him (there is) plenteous redemption. If Joseph, and some
others were called Saviors, for having delivered the people from famine and
temporal death, how much more Justly is Christ so called, who saves us from
that which is everlasting? For he (says the Angel) shall save his people from
their sins. Mat. 1.21


Ps. 30.8.
Consider 2. This Savior will come to you to day in the Holy Eucharist to save
thy Soul out of (her) necessities. To deliver you from your Spiritual Enemies,
giving strength and forces to overcome them. He will wash, and cleanse you with
the Sacred Blood he shed this day: And lastly he being the beginning both of
the year, and of all other things, will give you himself as a New Years Gift,
and Pledge of a happy year, being willing to abide continually with you, if you
will your self. O what a benefit?

Ps. 33.19. Ps. 16.7.
Consider 3. You must prepare a lodging in your Soul, against the coming of your
Savior. First by Humility, acknowledging your own unworthiness, and his
Greatness: For, as the Prophet says, The humble of spirit he will save.
Secondly by a great confidence in his Goodness; for, He makes his mercies
mavelous, and saves them that hope in him. Prepare also a New Years Gift for
him, saying with David, I am thine, save me. Ps. 118.94 and 122. Ps. 59.19.
Receive thy servant unto Good. A contrite and humbled heart, O God, thou will
not despise.

Of our Lords Circumcision. 1. Part.
COnsider 1. Christ was not subject to the law of Circumcision, as being
incapable of contracting Original Sin, whose remedy it was: He would
notwithstanding undergo it, though most painful. 1. To honor the Law in his
own Person. 2. Not to offend others by his singularity. 3. That he might soon
begin to shed his blood for us. 4. That having taken upon himself our sins, he
might also undergo the penalty. 5. To give us example of Obedience to the law
of God; of contempt of all worldly reputation; and of mortifying our selves.
Learn to do even what you are not obliged unto, and to seek the mortification
of your flesh; and cover not the reputation of a Saint, seeing you cannot but
confess your self a sinner.

Consider 2. Probably Christ was Circumcised by his Mother, or St. Joseph,
seeing the Law did not prescribe any certain place or Minister. Think with what
tenderness they performed this action, with what compassion toward the Child,
and resignation to the will of God, for that they knew he was not subject to
the Law. Stir up in your self like affections of Compassion, Resignation, etc.

Erod. 4.26 1 Reg. 18.27.
Consider 3. The affections of the Infant. How he willingly offers himself to
his divine Father, to suffer in satisfaction for your unlawful pleasures, how
patiently he endures the pain, how at the same time he cries as an Infant,
but rejoices withal for promoting thus your Salvation. He is this day truly
become a bloody Spouse, espousing us to himself, not as David did Michol, in
the Prepuces of the Philistines, but in his own precious Blood. Excite your
self to suffer something for your Spouse, who endured so much for love of you.

Of our Lords Circumcision. 2. Part.
Luc. 2.21.
HIs name was called Jesus. Consider 1. After the painful Act of Circumcision,
is given him a name that is above all names. For God honors them that suffer
any thing for his sake, and exalts those that humble themselves. Behold the
B. Virgin pronouncing this holy name, Phil. 2.9.
which she learned of the Angel, saying Jesus is his name. See how at the first
utterance thereof, all the Celestials, Terrestrials, and Infernals bowed their
knees; how all were transperted with joy, but chiefly the Blessed Mother,
saying with the Prophet. I will rejoice in God my Jesus. Do you also rejoice
for the imposing this Sacred Name wherein we must be saved.

Habac. 3.18. Act. 4.12.
Consider 2. The Excellencies of this Name Jesus, or Savior: for it expresses
all the divine Perfections. 1. Power, for that he has taken us out of the
hands of our most powerful enemy. 2. Wisdom, whereby he overreached his
adversary, appearing in the form of a slave, and concealing under it that of
God. 3. Charity, whereby, without any benefit to himself, and with his own
great pains and labor, he set us at liberty. 4. Sanctity, for unless he had
been without all blemish himself, he could not have cleansed others from their
sins. 5. Divinity, for none but God could pay the infinite debt of Sin. 6. His
dominion over all men, whom he bought with his precious blood. Truly Oil poured
out is his Name; dilating its sweet sent in all manner of Spiritual Graces.

Cant. 1.3.
Consider 3. How highly you ought to reverence this holy Name; how greatly to be
affected toward it; how carefully to labor in propagating its Glory;
following the counsel of the Apostle. All whatsoever you do in word or in work,
all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Beg of him to make good the
exposition of his Name, and to save you. Say with the Prophet. Col. 3.17.
Help us O God our Savior, and for the glory of thy Name O Lord deliver us,
and be propitious to our sins for thy Names sake. Ps. 78.9


Of our Spiritual Circumcision. 1. Part.
Jer. 4.4.
COnsider. 1. Every Christian ought Spiritually to be Circumcised, after the
example of his Lord and Captain. This we are all enjoined in those words of the
Prophet. Be circumcised to our Lord, and take away the prepuces of your hearts,
ye men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest perhaps mine indignation go
forth as fire, and be kindled, and there be none that can quench it, because of
the malice of your cogitations. Hence conceive how great necessity there is of
it, and take heed of incurring Gods wrath and indignation.

Consider 2. This Circumcision (as Saint Bernard notes) must be throughout the
whole man. Ber. ser. 1. de Circumc.
Therefore search your self narrowly; cut off all disordinate passions, and all
manner of superfluities, which may any ways hinder your Spiritual Progress.
In the first place you must take away all stiffnesse in judgment and opinion,
which is the fountain and origin of many evils: For, hence all manner of
Heresies, Illusions of the Devil, Dissentions, Strifes, and the like, take
their beginning. Wherefore detest it, as the plague and bane of Virtue. Learn
to submit it willingly to the Church, your Superiors, and Spiritual
Directours, whom you have in place of God, and as the Wiseman counsels, Lean
not upon thine own prudence, Prove. 3.5. and 7.
and, Be not wise in thine own conceit.

Consider 3. You must also circumcise Self-love, the greatest enemy man has.
It blinds the Understanding, it inflames the mind with hurtful desires,
which drown men into destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9
and perdition. Such are the desires of having; of enjoying the conveniences of
this life; of being honored and esteemed by men; of having our actions taken
notice of, and preferred before others; likewise the desire of vain and
unprofitable knowledge, love of vanities and pleasures of this world, and the
like. Cut off therefore all these, Mat. 5.31.
and cast away from you. Deny your self, and follow your Lord.

Of our Spiritual Circumcision. 2. Part.
COnsider 1. Not only the Inward man, as above, in the Understanding and Will,
but also the Outward, in the Exterior Senses, is to be circumcised. Think with
your self how many Souls have been cast into Hell, by occasion of one single
glance of the eye? How many have perished by the abuse of the other Senses, of
Hearing, Tasting? etc. Wherefore refrain your eyes from the sight of dangerous
objects, chiefly of Womer, and unchaste Pictures: Your ears from any thing that
sounds of Vanity, Curiosity, and much more of Dishonesty, Murmuring and
Detraction: Your Taste from excess in eating and drinking, also unnecessary
and untimely repasts, and so of the rest.

Consider 2. You must not omit, among the rest, to have a care of your Tongue,
and to cut off from it all Detraction, Murmuring, and whatsoever else serves
to sow discord. Likewise all manner of contentious, injurious, saucy,
unseemly, or immodest language. Also lying, cursing, swearing, and the like.
Lastly flattery, double dealing, dissimulation, vain complements, etc. that you
may be like to your Lord, of whom it is said. 1 Pet. 2.22
Who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. Examine your self
in each particular, and beseech our Lord with David. Ps. 140.3.
To set a watch to your mouth, and a door round about to your lips. Jac. 3.2.
Jac. 1.26.
For, If a man offend not in word, this is a perfect man. On the contrary, If
any man think himself to be religious, not bridling his tongue, etc. this man's
religion is vain.

1 Timothy 6.8
Consider 3. You must finally cut off all Superfluities relating to the Body: as
in Clothing, Sleep, Pastimes, and other Conveniences of this life. Having food
(says the Apostle) and wherewith to be covered, with these we are content.
Wherefore quit your self of all other things, that you may become the more like
to Christ, who says of himself. Ps. 87.16.
I am poor and in labors from my youth.

Rehold, the Dominators (and) Lord comes. Introit. Missae ex Malac. 3.1. Take
with thee presents and go to meet him. 4 Reg. 8.8
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as your Sovereign Lord, to be adored with Offerings.
Mat. 2.2.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Introit of the Mass. Behold there
comes the Sovereign Lord, and a Kingdom in his hand, etc. to wit, that Christ
is the Supreme Lord of the whole Earth, to whom all men, even Kings and
Princes, are to pay Tribute in acknowledgement of this Sovereignty. This the
Sages by divine instinct understood, and accordingly came this day to offer
their Gifts. He are come (say they) to adore him: And opening their treasures,
they offered him gifts, Gold, Frankin couse, Ibid. v. 11.
and Myrrh.

Deuteronomy. 16.6
Consider 2. This Sovereign Lord will come into your Soul to receive your
Tribute and Presents; and withal to return other far more precious gifts.
Wherefore Take gifts with you, and go forth to meet him. Bethink with your self
what you can ofter; for in Deuteronomy it was forbidden that any one should
appear before our Lord without offerings. There shall not appear before our
Lord any empty. But every one shall offer according to that be has.

Consider 3. You must prepare a Throne in the middle of your Heart, wherein to
place and adore your Lord, when he comes. Make him a Present of your Souls
three Powers, Memory, Understanding, and Will; so that he may wholly dispose of
them at his pleasure, and not permit you to know, affect, or even think of any
thing that may be less pleasing to him. Offer him the Gold of Charity and
Love, the Frankincense of Prayer, the Myrrh of Mortification. In fine, give as
much as you can, for it will be returned back with advantage.

I the Lord thy God, that teach thee profitable things. Is. 48.17. Lord show me
thy ways, and teach me thy paths. Ps. 24.4. Joel. 2.23.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Teacher of Justice.
This Sundays Meditation is to be inserted between the Week days, as it shall
fall out.

COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel, tha^ Christ was found in the
middle o^ Doctors hearing them, etc. He is truly our Doctor or Teacher, not
of profane Erudition, but of Justice. Whence the Prophet. Ye children of Sion,
rejoice, and be joyful in the Lord your God, because he has given you a Doctor
of Justice. And he himself by the mouth of David inviteth us to a lesson of the
fear of God, Ps. 33.12
saying, Come Children hear me, I will teach you the fear of our Lord.

Ps. 93.12
Consider 2. How much this Science of Justice ought to be preferred before all
worldly Sciences: These cannot save us, but may serve to increase our
damnation, if we make not right use of them: This alone can make us happy for
ever. Hence think what a benefit it will be to have this Doctor come to day
into your Soul; for, truly blessed is the man whom thou shall instruct, O Lord,
and shall teach out of thy law.

2 Cor. 6.16.
Consider 3. How Christ state to day in the Temple among the Doctors. See
therefore that your Soul be a Temple of the living God, (as the Apostle warns
us) not of Dagon, that is of Sin. Let it be a house of prayer, not of worldly
negotiation, nor a den of thieves, that is, of vain thoughts of self-esteem,
robbing God of the honor which is due to him alone. Then, with all humility
fall at the feet of your Lord, with Magdalen, and beseech him to teach you the
way of Salvation: For they that approach to his feet, Deuteronomy. 33.3
shall receive of his doctrine. Lastly bring with you an eagerness to learn,
and resolve to put in execution, what he shall say unto you; lest otherwise he
leave you to your self, according to that of the Prophet. Jer. 6.8.
Be thou taught Jerusalem, lest perhaps my Soul does depart from thee.

Of the Sages Journey toward Jerusalem. 1. Part.
Ps. 97.2.
COnsider 1. Our Lord being born, a Star appeared in the East; and the Eternal
Father, as he had revealed his Sons Birth to the Jews by an Angel, so would he
likewise manifest the same to the Gentiles by a Star; he being to be equally
Savior to both Jew and Gentile. Rejoice that the glory and greatness of your
Lord was thus made known to the remote Nations of the World, and give God
thanks for having made known his salvation in the sight of the Gentiles, whose
first fruits these Sages were; and in them to your self.

Mat. 22, 14
Consider 2. The Star in the East appeared to all that were in those parts, but
few would stir to seek out our Lord, or obey Gods call. Thus Many be called,
but few elect. Many there are, to this day, so wholly bent upon their temporal
affairs, that they neglect the light of divine inspirations. They pretend a
thousand difficulties, Prove. 22.13. Job 6.16.
saying A lion is without, etc. I am to be slain. But (as Job says) They that
fear the hoare frost, snow shall fall upon them. And they that are overmuch
concerned for temporal losses, will incur that which is irrecoverable, and
everlasting.

1 Pet. 2.9.
Consider 3. The singular benefit bestowed upon the Sages, that they above all
others should be efficaciously moved to seek Christ, even with neglect of all
their other concerns. Such is the benefit, whereby, among so many thousands in
England, God has vouchsafed to call you from darkness into his mavelous
light. Wherefore be ever grateful for it. Ponder besides how the Sages having
overcome all difficulties, enter upon their journey, and how they encourage and
comfort one the other. See how the Star goes before, and directs their
steps. In like manner, to them that with courage and resolution undertake any
enterprise in the service of God, there will not be wanting the conduct and
assistance of divine Grace. They follow the course of the Star; do you follow
the Guides which God has given you of holy Inspirations, Superiors, Spiritual
Directours, etc.

Of the Sages Journey toward Jerusalem. Mat. 2.
2. Part.
Cant. 3.3.
COnsider 1. The Sages being come near to Jerusalem, the Star disappeareth, in
trial of their Faith and Constancy: So God does often take away spiritual
comfort from his servants, that they may know it is none of their own, but a
free gift of his; and withal to exercise their patience, and fidelity toward
him. The Sages are perhaps somewhat troubled at it, yet do not thereupon leave
off their journey. So you, when spiritual consolation is taken from you, do not
therefore give back, nor lose heart: But betake your self to ordinary means;
enquire of others with the Spouse in the Canticles. Have you seen him whom my
soul loves? Inform your self by reading Spiritual Books; consult with your
Ghostly Father, etc.

Mat. 2.2.
Consider 2. How being entered the City, they boldly enquire after a newborn
King, saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? Ponder 1. Their
singular Faith, wherewith nothing doubting of the fact, they only sought after
the place. 2. Their great courage, being not afraid, even in the Royal City,
and in face of Herod himself, to make public enquiry after another King. 3.
Their admirable Devotion, being not ashamed openly to confess Christ, and
acknowledge that they came to do homage to him. And we are come to adore him.
Learn to do the like; Romans 1.16
and with St. Paul not to be ashamed of the Gospel.

Prove. 2.14
Consider 3. Herod was troubled. So the wicked grieve, wherein they should most
rejoice, and on the contrary rejoice in most wicked things. Think whether you
do not feel some inward grudge, repining, and trouble, when good times put you
in mind of disposing your self to the Sacraments; or when any thing of greater
perfection is proposed unto you; being loath to lose any thing of your wonted
liberty. And all Jerusalem with him. Thus Inferiors do easily fashion
themselves to higher Powers, especially in what is evil. Learn to rejoice only
in things appertaining to your eternal Salvation, and to give good example to
them that are under your charge.

Mat. 2.4. etc.
Of Herod's Enquiry after Christ.
ASsembling together all the high Priests, and the Scribes of the people, he
enquired of them where Christ should be born. And again Secretly calling the
Sages, learned diligently of them the time of the Star, etc. Consider here 1.
How diligent and full of care worldlings are in their temporal concerns; and
how dull and slothful you are in that of Heaven. Herod made greater search
after Christ to destroy him, then you do to love and serve him. 2. The
wonderful providence of God, which makes even the wicked instrumental in
concurring with his divine will to our good; and disposes so, that Herod
himself was cause of manifesting Christ to the Sages, and so to the world,
while he thought to obscure him, and make him away.

Consider 2. How the Priests and Scribes point out the place of his Birth,
saying in Bethleem of Juda; but themselves would not stir a foot. Miserable
wretches! They perish near the fountain of life, which they had discovered to
others. So do all they that preach to others the way to Heaven, which they will
never follow themselves: Like (says St. Augustine) to the builders of Noes
Ark, Aug. ser. 65. de diversis.
Who built that wherein others might escape the Deluge, and themselves perished
in the waters. Observe how Christ was not to be found in the head City, or at
Court; or in a Palace, But in Bethleem, in a manger, and in clouts, Job 28.13
And as Job says He is not found in the land of them that live pleasantly.

Prove. 21.30. Job. 5 13
Consider 3. Herod's words to the Sages. Go and enquire diligently of the Child,
and when you shall find him, make report to me, that I also may come and adore
him. Thus did he think to make a prey of Christ. O Sacrilegious Hypocrite! to
adore in words, and kill in heart the Son of God. But God blinded him so, as
not to think of sending a Messenger with them, that might inform him of every
thing; that hence you might learn There is no Wisdom, there is no prudence,
there is no counsel against out Lord, etc. Who apprehends the wise in their
subtlety, and dissipateth the counsel of the wicked.

Of the Sages Arrival and Adoration at Bethleem, Mat. sup.
COnsider 1. The Sages having heard the King, went their way. In seeking Christ
they loose no time, but having informed themselves where they might find him,
leaving the City with all its curiosities and entertainments, they follow on
their journey. O that you did seek Christ as close, and not let your self be
taken up with worldly vanities. And behold, the Star, etc. Went before them:
For, God is wont to be the more liberal of his Illustrations, the farther we
are off from the trouble and noise of worldly affairs. Until it came and stood
over where the Child was. Thus the divine Providence reaches from end to end
mightily. And seeing the Star they rejoiced with exceeding great joy;
especially when they saw it point out the place, where they were to find what
their hearts had so long wished, and sought for.

Consider 2 And entering into the house they found the Child with Mary his
Mother. Ponder their admirable faith, not being startled at a loathsome stable,
and an Infant lying in a manger; nor doubting any thing of the Mystery.
Consider the tears of devotion which the vileness of the house, the poverty and
rags, together with the beauty of the Infant, and the Virgins modesty did move
them to. How were they struck with admiration to see the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, (as now by faith they knew him to be) lying in a stable upon a
bed of straw?

Consider 3. And falling down adored him. 1. They prostrated themselves with
most profound humility, as well interior as exterior, acknowledging their own
unworthiness, and their subjection, and dependence on him. 2. They adored him
with a most perfect act of Adoration, as their Sovereign Lord and God. 3. This
Adoration was seconded with an entire oblation of themselves, and their
Kingdoms, with sincere expressions of gratitude, both for their own particular,
and for the general benefit of all, in his Incarnation, and Vocation of the
Gentiles, together with most ardent affections of love, and desires that all
the world might come to his knowledge and service. Learn hence what admirable
effects a lively faith does work in a devout Soul; and with that affections you
are to come to the same Lord in the Holy Eucharist.

Mat. 2.11.
Of the Sages Offerings or Gifts.
ANd opening their treasures they offered to him gifts, Gold, Frankincense, and
Myrrh. Consider how with the abovenamed affections of faith, humility,
reverence, devotion and love, they offer gifts in homage to their Sovereign
Lord, and that of the best things they had, and out of their treasures; that
you might learn to give to God, and to employ the best, not the worst things
you have, in divine uses. Consider the gifts in particular, and present yours
jointly with them. They offer Gold as Tribute to their Lord and King. Offer him
also Gold, that is 1. a heart full of Charity, loving him from your whole
heart; for as Gold is the chief of Metals, so Charity is the Queen of Virtues.
2. Exterior worldly goods with an affection and love to Poverty, setting them
all at naught in respect of his divine service, so as to be ready even actually
to leave all, rather then to offend him only Venially.

Ps. 140.2.
Consider 2. They offer Frankincense in acknowledgement of his Divinity. Offer
also your Frankincense of fervent and frequent Prayer, saying with David, Let
my prayer (O Lord) be directed as incense in thy sight. Offer again to God your
Frankincense, that is your will, as a most sweet perfume, and this by Obedience
to your Superiors, Governors and Directours whom God has appointed in his
place over you. For there is no Sacrifice more grateful to him, then that of
our will by means of Obedience. 1 Reg. 15.22.
Better is Obedience (says Samuel) then Victims.

Consider 3. They offer Myrrh as to a mortal man. Offer you also the Myrrh
(which is of a bitter taste) of Mortification, chastifing your body with St.
Paul, and bringing it to subjection, so as to obey the Spirit. Offer also a
special Myrrh of Chastiry, carefully avoiding whatsoever may endamage it: for
as Myrrh preserves dead bodies from corruption, S. Greg. Orat. 16.
so Chastity does keep both the bodies and minds of the living undefiled.
Lastly consecrate your whole self to God, and give whatsoever you have to him,
who has given you all things.

Of the Sages Return.
If the Octave fall upon Sunday, make this Meditation on Saturday, and on
Sunday of H. Communion as above.

1 Jo. 4.1. 2 Cor. 11.14.
COnsider 1. How the Sages having performed their homage, and duty of Adoration,
having also presented the B. Virgin, and St. Joseph with some gifts, and taken
their leave, were now ready for their return, full of spiritual joy, and zeal
of bringing others to Christ, and amongst them Herod himself; but were
admonished in their sleep that they should not go back to him. Whence you may
learn that God has a care of them that are his, and can easily frustrate the
subtle intentions of the wicked: And that in the way of Virtue, not every
motion which seems to be according to zeal, ought always to be followed; But we
must prove the spirits if they be of God; for oftentimes (as the Apostle
witnesses) Satan transfigureth himself into an Angel of light.

Consider 2. How they presently obeyed, and went back another way into their
Country. Mat. 2.12.
So ought we to follow the inspirations of God; and they that have had more
knowledge and experience of Christ, should enter into another course of life,
of greater exactness and perfection in their progress toward their heavenly
country; Greg. hom. in Epiph.
from which seeing we turned away by pleasures, we should return by the
contrary way of sorrow and repentance. Think how the B. Virgin behaved her self
in all these passages, and what joy she was in, to see her Son thus adored, and
that of the Prophet fulfilled. Ps. 71.10.
The Kings of Tharsis, and the Islands shall offer presents, etc. Recommend
your self earnestly to her, saying with S. Bernard. Orat. S. Ber.
By you (Virgin Mother) let us have access to your Son.

2 Cor. 9.6.
Consider 3. The B. Infant did not send the Sages away empty, but highly
rewarded for their pains and devotion: He bestowed upon them supernatural and
heavenly gifts in return to theirs; for their Gold he gave them the rich
treasures of Wisdom and Charity; for their Frankincense the gift of Prayer and
Devotion; for their Myrrh, the Sovereign Balm of his divine Grace against the
corruption of Sin. We can give nothing to God that returns not with advantage
to our selves; the more we give, the more we shall receive. Be liberal
therefore to God, that he may be so to you; remembering what the Apostle says.
He that sows sparingly, sparingly also shall reap, and he that sows in
blessings, of blessings also shall reap.

If there remain any days between the Octave and the 2. Sunday, repeat these
Meditations, according to the number of the days; If a whole Week, then on
Monday take the Meditation of the Purification, and go on with them the other
days as they follow, intermitting that of the second Sunday, till it comes in
its course of that year.

Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him. Mat. 25.6.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Spouse of your Soul.
Ose. 2.19.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel. There was a Marriage made in
Cana of Galilee, etc. Jo. 2.1. The like Espousals will be made this day between
Christ and your Soul, if you will but give your consent; for he on his part
does earnestly desire it, according to that, I will despouse thee to me for
ever, and I will despouse thee to me in Justice, and Judgment, and in Mercy,
and in Commiserations. Nay, although you have often been disloyal unto him by
your disordinate affection, and adhering to creatures, he is notwithstanding
ready to pardon all, and even invites you again to him by the Prophet. Jer. 3.1.
Thou have committed fornication with many lovers, nevertheless return unto me,
says our Lord, and I will receive thee.

Ps. 44.3.
Consider 2. How great a dignity it is to be espoused to a King here upon Earth:
How much greater then, to the King of Heaven? Think how incomparable is the
beauty of this your Spouse, Goodly of beauty above the sons of men, how great
his Nobility, Dignity, Glory, Riches, Wisdom and Power, that you may be the
more inflamed with his love.

Consider 3. Marriage is nothing else but a mutual Contract between two, of
living together as one, with communication of goods and fortunes. Wherefore see
you do not any more forsake him by sin, though it were to gain the whole world.
Besides communicate freely with him, and give him up whatsoever you have. Adorn
therefore, and set out your self in the best manner you are able, against the
time of your meeting; and like a good Spouse (as the Apostle admonishes) in
all things Study how you may please your Husband. 1 Cor. 7.34.


Luc. 2.22.
Of the B. Virgins Purification.
COnsider 1. The B. Virgin having retired her self forty days after her
Childbirth, goes up to Jerusalem together with the B. Infant, and St. Joseph,
in compliance with a double law, of her own Purification, and her Sons
Presentation. This Law concerned not her, who conceived by the Holy Ghost, not
by man; yet she would submit her self unto it. 1. To imitate her Blessed Son,
who would be subject to the Law of Circumcision. 2. Not to give offense, or
scandal to the Jews, that knew nothing of the Mystery wrought in her. 3. To
conform her self, in what was lawful, to others of her Sex, and not to appear
singular. 4. To be exemplar in works of greater perfection. Note each
particular, and seek to make your benefit thereof.

If. 64.6.
Consider 2. The admirable Virtues she exercised in this action. 1. Her heroical
Obedience, exactly fulfilling whatsoever the Law required of others; not
pretending any exemption, privilege, or dispensation; nor using Epike^as, or
interpretations, even in that wherein she might lawfully have used them. O that
you were so, even in things that you are obliged to! 2. Her prefound Humility,
in concealing the Mysteious Conception and Birth of her Son, and sustaining the
repute of being unclean. Be ashamed of your own pride, in seeking to be
accounted holy and without blame, whereas you are but a miserable sinner, and
as the Prophet says. All your Justices as the cloth of a menstrued woman, that
is, imperfect and saulty.

Ps. 83.3.
Consider 3. Her incomparable Purity, wherein although she did excel all
creatures, yet out of the desire she had of becoming still more and more pure,
would not be without that Ceremonial Purification, which the Law required in
others. Learn hence to go continually increasing in purity of body and mind,
though you may seem to your self never so much free from sin and imperfection.
Ponder lastly her singular Devotion, in hastening to the Temple, to offer up
solemnly to the Eternal Father both his and her only Son. Her Soul coveted and
fainted into the Courts of our Lord. Observe, and imitate, as often as you go
to Mass, to make the same Offering.

Luc. 2.22.
Of our Lords Presentation in the Temple
Genesis 8.21.
THey carried him into Jerusalem to present him to our Lord. Consider 1. this
Presentation; and 1. in relation to the B. Virgin; what acts of Virtue she
exercised therein, as of Faith, Adoration, Devotion, and Thanksgiving toward
God; and of Charity toward men, for whom she offered her only Son. 2. In
relation to the divine Insant; How he rejoiced that the hour was come, which he
had so much longed for, wherein he was to be publicly presented to his Eternal
Father, as a living Sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, and for yours in
particular. Think with what zeal of his Fathers Glory, and Man's Salvation he
also offered himself. 3. In relation to the Eternal Father, how acceptable this
action was unto him. If at the Offerings of Noe, and others, Our Lord smelled a
sweet savor, how much more at this Oblation of his beloved Son, made also by
himself, and in the arms of his bles^ed Mother?

Lue. sup. Levit. 12.8
Consider 2. And to give a Sacrifice, etc. a pair of Turtles, or two young
Pigcons. One for an Holocaust (says the Law) and another for Sin. Where
observe, how the Virgin disdained not to be reputed poor, (that being the
Sacrifice ordained by the Law for them that were not able to offer a lamb) and
a Sinner. Be ashamed to disown either, or to think much to be ranked among
them. Ponder what manner of gifts God requires: Turtles, Pigeons, Lambs; by
the Turtle is signified mourning and Penance, by the Pigeon simplicity, by the
Lamb mildness. With these Virtues therefore present your self, that so your
Offering may be acceptable to him.

Exodus 13.13. Levit. 27.6
Consider 3. Christ's Parents to fulfill the Law, redeem their Son with five
Sicles, although the Evangelists mention it not. Ponder 1. Who buyeth? His
Blessed Mother; not to keep him for her self, but to nurse, and bring him up
for us. 2. Of whom does she buy him? Of his Eternal Father, to whom he had
lately been presented: Thus, he would have his Son to be ours by a double
title, first by Gift in his Incarnation, and now again by Sale. O that you were
so liberal of your self to God! What is the price? Five Sicles, or pieces of
silver. Think at how easy a rate you may make God your own, and withal, how
inexcusable you are, in refusing to bestow that pains and labor for him, which
you do for the Vanities of the World.

Luc. 2.25.
Of what passed with Simeon, and others. 1. Part.
Eccle. 7.19.
COnsider 1. And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, etc. Here is described
the Sanctity of those that gave testimony of Christ; for there is nothing of
greater credit or authority, then Innocence of life. 1. He was Just and
religious, careful not to offend God in the least; for he that fears God,
neglects nothing. 2. He was expecting the consolation of Israel by ardent
desires, and prayers powered forth with a great and holy confidence. 3. And the
Holy Ghost was in him, inspiring him after a special manner to fix his thoughts
and desires upon these heavenly things, not on the terrene and vain objects of
this world: Such ought to be all those that have consecrated themselves to God,
Expecting, not earthly things, Tit. 2.13.
but (as the Apostle says) the blessed hope and advent of the glory of the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Consider 2. And he came in Spirit into the Temple. Ponder the difference of
them that frequent the Church; some coming in Spirit, others out of custom. See
how he came presently to know the Savior of the World, so much desired and
longed for, by the ancient Patriarks, and Prophets. See how he runs to the
Mother, takes the Blessed Infant into his arms, and there entertains him with
holy kisses and embracings. O what flames of love would it kindle to have the
Son of God so near? Imitate these affections as often as you receive the Holy
Eucharist, and learn to go in spirit to the Church, and not out of mere custom.

Consider 3. How well the Blessed Infant did recompense the long expectation of
this Holy Man, not only favoring him with his corporal presence, and that in
his arms, but also working interiourly in his Soul admirable effects of his
divine grace, and replenishing him with heavenly comfort, so to the full, as to
make him bid adieu to all earthly things, and to life it self, breaking forth
into that sweet Canticle. Now thou do dismiss thy Servant, O Lord,
according to thy word in peace, Because mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. O
that you could likewise bid farewell to all worldly desires, and say with the
Apostle. I have a desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23.
and to be with Christ.

Luc. 2.34.
Of what passed with Holy Simeon and others. Part. 2.
COnsider 1. What Simeon said of Christ. Behold this (Infant) is set unto the
ruin, and unto the resurrection of many in Israel. Christ will indeed prove to
be the ruin both of the unbelievers, and of those that work not according to
their belief, but withal a resurrection, and everlasting life to the Just.
Think how you would have him be to you; and take notice how even the holiest
things will turn to our ruin and damnation, if we make ill use of them.
Reflect therefore upon your self, and examine what use you make of Gods
benefits, and of the means bestowed upon you to work your Salvation.

Coloss. 2.3
Consider 2. And for a sign which shall be contradicted. O wonder! He was the
Increated Wisdom of God, In whom be all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge
bid, and yet he was contradicted by many: His words and actions were commonly
calumniated, and condemned; and thou silly man that thou art, do thou wonder
and repine that men sometimes do contradict thee, and reprove thy doings and
sayings? Learn to suffer patiently. If you desire to be Christ's Disciple, you
must be content to be as a set mark for others to aim at in contradiction; Mat.
10.24
For the Disciple is not above the Master.

Eccli. 11.27.
Consider 3. What the Holy man said to the B. Virgin. And thine own Soul shall a
sword pierce, etc. Ponder how God mixeth sorrow with gladness, and amidst those
excessive joys wherewith her Soul must necessarily be filled, to see her Son
honored in that solemn manner, he puts her in mind of her future sorrows.
Ponder the singular modesty of the Virgin, and withal, her resignation,
wherewith she accepted at the hands of God the piercing sword. Imitate her
example, and learn, not to be overjoyed in time of Consolation, but to think
then of the Desolation that may ensue. In the day of good things (says
Ecclesiasticus) be not unmindful of evil.

Luc. 2.36.
Of what passed with Anna and others. Part 1.
Ps. 38.5.
COnsider 1. In this Mystery are proposed unto us the Virtues of this Saint, for
our imitation. After seven years of a married life, she lived continually in
the Temple, till the fourscore and fourth year of her age, by fasting, and
prayers serving night and day. Ponder her great love of Chastity, her continual
exercise of Prayer and Mortification, and constant perseverance of so many
years in the Service of God. Compare these Virtues with your Inconstancy and
Tepidity, That you may know what is lacking to you.

Consider 2. And she at the same hour suddenly coming in, confessed to our
Lord. Ponder here 1. Gods sweet Providence in inspiring her to come so
opportunely, and withal revealing unto her the Mystery of his Sons
Incarnation. 2. Her concurrence with the divine Inspiration, not letting slip
one moment of the hour that was allotted her for the obtaining of so great a
blessing. Who knows whether this be not the hour, wherein God intends you
some special favor, if you would make right use of it? Learn hence to be ready
at all hours, and let not any slip from you. You may lose many, by neglecting
one.

Mat. 20.16 2 Pet. 1.10
Consider 3. Many others there were at that time in the Temple, who both saw,
and heard what passed, yet these two alone had their eyes open to know him; for
that this Blessed Infant in the exterior, made no show of any thing that was
singular, or above other children. Learn hence to conceal what is in you; and
withal, not to judge of others by their outside. Learn also that among so many
that come to the Holy Eucharist, those alone do truly know him, and do taste of
his sweetness, who come in spirit and devotion to the Church, and are rightly
disposed. Lastly, learn hence that many are called, but few elect. Labor
therefore the more (as St. Peter admonishes) that by good works you make sure
your Vocation and Election.

Luc. 2.38.
Of what passed with Anna and others. Part 2.
COnsider 1. The Interior Acts of Virtue this holy Woman exercised, when she
beheld the Blessed Infant: Her Faith, Hope, Love, Joy and Congratulation with
her self; perfect Resignation, etc. Observe and imitate as often as you come to
the same Christ in the Holy Eucharist. If you believe, where is your Humility,
Reverence and Devotion? If you hope in him, why do you afflict your self for
crosses and adversities? If you love him, why do you set your affection upon
creatures? If your joy be in him, why do you beg content and satisfaction from
earthly comforts? If, lastly, you have resigned your self to him, why do you so
often recall your self, and seek your own will?

Mat. 12.34
Consider 2. Out of the Vehemence of her affection and zeal, she brake forth
into the praises of God. She confessed to our Lord, and spoke of him to all,
etc. professing him to be the Messiah of the world, extolling his mercies,
admiring his humility, inviting all to acknowledge, reverence and love him, as
their Lord and Savior. O how true is that! Of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. The reason why you are so dumb in the praises of God, is,
because you are cold and tepid in affection. Learn of this holy Woman to speak
freely of God, and of heavenly things in your private discourses and
conversation with others: Be not content to enjoy God alone, but endeavor to
bring others to him, both by word and example.

Consider 3. And his Father and Mother were marveling upon those things, which
were spoken concerning him. They admired the divine Providence in revealing
these Sublime Mysteries to a few only, and those but obscure persons, rather
then to the great and wise men of the world. And after that they had wholly done
all things according to the law of our Lord, they returned. Learn by this their
example, eractly to accomplish the will of God in all, even the least things.
Accompany them home. Observe their religious comportment on the way. See how
they being now returned to Bethleem, apply themselves, each one in their
several duties, to tend and serve the divine Infant.

Of Holy Communion.
Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed, save me and I shall be saved. Jer.
17.14.
Consider Christ as the Physician of your Soul.
Is. 61.1.
COnsider 1. What is read this day in the Ghospel, to wit, that Christ healed
the Leper, and after that the Centurions servant, Matt. 8. and that he is the
general Physician of all our Souls; who therefore came into the world, That I
should heal (says he) the contrite of heart. And while he was upon earth,
wheresoever he came, Virtue went forth from him, Luc. 6.19.
and healed all.

Consider 2. How many diseases Man is subject unto; Our fever (says St.
Ambrose) is covetousness, our fever is sensuality, our fever is rage and
anger etc. So many are our diseases, as we have vices. Ponder what concern and
danger they are of, as bringing with them everlasting death; how hard to be
cured, being of the nature not of outward diseases that easily discover
themselves, but of inward malignities that lie hid from the patient himself,
and are in a manner rooted in the very substance of the Soul. What a happiness
were it to be cured of all these, and to have a Physician at hand who knows how
to apply sovereign remedies against them?

Is. 53.4.
Consider 3. We ought to put great trust in this our heavenly Physician. 1.
Because he is most skillful, and knowing all things; and that he might have a
more experimental knowledge of our necessities, He has born our infirmities,
and our sorrows he has carried. 2. Because he is most compassionate, even
thirsting after our health and Salvation; and therefore of his own accord asked
that man in the Ghospel, Will thou be made whole? 3. To the end he might the
more effectually cure us, Jo. 5.7.
he has made a most admirable Balsom of his most precious Body and Blood, for
us to take, as a most sovereign remedy. Cast your self therefore at his feet,
and say with the Prophet, Have mercy on me, Lord, Ps. 6.2.
because I am weak. Dispose your self to obey whatsoever this divine Physician
shall prescribe.

Of Christ's flying into Egypt. Part 1. Mat. 2.13.

COnsider 1. How different are the ways of God, from those of men. Christ, as
soon as born, is sent into banishment. God could have taken Herod away, or
easily have appeased his wrath, or have rendered his Son invisible: but he
would have him fly. Think how derogatory this was to the dignity of the Son of
God, how full of inconvenience: Thus God deals with them whom he loves best.
Are you greater, or better then the Son of God? why then do you complain when
he permits you to suffer some hardships? Take these as tokens of his love, and
you will bear them the better, and that with joy and thanks too.

Consider 2. God would not have him go to the Sages, where he would have been
held in honor and veneration, and could have wanted nothing; but into Egypt a
barbarous nation, and ever averse from the Israelites; far from home, from his
kindred and acquaintance: Thus did he take from his Son during his infancy all
manner of comfort, help and relief, which he might otherwise have had from his
friends. Why then do you so much seek to be respected and served by all? and
think much if you suffer any incommodity? If you did love and serve Christ in
earnest, you would rather rejoice, and think it honor enough to be neglected,
despised, and afflicted with, and for him. It suffices the disciple, that he
be as his Master, Mat. 10.25
and the servant as his Lord.

Heb. 13.14
Consider 3. Christ, as he would be born far from home, so would he be banished
far from his own Country. 1. That we should both own, and carry our selves as
strangers, and exiled persons; not as Citizens, or natives of this world;
knowing that we have not here a permanent City, but we seek that which is to
come. 2. That those who were afterward to suffer banishment for his sake,
might find comfort in his example. Learn willingly for the love of Christ to be
exiled from your native country and friends; for true is that saying, A man of
resolution makes every country his own. Cic. Tusc. 5.


Of Christ's flying into Egypt. Part 2. Mat. sup.

COnsider 1. Behold an Angel of our Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying,
Arise and take the Child and his Mother, and fly into Egypt. Ponder the
particulars. 1. The Angel commands in the name of God, who is our Supreme
Lord. 2. He delivers it not to the Virgin, though the more worthy, but to
Joseph as head of the Family. Thus God does first Illuminate Superiors by
himself, then us by them. 3. He appears in sleep, recommending thereby Gods
care of us, who while we are at sleep, is watching for our good. 4. He bids him
take the Child and his Mother, without care of any thing else. O that Jesus and
Mary were your only care and love! 5. He assigns him the place he is to go
to. Learn hence ^ot to be your own chuser, but to take all from the hand of
God, place, employment, prosperity, adversity, etc.

Pro. 20.24 Ps. 90.10.
Consider 2. Those words of the Angel, Be there until I shall tell thee. He
could have told him determinately till such, or such a time: but God would not
have them know it, that they might the more depend on his providence. Be not in
your affairs sollicitous for the future, as to time, place, and other
circumstances; learn to depend in all things on the divine providence; for the
steps of man are directed of our Lord, as the Wiseman says. And, He has given
his Angels charge of thee, that they keep thee in all thy ways. Follow this
conduct, not your own ways, and you will ever live in security.

Consider 3. Who arose, and took the Child, and his Mother by night, etc.
Ponder here S. Joseph's perfect obedience. 1. In submitting his judgment,
whereas there wanted not many things which he might have objected against so
sudden a departure. 2. In readily conforming his will, notwithstanding the many
difficulties that represented themselves. 3. In his prompt and exact execution,
in every particular, rising that very time of night, with breaking his sleep
and rest, and leaving all that he had, uncertain of returning any more. 4. In
performing all this with great chearfalness, knowing he did therein the will of
God. Compare, and reform your Obedience in all things to this perfect Example.

Of Christ's flying into Egypt. Part 3. Matt. 2.14.

ANd retired into Egypt. Consider 1. How without delay they put themselves upon
their journey; Ponder the tender affection of the Mother, and compassion
toward her Child, beginning even now from his infancy to train himself up to
hardships; and how notwithstanding, she resigneth her self to the will of God.
Think also how the divine Infant freely offers himself to his eternal Father,
even in these early days for banishment, labors, and miseries. He rejoices to
go into Egypt to sanctify it with his devine presence, and to destroy the
Idols that were in it. Isa. 19.1.
Behold our Lord etc. Will enter into Egypt, and the Idols of Egypt shall be
moved at his presence. Beseech him likewise to sanctify you in the Holy
Eucharist, and to destroy in you all the Idols of your Vicious affections.

Consider 2. What they do and suffer in the way. Offer your self as
companion: Observe their religious comportment, their pious discourses, their
interior recollection with God. See with what patience they endure, and
overcome the many difficulties of a very long and troublesome journey, of about
two hundred and seventy miles. Think what they suffer in the Innes, and other
places, being poor, and strangers in the country. Have compassion on them, and
be confounded for being so nice, and seeking so much your own ease and
satisfaction, in meat, drink, lodging etc.

Consider 3. How being come into Egypt, they took up there habitation, for
seven or eight years, between Heliopolis and Cairus. Think what manner of life
they led all that time. 1. Their religious observance toward God, and his
laws, as much as the condition of banishment in a Heathenish country would
permit. 2. Their Charity and Union among themselves. 3. Their extrem poverty,
having nothing but what they got by labor of their hands to maintain
themselves and the Child. 4. Their patience in the ill usages of the Egyptians.
5. The edification they gave to their Neighbors, and zeal in endevoring their
conversion; and that probably, not without success in many. Ponder every thing
attentively, and gather something for your self.

Of the Murder of the Holy Jnnocents. Mat. 2.16.

Ps. 2.4.
COnsider 1. Then Herod perceiving that he was deluded by the Sages, was
exceeding angry, and sending murdered all men children etc. Observe the
barbarous cruelty, and into what enormities Ambition does plunge a man; that
you may conceive the greater hatred against it. But let the wicked rage, and
fume, as they please, let them devise practices against our Lord, and his
Saints: He that dwells in the Heavens shall laugh at them, and our Lord shall
scorn them, as he did Herod, and frustrated his design. Learn therefore to
confide in our Lord.

Consider 2. The cruelty of the Officers, exceeding even that of the Tyrant.
See how redily, and to the full they execute their Princes command, murdering
as many as they could find all about Bethleem. Be confounded in your self,
for being so remiss in doing good. Imagine what a heartbreaking this must
needs prove to these childrens mothers. See that your concern and grief be no
less, as often as Christ is taken from you by sin. Think how Christ, though a
far of, beholds all these things with compassion, but withal rejoices at
the Infants glory, and crowns in Heaven.

Judic. 14.8
Consider 3. The goodness of God, who knows how to draw good out of the
Wickedness of man, and produce a honey comb out of the Lions jaws. He
permitted therefore this slaughter, that so he might raise the Infants to the
crown of Martyrdom. Commit your self, and all you have to God, for he knows
better how to dispose all things then you your felfe. Wish that you also may
come to shed your blood for him; but first imitate the Innocence of these
Saints, by purity of life, Apoc. 14.5.
That you may be without spot, before the throne of God.

Of Christ's Return out of Egypt to Nazareth. Mat. 2.19.

Psa. 33.6.
COnsider 1. When Herod was dead, behold an Angel of our Lord appeared in sleep
to Joseph in Egypt, saying, arise and take the Child, and his Mother, and go
into the Land of Israel. Who being afterward in doubt where to dwell, for
fear of Archelaus, was admonished again to go into Galilee. Observe here 1.
How short is the prosperity of the wicked in this life, and how soon it is
changed into everlasting miseries of the next. 2. What a special care and
providence God has of the Just, taking them in due time out of the afflictions
he permitted them to fall into for their greater good; and directing them in
all their ways. Therefore Come ye to him, and be illuminated, and your faces
shall not be confounded.

Cant. 2.1.
Consider 2. And coming, he dwelt in a City called Nazareth. Imagine the joy and
congratulations of their friends, and kindred, for their return, and for the
increase of a son; where admire their singular modesty, in concealing the
admirable Mysteries which God had wrought in them, leaving it to him to reveal
them in due time. Observe how Christ from Nazareth was called a Nazarite; and
Nazareth signifies a flower; and Christ says of himself in the Canticles, I
am the flower of the field, not of the garden; that is, born of mean, not of
noble or wealthy parents; and the Lilly of the Valleys, not of the mountains;
that is, springing forth of the hearts of the humble, not of the proud and high
minded. Be you therefore a Valley, that is, humble; that the pure lilly of
Chastity may bud forth of your heart, and your self flourish for ever in the
presence and company of your Lord.

Consider 3. Many are the followers of Jesus the Nazarite, but few of the
Crucified; They willingly hear him company in a prosperous and flourishing
condition, but leave him in adversity. They would be sharers of his kingdom,
not of his Passion, of his Crown, not of his Cross. But you my soul, so follow
the Nazarite, as to run after the sweet odor of his Virtues; and follow him
also Crucified, for that by his Cross, and not otherwise, you must pass to his
Crown.

A summary of the Virtues which Christ exercised in his Infancy.
HAving considered the Mysteries of Christ's Infancy, it will not be amiss to
cast an eye back, and reflect upon the admirable examples of Virtue, which he
gave us therein.

1. Of Contempt of the World. He would be born secretly, in the night, without
any pomp or attendants, unknown to all. Being born, he would be visited by
none of his country but by poor silly shepherds; in the Temple he chose to be
manifested by two mean and obscure persons, Simeon and Anna; and lived
afterward obscurely in banishment, refusing and contemning all the enjoyments
of this World.

2. Of Humility. From the God of infinite Majesty become a helpless Infant in
his birth; an outcast in Bethleem; a companion of beasts in a stable; a reputed
sinner in his Circumcision; a weak worm and fugitive in his flight into Egypt.
I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, Psa. 21.7.
and outcast of the people.

3. Of Poverty. For you he was made poor, 2 Cor. 8.9.
whereas he was rich: scarce admitting necessaries, and in what he had, ever
choosing the meanest and worst: a stable for his house, a manger for his cradle,
straw for his bed, course swathing clouts for his garments, a poor Virgin for
his Mother, a needy Carpenter for his reputed father. Make use of all this by
imitation, That by bis poverty you may be rich. Ibid. Phil. 2.8.


4. Of Obedience. He humbled himself made obedient etc. His birth in Bethleem
was an actual exercise of Obedience to Cesars edict, though to his extreme
great inconvenience. He would observe the general Laws of Circumcision,
Presentation etc. Though unconcerned therein; and in all things obeyed his
parents.

5. Of Patience. Allthough by right of his Divinity he was impassible, and by
merit of his Innocence unpunishable, yet would he in that tender age suffer
cold, hunger, infirmity, and want, the knife and wound of Circumcision, the
hardships of traveling, the affliction of banishment; besides the other common
miseries of Infancy, whereof he was most sensible, as having the perfect use of
reason.

6. Of love and Charity, both toward God and Man; directing all that he did
and suffered, to his honor and our good: He shed tears, and blood also in his
Circumcision, not for himself, as other Children, but to bewail the offense of
God, and our sins. He took upon him our infirmities and miseries, not by
constraint, or necessity, but out of pure love both to satisfy for us, and to
teach us by his own example all manner of Virtue. Return therefore love for
love. Learn to contemn the world, to be humble and obedient, to suffer
willingly want and hardships, and all this for the love of God and your
Neighbor.

Save me O God, because waters are entered into* my Soul. Psa. 68.1.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Peace and Tranquillity of the Soul.
Mat. 8.23.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Ghospel. How Christ allayed the tempest
at Sea, etc. Our soul is in this life as in a tumultuous Sea, tossed with many
storms and tempests, partly from the raging winds of temptations raised by
the malignant spirits, partly also from the swelling waves of our own passions
and concupiscences, which unless they be kept under will certainly sink us to
the bottom of perdition. Isa. 57.20.
The Impious (says the Prophet) are as it were the raging sea, which cannot be
quiet, etc. O how many famous men being swallowed up in it, Exo. 15.5.
are sunk into the bottom like a stone?

Ps. 88.10.
Consider 2. There is no other remedy against these Tempests then the protection
of God. Thou rulest over the power of the Sea, and the moving of the waves
thereof thou do mitigate. For he is the Peace and Tranquillity of the soul,
appeasing its turbulent motions at his pleasure: Mat. sup.
for to day he commanded the winds and the Sea, and there ensued a great calm.
The like he will do to you, at his coming in the Holy Eucharist, if you be
rightly disposed.

Mat. 14.31.
Consider 3. God often permits us to be tossed with the waves of troubles,
and temptations, while he seems to sleep; so to try our constancy, and
increase our Crown of glory. Besides, he is much pleased with the confidence we
put in him in such like dangers: Whence he reprehended S. Peter for his
diffidence, saying. O thou little of faith, why did thou doubt? See therefore
with what passions you are most disordered; and coming with great confidence to
the Holy Eucharist cry out with the Apostles, Mat. 8.25. Psa. 68.16.
Lord save us, we perish, or with David let not the Tempest of water drown me,
nor the depth swallow me.

Luc. 2.41.
Of Christ's going up to the Temple, etc. Part. 1.
COnsider 1. It was a law among the Jews that all of the Male kind should
thrice in the year appear before our Lord at Jerusalem. Hence S. Joseph and
the blessed Virgin also went; He in obedience to the Law, she out of devotion
to the house of God. Christ went up also with them, both to glorify his
Eternal father, and to give solemn thanks for all benefits received, as well
general as particular, for which end or cause that Law was instituted. Learn
willingly to visit the house of God, as often as you may, and to observe
exactly the Laws or rules of the place where you live.

Consider 2. His Parents went every year unto Jerusalem, etc. according to
the custom of the festival day; to teach you Constancy and Perseverance in good
works. Besides, allthough they had a good custom of going, yet they did it not
merely for custom sake, but with devotion and spirit; which we ought greatly
to observe in all matters of Religion, and chiefly in frequenting the Holy
Sacraments.

Consider. 3. When they returned, the Child Jesus remained in Jerusalem. Our
blessed Lord would leave his parents for a time; to give us example of
renouncing flesh and blood, where the service and honor of God is concerned.
Whence, afterward he pronounced, Mat. 10.37
He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me. All carnal
friends are to be left for God, neither are they to be consulted withal in
this point, much less to be heard or followed, if they prove contrary. Whence
is that renowned saying of S. Jerome. Hieron, apud. Bern. Ep. 351.
Trample over your father, trample over your mother, and with dry checkes fly
away to the standard of the Cross.

Of Christ's going up to the Temple, etc. Part. 2.
COnsider 1. What Christ did those three days. It is probable he remained all
that time in the Temple, wholly taken up in divine things, Barrad. Tom. 1.
employing himself in prayer, and conversing with the Doctors. He lay upon the
ground, lived without any other food, then what was very sparing, and that
perhaps got by begging (as some are of opinion) out of his great love to
poverty; so as to fulfill that of the Prophet, I am a beggar and poor, Psa.
39.18.
our Lord is careful of me.

Consider 2. How he behaved himself among the Doctors. Ponder 1. The Modesty of
his countenance, words, and actions, wherewith the Doctors were so much taken,
as to admit him into their company, and conversation. 2. His Humility in asking
questions, and harkering to their answers, as a learner, not as a teacher,
although he were the Wisdom of God himself. 3. His Prudence in the questions,
and answers he made, even to the astonishment of them all. 4. His Zeal
wherewith he acted all purely for the glory of God, not out of vain
ostentation. How contrary do most Scholars now a days, who with pride and
arrogance boast of, and foolishly blab out, what they know. See whither you be
not one of them.

Ps. 37.22.
Consider 3. How his good parents grieve for the loss of their son. Ponder 1.
Their Patience; for their sorrow was such that it disturbed not the quiet and
peace of their minds. 2. Their Humility, in ascribing it to their own fault,
whereas there was none on their part. 3. Their care in seeking after him with
sorrow and love. 4. The Prayer they made that whole night, begging ernestly of
God the return of the Child. It often happens that we lose Christ, in the day
time of prosperity, and that we come not to take notice of it till the night of
tribulation. Beg of your Lord not to leave you, say with the Prophet Forsake
me not O Lord, my God, depart not from me.

Christ is sought for by his Parents. Luc. 2.45.

Cant. 1.7.
COnsider 1. The great care of the B. Virgin and S. Joseph in seeking after
their son, who appeared not all that first night of their journey. They
returned into Jerusalem seeking him; Leaving no place either in the way, or
City unsearched, if so perhaps they might find him out, whom their hearts
loved so entirely. The B. Virgin might probably say that of the Canticles, Show
me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou lie in the
midday, or heat and height of my affliction. See with what fervor you ought to
seek after your Lord, as often as you have lost either his personal presence
with you, by Mortal sin, or his most gracious familiarity, by Tepidity.

Consider 2. Christ could not be found among his kindred and acquaintance; that
you might learn to quit your self of all inordinat affection toward your
kindred, country, and friends, if you desire to enjoy the company of Jesus.
Bern.
For as S. Bernard elegantly says, How shall I find you (good Jesus) among my
kindred, who could not be found among your own?

Cant. 3.1. and 2.
Consider 3. Neither yet is he found in some pleasant field, nor in the Market
place, nor common Inn. Nor did the spouse in the Canticles find her beloved in
the bed of ease and pleasures, nor in the streets and high ways of
distractions. He was sound at last in the Temple amongst the Doctors. Seek our
Lord therefore in the Church, and by prayer; and if you find him not the first
or second night, persever still in seeking after him, for as the Wise man says
of Wisdom, Sap. 6.1^.
He is easily seen of them that love him, and is found of them that seek him.

Luc. sup,
Christ is found by his Parents.
COnsider 1. And it came to pass after three days they found him in the
Temple. Behold the B. Virgin entering into the Temple, and think with what joy
her very bowels were filled, when she saw her Son, who was the very light of
her eyes; yet she did not thrust herself into the assembly, nor vainly boast
herself as Mother of such a Son, but silently and modestly waited the end. Do
you the like in such occasions.

Mat. 27.4^ Luc. sup.
Consider 2. The Mothers words; Son why have thou so done to us? This was not a
complaint, but an amorous expression of her grief, such as was that of Christ
to his Father, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Behold thy father and
I, etc. She honors her spouse in calling him father, whereas he was but
foster-father to the Child; she prefers him before herself by naming him in
the first place, that you might learn to prefer others before your self.
Sorrowing did seek thee. And therefore they found him; Ps. 125.5.
for They that s^^ in tears, shall reap in joyfulnesse.

Consider 3. The Child's answer. Did you not know that I must be about those
things which are my fathers? A true golden sentence, and worthy to be ever born
in mind; teaching you to prefer the service of God before other affairs, or
concern whatsoever. Examine your self, whither you be wholly taken up in those
things that are of your heavenly father, or rather in toys, in things of this
world, in self concerns, in affairs opposite to Heaven, and contrary to your
vocation.

Of Christ's Return to Nazareth, and of his Obedience to his Parents. Luc. 2.51.
Part. I.
COnsider 1. Christ having now performed the will of his Eternal father,
notwithstanding his great love to solitude, prayer, and the immediate worship
of God in the Temple, Weat down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was
subject to them: To teach us by his own example, that God expects not the
highest and most spiritual actions from all, and at all times; but requires
rather that we condescend to others, and conform our life in the exterior to
the condition of our calling, performing the proper and ordinary actions
thereof with perfection. Think how Christ related to his B. Mother by the way
what passed between him and the Doctors. And his Mother kept all these words in
her heart. Do you likewise keep the word of God in your heart, that it may
keep you.

Consider 2. The admirable example of Obedience which Christ vouchsafed to
give, and declare in these words. And was subject to them. Bern. ser. 2. super
Missus
Ponder with S. Bernard. Who? to whom? God to Men; God to whom the Angels are
subject, whom the Principalitys and Powers obey, was subject to Mary, etc. And
in what things? In all, even in the meanest and vilest offices. Id. in Cantser.
19. Idem sup. Missus.
The word and Wisdom of God despised not a Carpenter and a Woman.

Consider 3. With what good reason the same saint cries out, Learn O man to
obey, Earth learn to be subject, learn dust to submit. Be ashamed proud ashes;
God humbles himself, and do you exalt yourself? God submits himself to men,
and do you seek to domineer, and prefer yourself before your maker? If being
man yourself, you scorn to follow the example of man, surely it will not be
beneath you to follow your Creator.

Of Christ's Obedience to his Parents. Part. 2.
1 Reg. 15.22.
COnsider 1. That you may be the more excited to imitate this admirable example
of Obedience in Christ, toward Superiors, Governors, and Directours under
whom God has already, or shall hereafter place you; Consider the many
advantages that accompany Obedience. And first, nothing more acceptable can be
offered to God. God, indeed, is pacifyed with Victimes, and Sacrifice, as the
chiefest act of Religion, and worship, that man can exercise; and yet he
assures us, that Obedience is more grateful unto him. Better is Obedience
then Victimes (says he by his Prophet) and to harken, rather then to offer the
f^t of ramms. And with good reason (says S. Gregory) for that in Sacrifice the
flesh of an other, but by Odedience ou^ own will is killed, and the whole man
offered in Sacrifice.

Pro. 12.15
Consider 2. There is no safer way to Heaven: for, as the holy Saints teach us,
there is nothing more dangerous in a spiritual life, then to be ones own guide,
and to follow his own judgment, whence S. Bernard says excellently well. He
that is his own Master, has a fool for his Scholar; for (as Solomon says) The
way of a fool is right in his eyes, but he that is wise, hears counsels.

August.
Consider 3. In this one Virtue are included all others; whence by the Holy
Fathers it is called the Mother and Guardian of other Virtues: for he that is
Obedient, is also humble, patient, meek, charitable, continent, and Master of
himself, for, (as the Wise man says) An obedient man shall speak Victory.
Pro. 21.28
Procure therefore to be well affected to this Virtue, and to exercise it when
occasion is, in imitation of Christ.

Behold I sow my Law in you and it shall bring fourth fruit in you. 4 Esd. 9.31
Mat. 13.24
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the good seed of our Soul.
Zach. 9.17.
COnsider 1. What is said to day in the Ghospel. The Kingdom of Heaven is
resembled to a man that sowed good seed in his field. Ponder therefore how your
soul is a field, capable both of good and bad seed; and that God does cast
into it many good seeds, of holy Inspirations, and pious affections, by good
books, Preachers, Directours, etc. But the choicest seed of all is his own
precious body, which he sows in your soul by the Eucharist; for this is the
corn of the Elect, and the seed that yields fruit of eternal life.

Consider 2. The soil of your soul, of itself, is fruitless, and barren,
bringing forth nothing but thorns and briars, and subject to be overgrown with
cockle, which resembling the good seed of Virtues, do fill up, and cosen the
soul with vain hopes of fruit; and in harvest time, that is, in the later
judgment, are cast into the fire. Cleanse therefore your soul carefully from
the weeds and briars of Vice, with the harrow of Mortification; Separate the
cockle from the pure wheat, true Virtue from that which is false, and
counterfeit; that the seed of the heavenly sower may not be choked up within
you.

Heb. 6.7. etc.
Consider 3. How seriously you ought to labor, to the end that by means of so
much sowing, and frequent receiving the Sacraments, you may yield fruit,
answerably, lest otherwise the heavenly husbandman provoked to indignation
condemn you to the fire. For the earth (says the Apostle) drinking the rain
often coming upon it, and bringing forth grass commodious for them by whom it
is tilled, receives blessing of God; but bringing forth thorns and briars, it
is reprobate, and very near a curse, whose end is to be burnt.

Luc. 2.52.
Of Christ's growing in Age and Wisdom, etc. Part I.
COnsider 1. And Jesus proceeded in Wisdom, and age, and grace, with God and
men. Christ from his first conception had all fullness of Grace, Wisdom, and
all manner of Virtue; but he proceeded still forward in them, to the outward
appearance, accommodating his actions and discourses sutably to his age; that
you might learn to conform your self to the time and place you are in, and to
make continual progress in Virtue.

Luc. 9.62.
Consider 2. There are diverse ways both of profiting, and of failing in a
spiritual life. First, some after they have begun well, give back through
Inconstancy; and these our Lord condemns when he says, No man putting his
hand to the plough, and looking back, is apt for the Kingdom of God; and
bids us remember Lot's wife who was turned into a pillar of Salt, that
others might be the wiser by her misfortune.

Apoc. 2.4.
Consider 3. Others in their progress, grow remiss in fervor and use of those
means whereby they might profit, and therefore are in danger of falling. To
such Christ speaks in the Apocalypse. I have against thee a few things,
because thou have left thy first charity: Others again, begin and go on with
a slow pace; and although outwardly there appear no defect, yet for the most
part there is a real decay within. Finally others when they have once begun
well, Ps. 83.6.
go on cheerfully, disposing ascension in their hearts, etc. From one Virtue
to another. See in what class you are, or would wish to be, and mend your pace
toward gaining the prize.

Luc. 2.52.
Of Christ's growing in Age, Wisdom, etc. Part 2.
COnsider 1. Jesus proceeded in Wisdom and age and grace with God, and Men
(says the Evangeast.) We must therefore join both together, and avoid two
extremes: Wherefore ponder how some there are, whose care only it is to carry a
fair outside in the eyes of men, and do little regard their own true interior
profit, in the sight of God, and their own conscience. So did the Pharisees, of
whom Christ, Mat. 6.16.
They disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast, Amen I say
to you that they have received their reward. See whither you do your actions
so; for example, frequenting the Sacraments, hearing Mass, and the like, only
for human respects, and that you might not seem indevout: And see you mend.

Romans 10.2
Consider 2. Others there are on the contrary, who have no regard to the
edification of their Neighbor, in what they do out of fervor, having sometimes
an over great, and indiscreet Zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, as
the Apostle says. And these, the same Apostle admonishes to be providing good
things, not only before God, Romans 12.17.
but also before Men.

Mat. 5.17.
Consider 3. Lastly, Others join both together, and that in due manner,
according to the example of Christ, who said, So let your light shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. Run over all your actions in particular, and see what you are wont to
do only to please men, what again to please God alone, though it be with the
offense and disedification of others; and endeavor in all things to please God
by a right intention, and to edify men by good example.

Of the Necessity which all have of profiting in Virtue. Part 1.
COnsider 1. All that are disciples of Christ must make continual progress in
spirit. 1. Because not to go forwards in the way of God, as the Saints do
teach, is to go backwards. For as a boat cannot keep its ground in a swift
river, but must necessarily be carried down ward by force of the stream, unless
it be born upward by means of oars; so unless you go continually on
struggling with main force against the impu^se of nature, you will certainly by
force thereof be cast back, for as S. Bernard says Not to gain, doubtless is
to lose ground, Ber. Ep. 341
whence you will come to fall at last into the hands of your enemies, whom you
desire to escape.

Mat. 5.48.
Consider 2. Because such is the will of God, who will have us to be pure and
holy in his sight without spot or wrinckle. Be you perfect therefore (says
Christ) as also your Heavenly Father is perfect. No man becomes eminent all on
a sudden: Let every one therefore seek to perfect himself by degrees, that he
may at last arrive to the top of perfection.

S. Bern.
Consider 3. Because so it becomes a disciple of Christ to do. Whence S.
Bernard elegantly says The scholar that profits, is a glory to his Master;
Whosoever therefore profits not in Christ's school, is unworthy to have him for
his Master. What a shame would it be for one after seven years study of
Philosophy and Divinity, to have profited nothing, and to end his course no
better a scholar then he began? Much more ought you to be ashamed, if (which
God forbid) you become worse, more remiss in prayer, more given to detraction,
and a greater lover of your self and your own ease and satisfaction, then when
you first entered the school of Virtue. Endeavor therefore continually to
better your self.

Of the Necessity which all have of profiting in Virtue. Part 2.
Apoc. 2.5.
COnsider 1. The Damages which the neglect of advancing in spirit does bring:
for first it provokes God to wrath: Therefore in the Apocalypse it is said to
the Bishop who had done many good works, but had left his first Charity or
fervor, Be mindful from whence thou art fallen, etc. And do the first works:
But if not, I come to thee, and will move thy candlestick out of his place. God
perchance has designed you for a candlestick to give light to many: Have a
care therefore he do not remove you, for leaving your first Charity, or fervor
of devotion.

Pro. 10.4.
Consider 2. How the aforesaid neglect depriveth us of great spiritual gains,
and rewards. The slothful hand has wrought poverty says the Wiseman. O what
glory should we purchase in Heaven, if we were allways intent upon our
spiritual profit, and took hold of all occasions of exercising Virtue? Think
what care and labor worldly Merchants take to heap up money, which is to
perish and moulder away; and you that are a Merchant of Heaven, neglect
everlasting treasures, that are freely offered unto you.

Mat. 25.28.30.
Consider 3. How this same neglect disposes us to a final decay, and absolute
breaking; for, of the servant that neglected to increase the stock or talent
which he received, it was said, take ye away therefore the talent from him,
etc. And the unprofitable servant cast ye out into the utter darkness, etc.
Excite your self therefore to go on cheerfully: Examen wherein you are wont to
be most at a stand, and resolve to go through with courage. You have Christ for
your Captain, and for your reward life everlasting.

Of Christ's life from the twelfth to the thirtith year of his age. Part 1.
COnsider 1. There is nothing exstant in the Ghospel, of Christ's life, from the
twelfth to the thirtith year of his age, but of his Obedience to his parents,
and progress in Virtue, as we have seen above; that you may make the greater
account of them.

Consider 2. It seems certain that Christ spent great part of that time in
most high contemplation, and conversing with his heavenly father; for he that
was afterward to say of Mary Magdalen, that she had chosen the better part, in
respect of her love and exercise of contemplation, must needs practice it
himself much more perfectly. And if David seven times a day did utter praise to
God, and besides, did rise at midnight to confess unto him, Ps. 118.164. Item
v. 62.
how much more did Christ? Learn hence to give your self to prayer, both for
your own and your neighbors good; and that the frequent exercise thereof, and
familiar conversation with God, are prime, and necessary dutys of a Christian.

Jo. 7.15. Mar. 3.21.
Consider 3. All that time Christ concealed his Wisdom, so that he was held
unlearned by all; whence afterward for a wonder, they said How does this man
know letters, whereas he has not learned? Nay, they said that he was become
mad, for that he spoke, and wrought such strange things, as could not be
expected from him; Love to be unknown, and of no account. Believe me (said one)
He has lived well that has layn well hid. Ovid.
Be not too forward to vent your knowledge, though you take your self to be
more knowing then others. Let not the Wise man glory in his wisdom, Jer. 9.23.
etc. But he that glories, let him glory in this to understand and know me.

Of Christ's life from the twelfth to the thirtith year of his age. Part. 2.
Mar. 6.3.
COnsider 1. As to the exterior manner of living, it is probable Christ our Lord
practiced the Carpenter's trade, also after S. Joseph's death; whence the Jews
said of him, Is not this the Carpenter, the son of Mary? Imagine your self
therefore to see the Word of God, and Lord of Heaven handling his hatcher, and
plainer; hewing, sawing, plaining, and joining boards and other timber
together; and with astonishment think Who? What? Where? etc. And how true that
saying is, His work is strange from him. If. 28.21.


Genesis 3.19.
Consider 2. Christ did this, first out of love to Humility, for he that had
taken upon him other miseries of human nature, and had freely submitted himself
to the general malediction of Death, would also submit himself to the other
malediction of toil and labor, wherein it was said to Adam In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread. Secondly he did it to teach us by his example to
shun idleness the fountain and origin of all evil. See therefore you imitate
him, Eccli. 33.29.
for idleness (as the wise man says) has taught much naughtiness.

Consider 3. What singular profit the B. Virgin made all that time, of so long
and familiar conversation with her son. Imagine what discourses they hold one
with another, allways of God, and of divine matters. See the Virgin standing in
amaze, and beholding her son, while he out of love to humility sweepeth the
house, washes the pots, makes the fire, and dresseth meat for his mother, and
the like. Romans 11.33.
O depth of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of God! Reflect upon
every par^icular, and draw something out of all for your own benefit, etc.

The Maana was as it were the seed of Coriander. Number. 11.7
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as a Grain of Mustardseed.
Mat. 13.31
COnsider 1. What is said to day in the Ghospel. The Kingdom of Heaven is like
to a Mustardseed, etc. To wit, that Christ was the Mustardseed, being indeed,
in outward appearance, the least of all men, Ps. 21.7.
according to what he says of himself, I am a worm, and no man; but in Virtue
and efficacy, greater then the Angels themselves: and this is verified of him
most of all in the Eucharist: For, as to sense, what is of less show then a
mors^ll of bread? but what more divine then the Holy Eucharist, as to the
Virtue and excellency it contains with in it?

S. Tho. Op^s^. 58. (...) 21.
Consider 2. The many admirable Virtues of this Eucharistical grain. S. Thomas
recounteth twelve, like to the twelve fruits of the tree of life, of which we
read in the Apocalypse. 1. It drives the Devil from us. 2. It al^ayeth the heat
of Concupi cence. Apoc. 22.2
3. It clearseth the heart from sin. 4. It appeaseth the wrath of God. 5. It
enlightneth the understanding. 6. It inflameth the will. 7. It spiritually
delights the memory. 8. It confirms the whole man in good. 9. It freeth
from everlasting death. 10. It multiplyeth our merits. 11. It brings us to
Paradise. 12. It raises the body to life. How great is the multitude of thy
sweetness O Lord, Ps. 30.20.
which thou have hid for them that fear thee?

Consider 3. The Mustardseed discovers not its Vertve, unless it be bruised;
but being well bruised, or ground, it discloseth its heat and relish. In the
same manner, you must before hand by frequent meditating, and serious
consideration, beat upon, and bruise this divine seed of the Eucharist;
otherwise you will not understand its Virtue. Wherefore ruminate it well,
pondering its secret and hidden Virtues, and withal think what disposition it
requires in you: and then, to your great benefit you will perceive what a
sovereign heat and relish it has.

[If there are six Weeks after Epiphany, then in the sixth repeat the
Meditations of the fifth; For by reason it seldom falls out that there are so
many weeks, it seemed needless to provide distinct Meditations for the sixth
Week: Or else make the Meditations of the four and twentieth Week after Pentecost
of the Parables which that year are to be left out.]

Things to be noted concerning the Meditations of our Lords Passion.
THe Holy Church from Septuagesme leaves off her Allelluias and Canticles of
Joy, and disposes us to mourning, and the memory of our Lords Passion; for
therefore is this Sunday called Septuagesme (says Rupertus) because it
begins the seventh week before Passion Sunday. Wherefore it has seemed good
from thence to enter into the Meditations of the Passion, wherein, though many
affections may be exercised for the Colloquies, as appears by what has been
said in the Preface, yet chiefly seven are noted by some as most proper to this
Subject; the which because we can not with our intended brevity insert in every
Meditation, we have thought good to touch them briefly in this place. The
Affections are these, Admiration, Compassion, Compunction, Love, Hope,
Thanksgiving, Imitation.

1. Admire in each Mystery the dignity of the Person that suffers, and the
greatness of the pains, which he freely undergoeth. Is. 63.1.2.
Who is this that comes from Edom with died garments from Bosra? Why then is
thy clothing red, and thy garments as theirs that tread in the Wine Press?

2. Condole with him, as Childeren do with their Parents in their adversities,
Brothers with one another, Spouses with their beloved, Servants with their
Masters; for Christ is as much to you as all these. 2. Reg. 18.33.
Who would grant me that I might dye for thee, Absalom my son, my son Absalom?

3. Be confounded, and full of Compunction, for that your sins are cause of all
his Sufferings; for from whom would not that draw tears, which from Christ
drew so much blood? Psa. 50.5.
I do know mine Iniquity, and my sin is before me always.

4. Love him that is so loving to you, and suffers so much for your sake.
Lord (said S. Ambross) I owe more to your injuries for my redemption, Ambr. l.
1. in Luc.
then to your works for my creation.

5. Hope, and promise your self all good that your heart can wish for, for he
that has given himself, How will he not also give us all things? Romans 8.32.


6. Give him every where thanks for having suffered so much for you, Chryso.
hom. 26. in Mat.
The best keeper of benefits (says S. Chrysostom) is a faithful Memory of
them, and constant profession of Gratitude.

7. Lastly Imitate your Lord and Captain, in sufferings, reproaches, and
injuries. Has he suffered so much for you? and what have you, or what will you
suffer for him? Christ suffered for us (says S. Peter) leaving you an example
that you may follow his steps.

Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat the fruit of his Apple trees.
Cant. 5.1.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Master of the Vineyard of your Soul.
Mat. 20.1.
COnsider 1. Your soul, and the soul of every man, is a particular Vineyard
belonging to the great Householder, of whom we read to day in the Ghospel, etc.
Make account therefore that he will come to day to visit your soul his
Vineyard, to gather some fruit out of it. Imagine that he says with the spouse
in the Canticles. Cant. 7.12.
Let us rise early to the Vineyards, let us set if the Vineyard flourish, if the
flowers be ready to bring forth fruits.

Jer. 2.21.
Consider 2. This divine householder has omitted nothing on his part, that
might make you a fruitful Vineyard. I planted thee (says he by his Prophet) an
elect Vineyard, all true seed, etc. He has sowed within you many seeds of true
piety; he has hedged you in with holy Laws, he has provided you with the
benefit of the Holy Sacraments, as so many Presses and Conduits of his Grace.
Isa. 5.4. etc.
Finally what is there that I ought to do more to my Vineyard (says he
himself) and ba^^ not done to it? Procure therefore to yield him ripe fruit.
See whither he may not say of your Vineyard I looked it should yield grapes,
and it has yielded wild grapes, that is, sour and unpleasant grapes; for then
he will power out upon it that heavy curse that follows. I will lay it wast,
it shall not be pruned, and it shall not be dug; and briars and thorns shall
overgrow it, and I will command the clouds that they rain no shower upon it,
Which his infinite goodness avert.

Cant. 8.12. Ps. 1.3.
Consider 3. You must therefore Husband your Vineyard carefully against his
coming; Prime all superfluities by Mortification: Digg, and dive deeply into
your soul by a profound knowledge of your self: Root out by contrary acts the
briars of vicious habits, and by the tears of compunction water the dry
affections of your heart: Lastly, let your Vineyard be before you, by
continually looking to it, And it will give its fruit i^ its time.

Christ inviteth all men to contemplate his Passion.
Ps. 68.21.
COnsider 1. Christ with all reason does complain, that having suffered so many,
and so great pains and torments for man, man should be so ungrateful, as not
vouchsafe to think of them. I expected somebody that would be sorry together
with me, and there was none, and that would comfort me, and I found not.
Therefore Isay, The Just peri heth, Ps. 57.1.
and there is none that considers in his heart. Think what it is to consider
in ones heart, to wi^, with compassion, and compunction.

Thren. 1.12.
Consider 2. Nothing can we do more acceptable to Christ, then often to
meditate on his passion, for which cause he lovingly inviteth all unto it, by
his Prophet. O all ye that pass by the way, attend, and see if, there be sorrow
like to my sorrow: and in another place, Thren. 3.19.
Rememb^r my poverty etc, the wormwood and the g^ill. Think with yourself, if
you had lost but an arm or a foot^ indefence of your friend, might you not
justly, expect that he should be ever mindful of the favor? And what is that
to what Christ has suffered for you?

Thren. 3.20.
Consider 3. Offer therefore your self to Christ as an attentive spectator of
his Sufferings, and as a mindful and grateful partaker of his benefits. Say
with the same Prophet. Remembering I will be mindful and my soul shall
languish in me. Recording this thing in my heart, therefore I will hope. And
with reason may you hope; seeing he suffered to the end that he might be our
Advocat, and that he might wash away our sins with his precious blood; finally,
seeing that even upon the Cross he granted Salvation, and his Kingdom of Heaven
to the Thief.

Of Christ's Passion in General. Who Suffers?
THat you may be the better disposed to revolve the whole history of the
Passion, Consider first its general Circumstances, and in the first place. Who
it is that Suffers.

1. He that suffers is the Immacular Lamb of God Who did no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22.
(as S. Peter says) neither was guile found in his mouth. The Holy of Holies,
who received the divine spirit beyond measure; and one, whom his own Crucifiers
confessed to be Just, Mat. 27.54
and the Son of God.

2. He suffers, who had bestowed himself wholly for the good of others. Act.
10.39
Doing good, and healing all that werre oppressed of the Devil. Wherefore he
did not only not deserve those Sufferings, but on the contrary, all respect and
honor was due to him; so that he might justly complain with David They repayed
me evil things for good. Learn to suffer evil at their hands, Ps. 34.12.
from whom you have deserved kindness and gratitude.

3. He that suffers is the great lover of mankind, who is become all things
to us! for he is our Father, and our brother; He is our Master, Physician,
Spouse, Pastor, Cretour, Redeemer, and Benefactour. If therefore the Son ought
to be sensible of his Fathers Sufferings, the spouse of her beloveds; See that
you have compassion of him, who is your Father, Spouse, and Redeemer; and bear
his marks, if not in your flesh, as the Apostle, at least in your heart and
mind. Think what you may do or suffer, in return, for his sake.

Of Christ's Passion in General, How much he Suffers?
Consider 1. He suffers in all kinds. 1. In external goods, for he was
despoiled of all things, stripped of his clothes to the very skin, and hanged
naked on the Cross before all the world. 2. In his honor, for that all manner
of reproach and slander was cast upon him. 3. In fame, being variously traduced
in matters belonging to all sorts of Virtues, held for a Samaritan, and
possessed of the Devil, a Glutton and lover of Wine, a Blasphemer, and Seducer.
4. In point of knowledge, he was esteemed as one without litterature or
learning, a madman, and fool. 5. As for Miracles, he was accounted an
Impostor, and Inchanter; 6. He suffered in his friends, being forsaken by them
all.

Consider 2. How much he suffered in his body. Go through all his senses. His
eyes are defiled with spittle, and filled with blood falling down from his
sacred head, they were also tormented to see the scornful gestures, and
mockeries of them that reviled him. His cares were wounded with rough pulls and
pinches, but much more with blasphemies against God, and unjust accusations
brought against himself. His smell annoyed with the stench of Calvary; His
taste tormented with vehement thirst, and bitter drench of Vinegar and gall.
Lastly the sense of feeling over all the parts of his body, by stripes, thorns
and nails; so that it was most truly said of him, Js. 1.6.
from the sole of the foot to the top of the head there is no health.

Consider. 3. And add to these the Interior Anguishes of his mind; as that of
his Agony in the Garden, that other of his being left by his Father on the
Cross, and others such like. Be ashamed, that you cannot so much as endure the
cold of winter, or heat of Summer, and much less suffer patiently some small
sickness; Wish that you may come to suffer any thing, and even die for Christ.

Of Christ's Passion in General.
From whom he suffers?
COnsider 1. He suffers from all sorts of Men, from the highest and the
lowest, from the Sacred, and the profane; being dragged about the streets by
the scum of the people, forsaken by his friends, accused by the Priests, made a
laughing stock by the Soldiers, condemned in the High Priests Council,
ignominiously treated in the Kings Court, and sentenced to death at the
Presidents Tribunal. Learn hence to contemn the judgments of men, who were so
highly unjust and injurious to Christ.

Jo. 15.25.
Consider 2. He suffered from those, whom he came to save, and to whom he had
been singularly beneficial, all the time of his preaching; so that he might
truly say That they hated him gratis (for nothing.) And which is yet more, he
suffered himself to be betrayed by his own disciple, to give us example of
Parience in the like failings of friends. For the man also of my peace, Ps.
40.10.
in whom I hoped etc Has greatly trodden me ^^d^r foot.

Luc. 22.53.
Consider 3. How he was exposed, and left to the Tyranny of the Devil, according
to that of S. Luke. This is your hour, and the power of darkness. He was given
over to Satan, not as Job was, with that restriction Yet save his life, but
absolutely, Job. 2.6.
and even to death it self. Have compassion toward your Lord thus forsaken by
his friends, and left to the mercy of his enemies; and if at any time it be
your fortune to experience the like mockeries of men, Mat. 10.24
remember that the Diciple is not to be above his Master.

Of Christ's Passion in General.
For whom he Suffers?
COnsider 1. He suffers not for himself, being incapable of doing any thing
that might deserve punishment, but for all men; to reconcile them to his
Eternal Father, and to open unto them all (as much as lay in him) the gates of
Heaven. And because the whole man was wounded, he would suffer in every kind,
that so he might apply proper remedies to every vice. Therefore against our
Covetousness he opposed his Nakedness, his Reproaches against our Pride, his
Torments against our Luxury, his vinegar and Gall against our Gluttony, and so
of the rest.

Romans 5.8.10.
Consider 2. More particularly how he suffered also for his Enemies, that is,
for all Sinners. God commends his charity in us, because when at yet we were
Sinners, Christ died for us, etc. And when we were enemies, we were reconciled
to God by the death of his Son. And which is more, he prayed for his own
Executioners, Romans 12.21.
that you might learn to overcome in good the evil.

Gal. 2.20. Ps. 115.3.
Consider 3. He suffered for all, so that he offered to his Eternal Father his
Sufferings for every one in particular. Wherefore take them to your self, and
use them as your own, saying with S. Paul, Who loved me and delivered himself
for me. Think what return you can make him. What shall I render to our Lord for
all things that he has rendered to me? I will take the chalice of Salvation.
Take therefore the chalice of his Passion, and drink it up, at least
spiritually by contemplation, and you will thereby have made the most proper
and most acceptable return.

Of Christ's Passion in General.
With what affection he suffers?
Luc. 12.50
FIrst with the affection of a most ardent Love, most ernestly beforehand
wishing the hour of his Passion were come, and saying. I have to be baptized
with a baptism, and how am I straightened, till it be dispatched?

2. Of most profuse Liberality; for whereas the least drop of his blood would
have sufficed to redeem the whole world, by reason of the dignity of his
person, he would notwithstanding power out all he had: Ps. 21.15. Ps. 129.7. 1
Pet. 2.23.
As water I am powered out. Because with him (is) plenteous Redemption.

3. Of the greatest meekness. Who when he was reviled, did not revile, when he
suffered, he threatened not, but delivered himself to him that judged him
unjustly; Is. 53.7.
And was led as a sheep to slaughter.

4. Of an Insatiable zeal, thirsting the salvation of all men, which made him
cry out on the Cross I thrist. Jo. 19.28. Ps. 21.6.


5. Of an incomparable Humility making himself the Reproach of men, and outcast
of the people, who notwithstanding was in form of God.

Of extreme Proverty, renouncing all earthly goods whatsoever, even his own
garments, so as to hang naked on the Cross.

7. Of Invincible Patience and Fortitude, in suffering constantly to the end
most grievous torments.

8. Of the perfectest Obedience, being obedient in a matter of the greatest
difficulty, unto death, Phil. 2.8.
even the death of the Cross: And that, not only to his Eternal father, but
also to his bloody Executioners. I have given my body to the strikers, Is. 50.6.
and my cheeks to the pluckers. I have not turned away my face from the
rebukers, and spitters. Look thoroughly into this pattern of all Virtue, and
do according to what you see therein.

I will sow her unto me into the Earth, and will have mercy on her that was
without mercy. Osee. 2.23 Luc. 8.5.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Seed of Eternal Life.
Galat. 6.8.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Ghospel. The sower went forth to sow his
seed, etc. Christ our Lord is both the sower, and seed it self; for he sows
his own precious body under the form of wheat, in the hearts of the faithful,
not unto a corruptible, but an incorruptible harvest, and unto life
everlasting. For, He that sows in the Spirit (says S. Paul) of the Spirit
shall reap life everlasting. Think with your self how much this blessed harvest
is to be wished for.

Consider 2. This divine seed, although in it self it be most fruitful,
notwithstanding, requires the concurrence of a good soil to bring forth
fruit. Wherefore if it fall in the high way, it is trampled upon by the
passengers (as in the Ghospel;) if upon stones, it is dried up to nothing; if
among thorns, it is choked up. See therefore whither your soul be a fit soil,
well cleansed, supple, far from the high way; or rather whither it be not
thorny, stony, full of the cares and occupations of this life hard to receive
heavenly influences, and open to all manner of thoughts, and distractions. But
if it be so, see that you mend your self, and prepare your Soul to receive this
heavenly seed.

Consider 3. This seed, though in a good soil, and in the best heart, does not
yield fruit, but in patience (as Christ says) that you might learn to persever
with patience in expectation of the effect, Luc. sup. 15.
and fruit of this divine grain, and of whatsoever other Visitation of God: and
give not over to cultivate your Soul, for that perhaps you do not perceive
that fruit which you desire. Behold the Husband was expects the precious
fruit of the Earth, patiently bearing, J^c. 5.7.
till he receive the timely and the lateward, (that is, either timely, or later
fruit.) Do you the like, and you will bring forth plenty of excellent fruit.

He fortelleth his Disciples his Passion. Mat. 20. Marc. 10. Luc. 18.

Mat. 20.18
COnsider 1. Behold we go up to Jerusalem, etc. The time being now come, wherein
Christ had decreed from all Eternity to suffer for the redemption of the world,
he went up with his Disciples to Jerusalem, with great cheerfulness and speed;
for he went before them, Mar. 10.32
and they were astonished, and following were afraid. Thus did he hasten to
his death, carried on by the force of his love. You on the contrary are slow in
suffering any thing; He also went before, leading the way; that you might learn
to show first by example, what you would persuade by words.

Mat. sup.
Consider 2. He reveals his Passion to his Disciples. The son of man shall be
delivered to the chief Priests. He had done this before, but now more
expressly. He makes this frequent mention of his Passion, though most bitter
in it self, for that he did continually bear it in mind; and amidst all his
glory in the Transfiguration, he treated of his decease that he should
accomplish in Jerusalem. Luc. 9.31.
Do you endeavor to be piously affected toward the memory of it, that you
may say with the spouse in the Canticles A bundle of Myrrhs my beloved is to
me. Cant. 1.13.


Luc. 18.34
Consider 3. And they understood none of these things. The Apostles were as yet
worldly given, and bent upon honors and preferments. Luc. 22.24.
And there fell also a contention between them, which of them seemed to be
greater. Therefore they understood not the Mystery of the Cross, and what great
good consisted in Humility, and suffering of reproach. Cast you off all these
worldly affections, if you will understand the Mystery of the Cross. Ponder
Christ's severe reprehension of S. Peter, dissuading him from the ignominy of
his Passion. Go after me satan, Mat. 16.23
thou art a scandal unto me, because thou savorest not the things that are of
God, but the things that are of men.

Mat. 21. Luc. 19.
Of Christ's solemn Entrance into Jerusalem before his Passion. Part. 1.
Zachar. 9.9
COnsider 1. Christ drawing near to Jerusalem, sends two of his Disciples to
bring unto him an Ass, upon which he intended to ride into the City. At other
times he used to go on foot to the places where he Preached; now he would be
carried, though not in a Chariot, nor on a Sumptuous horse, but on the back of
a filly Ass; whereby he would manifest to the world that Poverty, Humility,
and Meekness are the proper Ensigns of his Kingdom. Whence the Prophet.
Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion, etc. Behold thy King will come to thee, the
Just and Savior, himself poor, and riding upon an Ass, etc.

Him. Vexilla.
Consider 2. Our Savior would enter after that unusual manner. 1. To show with
what alacrity he went to dye, as if he were going to a Kingdom, as indeed he
was, for on the tree God possessed his reign. 2. To teach us to triumph in the
midst of reproaches and contempts. 3. That the Ignominy of his Passion might be
so much the greater, by how much the greater was his precedent glory. And being
exalted, Ps. 87.16.
(says the Prophet) I am humbled, and troubled.

Mat. 21.15
Consider 3. The Acclamations of the people Hosanna to the Son of David, etc.
Where ponder first, that this cry was of the mean and common sort of people,
not of the rich, or wise men of the world, from whom these mysteries were kept
hidden. Secondly, how different was this acclamation from that wherein soon
after they cried out, Crucify, Luc. 23.21
Crucify him! How inconstant, and deceitful is the favor of the world! which
you notwithstanding do regard and value so much; but if you be wise, God
forbid that you should glory, Gal. 6.14.
saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of Christ's solemn Entrance into Jerusalem, and his Weeping upon the City.
Part 2.
Ps. 61.11.
COnsider 1. Christ in the midst of that Triumph, drawing nearer to the City,
wept for it. 1. To show that he was not, and that we ought not to be,
transported with like honors, when they are done us, but if riches (or
honors) abound, set not your heart upon them. 2. Out of Charity he bewailed
the blindness of the Jews, which he knew would prove to be their ruin. 3. To
give us example of weeping and lamenting in this vale of tears; for we read of
him to have wept several times, but not ever to have laughed; and to have
provnounced them Blessed that mourn. Mat. 5.5.


Luc. 19.42 and 43.
Consider 2. Christ's words upon the City. Because if thou also had known,
etc. Thou would, surely, weep. For the days shall come upon thee, and thy
enemies shall compass thee, etc. Take these words as spoken to your self, for
that if you did but know, and that in this thy day, the things that appertain
to thy peace, and what were to befall you hereafter what temptations, what
miseries, what falls, you would certainly weep, and spend the time you enjoy at
present more profitably. Do it therefore now with all diligence, and fortify
your self so, that you be not hereafter overcome, and cast down by your
spiritual enemies.

Luc. sup.
Consider 3. Christ assigns the cause of the Cities ruin to this Because
thou have not known the time of thy Visitation. How greatly does it import to
know the time wherein God does visit you, by his holy inspirations, by pious
books, etc. exciting you to Virtue, to the contempt of the world and the like?
Endevor therefore to understand the time of your Visitation. Ps. 94.8.
And even in this very day (that is, in this looser time of Shrovetide) if you
shall hear his voice harden not your heart, but go follow him. Betake your
self to prayer, and deplore the general not and folly of men in these days.

Mat. 26. Luc. 22.
Christ is sold by Judas for thirty pieces of Silver.
Ambr. l. 5. in Luc. c. 6.
COnsider 1. Christ could many ways have been delivered up into the hands of the
Jews, but for the greater ignominy would be sold, and that by his own Disciple,
and whom himself made choice of for an Apostle; that we might learn to bear
with false brethren, and that there is no place, or state of life so holy, that
is not in danger of falling. He was not ignorant that it would be held a foul
disgrace to his school; notwithstanding he chose him for an Apostle, for our
instruction; And In that point (as S. Ambrose says) he had rather have his
judgment called in question by us, then his affection.

Mat. 26.14
Consider 2. To what a height of madness the Spirit of Avarice does bring a man.
What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you? Ponder who it is that
is sold. It is the Lord, and God of all things. For how much? for thirty pieces
of Silver, for which scarce any laboring beast or slave can be had: At so easy
a rate is sold the Sovereign of the World, so vilely is he undervalued. By
whom? By his own beloved Disciple. To whom? To his mortal and sworn enemies.
Compassion^^ your Lord, and disdain not at any time to be treated below your
deserts, and quality.

Pro. 10.23
Consider 3. How often you have sold the same Lord for less, while you have
parted with him, for some petty delight, for a sinful thought, for a detracting
word, and the like. Think how many there are, this time of Shro^etide, that do
the same over and overagain, and out of extreme folly and madness, set God to
sale for trifles. A fool works mischief as it were by laughter, Says
Solomon. Look that you be none of them; and endeavor to appease Gods wrath
against them that do so.

Marc. 14. Luc. 22.
Of the Paschal Lamb.
Marc. 14.15.
COnsider 1. Christ, the day before he suffered, to teach us perfect Obedience
to the Laws of God, would eat the Paschal Lamb with his Disciples, sending
before Peter and John (Faith and Charity) to prepare a room, which was a Great
chamber, adorned. Such ought to be your Soul, enlarged with Charity, and
adorned with all manner of Virtue, as often as you entertain Christ in Holy
Communion. Ponder how Christ being sat down with his Disciples said to them,
Luc. 22.15
with desire I have desired to eat this Pasch with you before I suffer. Admire
the excess of his love toward us, longing for the time wherein he was to leave
us his precious body and blood, and to suffer and dye for us. O that you were
so desirous of occasions to do and suffer for him!

Exodus 12.
Consider 2. How religiously Christ observes all the Ceremonies and Rites
ordained by the Law for the eating of the Paschal Lamb; In each of them
reflecting upon himself and his Passion, whereof it was a representative
figure. Christ our Pasch (says the Church) is immolated, In Praef. Pasch.
for he is the true Lamb that takes away the sins of the world. Behold
therefore Christ with his Disciples standing at the table, girded about the
reins, with shoes on feet, and staves in hand, like passengers, eating
speedily, etc. whereby were expressed the vigor of mind and promptness
wherewith he suffered. Exodus 12.11.


Consider 3. Christ beholding the Lamb upon the table, dead, flead, and roasted,
he reflected how himself was to be extended upon the Cross, dead, flead with
whips, and scorched with the heat and rage of his torments. Beholding the same
Lamb cut in pieces, without breaking any of the bones, he considered the
mangling of his own sacred body, and disjoynting of his bones, though without
the breach of any. The have, wherewith they were to eat the Lamb, represented
the hasty fury and rage of his enemies to make him away. The bitter Lettice
called to his mind the Gall, and bitter chalice of his Passion. And the staff
in his hand represented the Cross which he was to embrace, and to be fastened
unto.

Jo. 13.
Of Washing the Disciples feet.
Jo. 13.1. etc.
COnsider 1. After the Paschal Lamb was eaten, Christ intending to institute a
new memorial of himself, in leaving us his precious body and blood to teach us
with what Humility and Purity we ought to come to it, would wash the feet of
his Disciples. Ponder the admirable Charity and Humility of Christ in this
action, expressed unto us in very signal terms by the Evangelist. Jesus
knowing that his hour was come that he should pass out of this world to his
father, whereas he had loved his that were in the world, unto the end he loved
them. And when supper was done, whereas the Devil had now put into the heart of
Judas etc, to betray him, knowing that the father gave him all things into his
hands, and that he came from God, and goes to God, he rises from supper, and
lays aside his garments, and having taken a towel, girded himself. Ponder
each particular.

Consider 2. After that, he put water into a basin, and began to wash the feet
of the Disciples, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.
Behold the God of Heaven cast at the feet of poor fishermen, and performing the
office of the meanest servant, which made S. Peter cry out, Lord, do thou
wash my feet? and again. Thou shall not wash my feet for ever. Ponder Christ's
severe reprehension of this D^sobedience. If I wash thee not, thou shall not
have part with me; and learn, that it is but false virtue, and Humility, that
opposes it self to Obedience.

Consider 3. How Christ also washes Judas his feet, and no doubt, but with
tender expressions of kindness, thereby to mollify his hard heart; but all in
vain. Learn to love your enemies, and to gain them to you by doing good
turns. Take heed of a hard heart: for The Impious when he shall come to the
depth of sins, Prove. 18.3.
contemns; but ignominy and reproach follows him. Ponder and observe those
words of Christ. Jo. sup.
I have given you an example that as I have done to you, so you do also.

Arise, be illuminated Jerusalem, because thy light is come, etc. upon thee
shall our Lord arise. Is. 60.1.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the light of your Soul.
Ps. 39.13.
COnsider 1. And imagine your self to be that blind man in this days Ghospel that
sat by the way begging Luc. 18.35; for you are truly blind in many things, not
distinguishing between black and white, true and false, solid and counterfited
good; nor able to see your own defects; so that you may truly say with the
Propher, Mile Iniquities have overtaken me, and I was not able to see.

Tob. 5.12.
Consider 2. What a sad and discomfortable life it is, to be in continual
darkness, without corporeal light. How much more then to live in spiritual
darkness, and blindness of mind? What manner of joy shall it be to me (said
Toby when he was blind) which sit in darkness, and see not the light of Heaven?
Think with your self, whether you behold the clear light of Heaven, or rather
the dimm and fading light of the Earth, and earthly things. Consider also how
dangerous it is to be in darkness; Jo. 12.35.
for he that waiketh in darkness knows not whither he goes, and is exposed
to a thousand dangers and falls; that you may hence learn rightly to esteem the
benefit of divine light.

Mal. 4.2. Jo. 1.9.
Consider 3. How Christ out Lord is the San of Justice (as the Prophet says)
and the true light which lighteneth every man that comes into this world.
Beseech him therefore, that coming this day into your soul, he would produce
therein the usual effects of light, and open your eyes to see your secret
defects, and to distinguish true and real goods from such as are only
counterfited; and have a care you do not close your eyes, or shut your windows
against this light. Job. 24.13
Job says of sinners They have been rebellious to the light, they have not
known his ways. See you be not rebellious, set open the windows of your heart,
and say with the Prophet Thou do illuminat my lemp, Ps. 17.29.
O Lord. My God ibluminat my darkness.

Mat. 26.26 Mar. 14.22 Luc. 22.19 1 Cor. 11.24.
Of the Institution of the B. Sacrament. Part 1.
Ps. 144.17
COnsider 1. Christ, after he had washed his Disciples feet, sat down again to
table, and intending to leave behind him a singular Memorial of his love
toward us, took bread into his hands, to show that it was the gift of a most
liberal hand. Thou openest thy hand; and fillest every living creature with
blessing. Then He lifted up his eyes to Heaven, to show whence this bread
comes. He gave thanks to his Eternal father for so great a gift be slowed upon
man by his means. He blessed i^, and blessing it transformed it into his own
body; do you also give thanks for being made partaker of the same divine
bread, and beseech him to give you such a blessing as may turn you into another
man.

Consider 2. How the Apostles were astonished, when they heard that Christ
would give them ^^s own body; but they were together illuminated with a
heavenly light, wherewith they believed all things possible to him: That you
might also learn to captivate your understanding in Obedience to faith. See
with what Humility, Reverence, and Devotion, each one communicates, and do
you the like, when you come to the same table. Judas alone in that company
Eats, 1 Cor. 11.29.
and drinks judgment to himself not discerning the body of our Lord.

Consider 3. This do ye for the commemoration of me. Ibid. v. 25.
Ponder Christ's infinite Charity and liberality, whereby he would have this
divine benefit continued throughout all ages; and therein gave power to
Priests, by virtue of his words to consecrate his precious body; which was
never granted to the Angels themselves. Think what a dignity this is; learn to
reverence them, whom God has so highly honored; and to hear their voice, to
which the Eternal word and Wisdom of God himself is so obedient at the Altar.
Be ever grateful, and endeavor to come always worthily to this divine
Mystery.

Of the Institution of the B. Sacrament. Part 2.
COnsider 1. Christ would institute this divine Mystery immediately before his
Passion. 1. To testify the excess of his love toward men, in preparing for
them a heavenly banquet, and inestimable present, even then, when they were
contriving his death. 2. To manifest the desire he had of ever remaining with
us, even corporally; for being now to depart out of the world, he would
notwithstanding leave himself, after a special manner, to abide with us for
ever. 3. To leave us a perpetual Memorial of his Passion, and a living
Sacrifice, (The Sacrifices of the ancient law ceasing by his death) by which
the fruit and virtue of his Passion might be applied to us. 4. To make us the
more sensible of his love, bequeathing himself unto us by his last will and
Testament.

Jo. 6.57.
Consider 2. Christ did institute this Sacrament under the forms of bread and
wine. 1. That so he might the straighter be united with us, becoming meat and
drink to us, penetrating our very bowels, and incorporating himself with us. 2.
To signify that he does work in our Souls what bread and wine does in our
bodies; that is, nourish, conserve, and augment our Spiritual life, so as even
to transform us into himself. He that eats me, the same also shall live by
me. 3. That as bread is made one mass of many grains, and wine one liquor of
many grapes, so by participation of this divine Sacrament, the hearts of the
faithful are made one Spirit; and therefore it is properly called Communion,
or union of many among themselves, and of all with Christ.

Ps. 115.4.
Consider 3. Allthough in each Sacramental form, the entire body and blood of
Christ is contained, without any real Separation of one from the other, yet
Christ would institute the Sacrament in two different forms, the better to put
us in mind of his Passion, and to signify that thereby all his precious blood
was entirely separated from his body; namely by his sweat in the garden, by
whips at the pillar, by the thorns, by the nails, and by the lance on the
Cross. Think what you can return to our Lord for his infinite love toward you,
expressed in this Sacrament; Say with David I will take the Chalice of
Salvation, by grateful remembrance, and compassion, and I will invocate the
name of our Lord.

Of our Lords Sermon after Supper. Part 1.
Jo. c. 14.15 16.17.
COnsider 1. Christ after the Communion of his Body, had that long Sermon to the
Apostles, which is in S. John, for that is the time wherein he is wont to treat
more at large with the faithful Soul, and would likewise with you, but that
you leave him presently after Communion, or do not harken to him, and
therefore profit little. In that divine Sermon our Lord performed the part, 1.
Of a Master, delivering such things as he would chiefly have observed. 2. Of a
Comforter, allaying his Disciples grief for his future absence, showing how
expedient it was for them: 3. Of an Intercessor on our behalf to his Eternal
Father, praying him to preserve us. See you observe what he enjoyneth, and be
thankful for the rest.

Jo. 15.9.
Consider 2. As our Master he does chiefly recommend unto us the love of God,
and of himself above all things. As my father has loved me, I also have loved
you, Abide in my love. Think whither you love him as he has loved you; and yet
there can be no comparison between yours and his love; for his is infinitely
beneficial to you, but yours wholly unprofitable to him; Notwithstanding out of
pure love to you, and to gain yours to himself, he has given you his own flesh
and blood for meat and drink, and his life upon the Cross for your Redemption.
Ibid. v. 13.
And greater love then this no man has. Are you ready to lay down yours for
him?

Jo. 14.15. Ibid. v. 23.
Consider 3. If you love me (says he) keep my commandments. And again, If any
one love me, he will keep my word. The proof therefore of love, Greg. hom. 30.
(says S. Gregory) is the performance of deeds. If you love Christ, resolve to
do and suffer something for him: at least put on the affection of compassion
for his sufferings, and leave it not off all this time of Lent. Offer up your
fasting, and whatsoever you may suffer thereby, in union with his pains and
dolours.

Of our Lords Sermon after Supper. Part 2.
Jo. 15.12. Jo. 13.34.
COnsider 1. After the love of God, Christ does earnestly recommend the love of
our Neighbor. This is my precept, And, A new commandment I give to you that
you love one another, as I have loved you. He calls it his and a new
commandment, because he renewed it being fallen to decay; And New, as to the
manner, and perfection; requiring that our love be like his, that is,
universal to all, friends and enemies, without respect to deserts, or
recompense, even with our own temporal incommodity, and if need be, with loss
of life; In this all men shall know that you are my Disciples if you have love
to one another. Ibid.
See you be his disciple in this, and take to heart what he going now to die
inculcated in such weighty terms.

Jo. 16.24.
Consider 2. Christ does also much recommend unto us the use of prayer. Until
now you have not asked any thing in my name. Ask and you shall receive.
Whatsoever you shall ask in my name, Jo. 14.13.
that will I do, etc. So friendly an invitation cannot but ground a great
confidence: The poor and needy are provoked, and even pressed to receive
benefits; and he inviteth, that is both able to make good his word, and cannot
deceive. Only we must be careful to pray in due manner; to wit, in Christ's
name, that is, only for such things as appartain to our Salvation; and with
Preseverance.

Jo. 16.2.
Consider 3. Christ our Lord does arimat his Disciples, and all that follow him,
to endure patiently reproach, torments, and death it self in his cause. Our of
the Synogogues they will cast you. The hour comes that every one which kills
you, shall think that he does service to God. He encourages them. Jo. 15.20.
1. By his own example. The servant is not greater than his master: If they
have persecuted me, you also will they pr^s^cute. 2. In delivering it as a
sign of Predestination. Ibid. v. 19.
Because you are not of the world, therefore the world hates you. 3. By
proposing the reward. Jo. 16.20.
Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. Here offer your self to suffer
whatsoever for Christ.

Christ is Sorrowful and prays in the Garden.
Mat. 26.30 Jo. 18.1.
COnsider 1. An Hymn being said He went forth with his Disciples beyond the
Torrent Cedron where was a Garden; that where began our ruin, there might also
begin our reparation. As he went, He began to fear, and to be heavy and sad,
Saying My soul is sorrowful even unto death; Marc. 14.33. Mar. sup. v. 37. (...)
that is, my grief is equal to the pangs of death, and such as would take away
my life, did I not reserve it for other torments. Christ could have been free
of all this, and have gone to suffer with a pleasant heart; for that the Joys of
the Beatifical Vision, which he ever possessed, were able to have drowned what
grief soever: But he would take upon him also these Interior afflictions, that
he might be like to us in all things, and with all, instruct us by his example,
how to behave our selves in the like sufferings.

Luc. 22.40
Consider 2. When he was come to, the place, be said to them, Pray, least you
enter into tempration. Then, being gone forward a little, Mat. 26.38
he fell upon his face, praying and saying. My Father, if it it possible, let
this Chalice pass from me; Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou. Ponder. 1.
His profound Rererence in prostrating himself. 2. His filial and fiducial Love
in the tender name of Father. 3. His perfect Resignation. Not as I will, but as
thou. 4. His continuing therein for a whole hour. Ibid. v. 40.
Could you not watch one hour with me. Take this as a partern to pray by, and
compare your prayers with it. Learn hence chiefly to resign your self perfectly
to God, in all things saying Not as I will but as thou.

Consider 3. Christ like a good Pastor careful of his flock, even in that
great distress, and in the heat of his prayer visits his Disciples; but finds
them a sleep, the first, second, and third time. Presently after Communion they
were so fervorous as to offer themselves to die for their Master; but now
cannot so much as hold up their heads in prayer; See whether you do not as
easily resent from your good purposes. They formerly watched all night, for
their worldly interest, in fishing: Now when it concerned their Souls good,
though commanded to watch, they sleep without care. Take heed of sloth,
tediousness, and forgetfullness in spiritual things, whereby the Soul does
truly slumber and sleep. The Souls sleep, Aug. in Psalm. 62.
(says S. Augustine) is to forget God.

Luc. 22.43.
Christ is comforted by an Angel, and sweateth blood.
COnsider 1. Christ having left his Disciples and being in prayer the third
time, There appeared to him an Angel from Heaven, strengthening him. Good God!
So far did our Lord give himself over to grief, as to borrow comfort from his
own creature. Observe here how God sends comfort at last to those that
persever in prayer. Think what reasons the Angel might use in comforting our
Lord: representing unto him the necessity of his Passion, The Glory that would
thereby redound to his Father and himself, The Redemption of Mankind, and the
like; the which allthough he understood better himself, yet would he not refuse
the proffer of comsort, that you should not disdain to learn of, and be
beholding to your inferiors.

Consider 2. And his sweat became as drops of blood trickling down upon the
Earth. See how all over his body it gusheth forth of the pores, and imbrueth
the earth. Beseech him to wash your soul also with the same. Detest your own
coldness in prayer, who can scarce let fall one single tear for your sins.
Ponder the causes of so strange a sweat. 1. The lively apprehension of all his
torments, as if they had been then present. 2. A deep resentment of the sins,
which notwithstanding would be committed, and of Men's Ingratitude, for whom in
vain he suffered those torments. Condole with your Savior, and grieve that
you were also cause of his so great affliction.

Consider 3. And being in an Agony he prayed the longer. Learn hence the more
you are afflicted, the more to persist in prayer. Christ could easily have
freed himself from this Agony, or strife between the flesh and the spirit, but
would suffer it, to give us example of resisting our passions, even to the
shedding of our blood. Think how easily notwithstanding you let your self be
overcome by them, and for the least fear give over your good purposes.
Wherefore in like occasions Do manfully, Psa. 26.14.
and let thy heart take courage, and expect our Lord.

Deliver me from my Enemies O my God, and from them that rise up against me,
defend me. Ps. 58.2.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as your Captain.
Mat. 4.1.
COnsider 1. What Job says. The life of man upon Earth is a warfare. Job. 7.1.
We are in a continual conflict with three most fierce enemies, that are allways
working our ruin the Flesh, the World, and the Devil. Christ (as we read in
this days Ghospel) would be tempted by the Devil, and fight hand to hand with
him, to train us up, like a good Commander, by his own example. Therefore David
cries out, Ps. 143.1.
Blessed be our Lord my God, who teaches my hands to battle, and my fingers to
War.

Ps. 17.40.
Consider 2. How much it does import us not to be overcome in this War, where we
fight for an Eternity. View your self thoroughly, and see in what particular you
are most weak, and defective, and in what manner of encounters you are more
frequently wounded. Rely on the defense and conduct of this your Captain, who
is to come this day into your Soul. For He will gird you with strength to
battle. He will protect, and guard you. If camps stand together against you,
Ps. 26.3.
your heart shall not fear.

Ps. 142.9.
Consider 3. Soldiers are wont to be sworn to their Captain: So ought you to
yours. This duty you have once performed in Baptism, by renouncing the Devil
and his pomps. But, O how often have you played the Renegade, and shamefully
left your colors? Yield your self now up again to your Captain, renew your
Oath, and promise from hence forwards a more exact Obedience. Cast forth of
your heart whatsoever may be suspected to have confederacy with his, and your
own enemies. Say with the Prophet. Deliver me from mine enemies O Lord, to thee
I have fled, teach me to do thy will, because thou art my God.

Mat. 26.46. etc.
Christ meets Judas and his followers.
Zachar. 11.
COnsider 1. Christ having ended his prayer, Said to his Disciples Rise, let us
go; behold he. approaches that shall betray me. And As he yet spoke, behold
Judas one of the twelve came, etc. Observe Judas his diligence in his wicked
design. The other Apostles sleep, and are scarce roused up at the third call;
But Judas watches, to betray his Master. How buisy are men in their temporal
affairs, how careless in their spiritual? Deplore this extreme folly of the
world. Judas one of the twelve came. O prodigious ingratitude! He, who was so
highly favored by his Master, comes in the head of his enemies, to deliver him
up into their hands. Learn not to rely much on gifts bestowed gratis and
without deserts, of which the more you have, the more you also have to answer
for, and the greater cause to fear. Houle thou fur tree (says the Prophet)
because the Cedar is fallen, etc. If an Apostle fell, why may not you likewise
fall?

Ps. 21.17.
Consider 2. And with him a great multitude with swords and clubs. Behold the
wicked Rout; see how they come all armed with malice, and prepared to work
their wicked ends upon Jesus, contriving with themselves by the way the manner
of laying hold on him, and securing him from escape; How Judas gives them a
sign, saying whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, hold him. Think what fright
the Apostles were in at the noise of the Soldiers. Then was truly fullfilled
that of the Prophet Many dogs have compassed me, the counsel of the malignant
have besieged me.

Consider 3. Christ did not fly, nor render himself invisible, as easily he
might, 4 Reg. 1.10. Jo. 18.4.
not called fire from Heaven to consume his enemies, as did Elias; but with an
undaunted courage, and desireous of dying for you, went forth toward them. See
you be grateful; and learn Constancy in adversity, and not to avoid occasions
of suffering for Christ, but rather with courage and resolution to meet and
entertain them.

Mat. 26.49. etc.
Of Judas his Kiss.
Ps. 54.22.
COnsider 1. And forthwith (Judas) coming to Jesus, he said Hail Rabbi, and he
kissed him. Ponder the Impudency of this treacherous disciple. He fawnes upon
his Master to destroy him. Such are the allurements of the world: They seem
kisses, but truly are so many darts. His words are made softer then oil, and
the same are darts. How many are there, that with outward signs of devotion
fondly fawn upon our Lord, while they carry about them a treacherous mind? how
many again, that have nothing but fair words, and honey in their mouths, while
their heart is full of gall, pois^n, and rancor against their neighbor? See
you be none of these; but above all, take heed you give not Christ such a kiss
in the Sacrament.

Consider 2. Christ's admirable Meekness and Charity. He upbraideth not,
teprocheth not, refuses not, but receives the Kiss, and speaks friendly to
him, Saying Friend, whereto art thou come? if so at least he might win him to
repentance: he calls him friend, to make him one; he asks what he comes
for, that entering into himself he might come to understand the enormity of his
fact, in so foully betraying his best Friend and Benefactor, his Master, his
Lord and God. See how mercifully God does seek to reclaim Sinners; and learn
with what mildness you ought to behave your self to your brother that injureth
you.

Luc. 22.48
Consider 3. Those other words, Judas, with a kiss do thou betray the Son of
Man? What stony heart would not these words mollify? and yet they move him not.
We condemn Judas for his hard heart, but little reflect that we are often
guilty of the same, while we are nothing moved by the inspirations of God, and
checks of our own conscience, crying out with a loud voice, What do you do?
will you sin? will you offend God? etc. It was a circumstance highly
aggravating Judas his sin, to make the kiss of peace an instrument of his
treason. What then will it be to turn, by abuse, the gifts of Grace into
instruments of Gods offense, and our own damnation? Take warning therefore in
time.

Christ casts his Enemies on the ground, and is taken.
Jo. 18.4.5.
COnsider 1. Jesus, having asked the Soldiers whom seek ye? They answered him,
Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus Says to them I am he, and thereby cast them on the
ground; to give them a testimony of his divinity; and to show that he could not
be apprehended, unless he had pleased. Ponder how those words I am are of
singular comfort to the Just, and signify as much as, I am your Father and
Protector, your Joy and Comfort; your wisdom, your Justice, your Sanctification
and Redemption, etc. It is I, fear ye not: Mat. 14.2^.
But to the wicked they are full of terror, threatening wrath, indignation,
punishment, revenge, and damnation. If now therefore they strike such terror
into his enemies, when it was (as he said) their hour and the power of
darkness, what will they do, Luc. 22.53
when it will be his day, and hour of exercising the power of Judge?

Jo. 18.6.
Consider 2. They went backward and fell to the ground. This is a type of
obstinat and impenitent Sinners, that fall flat on their backs, so as not to
see, or regard their falls. Beseech our Lord, that if at any time you come to
fall, it may be upon your face, that you may see and acknowledge your fall by
Humility, and get soon up again by Penance. See how S. Peter draws his
sword, and cutteth off the ear of Malchus, but Christ reprehendeth him for it,
forbids all violence and resistance, and heals the servants ear; that you
should learn to do good for evil to your enemies.

Consider 3. Christ having said If you seek me, let these go their ways,
forgetful of himself, solicitous for his Disciples, Mar. 26.50
Then they drew ^eer, and laid hands on Jesus, and held him. Behold with what
rage those Hell Hounds rush upon the meek lamb; buffet, kick, and beat him with
their clubs, cast him on the ground, and trample over him. Good God what a
spectacle is this? He who sits upon the Cherubs, Ps. 79.3.
is trodden under the fecr of the wicked. The same do all Sinners, who (as S.
Paul says) tread the Son of God under foot. Heb. 10.29.
See you be not one.

Christ is bound. The Disciples fly.
Jo. 18.12.
COnsider 1. Having apprehended Jesus, they bound him, doubtless with hard
cords. See how he yields his sacred hands and arms to be bound, who
notwithstanding, if he had pleased, could more easily then Sampson have broken
those cords all in pieces, Judic. 10.12.
as threads of Linen cloth. It was love alone that could fetter those hands
which framed the Heavens, and wrought wonders on earth. Do you likewise permit
your self to be bound with the bands of Charity, with the tie of Obedience, and
obligation of such duties as appartain to the state and condition you live in.
Eccli. 6.25
Thrust thy foot into her fetters, and thy neck into her chains (says the
wiseman speaking of true wisdom) and be not weary of her bands.

Mar. 14.50
Consider 2. Then his Disciples leaving him, all fled. Think what a sore
affliction it was to Christ to be left so by his friends; whereof he often
complains by his Prophets. Ps. 87.9.
Thou have made my familiars far from me, they have put me abomination to
themselves. Ps. 63.3.
I have trodden the press alone, and of the Gentiles there is not a man with me.
Besides, it was an action that redounded to the dishonor and reproach of his
school, which had brought up such timorous and saint-hearted Disciples. But he
was chiefly concerned for their want of faith, wherein they did all waver. See
you do not leave Christ to suffer alone; bear him company, at least, by
affection and compassion. Be content to be slighted, and left by your friends.

Mat. 26.35
Consider 3. The weakness of man's nature, in these Apostles, who,
notwithstanding the many miracles they had seen Christ work, the grace which
they lately received by the divine Eucharist, and fervor wherein every one said
Allthough I should dye together with thee, I will not deny thee, Yet no sooner
were they assaulted with temptation, but they all failed. Think how little
reason you have to trust your self. Eccli. 2.1.
Therefore coming to the service of God (says the wise man) stand in fear, and
prepare thy Soul to Tentation. And the Apostle, Phil. 2.12.
With fear and trembling work your Salvation.

Christ is led to Annas.
Jo. 18.13.
COnsider 1. They brought him to A^^ta^ first. Ponder how Christ would be
brought before all the Tribunal seats, for the greater Ignominy. all the
Tribunal seats, for the greater Ignominy. Therefore he is led first to Annas
as President of the supreme Council, whereunto it appertained to judge of
Doctrines. See with what Clamor, Laughter, and Ignominy, Christ is hurried
along the ways and streets, people running every where to their doors and
windows to see the Captive. How different was this entrance into Jerusalem,
from that which he made, some sew days before, when they cried out Blessed is
be that comes in the name Mat. 21.9.
of our Lord? Hence learn to contemn the inconstancy of worldly favor.

Is. 9.3.
Consider 2. How Christ is brought as a Criminal to the Tribunal of this Judge.
The Creator stands before his Creature; The Eternal Wisdom of God is brought to
the bar, to give account of his Doctrine to an arrogant smatterer in the Law:
Behold the Doctors round about him, all puffed up with their learning,
Rejoicing as conquerours rejoice; after a prey is taken. Hear how they question
him concerning his Doctrine, and Disciples. Beseech our Lord to instruct you in
things appertaining to your salvation, and not to let you harken after vain
Sciences, whose fruit is no other then pride, and ostentation.

Jo. 18.20, 21.
Consider 3. How Christ bears their reproaches with silence; but answers
resolutly to the point of Doctrine, because thereon depended the salvation of
many. I have openly spoken to the world, etc. Why ask thou me? ask them who
have heard, etc. Learn hence to stand resolut in defense of your faith, and of
truth; and to be silent in your own private injuries. See how he says nothing
of his Disciples; because being he could not commend them, as staggerers in
their faith, he would not say any thing to their dispraife. Do you in the same
manner endeavor to hide others defects, when you may, and not to discover them,
but to a good end.

Aug. l. 3. de Cons. c. 6.
Of the Blow Christ received in Annas's House.
Jo. 18.22.
COnsider 1. One of the Ministers standing by gave Jesus a blow. Ponder here the
General Circumstances. Who? To whom? and What? Think 1. How cruel this blow
was, as being given by a furious and armed Soldier. 2. How ignominious, before
so great an assembly, and inflicted upon his person, whose sanctity of life,
and Miracles made him to be admired, and respected by all. 3. How unjust and
Injurious, for a most just and prudent answer. 4. How grievous, as being
seconded with the loud laughter, and scornful applause of the company. O
amiable countenance, which the Angels so much desire to behold, how has this
ignominious buffet set you all over in a blush! Now my beloved is (truly) white
and ruddy, Cant. 5.10.
and to be imitated by me both in candor of life, and Vermillion of patience.

Jo. s^p.
Consider 2. On the contrary the mildness, and patience of our Lord: He is not
moved to indignation he revengeth not, though it were in his power, and could
in a moment have annihilated the wretch; Yet modestly he justifyeth himself,
that he might not seem to have injured the high Priest, whom he respected, for
the place and authority he bare. If I have spok n ill, give testimony of evil,
but if well, why strikest thou me? How different are your replies, when you
have done amiss? Endeavor therefore to imitate your Lord, Luc. 21.19
and in your patience to possess your Soul.

The Third Station.
Consider 3. And Annas sent him bound to Caiphas. Imagine what a painful and
ignominious journey this was to our Lord, being haled, and dragged about the
streets, at that time of night, like some notorious malefactor, from one
Judgment seat to another. Think what indignities he suffers, as he passes
along, from all sorts of people even those that had received benefits from him.
What a spectacle was it to Heaven to see the Lord of Angels thus abused?
Condole, admire, give thanks, imitate, etc.

The Spirit of our Lord shall seize upon thee, etc. And thou shall be changed
into an other man. 1 Reg. 10.9.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Transfigurer of your Soul.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Ghospel that Christ transfigured
himself, taking upon him the form of a glorious body. Mat. 17.1. The same will
he do this day to your soul, transfiguring it into himself, by virtue of the
Holy Eucharist, if you do not otherwise hinder him. For the Eucharist makes us
(as S. Thomas speaks) the same with God. S. Tho. Opus. 58. c. 15. Aug. Cons.
l. 7.10.
And S. Augustine makes God to say. I am the food of great ones, grow and you
shall feed on me, yet so, that thou shall not change me into thee, but thou
shall be changed into me.

Romans 8.29 Genesis 3.5.
Consider 2. What an inestimable benefit, and dignity it is for man to be
transformed into God, and to be made conformable to the image of his Son. It
was the temptation of our first Parents You shall be as Gods: but they were
deluded. By the Eucharist, and the Grace that proceeds from it, we truly
become one with God, being made partakers of the divine nature, and even
incorporated, and of the same blood, S. Cypr. Cat. 4. 1 Reg. 18.18. Jo. 1.12.
with Christ, as that Holy Father speaks. Humble your self therefore, and say
with the Prophet What am I, or what is my life, or the kindred of my father,
that I should be made not the Son in law of a King, but the true adoptive Son
of God? for as many as received him, be gave them power to be made the Sons of
God.

Exodus 34.29.
Consider 3. What is said of Moses, that his face was horned (that is,
resplendent, and shining with two rays of glory) by the conversation of the
talk of our Lord. Be you also much conversant with God in prayer, that you may
in like manner be transfigured. Besides, you must make him the only object of
your love and affection, and perfectly hate whatsoever is displeasing unto him,
for, as S. Augustine says, Every one is such as is his love; August. Tom. 2.
(...). Ep. 1. Jo.
if you love earth you will be earth, if you love God, you shall be God: love
God therefore that you may be one with him.

Christ is accused before Caiphas, etc.
Mat. 26.59
COnsider 1. Christ being brought before Caiphas, The chief Priests, and the
whole Council sought false witness against Jesus, that they might put him to
death. O Injustice! Judges who should punish, seek false witness, against known
innocence; and patronize their private unjust en^^^ and hatred, by the pretense
of public Justice. See how the son of God stands at the bar before his
sworn enemies, and forsworn witnesses, and accusers. The innocent lamb who did
no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22.
neither was guile found in his mouth, answers all his accusations with
silence. Ps. 37.14.
But I as one deaf did not hear, and as one damb not opening his mouth. Learn
hence to be deaf and dumb in like occasions, and to commit your cause to God.

Consider 2. So irreprehensible was Christ's life, that his very enemies, even
upon false informations, could not fasten upon any thing, that could make up a
crime against him. Wherefore the high Priest conjureth him, by the living God,
to say whether he were Christ, That he might condemn him of Blasphemy if he
affirmed. Christ who had been silent before, in reverence to the sacred name of
God answers Thou say; Mat. sup. Mar. 14.62
I am, and withal gives them an Item of the later judgment, if perhaps, for
fear thereof they might be moved to desist from their wicked intents. But the
perverse are hardly corrected. Eccle. 1.15
Beseech our Lord you may never come to be one of them.

Mat. 26.65
Consider 3. The counterfited zeal of the wicked. Then the high Priest rent his
garments saying, He has blasphemed. Do you rather rend your heart with true
contrition for being the cause of all these sufferings of Christ. Joel. 2.13.
Rent your hearts, and not your garments (says our Lord) Hear how they all cry
out with one voice He is guilty of death. Mat. sup.
O most unjust Sentence! Sweet Jesus, do you thus endure to be held a
blasphemer, and sentenced to death, and shall I seek to be thought more of by
all, and better then I am?

Of the Injuries which Christ suffered in the House of Caiphas. Part 1.
Mat. 26.67
COnsider 1. How Christ being sentenced guilty of death, Then did they spit on
his face, and buffeted him; and others smote his face with the palms of their
hands, saying, prophecy unto us, etc. Ponder five extraordinary kinds of
Ignominy which Christ suffered all that night. 1. They spit upon him, who with
spittle had given sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, and hearing to the
deaf: and on that face, which the Angels adore, and just Souls long after,
saying, show thy face, and we shall be saved. Ps. 79.20.
He was spit on by most lewd miscreants, striving to out do on another; so
that he was covered all over with filth. But he, like a meek lamb, made good
that of the Prophet, Is. 50.6.
I have not turned away my face from the rebukers, and spitters, but with a
peaceable countenance received all. But do not Sinners still to this day spit
on thee? Are not our Sins, for which you suffered all this, and death it
self, more loathsome unto you, then the Spittle of the Jews?

Luc. 22.64.
Consider 2. The second Ignominy. And they did, blind fold him. No doubt, but
with some loathsome clout, that their sport might be the more completely
injurious. Heb. 4.13.
They veil those eyes to whom all things are naked and open: and cover that
face, whereof all nations stand in love and admiration. The same do all
Sinners, who that they may sin with the greater liberty, hide God from
themselves, and think that he sees them not. They say according to Job, For
what knows God? etc. The clouds are his covert, Job. 22.13
neither does he consider our things. Have a care you be not one of these.

Mat. 26.67
Consider 3. They buffeted him, and smote his face with the palms of their
hands. Ponder how thick one upon an other, with what cruelty, and how
Ignominiously, by those ruffians, every one striving to out do an other in
scoffs and blows. Then was truly fullfilled that of the Prophet. He shall give
the cheek to him that strikes him, Thren. ^.30.
he shall be filled with, reproaches. Admire, compassionate, Imitate.

Of the Injuries which Christ suffered in the House of Caiphas. Part. 2.
COnsider 1. The fourth kind of Ignominy was the insolency they practiced upon
the Sacred hair and beard of our Lord, pulling, and tearing both off with
violence; the which although the Evangelists do not express, yet Isaie does
signify as much in those words, Is. 50.6. Judic. 16.
I have given my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to the pluckers. Sampson
cut of fond love to Dalils lost his hair; but you O Lord, out of a better love
to mankind, suffer your self after a violent and cruel manner to be despoiled
of yours, so as to become even bald again. O make me suffer the like for love
of you, that having out of all superfluities, I may follow you, as naked, as
you made your self for me.

Mat. 26.68 Luc. 22.65
Consider 2. The fifth kind of Ignominy, of insulting over him, with reviling
and reprochful language, saying, Prophecy unto us O Christ, who is he that
struck thee. And blaspheming, many other things they said against him. Here
they rip up their old slanders, calling him a glutton, a drurk^rd, a seducer, a
blasphemer, possessed with the Devil, and the like; so that that of Job was
verified in his sacred person. Job. 16.11.
They have opened their months upon me, and exprobrating have stricken my
check; they are ^illed with my pains. Consider with what patience Christ
endured all this, and be confounded at your own impatience, who can scarce take
a light word at your brothers hands.

Consider 3. These Indignities lasted the whole night; for they of the Court
and Council, in all likelihood repairing home, to take rest in their soft beds,
Christ was delivered up to the guards, to be strictly, watched, and treated at
their pleasure and mercy. Think what sense and feeling our B. Lord had all that
night, in the condition of being tired out with ill usage, and want of sleep
and rest; and thence gather what yours ought to be. Be ashamed of your little
mortification and patience in bearing light affronts, and occasions of your own
confusion, seeing your Lord for your sake has endured far greater, in all
kinds, and at the hands of the b^sest sort of people.

Of S. Peter's denying Christ. Part 1.
Mat. 26.69.
COnsider 1. S. Peter having followed our Lord into Caiphas his house, and
standing with the rest at the fire, There came to him one wench, saying, thou
also wast with Jesus the Galilean; but he denied before them all, saying, I wot
not what thou say, etc. He who but some few hours before said Though I
should dye with thee I will not deny thee, now at the first word, and that of a
woman, Ibid. v. 35.
out of shame and fear, foully denies that he ever knew him. O how many are
there now a days, who not out of humility, but out of a shameful ^ear of what
the world would say or think of them, Luc. 22.57.
dare not own any Christian or Virtuous action, nor profess themselves
disciples and followers of Christ! See you be none of these.

Mat. 26.74
Consider 2. Peter being still in the same company, and ta^ed by diverse of being
Christ's Disciple, he persisteth in his denial, the second and third time:
neither minded he the first cock crowing; or at least, cared not, but Began to
curse and to sw^are that he knew not the man. Observe the different effects of
good, and evil company. Peter among his fellow disciples, was so fervorous, as
to offer to dye for his Master; in this lewd company he disoweneth even to know
any such man. Learn hence to avoid evil company and conversation; for as the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.33.
says Evil communications corrupt good manners.

Consider 3. Some particular circumstances of S. Peter's fall, which all the
Evangelists do set down at large, to teach us to be wary by others harms. 1.
The occasion or cause of this fall was that vain presumption of himself. Mat.
26.33.
Allthough all shall be scandalized in thee, I will never be scandalized. 2.
His Negligence in prayer, yielding to sleep, when he should have watched in
prayer, by Christ's express command, Ibid. v. 41.
Watch ye and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. 3. The instrument of
this fall was a Woman, as was that of Adams first Sin. Admire and tremble to
see the pillar of the Church cast down at the voice of a Woman. 4. His sin
increased by degrees, passing from a simple denial to execration, and open
Perjury. Learn to resist the very beginnings of evil, and to be greatly
concerned for small defects; Eccli. 19.1.
for he that contemns small things, shall fall by little and little.

Of S. Peter's denying Christ. Part 2.
COnsider 1. Our Lord turning looked on Peter. Lue. 22.61 ^^rad. To. 4 l. 6. c.
21. S. Aug. l. 1. de Gratia. c. 45.
While Peter was actually denying our Lord the third time, Jesus happened to be
led down from the upper room where he was condemned, to the lower Court where
Peter was, and graciously looked upon his sheep that was perishing; Or, (as
some do expound) with the interior eyes of his mercy looked upon him a far of,
and by his grace moved him to repentance. See how in the midst of his own
afflictions, he forgets not his ungrateful Disciple. Ps. 24.16.
With the same eyes, O Lord, have respect to me, and have mercy on me.

Mat. 26.75
Consider 2. The Conversion and Repentance of S. Peter. And going forth he wept
bitterly, not out of the servile fear of punishment, but out of love, and sense
of his ingratitude in offending so good a Lord, Master, and Benefactor. He
rightly understood that of Jeremy. Jer. 2.19.
That it is an evil, and a bitter thing to thee to have left thy Lord thy God.
Do you also procure to understand it a right, that you may henceforwards keep
your self from falling. O How often have you, not only in bare words, but by
deeds, denied your Lord, and offended him, perhaps more then Peter, but have
not as yet duly lamented your fault, as he did?

Theod. Hist.
Consider 3. The long Penance S. Peter performed for this denying his Master.
He is said to have bewailed it his whole life time, breaking forth into tears,
as often as the Cock-crowing, or other occasion refreshed the memory of his
sin; in so much, that his eyes were become as two fountains of tears, and his
continual weeping had made furrows in his cheeks. Be confounded to see that
nothing dries up sooner then your tears. Persever therefore in works of
Penance, and as Ecclesiasticus admonishes, Eccli. 5.5.
Of sin forgiven be not without fear.

Of Judas his Despair.
Mat. 27.3.
COnsider 1. Then Judas that betrayed him, seeing that he was condemned,
repenting him, returned the thirty silver pieces, etc. Saying I have sinned
betraying just blood. Think what an unquiet mind Judas carried, after his
treacherous and Sacrilegious fact; so that he could take no joy in the money,
for which he sold his Lord; but the worm of his guilty conscience gnawing his
heart, he brought it back; whence you may learn that Sinners reap no so^id
content out of their wickedness, but much pain, Aug. l. 1. Coaf. c. 11.
disquiet, and trouble. Lord you have ordained it, (says S. Augustine) and
accordingly it is in are, that every disordinat mind is its own punishment.
Therefore in Job it is said of the Impious. Job. 15.21
The sound of terror is allways in his ears.

Mat. sup.
Consider 2. The answer of the Wicked Priests. What is that to us? look thou to
it. They are little concerned for their Neighbor, whether he perish or not;
and like Cain will not be their brothers guardians: Not so the good ones, who
with all endeavor labor to pull their neighbor out of the depth of sin. They
do not say What is it to us? look you to it; but do help and asist, whom, and
what they are able, some with charitable offices, others by their prayers; They
are tender to all in compassion, 1 Cor. 9.22
and with the Apostle, To all men become all things, that they may save all.
These you must also procure to imitate.

Mat. sup.
Consider 3. He went, and hanged himself with an halter. See how one sin is the
punishment of another, despair of treachery; God often permitting us to fall
the second time in punishment of the first sin; that you may learn to shun all.
Take notice of the fubtile wiles of the Devil, who at first provokes to sin,
and afterward taking away all hopes of pardon, casts the Sinner headlong
into damnation by despair. Observe also how desperate, and mad are the
determinations of a troubled conscience, so that the Wise man had reason to
say, Sap. 17.10.
A troubled conscience does allways presume cruel things. Lastly from this
final ruin of an Apostle. He that thinks himself to stand, let him take heed
least he fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.

I have sinned, what shall I do to thee O Keeper of Men? Job. 7.20.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Guardian of your Soul.
Ps. 23.8. Genesis 15.3. Ps. 120.4.
COnsider 1. What is said in this days Ghospel, When the strong armed keeps
his Court, those things are in peace that he possesses. Luc. 11.21. Imagine
therefore your soul to be a Court or Castle, which Christ our Lord, who is both
strong and armed, desires to guard, that whatsoever she possesses, may be
preserved in peace and security. There is none stronger then this Champion of
ours. Our Lord strong and mighty. Our Lord is a Man of War, Omnipotent is his
name. No keeper can be more watchful then he. He shall not slumber, nor sleep,
that keeps Israel, and does all with that care and love, as if it were to
keep the apple of his own eye, as Moses speaks. Deuteronomy. 32.10
O what a happiness it is to be under the protection of such a Guardian?

Ps. 22.5.
Consider 2. This Guardian of yours will enter to day, in the holy Eucharist,
the Castle, or fortress of your Soul, to visit, strengthen, and defend it
against your Mortal enemy the Devil, who surrounds it day and night, seeking
how he may destroy it. For, this divine banquet, or table (as David says) is
chiefly instituted as a fence against our enemies. Thou have prepared in my
sight a table against them that trouble me. Hence conceive a great confidence
in your Guardian, and as great a desire of the happy hour wherein you are to
receive him.

Consider 3. In what manner you may best entertain this Guardian. You must be
sure to cast out of your heart whatsoever may offend his purest eyes, least
otherwise being offended at his entrance, he presently leave you, and deliver
you over to your enemies. Deliver him up the keys of your. Castle, that he may
freely dispose of you and yours in all things, and upon all occasions. Ask
pardon for your former offenses, Ps. 139.5.
Say with the Prophet. Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the sinner, and from
unjust m^n deliver me.

Christ is led from Caiphas to Pilat.
Mat. 27.1.
COnsider 1. And when morning was come, all the chief Priests and Ancients of
the people consulted together against Jesus, that they might put him to death.
How diligent are the sons of darkness in prosecuting their wicked designs,
scarce giving themselves time to sleep, or rest? O that you were as zealous in
the service of God! Think how welcome to our B. Lord was that last morning, in
which he was to perfect the work of our Redemption. Ponder how being now in
full Council, they examine our Lord over again, condemn him as a Blasphemer,
vote him guilty of death, and deliver him finally over to the secular power to
be executed.

Luc. 23.1.
Consider 2. All the multitude of them rising up, led him to Pilat. Think what a
heavy journey this was to our B. Lord. By this time the whole town was full of
what had passed the night before, and in a longing expectation of the result of
the high Council; and now they see the Captive hurried along by their doors,
and accompanied by their high Priests and Elders, as so many unquestionable
witnesses and proclaimers of his guiltiness. Our B. Lord is held and treated by
all as a Notorious Malefactor, and entertained all along as he passed with loud
shoutes and clamors, with scoffs, with reproaches, and with barbarous insolences
of the rude and enraged people; And even those who before held him in
veneration, as a great Prophet, and their Messiah, now hold themselves as
miserably seduced, and him for a grand Impostor. Who ever did, or could suffer
so much in his reputation?

Jo. 18.28.
Consider 3. Being come to Pilats Court, they went not into the Palace, (it
being the habitation of a Gentil) that they might not be contaminated, but that
they might eat the Pasch. O superstitious Hypocrisy! They pretend Religion and
Conscience in a small matter, while they are actually contriving murder and
Sacrilege. They strain a gnat, and swallow a Camel. Mat. 23.24
Yet would to God you were as nice, and zealous, in point of purity, when you
come to eat the true Pasch, in the Holy Eucharist, and would not thrust your
self in, after so distracted a manner, and full of worldly cogitations.

Christ is accused before Pilat.
Luc. 23.2.
COnsider 1. Pilat having brought Jesus forth to the People and demanded what
accusations they had against him, They began to accuse him. 1. As a seditions
person We have found this man subverting our Nation; who ever taught and
practiced Obedience, and did good to all. 2. As Prohibiting to give Tributes to
Caesar, who notwithstanding was known to pay tribute for himself, though
otherwise exempt. And. 3. For saying that he is Christ the King. Jo. 6.15.
And yet (though he were truly so) when they would have made him King, he fled,
and hid himself. Ps. 61.10.
Learn hence what liers the children of men are in their balances, and how easy
a matter it is to calumniat the Innocent.

Mat. 27.14
Consider 2. Christ our Lord could easily have cleared himself with a word, but
would answer all his accusations with silence, so that the President did
marvel exceedingly, fullfilling thereby that of the Psalmist I have set a
guard to my mouth when the sinner slood against me. Psa. 38.2.
O that you would do the same when others rise up against you. Know that an
Innocent life is the best plea; and that true courage and fortitude consists
in silence, and contempt of injuries and affronts, committing our cause to God,
according to that of the Prophet, In silence and in hope shall your strength
be. Js. 30.15.


Consider 3. Pilat laying hold of the last accusation, asked Jesus whether he
were King of the Jews, Luc. sup. Jo. 18.36.
who answered, Thou say; but withal, My Kingdom is not of this world, nor
of worldly greatness, pomp, and state; but of Poverty, Contempt, Hymn. Vexilla.
Obedience, Humility, and the Cross. God took his reign from the Cross, Think
whether or no you belong to his Kingdom; for if you are of the world, that is,
if you mind, and seek after things of this world, you are none of his; They are
not of the world. Jo. 17.14.
(says Christ of his Disciples) as I also am not of the world. Learn hence to
have a high value of the Cross, Humility, etc.

Christ is sent to Herod.
Luc. 23.4.
COnsider 1. Pilat sought what he could to set Christ at liberty, for that
(says he) I find no cause in this man. The Pharisees urge the more, saying. He
stirs up the people, etc. Beginning from Gali^^e even hither; whence he
takes occasion to send him to Herod, as one belonging to his jurisdiction, but
withal straightly bound as a Malefactor, guarded with Soldiers, and
accompanied with the Priests his accusers. Thus was our B. Lord posted from one
Tribunal to another, and exposed to the public view and scorn of the whole
City. Good God! ^ow were the former affronts and insolences redoubled upon
him, and that of Jeremy verifyed to the full? Thren. ^.15
All that passed by the way have clapped their hands upon thee, they have
hissed and moved their head.

Luc. 23.10
Consider 2. Christ at first is civily entertained by Herod, who hoped to see
him work some miracle; but our Lord abhorred his lewdness, and would not comply
with his curiosity, nor owe his life, which he so much desired to lay down, to
his favor and courtesy, nor return one single word to many of his; and though
the chief Priests and the Scribes stood constantly accusing him, he made no
answer. Admire and imitate the courage and constancy of his mind, which could
neither be bent by flattery, nor overcome with ill usage; and learn withal to
be reserved, and not familiar with persons of a lewd life, without certain
hopes of gaining them.

Ibid.
Consider 3. And Herod with his army set him at naught, and he mocked him
putting on him a white garment. Ponder how Christ our Lord, the eternal wisdom
of God, is held for a fool, and one that out of simplicity had called himself
King; and is treated as such by the King and his whole Court, delighting
themselves with flouting and scoffing at him. And in this plight he is sent
back to Herod, and proclaimed all along as he went for a fool, and fantastical
King. Good Lord! Is this the way you choose to cure my pride, and confound my
arrogance? With how much truth did the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 3.18
if any man seem to be wise among you in this world, let him become a fool,
that he may be wise?

Barabbas is preferred before Christ.
Mar. 27.15
COnsider 1. Upon the solemn day the President had accustomed to release unto
the people one prisoner, whom they would. Hence, desirous to release Jesus,
whose innocence was clearer then the Sun, he puts him in balance with a most
wicked fellow, that was guilty both of sedition and murder: Offering them their
choice, whom they would have freed of the two. Think what a comparison this
was, of light with darkness, of a murderer with the author of life, of a common
robber with a most munificent Benefactor, and giver of all good. And yet Christ
disdained it not.

Luc. 23.18.
Consider 2. The foolish and most unjust demand of the people. Dispatch him, and
release us Barabbas. It was a foul disgrace, and ignominy to be matched with so
bare, and notorious a Villain, but much greater to be set behind him. Now was
truly fullfilled that of the Propher. Ps. 21.7.
I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and outcast of the people. What are
the judgments of the world? What wise man would rely on them, or care whither
they praise or reprove? The like judgment to that of the Jews you do pass, as
often as you sin mortally, prefering in your heart and affection, some
momentary delight before an infinite good, some vile creature before the
Creator, and even a Barabbas before Christ.

Mat. 27.22
Consider 3. Pilat demands, What shall I do then with Jesus? The people cry
out saying Crucify, crucify him. Luc. 23.21.
Think with what Modesty and Patience Christ received these unjust demands, not
uttering the least word against them. Ask your self often this question, What
will you do with Jesus? Will you Esteem, Love, Serve, and Honor him, as you
ought, or rather choose to afflict, injury, and even crucify him a new? for, no
less do all Sinners, Crucifying again (as the Apostle says) to themselves the
Son of God, Heb. 6.6.
and making him a mockery.

Of the Whipping at the Pillar. Part 1.
Jo. 19.1.
COnsider 1. Then therefore Pilat took Jesus, and scourged him. To the end he
might in some part satisfy the rage of the Jews, and so set him afterward at
liberty. Think notwithstanding how this sentence was 1. Unjust, as being
pronounced against him, who by the Judges own confession was innocent. 2.
Infamous, it being the usual punishment of common slaves. 3. Cruel, it being
decreed purposely to satiate the Jews fury. See how readily, for all that, and
how cheerfully Christ does accept of it, saying with the Prophet. Ps. 37.18.
I am ready for scourges: And this to satisfy for your Sins.

Consider 2. So soon as the sentence was given, how impudently the Soldiers
strip him of his clothes, and bind him to the pillar. Ponder the Virginal
bashfullness, and shame our most chaste Lord was in, to see himself exposed all
naked to the view of so great a multitude. See with what promptitude of
Obedience he stretches forth his arms to be bound, without making the least
complaint, or resistance, and learn hence how truly meek and humble of heart
he is, Mat. 11.29.
and you ought to be.

Consider 3. The Grievousness and Cruelty of this scourging. 1. In regard of
the instruments, which are credibly said to have been of three sorts, to wit,
thorny rods, hard sinews, and Iron chains. 2. By reason of his delicat, and
tender complexion, being also much exhausted with his late bloody sweat, and
ill treating, restless night, and painful journeys of that morning. 3. Through
the cruel usage of his tormentors, who were set on, and provoked by the
Pharisees that stood by. 4. For the multitude of stripes, which, as is gathered
out of S. Brigits revelations, surmounted the number of five thousand; Whereas
the law of Moses allowed not full forty for any Malefactor. Therefore Isaie
from the sole of the foot to the top of the head, Is. 1.6.
there is no health in him.

Of the Whipping at the Pillar. Part 2.
I Magin your self to see Christ our Lord fast bound to the Pillar, with a
company of Soldiers round about, tyranizing over him with their whips; and
consider the general Circumstances Who? What? Where? etc.

Heb. 1.3.
Who is he that is tied to the Pillar? The only begotten Son of God, The
brightness of his glory, and the figure of his substance. He is higher then
Heaven, Job. 11.8.
deeper then Hell. The most high Creator omnipotent, and mighty King, and to be
feared exceedingly. Eccli. 1.8.
Sitting upon his throne, and the God of dominion.

Is. 53.4.
What? He is most unhumanly scourged, even to the discovery of his ribs, and
bones. No slave was ever so cruelly handled. We have thought him as it were a
lepre, and strickin of God and humbled.

Where? In the very middle of the world, in a most populous City, in the open
Court of the President; a whole Legion of Soldiers, and an infinite multitude
of people looking on.

Is. 63.5.
With what helps? Destitute of all human assistance. There was none to appear
in his defense, none to comfort him. I looked about (says he by the Prophet)
and there was no helper, I sought, and there was none to aid.

Ps. 90.4.
Wherefore? To satisfy for your sins, to make a bath of his precious blood to
wash and cleanse you withal. He took upon his shoulders stripes which were due
to you; whereby he made good that of the Prophet. With his shoulders shall he
overshadow thee.

Is. 50.6. Is. 53.7.
How? Of his own free choice, cheerfully, constantly, and silently. I have given
my body to the strikers, etc. As a lamb before his shoarer be was dumb.

When? In the most solemn feast of the Pasch, at what time an infinite number of
people were resorted from all parts to celebrate that Mystery. All which made
to his greater ignominy, and confusion.

Come, eat ye my bread and drink the wine which I have mingled for you. Prove.
9.5.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the food of your Soul.
Jo. 6.55.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Ghospel, how Christ with five loaves fed
five thousand persons, Jo. 6. He will come this day into your soul, to feed it
with a food, the sweetest, most precious and wholesome, that ever was from the
beginning of the world, his own sacred Body and Blood. For My flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; and that you might not fear to come, he
invites, and calls upon you. Eat, Cant. 5.1.
O friends, and drink, and be inebriated my dearest.

Consider 2. Three chief effects which corporal food works in the body. 1.
It nourishes and strengthens. 2. It satiat's. 3. It preserv's life. In the same
manner (as S. Thomas says) this divine food works in the Soul. Opusc. 58. c.
9.
It strengthens, giving Grace and Virtue to overcome vice; It satiat's, in
begetting a loathing of worldly pleasures; for (as the wise man says) A soul
that is full shall tread upon the honey comb, Prove. 27.7
that is, the delights of this world; Lastly it preserv's the spiritual life of
the Soul, and advances it to a blessed Eternity. Jo. 6.58.
He that eats this bread (says Christ) shall live for ever. O what a
happiness is it to feed upon such bread?

Consider 3. No meat, though never so wholesome, does good, but in a body well
disposed, and taken in a clean stomach, as the Physicians affirm: Foul bodies
the more you nourish, the more you endanger; for in these all nourishment is
turned into ill humors. See therefore that you duly prepare your Soul, Ps.
33.9.
if you desire to taste how sweet our Lord is. Purge your self of bad humors,
and evil affections, which hinder spiritual digestion. Let a man prove
himself, and so, 1 Cor. 11.28.
that is, well proved and examined, and not otherwise, let him eat of that
bread, and drink of the chalice.

Of the Crowning with Thorns.
Ps. 37.15.
COnsider 1. Christ out of his excessive love of suffering for us, not content
with ordinary sufferings, permitted the Soldiers to invent, and practice upon
him an unheard of kind of cruelty, striving to out do, both in invention and
cruelty, what was newly done in Herod's Court. 1. Therefore they strip him of
his own clothes, not without great torment, they being now cloven to the gore
blood which ran from his wounds: then they put about him a purple garment in
token of a mock-King. See how he lets them abuse him a^ their pleasure, without
the least resistance, or contradiction, being become as a man not having
reproofs in his mouth.

Mat. 27.29
Consider 2. And plating a crown of thorns; put it upon his head. O unheard of
torment! Some affirm that our Lord was wounded in seventy two distinct places
of his head by those thorns. Cant. 3.11.
Go forth, my Soul, and see King Solomon in the diadem wherewith his mother,
the Synagog, whereof he was according to flesh, has crowned him, and be
astonished. Away with Pride, away with all sensuality. Be ashamed (says S.
Bernard) to be a delicat or nice member, Bern. ser. 5. de. Om. SS.
under a thorny head.

Mat. sup.
Consider 3. And they put a reed in his right hand. And bowing the knee before
him, they mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews, and spitting upon him,
they took the reed, and smote his head. What indignities are these? What
torments? Ponder severally each one. See how the King of invincible patience
lets not go, but keeps still in his hand the Scepter of scorn and
derision, to provoke you to imitate. Now was fullfilled that of the Prophet
Behold my servant, Mat. 12.18 and Isa. 42.1.
etc. He shall not contend, nor cry out, neither shall any man hear in the
streets his voice, The reed bruised he shall not break, and smoking flax he
shall not extinguish.

Jo. 29.
Lo the Man. Part. 1.
Jo. 19.5.
COnsider 1. Jesus therefore went forth carrying the Crown of thorns and the
purple Vestment. Ponder how Pilat to move the Jews to commiseration, brought
forth our Lord, scourged, and crowned, as he was, and showed him to the people.
Think what a confusion it was to our Lord to be exposed thus for a sight to the
Pharisees, and his other enemies, and with what humility and patience our meek
Lamb bare it. O how are you, sweet Jesus, altered from what you lately were,
when you appeared glorious on the mount Thabor? or when you sat upon the
Cherubins, displaying the raves of your Majesty in the highest Heavens?

Is. 53.2.
Consider 2. Pilat said Lo the Man. He was so disfigured, that he could be
scarce known for a man. How true was that of the Prophet, There is no beauty in
him, nor comlines, and we have seen him, and there was no sightlines? Who would
not melt with tears to behold so sad a spectacle? and yet the hard hearted
Jews are nothing moved, but cry out the more. Crucify, crucify him. O most
beautiful of men, where is now that gracious aspect of yours? where those
rays of your divine countenance? Do not consider me (says he) that I am
brown, Cant. 1.6.
because the Sun has altered my color. The Sun, and heat of your charity, O
Lord, has indeed altered your color, and metamorphiz'd you into a worm, and
the reproach of men for us.

Pro. 29.25.
Consider 3. Pilat had long labored to release Christ, but when he heard those
words of the Jews, If thou release this man, thou art not Cesars friend. out of
human respects, and policy, lest perhaps he might be accused to Caesar, yielded
him unto them against all Justice. Have a care that like human respects
prevail not with you against Justice and Equity. He that fears man, shall
soon fall (says Solomon) He that trusts in our Lord shall be lifted up.

Jo. 19.
Lo the Man. Part 2.
COnsider 1. Having set Christ before your eyes with the Crown of thorns on
his head, and Robe of scorn on his shoulders, as in the former Meditation, and
wounded all over from head to foot, Imagine those words, behold the man, spoken
to you by the holy Ghost, to the end you should more attentively contemplat
him; as much as if he should say, He whom you behold in the outward shape of
man, the same is God, and Lord of all things, the Messiah, Savior, Doctor, and
Pastor of men, who for love of mankind, abased himself beneath the condition of
a slave, even to this lamentable plight.

Mat. 12.18
Consider 2. And imagine these same words spoken by the Eternal Father proposing
his Son as an example of all Virtue for you to imitate. Behold the man. Behold
the servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul has well liked.
Look, Exodus 25.40.
and make it (or do) according to the pattern. He suffers himself to be
contemned and scoffed at, to confound your pride; He is naked to correct your
Covetousnes; He indureth excessive torments to satisfy for your sensuality; He
turns his cheek to the striker, to allay your anger and passion; and so of
the rest. See therefore how you may imitate.

1 Jo. 2.2. Ps. 83.10.
Consider 3. These words may be spoken by you, and by the whole Church to the
Eternal Father, offering Christ unto him as a pacifick Host for all our sins.
O Eternal Father Behold the man, who in the name of all mankind is come to pay
Adams ransom. He is the Propitiation for our sins. Therefore behold O God
our Protector, and look upon the face of thy Christ. Say the same often to
your self, with affections of compassion to your Lord and Savior, of gratitude
for suffering so much for love of you, of confidence and hope in so great a
goodness, and of an ardent desire of imitating his example, and of suffering
for love of him.

Mat. 27. Luc. 23.
Christ is condemned to death.
Mat. 27.19
COnsider 1. As Pilat was sitting in place of Judgment, his wife sent unto him,
etc. Ponder the goodness of God, seeking diverse ways to hinder the sins of men,
as here he did, admonishing Pilat by his wife, and her in sleep, so that it may
be justly objected to every sinner Perdition is thine O Israel. O how often
has he admonished you, Osee. 13.9
speaking interiorly to your heart by holy Inspirations, and exteriorly by
Preachers and superiors, forbidding you to do this, or that, and yet you have
not given over! Be careful hereafter to be more observant of his admonitions.

Mat. 27.24
Consider 2. Pilat seeing that he nothing prevailed, etc. Taking water washed
his hands saying I am innocent of the blood of this Just man. And yet at the
same time pronounced sentence of Death against him. So, many pretend innocence
in their life, but matter not their foul mouths; they will not offend their
neighbor in their outward actions, but scruple not to wound him with their
tongues. Hear how the Jews cry out. His blood be upon us, and upon our
Children. See how the heat of passion casts a man headlong upon his own
ruin: And have a care you be not overruled by any.

Luc. 23.24
Consider 3. And Pilat judged their petition to be done. Think how unjust this
sentence was, whereby the Author of life was condemned to death, almost in the
same breath wherewith he was pronounced Just and innocent, and how wickedly
Pilat did in yielding to their unjust demands, against his own conscience; that
you might learn to stand resolutly for Justice, although you were to suffer a
thousand deaths for it. Think with what shouts the people wellcomed this
sentence, and how the Priests and Pharisees triumphed. Ponder what feeling
Christ himself had at that time, how he complained not, nor made any
opposition, but with an undaunted mind, 1 Pet. 2.23.
delivered himself to him that judged him unjustly.

Christ carries his Cross.
Romans 13.14.
COnsider 1. Sentence of Death being given, Christ is stripped of the Purple
Garment, and clothed with his own, that he might be the better known in his
own attire. The robe is taken off, not the crown, that he might not be without
torment. So you likewise, if you desire to carry your Cross after our Lord,
must cast off the purple robe, that is, the love of the world, and put on the
garments and livery of Christ, to wit, Mildness, and Patience, according to
that of the Apostle. Do ye on our Lord Jesus Christ.

Consider 2. The Cross being brought forth, ponderous in weight, and fifteen
foot in length, our Savior doubtless exulted, and with greater reason, and
feeling, then did afterward his Disciple S. Andrew, saluted the same in those,
or the like words. Welcome O precious Cross, long wished-for, Barrad. l. 7. c.
10.
entirely beloved, and now at last prepared to my hearts desire; he embraced,
kissed, and took it upon his shoulders. O what shouting and laughter was there
then among the people? For his greater Ignominy there are led with him two
thieves: But with what difference both of countenance, and disposition of mind
do they bear their several Crosses? Think with your self whom you will rather
choose to imitate in carrying yours.

Jo. 19.17.
Consider 3. And bearing his own Cross he went forth, etc. To wit, between two
thieves, the Crier all along proclaming the respective causes of their death.
Genesis 22.6.
So did Isaac formerly carry on his shoulders the wood of the Holocaust,
whereon himself was to be sacrificed: See how the tender and feeble members of
Christ shrink under the heavy burden; and how he stumbleth and falls often
to the ground, as he goes, being quite tired-out and exhausted by his
torments. O Angels of Heaven! why do you not ease his burden? But your sins,
O my Soul, are more burdensome unto him, for our Lord has put upon him (says
Isaie) the Iniquity of all us. Cease therefore to sin, Is. 53.6.
that you may likewise cease to burden him.

Of Meeting the Blessed Virgin.
COnsider 1. Christ being sentenced to death, the news was probably carried to
the B. Virgin, by some of the Disciples. Ponder how according to Simeons
prophecy, her Soul is here pierced with the sword of grief. She might likely
say with David, Who would grant me that I might dye for thee Jesus my Son, my
Son Jesus? She resigned herself, 2 Reg. 18.33.
notwithstanding, wholly to the will of God, according to that, As it shall be
the will in Heaven, so be it done. 1 Match. 3.60.


Consider 2. How notwithstanding her grief, with an undaunted courage, she
resolves to go to the place of Execution, to give her last embracements, and
farewell to her B. Son: She stays therefore with other women, by the way side,
where her Son was to pass by. Think what torment of mind she felt, when she
first saw the rout of people coming along with Nails, Hammers, Ladders, and
other such like instruments; What afterward when she beheld her most innocent
Son coming between two thieves, laden with a heavy Cross, and cudgelled on by
the Soldiers to make have. Condole with them both, and grieve for giving cause
of their sufferings by your Sins.

Luc. 23.28.
Consider 3. Those words of Christ to the other women that followed, Weep not
upon me, but weep upon your selves, and upon your Children, etc. For if in the
green wood they do these things, in the dry what shall be done? Christ was a
fresh, green, and juicy stock, full of all manner of grace and perfection: all
we sinners are as so many dry sticks, fit for nothing but the fire. If then the
green wood was in that heat of suffering for the sins of others, how will the
dry withered sticks burn in Hell, or Purgatory, for their own? And if God the
father did so severely chastize the offenses of his slaves in the person of his
most innocent Son, how much more will he punish them in the offenders
themselves, Eccla. in Off. Def.
when That day shall once come, the day of wrath, calamity, and misery? Weep
therefore for your self now, that you may not hereafter be forced to weep for
ever.

I will expect our Lord who has hid his face from the house of Jacob, and I
will wait for him. Is. 8.17.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as a hidden God.
Is. 45.15.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Ghospel, how Christ hid himself from the
Jews that would have stoned him; Jo. 8.59. in memory whereof the Crosses this
day are covered in the Churches, and Christ himself by Isaie is termed a hidden
God. Verily thou art God hidden, the God of Israel, a Savior. And speaking of
him in his Passion he says. Is. 53.3.
His look, as it were hid, and despised. He hid his Divinity under the disguise
of flesh and blood, his glory with the Ignominy of his Passion, and both his
flesh and Divinity under the forms of bread and wine; so that the Psalmist
with reason said of him, Ps. 30.20.
How great is the multitude of thy sweetness, O Lord, which thou have hid for
them that fear thee?

Seq. in fest^ Corp. Chr.
Consider 2. In the Eucharist not only the flesh it self of Christ is hidden
from our senses, for the greater merit of our faith, but also its Virtue and
efficacy; whence it is, that not all that come to this Sacrament, do taste of
its sweetness and delight; nay it is no less then death to the bad as it is
life to the good: And even among the good, it works in every one very
different effects; so that it may deservedly be called a hidden Manna, and a
white counter, and a new name written, Apoc. 2.17
which no man knows but he that receives it.

Ibid.
Consider 3. If you desire to know the sweetness of this hidden Manna, 1. Be
Master of your self, and your Appetites; for, To him that overcomes (says our
Lord) I will give the hidden Manna. 2. Be humble, and little in your own eyes.
Mat. 11.25
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
to little ones. Cant. 2.14 Deuteronomy. 32.13. 1 Cor. 10.4
3. Hide your self in the holes of the Rock, in Christ's wounds, and Meditation
of his Passion, and so you will come truly to suck honey out of the Rock. For,
The Rock, as the Apostle says, was Christ.

Of Crucifying our Lord. Part 1.
COnsider 1. Being come to the place appointed for execution, our Lord is again
stripped naked of his clothes in the sight of so great a multitude, before the
insolent Soldiers, and them that sought for nothing more then subject of scorn
and laughter. He bears patiently this Ignominy due to our Sins, and gives us
thereby in his own person a lively example of Evangelical poverty. Then, to the
end that no sense might be without its torment, Mat. 27.34
They gave him wine to drink mingled with gall. And when he had tasted, he
would not drink. Ambr. in Luc. c. 25.
Not for the galls sake (says S. Ambrose) but for that he refuses such
bitternesses as are mingled with wine. For our Savior would swallow down the
bitter pills of his Passion without the mixture of any sweetness. Be ashamed
for seeking dainties for your palate, and for murmuring when they are not
afforded.

Is. 55.8.
Consider 2. The Circumstance of Place. It was a high hill, exposed to the view
of all, for the greater Ignominy; full of deadmens bones, for the greater
horror and loathsomness. Our Lord made choice of an obscure place to be born
in, thereby to conceal his glory, but would dye hanged up a loft, openly in the
sight of all, and in the middle of the Earth, as some observe, for the greater
infamy. How different, O Lord, are your cogitations from our cogitations, and
your ways from our ways? We strive what we can to conceal whatsoever is in us
that may turn to our disgrace, and divulge al^ that makes to our praise and
commendation.

Is. 53.7.
Consider 3. The Circumstance of Time. On the most solemn festivity of Easter,
at what time all the people were wont to flock to Jerusalem; at broad light,
and in the very heat of Noon day, to signify the fervor of his Charity,
wherewith, as with fire, this holocaust was consumed. For, he was offered
because himself would, and at what time he would, and where he would, and with
whom he would, but withal would do it in that manner, that he might teach us
by his own example to contemn all things.

Of Crucifying our Lord. Part 2.
Genesis 22.9.
COnsider 1. All things being now ready for his crucifying, he is insolently
thrown down by the Executioner upon the Cross; See how obediently he places
himself thereon; and like Isaac when he lay on the Alter upon the pile of wood,
offers himself in Sacrifice to his Eternal Father. See how he stretches
forth his hands to the holes whereto they were to be nailed, for Adams
stretching forth his to the forbidden fruit. Hear the hideous sound of the
hammers knocking the nails into his Sacred hands and feet. See the streams of
blood running down upon the ground, and learn by the example of our Lord to
crucify your flesh, Galat. 5.24
with the vices and concupiscences as the Apostle teaches.

Ps. 21.18.
Consider 2. What excessive torment must our blessed Lord feel in those tender
parts, and full of sinews, especially being violently stretched out, and
probably also disjoynted to make them reach to the holes; so as to fulfill
that of the Prophet. They have dug my hands, and my feet, they have numbered
all my bones. Compassionat your dear Lord, and grieve for having been cause of
these his torments by your sins. Bern. ser. de Nativit.
Acknowledge O man (says S. Bernard) how grievous your wounds are (that is
your sins) for which it was necessary our Lord should be wounded.

Consider 3. Our Lord being nailed, to the Cross, is pulled up on high, and
violently let down again into the trench they had made to fasten the Cross in,
to the unspeakable increase of all his torments. O what a spectacle was this to
the World, to Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9.
and to Men? Of compassion, and astonishment to the Angels, of scorn and
derision to the wicked, of compunction and example to the Just, and a Sacrifice
most acceptable to the Eternal Father. Fall at the feet of the Crucifix, take
up the sacred blood that falls down, and speak what affection shall suggest.

Of Crucifying our Lord. Part 3.
COnsider 1. What Christ might do, say, or think, hanging on the Cross, and in
those hideous torments, when he received no comfort either exteriourly from
men, or interiourly in his Soul. If he stirred his body, it was tormented a
fresh by the wounds of his hands and feet, whereon the whole weight of his body
did hang. If he moved his head, the thorns were stricken in the deeper; and yet
not the least sigh, or moan, or complaint was heard to proceed from him; but he
offered all to his Eternal Father for your and others sins.

Mat. 27.39 etc.
Consider 2. And they that passed-by blasphemed him; The Priests, the Soldiers,
and all sorts of men. They upbraided him. 1. With Impotency. He saved others,
himself he cannot save. 2. With Arrogance, as vainly taking upon him the title
of King. If he be King of Isarel, let him come down. 3. As counterfeiting
himself Son of God, and presumptuously relying thereon. He trusted in God, let
him now deliver him, if he will, etc. 4. As boasting of himself. Vah! thou that
destroyest the Temple of God, and in three days do reedify it. To all this
he holds his peace, as a dumb sign or mark exposed to all manner of
contradiction, So as to be filled with reproaches. Thren. 3.3^


Is. 53.5.
Consider 3. Christ would not come down from the Cross, nor shorten the durance
of his pains, as easily he might, but would continue in them to the last
breath, without admitting any manner of comfort; that you might also learn to
persever in good, even until death. Take notice also that he suffered all this
for our sins. He was wounded for our iniquities, he was broken for our sins.
Take heed therefore lest returning to sin, Hebr. 6.6.
you crucify again to your self (as the Apostle speaks) and to your own
ruin, the Son of God.

Of Christ's first word on the Cross. Father forgive them, etc. Luc. 23.34.

Luc. 9.3^.
COnsider 1. Christ's was given to the world by his Eternal Father, as a Doctor
or Master, to teach us the way of Salvation. This is my beloved Son, bear him.
Hear him then from the Cross, as his Pulpit, or chair, reading seven admirable
lessons unto you: and seek to prove a diligent disciple in his school, that
you may say with the Apostle. 1 Cor. 2.2.
I judged not my self to know any thing among you but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified.

Is. 53.12.
Consider 2. Christ's first Lesson is of loving our Enemies, and praying for
them. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. He does not call
fire down from Heaven upon his persecutors, as did Elias, nor curses them, as
Elizeus; but asks pardon for his enemies, and (as Isaie says) prays for
the transgressors, fullfilling by deeds what before he commended in words Pray
for them that persecute, Mat. 5.44.
and abuse you. See whether you do so, I say not only for your enemies that
persecute you, but for your familiars and neighbors, who may perhaps offend
you with some light word, or injury.

Consider 3. More particularly each circumstance. Who is it that prays? The
Son of God. Whom does he pray? His Eternal Father. Where? On the tree of the
Cross. At what time? When he was quite spent, and exhausted with suffering, and
now ready to dye. In what manner? Not sitting, or lying at his ease, but strait
erected upon his feet, and stretching forth his hands. In what terms? Not
many, but full of affection, and mingled with sighs, tears, and blood. For
whom? for sinners, for his enemies, persecuters, and tormenters. What does he
ask? Mercy. Before whom? To the hearing of all, even his Adversaries, that you
might learn Mildnes, and Charity toward all, and in all occasions.

Of the Second Word.
Luc. 23.43
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
Is. 53.12.
COnsider 1. It was none of the least Ignominies which our Savior suffered, to
hang between two thieves, as their ringleader, making good that of the Prophet.
And he was reputed with the wicked. He was born between two silly beasts, and
would dye between two thieves, to give us example of Humility, though in Heaven
he be seated between the Father and the Holy Ghost. Ambr. in Luc. c. 23.
Even he himself (as S. Ambrose speaks) was a thief by Mystery, laying wait
for the Devil, to steal away his weapons; and on the Cross robbed him of a
thief. O Lord rob me thus of my heart, that it may serve you alone.

Ambr. sup.
Consider 2. Those words of Christ. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
Admire the riches of Gods Bounty, and Longanimity. He takes up infamous
robbers, and makes them his sons, and heirs of his Kingdom, and this at the
first word, without any put-ofs, or delays. This very day thou shall be with
me. He gives the thief incomparably more then he demanded of him. He craved
only a remembrance, and Christ promises him a Kingdom; for (as S. Ambrose
says) Our Lord ever bestows more then is demanded of him, and his grant is
larger then the Petition. Who would not love, and willingly serve such a Lord?

Job. 33.27
Consider 3. Three several sorts of sufferers in these three that were put to
the same death of the Cross: some deservedly, but impatiently, as the bad
thief: Others though deservedly, yet patiently, as the good thief: Others again
both undeservedly, and withal patiently, as Christ our Lord. Seek to be one of
the two later sorts; at least be of the second, and confess with holy Job, I
have sinned, and indeed I have offended, and as I was worthy, I have not
received; for you are truly worthy of many stripes.

Of the Third Word.
Woman behold thy Son.
Jo. 19.25.
COnsider 1. And there stood beside the Cross of Jesus his Mother. Ponder how
his blessed Mother, and other devout persons stood near the Cross: Whence you
may learn that the lovers of Christ, are also lovers of his Cross, and the
nearer they stand to this, the more they show their love to him. Think how his
B. Mother was afflicted when she saw her son, and that such an one, so
barbarously used. S. Bonav.
Your Son O Virgi^ (says S. Bonaventure) suffered in his body, you in mind.
The several wounds, which were all over his body, met together in one within
your heart. Yet she gave not the least sign of impatience; not did she any
thing misbeseeming her person; that you might learn to compassionat Christ
together with her, and withal to suffer your own adversities with courage.

Jo. sup.
Consider 2. Woman behold thy Son. He calls her woman, not Mother, that he
might not seem to regard flesh and blood, who was wholly employed in doing the
will of his Eternal Father; and that he might not the more deeply wound her
afflicted heart with the tender name of Mother. He commends unto her his
Disciple S. John, and in him all Christians; that she who is so powerful with
God, might be a Mother to us. She willingly accepts the charge, so that she
is deservedly styled by the Saints The Mother of the living. S. Epiph. l. 3.
hom. 78. Him. Ave Maris stella
Recommend your self therefore unto her, saying with the Church, show your self
a Mother.

Eccli. 13.20.
Consider 3. Behold your Mother. To wit, so as to have recours unto her, as a
child to his Mother; and that you love, respect, and assist her as your own
parent: Teaching us herein to be careful of our parents to our last breath.
Observe how he recommends Virgin to Virgin. Be therefore a lover of Chastity,
if you desire to be ranked among the sons of Mary. For like to like, and as the
Wise man says, Every man will associat himself to his like. Imitat S. John in
devotion to your Sacred Mother, who from that hour took her to his own.

Behold thy King comes to thee meek.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as a mild King.
Mat. 21.5.
COnsider 1. What is said this day in the Ghospel. Behold thy King comes to
thee meek. Thou art the same my King, and my God, Ps. 43.5.
which command the Salvations of Jacob. At other times we may take him as
the King of Majesty, the King of Glory, a powerful King, and exceeding
dreadful. But in his Passion he would show himself a mild King. who when he
suffered, threatened not, etc. 1 Pet. 2.23.
And therefore to day sits upon an Ass, a gentle, tame beast; Ps. 98.1. Ps.
103.3.
who at other times is said to sit upon the Cherubs, and walk upon the wings of
the winds. With this mildness he will come to you in the Eucharist, wherein
that you might not dread his Majesty, he lies hid under the disguise and form
of most delicious food, and suffers himself, with admirable patience and
longanimity, to be taken into the mouths and breasts even of his enemies.

Ps. 22.2.
Consider 2. How much you ought to wish that this King may come and reign in
your soul, and subdue all your unruly passions; For he is both of infinite
wisdom and power to govern and protect you; and as infinitely rich, and
bountiful to reward, and Crown you. Our Lord rules me (says David) and
nothing shall be wanting to me. Wherefore if you will want nothing, deliver
your self to be ruled by him.

Consider 3. You must duly prepare your soul to receive your King, so, that he
may come to visit you in his mildnes, not in his fury and indignation. Go
forth therefore to meet him like the Children of Jerusalem, carrying with you
fresh green branches of good works; spead your garments in his way, and cast
under his feet, at least in affection, all earthly and worldly concerns; sound
forth and sing his praises, and say with the Prophet, I will exalt thee my God
the King, Ps. 144.1. Ps. 5.3.
and I will bless thy name for ever. And, Attend to the voice of my prayer, my
King, and my God.

Of the fourth Word.
My God, my God. etc.
Mat. 27.46
COnsider 1. About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a mighty Voice saying, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? A loud cry and voice are signs of
excessive grief, for our Lord was left all alone in his sufferings, which
continued a long time, with exceeding great torment; destitute of all manner of
comfort, which might arise from the Inferior part of the soul; forsaken of his
own people, even Disciples; forseeing withal, that the greatest part of the
world would forsake him, to whom all those bitter torments of his would prove
in vain; so that now was truly fullfilled that of Jeremy the Prophet. Thren.
2.13.
Great is thy destruction as the Sea, who shall heal thee?

Consider 2. Christ our Lord could easily have freed himself from these
interious anguishes of mind, by giving way to the joys of the Beatifical
vision, which possessed the Superior Powers of his Soul, to overflow also the
inferior; but would endure them all, that he might be the more like to us in
all things, and withal to instruct us how to behave our selves in time of
Desolation, Dryness in Devotion, and Trouble of mind, which are incident to
persons even of the greatest Virtue and Perfection. Learn therefore to stand
resolutly in like occasions, to betake your self to prayer, and to hold out
with patience in expectation of Gods divine assistance, Habac. 2.3.
Because coming he will come (says the Prophet) and he will not slack.

Ps. 25.2.
Consider 3. If God the Father left his beloved Son in this manner, wonder not
if he seem to leave you to your self for some time without all comfort. Nay
such Desolations are signs of his love, sent us for trial of our Constancy,
and enlargement of our Crown. Whence it is that David said, Prove me O Lord,
and tempt me: burn my reins and my heart. Offer your self in like manner; Only
beg of him with the same Prophet, that when he leaves you, Ps. 118.8.
he forsakes you not wholly.

Of the fifth Word. I thirst.
Jo. 19.28.
COnsider 1. Jesus knowing that all things were now consummate, etc. He says, I
thirst. Christ had a double thirst, Corporal, and Spiritual. His Corporal
thirst was most vehement, and inflamed with his last nights restless watching,
weariness, interior affliction, and effusion of so much blood. Our Blessed
Lord would also suffer this torment for our instruction, neither would he
quench his own thirst, Ps. 77.16. Judic. 15.19.
who brought forth water out of the Rock, for his people that thirsted in the
desert, and afforded Sampson in his thirst drink out of the jawe of an Ass;
that you might learn to suffer hunger, thirst, and other corporal incommodities.

Consider 2. And they putting a sponge full of Vinegre about Hyssope, on the
top of a cane, offered to his mouth, not to refresh but to torment him a new.
Ps. 135.25. Ps. 144.17.
What a potion was this for the Son of God? who gives food to all flesh. And
fills every living creature with blessing. How much better drink does ^ie
afford us of his own precious blood in the Holy Eucharist? Ps. 22.5.
And your chalice inebriating, O Lord, how good is it? Be ashamed for being so
nice in your drink, and perhaps complaining also, if it happen to be any thing
stale, harsh, unpleasant, etc.

Mat. 5.6.
Consider 3. Christ's spiritual thirst, which was chiefly of three things. 1. Of
obeying his Heavenly Father, and fullfilling whatsoever was written of him. 2.
Of suffering yet more; to which purpose he openly proclaimed his thirst, whereby
he might be the more tormented, not refreshed. 3. Of effectually redeeming
whole Mankind, for whom he dyed. Strive to imitate him in all these. Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after Justice, for they shall have their fill.

Of Christ's last Words, and Death.
Jo. 19.30.
COnsider 1. Jesus therefore when he had taken the Vinegre, said, It is
consummate. He congratulated with himself. 1. For having performed the will of
his Heavenly Father, Phil. 2.8.
being made Obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. 2. For having
fullfilled the Prophecies, and figures that were of him, Mat. 5.18.
of which he said, I came not to break the Law but to fulfill. 3. For being
come to an end of all his labors, which he endured to the very last; drinking
up the chalice prepared for him, to the bottom, dregs and all. Well therefore
might he say to his Eternal Father, I have consummated the work which thou
gave me to do, etc. And I come to thee. Jo. 17.4. and 10. Luc. 23.46.


Judic. 7.20
Consider 2. The Last Word. Father into thy bands I commend my Spirit. He said
it with a loud voice, in sign of Triumph over Death, Sin, and the Devil. So
Gedeon with broken pitchers, and loud cry, proclaimed Victory over the
Madianits. He teaches us withal how to recommend our selves to God at the
hour of death, and what we ought chiefly to be careful of at that time,
casting off all thoughts of wordly affairs. Beseech our Lord that death may
not so steal upon you at unawates, as to prevent these, or the like good
affections.

Jo. 19.30.
Consider 3. And bowing his head he gave up the ghost. O unspeakable Mystery!
The Sun of glory is ecclipsed: The Temple of the living God is dissolved: The
Author of life yields to death. O how true is that of the Apostle! You are
bought with a great price. Wherefore Glorify, 1 Cor. 6.20
and bear God in your body, but much more in your mind. See that you be not
more insensible then the senseless creatures themselves. The Sun was darkened,
and the veil of the Temple was rent in the midst. The Earth did quake, and the
rocks were reat, Luc. 23.45. Mat. 27.51.
and the graves were opened, etc. Be ashamed, and confounded for your sins;
Tear a sunder the double veil of self-love and will, that hangs between God
and you; Tremble at the account you are to give for Christ's death and Passion;
Rent your hard heart by true Contrition; And lastly quit the loathsome Grave of
Sin, and Tepidity.

Arise, sit up Jerusalem, lose the hands of thy neck etc. You were sold for
naught and without silver you shall be redeemed. Is. 52.2.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as your Redeemer.
Ps. 110.9.
COnsider 1. The benefit of our Redemption, which the Church does most
particularly solemnize all this holy time. We were all under the Tyranny of the
Devil, cast off from the face of God, by demerit of our sins: nor was there any
one, that could free us from this slavery; no creature being sufficient to pay
our ransom. We were all lost for ever. When behold the only begotten Son of God
sent redemption to his people, offering himself in Sacrifice for our sins,
being truly our Father, Is. 63.16.
our Redeemer, as Esaie speaks, from the beginning such is his name.

1 Pet. 1.18.
Consider 2. At what rare we were redeemed, namely, Not with corruptible things,
Gold, or Silver, but with his own precious blood. And whereas one single drop
had been abundantly sufficient, he would notwithstanding powr^ it all forth,
and suffer so many bitter torments; Ps. 129.7.
Because with our Lord there is mercy, and with him plenteous redemption.
Besides, not content with redeeming us once, he has left himself unto us in
the Eucharist, so that allthough you should often fall into the Enemies hands,
you might have wherwithall to free your self again. O unspeakable love! Return
the best thanks you are able.

Consider 3. This Redeemer will come to day into your soul to free you from the
relics of your former captivity, and to lose the bands of vicious habits, if
any be in you. Prepare your self therefore to meet him. Bestow your self as a
thing none of your own, but wholly his, who bought you. 1 Cor. 6.19
You are not your own (says the Apostle) for you are bought with a great
price. Wherefore render your self wholly to him, whose you are, and cast off all
affection to whatsoever else. Say with the Psalmist. I am thine, save me, Ps.
118.94 Orat. deVen Sacr.
and with the Church pray that you may feel in your self the benefit of his
Redemption.

A Summary of our Lords Passion.
Thren. 1.12.
I Magine your self to stand at the foot of the Cross on Mount Calvary, and to
hear our Savior call out in these words of the Prophet, O all ye that pass by
the way, attend, and see if there be sorrow like to my sorrow. Ponder
attentively the whole Passion according to four particular Circumstances.

1. How ignominious it was. He was hanged as a thief aloft in the air, as one
unworthy either to live, or die on the earth; He was condemned at four several
Tribunals, hurried along the streets, and pointed at as a Blasphemer, Seducer,
Impostor, Glutton, Madman, and Fool. What say you to all this, that are so nice
of your Reputation!

2. How Grievous it was. 1. By reason of his delicate and tender complexion. 2.
Because he would admit of no manner of comfort, either interior, or exterior.
3. For that he was left all alone, and forsaken by his friends. Ps. 68.9.
I am become a forreigner to my brethren, and a stranger to the Sons of my
Mother, the Synagogue. 4. Upon the Cross, if he would seek any ease by moving,
or turning himself the whole weight of his body lay the heavier upon the wounds
of his hands, and feet, with increase of his torments. If he went to lean his
head, the thorns were stricken the deeper in; If he thirsted, his drink was
Vinegre and Gall etc. Good God what torment?

Is. 1.6.
3. How Universal it was; both in body and mind. That of the Prophet was truly
fullfilled in him. From the Sole of the foot to the top of the head, there is
no health. His head was pierced with thorns, his face buffeted with fists, and
defiled with spittle; his eyes black and blew; his lips swollen; his teeth
stricken out; his beard plucked off; his ears rent with pulls and pinches; his
nose beaten flat; his shoulders torn with stripes; his side pierced with a
lance; his hands and feet bored through with nails: in fine his whole body
imbrued in his own blood.

4. How lasting it was; His whole life was a continual suffering. I am poor,
and in labors (says he by his Prophet) from my Youth. Ps. 87.16.
But those things which he suffered from his last supper to his last breath,
were intolerable, and lasted all that night, and day fellowing, for about
twenty hours together. Speak what affection shall suggest.

Of our Lords Burial.
Mat. 27.
COnsider 1. After our Lord was dead, his sacred body was taken down from the
Cross with great devotion and tears, by Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathia, who
laid it in the Mothers arms; whereby that of the Canticles was fullfilled.
Cant. 1.13
A Buadle of Myrrh my beloved is to me, he shall abide between my breasts.
Think what expressions of grief and sorrow, what sighs, and tears passed from
her. Ponder what was said and done at that time by her, and her devout
companions. See that your beloved Lord be also to you a bundle of Myrrh; and
that by frequent contemplation of his Passion, you lodge him in your bosom and
heart.

2 Cor 4.10.
Consider 2. Grief and love having acted their parts, they embaulm the sacred
Corpse, and wrap it up in a clean winding sheet. Our Lord is delighted with
cleanliness even in his grave; that you might learn diligently to cleanse your
heart, as often as you receive him in the Holy Eucharist. Our Lord will have
his Mystical members embaulmed, especially with the Myrrh of Mortification,
that with the Apostle, Allways bearing about in our body the Mortification of
Jesus, the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our bodies. Think how you may
put this in practice.

Tit. 2.13.
Consider 3. Our Lord being buried, every one betake themselves to their own
home; for they were not permitted by the keepers to remain at the Sepulcher.
Think in what solitude the B. Mother, and other devout persons were in, and how
they gave themselves wholly to prayer, Expecting the blessed hope, and advent of
the glory of the great God. The B. Virgin doubtless comforted herself with that
of the Psalm. At evening shall weeping abide, and in the morning gladness. Ps.
29.6.
Do you likewise in Desolation have recourse to prayer, and learn to put your
trust in God.

Things to be observed concerning the Meditations of the Mysteries after our
Lords Resurrection.
1 Cor. 6.17.
THe Meditations upon the Mysteries after our Lords Resurrection appertain to
the Unitive way. This being an Uniting of our will with the divine will of God,
by way of affection, makes that our will, as it were, going forth of her self,
lays hold on the goodness of God represented unto it, and adhereth unto him,
and by this adhesion is united with him, according to that of the Apostle, He
that clea^eth to our Lord, is one Spirit. Hence this Unitive way has diverse
affections properly belonging unto it, which we may make use of in the ensuing
meditations. The chief are these following.

1. Admiration of Gods Majesty whom we contemplat, and of his Attributes, and
Perfections. 2. Joy and content for that God is so absolutely perfect in
himself, good to others, and so admirable in his works. 3. Praise, and
thanksgiving for his gifts and benefits, with desire of seeing and enjoying
him, and of honoring, and obeying him. 4. Zeal of Gods Glory, and good of
Souls, wishing that all the world might come to know, love, and serve him. 5.
Trust in his Goodness and Providence, together with a filial respect, standing
in fear of being separated from him, or of committing any thing which may
justly offend so great a Majesty; and bewailing all the sins whereby we had
incurred at any time his just indignation. 6. Desire of these Heavenly things
we contemplat; so that whatsoever is upon earth may seem but dirt unto us,
while we look up to heaven, saying with the Prophet. How beloved are thy
tabernacles, Ps. 83.2.
O Lord of hoasts! my Soul coveteth, and faints unto the Courts of our Lord.
And, Ps. 41.2.
Even as the heart desires after the fountains of waters, so does my Soul
desire after thee, O God.
2 Cor. 3.18.
By these, and such like affections, let us endeavor to obtain, that Beholding
the glory of our Lord, etc. We may be transformed (as the Apostle speaks)
into the same image from glory unto glory; that is, that we may become like
unto him, by the union of our wills; increasing daily more and more in the
knowledge of him, till at length passing from the imperfect clarity of this
life and pilgrimage, we arrive to the perfect clarity, and glory of our native
Country and Beatificall Vision.

Rise thou that sleep and arise from the dead, and Christ will illuminate
thee. Ephe. 5.14.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as our Resurrection.
Apoc. 3.17
COnsider 1. The manner wherewith Christ raised his body out of the Sepulcher,
of deformed rendering it glorious. Ponder what a difference there is between a
body that is dead, pale, wan, destitute of all sense and motion, and the same
when it is invested with the array and endowments of glory: The same difference
is between the Soul in Sin, and in the state of Grace; and almost the same
between tepidity and fervor. For in the state of Tepidity the Soul is as it
were in a slumber, and void of all heroical motion, she is insensible of things
appertaining to God, and being possessed with innumerable fantasies, pursues
vain trifles, and dreams, instead of real, and solid goods. She thinks
herself in a good state, when in truth she is like that man in the Apocalypse,
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Jo. 11.25.
Consider 2. Christ is ready to raise us out of these miserable states;
therefore he says, I am the resurrection and the life. To wit, the cause, and
Author of both, and as well of the Soul, as of the body. O what a benefit it
is, and how infinitely to be valued, to be raised from the death of Sin, and
grave of Tepidity, and to be placed in the clear light of the Childeren of
God, that walk and work with fervor? The same will Christ bestow upon you, this
day, in the Holy Eucharist, if you hinder him not. For therefore he is called
the bread of life: Jo. 6.35. Ibid. v. 40. S. Tho. and alii.
and as we owe unto him the Resurrection of our bodies, in the last day, so do
we now the Resurrection and reviving of our Souls.

Colos. 3.1.
Consider 3. The signs of our rising with Christ are to seek, and mind the
things that are above, not the things that are upon earth. So the Apostle, If
you be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above, etc. Seek therefore
and affect only heavenly things, Romans 6.9.
and as Christ Rising again from the dead, now dies no more; So you being
raised from the state of Tepidity to Fervor, have a care you fall not into a
relapse.

Of our Lords Resurrection.
COnsider 1. There having now passed time sufficient to evidence the certainty
of his death, on the third day, early in the morning, our Lord hastened to
bring forth the Holy Fathers our of Limbus, to comfort his B. Mother, and
desolate Disciples, and Illustrate the whole world with the rays of his glory.
What Jubily were the Holy Fathers in at that time, when they saw that Blessed
hour come of their delivery, which they had longed for, so many ages? Free, O
Lord, in like manner my Soul from the Lions mouth, and from the deep lake, and
let not my Enemies, The World, the Flesh, and the Devil, ever domineere over me.

Consider 2. How when Christ's Soul was come out of Limbus to the body in the
Sepulcher, he showed it to the Holy Fathers, as it lay, pale, and wan, all
mangled, and disfigured; that they might see how much he had suffered for them,
and at what rate he had redeemed them. Then he reunited it to the Soul, and
that of David was fullfilled, Our Lord has reigned, Ps. 92.1.
he has put on beauty; Our Lord has put on strength, and has girded himself.
For he took upon him the four properties of a glorified body. 1. Of Clarity,
rendering it brighter then the Sun it self. 2. Of Subtility, to penetrate the
Sepulcher, and whatsoever other corporal substance. 3. Of Agility, to move
itself to the remotest places in a moment. 4. Of Impassibility, so as to be
incapable of dying, or suffering any more. Being thus crowned with glory, he
might say to his Eternal Father with David, Thou have turned my mourning into
joy unto me, thou have cut my sackcloth, Ps. 29.12.
and have compassed me with gladness.

Apoc. 5.12
Consider 3. How the Eternal Father congratulateth with his son, as also do the
Angels of Heaven, and the Fathers of Limbus, for the reunion of his body; all
crying out as with one voice, The Lamb that was slain, is worthy to receive
power, and divinity, and wisdom, and strength and honor, and glory, and
benediction. Join you with them, and say, This is the day which our Lord made,
Ps. 117.24
let us rejoice and be glad therein. Learn hence that the Tribulations of the
Just are but short, but their glory everlasting, Romans 8.17
and that if we suffer (with Christ) we shall also be glorified with him.

Of our Lords Apparitions, and how he appeared first to his Blessed Mother.
Act. 1.3.
COnsider 1. Christ three different ways manifested his Resurrection. 1. By
Saints, who arose in their bodies, and appeared to many. 2. By Angels at the
Sepulcher. 3. In his own person, showing himself alive in many arguments, for
forty days appearing, etc. After the same manner, he is wont to manifest
himself to his devout servants, by spiritual men, by their Angel Guardians, and
immediately by himself. He that loves me, etc. I will love him, Jo. 14.11.
and will manifest my self to him. Love him therefore, that he may manifest
himself also to you.

2 Cor. 1.7.
Consider 2. Christ first of all appeared to his B. Mother, according to the
pious belief of the Church; that she who had drunk most of the bitter chalice
of his Passion, should be the first in partaking the joy of his Resurrection,
As you are partakers of the Passions, so shall you be of the consolation also.
She did most certainly believe, and most ardently expect the hour of his
Resurrection, and said with David, Arise my glory, Ps. 56.9.
arise psalter and harp, and therefore she was not frustrated of her desire;
that you might learn both fervently to desire heavenly things, and withal
patiently to expect the time. Habec. 2.3.
If he shall make tarriance, expect him, because coming he will come, and he
will not slack, and will recompense his delay.

Consider 3. What joy possessed the Mothers heart, when she beheld her son?
What holy embracings passed between them? What was said, or done on both sides?
Doubtless the Holy Fathers Adam, Abraham, Moses, David, and others, did
congratulate with the Virgin, and say, Thou Daughter art blessed of our Lord,
for that by thee we have partaken the fruit of life. Ecl. in Off. E. V.
Do you likewise congratulate with her, from your heart, and say with the
Church, Rejoice thou Queen of Heaven Alleluia, because whom thou did deserve
to bear Alleluia, Regina. Coeli.
is risen again as he said Alleluia, Pray unto God for us Alleluia.

Angels appear to the Women at the Sepulcher. Mar. 16.1.
Jo. 20.1.
ANd very early, the first of the Sabboths, they come to the monument. Consider
1. The devotion of these three women. 1. They brought Spices, not sparing any
cost to perform the last Obsequies of their love, in annoyling the corpse of
their Lord. 2. For the same purpose they rise very early, and when it was yet
dark. Learn to spare no labor, nor cost in the service of God, according to
your ability: and that as the wife man says, Sap. 16.28.
We ought to prevent the Sun to bless God, and at the rising of the light to
adore him. See whether you be so early in the morning employed in the Divine
Service.

Consider 2. And they said one to an other, who shall role us back the stone
from the door of the monument? Among their pious discourses in the way, they
were in care about removing the stone. But no sooner were they come, but they
saw the stone roled back. So we fancy to our selves many difficulties in the
way of virtue, and perfection, which notwithstanding when we come to practice,
Allmighty God does facilitate unto us, and take away. And entering into the
monument they saw a young man sitting on the right hand. God rewards the
Women's devotion with the vision of an Angel. And his countenance was as
lightening, and his garment as Snow. Mat. 28.3.
Who would not wish to dwell with such happy company?

Galat. 6.14 1 Cor. 2.2.
Consider 3. Be not dismayed; you seek Jesus of Nazareth that was crucified.
Among the titles of our Lord now in glory, is also ranked that of being
Crucified, that you might learn with the Apostle not to glory, saving in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And even not to know any thing but Jesus
Christ and him Crucified. Think what joy the holy Women were in, to hear that
Christ was risen, and how they went forth quickly out of the monument with
fear and great joy, Mat. 28.8.
running to tell his Disciples.

Christ appears to Mary Magdalen. Jo. 20.11.
MAry stood at the Monument without, weeping. Consider the fervorous love of
this pious Woman, and Constancy in persevering still at the Sepulcher, whereas
the others returned back: whereby she deserved to see our Lord before the rest;
for, as S. Gregory upon this place says, Greg. hom. 25. in Evang.
The Virtue, value, or worth of a good work is perseverance. Learn hence how to
seek our Lord, when by sin he is taken from you, or when by desolation he
withdraws himself; you must do it with sighs, tears, and ardent love,
whereby you will come to find him whom your Soul loves. Cant. 3.4.


Consider 2. Angels appear unto Mary, and ask her Woman why weepest thou? but
could not satisfy her mind or affection; for no wordly comfort is able to
content the soul that truly seeks God. Then Christ himself appears, but
first in the shape of a Gardener, so as she knew him not, saying, Sir if thou
have carried him away, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him
away. Great was the force of her love: She excepted no place, feared no danger,
but was ready to seek her Lord upon any terms. See whether your love be such.

Job. 3.22.
Consider 3. Jesus says to her, Mary. Our Lord does often conceal his
presence, and seems to be far off from his servants, when he is near at hand;
He conceales himself under a disguise, the better to try our love and inflame
our desires; but discovers himself at last, and (as Sara said) after tears
and weeping powers in joyfullness. Beseech our Lord, that he would vouchsafe
to be so intimate and familiar with you, as to call you by your name, and
speak so to your heart, that you may come to know his voice, and with B.
Magdalen, be more and more inflamed with his love.

Our Lord appears to the other Women. Mat. 28.9.
COnsider 1. While the Holy Women, among whom probably was S. Mary Magdalen,
were in their return from the Sepulcher to the City, Christ met them in the
way, and saluted them, saying, All hail. Ponder here the great goodness of our
Lord, affording comfort in a most seasonable time, and not disdaining the
weaker fer. Ponder also that word All hail, which the Angel Gabriel likewise
used to the B. Virgin, and did work in their hearts what it did outwardly
signify. O Lord speak so to my Soul. Cant. 2.14.
Let thy voice sound in my ears, for thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely.

Ps. 44.8.
Consider 2. But they came near, and took hold of his feet, and adored him. They
were permitted to touch and kiss his sacred feet. O with what reverence, and
joy of heart did they do it? In reward of their good desires of anealing his
sacred Corpse in the Sepulcher, they were themselves anointed with the oil of
gladness above their fellows. Learn hence with what affections you ought to
embrace, not his feet, but whole Christ in the Eucharist, as often as you
frequent it. Lay fast hold on your Beloved, and let him not go from you, till
he has given you his blessing, Genesis 32.26.29.
as he did to Jacob.

Pro. 18.19
Consider 3. Jesus said to them, Fear not, go tell my brethren, etc. Admire
the sweetness of our Lord in comforting his servants, and taking from them all
fear. Ponder those words My Brethren, bearing a most friendly and sweet name;
He who was now King of Glory, disdained not to call poor ignorant fishermen his
brethren. O what a happiness it is to have such a brother? Love him therefore
as your brother, and put your trust in him; for if the Brother that is helped
of Brother (as the Wise man says) is as a strong City, how much more he who
is helped of such a Brother?

Peter and John go to the Sepulcher, and Our Lord appears to Peter.
Luc. 24.11.
COnsider 1. The devour Women relate what they had seen at the Sepulcher to the
Disciples that were assembled together: But it seemed before them as dotage;
for the Apostles were as yet fixed to sensible things, and were not enlightened
by the Holy Ghost. So the Mysteries of the Cross, and Resurrection, seem no
better then mere folly to the Wise men of this world. Beseech our Lord to
enlighten your darkness, that you may not dote so miserably with the World.

Consider 2. Peter and John more desireous then the rest of knowing the truth,
ran to the Sepulcher, entered in, looked thoroughly about, and found all as the
women had related; but neither Angels nor our Lord appeared unto them, for
their further trial, and for that the relations of others ought to have
sufficed. By John is signified Faith, by Peter Charity: with both we must seek
Christ, if at any time he be taken from us.

Consider 3. On the same day afterward Christ appeared (as is gathered out of
S. Luke) unto Peter, Ibid. and v. 34.
who went away marvelling with himself at that which was done. And, Our Lord
has risea indeed, and has appeared to Simon. Thus our Lord would comfort him.
1. That he might afterward confirm others in the same belief. 2. Because he
had already blotted out the Sin of his denial with due penance, and now
deserved to receive corsolation. 3. Because of all the Disciples he loved
Christ most, and therefore conceived more grief then any for his death. Learn
to bear Christ company in his sufferings, that you may rejoice with him in his
Resurrection. For, Ps. 93.19.
according to the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, thy consolations have
made my Soul Joyful.

I will hear what our Lord God will speak in me, because he will speak peace
upon his people. Ps. 84.9.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Prince of Peace.
Jer. 29.11. Is. 9.6.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Ghospel, how Christ appeared unto the
Apostles, and thrice imparted unto them his peace, saying, Peace be to you, Jo.
20.19. For he is our peace (as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.14.) intending
cogitations of peace, and not of affliction: and therefore among other titles*
he is called by Isaie the Prince of Peace.

Gal. 5.17.
Consider 2. There are three sorts of peace, which we are to procure. 1. With
God. 2. With our Neighbor 3. With out, solves; for the flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; Ps. 37.4.
and therefore David said My bones have no peace: And a man's enemies (are) they
of his own household, to wit, Mich. 7.6.
his own unlawful Appetites This threefould peace the Prince and Author of it
will bring unto you in the Eucharist, if you hinder not; for the Eucharist is
properly a Pacifick Host, between God and us; The Simbole and band of Charity
between us and our Neighbor: Cyril. lib. 4. in c. 27. Je.
and lastly that which (as S. Cyril says) does restrain the raging tyranny of
our members, and does entrench us round about with perfect peace. Whence David
said. Ps. 147.3.
He has set thy borders peace, and fills thee with the fat of corn.

Levit. 26.6
Consider 3. Christ brought Peace this day to the Arostles, when the doors were
shut, and they assembled together within, and in prayer. Therefore shut up
carefully the gates of your senses, and retire your self within the inward
closet of your heart; and our Lord Will give peace in your coasts. You shall
sleep, and there shall be none to make you afraid. But above all, purge your
self thoroughly from sin. (...). 48.22.
For There is no peace to the impious says our Lord.

Luc. 24.13.
Our Lord appears to the Disciples going to Emmaus. Part. 1.
COnsider 1. Behold two of them went the same day into a town, etc. They went
therefore on the very day of the Resurrection to a neighboring town, or
village, and while they were discoursing together of our Lords Passion, and of
the reports and signs of his Resurrection, Christ joined himself with them;
that you might learn how grateful unto him are pious discourses especially of
his Passion. They knew not our Lord, because they wavered in their Faith.
Wherefore if you will understand divine things, you must firmly believe; Is.
7.9. Juxta Septuag.
for (as Isaie says) If you will not believe, you shall not understand. God is
often with us at hand, and we take no notice of him.

Consider 2. How sweetly Christ did insinuat himself to his Disciples. What are
these communications that you conferr one with another? Like a Physician he
searches the wound to apply his salve. They answered. Concerning Jesus of
Nazareth, who was a Man, a Prophet, mighty in work and word, before God, and
all the People. An honorable opinion of our Savior. Such ought to be all
those that are employed in gaining Souls, joining action to their words and
exhortation, and teaching first by example, what they are to Preach by word of
mouth. Greg. l. 1. Ep. 24.
For that speech does more easily penetrate the hearts of the auditors, which
has recommendation from the Orators life, as S. Gregory says.

Mat. 11.12
Consider 3. Those words of Christ. Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and so to enter into his glory? to wit by his passion. And what way
will you enter, that seek your own ease, convenience, and satisfaction in all
things? and can not endure to suffer in the least? Think how little you have
suffered hitherto in Gods cause; and yet The Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent bear it away.

Luc. 24.30. etc.
Our Lord appears to the Disciples, etc. Part 2.
COnsider 1. How Christ walks with his Disciples, and explicateth unto them
the mysteries of his Passion. O how their hearts were inflamed by the divine
fire, which was so near them? So that with good reason they might afterward
say, Was not our heart bur^ing in us? etc. A sign therefore of Christ's
presence in a Soul, is fervor, if you be cold and without fervor, Christ is
not with you.

Prove. 8.31.
Consider 2. How the Disciples being come to their journeys end, invite Christ
to take up with them. He makes as if he had further to go; but they prevail
with him to stay. In the same manner, although he desires nothing more then to
be with us, according to that, My delights (are) to be with the Children of
Men, yet he loves to be entreated, and in a manner forced to it by ernest
Prayer. So Jacob compelled the Angel. I will not let thee go unless thou bless
me. Genesis 22.26. Mat. 15.28
So likewise the Cananean Woman, by still urging on, after the first repulse,
obtained her Daughters care.

Author Imperf. August Paulinus Beda and theophilact. hic.
Consider 3. Whiles he sat at the table with them, he took bread, and blessed,
and brake, and did reach to them, Whereupon Their eyes were opened, and they
knew him. These signal actions, and the singular effect of notifying Christ,
show that it was a Sacramental entertainment (as also the Holy Fathers do
generally teach.) The Souls of the faithful and worthy receivers are truly
enlightened by the breaking of the Eucharistical bread, and their eyes opened
to see, acknowledge, and love the infinite goodness of the Author. Christ having
thus discovered himself, presently disappeareth; for he would not have us
entertain our selves overlong, even in spiritual consolations, but betake our
selves to our employments: and therefore the Disciples rising up the same hour,
went back into Jerusalem, and related with great joy what had happened.

Christ appears to his Disciples gathered together, S. Thomas being absent.
Jo. 20.19.
Part 1.
Is. 66.11.
COnsider 1. When it was late that day, etc. And the doors were shut, Jesus
came and stood in the mids, etc. This is the sixth apparition, wherewith
Christ was pleased to comfort his friends, on the very day of his Resurrection.
That all might be filled of the breast of his consolation, and flow with
delights in all manner of his Glory. But here he appears. 1. Late in the
evening, that you should learn to expect our Lord with patience and
Longanimity. 2. He entered, the doors being shut, to show the subtility
wherewith his body, now in glory, was endowed. Do you in like manner shut the
doors of your senses. You must be a garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12
a fountain sealed up, if you desire to entertain Christ. 3. He stood in the
middle, as a Shepherd amidst his flock, as a Master among his disciples, and
as the Sun in the middle of the world. Stand thus, O Lord, in the center of my
Soul, Feeding, Teaching and Illuminating her.

Phil. 4.7.
Consider 2. He says to them, Peace be to you. He wishes them not plenty of
Riches, nor Honors, nor the like, but Peace, and this with God, within
themselves, and among one another. Learn to prize and purchase this peace
before all worldly wealth; and beseech our Lord That the Peace of God, which
passes all understanding, keep your heart and Intelligence in Christ Jesus.

Consider 3. To confirm them the more, he asks whether they have any thing to
eat, And they offered him a piece of fish broiled, Luc. 24.42
and a honey comb, and he did eat thereof. Christ does often ask of you some
thing to eat; For The Word of God (as S. Ambrose says) feeds upon the
virtues of our Souls. De bon. Mor. c. 5.
You are as a fish swimming in the main Sea of this world, all wet and slabby
with the vanities thereof: Be therefore broyled with the fire of Charity, and
seasoned with the honey of Devotion, that you may make up a dish fit for our
Lords table.

Jo. sup.
Christ appears to his Disciples gathered together, etc. Part 2.
COnsider 1. How after he had eaten he ordained his Disciples as Missionants,
Doctors, and Pastors of his flock; but first repeateth, Peace be unto you; to
show how necessary Peace and union is among themselves, in Apostolical men. As
my father has sent me, I also do send you. That is, with the same authority
that my father sent me, I also send you; and as my father sent me into the
world not to seek my ease and pleasure, but to take pains, and suffer
afflictions, after the same manner I send you; that you may learn hence what
things Apostolical men ought to be lovers of.

Consider 2. When he had said this, he breathed; and he said to them, Receive
ye the Holy Ghost. Our Lord could have given it without breathing on them, but
he would use this Ceremony, that you might learn to reverence the like
ceremonies of the Holy Church; for likewise by means of them is conferred the
Holy Ghost, and his Grace, which is done either by virtue of the work it self,
or in respect of the merits and disposition of the person that works. Beseech
our Lord that he would in like manner breath upon you, inspiring you with his
divine Spirit. Say with the Spouse in the Canticles. Come Southwind, Cant. 4.16.
blow through my garden, and let the aromaticall Spices thereof flow, that is,
all manner of virtue.

Zachar. 13.1.
Consider 3. Whose Sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven, etc. Ponder the
dignity and power expressed and conferred in these words. He gave not the like
to the Priests of the old law, nor to the Angels themselves. Besides, he did
not confine it to any determinate number, or quality either of Sins, or of
Priests, but would have it general for all, by the Sacrament of Confession, to
show the Riches of his Bounty. Give him thanks for so great a benefit, and so
easy a remedy of your Sins. For this is truly a fountain lying open to the
house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for the ablution of the
Sinner, and of the menstruous Woman.

Jo. 20.26.
Christ appears to his Disciples when S. Thomas was present.
Confider 1. The great Incredulity of S. Thomas, and how he came to fall into
it. 1. He was singular, and a part from the rest, when Jesus appeared. 2. He
stubbornly rejected what the others alleged in testimony of the Resurrection.
3. He presumptuously prescribed God the means, without which he would not
believe. Unless I see in his hands the print of his ^ailes, etc. I will not
believe. 4. He persisted in that obstinacy eight whole days, nothwithstanding
the persuasions, and endeavors of them all, and probably of the B. Virgin
herself. See you be not singular; and Learn how dangerous a thing it is,
wilfully to be ruled by ones own judgment, and not to yield to others.

Consider 2. Christ's goodness, like a good Pastor seeking after his lost sheep.
He returns therefore, he enters again, the doors being shut, he saluteth as
before, and turning to Thomas, rebukes him not, nor reprehends him, but sweetly
calls him to himself in these words, Pat in thy singer hither, and see my
hands, and bring hither thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
incredulous, but faithful. O how was his heart inflamed, when he put his hand
into those burning fornates of love! In like manner ought yours to be inflamed,
as often as you receive him in the Holy Eucharist, if you were not wholly
insensible, and colder then the very Ice.

Ps. 29.9. and 13.
Consider 3. The Admirable Confession of S. Thomas. My Lord, and my God. He
acknowledges him true Man, and true God; expressing his ^^^an nature in the
first word, and his divine nature in the other. Ponder with your self these
titles; and seeing he is your Lord, carry your self not as your own man, but as
his; and for that he is also your God, see that you yield him due Worship and
Honor. Say with the Prophet To thee O Lord I will cry, and I will pray to my
God. And, Lord my God, for ever I will confess to thee.

Of Christ's wounds showed to S. Thomas, remaining in his Glorious Body.
Jo. 16.33.
COnsider 1. Our Lord out of his goodness would retain the marks of his wounds,
and the very holes of the nails, for diverse ends. 1. To strengthen his
Disciples and us in the belief of his Resurrection; demonstrating thereby that
it was the same body that rose, and that was before nailed to the Cross. 2. In
sign of his Victory, and Triumph over the world, according to that. Have
confidence, I have overcome the world. 3. That they might be a perpetual
memorial of his love toward us, to provoke us to return our love, and to
suffer for him; whence S. Paul said I bear the marks of our Lord Jesus in my
body; to wit, Gal. 6.17.
by continual mortifying the flesh.

Is. 49.15.16.
Consider 2. He retained them. 4. To show what care he would have of us in
Heaven, according to that of Isaie, why, can a woman forget her infant? etc.
Yet will not I forget thee; Behold; I have written thee in my hands. 5. That he
might present them to his Eternal father, pleading for us as our Advocate;
Whence it is that David said, Behold O God, our Protector, Ps. 83.10.
and look upon the face of thy Christ.

ss. 12.3.
Consider 3. He kept them, that they might be as so many fountains, and rivers
of his grace, and favors, like to those fountains which watered all Paradise.
Whence the Prophet said. You shall draw waters in joy out of the Saviors
fountains. 7. That they might be an universal refuge in all out afflictions,
according to that. Ps. 103.1^
The rock a refuge for the Irchins, that is, Sinners. For the Rosk, as the
Apostle says, was Christ. As often therefore as you are afflicted, betake your
self to these wounds. Enter into the rock (with Isaie) and be hid in a pit,
Isa. 2.10.
in the^ ground, from the face of the fear of our Lord. Abide with the Spouse
in the Canticles, in the holes of the Rock, Cant. 2.14
in the hollow places of the wall.

Our Lord rules me, and nothing shall be wanting to me: in the place of
pasture, there he has placed me. Ps. 22.2. Genesis 31.40
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as a Good Pastor.
Is. 53.7.
COnsider 1. What Christ says to day in the Ghospel. I am the good Pastor. Jo.
10.11. Ponder how well this title aggreeth with him. A good Pastor was Jacob
who said of himself Day and night I was parched with heat, and with frost, and
sleep did fly from mine eyes: But much better was Christ, who after thirty
three years heats, and colds, lastly laid down his life for his sheep, and
himself become as a sheep, was led to slaughter. But what Shepherd did ever
feed his sheep with his own blood? That did Christ, to raise and make them fit
for Heaven; He gave them his body and blood for meat and drink. Who would not
wish to be fed by such a Pastor?

Ezech. 45.11. etc.
Consider 2. This Pastor will come to you to day in the Holy Eucharist, to take
care of you, to feed, to cherish, and to defend you from the Infernal wolves.
For there is no part of a Shepherds Office which he does not most willingly
perform. Therefore he says by the Prophet. Behold I my self will seek my
sheep and will visit them as the Pastor visits his flock, etc. In the most
plentiful pastures will I feed them, etc. That which was Iost, I will seek,
and that which was cast away I will bring again, and that which was broken, I
will bind up, and that which was weak I will strengthen, and that which was fat
and strong I will keep, and will feed them in Judgment. Ponder each
particular; for all is full of pith.

Jo. 10.27.
Consider 3. Seeing you are a sheep endowed with reason, you must be careful
that nothing be in you that may be ungrateful to the eyes of this your Pastor;
wherefore wash your self from the dirt and filth of sin, that you may appear in
his sight with a pure and clean fleece. Besides, My sheep (says he) Hear my
voice. Hear therefore and obey him, diligently, that you may deserve to remain
for ever in his sold.

Jo. 21.1.
Our Lord appears to the seven Disciples that were fishing. Part 1.
COnsider 1. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas, and Nathanael, etc.
Peter inviting them to fishing, they all show a readiness to accompany him: We
also come with thee; teaching us thereby what union and concord ought to be
among Evangelical Laborers in the fishing for Souls. They go a fishing, both
for the relief of their poverty and want, and to avoid Idleness; that you
might learn to esteem the one and shun the other.

Ps. 126.1.
Consider 2. How that night they took nothing. So all humane industry
whatsoever, of it self is in vain, without the divine concurrance. Unless our
Lord build the house, they have labored in vain that build it. This has
place chiefly in the gaining of Souls; that you should learn not to trust to
your own abilityes, but to place all your hopes of success in the divine
assistance. 1 Cor. 3.7.
Neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters; but he that
gives the increase, God. Observe likewise that in the night of sin nothing is
to be taken, in order to Eternal life; but all our labor, though otherwise
never so good, during that state (as to merit) is wholly lost.

Prove. 21.28.
Consider 3. How when morning was now come, Jesus slood on the shore, yet the
Disciples knew not that it was Jesus. So he often is it hand in our
necessities, though we mind him not. Then he asks whether they have any meat,
though he knew they had not; because he will have us acknowledge our wants,
before he bestows his gifts. Lastly he bids them cast the Net on the right
side of the boat; and having obeyed, now they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes, in reward of their Obedience; that you might learn also to
follow and obey the Councels of your Superiors. For, An obedient man (says
Solomon) shall speak Victory.

Jo. 21.7.
Our Lord appears to the seven Disciples that were fishing. Part. 2.
COnsider 1. John knowing it to be Christ, by the miraculous draught of fish,
undoubtedly pronounces, It is our Lord. And Peter presently in all have
flingeth him self into the Sea, to swim unto him. In John is expressed the
light of the contemplative life, which is quick sighted to know our Lord, and
to point him out to others. In Peter is figured the fervor of the Active life,
which is allways forward upon works of Piety. Give your self to both, that by
contemplation you may come to know the Divine will, and by Action you may
effectually put it in practice.

Mat. 11.28.
Consider 2. Our good Lord had prepared a dinner for them (probably) by the
hands of Angels, against they were come on shore. For After they came down to
land, they saw hot Coals lying, and fish laid thereon, and bread. Observe how
lovingly he invites them, saying Come dine, etc. And himself distributes the
bread among them. In like manner he invites us all to partake of his fullness.
Come ye to me all that labor, and are burdened, and I will refresh you.
Wonderful is the care and providence of God over his servants, that you may
learn to cast your care upon our Lord, Ps. 54.23.
for he will no^rish thee.

Consider 3. If it be your calling to fish for Souls, you must be sure to cast
your net on the right side, by a right and pure intention, only seeking the
glory of God, and gain of Souls: not on the left, seeking your own temporal
profit. The Apostles (says S. Bernard) did spread their nets to catch fish,
not Gold, nor Silver. Bern. Ep. 137.
See that you do the like.

Jo. 21.15.
Our Lord commits his sheep to Peter.
COnsider 1. How presently after they were refreshed: Christ intending to make
Peter his Vicar, and to commit unto him the care of his flock, questions him
first about his love toward him, and that thrice, one after another, Saying,
Simon of John, love thou me more then these? to teach us how well grounded he
must be in Christ's love, whosoever undertaketh the government of Souls, for the
undergoing with courage and resolution the labors which accompany that charge.
Examen your self whether you have a sufficient stock of love to discharge your
duty in this point, according to your calling.

Ezech. 34.2.3.
Consider 2. What Christ said, feed my sheep. Ponder what it is to feed, and how
it is to be done. For it is the same as to further them toward their Eternal
life, by Preaching the word of God, by administration of Sacraments and by the
example of a good life. Let such of this calling take heed they be not the
number of those, whom our Lord speaks of by his Prophet, Woe to the Pastors of
Israel, etc. You did eat the milk, and were covered with the wool, and that
which was fat you killed, but my flock you fed not.

Consider 3. Our Lord foretold Peter his death, and manner thereof, which he
was to suffer for his sake, as a certain pledge of their mutual love, that you
might learn to esteem such sufferings, and death it self as tokens of Gods
love, and special favor toward you, as truly they are: Therefore the Prophet
said (according to the Septuagint) who are weyned from milk, Is. 28.9. juxta
Septuag.
expect tribulation upon tribulation, hope upon hope, etc. That is, you who are
come to man's estate in Virtue and perfection, expect tribulation upon
tribulation; that you may deserve for your reward hope upon hope.

Mat. 28.16.
Our Lord appears to all the Disciples on the Mount.
COnsider 1. The unspeakable Goodness of our Lord, who that he might comfort
his friends to the full, appointed them to repair to a mountain of Gallile,
where they might all see him at once. For probably this was that famous
Apparition, of which S. Paul mentions. 1 Cor. 15.6
Then was he seen of more then five hundred Brethren together. Think with what
fervor they all went to see our Lord. O that you would come with the like, to
receive him in the Holy Eucharist!

Ps. 26.3.
Consider 2. How our Lord appearing unto them, comforted, and confirmed them in
their faith, and among other things, said unto them, All power is given to me
in Heaven, and in Earth. He had the same Power from all eternity as God: but
received it now due to him as man, in reward of his merits and sufferings.
Rejoice that so great power is reposed in him, who loves you so entirely. How
well may you assure your self of his Protection, and say with the Prophet? If
camps stand together against me, my heart shall not fear. If battle rise up
against me, in this will I hope.

Jac. 2.10.
Consider 3. It follows. Going therefore teach ye all Nations, baptizing them,
etc. Where he instituted the Sacrament of Baptism, in place of Circumcision.
And as that was the door or entrance in the ancient Law so is Baptism in the
new; but with far greater advantages of grace, etc. Observe likewise that
Baptism, or faith alone, suffices not to Salvation, and that there is also
required the observance of all the Commandments, Teaching them to observe all
things, etc. For whosoever offends in one, is made guilty of all. Therefore
(David said) I was directed to all thy commandments; Ps. 118.128.
all wicked way I have hated. Do you the like.

Of other Apparitions within the forty days.
Act. 1.3.
COnsider 1. How our Lord (as S. Luke says) Showed himself alive after his
Passion in many arguments, for forty days appearing, etc. So long would our
Blessed Lord remain with them, to confirm them the more in the belief of his
Resurrection. And during that time, allthough he was ever present with them
after an invisible manner, yet visibly he appeared only at times; that so like
a tender mother, he might use them by degrees to more solid, though harder
fare, to wit, the want of his corporal presence.

Ibid.
Consider 2. How in these Apparitions (says S. Luke) he spoke of the Kingdom of
God. Not of vanities, or curiosities, or of things delightful to sense, nor of
news, nor of other worldly trifles; but of purchasing the Kingdom of God; and
that by sufferings, and Tribulations, by mortification of our selves, and
violence; according to that, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat.
11.12
and the violent bear it away. Learn hence to treat willingly of Heavenly
things. Moreover, it is like, our Lord in that time did teach the Apostles
those things, which they afterward delivered to the Church by Tradition.
Beseech our Lord that he would vouchsafe to converse with you in the secret
closet of your heart and there instruct you in his law. Say with the Prophet
Blessed art thou, Ps. 118.12.
O Lord, teach me thy Justifications.

Consider 3. And reflect seriously upon your self, how often God has spoken
within your heart, concerning the Kingdom of God; moving you both to the desire
and purchase thereof, by works of Perfection, of Charity, of Humility, of
Temperance and the like. And you have not heard his voice. Listen therefore to
him hereafter, least perhaps he bring upon you those plagues of which Moses,
Our Lord shall increase thy plague, Deuteronomy. 28. v. 59.62.
etc. Great plagues and continuing, sore infirmities and perpetual, etc.
Because thou heardst not the voice of our Lord thy God.

Of diverse Circumstances of Christ's Apparitions.
Cant. 5.^.
COnsider 1. Diverse Circumstances of these Apparitions, which were made after
the Resurrection; for that almost the like do daily happen in the interior
Visitation of the Soul. 1. These Apparitions were not of continuance, but short
and by fits, and more or less frequent, according to the disposition and fervor
of desire in the parties. The same order our Lord observes with a devoute
Soul, communicating himself unto her, not allways, or without intermission; but
at times, and by fits only. Inflame your self with his love, that you may the
oftener enjoy him, and be able to say with the spouse. If you shall find my
beloved tell him that I languish with love.

Consider 2. He appeared for the most part unexpectedly, and as sudenly he with
drew himself; and commonly made but a short stay; whereby he nourished in them
a desire of him self. In the same manner he visits the faithful Soul. Whence
says S. Bernard. Bern. in Can^ ser. 32.
There may in this life be joy and content in the spouses presence, but not
satiety. Therefore do not expect to have your fill here, but let it suffice
you to have a taste only of the joys of his divine presence. Ps. 16.15.
You shall be filled (with David) when his glory shall appear.

Jo. 3.8.
Consider 3. The time and place were different, So it is in the interior Visits
of the Soul, which happen sometimes in prayer, sometimes in reading, at other
times in midst of buisiness and affairs. For the spirit breaths where he
will. Lastly, at sometimes he appeared in a disguise, as he did to Mary
Magdalen, and the two Disciples going to Emmaus, sometimes in his own shape and
figure, at other times again he made himself known only by Angels. In the same
manner he manifests himself to us, now immediately by himself, and that
apparently, now obscurely, now again by our Superiors, Preachers, etc. Beseech
him to open your eyes, that you may know him, in what manner soever he shall
please to show himself to you. Say with the Spouse, Cant. 1.7.
Show me where thou feedest, where thou lie in the midday.

Our Lord will comfort Sion, and all the ruins thereof, and he will make her
desert, as delicacies. Is 51.3.
Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ as the Comforter of our Soul.
Ps. 33.20.
COnsider 1. What is read in this days Ghospel. I will see you again, and your
heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from you. Jo. 16.22. Think
how many are the tribulations of the Just in this life, from within, and
without: That all the delights of this world are but vain and empty, and that
there is not any solid comfort, or joy to be taken in any thing but in God
alone, who therefore by S. Paul is said to be the God of all comfort, who
comfort us in all our tribulation. 2 Cor. 1.3.


Ps. 22.5.
Consider 2. Christ in the Eucharist is properly the comforter of the afflicted.
Therefore David: Thou have prepared in my sight a table against them that
trouble me. And, My chalice inebriating how goodly is it? For the Holy
Eucharist is a torrent of pleasure, a river flowing with sweetness, an Ocean of
Spiritual delights, inebriating the mind with unspeakable sweetness, according
to that of the Psalm. Thou have visited the Earth, and have inebriated it, Ps.
64.10.
thou have multiplied to enrich it. If it does not inebriat, nor enrich you, it
is a sign you are not sufficiently disposed.

Ps. 93.19.
Consider 3. The necessary disposition to enjoy this sweetness, and these
Spiritual comforts is. 1. A perfect grief for your sins. For according to the
multitude of my Sorrows in my heart (says David) thy consolations have made my
Soul joyful. 2. An aversion and loathing of the World, with a hunger and
longing desire of Heavenly things. Therefore our Lord says by Jeremy, Jer.
31.25.
I have inebriated the weary Soul, and every hungry Soul I have filled. Come
therefore confidently with these, Is. 66.11.
that you may suck and be filled of the breast of (his) consolation.

Of the Benefit of Creation. Part 1.
COnsider 1. What you were before God created you: As to your Soul you were
quite nothing; as to your body little better; for that which you have from your
parents, how easily might God have hindered, and turned it into some other
substance? Therefore out of his mere goodness, without any merits of yours,
among innumerable other creatures, which he could have produced instead of you,
he decreed to take you out of the abyss of your nothing, and to bestow upon
you the form, or being, not of a stone, or tree, or of some brute beast, Jer.
18.6.
but of Man. Behold says our Lord, as clay in the hand of the Potter so are
you in my hand.

Consider 2. The Excellency of your Soul, which God has placed in your body.
1. It is a spirit like unto the Angels, and God himself, that you should learn
to regard only Spiritual things, and not hunt so wretchedly as you do, after
corporal pleasures and riches. 2. It is Immortal, and cannot be destroyed by
any created power; See therefore that as you are immortal by nature, you be
likewise so by grace. For the death of the Soul is Sin.

Deuteronomy. 32.18.
Consider 3. The noble powers wherewith God has endowed your Soul; chiefly the
Memory, Will, and understanding; also the Prerogative of free will, whereby you
are Lord and Master of your own actions. Likewise a capableness of Wisdom,
Grace, and the like. Think what you may return to your Creator for all these
benefits; at least return him these same again without blemish, and take heed
you come not to suffer that reproach. God that-begat thee thou have forsaken,
and have forgotten our Lord thy Creator.

Of the Benefit of Creation. Part 2.
Job. 10.8. and 10.
COnsider 1. The many benefits that are discovered in the composition of your
body. Thy hands have made me (says Job) and framed me wholly round about, etc.
Thou have as milk milked me, and carded me as cheese, etc. See with what
variety of members, senses, and necessary instruments and conveniences for the
exercise of its several Functions, God has furnished you; how admirably and
fitly he has disposed all things in their due place and order; so that in the
whole Fabric nothing can be found either superfluous, or wanting, or
disordered. Ps. 138.6. S. Basil. apud Bellarm.
Hence David with reason cries out, Thy knowledge is become mavelous of me;
that is (as S. Basil expounds) out of the structure of my body; it is made
great, and I cannot reach to it.

Romans 6.19
Consider 2. How every member of your body is a particular benefit of God: Think
how it would be with you, if you should want your eyes, your tongue, or hand,
or any other member; how much would you esteem your self bound to him that
should restore any single one of these that had been lost? How much more
grateful then ought you to be to God, who has bestowed them all upon you,
whole and entire? See therefore you do not abuse these same benefits, to the
displeasure and dishonor of your Creator, by exhibiting your members to serve
uncleanness, and iniquity to iniquity, rather then to serve Justice (as the
Apostle admonishes) unto Sanctification.

1 Cor. 9.7.
Consider 3. How just a thing it is, that he who has created your whole self,
should likewise wholly and entirely possess you: For, as the Apostle says, Who
planteth a Vine, and eats not of the fruit thereof? God has planted you as a
choice Vine in his Vineyard: yield him therefore the fruits thereof, fruits of
Piety, Charity, Patience, and of other like Virtues. Bern. de quadr. debite.
All that you have (says S. Bernard) you owe it him, of whom you have it.

Of the benefit of Conservation. Part 1.
COnsider 1. The greatness of this benefit. By Creation alone God gave you your
self but once; by Conservation he does the same every moment of your life; for
unless he did preserve you, you would immediately return to your own nothing.
The Noon-beams have not so strict a dependence of the Sun, as you have of God.
If therefore one that should hang by a small thread held in an others hand,
ready to fall from a high Tower into a deep Pit, (if the thread should be let
go) would not dare to revile, or injure him that held the thread, how dare you
that depend immediately on the hand of God, provoke him, by sin, to let go the
thread of his concurrance, and your life?

Consider 2. As you cannot live without God, so neither can you, though living,
exercise any action of life, without his special concurrance, not so much as to
move a hand, or open your eyes, or utter a word, or do the least thing; for (as
S. Paul said) in him we live, Act. 17.28 Aug. in So^^leq. c. 18.
and move, and be. Whence S. Augustine: You oblige me to you, Lord, every
moment, while every moment you afford me your large benefits.

Consider 3. God does not barely preserve your life, but withal defends it
from innumerable evils and miseries which others suffer; so that others
miseries are your benefits. Think with your self why you are not, as many
others are, blind, deaf, dumb, same, and oppressed with a thousand diseases and
infirmities; why not slain by Sword, consumed by fire or water, or dashed in
pieces by some ruin, and the like. God has delivered you from all these
misfortunes, that being so highly obliged to him for his benefits, Lue. 1.74,
75.
you might serve him in Holiness and Justice before him, all the days of your
life.

Of the benefit of Conservation. Part 2.
Ps. 8.5. and 8.
COnsider 1. Almighty God for your better p^^servation, has not only removed
evils from you, (as we have seen) but also, as a most indulgent Father, has
abundantly provided you both with necessaries, and all useful conveniences. He
has furnished this lower world for you, as a house to dwell in, and has
adorned it with the Sun, Moon and Stars, for your benefit and delight, and has
stored it with all manner of living creatures for your use. In fine, whatsoever
flourishes in gardens, walks in the fields, swimmeth in the waters, flies
in the air, or shines in the Heavens, is all for you. What is man that thou
art mindful of him? etc. Thou bast subjected all things under his feet, all
sheep and Oxen: Moreover also the beasts of the field, the birds of the air,
and fishes of the Sea, that walk the paths of the Sea.

Consider 2. How God not content to have provided all these creatures for your
use, vouchsafes also jointly to concur with them; for seeing he has necessary
influence into all their actions, with the fire he does truly warm you, with
the Sun he illuminates you, with the air he refreshes you, with meat and drink
he feeds you, with the flowers he delights you; and so of the rest. Wherefore
say with S. Augustine; As there is not any hour, Lord, Aug. in Soliloq. c. 18.
or moment of all my life, wherein I do not enjoy your benefits, so ought there
not to be any moment, wherein I have you not before my eyes by remembrance, and
love you not with my whole strength.

Ps. 115.3.
Consider 3. Other benefits of God appertaining particularly to the mind; such
as are good Education, care of Parents and Superiors, counsel and example of
the Virtuous, the endowments of Knowledge, Arts and Sciences, together with the
conveniences of this life, and that perhaps with little care or labor of your
own, which many others cannot get without sweat of brow, and hazard oftentimes
of soul. Think therefore what you shall render to our Lord for all things that
he has rendered to you. Pro. 23.26
He desires nothing but your self: My Son (says he) give me thy heart^.

Of the benefit of Redemption. Part. 1.
COnsider 1. That you may the better understand the greatness of this benefit,
ponder what a misery it is to live in Slavery, under some cruel Tyrant, where
you are to endure perpetual imprisonment, hunger and thirst, stripes, and other
torments. Think what the Children of Israel suffered in the bondage of Egypt,
and Captivity of Babylon, and what you were like to suffer, if you were
condemned perpetually to the Galleys under the Turk, and what you would give
for your Ransom.

2 Timothy 2.26.
Consider 2. The Slavery of Sin is incomparably greater then all this, which
makes us Slaves of the Devil (as the Apostle-speaketh) and liable to the
torments of Hell: We were all under this slavery; nor was there possible any
humane means of escaping; when behold, the only begotten Son of God came down
from heaven, and took upon him to satisfy for our sins, that so he might
deliver us from so cursed a servitude: Tit. 2.14.
Who gave himself (says the Apostle) for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity.

Ps. 15.2.
Consider 3. The cause of so great a mercy: Christ did it not for any profit of
his, as if he had need of us: Thou art my God (says David) because thou
need not my goods. Nor for any deserts of ours, which then neither were, nor
could be any; but out of his own mere goodness and mercy; according to that of
Isaie; In his love, Is. 63.9.
and in his indulgence he redeemed them, and bare them, and lifted them up all
the days of the world. Who would not love so loving a Lord, and give himself
up wholly to him, without whom he had been lost for ever?

Of the benefit of Redemption. Part 2.
Ps. 129.7.
COnsider 1. The manner wherewith Christ redeemed you from the said slavery:
With good reason David said, With him is plenteous Redemption; for he could by
his absolute power have remitted all our sins, without taking man's flesh upon
him: He might also have satisfied the rigor of Justice by the least action of
his, after his Incarnation; but would suffer so much, that where sin abounded,
Romans 5.20
grace might more abound: and that he might leave us example, according to S.
Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21
that we may follow his steps.

Consider 2. More in particular what he suffered. In the Manger, in his
Circumcision, in his flight, and in Egypt it self; by hunger and thirst, by
cold and nakedness, by much traveling, and frequent dangers. Lastly, during
the time of his Passion, by his scourging at the Pillar, by the crowning with
Thorns, and nailing on the Cross: and all this he suffered for his Enemies;
that is, for all sinners. Who did ever suffer so much even for his friends?
Wherefore the Church on Easter Eve breaks forth into those admirable notes; O
happy fault, which deserved to have such, In benedic. Cerei.
and so greet a Redeemer!

Consider 3. What you ought to do in return, and what to offer to such a
Redeemer: Ask your self that question with S. Bernard; If I owe my whole self
for being made, Bern. de diligendo Deo.
what more shall I add for being repaired, and repaired in such manner? for I
was not so easily repaired, as first made. Wherefore behave your self as a
Bondslave of Christ, as truly you are; thank him for so great a favor, and
give your self wholly to his service. Reflect often upon that saying of the
Apostle; 1 Cor. 6.20.
You are bought with a great price; glorify, and bear God in your body.

Of Holy Communion.
Consider Christ at the Advocate of our Soul. Behold the Lord God my helper,
who is he that shall condemn me? Is. 50.9.

1 Jo. 2.1.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel. I go to him that sent me, etc.
And, it is expedient for you that I go, Jo. 6.5.7. For our Lord went to his
Eternal Father to plead for us, and that he might be in that Supreme Consistory
of Heaven, our Patron, Advocate, Mediator, or Intercessor, according to that of
S. John; We have an Advocate with the Father. Jesus Christ the Just. And that
of S. Paul; 1 Timothy 2.5
There is one Mediator of God and men, Man Christ Jesus. Therefore it was truly
expedient for us, that he should go to his Father, to intercede in our behalf,
being guilty of many crimes.

Apoc. 1.5.
Consider 2. What a benefit it were to have for Proctor, or Advocate, in the
Court of some worldly Prince the Kings only Son, ready upon all occasions to
defend you with his Father, and to further and promote you what he could: Such
an one is Christ our most loving Lord, who has loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his blood; most willing to help us, who will all men to be saved:
And lastly, 1 Timothy 2.4
most powerful to obtain what thing soever of his Father; Luc. 10.22.
All things are delivered to me of my Father.

Sap. 1.4.
Consider 3. How much you are to wish for that hour, wherein this Advocate of
yours is to come into your Soul, in the H. Eucharist; for then you may
confidently open unto him all your miseries and necessities, that he may plead
to his Father for officacious redress: See therefore that the lodging of your
heart be clean, for he is wonderfully delighted with cleanliness; and as the
wise man says, Wisdom will not enter into a malicious Soul, nor dwell in a
body subject to sins.

Of the benefit of Adoption: Part 1.
1 Jo. 3.1.
COnsider 1. That of S. John: See what manner of charity the Father has given
us, that we should be named, and be the Sons of God. The Father of Mercies was
not satisfied with redeeming us, but would also adopt us to be his Children:
The benefit is the greater, in regard of the meanness of the person, and the
Excellency of the Dignity to which he is raised: For what more vile or base
then Man? What more excellent then God? Man, as to his body, is no better then
dirt and dust, a sack of dung, and meat for worms: As to his Soul he is the
very sink of sin, an Abyss of ignorance, and Myrrour of Inconstancy: Think how
slender is his ability, how little it is he knows, what miseries he is
subject unto: so that Job said with reason, What is man that thou magnifiest
him, Job 7.17.
or why set thou thy heart toward him?

Genesis 41.40. 1 Reg. 9. Ps. 77.70.
Consider 2. On the other side, what God is, and how great is his Majesty,
Glory, Riches, Beauty, Power, etc. and what a dignity it is to be his adoptive
Son: If it was esteemed a great and wonderful thing in Joseph the Patriarch, to
be taken out of prison, and made Lord of Egypt; in Saul from following of
Asses, to be anointed King; and in David, from following after the Ewes with
young, to be assumed to a Kingdom: How much more is it to be admired, that a
lump of earth should be raised to dignity of being the Son of God? and that the
harbourer of worms should become the companion of Angels?

Ps. 112.7, 8
Consider 3. How much you owe to God for having so highly exalted you, Raising
up the needy from the earth, and lifting up the poor out of the dung, to place
you with the Princes of his heavenly Court. O unspeakable honor! you deserve
not the name of Gods servant, Leo Sermon. 1. de Nativit.
and you are made his Son: Acknowledge therefore, O Christian, (says S. Leo)
your dignity, and being made partaker of the Divine Nature, do not by unworthy
behavior degenerate to your former baseness.

Of the benefit of Adoption. Part 2.
COnsider 1. The admirable effects of this benefit. 1. It puts us under Gods
special providence and protection, so as to bring us up, govern, maintain, and
defend us, as a loving Father does his Children. Whence David said, Ps. 102.13
As a father has compassion of his children, so has our Lord compassion on
them that fear him, etc. And by Isaie he promises yet more: Why, Is. 49.15.
can a woman forget her Infant, that she will not have pity on the son of her
womb? And if she should forget, yet will not I forget thee. O what a security
it is to be protected by such a Father? If God stand for us, who will be
against us?

2 Pet. 1.4.
Consider 2. How by this adoption we are made partakers of the Divine Nature,
and in a manner Gods, according to that of the Psalmist; I said you are Gods,
and the sons of the highest all; Ps. 81.^.
for it makes us partakers in some degree of Gods perfections and excellencies;
as of his Wisdom, Fortitude, Constancy, Justice, Charity, and other
Attributes, which in him are by nature, and are communicated to us as his
children, by grace. Learn therefore greatly to esteem such a benefit, that
makes you like to God himself.

Romans 8.17
Consider 3. How it makes us also Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, according to
that of the Apostle, And if sons, heirs also, heirs truly of God, and coheirs
of Christ. O what a happiness! Look therefore upon heaven as your own by
inheritance: Say with that Philosopher, Corn. ad Romans c. 1^, 14.
I am born to greater things, then to make my self a slave to my own flesh.
Direct your thoughts and cares thither, where you are sure to inherit endless
treasures, contemn all mortal things, and give your mind only to such as are
truly great and everlasting; and as a certain holy man was wont to say, In Vita
P. Balt Alvarez.
Do not degenerate from the high thoughts of the sons of God.

Of the benefit of Adoption. Part 3.
Deuteronomy. 32.6
COnsider the several Obligations we have, by reason of this benefit. The first
is, of loving tenderly, and from our whole heart, so loving a Father: For if
children of this world do naturally love their Parents, of whom they only
receive their corporal substance, and earthly goods; how much more are you
bound to love God, from whom all proceeds that is good, and who has possessed
thee, and made, and created thee.

Exodus 20.12.
The second Obligation is of honoring him as our Father; that is, reverencing
him with exterior worship, and serving him what we can, with all respect and
duty. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that thou may be long lived upon the
earth: And our Lord himself by Malachy says; And if I be the father, Mal. 1.6.
where is my honor?

Mat. 5.48. Ephesians. 5.1.
The third Obligation is of imitating God, as children do their Parents:
Therefore Christ said, Be you perfect, as also your heavenly father is perfect:
And S. Paul, Be followers of God, as most dear children. You must therefore
imitate his Sanctity and Immunity from sin, his Charity, Mercy, Justice, and
other Virtues: Lev. 11.45
You shall be holy (says our Lord) because I am holy.

Lev. 19.3.
The fourth Obligation is of fearing ever to offend our Father, according to
that of Leviticus, Let every one fear his Father and Mother: And if children of
this world fear to offend their Parents, that they may not be disinherited by
them, how much more ought we to fear God? Take heed that it be not ever
objected to you, Is. 1.2.
I have brought up children, and exalted them, but they have despised me. You
will despise him, if you prefer your own will and desires, before his Counsels
and Commands.

Of the benefit of the H. Sacraments.
Is. 12.3.
COnsider 1. The wonderful care your Heavenly Father has of you: for, to
conserve you in the grace of his Adoption, he has provided you with many
means, for which you owe thanks and gratitude; the chief of them are the seven
Sacraments, which as so many Fountains he would have to flow with several gifts
of Grace, in all abundance, according to the diversity of our necessities, so
as to make good that of the Prophet; You shall draw waters in joy out of the
Saviors Fountains.

Ps. 83.5.
Consider 2. The infinite Wisdom of God, in most fitly ordaining each
Sacrament: for, that man might be born into a spiritual life, he instituted
Baptism; to grow up, and be strengthened in the same, Confirmation; to be
nourished, Holy Eucharist: That he might have a remedy, and certain cure
against his spiritual diseases, Penance: That he might be armed for his last
Combat, Extreme Unction. Lastly, for the right discharging of several states
and duties in his Church, he instituted H. Order, and Matrimony. Truly blessed
are they that dwell in thy house, O Lord, who do so abundantly provide for
them that fear thee.

Is. 55.1.
Consider 3. These Fountains of Grace 1. Are open to all; none are excluded,
though never so poor: Whence the Prophet cries out, All ye that thirst, come
to the waters, and you that have no silver, make have, buy, and eat. 2. They
are ever flowing, without cessation, like that Woman's Oil in the fourth of the
Kings, which never failed to run, 4 Reg. 4.
so long as there were any empty Vessels. 3. They do infallibly work their
effect, by force of that virtue which they receive by the Divine Institution,
unless we put an impediment. 4. They are placed in obvious things, and easy to
be had, for our more certain use and benefit: Be thankful to God for so great a
liberality, and endeavor to come ever worthily unto them.

Of the benefit of the Custody of Angels.
Ps. 90.11.
COnsider 1. What David said, He has given his Angels charge of thee, that they
keep thee in all thy ways. Our heavenly Father not content to make us his Sons,
would also provide us (as Princes do their children) with Tutors, and
Guardians. This charge he committed to the Angels themselves, who should
illuminate, govern, and protect us; Heb. 1.14.
for they are all ministering spirits (says the Apostle) seat to ministen for
them, which shall receive the inheritance of salvation.

Eze. 28.12.
Consider 2. To whom, and of whom he has committed this charge: To the Angels,
who are most Noble Creatures, pure Spirits, immortal by nature, full of
wisdom, and perfect of beauty, more powerful and strong then whole Armies of
men, adorned with all manner of grace and glory, and ever enjoying the Vision
of God: To these then he has committed thee, who art but a silly worm, and no
better then dirt and ashes, Ps. 90.12.
that they should bear thee in their hands, lest perhaps thou knock thy foot
against a stone: O what a care and protection is this of the Angels! what a
favor?

Consider 3. How this ear of theirs ought to stir up in us (as S. Bernard
admonishes) Reverence, Devotion, Bern. in Ps. 90.
and Confidence in them; Reverence in regard of their presence, Devotion for
their benevolence, Confidence in their sure custod^. If I should deliver myself
to be thy servant (said young Tobias to the Angel Raphael his Guardian) I
should not deserve thy providence. Tob. 9.2.
Reverence therefore your Angel-Guardian with affection, and do not presume in
his sight, who is always present, to do that which you would be ashamed of
before man. Observe him, Exodus 23.21, 22.
and hear his voice, etc. (says our Lord) and I will be Enemy to thine
Enemies, and will afflict them that afflict thee: And mine Angel shall go
before thee.

Of the benefit of the Patronage of Saints. and chiefly of the Blessed Virgin.
Job 42.8.
COnsider 1. Our heavenly Father has not only provided us with Guardians, but
also Patrons and Advocates; to wit, the Blessed that reign with him in Heaven;
to the end, that in regard he is also our Judge, we might have those that would
continually intercede for us, and move him to mercy. Go (says our Lord) to my
servant Job, and offer Holocaust for your selves, and my servant Job shall pray
for you: His face I will receive, that the folly be not imputed to you.

2 Machab. 15.14.
Consider 2. With what care and love the Saints in Heaven perform this Office,
and with what benefit to us, obtaining for us all manner of good, as is evident
by infinite Miracles and Revelations. Of holy Jeremy it is said in the second
of the Macha^ces, This is a lover of his Brethren, and of the people of Israel;
this is he that prays much for the people, and for the whole City. What
confidence therefore may we justly put in the protection of such powerful
Advocates? If it be a thing of great account, to have a powerful friend in some
worldly Princes Court, how much more to have one in the Court of Heaven?

Consider 3. How diligent you ought to be in the worship and Invocation of the
Saints, especially these of your Name, and your Patrons, that they may obtain
of our Lord what you stand in need of. But above all, you must procure to be
fervent in devotion, and reverence to the B. Virgin, who being Mother of all
the living (as the Fathers call her) she exceeds all others, S. Epiph. Sermon. 78.
both in love to us, and in power with her Son. Give God thanks therefore for
so powerful an Advocate, and recommend your self with all earnestness unto her;
Zach. Ep. Foro. l. 2. to 1. c. 7.
for she denies help to none that does duly ask it, and intercedes not for
any in vain to her Son.

Of Holy Communion. Incline thine car, O Lord, and hear me, because I am needy
and poor. Ps. 85.1.

Consider Christ as a Liberal bestower of Gifts.
Eccli. 24.26.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel. Until now you have not asked any
thing in my Name; ask, and you shall receive, etc. Jo. 16.24. Imagine your
self, on the one side, as a poor naked beggar, and wanting many things
necessary for the maintenance of your spiritual life, and Christ our Lord, on
the other, infinitely rich, infinitely liberal, and desirous that all should
partake of his plenty: Hear his solemn proffer; Ask, and you shall receive.
Never did any Prince make so liberal a promise: He longs, in a manner, to be
rid of his gifts: Pass to me all ye that desire me, and be filled of my
Generations. He is more ready to give, then we to receive.

Consider 2. This bountiful Lord will come this day unto you, in the Eucharist;
and if you be gracious in his sight, will say unto you, as Assuerus did to
Esther, What is thy Petition, Esther, Esther 7.2
that it may be given thee? and what will thou have done? although thou shall
ask the half part of my Kingdom, thou shall obtain. See therefore what you
stand most in need of, and have ready your Petition, and adorn your self as
Esther did, that you may gain his good will to you, when he comes.

Jo. 9.31.
Consider 3. The impediments which will render your prayers of no effect, to the
end you may take them away. 1. Sinners God does not hear, that is, as long as
they persist in sin without repentance. 2. Neither does he hear those that ask
vain and unprofitable things, but sends them away with that check and rebuke,
You know not what you desire. Mat. 20.22.
3. Nor yet those that pray tepidly and coldly: But because thou art lukewarm,
Apoc. 3.16.
etc. I will begin to vomit thee out of my mouth. 4. And lastly, he requires
constancy and perseverance in asking: So to him that persevered knocking were
given Loaves, Luc. 11. Even for his importunity, as many as he needed. Luc.
11.8.


Of the benefit of Prayer. Part 1.
Psa. 140.^
COnsider the benefit of Prayer, which the Church recommendeth particularly unto
us, these Rogation days. Consider therefore first, the Dignity and Excellency
of Prayer. 1. It is an act of Religion, and divine worship, offered to God, and
accepted by him as Incense, and Sacrifice; according to that, Let my prayer be
directed as Incense in thy sight, and the elevation of my hands, as evening
Sacrifice. 2. By Prayer man becomes companion of the Angels, and converseth
familiarly with God himself. 3. God takes himself to be honored by our
prayers, as he expressly tells us by his Prophet, Invocate me in the day of
tribulation, Ps. 49.15.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorisie me.

1 Pet. 5.8.
Consider 2. The necessity we have of Prayer, in regard of the miseries of this
mortal life, and continual dangers 1. Of Soul; from the assaults of the Devil,
who as a roaring Lion goes about, seeking whom he may devour; from the
alurements of the world, and from the rebellion of our own flesh. 2. Of Body,
from War, Famine, and Pestilence; from poverty, sickness, loss of goods and
fortunes, death of friends, and from innumerable other crosses and afflictions:
All which make us to cry out with King Josaphat to our Lord; Whereas we are
ignorant what to do, 2 Paral. 20.12.
this only we have lest, that we direct our eyes to thee.

Luc. 18.1.
Consider 3. The goodness of God, who whereas he could sufficiently redress all
our necessities, with the general Providence, wherewith he provideth for his
other creatures; yet to endear us the more to himself, requires that we have
our recourse unto him by prayer, acknowledging him the Author of all good, and
depending wholly on him in all occasions; and therefore he has given us an
express Command thereof, delivered by Christ in these words: It behooves always
to pray. Reflect upon your own particular necessities, spiritual and temporal,
Heb. 4.16.
and go with confidence to the Throne of Grace, that you may obtain mercy, and
find grace in seasonable aid.

Of the benefit of Prayer. Part 2.
COnsider 1. More in particular the benefits and efficacy of Prayer, which as
S. Hierom says, overcomes the in^i^cible, Hieron. in Epist.
and b^adeth the Almighty moving him to mercy, and tying his hands from
punishing our sins: Suffer me (said God to Moses, Exodus 32.10.
when he was praying for the people) that my fury may be angry against them. It
is a general remedy against all difficulties and temptations; Prosp. in Sermon.
Exodus 17.11. etc. Jos. 10.14.
and a Scourge (as S. Prosper says) to the Devils. Moses lifting up his hands
in prayer, obtained victory over the Amalecites; Josue by prayer made the Sun
and Moon stand still, our Lord obeying the voice of a man: How much more then
may we hope the effect of our prayers for the obtaining of spiritual blessings?

Consider 2. Prayer, as S. Augustine says, Aug. Sermon. 26. de temp. Luc. 11.13
is the Key of Heaven, opening unto us all manner of heavenly treasures: For by
prayer we obtain 1. The divine Spirit of God: Your father from heaven will give
the good Spirit to them that ask him. 2. Increase of habitual and sanctifying
grace. 3. More frequent supplies of actual grace. 4. All manner of virtues, and
supernatural gifts: Besides, in the exercise thereof, our faith is quickened,
our hopes raised, and our love and affection inflamed toward God, whom therein
we acknowledge to be our chief Benefactor, and Author of all good.

Is. 65.24.
Consider 3. All this, and whatever else we can desire for our good. Almighty
God is readier to bestow upon us, then we to ask, and does even prevent our
prayers, according to that; And it shall be, before they call, I will hear; as
they are yet speaking I will hear: And if he denies us any thing, it is our
fault (in demanding, either what we ought not, or not in the manner we ought)
but still his mercy; Aug. Ser. 53. de Verb. Dom.
for God in his mercy (says S. Augustine) denies such things, which he could
not grant, but in wrath. Be grateful for so great a benefit, and serve your
self of it, by a due and constant use in all your occasions.

Of the benefit of Prayer. Part 3.
Eccli. 18.23.
COnsider 1. That of the wise man: Before prayer prepare thy soul. This
preparation consists 1. In an humble heart toward God, acknowledging our
sins, and unworthiness to appear in his sight, as did the Publican, and
Centurion; for God has had respect to the prayer of the humble, Ps. 101.18
and he has not despised their Petition. And, the prayer of him that humbles
himself shall penetrate the Clouds. Eccl. 35.19.
2. In peace and charity with our Neighbor, pardoning all injuries and
offenses: When you shall stand to pray, Mar. 11.25
forgive, if you have ought against any man, etc. 3. In putting off all
hardness of heart toward the needy; for (as the wise man says) He that
stops his ear at the cry of the poor, Pro. 21.13
himself also shall cry, and shall not be heard.

Mat. 6.6.
Consider 2. In our prayer we must observe what Christ requires in those words:
When thou shall pray, enter into thy chamber, and having shut the door, pray to
thy father in secret, etc. That is, we must retire our selves from all
distracting objects, and shut the doors of our senses: We must also pray in
spirit, Jo. 4.23.
and verity, that is, with a serious and earnest application of mind, intending
from our heart, what we outwardly express in words, that we may not be in the
number of those, of whom the Prophet, This people honoreth me with their lips,
Mat. 15.8.
but their heart is far from me. We must finally bring a lively faith, and
confidence: All things whatsoever you ask praying (says Christ) believe that
you shall receive, Mar. 11.24
and they shall come unto you.

Consider 3. The grounds of this confidence, which are chiefly three. 1. The
love of the Eternal Father toward us: For as Christ said, Jo. 16.27.
The Father himself loves you; and who of his own accord bestowed his only Son
upon us, will not stick to grant us, upon earnest entreaty, lesser blessings.
2. The Merits and Passion of Christ, who is our Mediator and Advocate, and
assures us, Jo. 14.13.
Whatsoever we shall ask in his name, that he will do. 3. The intercession
which the Divine Spirit himself does make for us, who, as the Apostle says,
Romans 8.26
requesteth for us with groanings unspeakable.

On the Feast of our Lords Ascension. Arise, be illuminated Jerusalem, upon
thee shall our Lord arise, and his glory shall be seen upon thee, Is. 60.1

Of Holy Communion. Consider Christ as the King of Glory.
Ps. 46.6.
COnsider 1. Christ is often in the Scripture called the King of Glory, and this
day in triumphant manner he ascended the highest Heavens, in great Glory and
Majesty: God is ascended in Jubilation, and our Lord in the voice of Trumpet.
He is the Fountain whence Glory is derived to all the blessed, and the several
gifts of grace to the faithful; but especially in this day of his Triumph, as
great Princes are wont, in like occasions, he prodigally distributeth his gifts
and favors among his people; according to that of the Apostle, Ascending on
high, he led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8.
he gave gifts to men.

If. 60.13.
Consider 2. This King of Glory will come this day to you, though under the
Cloud of the Eucharistical Species; to the end, that by the gifts of his grace,
he may dispose you to partake also of his glory: The glory of Libanus shall
come to thee, etc. to adorn the place of my sanctification, and the place of my
feet I will glorify. O what a favor, and benefit is this? What may you not
hope for from so bountiful a Guest, in this day of your solemnity?

Ps. 23.7.
Consider 3. How to receive worthily this King of Glory: Lift up your gates, ye
Princes, and be ye lifted up, O Eternal Gates, and the King of Glory shall
enter in. The gates of the Soul are our interior powers, Reason and Will, by
which there is a mutual intercourse between our Soul, and enteriour objects;
they entering into her, and she going forth to them: Lift up therefore these
gates on high: raise them only to such things as are heavenly, and everlasting;
and then the King of Glory will enter into you, and make you partaker of his
Glory.

Of our Lords Ascension. Part 1.
Mar. 16.14
COnsider 1. The forty days being expired, which our Lord was pleased to spend
in comforting and instructing the Apostles, after his Resurrection, last he
appeared to those cleven, as they sat at the Table; and having strengthened
their faith, which wavered yet in some of them, he leads them forth to Mount
Olivet, that where he had began his Passion by his Bloody Sweat, there he might
also begin his Triumph. See with what tenderness of love he does all this; and
withal learn hence, that the way to glory is by suffering.

Luc. 24.49
Consider 2. These words of Christ to his Disciples; But you, tarry in the City,
till you be endowed with power from high. If our Lord would not have his
Apostles too forward in preaching, but quietly, and in prayer to expect power
and virtue from Heaven, how fitting is it, that others who have not been
trained up in Christ's School, as they were, should first prepare themselves in
private, and holy cetiredness, and long prayer, for preaching, and other
Apostolical Functions?

Ps. 103.3.
Consider 3. After they were all come to the Mount, our Lord being now to
depart, lifting up both his hands, to signify the fullness of his blessing, he
blessed them; then raising himself up, he ascended by degrees, till he was out
of their sight. Think how the Disciples rejoiced to behold the glory of their
Lord, Making the Cloud to ascend on, and walking upon the wings of winds: Do
you also ascend in spirit with him, Ps. 83.6.
Dispose ascensions in your heart (as the Prophet speaks) making continual
progress from one virtue to another, till you arrive to the height of
perfection.

Of our Lords Ascension. Part 2.
Ephesians. 4.8.
COnsider 1. Our Lord being out of the sight of his Disciples, enters into
Heaven, in a triumphant manner: He was accompanied with an infinite multitude
of Angels, who came forth to meet him: there followed a numerous Train of the
Holy Fathers, whom he had redeemed out of captivity, according to that,
Ascending on high, he led captivity captive. Neither was there wanting solemn
and public Jubily: God is ascended in Jubilation, Psa. 46.6.
and our Lord in the voice of Trumpet: The Angels inviting one the other in
those terms, Sing to our Lord, Ps. 67.33, 34.
sing ye to God that mounteth upon the Heaven of Heaven to the East: And the
like.

Consider 2. Christ being come to the Throne of his Eternal Father, presents
him with the holy company of Saints, as spoils taken from the Infernal Enemy;
he gives him account of the work he had accomplished, Jo. 17.4, 5, 6.
saying, I have glorified thee upon Earth: I have consummated the work which
thou gave me to do; And now glorify thou me, O Father, with thy self, etc. I
have manifested thy Name to men, etc. The Father welcometh his Sons return with
unspeakable expressions of love, and places him on his right hand; fulfilling
that of the Psalm; Our Lord said to my Lord, Ps. 109.1.
sit on my right hand, etc.

Apoc. 5.12
Consider 3. The Jubily which was at that time in Heaven; of the Holy Fathers,
for the happiness they were arrived to; of the Angels, both for the company of
the Saints, and for the filling up of the places which had been so long empty.
Lastly, of them all, for the humanity of Christ our Lord, which they saw
glorified according to its deserts: Then did they likewise break forth into
those words of the Apocalypse, The Lamb that was slain, is worthy to receive
power, and dignity, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
benediction. Join your lauds and praises with theirs, rejoice for having such
an Advocate with your Father; and fix your thoughts there, whither your Head,
and best part of you, is already gone.

Of Holy Communion. Our Lord will give Grace and Glory: He will not deprive
them of good things that walk in Innocence. Ps. 83.12, 13.

Consider Christ as a Pledge of Future Glory.
COnsider 1. How great is the Glory of God, and of all the Blessed in Heaven,
how excellent a place, what noble Citizens, and what happy concord and union
among that blessed company, and the like. Our most merciful Lord promises us
in due time the fellowship of this glory, and in the mean while, gives us for a
pawn, or pledge, his most precious Body and Blood. Wherefore the Church cries
out, O sacred Banquet, Brev. Rom
wherein Christ is received, etc. and a pledge of future glory is given us.

Deuteronomy. 4.7.
Consider 2. What a great matter you would think it, if some Prince should
promise you a Kingdom, after the term of some few years, and in the mean time
should give you his only Son for security: Truly there is no other Nation so
great, that has Gods approaching unto them, as our God is present to us. He is
present with us here in nourishment, that he may afterward be wholly ours in
reward.

2 Cor. 1.22.
Consider 3. This divine pledge does not only serve as an assurance, but does,
even in this life, produce in some sort the effects of Glory, if it be not
hindered. For 1. It brings with it the luster of Habitual Grace, then the which
nothing is more glorious in the sight of God. 2. It rendereth the Soul
impassible, that is, not subject to be moved or disturbed by any worldly
adversity. 3. It gives us a spiritual agility, promptly and readily to obey the
Commands of God. 4. It assords us also a certain subtility, to go through, and
overcome what difficulties soever. Prepare your self therefore worthily to
receive it, and bless the infinite mercy of God who has given the pledge of
the Spirit (as the Apostle says) in our hearts.

Of Heavenly Glory, as it is in it self.
COnsider 1. Christ ascended into Heaven to prepare us a place: Jo. 14.2. Leo
Se^. 1. de Ascens.
I go (says he) to prepare you a place. For Christ Ascension (as S. Leo says)
is our promotion; so that where the glory of the Head is gone before, there is
hopes for the rest of the body to follow after. Give God thanks for having
vouchsafed to call you; and contemplate the happiness of that state, that you
may be the more inflamed with the love of it.

Consider 2. Heavenly Bliss (as the Divines define it out of Boethius) is a
state perfected by the concurrance of all good. There are no evils to molest
you, Greg. in fine 7. Psalm. Penit.
nor any good wanting which you can desire. There, says S. Gregory, will be
light without eclipse, joy without sighs, desire without pain, love without
sorrow, satiety without cloying, safety without danger, life without death,
health without impare, and so of other happinesses, without the admixture of
those evils, of which nothing in this life is free.

Jo. 16.22.
Consider 3. All these happinesses are everlasting, and never to be lost:
Wherefore after a thousand millions of years they will not decay, nor diminish,
but will be then as new as ever; And your joy (says Christ) no man shall take
from you. Think how different are the enjoyments of this life, which soon pass;
Bern.
and as S. Bernard says, While they are possessed, they burden, while they are
loved, they defile, and when they are gone, they torment. See which you will
choose to prefer.

Of Heavenly Glory, as to the Place and Company.
Baruc. 3.24. Apoc. 21.18. etc.
COnsider 1. The happiness of the State, in regard of the Place, which is the
highest Heaven, then the which nothing can be imagined more beautiful,
pleasant, or glorious. O Israel (said the Prophet) how great is the House of
God, and how great is the place of his possession! This is that City described
in the Apocalypse, whose gates are of Pearl, the walls of Jasper stone, the
foundations of the walls of other precious stone, the streets, and the City it
self, of pure gold: The City needs not Sun, Ibid. v. 23.
nor Moon, etc. for the Lamb is the lamp thereof: O! How beloved are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hoasts! My soul coveteth, Ps. 83.2, 3.
and faints unto the Courts of our Lord.

Apoc. 7.9.
Consider 2. The happiness arising from the company: There will be a great
multitude which no man can number, of all Nations, and Tribes, and Peoples, and
Tongues, etc. There is to be seen an infinite number without dissension,
distinction of degrees without envy, free communication without confusion. If
it be a pleasure in this life to converse with such as are learned, noble, and
of agreeable conversation, how much greater pleasure and satisfaction will it
be, to have Angels for our companions, who are most Noble Spirits, and endowed
with all manner of Science and Virtue? and to live for ever in the company of
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and the other
Saints of heaven.

Phil. 3.8.
Consider 3. How vile and contemptible all earthly things should appear unto
you, while you look up to heaven; and how you ought to esteem all things as
detriment, and dung, to gain heaven.

Of Heavenly Glory, as to the Soul.
Ps. 144.7.
COnsider 1. The Essential Glory of the Soul, which shall be wholly replenisht
with God, as a burning hot iron is with fire. In the first place, the Memory
will be employed in the remembrance of most delightful objects, nor shall the
mind be ever diverted from the present happiness it enjoys. They shall utter
the memory of the abundance of thy sweetness, and in thy Justice they shall
rejoice.

Secondly, The Understanding shall be wholly taken up with the Vision of God,
intuitively beholding the Divine Nature, Persons, Attributes, and Mysteries,
that now lie hidden from us. There it will see the profound secrets of Gods
Councels, and of his Providence, both over us, and all others: We see now by a
glass (says the Apostle) in a dark sort, 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 Jo. 3.2. Ps. 138.17
but then face to face: And as S. John says, We shall see him as he is: O what
a happiness! O how honorable are become thy friends, O God!

Ps. 35.9.
Thirdly, The Will, after an unspeakable manner, shall adhere to God, and be as
it were transformed into him by love; whence it will even overflow with the
excess of joy; and that of the Psalm will be fulfilled, They shall be
inebriated with the plenty of thy house, and with the torrent of thy pleasure
thou shall make them driak: Their whole life and employment shall be wholly to
contemplate, love, and enjoy their Creator, to delight and rejoice in him, and
to praise, bless, thank, and congratulate with him for his infinite
perfections. Who would not be content to suffer not only patiently, but also
willingly the afflictions of this life, to purchase such a Crown of Glory? O
how true it is, that the passions of this time are not condign to the glory to
come, Romans 8.18
that shall be revealed in us!

Of Heavenly Glory, as to the Body.
Mat. 13.43
COnsider 1. The proper gifts of a glorious body: The first is, Clarity or
Brightness, shineing like unto the Sun: Then shall the Just shine as the Sun in
the Kingdom of their Father. The second is Impassibility; for as S. John
says, They shall no more hunger, Apoc. 7.16 Sap. 3.7.
nor thirst. The third is Agility, The Just shall shine, and as sparks in a
place of reeds they shall run abroad. The fourth is Subtilty, whereby they
shall be able to penetrate other bodies, and be like unto Spirits, free from
the necessities belonging to the vegetative life; Mat. 22.30
as the Angels of God.

Job 19.26
Consider 2. The happiness of each Sense. 1. The Sight shall be delighted in
beholding the glorious bodies of the Saints, especially of Christ, and his
Mother: I know (says Job) that in my flesh I shall see God my Redeemer. 2. The
Hearing shall be recreated with heavenly Music, Hymns and Canticles. Less. de
SS. bon. l. 3. c. 8.
3. The Smelling shall be filled with unspeakable sweetness, issuing forth of
the glorified bodies: Your Saints, O Lord, shall flourish as the Lilly, and
shall be as the odor of Balm with you. 4. The Taste, though not by way of food,
shall have also its proper delight? Ps. 35.9.
With the torrent of thy pleasure thou shall make them drink. 5. Lastly, the
Touching shall have its fill of most pure delight, and that, all the body over.
So that the Apostle with good reason did say, Eye has not seen, nor ear has
heard, 1 Cor. 2.9
neither has it ascended into the heart of man what things God has prepared
for them that love him.

Mat. 11.12
Consider 3. What is fit for you to do, to obtain so great a reward: The Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence: Offer therefore violence to your self, and you
shall have it.

Of the Expectation of the Holy Ghost. Part 1.
Act. 1.14.
COnsider 1. How the Apostles being returned from the Mount, whence our Lord:
scended, they repair all of them into one Room, and by continual prayer, and
servent acts, dispose themselves to receive the Holy Ghost: They were
persevering with one mind in prayer with the women, and Mary the Mother of
Jesus, and his Brethren. The dispositions therefore which they used were: 1.
Retiredness in a private room, far from noise and profane company. 2.
Perseverance in prayer. 3. Concord, and umon of minds. 4. The company of the B.
Virgin.

Luc. 24.49
Consider 2. If our Lord would have the Apostles to prepare themselves in this
manner, for the receiving the Holy Ghost, whom neverthele she was to send, for
the establishing and propagating of his glory, how much more necessary is it
for others of the like calling, to tarry in the City, as they did, in solitude
and retirement; and by continual contemplation of divine things to prepare
themselves, till they be endowed with power from high, to exercise their
Apostolical Functions? Do you also imitate the Apostles fervor in seeking the
Holy Spirit; say with the Prophet, Ps. 50.12.
Create a clean heart in me O God, and renew a right spirit in my bowels.

Consider 3, The coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles was deferred ten
days; which number in Scripture generally signifies multitude, that we might
learn with long patience to expect our Lord; whose presence, though never so
short, will abundantly recompense whatsoever delay. God, ^^^th S. Augustine, S.
Aug. Ep. ^. Fra^. a^. 4.
by deferring, extends our desire, by desiring, inlargeth our heart, by
enlarging, makes it the more capacious.

Of the Expectation of the Holy Ghost. Part 2.
Jo. 3.16.
COnsider 1. The causes of giving the H. Ghost: The first was the infinite
goodness of God, who so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son.
And although the world had treated him so ill, he would notwithstanding also
give us the H. Ghost, who might teach us all truth: The second were the merits
and prayers of Christ: I will ask the Father, Jo. 16.13. Jo. 14.16.
and he will give you another Paraclete: The third, for that he was to
consummate the work of our Redemption, giving us the gifts of his divine grace,
whereby we might obtain heaven.

Romans 5.5.
Consider 2. The greatness of this gift, then the which nothing can be more
excellent or divine, for it is God himself: The Charity of God is powered forth
in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given us. With himself therefore he
gives us all things; for he is, as the Church sings, Seq. in Missa.
the bestower. of gifts, and the light of our hearts: He is as an everflowing
river, whence all manner of grace is derived unto us: He that believes in me,
Jo. 7.38.
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters: And this he said of the
Spirit that they should receive, which believed in him.

Prove. 3.32
Consider 3. To whom he is given: First to Idiots, and Fishermen; for he is the
Father of the poor, And his communication is with the simple. Secondly, he is
given to all fa^thful souls that fervently desire him; Joel 2.28.
I will power out my spirit upon all flesh. Pray therefore with a fervent
desire, and prepare your self worthily, that he may come, and remain ever with
you.

Of Holy Communion. Lo, our Lord will come in Fire. Is. 66.15.

Consider Christ as a Fire.
COnsider 1. How the Holy Ghost descended this day upon the Apostles in the
form of Fire; how he enlightened, and inflamed them, and made them quite other
men. Think how greatly you stand in want of this heavenly Fire, who are so cold
in Gods service, and all over full of the dross of worldly affections, and have
need to be thoroughly purged. Is. 1.22.25
Thy silver is turned into dross, etc. I will turn my hand to thee, and I will
boil out thy dross till it be pure, and will take away all thy tyn.

Deuteronomy. 4.24
Consider 2. Christ in the Eucharist is properly a Fire to your Soul, but
covered with a Cloud: Thy God (says Moses) is a consuming fire, for it
consumes the chaff of terrene affections, takes away the dross of
imperfections, inflames our tepidity, and illuminates our darkness; and as S.
Gregory speaks, Greg. Hom 5. in Ezech. Is. 6.7. etc.
purifieth the soul, which it does replenish, from the rust of sin. The
Eucharist is like to that hot Cole taken from the Altar, which cleansed the
lips of Isaie, and endowed him with the spirit of Prophecy: Confide that it
will also work the same effects in your Soul, if you be worthily disposed.

Consider 3. The dispositions to this Fire in the Apostles were, as has been
said. 1. Retirement. 2. Constant Prayer. 3. Mutual concord. 4. The B. Virgins
company and pretection. Imitate therefore their example, and take heed lest
being once warmed at this Divine Fire, you return to your former state of
coldness and tepidity.

Of the coming of the H. Ghost upon the Apostles. Act. 2.1. etc.
Part 1.
COnsider 1. The time being expired which God had ordained, and the Apostles
being duly disposed by prayer, the H. Ghost came upon them, being all together
in one place, that you should learn to give your self to prayer, to follow the
community, and fly singularity, if you desire to be visited by the H. Ghost.
Besides, he came suddenly, because his Visitation has no prefixed time, and
therefore ought without intermission to be sought for, and with long
expectation to be attended.

Is. 11.9.
Consider 2. And it filled the whole house where they were sitting. Ponder the
bounteous liberality of the Divine Spirit, leaving nothing void of his gifts:
The earth is replenished with the knowledge of our Lord, as the covering waters
of the Sea: And although they were all full, yet one received more then
another, according to the greater or lesser capacity of each ones Vessel:
Whence the B. Virgin received more then all the rest. Enlarge therefore your
vessel, or heart, that you may deserve to receive a ^^rge proportion: Ps. 80.11.
Dilate thy mouth (says he by his Prophet) and I will fill it.

Consider 3. And there appeared to them parted Tongues, as of fire. The H.
Ghost took upon him the form of Fiery Tongues, because (as S. Gregory says)
whom he replenisheth, he makes both fervent and eloquent: Greg. Hom. 3. in
Evang.
Desire him to effect both in you, the first for your own good, the other for
the benefit and edification of others.

Of the coming of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.4. etc.
etc. Part 2.
Mat. 12.34
COnsider 1. And they began to speak with several Tongues, as the H. Ghost gave
them to speak. Ponder 1. The greatness of the Miracle; poor Fishermen that were
ignorant, and unlearned, speak the Languages of all Nations. Ponder 2. What
they speak of; to wit, the great works of Christ, not of vain trifles, or
worldly rumors. So those who are full of God, speak not but of such things as
are of God; for, Of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. See
therefore whether or no thy speech does bewray thee, Mat. 26.73
and prove that thou art full of the World, not of God.

Consider 2. The multitude came together, and was astoni^hed in mind, whereof
some did believe; but others deriding, said, that these are full of new wine:
So there will not be ever wanting those that will laugh at good works, but we
must not therefore leave off: Beseech our Lord to make you drunk with the like
wine; for he whom Gods love does inebriate (says S. Bernard) knows how Jesus
does relish: S. Bern. in Jubilo.
O how happy is that man whom he does satiate, there is not any thing l^ft him
to desire.

Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
Consider 3. The effects which the Holy Ghost does work in a faithful soul: Be
filled with the spirit; speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Canticles, chanting, and singing in your hearts to our Lord, says
the Apostle. See whether you do so; at least excite, and stir your self up to
like actions.

Of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Part 1.
COnsider 1. How bountiful the Divine Spirit is to us, who having no need of us
in the least, notwithstanding does liberally bestow upon us most precious, and
beneficial gifts, which are, as S. Thomas says, S. Tho. 1.2. q. 68. a. 4. c.
Habits inabling a man to follow promptly the instinct of the Holy Ghost,
chiefly in order to Noble and Heroic Acts, and are commonly accounted seven,
out of Isaie, to wit, The spirit of wisdom and understanding, Is. 11.2.
the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and piety, and the
spirit of the fear of our Lord.

Consider 3. These gi^ts serve us as Spiritual Armor to strengthen our several
infirmities; for the spirit (says S. Paul) helps our infirmity: Romans 8.26
Greg. Mor. l. 2. c. 27.
Therefore he gives us (as S. Gregory teaches) wisdom against folly,
understanding against dullness, counsel against rashness, fortitude against
fear, science against ignorance, piety against indevotion, the fear of our Lord
against pride.

Seq. in Missa.
Consider 3. How much you are subject to these infirmities, how foolishly you
prefer the things of this life before Eternity, how dull and heavy you are in
things appertaining to the service of God; and so of the rest. Beseech the
Divine Spirit to arm you with the even-fold Shield of his gifts: Say with the
Church; Come holy Spirit, send forth a beam of your heavenly light, etc.

Of the gifts of the Holy Ghost. Part 2.
COnsider 1. By the foresaid gifts we are not only helped against whatsoever
infirmities, for the avoiding of evil, but also provided with excellent helps
for the obtaining of good. 1. Wisdom helps to understand the divine
perfections of God, and that with gust, and affections of love. 2.
Understanding, to penetrate the mysteries of faith, and the profound secrets
that lie hidden therein. S. Knowledge, to contemplate with profit created
things as they proceed from, and lead us to God, and inform our life and
manners.

Sap. 9.14.
Consider 2. We are also helped by Counsel in our doubts and perplexities: For
the cogitations of mortal men be fearful, and our providence uncertain: And as
a woman that travel^eth, Eccli. 34.6.
thy heart suffers fantasies, unless it be a Vision sent forth from the
Highest. And because it is dangerous to trust to our selves, by the gift of
Counsel we are moved to let our selves be led by others, especially Superiors
and spiritual Directors, according to that, Establish with thy self an heart of
good counsel, Eccli. 37.17, 18.
and persuade your self, that the soul of a holy man utters true things, etc.

Prove. 8.13
Consider 3. By Fortitude we are encouraged to undergo manfully whatsoever
difficulties, and dangers in Gods service, and with an undaunted courage to
suffer torments, and Martyrdom. By Piety we are informed to carry our selves
as children toward our Superiors, as Mothers toward our Inferiors, with the
bowels of charity, and as Brethren to our Equals. Lastly, The fear of our Lord
hates evil, and preserves us from sin, even the least: Because he that fears
God, Eccl. 7.19.
neglects nothing. Therefore beg these gifts of our Lord, who gives to all
men abundantly. Jac. 1.5.


Of the fruits of the Holy Ghost.
Galat. 5.22, 23.
COnsider 1. The Holy Ghost is like a great Tree, whose top reaches to heaven,
and whose branches shadow the whole earth; its fruits are recounted by the
Apostle twelve in number: The fruit of the spirit is, Charity, Joy, Peace,
Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Longanimity, Mildness, Faith, Modesty,
Continency, Chastity. These are most precious fruit, and fall of all sweetness:
And his fruit (says the Spouse) was sweet to my throat. Cant. 2.3.


Mat. 7.16.
Consider 2. And examine your self whether you have the Spirit of God; and
whether you be partaker of his fruits; for by their fruits you shall know them,
says Christ. Think therefore with your self, how charitable you are, how
patient, mild, and modest, and so of the rest; for if you find your self
destitute of these, it is a sign the divine spirit has for as yet overshadowed
you, nor come into you; for he that lives in the spirit, Gal. 5.25.
in the spirit also walks.

Sap. 1.5.
Consider 3. The prime disposition requisite for the receiving the Holy Ghost,
is a pure intention of serving God in all things, for his own sake, not for
worldly respects; for (as the wise man says) The Holy Ghost of discipline,
will fly from him that feigneth. Wherefore endeavor to please him in all
things, and to conform your self to the discipline of the place and calling you
are of, and that not in the outward show only, but sincerely, and from the
heart.

Of the manner of life which the Holy Ghost inspired into the first Christians.
Act. 2.42.
COnsider 1. They were persevering in the Doctrine of the Apostles, and in the
communication of the breaking of bread, and of prayers; for chiefly by these
three things spiritual life is nourished, and increased, to wit: 1. By hearing,
or reading the Word of God. 2. By frequenting the Sacraments, and principally
that of the Altar. 3. By continual prayer. Do you likewise insist chiefly upon
these.

Consider 2. Their living in common: All they also that believed, were
together, Ibid. v. 44.
and had all things common. Their Charity and mutual concord: And the multitude
of believers had one heart, Act. 4.32.
and one soul. Their Evangelical Poverty, for love of which, As many as were
owners of lands, or houses, sold, Ibid. 34, 35
and bought the prices of those things which they sold, and laid it before the
feet of the Apostles, etc. Neither did any one say, Sup. v. 32.
that ought was his own of those things which he possessed, but all things were
common to them.

Act. 2.46, 47.
Consider 3. The rest of their life; they were daily also continuing with one
accord in the Temple; and breaking bread from house to house (as well the
Eucharistical bread in Communion, as common bread in Hospitality) they took
their meat with joy and simplicity of heart, praising God, and having grace
with all the people. How far are we off from the like fervor, assiduity of
prayer, and simplicity of heart? Let us therefore imitate their example, that
we may come to enjoy their company in heaven.

Lord, if I have found grace in thy sight, go not past thy servant. Genesis 18.3.
Trinity Sunday.
Of Holy Communion. Consider Christ as the Second Person of the most Blessed
Trinity.
Isa. 6.3.
COnsider 1. What Faith teaches us concerning this most sacred mystery; to wit,
three Persons subsistent in one single Nature, or Essence of Divinity, the
Father unbegotten, his only begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, proceeding from
both. Imagine your self to see innumerable millions of Saints and Angels in
heaven prostrate before the Throne of the Divinity, with most prefound
reverence, and admiration of this incomprehensible Mystery, and continually
singing forth, Holy, holy, holy the Lord God of Hosts.

Consider 2. The Second Person of this Sacred Trinity will abide with you this
day, and with him the other two, the Father, and the H. Ghost, who being the
self-same in Nature with the Son, Suar. 2. p. to 3. dis^. 51. See. 6.
in a special manner are also present in the Eucharist. What entertainment
therefore will be sitting for such Guests, what care of neatness, and adorning
your self with acts of virtue?

Consider 3. With what servour, humility, and devotion Abraham entertained the
three Angels, who represented the B. Trinity: He received three, but adored
only one (says S. Augustine) saying, Aug. l. 16. c. 29. Civit.
Lord, if I have found grace in thy sight, go not past thy servant. Then
himself ran to the Herd, took from thence one of the best Calves, and caused it
to be boiled, and set before them. Do you the like, and present your guests
with the best you have, to wit, your heart well prepared by the sire of
Charity, and say with the Church, In Offic. ss. Triritatis.
Blessed be the holy and undivided Trinity, now and ever, and world without end.

Of the first Person of the B. Trinity, or of the Eternal Father.
2 Cor. 4.4. Heb. 1.3.
COnsider 1. The Eternal Father (as Faith teaches) is the Fountain and Origin
of the other persons in the B. Trinity; for understanding himself by an
Intuitive Vision, he begets the Eternal Word, that is, a most perfect and
substantial Image of himself, which is the Son, the Image of God, and the
figure of his substance. And again, together with the Son, by mutual love,
breaths forth the Holy Ghost; communicating unto them both his entire Nature
without division, retaining in himself his own proper personality
uncommunicated. Admire the sublimeness of this Mystery: stir your self up to
acts of Faith, and acknowledge how weak man's understanding is to comprehend
divine things: O depth of the riches of the wisdom, Romans 11.33.
I and of the knowledge of God, etc.

Consider 2. Although all exterior works of God are common to the whole
Trinity, notwithstanding those of Power and Omnipotency are appropriated to the
Father; such are the Creation, Conservation, and Government of the World:
whence you may learn both how much you ought to love him who created you; and
for your sake produced this admirable Structure of the Universe, and how much
reason you have to fear him, Mat. 10.28
who in a moment can destroy both soul and body into hell.

Jo. 16.27.
Consider 3. This Father, and Lord of all things, notwithstanding the greatness
of his Majesty, stoopeth so low beneath himself, for love of us, who at the
best are but his Slaves and Vassals; as to make us his children, and heirs by
adoption: For the Father himself loves you (says Christ) Nay, God so loved
the world, Jo. 3.16.
that he gave bis only begotten Son for its redemption. See therefore how much
reason you have to love and reverence with your whole heart, and with all your
strength, so loving a Father.

Of the Second Person of the B Trinity, or of the Son.
Is. 53.8.
COnsider 1. That, as Faith teaches, the Son was begotten from all Eternity,
without the least difference of time, or point of inequality: for he is
Consubstantial; Coeternal; and in all things equal to the Father; he is
properly the Word of the Divine Intellect, expressing in himself the whole
substance of the Divinity, the which being made as it were Vocal by the
Incarnation, declared unto us the secret Mysteries of the Father: Who shall
declare his generation? Neither the Angels themselves can comprehend this
unspeakable Procession: Therefore what you cannot conceive either by sense or
reason, believe with a firm faith, and rejoice for the glory of the Son, equal
in all things with the Father.

Consider 2. The Sons love toward mankind who to redeem his Slave, delivered
himself over to death: For us men, and for our salvation, Symb. Nicen.
he descended from heaven, and was incarnate, and born, and that in so humble
and contemptible a manner: God was made man, that man might be made God: Aug.
Ser. 9. de Not. Leo Ser. 6. de Not.
Or as S. Leo says, Christ was made the Son of man, that we might be made the
Sons of God. O ineffable love! O incomprehensible favor!

Consider 3. How you may requite so great a love: Doubtless it requires that
you both reverence his divine person with the greatest devotion and respect,
and with as great tenderness, love that sacred humanity which he took upon him,
and nailed to the Cross for your sake: Say with S. Bernard, S. Bern. Ser. 1. de
Epiph.
The more vile he is become for me, so much the more dear he is to me; and take
heed least by sinning you alienate from your self so loving a friend.

Of the Third Person of the B. Trinity, or of the Holy Ghost.
Pref. Miss.
COnsider 1. The Holy Ghost as the Third Person of the B. Trinity, proceeding
from the Father and the Son, but coeternal, and consubstantial to them both, of
equal power, wisdom, and so of the other divine Attributes: For there is (as
the Church sings) Propriety in the Persons, unity in the Essence, and
Equality in Majesty. Do you also reverence and honor this divine person, and
join your voice with the Seraphins, crying out, Holy, Is. 6.3.
holy, holy, etc.

Consider 2. The Holy Ghost appeared over our Lord in the form of a Dove, both
to express his love toward us, for the Dove is a Symbol of sociable love; and
withal to teach us mildness, and simplicity in our life and actions. To him
likewise are attributed the works of our Justification, the distribution of
Graces, and the benefits of Inspirations, and Illuminations: The spirit
breaths where he will, Jo. 3.8.
and thou hear his voice: That you may hence see how much you stand in need
of his divine help and protection.

1 Cor. 6.19.
Consider 3. The Holy Ghost does not only communicate the gifts of his Grace,
but also his own substance and person to the Just, inhabiting and abiding in
them after a special manner, as Divines teach, according to that of the
Apostle; Know you not that your members are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which
is in you? See therefore that you make not his Temple a Den of Thieves, by sin:
Beg of him by continual prayer, that he would wash away what is unclean in you,
Seq. in Missa de S. Spiritu.
water what is dry, heal what is wounded, bend what is stiff and unruly,
cherish what is cold and faint, and redress whatsoever is amiss.

Corpus Christi Day. He has made a memory of his admirable works, etc. He has
given meat to them that fear him. Ps. 110.4.5

Of Holy Communion. Consider Christ as the Instituter of the most Blessed
Sacrament.
Eccli. 39.27.
COnsider 1. How much you are bound to Christ for instituting so admirable and
beneficial a Mystery, from which, as from a Fountain, all manner of good does
flow: For the Eucharist 1. Is properly a sacrifice for our sins. 2. Spiritual
food to keep us in heart. 3. A lively Memorial of our Lords Passion. 4. The
Spring and Fountain of all grace and virtue. His blessing (says
Ecclesiasticus) has overflowed as a stream.

Supra.
Consider 2. This divine Instuter, who several ways had showed himself wonderful
in his other works, would in this single one employ all the treasures of his
power and wisdom; for in the Eucharist there are discovered: 1. His infinite
wisdom in inventing so admirable a food. 2. The like power in the
Transubstantiation of Bread and Wine. 3. His goodness in communicating himself,
and penetrating our very bowels; in the nature of meat and drink. 4. His
liberality in giving himself wholly to each one, even to the wicked. 5.
Patience in permitting himself to be unworthily handled, and even trodden under
feet sometimes by the wicked; and so of other virtues: He has made a memory of
his mavelous works, etc. He has given meat to them that fear him.

Seq. in Missa.
Consider 3. Hence the Church, with good reason, these days does celebrate the
memory of this Mystery with great pomp and solemnity. If the Ark of God
formerly was carried with so great state, the King himself dancing all the way
before it; how much more honor does the H. Eucharist deserve? Go forth
therefore to meet it in the best array of your Soul; praise, honor, and thank
the Author of it: At least do what you are able, because he is above all
praise, and you cannot praise him sufficiently.

Of the H. Eucharist compared with the Manna. Part 1.
COnsider 1. Nothing in the Ancient Law was more wonderful then the Manna,
which for forty years together fell daily from heaven, for the sustenance of
the people: whence David said of it, He has made a memory of his mavelous
works, etc. Consider therefore twelve admirable proprieties of it, Ps. 110.4.
in a far more perfect manner expressed in the Eucharist.

1. The Manna was bread, but without seed, or tillage; not growing out of the
earth, but coming down from heaven: So the H. Eucharist; This is the bread that
came down from heaven: Jo. 6.58.
And the sacred Body of Christ, which is contained therein, proceeded not by
humane generation, but from the Virgin alone, and by the divine influence of
the Holy Ghost.

2. The Manna was made only by Angels, whence it was called The bread of
Angels; Ps. 77.25. Malac. 2.7.
and the Eucharist only by Priests, who are the Angels of the Lord of Hosts
upon earth.

3. The Manna contained in it self alone, All delectation, and the sweetness of
all taste: Sap. 16.20 Cyp. tract. de Coena Dom.
so the Eucharist surpasses (says S. Cyprian) all delicacies prepared for the
taste; and all the dainties of sweet meats.

4. The Manna in such variety of taste and delight, yet did relish differently
to each one, according as they desired: For, serving every man's will, it was
turned to that that every man would: Sap. 16.21
so the Eucharist affords whatsoever virtue any one can desire; to some
Humility, to others Chastity, and so of the rest.

5. The sweetness of the Manna was hidden, and enjoyed only by the just: whence
the wicked complained, saying, Our soul now loatheth at this most light meat:
Number. 21.5
so with sinners the Eucharist relisheth no better then ordinary bread, and
therefore is called a hidden Manna.

6. The Manna was like to the seed of Coriander, whose property it is said to
be, that though it be broken into never so many pieces, yet it retains in every
one the whole virtue or strength of the seed: so the Eucharist, though broken
into a thousand parts, still as much will remain in one single parcel, Seq. in
Missa.
as was before in the whole.

Of the H. Eucharist compared with the Manna. Part 2.
Exodus 16.18.
COnsider the other Proprieties. 7. Therefore Manna was given in an equal
measure to every one: Neither he that gathered more, had above, nor he that
gathered less, found under: so in the Eucharist, one takes, a thousand takes,
but as much he, Seq. in Missa.
as they, etc.

8. The Manna was to be gathered betimes, Exodus sup. 21.
before the Sun rising, otherwise it presently melted away, although within
doors it would endure both fire and Mortar; Sap. 16.28
That it might be known to all men (says the wise man) that we ought to
prevent the Sun to bless thee: so the Eucharist does impart its sweetness, not
to slothful and sluggish people, but to the fervent: Prove. 8.18
They that watch toward me shall find me.

9. The Manna in an equal proportion served as well men as children, old and
young: Exodus sup. 18.
so the Eucharist, still the same in it self, does work differently in all,
according to their capacity, and the disposition they bring.

10. The Manna being kept only till the next day, out of covetousness, became
full of worms, Exodus sup. 20. and 32.
and putrified; yet being laid up by Gods Command in a Golden Vessel, lasted
incorrupt for many Generations: so the Eucharist, to them that receive it
unworthily, turns to corruption, and to their greater judgment, and
damnation; but in the golden vessel of a good and perfect heart, it becomes
the seed of eternal life.

11. The Manna, Sup. 35.
all the time of their Pilgrimage, for forty years together, never failed: so
likewise the Eucharist is our constant and neverfailing provision, during the
time of our Pilgrimage: I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the
world.

12. The Manna fell daily, Exodus sup. 22. etc.
without intermission, except Sabbath days, on which they lived upon what they
had gathered the day before: The Eucharist is our daily bread in this life, but
will cease on the Sabbath of Eternal repose, where we shall live for ever upon
what we have gathered in this life.

Of Holy Communion. Come eat ye my bread, and drink the wine which I have
mingled for you. Prove. 9.5.

Consider the Eucharist as a Banquet. Part 1.
Mat. 11.28
COnsider 1. What is read this day in the Gospel: A certain man made a great
supper, etc. This man is Christ, and the Eucharist the supper or banquet, to
which all men are invited: Come ye to me all that labor, and are burdened,
and I will refresh you. Never was there from the beginning of the world, by any
Prince, made so sumptuous and magnificent a banquet: Wherefore prepare the
appetite of your soul, that it may take its fill of it; and ponder the
admirable properties of this heavenly banquet.

1. It is infinite in greatness, made not for one City or Province, but for all
Nations to feed on: Our Lord of Hosts shall make to all peoples in this Mount a
feast of fat things, Is. 25.6.
a feast of Vintage.

2. It is perpetual, and never failing, and not for many days only, as was that
of Affuerus, nor yet for some years: it has already lasted above 1600 years,
and is to last yet, Mat. 28.20
even to the consummation of the world.

3. It is furnished with admirable variety, containing in it self (as the wise
man says)* Sap. 16.20
all delectation, and the sweetness of all taste.

4. The meat of this Feast is most wholesome: He that eats this bread shall
live for ever. Jo. 6.58. Ps. 80.17. 1 Cor. 10.4.


5. It is most delicions: He fed them of the fat of corn; and out of the rock,
with honey he filled them: And the rock (says S. Paul) was Christ.

6. It is most exquisite; for what more rare and excellent, then the only Son
of God? Deuteronomy. 32.39.
See ye that I am only, and there is no other God besides me.

7. It is most precious, above dissolved pearl: for what can be more precious
then that blood, which was the ransom of the whole world? Therefore come unto
this divine feast with a longing desire, and say with the Church, O sacred
Feast, In Offic. Corp. Christi
in which Christ is received, the memory of his Passion renewed, our mind
filled with grace, and a pledge of future glory given us.

Of the Eucharist as a Banquet. Part 2.
Dan. 5.1.
COnsider 1. Besides the fare, also the dignity of the Guests, the quality and
number of Waiters, and the sumptuous service of the meat, in plate of gold,
silver, etc. do make to the commendation, and magnificence of the Feast.
Baltasser the King made a great feast to his Nobles, a thousand, in gold and
silver Vessels. The Guests in this Banquet are the three Divine Persons of the
most B. Trinity: What more Royal and Divine? Apoc. 3.20
If any man shall open to me the gate, I will enter in to him, and will sup
with him, and he with me. And in another place; If any man love me, Jo. 14.23.
etc. my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and will make abode
with him.

Dan. 7.10.
Consider 2. The Waiters are Angels, the most excellent of all creatures by
nature: Thousand of thousands minister to him, and ten thousand hundred
thousands assist him: They assist therefore their Lord, as the holy Fathers
say, in time of Divine Sacrifice, and so long as he remains personally with
you, Chrysostom. de Sacerd. l. 6.
they also attend you; that you may learn even by this with what reverence you
ought to behave your self in time of Communion.

Is. 52.11.
Consider 3. The furniture and service in the outward show, are but mean and
plain, but in truth surpass all the power of Nature: For the Mess of Life is
handed to you under the vail of accidents, which are miraculously preserved
without their proper substances; then the which there is no greater wonder in
Nature. Learn therefore hence, how well adorned with virtues you ought to come
to this heavenly Banquet: Be cleansed (says the Prophet) ye that carry the
Vessels of our Lord: How much more you that receive within you our Lord himself?

Of the Eucharist compared to the Tree of Life, and its fruits. Part 1.
Apoc. 22.2
COnsider 1. How the Tree of Life in Paradise restored the decaying forces of
Nature, and kept man, who was then immortal, in continual repair. And in the
Apocalypse it is said, the Angel showed me the Tree of Life, yielding twelve
fruits, etc. The Eucharist is the Bread of Life, so called by Christ, Jo. 6.48.
because by the Grace which it gives, it makes us immortal, and yields
twelve sorts of fruit most Sovereign against so many infirmities, S. Tho.
Opusc. 58. c. 21.
or miseries (as S. Thomas teaches) which man's Nature is subject to by sin.

1 Pet. 5.8.
Our first Misery does arise from the assaults of the Devil, who as a roaring
Lion goes about, seeking whom he may devour.. Against this the Eucharist does
arm us, giving strength both to resist, and to chase our Adversary away, like
to that Fish of Toby, whereof it is said, Tob. 6.8.
The smoke thereof drives out all kind of Devils.

Romans 7.23
The second Misery is the Rebellion of Concupiscence, of which the Apostle
says, I see another law in my members, repugning to the law of my mind:
Another law, that is, concupiscence of sin in our members; as in the eye to
covet, in the tongue to slander, etc. This heat of Concupiscence is allayed by
the H. Eucharist; to which purpose, the Manna is said to have lain like unto
the hoar frost on the ground. And our Lord by the Prophet; Exodus 16.14.
I will be as Dew, Israel shall spring as the Lilly. Ose 14.6.


Eccles. 7.21
The third is the stain and corruption of the heart: For there is no just man in
the earth, that does good, and sins not. This the Eucharist does cleanse,
like to the hot Cole that cleansed the lips of Isaie. Is. 6.6.


Pro. 21.14
The fourth is the offense of the Creator: This also the Eucharist takes away,
appeasing his wrath and indignation against us: A gift hid (says the wise man)
quenches angers. There is none more acceptable and obliging gift, then the
only Son of God, who is truly hid, and offered to his Eternal Father, in the
Eucharist.

Of the Eucharist compared to the Tree of Life, and its fruits. Part 2.
Genesis 1.2.
THe fifth Misery, is want of the knowledge of our selves; Darkness was upon the
face of the depth: so is it likewise upon the heart of that man, that is not
enlightened with the grace of God: Therefore the Prophet says, The heart of man
is perverse, Jer. 17.9.
and unsearchable, who shall know it? The Eucharist remedieth this, enlightening
our understanding; like to the honey, that enlightened the eyes of Jonathas:
Your selves have seen that mine eyes are illuminated, 1 Reg. 14.29.
because I have tasted a little of this honey.

Mat. 24.12
The sixth is want of love toward God, and our Neighbor: for where Iniquity
shall abound, Charity shall wax cold: This is cured by the Eucharist, which
inflameth the heart with divine love; for the lamps thereof, lamps of fire, and
flames.

Cant. 8.6.
The seventh is the indisposition of our spiritual appetite, whereby we relish
not spiritual things; for the sensual man perceives not these things that are
of the Spirit of God: 1 Cor. 2.14.
And he that feeds himself with the pleasures of this present life, his
interior senses are so disordered thereby, that he cannot relish spiritual
things. The Eucharist helps this, curing the palate of our heart, so that we
may taste, and see that our Lord is sweet. Ps. 33.9.


Luc. 14.30
The eighth is a faintness in perfecting what is good; we often begin
fervorously, but soon fail: This man began to build, and he could not finish
it: Against this the H. Eucharist does strengthen us; like to that Loaf of
Bread, 3 Reg. 19.8.
which the Angel brought to Elias, In the strength whereof he walked forty
days and forty nights, without any toil, unto the Mount of God, Horeb. Beg
therefore of our Lord these fruits, especially that you may be constant in
good: For of all Virtues (says S. Bernard) Perseverance alone is crowned.
Bernard.


Of the Eucharist compared with the Tree of Life, and its fruits. Part 3.
Ephesians. 2.3
OUr ninth Misery is the penalty of Eternal Death: For we were (as the Apostle
says) by nature the children of wrath. From this evil the Eucharist freeth us,
giving us Eternal Life: For if any man eat of this bread (says our Lord) he
shall live for ever. Jo. 6.51.


Genesis 8.21.
The tenth is our continual decay in good, passing daily from bad to worse: For
the sense and cogitation of man's heart, are prone to evil from their youth.
This is taken away by means of the H. Eucharist, whereby, as by spiritual food,
man grows up in a spiritual life, and increases in merits of good works; for
he that abides in me, and I in him, Jo. 15.5.
the same bears much fruit.

Ps. 119.5.
The eleventh is the irksomness of this worldly banishment; of which David, Woe
is to me that my sejourning is prolonged: The Eucharist does mitigate this
tediousness, and is given also as a Viaticum, or provision, to live upon in
this our Pilgrimage, as was the Manna to the Israelites in the Desert, till
they were brought into the Land of Promise, which to us is the Kingdom of
everlasting glory.

Genesis 3.19.
The twelfth is a total corruption of our corporal substance; because dust thou
art, and into dust thou shall return. And thus, according to the course of
Nature, this our body would perish for ever; but by reason of the corporal
participation of Christ (as S. Thomas says) the Saints shall rise again in
their bodies, more glorious then the Sun; according to that of Christ, He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has life everlasting, Jo. 6.54.
and I will raise him up in the last day.

Ps. 102.2. and 3.
Admire the admirable virtue of these heavenly fruits, and be thankful for so
powerful a remedy and preservative against all your maladies: My soul, bless
thou our Lord, etc. who heals all thine infirmities.

Of Preparation for receiving the H. Eucharist by Faith, and Purity.
1 Cor. 11.28.
COnsider 1. How necessary is a due preparation before hand for receiving the H.
Eucharist, least otherwise, through mortal sin you make that your poison, which
is the food of life; or through indevotion and tepidity, you partake less of
its sweetness. Therefore the Apostle admonishes; Let a man prove himself, and
so let him eat of that bread: And Mat. 22. he that presumed to come to the
Marriage Feast, without the wedding garment, was cast into utter darkness.

Heb. 10.22.
Consider 2. The first preparation must be by Faith, which is as it were the
ground and foundation of all the rest: therefore the Apostle says, Let us
approach with a true heart, in fullness of faith. Kindle therefore in your self
a lively faith, as often as you frequent this Sacred Mystery, and denying
whatsoever sense shall object to the contrary, offer your life and blood to
defend the truth of Gods Word.

Consider 3. The second preparation must be by Parity, which the greater it
shall be, the more you will partake of its divine fruits, and taste of its
hidden sweetness: wherefore the Prophet; Be cleansed, ye that carry the Vessels
of our Lord: Is. 52.11.
The same does the Church recommend unto us, by ordaining the H. Eucharist to
be consecrated upon clean Corporals; S. Tho. 6.11.
which (as S. Thomas observes) are first washed, then wrung, and thirdly dried;
so he that goes to receive this Sacrament, must first of all be washed with the
tears of Penance, then wrung by works of Mortification; and thirdly, well dried
of worldly affections, by the fervor of Charity. See whether you find these
dispositions in your self.

Of Preparation for receiving the H. Eucharist by holy Desires and Prayer.
Eccli. 24.26.
COnsider 1. To the foresaid Purity must be joined an ardent desire, and hunger
after this heavenly Banquet; for our Lord inviteth such to himself, in those
words, Pass to me all ye that desire me, and be filled of my generations: And
by the Psalmist he tells us, Ps. 106.9.
that he has filled the empty (that is the thirsty) soul, and the hungry soul
he has filled with good things. Procure therefore in your self this hunger,
and thirst, as often as you come to this Divine Table; Dilate thy mouth, Ps.
80.11.
and I will fill it, faith our Lord.

Ps. 104.40
Consider 2. To this desire must be added earnest Prayer, for God bestows all
he has upon them that ask: Therefore said David, They made petition, and the
Quail came, and he filled them with the Bread of Heaven. If therefore you
desire to have your fill of this heavenly Bread, you must make earnest suit for
it, and give your self to Prayer and Meditation: Under his shadow whom I
desired, Cant. 2.3.
I sat, that is, in holy Meditation, and Contemplation; whence having had
experience of its sweetness, the Spouse presently adjoyneth, and his fruit was
sweet unto my throat.

Consider 3. You must not wonder, if after diligent preparation on your part,
you do not always perceive the sweetness of this heavenly food: For as the
Physician to some Patients prescribes such Physic as is pleasing to their
sensitive palate, or appetite, to others again, such as is agreeable only to
the rational appetite, as being more wholesome then toothsome: S. Tho. cit. c.
22.
So God does temper the sweetness of this heavenly potion, that it does relish
to some by affectual devotion, to others only by the knowledge and satisfaction
they receive of its great profit and benefit, as he knows to be most
expedient for every one: Submit your self therefore to this heavenly Physician,
and beg of him to give you that relish, which he knows to be most for your
benefit.

Of Holy Communion. I have strayed as a sheep that is lost, seek thy servant.
Ps. 118.176.

Consider Christ as a Shepherd, seeking after one of his strayed Sheep.
Luc. 15.4.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel of a Shepherd, who having a
hundred sheep in his Flock, went to seek one that had gone astray: Consider how
that Christ is this Shepherd: Ponder his exceeding care of this one lost sheep,
whereas he had ninety nine, that is, innumerable others, to wit, Angels grazing
on the Eternal Hills. He wanted neither the wool, nor milk of his wandering
sheep, and yet seeks up and down, every where, in sweat and labor, to find
him out; and having found him, he neither beats, nor kicks him, but lays him on
his shoulders, and brings him home. O God! What is man that thou magnifiest
him, Job 7.17.
or why set thou thy heart toward him?

Is. 53.6.
Consider 2. That your Soul in particular is a strayed sheep, which has
hitherto wandered up and down, through the thickets and briars of your own
inventions, out of your Fold, and out of the bounds of that perfection which
God has called you to: You do not yield him the wool of your exterior
actions, nor the milk of your interior: You take no delight in his rich and
pleasant pastures, but rather cast your self upon the vile Fodder of worldly
delights. All we have strayed as sheep, every one has declined into his own
way, says the Prophet.

Consider 3. This loving Pastor will come to day unto you, to bring you back
into your right way: Therefore ask him pardon, for having hitherto so foolishly
gone astray, and that you have not been more attentive to his Call, and holy
Inspirations: Offer him from hence forwards the wool and milk of all your
actions: Say with the Prophet; I have strayed as a sheep that is lost; seek thy
servant, because I have not forgotten thy Commandments.

Meditations of the Life and Doctrine of Christ our Lord, from his Baptism to
his Passion.
Note.
THe Life and Doctrine of Christ, during the time of his three years Preaching,
yield plentiful matter for Meditation. But because we cannot go through with
every passage, we will insist upon the chief, and therein follow, not so much
the order of the History, which is often in contraversie, as a certain
similitude, and connection of one matter with another; as we find others to
have done before us.

Of the Preaching of S. John Baptist. Part 1.
In these days comes John the Baptist Preaching in the Desert, Mat. 3.1.
etc.
Marc. 1.2.
COnsider 1. The Preaching of John goes before the Preaching of Christ, as does
the break of day before the rising of the Sun; for of him it is said, Behold I
send mine Angel before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee. John
therefore was an Angel, Malac. 3.1.
both by Office, and in the Innocence of his Life, and manners, such as ought
to be all Priests, who are often in the Scripture called Angels. Malac. 2.7.


Mat. 3.4.
Consider 2. More in particular the admirable Virtues of this holy Preacher:
First his austerity of life; for as the Evangelist testifies, He had his
garment of Camels hair, and a girdle of a skin about his loins, and his meat
was Locusts, and wild honey. Doubtless his lodging and bed were answerable, to
wit, the bare ground, under some Den or Cave, nor had he any better defense
against the cold of Winter, and heat of Summer. Think how much you come short
of this great Preacher, who are not content with those conveniences which your
state of life affords you.

Consider 3. This austerity of life was accompanied with continual
contemplation of heavenly things, wherein he spent his whole life, to the
thirtieth year of his age: Admire his Constancy in so long a warfare; for there
can be no doubt, but that in all that time he had many Combats with the Devil.
Ponder his incomparable Innocence of life, without committing the least Venial
sin, as most are of opinion; and withal, endeavor to imitate, and come as
near him as you can.

Of the Preaching of S. John Baptist, Mat. 3.2.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. The Subject of his Preaching was nothing but Penance, saying, Do
Penance, etc. to which he exhorts his Auditors, by proposing to them first
hopes of the Kingdom of Heaven, then the fear of Gods most severe judgment,
representing him with his Fan in his hand, to cleanse the Wheat from the Chaff.
Think how much you stand in need of this Penance; see whether you be Wheat, or
Chaff; if the first, see you do not degenerate; if the second, endeavor to
convert your self, by the Divine Assistance, into pure Wheat, that you may not
deserve to be cast into unquenchable fire.

Is. 5.4.
Consider 2. Those words; Every tree that does not yield good fruit, shall be
cut down, and cast into the fire. It is not enough to produce any kind of
fruit, but it must be pure good. Examine your works, what they are, whether
good, solid, and perfect, or not rather counterfeited, and fair only to the
outward appearance, or at least imperfect, and not of full growth and maturity,
least that may be said of you; I looked it should yield grapes, and it has
yielded wild grapes: And that other, Cut it down, whereto does it also occupy
the ground? Luc. 13.7.


Consider 3. John begins not, but at a mature Age, and after a long
preparation by Prayer and Mortification: But then by the impulse of the Divine
Spirit, by whose Inspiration also he had before retired himself, enters with
an invincible courage upon his charge: For the Holy Ghost is wont to set them,
whom he has once perfected, upon the perfecting of others. Your Desert is a
private retired life, wherein you must prepare your self by Prayer,
Mortification, and holy Solitude, attending to God alone, that you may prove
the sitter Instrument, either of the Gospel (if such be your calling) or of
your own and your Neighbour^ perfection.

Of the Jews Message to John. Jo. 1.19.
Part 1.
COnsider 1. The Jews moved with the Sanctity of John, made great resort unto
him; and not only the common people, but the chief Magistrates began to doubt
whether he were not Christ: Therefore they sent from Jerusalem Priests and
Levites to him, that they should ask him, who art thou? Ponder how powerful
Innocence of life is to move men's minds, and how true is that which S. Bernard
says, Bern. Sermon 55. in Cant.
That louder is the voice of works, then of words.

Consider 2. The diverse acts of Humility of S. John in this occasion; for
whereas he was in such esteem with the Jews, as to be held for Christ, he did
not therefore vainly vaunt himself above what he was, as worldly men are wont,
in like occasions; but confessed, and did not deny, and he confessed that I am
not Christ. This is the first degree of Humility, to disown what he knew
belonged not unto himself, and to resign it where it was due. See whether you
do not otherwise, making your self more then you are, and concealing what in
truth you are.

Mat. 11.9.
Consider 3. How when the Jews demanded again, whether he were not Elias, or
some Prophet; he answered No. He might have given himself out for Elias in
Spirit, though not in person; and for a Prophet, and more then a Prophet, as he
was styled by the Angel, and by Christ himself. But he that is truly humble,
does not only refuse what is not his own, but also takes off (as far as truth
will permit) from what is his due. He never commends himself, Bern. Ep. 87.
but rather (as S. Bernard says) as much as lies in him, will not be known
what he is. Be ashamed therefore to seek the applause of others, and not
content with that, to be your own Trumpeter.

Of the Jews Message to John. Jo. 1.23.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. The Jews still urging him to give some account of himself, He
said, I am the voice of one crying in the Desert, make straight the way of our
Lord. He boasts not of his Race, Parents, Priesthood, etc. as worldly men are
wont: He calls himself a Voice, expressing thereby his Office of Precursor,
and signifying withal, that whatsoever he was, belonged wholly to another, to
wit, God, whose Instrument he was in speaking. This is a third degree of
Humility, that when we are constrained to discover some good, or perfection
that we have, we acknowledge it only as a gift of God, and not as any thing of
our own.

Consider 2. They said to him; Why then do thou baptize, if thou be not
Christ? The Jews check him, as taking upon him, by his own private Authority,
an Office not belonging unto him: But he contendeth not in his own defense, nor
makes any Apology, but referring the matter to God, proceeds in villifying
himself, Saying, I baptize in water, but there has stood in the mids of you,
whom you know not, etc. whose latchet of his Shoe, I am not worthy to loose.
This is a fourth degree of Humility, to be backwards in ones own excuse. O that
we would all practice it!

Consider 3. The Jews sent the Message to John, not to Christ, of whom
notwithstanding they might have been better informed: So we often seek comfort
from creatures, instead of the Creator. Observe moreover the blindness of the
Jews, who hearing of John, that Christ (whom they fought) conversed among them,
notwithstanding made no further enquiry after him. For your part, be diligent
to understand the Will of God in all things, and when you have understood it,
be as faithful to put it in execution, etc.

Of Christ's Baptism. Mat. 3.13.
Part 1.
COnsider 1. How Christ beginning his Preaching, goes first to be baptized; to
teach us, that we should begin the work of God with a clean heart. Therefore he
takes leave of his Mother, who though she cannot but grieve thereat, for the
absence of such a Son, yet withal, she rejoices for the Redemption of Israel,
drawing so near at hand: He takes a long journey to John, the greater to the
lesser, the Lord to the Servant, to be baptized by him as a finner, among the
Publicans and Soldiers, and among the Rout and Scum of people. Admire this
Humility of the Son of God, and learn, that it is the best preparation toward
the undertaking of great things, according to that; And that which shall b^
saved of the House of Juda, and which is left, Is. 37.31.
shall take root downward, and shall bear fruit upward.

Consider 2. How John by Divine Revelation knowing our Lord at his coming,
modestly refuses to baptize him; saying, I ought to be baptized of thee, and
come thou to me? Think what affections of joy, reverence, and submission,
John felt at that time in his heart, seeing the Creator humbling himself so low
as to receive Baptism of his Creature. Stir up the like affections in your
self, as often as he comes to you in the B. Sacrament.

Consider 3. Christ's answer: Suffer me for this time, for so it becomes us to
fulfill all Justice. Ponder those words, All Justice, and learn to omit nothing
in the way of Virtue, that may benefit your self, or edify your Neighbor.
Examine your self whether you do so, and whether you put in practice what you
teach others by word of mouth; for as S. Ambrose says, That Pastor fulfilleth
Justice, Ambr. in 3. Luc.
that makes good by deeds, what he teaches by words.

Of Christ's Baptism. Part 2.
Luc. 3.21, 22.
COnsider 1. What S. Luke says; Jesus being baptiz^d, and praying, Heaven was
opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in corporal shape, as a Dove upon him: For
God is wont to exalt, and honor the humble. Christ therefore is honored here:
1. By the opening of the Heavens, to signify that by him Heaven Gates were
opened to us. 2. By the coming down of the H. Ghost, to express the fullness of
Grace, and Heavenly Gifts, which were in him, and were by him to be derived
unto us all. 3. He is proclaimed the Natural Son of God, to whom all creatutes
ought to give due honor.

Consider 2. The Holy Ghost appeared in the form of a Dove, to show what manner
of life ought all they to lead that are baptized: That every one may understand
(says S. Augustine) if he has the simple spirit (that is, August. Tract. 6.
in Joan.
of truth and sincerity) that he must be like a Dove, have peace with his
Brethren, which the Doves kind kisses do signify: And last^y, to hurt no body,
for the Dove hurts not so much as a fly.

Is. 54.7.
Consider 3. The heavenly effects of our Sacrament of Baptism, expressed unto
us in Christ's Baptism. 1. The opening of Heaven Gates. 2. The revealing of
Divine Mysteries. 3. The Remission of Sins. 4. The Unction of the Holy Ghost.
5. The Adoption to be the Children of God. Give thanks for so manifold a
benefit, and being now made the Son of God, raise up your thoughts, and
affections to your heavenly habitation, that lies open for you: Say with the
Prophet, who will give me wings as of a Dove, and I will fly, and rest?

Of Holy Communion. Direct, (...) Lord, my way in thy sight. Ps. 5.9.

Consider Christ as the Director of our Actions.
Luc. 5.5.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel: Master, laboring all the night,
we have taken nothing; for men live in a great Mist, or darkness of Ignorance,
not knowing what to do, nor what will prove beneficial, or hurtful for them;
wherefore they stand in need of a Divine Light, whereby they may be directed in
all things. 2 Paralip. 20.12.
Whence King Josephat said, Whereas we are ignorant what we ought to do, this
only we have left, that we direct our eyes to thee. Neither does God refuse the
Office of a Director; for it is said of Joseph, Genesis 39.23.
Our Lord was with him, and directed all his works.

Consider 2. Christ, as we read in this days Gospel, directed the Apostles
Fishing, and presently there was taken a great quantity of Fish: He will
likewise come this day into your Soul, and direct your Fishing, that is, your
spiritual affairs; so that you have great reason to hope for much profit,
provided that you loose your Net in his Word, Luc. sup.
that it, follow his directions, and promptly obey his interior Inspirations.

Consider 3. You must prepare your heart against the coming of this your
Director; and first purge it from all sin: And therefore S. Peter in this days
Gospel said, Go forth from me, Sup. v. 8.
because I am a sinful man, O Lord: Knowing that Christ cannot stand with sin,
Secondly, you must make earnest suit unto our Lord, beseeching him to do you
that favor: for of King Ozias it is said; 2. Paralip. 26.5.
And when he sought our Lord, be directed him in all things. Wherefore say with
the Prophet, Look upon thy servants, and upon thy works, and direct their
children: And let the brightness of our Lord God be upon us, Ps. 89.16.
and direct thou the works of our hands over us; and the work of our hands do
thou direct.

Of Christ's retiring into the Desert, etc. Mat. 4. Marc. 1. Luc. 4.
Mat. 4.1.
COnsider 1. Jesus full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was driven
in the Spirit into the Desert, etc. Ponder whither the Holy Spirit does lead
the Soul, which it has once replenished; to wit, to prayer, and contemplation
of heavenly things: Besides, our Lord retired himself, to avoid the applause of
the people, which was like to follow from those wonderful signs, which they had
seen in his Baptism. He would before his Preaching make use of these Spiritual
Exercises of 40 days, that you might learn to be well affected toward the:
like, and to perform them with Spirit and Devotion, in their time, according to
the example of our Lord.

Romans 8.14
Consider 2. Christ is said, after his Baptism, to have followed the Conduct of
the Holy Ghost; to intimate, that all who are baptized, ought to follow the
direction of the Divine Spirit, not their own judgment. Examine your self by
what Spirit you are led in your actions, whether of Perfection, or of Vanity.
If you be the Son of God, you must in all things be led by his Spirit: For,
according to that of the Apostle, whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they
are the Sons of God.

Marc. 1.13
Consider 3. What S. Mark says of Christ; And he was with Beasts. Admire the
Humility of our Lord, who being the Creator of all, disdained not for forty
days to keep company with bruit beasts: He might truly say with Job, I, was
the Brother of Dragons, Job 30.29
and fellow of Ostriches. Be confounded, that you cannot live contentedly, but
with those of your own humor: Learn to bear patiently the fellowship of
troublesome companions, if you chance to live among them: Greg. in cap. 30. Job
For as S. Gregory says, No body is perfect, that is impatient among ill
Neighbors.

Of Christ's Fasting, Mat. 4. Luc. 4.
Mat. 4.2.
COnsider 1. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, afterward
be was hungry. Consider how Christ joined Fasting, and Mortification to his
Prayer in the Desert; for Prayer, and Mortification, are as two Sisters,
helping one the other: Prayer quickneth Mortification, and Mortification
refineth Prayer, as Fire does Gold. In this manner, therefore, Cant. 3.6.
Christ's prayer ascended by the Desert, as a little rod of smoke of the
Aromatical Spices of Myrrh and Frankincense: Endeavor that yours may ascend
in like manner; and remember what the Angel said, Tob. 12.8.
Prayer is good with Fasting and Alms.

Pro. 21.27
Consider 2. Our Lord fasted with that rigor, in the beginning of his
Preaching, to teach us, that the beginning of a spiritual life (much more of an
Apostolical one) ought to be taken from taming our sensual appetite. Hence the
ancient Fathers, as Cassian witnesses, ordained, that the first Spiritual
Lesson should be of taming this appetite; for he that cannot master these
palpable, and grosser Vices, how will he be able to subdue those that are more
subtle and secret? See therefore how you are in this point, and ponder that of
the wise man; He that loves good cheer shall be in poverty (to wit spiritual)
he that loves wine, and fat things, shall not be rich.

Consider 3. The many fruits of Fasting, that you may give your self to it, as
far as your health and strength of body will permit. 1. It tameth the rebellion
of the flesh. 2. It purifieth the mind, and makes it fit for heavenly
contemplation. 3. It appeaseth Gods wrath and indignation. 4. It satisfies for
sin. 5. It is meritorious of eternal life. 6. It often obtains likewise
temporal blessings. 7. It is the Devils scourge. 8. It is the food and
nourishment of all Virtue.

Of Christ's Temptations in the Desert. Mat. 4. Luc. 4.

Heb. 4.15. Heb. 2.18.
COnsider 1. After 40 days fast in the Desert, our Lord suffered himself to be
tempted by the Devil, in point of Glurtony, vain Glory, Ambition, and Avarice.
1. That he might learn by his own experience, to have compassion on our
infirmities: For in that wherein himself suffered, and was tempted, he is able
to help them also that are tempted. 2. That as a good Captain he might instruct
us how to fight in this spiritual warfare: Thank him therefore for so great an
example of humility, and say with the Prophet; Blessed be our Lord my God, who
teaches my hands to bated, Ps. 143.1.
and my fingers to war.

S. Hilar.
Consider 2. No body in this life, although he be a Saint, is free from
Temptation. This appears by the example of Christ, and his Saints, in so
much, that the perfecter a man is, the more fiercely he is assaulted by the
Devil, who is more pleased (says S. Hilary) with victory over Saints. Be not
therefore troubled, if you find your self at any time tempted in this, or that
matter; but as the wise man advises: Son, coming to the service of God, etc.
prepare thy soul to tentation; Eccli. 2.1.
knowing that our Enemy, though he rages never so much, can overcome none
(says S. Bernard) but such as will themselves. S. Bern.


Tob. 12.13
Consider 3. Temptations come to us, not only by the Devil, to overthrow us, but
also by Almighty God, to Crown us for victory over them: And therefore it was
that he tempted Abraham, and all his friends, as it is said of Toby: Because
thou wast acceptable to God, it was necessary that tentation should prove thee.
Jac. 1.2.
Hence the Apostie admonishes us to rejoice in our tentations, and to trust in
God, 1 Cor. 10.13.
who is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that which we are
able, but will make also with tentation issue, that we may sustain.

Of Christ's first Tentation in the Desert. Mat. 4. Luc. 4.

COnsider 1. And the Tempter approached, and said, Mat. 4.3. S. Greg. Hom. 16.
in Evang.
If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. He sets
upon Christ in the Desert, with the same weapons wherewith he overcame Adam in
Paradise: And he tempts him first with Gluttony, for that he saw Christ to
suffer hunger after his long fasting, S. Tho. 3. p. q. 41. ar. 1.
being desirous also to get out by this miraculous food, whether he were truly
the Son of God. See how craftily he sets his batteries against those places
which he thinks to be of less strength, like to a prudent Captain that
besieges a Town: View therefore narrowly your walls on every side, and be
careful to strengthen your self chiefly there, where you find your self weakest.

Consider 2. How five manner of ways we may be tempted and overcome with
Gluttony. 1. By preventing due time. 2. By seeking more costly and nice fare.
3. By curiosity in dressing even ordinary meats. 4. By exceeding the just
measure. 5. By too much greediness. Examine therefore your self how you are in
these points; for as B. Isidore says, B. Isid. de Sum. l. 2. c. 42.
No man can attain to the perfection of Virtue, unless he firsi master the
ravening of his belly.

Romans 14.17.
Consider 3. Christ's answer to this Tentation: Not in bread alone does man live,
but in every word that proceeds from the mouth of God; teaching us, that we
should not be too sollicitous about our corporal food; For the Kingdom of God
is not meat and drink; but much more about spiritual things, whereby we do
truly live to Eternity: Wherefore we are not to expect a Miracle for meat and
drink, but commit those cares to Gods ordinary Providence, who gives to h^asts
their food, Ps. 146.9.
and to the young Ravens that call upon him. Learn hence to cut off all
superfluous thoughts and discourses of such things.

Of Christ's second Tentation in the Desert. Mat. 4. Luc. 4.

Mat. 4.5.
COnsider I. Then the Devil took him up into the holy City, and s^t him upon the
Pinnacle of the Temple, etc. For the Enemy thought (says S. Cyprian) whom he
could not prevail withal by Gluttony, might be overcome by vain glory:
Therefore he carries our Lord, by his permission, in the Air, and sets him on
the top of the Temple of Jerusalem, persuading him to cast himself down
harmless, to the end, that the men below astonished with the Miracle, should
come to know, and honor him. Ponder how subtle and dangerous a temptation this
is, in regard we are naturally covetous of praise and honor; and see whether
it does not insinuate it self also into your actions.

Col. 3.1, 2.
Consider 2. Those words of the Tempter; Cast thy self down, etc. So he says to
all that sin, Cast your self-down into sin, which is truly a downfall. Nay, he
endeavors to persuade all men to cast themselves down, that is, to bend
their thoughts and cares upon earth, and earthly things, and plunge themselves
in them. Think how often, and what things they are in particular, that he
buzeth in your ears; and hearken rather to the Apostles advice in those words;
Seek the thing that are above; mind the things that are above, and not the
things that are upon the earth.

Consider 3. How resolu^ely Christ does reject that miraculous descent, and
with it, Vain Glory, which was to rise from it: Thou shall no^ ^^enpt the Lord
thy God; teaching us not to expect Miracles from God, when we can use humane
means. Learn therefore both to contemn the esteem and praise of the world, and
not to seek, or expect extraordinary favors, visitations, or illustrations
from God: For (as the wise man says) Every arrogant man is an abomination to
our Lord. Prove. 16.5


Of our Lords third Tentation in the Desert. Mat. 4. Luc. 4.

Mat. 4.8.
COnsider 1. Again the Devil took him up into a very high Mountain, and he
showed him the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, etc. This is the
third device of the Devil, and the most forcible of all others, whereby he
overthr^weth most men, to wit, the promise of wealth, and honors; whence the
wise man says, Eccli. 8.3.
Gold and silver has destroyed many: But the Liar proffered more then he could
perform, saying, All these will I give thee, if falling down thou will adore
me. In like manner, to them whom he induces to sin, he promises great
matters, content, honors, riches, etc. but at the up-shot, pays them only
with grief and mi eries.

2 Pet. 2.19
Consider 2. Christ's Constancy; teaching us by his example, not to sin for
gaining the whole world: And yet how many are there that run daily to Hell but
for a small parcel of it? Avaunt Satan, for it is written, The Lord thy God thou
shall adore, and him only halt thou serve. See whether you serve your Lord God
only, or not rather your own inordinate desires, often adoring the Devil in
them: For wherewith a man is overcome, of that he is the slave also, says S.
Peter.

Consider 3. After the third repulse the Devil lift him, and behold Angels came
and ministered to him, in reward of his Victory. Think with what alacrity those
heavenly Spirits come, sent by the Eternal Father, and with what reverence they
serve their Lord with the meat they bring: So those that serve, or help others,
in mean Offices, do thereby truly serve Christ in his little ones. Observe what
S. Luke says, Luc. 4.13.
that all the tentation being ended, the Devil departed from him until a time;
that you might not think your self secure, although twice or thrice you should
have forced him away. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Genesis
We have need of great vigilance (says S. Chrysostom) because we have
continual War, and no Truce.

Of Holy Communion. I will go into thy house with holocausts, I will render
thee my vows which my lips have distinguished. Ps. 65.13.

Consider Christ as an Offering, and a Sacrifice.
Ephesians. 5.2.
COnsider 1. What is read this day in the Gospel, Mat. 5.24. If thou offer thy
gift at the Altar, etc. The Eucharist, of all other, is the most excellent
Offering that can be made, wherein the Body and Blood of Christ are offered to
God, as a Propitiatory Sacrifice, for the living, and the dead: For Christ
loved us, and delivered himself for us an Oblation and Host to God, in an odor
of sweetness, as the Apostle says. What a treasure therefore have we in such a
gift, Oblation, and Sacrifice?

Consider 2. This Divine Sacrifice has three Excellencies above all the
Sacrifices of the Old Law. S. Tho. opusc. 58. c. 4.
1. In the exterior decorum, as being more seemly, and decent, and without
effusion of blood. 2. In the interior worth and dignity, for that in others
only beasts were offered, in this the Son of God himself. 3. As to the effects;
for this Sacrifice has virtue and efficacy for the good of the living in this
world, for freeing the dead out of Purgatory, and for the glory of the Blessed
in Heaven.

Lev. 21.23
Consider 3. For due preparation to offer this Sacrifice, is required: 1.
Singular Purity; according to that, Let him not approach to the Altar that has
a blemish, and he must not contaminate my Sanctuary. 2. And chiefly, Fraternal
Charity and Union, as is intimated in this days Gospel: Mat. sup.
If thou offer thy gift, etc. go first to be reconciled to thy Brother, etc.
This was required in all Sacrifices, but is chiefly necessary in the Holy
Eucharist, which was principally instituted to unite us all together, as
Members of the same Body, under one Head: and therefore by the Council of Trent
it is called, the Seal of Unity, the Bond of Charity, Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 8
and the Symbol of Concord.

Of the Apostles first Vocation. Jo. 1.36.
Part 1.
Romans 11, 33.
COnsider 1. Christ going about to choose his Disciples, by whom he would
instruct the whole World, went not to Hiecusalem, nor Rome, nor Athens, to make
his choice of Wife, Noble, and Rich men, whom (if he had so pleased) he might
easily have drawn to himself, as he did the three Sages from the East; but
would choose such as were poor, simple, and contemptible in the sight of the
world: O Depth of the riches of the Wisdom, and of the Knowledge of God! What
man now-a-daies would make such a choice? Christ did it 1. For the commendation
of Humility, which was necessary for his Disciples. 2. For the manifestation of
the Divine Power, in working great things by weak Instruments: 1 Cor. 1.27.
The foolish things of the world has God chosen, that he may confound the wise.

Consider 2. How even these men were chosen by our Lord, not assembling the
people, and publicly selecting his Disciples out of that number, for the
greater Authority of his Preaching; but without any noise or stir, and as if he
had lighted upon them by chance. So two of John's Disciples hearing that
commendation from their Masters mouth, Behold the Lamb of God; and as they were
following Christ, he turned to them, and most courteously asked, What seek you?
and having brought them home with him, invited them to a further acquaintance.
Learn to prevent others in courtesy and civility, and to deal your affairs
solidly well, but with little noise and ostentation.

Eccli. 17.12.
Consider 3. One of these Disciples was S. Andrew, who being inflamed with the
love of God, was desirous presently to set others on fire: Therefore finding
out his Brother Peter, brings him to Christ, saying, We have found Messiah.
You also by Gods great mercy, before many of your time, have found out the
Messiah in the Catholic Church. Do you likewise endeavor by means suitable
to your calling, to bring many others to him: For as the wise man says; God
gave them Commandment, every one concerning his Neighbor.

Of the Apostles first Vocation. Jo. 1.43.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. On the morrow he would go forth into Galilee, and he fi^deth
Philippe, etc. Many others our Lord found in the way, but Philippe after a
special manner, and selected him for Eternal Life, saying, Follow me, who
presently followed him. Think how many able and famous men in your Country our
Lord permits to perish in their Errors, and has singled you out of so many
thousands, like another Philippe, and has made you as a chosen arrow: Is. 49.2.
In his Quiver he has hidden you. See therefore you follow our Lord, as
Philippe did, and do not undervalue so great a benefit.

Greg.
Consider 2. Philippe finds Nathanael, and says to him, etc. The love of God
is not idle, but works great things where it is, or else if it works not
(says S. Gregory) it is not at all. So Philippe, as soon as he came to know
Christ, hastened to bring others to him. Ponder those words of Christ; Behold
an Israelite in very deed, in whom there is no guile: Examine your self whether
you be such, walking with a pure intention in the sight of God; Eccli. 3.28
for a heart that goes two ways shall not have success, says Ecclesiasticus.

Consider 3. Christ told Nathanael, what he secretly did under the Fig Tree,
etc. Whence you may learn, that all things lie open to the eyes of God, even
those which you do by your self alone, in the most secret corner of your
Chamber, and of your heart; and see that you behave your self worthily in his
sight: Ponder also the Noble Confession of Nathanael; Rabbi, thou art the Son
of God, thou art the King of Israel; and stir your self up to like acts of
Faith, Confession, and Reverence.

Of the second Vocation of S. Peter and S. Andrew. Mat. 4. Luc. 4.

COnsider 1. Jesus walking by the Sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, etc. The
first calling was only to a familiarity, as S. Augustine affirms, whence
afterward they returned to their employment of Fishing: The second was to leave
all, to follow our Lord, and to be his Disciples; so a Soul is disposed by
degrees to Perfection: Ponder those words, Come ye after me, and I will make
you to be Fishers of men: You must follow the footsteps of Christ, if you
intend to be a Fisher of men.

Consider 2. What a dignity it is to be a Fisher of men: If it be gainful to
fish for Pearl, and precious stones, how much more to fish for, and gain Souls
to our Lord, which himself bought at the price of his own precious Blood: Of
all divine things (says S. Denis) the most divine is, S. Dion. de Eccl.
Hierarchia. c. 3.
to cooperate with God toward the salvation of souls. Think how you may also
concur to so glorious an end, according to the state, and calling you are of;
and fit your Spiritual Nets for catching this kind of Fish for our Lord; that
is, use those means which your state of life affords for the gaining of
Souls, Prayer, Counsel, Example, etc.

Mat. 6.24.
Consider 3. But they incontinent, leaving the Nets, followed him. Observe their
prompt Obedience; they neither excuse themselves, nor pretend poverty, etc.
Such ought to be your Obedience to God, and his holy Inspirations, and to your
Superiors, whom you have in place of God, without making any complaints, or
excuses. Worldly cares and businesses are Nets that entangle, and hinder us,
that we cannot give our selves freely to God: Therefore you must leave all, if
you will follow Christ, and lead an Apostolical life: For no man can serve two
Masters.

Of S. James and S. John's Vocation. Mat. 4. Mar. 1.

Mat. 4.21.
COnsider 1. And going forward from thence, he saw other two Brethren, James of
Zebedee, and John his Brother, etc. Observe how Christ first of all calls two
couple of Brethren, Peter and Andrew, James and John, that upon these, as so
many Pillars, he might raise his Church; to signify, that all his Disciples
ought to be well grounded in Fraternal Charity, according to that, Jo. 13.36.
In this all men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to
another: See therefore how you are in this point, if you intend an Apostolical
life.

Consider 2. Of these it is said, that they forthwith left their Nets, and
Father, and followed him. Wherefore those that intend to be Apostolical men,
must leave not only worldly goods, but even their Parents also, for Christ,
casting off all humane affection toward them, and converting it into a divine
one, in making it subordinate to the Divine Service. Examine your self whether
this love to your Parents and Kindred, does not bear too great a sway in you,
and hinder you from greater perfection.

Consider 3. And ponder how that word forthwith was not set down here without
Mystery: They were mending their Nets with their old Father, but as soon as our
Lord called; they left their Nets, as they were, and objected not their Fathers
old Age, but followed him without more a do: for perfect obedience is to leave
their things imperfect. Whence the ancient Monks, as Cassian witnesses, Gloss.
ibid. l. 4. Instit. c. 14.
would leave even a single letter unfinished, at the sound of the common Bell,
or other sign. See whether you be so ready to comply with the Inspirations of
God, the duties of the Church, and appointment of your Superiors, or whether
you do not rather seek excuses and pretenses contrary to what is required of
you.

Of S. Matthews Vocation. Mat. 9. Luc. 5.

Mat. 9.9.
COnsider 1. Jesus passing through Galilee, saw a man sitting in the
Custom-House, where he received Tolls; and he says to him, follow me: Great
was the force of this Call, which was able to take a man off, that was glued
fast to his riches; and yet perhaps the same would not be forcible enough to
withdraw you from lesser impediments. Who would despair of Salvation, when he
sees public sinners taken out of a Custom-House, and assumed not only to the
friendship of God, but even to the highest dignity of Apostleship? Most true it
is, Ps. 144.9.
His commiserations are over all his works.

Consider 2. How Christ afterward refused not to eat at Table with Matthew, and
other Publicans, that so he might gain them: yet the Pharisees mutter at it.
Whence you may learn, that there is nothing so holy that is not liable to men's
censures: Wherefore, if at any time you chance to suffer reprehension, or
slander, when you have done well, remember that the Scholar is not to be above
his Master.

Consider 3. The mild answer of Christ; They that are in health, need not a
Physician, but they that are ill at case: And, I am not come to call the Just,
but sinners. See how Christ professes himself a Physician; open therefore your
wounds and diseases unto him: August. in. Psalm. 102.
For as S. Augustine says, No disease is incurable to the Omnipotent
Physician, only permit your self to be cured by him, hinder not his hand, he
knows what he does; and be not only content when be stroaketh you, but also
patient when he lanceth.

Of S. Paul's Vocation. Act. 9.1.

Jer. 29.11.
COnsider 1. And Saul as yet breathing forth threatenings and slaughters against
the Disciples of our Lord, etc. Ponder the unspeakable mercy of God: Saul
persecuted his Church, and was in a raging fury to destroy it; when as our
Lord, on the contrary, not seeking revenge, but intending cogitations of peace,
prevents him, while he is yet contriving his wickedness, and casts him off his
horse, to cure his mind, while he graciously calls upon him, saying, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? that you might learn to reverence Christ in your
Neighbors, and esteem their injuries, as done to Christ himself.

Consider 2. Lord, what will thou have me to do? Ponder the admirable
resignation of his Will: So ought you also to pray, and to offer your self
ready for whatsoever he shall please to do with you; and with much prayer, and
great fervor, to seek after the Divine Will, and resolutely to fulfill it,
when once you know it.

Consider 3. Arise, and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou
must do. Our Lord, though after a miraculous manner he had prostrated him on
the ground, yet would not instruct him himself, but sent him to Ananias, to
learn what he would have him to do; that you might learn to acknowledge and
reverence God in your Superiors, and spiritual Directors. Observe moreover,
how Saul spent three whole days in prayer, without taking either meat or
drink, before he had his sight restored; for fasting, and prayer, are the best
disposition for the receiving of spiritual sight. Lastly, until Ananias had
imposed his hands upon him, his eyes being opened, he saw nothing, representing
thereby by the state of a sinner: Whence it is said; Blind the heart of this
people, Is. 6.10. and Luc. 8.10.
that seeing they may not see, and hearing may not understand.

Of Holy Communion. Arise, eat, for thou have yet a great way to go. 3 Reg. 19.7

Consider the Eucharist as the Viaticum of our Pilgrimage.
Marc. 8.3.
COnsider 1. What is read in this days Gospel, of Christ's feeding the
multitude, lest they should faint in the way: If I dismiss them fasting into
their home, they will fail in the way. We are all of us in our way to our
heavenly Country; While we are in the body, 2 Cor. 5.6
we are Pilgrims from God: Wherefore we must have necessary provision for our
journey, that we may not fail in the way, and out of weariness, take up in the
Stable of this contemptible world, instead of passing on to our Heavenly
Country: Therefore (as said that man Jud. 19.) taste first a little bread,
Judic. 19.5
and strengthen thy stomach, and so thou shall depart.

3 Reg. 19.8
Consider 2. This strengthening bread is properly the Holy Eucharist, which is
therefore given us under the form of Bread, and that of Wheat, which is most
comfortable of all other, thereby to enable us to go on with alacrity, to
overcome the toil and labor of the journey, and to resist our spiritual
enemies, that strive to hinder our passage. A lively figure of this was that
bread which the Angel gave to Elias, in the strength whereof he walked forty
days and forty nights, unto the Mount of God, Horeb.

Consider 3. This bread, although of it self most comfortable and
strengthening, produces not its effects but in a well ordered and clean
stomach; for, if it be foul, it overchargeth, and weakneth it the more; 1 Cor.
11.30.
Therefore are there among you many weak, and feeble (says the Apostle)
because they received Christ's Body unworthily: Wherefore duly prepare your
soul, and cleanse it of all disordinate affections; and then this heavenly
bread will enable you so, as to run cheerfully in the way of Gods Commandments;
according to that, Ps. 118.32
I ran the way of thy Commandments when thou did dilate my heart.

Of three that offered themselves to follow Christ. Mat. 8. Luc. 9.
Part 1.
Mat. 8.19.
COnsider 1. While Christ was walking by the Sea of Tiberias, with multitudes
about him, A certain Scribe came to him, and said, I will follow thee whither
soever that thou shall go. This was a liberal Oblation of himself, but not
accepted of; For the holy Fathers are of opinion, S. Hieron. and S. Aug. apud
Barrad. to 2.
that this man followed Christ only for gain, as thinking by his Miracles, and
concourse of people, that he gathered store of money: Or perhaps also he would
follow him out of vain ostentation, and that he might come to work Miracles. O
how many are there in the world, that say they follow Christ, but in truth,
seek their own ends?

Mat. 5.3.
Consider 2. Christ's answer: The Foxes have holes, and the Fowls of the air
Nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head: As ^f he would say,
Why should you desire to follow me for worldly wealth, who have no lodging of
my own, being less provided then the very beasts, and fowls themselves? O
wonderful poverty of this Sovereign King! But this Poverty is so rich, and of
that value, as to be able to purchase the Kingdom of Heaven, according to that,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Ps. 87.16. Mat. 11.29 Abdias 4.
Consider 3. The Disciples of Christ ought not to be either Foxes, having their
holes, that is, Coffers to hoard up treasures in; or Birds, building their
Nests aloft, and seeking high and eminent employments, and dignities; for that
he himself is poor, and in labors from his youth: Meek and humble of heart.
Ponder those words; If thou shall be exalted as an Eagle, and if thou shall set
thy Nest among the Stars, thence will I pluck thee down, says our Lord.

Of three that offered themselves to follow Christ. Mat. 8. Luc. 9.
Part 2.
Luc. 9.59.
COnsider 1. Christ said to another, follow me: And he said, Lord, permit me
first to go, and to bury my Father. This was a great mercy of Christ, inviting
him to be his Disciple, and yet not accepted of, but upon condition; for he
would first bury his Father, who lay a dying; or as others expound, would have
taken care of him till he died, and after that, betake himself to the service
of God: So, many would serve God, but after their own fashion, that is, after
they have served their own pleasures, and had their swing in the world.

Luc. 14.26
Consider 2. Our Lords answer; Let the dead bury the dead; but go thou, set
forth the Kingdom of God. He teaches us to prefer God before our Parents, or
Kindred: He forbids not the performance of our duty, but would have natural
affection give way to the Divine Service; for he will have his Disciples to
cast off all carnal affection: wherefore in another place he says; If any man
come to me, and hates not his Father and Mother, etc. he cannot be my Disciple.

1 Timothy 5.6
Consider 3. Christ terms them dead, that live to the world in sin: For there
are two sorts of death, one of the body, the other of the soul; the body dies,
when the Soul departs; the Soul dies, when it is separated from God by sin:
Christ therefore says, let them that are dead to God, bury and take care of
them that are dead to the world: But let your care rather be to preserve the
life of your Soul, lest some time or other you come to die by sin, and be cast
off from the Face of God, more loathsome to him then any dead carcass: She that
is in deliciousness (says the Apostle) living is dead.

Of three that offered themselves to follow Christ. Mat. 8. Luc. 9.
Part 3.
Luc. 9.61.
COnsider 1. A third came to Christ, and offered himself to follow him; but
asked leave, that he might first return home to dispose of his things, and take
leave of his Father, and Friends: I will follow thee Lord, but permit me first
to take my leave of them that are at home. A reasonable request in appearance,
but not received; for that all dangerous delays in the service of God ought to
be carefully avoided: Eccli. 5.8.
Slack not to be converted to our Lord, and defer not from day to day.

Consider 2. Christ's answer; No man putting his hand to the Plough, and looking
back, is apt for the Kingdom of God: As much as to say, the Ploughman that has
his hand upon the Plough, and looks the contrary way, is not fit to plough;
so he that intends to be my Disciple, and turns back to regard worldly
affairs, is not fit to preach the Gospel: The Ploughman must see what is before
him; so must the Disciple of Christ, according to the Apostle, Phil. 3.13.
Who forgetting the things that are behind, stretched forth himself to those
that are before.

Eccli. 27.12.
Consider. 3. We are admonished here of constancy, and perseverance in what we
undertake for God: A fool is changed as the Moon, but a holy man continues in
wisdom, as the Sun; never going back, but still making progress. Examine your
self how constant you are in your good purposes, whether you keep the first
fervor of your Conversion, or as much as you remember your self to have had at
other times, etc. Be steadfast in the way of our Lord; Eccli. 5.12
and if you find your self to have grown cold, do penance, Apoc. 2.5.
and do the first works.

Of the Vocation of the Rich young man. Mat. 19. Mar. 10. Luc. 18.
Part 1.
Luc. 18.18 Mar. 10.17
COnsider 1. As our Lord passed through Jewry, A certain Prince running forth,
and kneeling before him, asked him, saying, Good Master, by doing what shall I
possess everlasting life? Such ought to be your cares, and cogitations, to wit,
of Eternal life, not of this miserable and mortal one, which vanishes away
like a shadow: Therefore stir your self up, and often ask your self that
question; By what doing shall I possess everlasting life?

Mat. 19.17
Consider 2. Christ's first answer; Keep the Commandments, for this is necessary
for all men; neither will it suffice to keep one or more, unless you keep all;
for he that osteadeth in on^, is made guilty of all. Jac. 2.10.
See therefore whether you observe every one, and in what manner, which ought
to be exact and perfect, according to that, Thou have very much commanded thy
Commandments to be kept. Ps. 118.4.


Consider 3. The young man having answered, that he had kept all the
Commandments of the Law from his youth; Jesus beholding him, loved him, and
said to him, etc. Go sell whatsoever thou have, Mar. 10.21
etc. and come follow me: Or as S. Matthew recounteth, If thou will be perfect,
go sell the things that thou have, etc. It is therefore a sign, Mat. 19.21
or effect of Gods love to a person, when he invites him to renounce all
things, and to follow Christ in embracing poverty; think with your self what
God requires of you in this point; endeavor at least to be poor in affection,
that you may the more readily follow Christ, who for you was made poor, whereas
he was rich, that by his poverty you might be rich. 2 Cor. 8.9.


Of the Vocation of the Rich young man. Mat. 19. Mar. 10. Luc. 18.
Part 2.
Mat. 19.22
COnsider 1. when the young man had heard this word (of selling all he had) he
went away sad, for he had many possessions. Thus we often purpose to do great
matters for God, and wish for occasions to suffer for him, but when we come to
the push, we fail, and put on a sad countenance. Observe how this young man
answered not Christ's call, to follow him, because he was rich: And if God has
taken from you the like hinderance of riches, give him thanks, for that
otherwise perhaps being entangled therewith, and thereby hindered from following
him, you had long since been a lost man.

Luc. 18.24, 25.
Consider 2. That saying of Christ after the young man's departure; How hardly
shall they that have money, enter into the Kingdom of God? For it is casier for
a Camel to pass through the eye of a Needle, then for a rich man to enter into
the Kingdom of God. Wherefore that you may easily enter, cut off the Camels
bunch, that is, at least all disordinate affection to the riches of the world;
and take heed of scraping, and hoarding up: For they that will be made rich
(says the Apostle) fall into tentation, 1 Timothy 6.9
and the snare of the Devil, etc.

Consider 3. The saying of S. Peter upon this occasion; Behold we have left all
things, Mat. sup. v. 27.
and have followed thee. Whence the holy Fathers gather, that the Apostles made
a vow of Poverty, and left all, not only what they had, but also what they
might have, and even the very desire of having: Ponder the greatness of the
reward, which our Lord promised to all that should leave any thing for his
sake; to wit, they shall receive an hundred times so much now in this time,
Mar. 10.30
etc. and in the world to come, life everlasting. O incomparable purchase! and
to be preferred before all the gains in this world!

Of our Vocation in General to follow Christ. Mat. 16. Mar. 8. Luc. 9.

Luc. 9.23.
COnsider 1. Christ has prescribed certain Laws to be observed by all that come
to his School: therefore as S. Luke says, he said to all, If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow me.
These therefore are the Laws of his School, to wit, Abnegation of himself, and
his desires, Carrying the Cross, and that daily, and Imitation of Christ in all
things. See how you are in these particulars, that you may become a worthy
Disciple of such a Master.

Consider 2. More in particular, what it is properly to deny himself: for it
is, as holy men say, to break and leave ones own will, Colos. 3.9. S. Basil ^a
reg. fusius q. 6.
and to spoil himself of the old man, with his acts. Think how necessary this
is; and on the contrary, how dangerous a thing it is to follow ones own will
and judgment. See how you are in this point, and how you may better your self
in it, to Gods glory: And lastly, S. Bern. Sermon. 2. de S. Andrea. S. Hieron. in
c. 16. Mat. 2 Cor. 4.10
by what means you may arrive to this Abnegation of your self.

Consider 3. To carry our Cross daily, the Apostle also advises us, in those
words, Always bearing about in our body the mortification of Jesus: Therefore
no day without a line, or some progress in Mortification ought to pass with a
Disciple of Christ: whence S. Augustine says, The whole life of a Christian,
if he lives according to the Gospel, is a Cross, and a Martyrdom. Therefore
take up your Cross cheerfully, and whatsoever is ungrateful to flesh and blood;
for by the Cress the way lies open to a Crown.

Of Holy Communion. Let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat the fruit of
his Appletrees. Cant. 5.1.

Consider Christ as a Good Tree.
Cant. 2.3.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel; Every good Tree yields good
fruits, Mat. 7.17. Christ, above all others, is a good Tree, and is often
compared to several sorts of Trees, in the holy Scripture: In the Canticles it
is said; As the Appletree among trees of the woods, so is my beloved among the
Sons. Other men are trees of the woods, which bring forth no other then wild
and sour fruit, to wit, Sin. Christ alone is the Appletree bringing forth most
delicious fruit; and as the Apple by its juice affords both meat and drink,
so Christ by his precious Body and Blood, is both meat and drink to us in the
Eucharist.

Jer. 31.32.
Consider 2. Your Soul is as a Garden planted with Gods own hand, according to
that; Their Soul shall be as a watered Garden: Into this Garden of yours will
be brought, to day, and planted this heavenly Tree, the true Tree of Life,
yielding twelve fruits, as is said in the Apocalypse, which are Charity, Joy,
Peace, Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Longanimity, Galat. 5.22, 23.
Mildness, Faith, Modesty, Continency, Chastity. O how are you to long for that
hour, in which your beloved is to come into his Garden, and eat the fruit of
his Appletrees, that is, of good works, which he will produce in you.

Cant. 2.3.
Consider 3. If you desire to have your fill of this fruit, you must set your
self down under the shadow of the Tree, by an attentive contemplation of its
Excellency and goodness; for so it is said of the Appletree above men^ioned,
Under his shadow whom I desired, I sat, and his fruit was sweet to my throat.
Prepare your self therefore by holy desires, and whet your appetite by prayer,
and it will be granted you to taste, Ps. 33.9.
and see how sweet our Lord is.

Of the Marriage Feast of Cana in Galilee. Jo. 2.1.
Part 1.
Ps. 67.4.
COnsider 1. And there was a Marriage made in Cana of Galilee, and the Mother of
Jesus was there; And Jesus also was called, and his Disciples, to the Marriage.
Our most benign Lord refused not to be present at the Marriage Feast, that he
might take occasion to do good to many, and withal confirm his Disciples in
their Faith. Think with what gravity and modesty he behaved himself at Table,
and learn to keep moderation in occasions of your mirth and jollity, according
to that, Let the Just make merry, and rejoice in the sight of God, that is, as
in the sight of God, and having him continually before your eyes.

S. August.
Consider 2. The Wine failing, his Blessed Mother, of her own accord, without
being asked, is careful to relieve their necessity, in requital of their kind
invitation; and therefore says to her Son, They have no wine: How much more
careful will she be in the spiritual necessities of those that are devoted to
her? For by how much the more holy she is then other Saints, so much the more
sollicitous she is of our good (says S. Augustine.) Beseech her to intercede
to her B. Son also for you; for you are truly in want of the spiritual Wine of
Charity and Devotion.

Judith 8.13.
Consider 3. Christ's answer, which was seemingly harsh; What is it to me and
thee woman? my hour comes not yet: To teach us; First, that we are not to
appoint God any set time of helping us, as they did whom Judith reprehendeth,
in those words; You have set a time for the mercy of our Lord, and according to
your pleasure, you have appointed him a day. Secondly, that in the service of
God, we must put off all carnal affection; for which reason Christ is never
read to have called the B. Virgin by the tender name of Mother, even upon the
Cross: whence Moses speaking of the Levites says; He that said to his Father,
and to his Mother, I know you not; Deuteronomy. 33.9
and to his Brethren, I know you not, etc. These kept thy word, and observed
thy Covenant.

Of the Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee. Jo. 2.5.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. His Mother says to the Ministers; Whatsoever he shall say to you,
do ye. Admire the admirable confidence of the B. Virgin, who nothing dismayed
with the seeming rough answer, encourages the Servers, as if her request had
been granted: Observe, that the confidence of obtaining what was asked, was
grounded in the exact performance of what our Lord should enjoin, according to
that; If my words abide in you, you shall ask what thing soever you will, Jo.
15.7.
and it shall be done to you. Be sure therefore to fulfill whatsoever Almighty
God says unto you, either by Himself, or his Vicars, your Superiors and
Directors, if you desire to be furnished with Spiritual Wine.

S. Aug.
Consider 2. Christ's Injunction, saying, Fill the Water pots with water: It was
Wine that they wanted, and yet he bids them power in water, who could
without more ado, have created Wine in the Vessels, as they were, without any
water: But God commands sometimes things that seem to stand with little
reason, to try our obedience. Besides, he will have us to concur in things
appertaining to our own Salvation; for as S. Augustine says, He that made you
without you, will not save you without you.

Apoc. 3.2.
Consider 3. The perfection, of Obedience in these Servers; they reply not, they
question not any thing, nor ask a reason why, but presently fill the Vessels,
and that to the top: so we ought to perform readily, entirely, and to the full,
the Commands of God, and our Superiors. Almighty God would have nothing that
was maimed, or imperfect, offered to him in Sacrifice. See whether your works
be such; and have a care it be not said of you, I find not thy works full
before my God.

Of the Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee. Jo. 2.10.
Part 3.
COnsider 1. The greatness of the Miracle: The creature obeyed the will of
Christ, and the water was presently turned into wine; which being powered out,
and tasted by the chief Steward, the Miracle appeared to the singular joy of
the B. Virgin, confirmation of the Apostles in their Faith, and astonishment of
all. Observe the force of the B. Virgins Intercession, by whose means our Lord
wrought his Precursors first Sanctification, and this first Miracle; that you
might learn, that all temporal and spiritual blessings are to be derived unto
us by her.

Sap. 2.8.
Consider 2. Those words of the chief Steward; Every man first sets the good
Wine, etc. and then that which is worse: Even so the world deals with its
customers; at first it presents them with the Cup of Joys, allurements, and
pleasures; Let there be no meadow, which our riot shall not pass through; but
afterward it plungeth the soul into vexation, and trouble of mind, and
torment: Its Wine is such as Solomon speaks of, It goes in pleasantly, Prove.
23.31, 32. Deuteronomy. 32.32.
but in the end it will bite like a Snake, and as a Basilisk it will power
abroad poisons: Their grape (is truly) the grape of gall, and the clusters most
bitter.

Ps. 59.5.
Consider 3. God deals contrariwise; he keeps his good Wine to the last; at
the beginning he afflicts and chastises, but afterward comfort and
crowns: Thou have showed unto thy people hard things, thou have made us drink
the wine of compunction. But afterward, They shall be inebriated with the
plenty of thy house, and with the torrent of thy pleasure thou shall make them
drink. Besides, Christ did not bring forth his Wine, till his Entertainers Wine
failed, for that spiritual comfort is not afforded, but in the absence and
contempt of all sensual pleasure. So the Manna rained not down till the
provision of Meal that was brought out of Egypt was spent: and afterward
again, Manna failed after they did eat of the Corn of the Land. Josue 5.12


Of casting the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. Jo. 2.14.
Part 1.
Ps. 92.5.
COnsider 1. Jesus being entered into the Temple, he found in it them that sold
Oxen, and Sheep, and Doves, etc. which though they were sold there for the use
of the Sacrifices, yet Christ was displeased with worldly Traffic in the House
of God; that you might learn with what modesty and silence you ought to behave
your self in the Church, in time of Divine Service; for holiness becomes thy
House, O Lord, (says David) for length of days.

Ps. 68.10.
Consider 2. Christ inflamed with zeal for his Fathers House, when he had made
as it were a whip of little cords, cast them all out of the Temple, the sheep
also, and the oxen, and the money of the Bankers be powered out, and the Tables
he overthrew. The same he did again afterward, a little before his Passion.
The most meek Lamb, when his Fathers Honor was concerned, put on the Lion,
fulfilling in himself that of the Prophet, The zeal of thy house has eaten me:
with such zeal ought all Priests to be inflamed, and with their utmost
endeavor to hinder the sins of their Neighbor.

Consider 3. This zeal of the Divine Glory is most grateful to God, whence he
does reproach some of his Prophets in those words; You have not ascended
against, nor opposed a wall for the House of Israel: Wherefore S. Gregory
says, S. Greg. Hom. 17. in Evang. S. Aug. sup. Joan.
No Sacrifice is more grateful to God, then zeal of Souls. True zeal of Souls
consists in this, that whatsoever you see amiss in others, you endeavor to
mend, which if you cannot, to bear withal, and deplore. See how cold perhaps
you are on this behalf, as if (like another Cain) you were not your Brothers
keeper. Genesis 4.9.


Of casting the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. Jo. 2.16.
Part 2.
Mat. 21.13
COnsider 1. How Christ casting them out of the Temple, says, Make not the
House of my Father a house of Merchandise: And at another time, a little before
his Passion, My house shall ^e called the House of Prayer, but you have made it
a Den of Thieves: Whereby we are taught to observe due reverence, both
interior, and exteriout, in Gods Church: See whether you make it an House of
Prayer, or not rather of Merchandise, thinking of your affairs, studies, or
other trifles.

1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
Consider 2. Your Soul is a Temple of God, according to that of the Apostle, You
are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in you: Whence follows
that terrible sentence; But if any violate the Temple of God, God will destroy
him. Consider therefore whether it be a House of Prayer, by frequent lifting up
your mind to God, or rather of worldly negotiation, bending your thoughts upon
earthly things, your own temporal concerns, meat, drink, and the like;
wherefore cast out from thence sheep and oxen, that is, all brutish, and
earthly affections; even offering violence to your self, by whips and cords;
for, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11.12
and the violent bear it away.

Ps. 118.61
Consider 3. Christ brought not the scourge into the Temple, but made it of the
cords he found there: So our Lord carries not a scourge about him, but makes
one up of our sins, as of so many cords: The cords of sinners (says David)
have wrapped me round about: wherefore cast forth all sin out of the Temple of
your Soul, and you will leave him nothing to make a scourge of: Woe to you that
draw iniquity in cords of vanity, Is. 5.18.
and sin as the link of a Wayn; which those do, who add sin to sin, and the
longer and more grievous the sin is, Aug. To. 10 in Joan.
the more grievous also will be the scourge.

Of our Lords discourse with Nicodemus. J^ 3.1. etc.

Romans 1.16
COnsider 1. How Nicodemus being a prime man, and well skilled in the Law, came
to Christ for instruction; but in the night time, and in private, for fear of
the Jews, and in regard of his worldly reputation, being ashamed, perhaps, to
appear amongst the poor and unlearned Disciples: Think how many are hindered
from their Salvation, by these worldly respects; but do you rather say with S.
Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel; and confess God both confidently and
openly; For he that shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, him the son of man
shall be ashamed of, Luc. 9.26.
when he shall come in his Majesty, says our Lord.

Consider 2. Christ, as a most loving Physician, accommodated himself to the
weakness of this Disciple, and instructed him in many things. 1. Concerning
Baptism. 2. Of the causes of his coming into the world. 3. Of his Passion that
was to ensue. 4. Of Faith necessary to salvation. Give God thanks for these,
and ponder in particular the benefit of our Spiritual Generation by Baptism:
You must be born again, etc. Consider also the greatness of that love wherewith
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that every one
which believe in him, perish not.

Mat. 10.26
Tonsider 3. Those words, The light is come into the world, and men have loved
the darkness, rather then the light. O shameful neglect! Examine your self
whether in your actions you rather love darkness, then light; for every one
that does ill, hates light. See whether you do nothing in private, which you
would be ashamed of in public, and hereafter desist from it; for nothing is
hid, that shall not be revealed; and secret, that shall not be known, at least
by God, in whose sight continually you are.

Of Holy Communion. Render account of thy Bailiship. Luc. 16.2.

Consider Christ as coming to exact an account of your Bailiship.
Luc. 16.1.
COnsider 1. What is said this day in the Gospel. There was a certain rich man
that had a Bailiff, etc. Think that you are this Bailiff, whom our Lord has
entrusted with several goods, Internal, External, Natural, Supernatural; but
with what fruit? It Is to be feared, but little yet. Look thoroughly into your
self, and perhaps you will find all out of order: You have slept out your sleep
of tepidity, and now you find nothing in your hands; and therefore you are in
disgrace with your Lord, as having squandered away, not your own (who have
nothing of your self) but his goods.

Consider 2. Our Lord will come unto you to day, in the Eucharist, to exact an
account of the goods he has entrusted you withal; but at present he will do
it favorably, with mercy and commiseration: For (as Job says) he does not now
infer his fury; Job 35.15
neither does he revenge wickedness exceedingly: He will rather supply your
defects, forgive you your debts, and make good unto you again by his holy
Grace, what you had misspent: Hereafter he will come with an Iron Rod, to do
Justice, and Judgment, and will search you with Lamps. Endeavor therefore now
to please him, by an exact performance of your duties, seeing you cannot
otherwise make him any recompense.

Mat. 18.32
Consider 3. These duties are: 1. An humble begging of pardon, according to
that, I forgave thee all the debt, because thou besoughtest me. 2. Frequent and
constant love; Luc. 7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much. 3. A perfect
forgiveness of offenses, and injuries done to you by others: Luc. 6.37.
Forgive, and you shall be forgiven. With these affections bring your Lord into
the Closet of your heart, Ps. 142.2.
saying with the Psalmist, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, but
rather, according to the multitude of thy commiserations have respect to me.
Ps. 68.17.


Of our Lords Sermon on the Mount. Mat. 5.
Part 1.
Mat. 5.1.
COnsider 1. Seeing the multitudes, he went up into a Mountain, etc. and opening
his mouth, he taught them, etc. Ponder 1. The place of this famous Sermon,
which is a high Mountain. 2. The Preachers Person, which is the increated
Wisdom of God. 3. His Chair, or Pulpit; for he taught them upon the bare
ground. 4. His Auditors, which were his Disciples, and other unlearned and
simple people. 5. The subject of his discourse, which was of true felicity. Go
you up in spirit with the people, and sitting at the feet of so great a Master,
give attentive ear to what he says: 1 Reg. 3.10.
Say with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

Consider 2. Christ in this his Sermon performed not only the Office of a
Teacher, but also of a Lawgiver, declaring the Ancient Law, and proclaiming the
New: It was said to them of old, Thou shall not kill, etc. But I say to you,
Mat. sup. v. 22.
that whosoever is angry with his Brother, shall be in danger of judgment, etc.
and the like. Reverence therefore this your Lawgiver, and give him thanks for
his wholesome precepts: Beseech him to print his holy Law in the fleshly Tables
of your heart; say with David, Set me a Law, O Lord, the way of thy
Justifications, Ps. 118.33
and I will seek after it always.

Colos. 2.3. Is. 9.6.
Consider 3. He performed also the part of a Counselor, exhorting them to
points of the greatest perfection, even beyond the obligation of the Law; as of
turning the other cheek to the striker, of letting go the Cloak also to him
that takes away the Coat, of going two other miles with him that will force you
one mile, and the like. Think how just it is to follow his counsel in all
things; for in him be all the treasures of wisdom and Knowledge hid: And by
Isaie, he is styled Counselor, and the Angel of great Council.

Of our Lords Sermon on the Mount. Mat. 5.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. All men have a natural desire of felicity, yea, even the most
wicked of all would be happy, but will not seek after true happiness: Therefore
Christ begins with that which all men desire, as if he should say, You all
desire to be happy; therefore I will show you the several ways that lead to
true happiness. Do you therefore set your affections upon this true Felicity,
and seek it only by such ways, or means as Christ has pointed out to you.

Ps. 143.15
Consider 2. How contrary are the ways of God from the ways of the world, and
his judgments from those of men: The World places its felicity in honors,
riches, pleasures, eating and drinking, freedom from pain, and grief, etc. They
have said, that it is a happy people which has these things: On the contrary,
Christ pronounces them happy that are poor, meek, and humble, that hunger and
thirst after Justice, that suffer reproaches and torments, etc. As the Heavens
are exalted above the earth, so are my ways exalted above your ways, Is. 55.9.
says our Lord. See with what Party you side, with Christ, or with the World.

Ps. 83.6.
Consider 3. Eight Virtues contemptible to the world, Christ honored with the
title of Beatitudes, and of them, as so many steps, made a Ladder for us to
climb up to our last and everlasting Felicity. These are: 1. Poverty of Spirit.
2. Meekness. 3. Sorrow for Sins. 4. Hunger and thirst after Justice. 5. Mercy.
6. Purity of Heart. 7. Making of peace both with God, and with Men. 8.
Suffering Persecution for Christ. You must also climb this Ladder, if you
desire to enter into the Joy of our Lord: Blessed is the man whose help is from
thee, he has disposed Ascension in his heart.

Of the first Beatitude.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit, Mat. 5.3.
etc.
COnsider 1. More in particular each virtue, and in them 1. Their Acts. 2.
Christ's Example. 3. Their reward. The proper Acts of Poverty are counted five.
1. He is poor in spirit, who in affection is ready rather to lose all then
offend God. 2. Who actually leaves all for his sake. 3. Who aspireth not to
things above himself, presumes not of himself, nor seeks the praises of men.
4. Who denies his own judgment and will, submitting himself to others. 5. Who
acknowledges whatsoever he has as a gift of God, and rightly understands
his own nothing: My substance is as nothing before thee. Ps. 38.6.
See how you are in each point.

Phil. 2.7.
Consider 2. The admirable Examples which Christ gave us in this kind,
throughout his whole Life; but chiefly in his Crib, in Banishment, in his
Parents House, and on the Cross: Besides, he exinanited himself (as the Apostle
says) made subject and obedient, not only to his Eternal Father, and Parents
on earth, till the thirtieth year of his Age, but also to his Tormentors, even
to death it self: And of his Doctrine, he publicly professed, My Doctrine is
not mine, but his that sent me. Jo. 7.16.


Consider 3. The Reward of this Poverty; For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Mat. sup.
Think what a gainful kind of Merchandise this is, to get an Everlasting
Kingdom, by the exchange of some few transitory enjoyments of this life. Ponder
the excellency of this Kingdom, its riches, glory, beauty, and perpetuity: That
which eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear has heard, neither has it ascended into the heart of man, what
things God has prepared for them that love him. Wherefore S. Grogory Nazianzen
had reason to say, Happy is he that buyeth Christ, S. Greg. Naz. de Beatitud.
and spiritu vitae Regul.
though with all his goods and fortunes.

Of the second Beatitude.
Blessed are the Meek, Mat. 5.4.
etc.
COnsider 1. After Poverty in Spirit, that is, contempt of the World, and its
desires, follows Meekness, as the Child its Parent: The Acts of this are
chiefly three. The first is to bridle the passions of Anger and Revenge; and
when zeal is to be showed, to do it without any perturbation, either interior
or exterior. The second is to be affable to all, and troublesome to none,
neither in word, nor in action. The third not to oppose, or put off injuries
with violence (even when you lawfully may) but to suffer your own contempt,
with peace and tranquillity of mind. Think how you are in these particulars.

Mat. 12.19, 20. and Is. 42.2, 3, 4.
Consider 2. Christ's example herein, of whom Isaie says; He shall not contend,
nor cry out, neither shall any man hear in the streets his voice: The reed
bruised he shall not break, and smoking flax he shall not extinguish, etc. He
shall not be sad, nor turbulent. And S. Peter; 1 Pet. 2.23
who when he was reviled, did not revile, when he suffered; he threatened not,
but delivered himself to him that judged him unjustly: And of himself he says,
Mat. 11.29
Learn of me, because I am meek and humble of heart. Think how you may imitate
the same.

Eccli. 3.19
Consider 3. The Reward: For they shall possess the Land, to wit, of their own
heart, being Masters of their own passions; and also of the hearts of others,
according to that, Son, do thy works in meekness, and thou shall be beloved
above the glory of men. Lastly, they shall possess the Land of Promise, Ps.
36.11.
and Everlasting Inheritance: The meek shall inherit the Land, and shall be
delighted in multitude of peace. Procure therefore to have this Meekness in
your life and conversation; that you may come also to be delighted in multitude
of peace, as well with God, as with your self, and with all the world.

Of the third Beatitude. Mat. 5.5.

Blessed are they that Mourn, etc.
Ps. 119.5.
COnsider 1. This Mourning is threesold. 1. Of Compunction for our own sins,
according to the example of David, and S. Peter. 2. Of Compassion for others.
3. Of Devotion for our banishment in this world, our separation from God, and
our longing desire after him: Woe is to me that my sejourning is prolonged.
This Spiritual Mourning does not wholly consist in afflicting the mind, but
also in refusing such things as bring pleasure and delight with them: Whence
the wise man; Eccles. 2.2.
Laughter I have reputed error, and to Joy I have said, why art thou deceived
in vain? Think on the contrary, how greedily you seek after your own content
and satisfaction in all things, Prove. 2.14
and perhaps also rejoice in most wicked things.

Consider 2. The example of Christ our Lord, of whom S. Chrysostom writes,
Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Mat. Eccles. 7.5.
You will often find Christ weeping, but never laughing: And Solomon says, The
heart of wise men where sadness is, and the heart of fools where mirth. Think
therefore how reasonable it is you should imitate the example of so great a
Master, and rank your self with wise men, rather then with fools.

Mat. 5.5.
Consider 3. The Reward: For they shall be comforted; both in this life with
Divine Illustrations, and with the testimony of a good conscience; but more to
the full in the life to come, where they shall be inebriated with the plenty of
Gods House, Ps. 35.9.
and be made drink of the torrent of his pleasure. Wherefore lament your own
and your Neighbors sins; for those that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. On
the contrary, Luc. 6.25.
Woe to you that do now laugh, because you shall mourn and weep: And in the
Apocalypse it is said, Apoc. 18.7.
So much as she has glorified her self, and has been in delicacies, so much
give her torment, and mourning.

Of the fourth Beatitude.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Justice, Mat. 5.6.
etc.
1 Cor. 1.30
COnsider 1. To hunger and thirst after Justice, has these proper Acts: The
first is to desire all things, without exception, to be fulfilled, which are of
Justice, and obligation toward God, and our Neighbor. The second, to desire
more and more our Progress in Virtue. The third, that this same Justice be in
all the world, and that all may purchase and conserve it. The fourth, to hunger
after Christ our Lord, who is our Justice and Sanctification, (as the Apostle
witnesses) both Sacramentally, and Spiritually, by a lively faith and
interior gust. Think how you are in these points, and whether you do not
rather loath these, and thirst only after worldly delights.

Jo. 4.34. Jo. 19.28.
Consider 2. The example of Christ, who, all his life time, sought after nothing
else then to do the will of his Father, according to that, My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me. And hanging upon the Cross, he said, I thirst; to
wit, the Salvation of Mankind, for whom he shed his blood. Such ought to be
your hunger and thirst; not that of the wicked, that serve their bellies.

Consider 3. The Reward: Mat. sup.
( For they shall have their fill. God affording them special graces, and
spiritual comforts in this life, and replenishing, them to the full, with the
clear Vision of himself, in the suture; according to that, Ps. 16.15.
I shall be filled when thy glory shall appear. Think how much this heavenly
Saturity is to be wished for, which never cloyeth, though it lasts for all
Eternity: See whether you had rather have your fill in this life, or in the
next; it will not be afforded in both, in one you must suffer hunger.

Of Holy Communion. Hear me, O Lord, because thy mercy is benign. Ps. 68.17.
Luc. 19.41

Consider Christ as a Mercisul Lord.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel; how that Christ wept upon
Jerusalem; for God is very sensible of our miseries, and compassionate; and is
therefore called by the Apostle, The Father of Mercies; and often, 2 Cor. 1.3
Infra. Heb. 4.15.
The merciful and pitiful Lord: For the Apostle says (speaking of Christ)
that we have a High Priest, who can have compassion on our infirmities:
wherefore you may justly comfort your self in this, that this same merciful
Lord will come to day into your Soul, to power out the riches of his Mercy upon
her.

Ps. 110.4, 5
Consider 2. The Mercy of God toward men never showed it self more in any work,
then in the Eucharist: therefore David cries out, He has made a memory of his
mavelous works, a merciful and pitiful Lord; he has given meat to them that
fear him. Think what a mercy this is, to feed us with his own Flesh, and make
us drink of his Blood: Who ever did so much for his greatest friend? Lay open
therefore confidently, the miseties of your Soul, when he comes to you, and
beseech him to afford redress.

Consider 3. You must have great care, when he comes unto you, that you give
him not occasion of weeping upon you, as he did upon Jerusalem, Because thou
have not known the time of thy Visitation. Luc. sup. 44
He does often visit us, by holy Inspirations, by good books, etc. and thereby
incites us to perfection. See how you correspond, least there may be the same
reason to say of you; For the days shall come upon thee, and thy Enemies shall
compass thee with a Trench, V. 43.
etc. and (by Sin) beat thee flat to the ground.

Of the fifth Beatitude
Blessed are the Merciful, Mat. 5.7.
etc.
COnsider 1. Mercy comprehends fourteen sorts of actions, which are called
Works of Mercy; seven Spiritual, and seven Corporal. The Acts of this Virtue,
that they may be perfect, must 1. Extend themselves to all, without exception,
even our Enemy. 2. Lay hold of all occasions of doing good, and that in all
manner of distress, according to our ability. 3. They ought to be performed
with an interior, pious affection: Think how you are wont to be in these,
especially the spiritual works Mercy.

Mat. 11.28
Consider 2. The example of Christ in these particulars. 1. As to all sorts of
persons: therefore he said, Come ye to me all (without exception) that labor,
and are burdened, and I will refresh you 2. As to all occasions of doing good;
therefore He was teaching daily in the Temple: Luc. 19.47 Act. 10.39
And He went throughout doing good, and bealing all that were oppressed of the
Devil. 3. He performed all with a most tender affection, like to the Samaritan,
Luc. 10.30 etc.
who bound his wounds that fell among thieves: therefore go, and do thou in
like manner.

Luc. 6.38.
Consider 3. The Reward; For they shall obtain mercy, as well in this life, both
for body and soul; as in the life to come, likewise for both, and that after a
perfect manner: and indeed, with the same measure that you do mete, it shall be
measured to you again. Think how much you stand in need of Gods Mercy: What
would become of you, if he should deal with you according to your deserts? Be
merciful therefore, and that, in all the works of mercy, that you may obtain
mercy: Judgment without mercy to him (says S. James) that has not done mercy.
Jac. 2.13.


Of the sixth Beatitude.
Blessed are the clean of heart, etc. Mat. 5.8.

1 Timothy 1.^.
COnsider 1. Cleanness of heart consists 1. In being free from all sin, both
Mortal, and Venial. 2. In the frequent exercise of holy thoughts. 3. In the
purity of a right intention, doing nothing with dissimulation, or with
intention to appear before men: Therefore the Apostle requires of us, Charity
from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and a faith not feigned. Examine your
self how you are in these particulars.

1 Pet. 2.22. Sap. 7.26.
Consider 2. Christ's example, who (as S. Peter says) did no sin, neither was
guile found in his mouth: Therefore he is also called, The brightness of
Eternal Light, the unspotted glass of Gods Majesty, and the Image of his
goodness: And did often rebuke the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.2^
Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, because you make clean that on
the outside of the cup, and dish, but within you are full of rapine, and
uncleanness. See whether you imitate Christ, or rather the Pharisees, in your
actions.

Sap. 1.4, 5.
Consider 3. The Reward: For they shall see God. O what a happiness it will be
to see God! Neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, etc. Labor therefore to
obtain this purity of heart, which the greater it is, the perfecter will be
your Vision, and Essential Happiness. Even in this life such shall have a
clearer knowledge of God, and divine things: On the contrary, Wisdom will not
enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a soul subject to sins: And the Holy
Ghost of discipline, will fly from him that feigneth, says the wise man.

Of the seventh Beatitude.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, Mat. 5.9.
etc.
COnsider 1. There are four several ways of making peace. The first is, to make
peace with ones self, by subjecting the Flesh to the Spirit, and the Sensual
Appetite to Reason. The second is, to keep peace with others, to hurt none, to
give no body occasion of complaint. The third is, to pacify, and make agree
those that are at variance. The fourth, and most excellent of all others, is to
reconcile souls to God. Think how you carry your self in these.

Is. 9.6.
Consider 2. The example of Christ, who therefore came down from Heaven, that he
might be out Mediator for peace, and is therefore called, A peaceable King, and
Prince of Peace. At his first entrance into the world, he brought Peace with
him: And in earth, Luc. 2.14.
peace to men of good will: And at his going forth of it again, he left us his
Peace as a Legacy, saying, Jo. 14.27.
Peace I leave to you, my peace I give to you, etc. Lastly, he would have his
Disciples to salute all with the word of peace, Peace to this house: And
himself, after his Resurrection, Luc. 10.5.
used the like salutation to them.

Phil. 4.7.
Consider 3. The Reward: For they shall be called the Children of God. Think
what a dignity it is to be the Son of Almighty God: If it be thought a great
matter to be the Son of some earthly Prince, how much more to have the Heavenly
King, and Lord of all, for his Father? Wherefore Almighty God does after a
special manner love, cherish, and protect these Peacemakers, as his own
children. See how you keep peace within your self, with God, and with your
Neighbor; and do your endeavor, that the Peace of God, which passes all
understanding, keep your heart aad intelligence.

Of the eighth Beatitude.
Blessed are they that suffer Persecution, Mat. 5.10.
etc.
1 Pet. 4.16
COnsider 1. These four things. 1. Under the Name of Persecution, are
comprehended all manner of injuries, afflictions, and incommodities, in our
fortunes, honor, and life. 2. These are raised by the Devil, or his Ministers:
Sometimes also through mistake (God so permitting) by the Just. 3. They are
inflicted for Justice sake, when one suffers them for the exercise of virtue,
and incompliance with his proper duties, both toward God, and men. 4. In such
occasions they are to be suffered not only patiently, but also joyfully, for
the greatness of the reward: Therefore S. Peter says, Let none of you suffer
as a Murderer, or a Thief, or a Railer, etc. but if as a Christian, let him not
be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this Name.

Consider 2. The Example of Christ, who endured all manner of injuries, and
incommodities; in his honor, in his goods, in his person; for a cause, which
on his part, was the most just that could be; to wit, for the publishing his
most wholesome and Divine Law, and bringing Mankind back from the dirt and mire
of Vice, whereinto he was fallen, to the way of Eternal Salvation: Exodus 25.40.
Therefore look, and do according to the pattern.

Romans 8.18
Consider 3. The Reward: For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: And again; Be
glad, and rejoice, for your reward is very great in Heaven. Ponder well the
greatness or this Reward; and how true is that of the Apostle; The passions of
this time are not condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us.

Of those words of our Lord, Mat. 5.13.
You are the Salt of the Earth, etc.
COnsider 1. Salt does both season Meat, and preserve it from Corruption: So it
is the part of all Apostolical men, to preserve Souls from the corruption of
sin; and besides, to render the exercise of Virtue savoury and pleasant unto
them: If it be your lot to serve God in the nature of Salt, see that you be
first thoroughly refined, and purged from worldly affections, by the fire of
Divine Charity, that you may be such your self, as you desire to make others.

Consider 2. How excellently Christ performed this proper effect of Salt; who
to purge and preserve us from sin, spent himself wholly upon us, in a manner
melting away like salt; and communicated to our actions, of themselves insipid,
and of no worth, the divine savor and value of his precious Merits. Moreover
by his Example and Doctrine, he has made Persecutions, which are bitter of
themselves, sweet and pleasant unto us. Permit your self therefore to be
seasoned with the Salt of his Wisdom, and Example; Levit. 2.13
what Sacrifice soever thou offerest, thou shall season it with salt, says our
Lord, that is, with the Merits and Example of Christ.

Mat. 5.14.
Consider 3. But if the salt loose his virtue, etc. it is good for nothing any
more, but to be cast forth, and trodden of men. In the same manner will God use
those Preachers, that have no virtue or efficacy, either of Example, or
Doctrine, to season the life and manners of others, but vanish and moulder away
by pride, vain glory, and affection to worldly things: Romans 1.21
They are become vain in their cogitations (says the Apostle) and their
foolish heart has been darkened. See that you do not at any time come to this
pass.

Of those words of Christ, Mat. 5.15.
You are the Light of the World, etc.
Dan. 12.3.
COnsider 1. Apostolical men are to be not only Salt, to purge the hearts of men
from sin, but also the light of the world, to enlighten others, and direct them
into the way of all Virtue: This is a Divine Office, and most acceptable to
God, according to that, They that be learned shall shine as the brightness of
the Firmament, and they that instruct many to Justice, as stars unto perpetual
eternities. It Is the property of light, both to enlighten, and to give heat.
See therefore how you do already, or may hereafter perform both.

Jo. 1.9.
Consider 2. How Christ was the true Light which lighteneth every man that
comes into the world, by word and example, and by the interior Rays of his
Grace. Besides, ponder how light, although it pass through unclean places, is
nothing defiled thereby: So Christ, and all Apostolical men, although they
converse and deal with sinners, yet partake not with them in their sins.

Baruc. 3.25.
Consider 3. Those words of Christ; Neither do men light a candle, and put it
under a bushel: Where also those are reprehended, who employ not themselves in
enlightening their Neighbor, according to the Talent they have received, but
rather hide their light in their bosom, either out of pusillanimity, or
sluggishness: Do you rather, according to the charge God has committed unto
you, be careful to shine forth to all, like unto the Stars of which Baruch
speaks, They were called, and they said, Here we are; and they have shined to
him with cheerfulness, that made them.

Of Holy Communion. Because with thee there is propitiation, and for thy Law I
have expected thee, O Lord. Ps. 129.4.

Consider Christ as our Propitiation.
Luc. 18.13
COnsider 1. That you are that Publican, of whom it is read to day in the
Gospel; for by reason of your many sins you deserve not to lift up your eyes to
Heaven, but ought rather to knock your breast, and to cry out continually with
him; O God be propitious to me a sinner. Call to mind the sins of your life
past, and you will see how fitly that saying agrees with you.

1 Jo. 2.2.
Consider 2. You have cause of great confidence, in regard that after so many
sins, you have the Judges Son to stand for you, and more then that, have the
Judge himself, Christ our Lord, your Propitiator: For he is the Propitiation
for our sins, nor for ours only, but for the whole worlds. And although he be
always, and every where merciful, yet never more then in the H. Eucharist,
where that he might be propitious unto us, he would even be incorporated with
us. That which covered the Ark of the Covenant in the Old Law, Exodus 25.20.
was called the Propitiatory; much more therefore is the Eucharist our
Propitiatory, having under it the Living Ark of the true Covenant between God
and us.

Levit. 23.28.
Consider 3. The Jews were forbidden to do any servile work upon the day of
Propitiation: No servile work shall you do in the time of this day, because it
is a day of Propitiation. Sin is properly a servile work: Amen, Amen, I say to
you, Jo. 8.34.
that every one which commits sin, is the servant of sin, says our Lord:
Abstain therefore from sin, even the least, especially upon days of Communion;
and with the Prophet say to our Lord, when he comes, For thy Name, O Lord, Ps.
24.11.
thou will be propitious to my sin, for it is much.

Of our Lords Prayer. Mat. 6.9. etc.
Part 1.
COnsider how Christ, on the Mount, like a great Master of a spiritual life,
among other things, taught his Disciples also the manner of Prayer, which
because we use daily, to the end we may do it with the greater fruit, and
spiritual gust, it will be to good purpose to ponder each word apart.

Our Father which art in Heaven. In the Old Testament, God was ordinarily
called the Lord; in the New, he is pleased to be called Father, and that by his
own Vassals. He is Father 1. By Title of Creation. 2. Of Conservation. 3. Of
Adoption. See therefore that you prove a Child worthy of such a Father:
Besides, it is said, Our, not mine alone, that you should understand, that all
men are your Brethren, and to be loved by you as such: Who art in Heaven, as in
the Seat of Majesty, though he is every where by his presence, that you should
raise your thoughts thither, as to your Native Country, flowing with all manner
of riches and delights.

Is. 6.3. Ps. 113.9.
Hallowed by thy Name. This is that which we ought to seek in the first place,
to wit, the honor and glory of God, that he may be worshipped, and loved of
all, and honored by the Saintity of our lives: Therefore stir up often these
affections in your self; say with the Seraphins, Holy, holy, holy, the Lord God
of Hosts; and with David, Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give
the glory.

Apoc. 5.10
Thy Kingdom come. That is, let thy Kingdom come to us in this life by Grace,
in the other by Glory; for God does truly reign in the Just by Grace, according
to that, Thou have made us to our God a Kingdom. See whether God, or not rather
the world, reig^eth in your heart, and affection.

Of our Lords Prayer. Mat. 6.9. etc.
Part 2.
COnsider the rest of the Prayer. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
The Will of God is of three sorts, of Precept, of Council, and of good
Pleasure. Let all therefore follow your counsels and inspirations, obey your
commands, approve and reverence your good pleasure in Earth, as the Saints do
in Heaven, and execute your holy will readily, cheerfully, and constantly. See
whether you do so.

Mat. 4.4.
Our daily bread, etc. Both corporal, whereby the life of the body is
maintained, and chiefly spiritual, whereby the Soul is preserved in life: for
not in bread alone does man live, but in every word that proceeds from the
mouth of God, etc. Give us this day, that is, daily; that you should daily ask
it, not for your self alone, but for us all, even your Enemies.

Luc. 6.37.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we, etc. Therefore first forgive, if any one
have offended you, either by word or deed, that you may deserve to have
forgiveness of your offenses: You are indebted more then ten thousand talents
to God, in comparison whereof your Brother scarce owes you a penny; forgive
therefore the lesser debt, that your greater may be forgiven you: Forgive, and
you shall be forgiven.

And lead us not into temptation. That is, do not permit us to be overcome. It
is not always expedient for us to be without temptation in this life, for the
trial and improvement of our virtue: Beg therefore strength to resist.

But deliver us from all evil, both of guilt, and of punishment; from the
snares of the Devil: Lastly, from all evil, past, present, and future, that you
may enjoy everlasting happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven. Amen. Be it, be it.

Of other sayings of Christ on the Mountain. Mat. 5. and 6

COnsider 1. In the same Sermon our Lord does very severely forbid anger
against our Brethren. There are three degrees of anger; the first of the heart;
the second of words; the third of deeds. Ponder the evils which it brings us:
It perverteth Reason, it exposes us to grievous sins, and makes us liable to
the torments of Hell. Think how you are subject to this in your actions; and
see you mend your self.

Consider 2. He does also forbid us to swear, Let your talk be yea, yea, no,
no. Mat. 5.37.
Think how detestable is the custom of swearing, how unworthy of any Christian,
much more of sacred persons: A man that swears much, Eccli. 23.12.
shall be filled with iniquity, and plague shall not depart from his house;
that is Gods revenge. See whether perhaps any such custom have place in you,
and seek to root it out, both in your self and others.

Mat. 6.1.
Consider 3. Those words; Take good heed that you do not your Justice before
men, to be seen of them. He teaches us to fly vain glory, rising from good
works, otherwise we shall have no reward in heaven: We are to do good works
before men, according to that, Mat. 5.17.
So let your light shine before men, etc. yet not with intention thereby to
please men, but God alone: S. Greg. Hom. 11. in Evang.
Therefore let the action (says S. Gregory) be so in public, that the
intention, whereby we seek only to please God, be kept in private.

Of sending the Apostles to Preach. Mat. 10. Luc. 10.
Part 1.
Luc. 10.2.
COnsider 1. Our most merciful Lord beholding the state of Souls in Israel,
said, The harvest truly is much, but the workmen few: Pray therefore the Lord
of the harvest, that he send forth workmen into his harvest. Our Lords harvest
are the Elect, who expect the preaching of the Gospel; and of these there are
many of your own Country, for whose good you ought to be concerned: Beseech our
Lord therefore to send zealous workmen, and such as may reap much fruit; and if
it be your lot to be one, see you spare no pains, nor labor, seeking the good
of souls, not your own private ends.

Luc. 10.1.
Consider 2. Hence Christ sent his Disciples to preach: But two and two, to
recommend Charity unto us, wherewith the Preachers of the Gospel ought to be
linked together: for, Prove. 18.19
Brother that is helped of Brother, is as a strong City. Think how necessary
this Union, and mutual assistance is among all that help Souls, least otherwise
what one gathers, an other scatters, and what one builds, an other
destroys. Exci^e your self therefore to an Universal and Apostolical Charity
toward all. Note also, that these Harvest-men must be sent, or called, by
Christ, and his Substitutes, and not thrust themselves in by their own private
Authority.

Mat. 10.8.
Consider 3. Christ's Precepts to those he was to send. 1. He debarreth them far
from all Avarice: Gratis you have received, gratis give ye. 2. 2. He forbids
superfluous and precious things: Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money, in
your purses. 3. In ordinary conveniences he prohibiteth such as are less
necessary: Not a skrip for the way, neither two coats, etc. 4. Even in
necessaries, he will have them confide in God, and feed upon what is set before
them, without seeking after extraordinaries and particularities, Eating and
drinking such things as they have. Think how you ought to observe these things,
Luc. 10.7.
if you desire to labor in our Lords Harvest, with profit, rather then with
pomp.

Of sending the Apostles to Preach. Mat. 10. Luc. 10.
Part 2.
Mat. 10.16
COnsider 1. Those words: Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves: An
unheard of kind of warfare; he sends sheep to combat with wolves: So true it
is, 1 Cor. 1.27
The weak things of the world has God chosen, that be may confound the strong.
Moreover, he admonishes his Preachers to be like sheep, that is, meek, not
returning evil for evil, but employing themselves wholly to the benefit of
their* Neighbor, like unto sheep, which give their milk, and wool, and flesh,
and all they have, for man's use.

Consider 2. Those other words; Be ye wise as Serpents, Mat. sup.
and simple as Doves: He would have the Serpents Wisdom joined with the Doves
Simplicity: He requires Prudence in taking fit occasions of time, and place,
etc. to help our Neighbor: Simplicity in doing all things sincerely, without
double dealing, or malice, and proceeding without bitterness and gall (which
Doves are said not to have) Thine eyes are as Doves (says the Spouse in the
Canticles) that is, Cant. 1.15
pure: Such therefore ought to be the eye of your intention.

Mat. 10.7. Marc. 6.12
Consider 3. The Subject they are enjoined to preach on: Going preach, saying,
that the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, etc. And going forth, they preached that
they should do Penance. They preached not of vain and curious matters, but of
such only as were profitable for the good of Souls; such ought to be the
endeavors, and manner of preaching of those that have care of Souls, speaking
inwardly, to their Hearers spiritual profit, and not to the outward show:
Hieron. ad Nepot.
Let your applause (says S. Hierom) be your Auditors tears.

Of the Disciples return from Preaching. Luc. 10.17

COnsider 1. How the Disciples being returned from Preaching, and something
touched with vain glory (as the H. Fathers expound) for having cast out Devils,
SS. Greg. Hieron. Cypr. apud Barad.
said, Lord, the Devils also are subject to us. Whence you may see how surtle a
vice vain glory is, that insinuates it self even into the actions of the
Apostles; that you may so much the more beware of it your self.

Consider 2. Christ's Reprehension: I saw Satan as a Lightning falling from
Heaven: as if he should say, as Satan in the beginning fell down, as Lightning
from Heaven, for his haughtiness and pride, so do you take heed, least being
puffed up with vain glory, you come to be involved in the same ruin; that you
may learn always to stand in fear, and that no state or condition whatsoever,
even of Apostles, or Angels, is secure from falling.

Job 20.5.
Consider 3. Rejoice not in this, that the Spirits are subject unto you, but
rejoice in this, that your names are written in Heaven: True joy is found only
in solid virtue, and hopes of Eternal Life, not in special favors, or
miraculous gifts, which ought rather to cause in us fear, and caution, least we
abuse them: Learn therefore to seek content of mind only in heavenly things:
The joys of this world are but vain and counterfeited; The joy of the Hypocrite
(that is of the deceitful world) as it were for a moment, says Job: Heavenly
content alone is everlasting, according to that, Is 35.10.
Everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they shall obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and mourning shall fly away.

Of Holy Communion. Lord, thou will open my lips, and and my mouth shall show
forth thy praise. Ps. 50.17. Mar. 7.31.

Consider Christ as Giver of Hearing, and Speech to your Soul.
Is. 65.12.
COnsider 1. What is read this day in the Gospel, how Christ cured one that was
Deaf and Dumb. Imagine your self to be such, as truly you are, in Spirit: Think
how deaf you are to Gods Voice and Inspirations, often exciting you to
Compunction, Patience, Humility, and all manner of Perfection; I called, and
you have not answered, I spoke, and you have not heard. Think also how dumb you
are in speaking of God, and divine matters, whereas much fruit might come of
such holy discourses, both to your self, and others: You may truly say with the
Prophet, Jer. 1.6.
I cannot speak, because I am a child, in matters of spirit.

Mar. 7.37.
Consider 2. Christ will come to you to day in the Eucharist, of whom it is said
in the Gospel; He has made both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak: And
if he did it then corporally, much more will he do it now spiritually, opening
the ear of your heart, so as to hear his voice; and informing your tongue to
speak of him to the edification of others, according to that, The Lord has
given me a learned tongue, Is. 50.4.
that I may know to stay him up that is weary, with a word, etc. In the morning
he stirs up mine ear, that I may hear him as a Master, etc. O what a
happiness!

Mar. 7.32.
Consider 3. The preparation necessary for the receiving of these blessings is:
1. Frequent Prayer; for the Disciples to day besought him, that be would impose
his hand upon him. 2. Retiredness from the noise and affairs of the world; for
he cured him not, till he had taken him from the multitude apart. 3. Humility,
Sap. 10.21
for Wisdom has opened the mouth of the dumb, and the tongues of Infants she
has made eloquent: Be therefore an Infant, without deceit, and a little one in
your own eyes, that you may deserve of our Lord to be made eloquent, to his
glory.

Of S. John's Message to Christ. Mat. 11. Luc. 7.
Part 1.
Mat. 11.2.
COnsider 1. When John had heard in Prison the works of Christ, etc. Ponder the
admirable courage of this holy Precursor, who did not stick publicly to
reprehend the impious Marriage of the wicked King, and chose rather to endure
the hardship of Prison, and suffer death it self, then dissemble the truth,
much less to betray it. Such ought to be all Apostolical men, full of zeal in
Gods Cause, constant Upholders of the Right, and such as know not how to yield
either to threats, or flatteries.

Consider 2. John being in prison, sent two of his Disciples to demand of
Christ, Art thou he that art to come, etc. Not as if he any thing doubted of it
himself, but to the end the hearts of his Disciples might be confirmed in their
Faith, by their discourse with Christ: So Charity seeks all ways of helping
others: Do you rejoice and give thanks, that Christ has been pleased long
since to come among us, and not held the world in longer suspense, and
expectation of his coming; and for the infinite benefits and treasures we enjoy
by means of his Incarnation.

Consider 3. Christ's answer: Go, and report to John what you have heard and
seen: The blind see, etc. He does not in open terms say, that he is Christ, to
avoid even the least show of boasting, but proves it by his works; for as S.
Bernard says, Bern. Sermon. 55. in Cantic.
Louder is the sound of works, then of words. In like manner therefore, you
must show your self to be a Christian, Priest, or Religious, more by your
works, then by your words: Prove. 31.31.
Let her works (says the wise man) praise her in the gates. Besides, seeing
Christ so liberally bestowed corporal benefits, making the blind to see, the
lame to walk, and the like; you have much more reason to hope for Spiritual
gifts and favors at his hands.

Of S. John's Message to Christ. Mat. 11. Luc. 7.
Part 2.
Mat. 11.7. etc.
COnsider 1. S. John's Disciples being gone, our Lord began to commend their
Master: First for his constancy in Virtue, that he was not like a Reed, tossed
with every wind, and wavering on every side, nor empty, or void of pith, and
substance: He was not a reed (says S. Gregory) whom no alteration of things
did ever make to bend. S. Greg. Hom. 6. Evang.
See whether you be not a Reed, easily turned on every side by the least blast
of men's mouths, inconstant in your good purposes, and without any pith of solid
virtue.

Consider 2. He is commended for the austerity of his life, and that he was not
clothed in soft garments, etc. that you might learn to shun all niceties and
superfluities in meat, drink, and apparel, if you desire to be approved of by
Christ in the day of Judgment. Lastly, he is termed by Christ an Angel, to wit,
both by Office, and Purity of Life, that you should do your utmost to imitate
his Angelical behavior, and incomparable Innocence of Life.

Consider 3. Upon this occasion Christ said, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent bear it away. Think how true that was in S. John, in
the Martyrs, and in all the Saints: There are two sorts of Violence, the one
exterior, which curbs the flesh, the other interior, which bridleth the
inordinate appetites of the mind; whereof this latter is the more excellent,
but both to be used: wherefore S. Hierom with good reason did say, So much
shall you profit, Hieron. ap. Rodrig. p. 2. tr. 1. c. 5
by how much you offer violence to your self. See what, and how much it is,
that you do in this point.

Of the Martyrdom of S. John Baptist. Mat. 14. Marc: 6. Marc. 6.22.

Eccles. 7.2.
COnsider 1. Herod made the supper of his Birthday to the Princes, etc. Worldly
men place their felicity in the enjoyment of this mortal life, which
notwithstanding passes away like a shadow: On the contrary, the Holy Ghost
says, Better is the day of Death, then the day of Nativity; for that this
brings us into this world, and into innumerable miseries; the other, if we
have lived well, uniteth us with God himself: Therefore have your eye always
upon that, and dispose your self to it in all your actions.

Pro. 23.2^
Consider 2. Among their Cups and Dances, was demanded, and granted the Head of
a most innocent and holy man; where you may learn, what crimes Riot and
Wantonness do beget; whence the wise man says, Be not in the feasts of great
drunkards. Herod fell into this Precipice, for that he would not hear S. John;
which word signifies Grace. Take heed therefore you do not expose your self to
the same ruin, by resisting Gods holy Grace, and Inspirations: Woe to thee
that despisest, Is. 33.1.
shall not thy self also be despised?

Ps. 115.6.
Consider 3. S. John received the Sentence of Death with great joy, and with as
great constancy laid his Head on the Block, whence he breathed forth his
blessed Soul into the bosom of Abraham: Precious in the sight of our Lord is
the death of his Saints. Beg that you may come to the like end, whereby you
will have a most secure and short passage to Heaven: Offer your self often to
God for Martyrdom: Imitate the example of so many glorious Martyrs of your
Country, by the continual practice of Virtue, and constancy in Faith and
Religion.

Of five thousand fed in the Desert. Mat. 14. Jo. 6. Mar. 6.
Part 1.
Mar. 6.34.
COnsider 1. How a great multitude of people followed Christ into the Desert,
drawn by his Miracles and Doctrine: He had compassion on them, etc. and he
began to teach them many things. He first gives them spiritual food,
afterward also corporal. You must also retire into the Desert, far from the
noise of worldly cares, if you desire to be regaled by our Lord: Osce 2.14
I will lead her into the wilderness, and I will speak to her heart, says our
Lord of a faithful soul. Observe also the Apostles care for the people, saying,
Mat. 14.15
Dismiss the multitudes, that going into the Towns they may buy themselves
victuals.

Ibid.
Consider 2. Christ having demanded of his Disciples what they had to set before
the people, they answered him, We have not here but five loaves, and two
fishes. This was all the provision of that Apostolical Family, a few course
loaves, and two fishes, although they were themselves Fishermen. Moreover, they
promptly exhibit what they have, without alleging their own want, or scarcity;
that you might learn, what you can, to help others; according to that, Tob. 4.8.
As thou shall be able, so be merciful.

Ps. 67.4.
Consider 3. The Order of the Miracle; the loaves being brought, Christ
commanded the multitude to sit down upon the grass: The Apostles minister,
himself looking up to heaven, blessed the loaves, and distributed them. In the
same manner ought you to look up to heaven, before you eat; that is, to lift up
your heart to the Giver of all good, that you may not fall upon your meat as
beasts do: Therefore David; Let the Just make merry, and rejoice in the sight
of God.

Of five thousand fed in the Desert. Mat. 14.20 etc.
Part 2.
Ps. 77.19. Deuteronomy. 32.13.
COnsider 1. How the Loaves by Divine Power were multiplied in the Apostles
hands; so that although they were continually distributing, yet still they
found either in their hands, or in the Baskets, more to distribute, the Angels
(as is probable) secretly supplying new provision of loaves, and fish. In like
manner formerly, at the prayers of Elias, neither Meal nor Oil was wanting,
although the present provision was daily spent: Who would not willingly serve
so good and powerful a Lord? who can prepare a Table in the Desert, and is able
to bring forth honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of the hardest stone.

Is. 55.2.
Consider 2. They did all eat, and had their fill. The delights of this world
may please and content us for a while, but cannot fill; for the Souls capacity,
and appetite, is greater then to be satisfied with such Trash; Christ alone is
able to give it full content; wherefore he says by the Prophet, Why bestow you
silver not for bread, and your labor not for satiety: Come therefore to him,
that you may be filled.

Pro. 19. 17
Consider 3. After all had eaten, the Apostles gathered out of the leavings more
then what they had given out, to wit, twelve full baskets of the fragments. So
God is wont to reward the Charity of his Servants, and is liberal to the
liberal; He lends our Lord, that has mercy on the poor, and he will repay
him the like. Give therefore to your Brother good measure, and pressed down,
Luc. 6.38.
and shaken together, and running over, that you may receive the like into your
bosom.

Christ flies, Jo. 6.14.
not to be made King.
Ps. 43.5.
COnsider 1. Those men therefore when they had seen what a sign Jesus had done,
said, that this is the Prophet, etc. They were astonished at the strangeness of
the Miracle (of feeding five thousand with so little provision) and would
therefore have made Christ their King. Our Lord works daily a far greater
Miracle in feeding the whole world, bringing forth plentiful Harvests out of a
few grains of Corn; why therefore do we not make him King of our heart, obeying
him in all things? Thou art the same, my King, and my God, which command the
salvations of Jacob, said King David.

Consider 2. Jesus therefore when he knew that they would come to take him, and
make him King, he fled again into the Mountain himself alone. Sovereignty was
due to Christ, as being Son of God; it was due also to his Merits, and
Bountifulness toward men, but he would not accept of it; and whenever there
was any Treaty about it, he fled away, and hid himself: How few are there that
would do so nowadays? But Christ did it, to reach us to fly honors, as much
as lies in us, and to affect humility and lowliness. See how you are in this
point, and whether you do not rather seek after such things as bear a luster
and greatness in the eyes of the world, or at least prefer your self before
your Companions and Neighbors.

Mat. 14.23
Consider 3. What our Lord did on the Mountain: He ascended (says S. Matthew)
into a Mountain alone to pray. It was his u^ual custom, to retire himself far
off from the multitudes, to pray, and this for our example; for he stood not in
need of prayer for himself, but was continually beholding the Face of God by
the Beatifical Vision. Imitate therefore this example of our Lord, and
endeavor to join the contemplative life with the active. Eccli. 18.22.
Be not hindered (says Ecclesiasticus) to pray always.

Of Holy Communion. Our Lord shall bind up the wound of his people, and shall
heal the stroke of their wound. Is. 30.26.

Consider Christ as the good Samaritan.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel, Luc. 10.30. Of a man who fell
among Thieves, that wounded him, and of the Samaritan that bound up his wounds.
Consider how this man was Adam, the Thieves the Devils, who by Original Sin
dispoiled him, and us all in him, of all grace, and other free gifts, and
wounded him (as Divines teach) in his Natural Faculties; in the Understanding
by Ignorance, in the Will by Malice, in the Irascible Power by Weakness, in the
Concupiscible by unlawful Concupiscence; and these are the four Wounds of our
Nature, S. Tho. 1.2 q. 85. ar. 3.
as S. Thomas teaches: Such therefore is your state and condition.

Zachar. 9.17.
COnsider 2. The Pious Samaritan will come to you, this day, in the Holy
Eucharist, to bind your wounds, and take care of you: He will power into your
Soul Wine springing Virgins, and the Oil of his Mercy, wherewith he does
comfort Sinners: He will lay a Salve of his own Sacred Flesh to your wounds,
and unless you put a hinderance, he will enlighten your Understanding, like to
the Honey by which Jonathas his eyes were illuminated; 1 Reg. 14.27. Is. 6.6.
He will refine and rectify your Will, like to the burning hot Coal, which
cleansed the lips of Isait; He will strengthen, and enable you to endure hard
things, like to the Loaf that strengthened Elias. Lastly, 3 Reg. 19.8.
he will temper the heat of Concupiscence, like to the Manna which lay upon the
ground, Exodus 16.14.
like unto the hoar frost.

Is. 64.1.
Consider 3. How much you ought to wish for that hour, wherein this Samaritan is
to come to you; say with the Prophet, Would God thou would break the Heavens
in sunder, and would descend; and with that other Prophet, Jer. 17.14.
Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed, save me, and I shall be saved; and
above all, be sure to entertain him with hearty love, that comes so lovingly
to you.

Of Christ's allaying the Tempest. Mat. 8. Mar. 4. Luc. 8.

Marc. 4.38
COnsider 1. Christ went with his Disciples into the Boat to pass over the Lake,
and while they were sailing, he was in the hinder part of the Boat, sleeping
upon a Pillow. Our Lord betakes himself to sleep (though but for a while) to
show himself subject to humane infirmities. In the mean time there arises a
Tempest, the Boat is in danger, the Disciples are troubled: So Almighty God
does often permit us to be tossed with temptations, and almost overwhelmed,
while he in the mean time in a manner sleeps, that is, deferreth his peculiar
assistance, thereby to humble us, and force us the more earnestly to implore
his help.

Consider 2. The Disciples seeing themselves in danger, came to him, and raised
him, saying, Lord save us, Mat. 8.25. Marc. sup.
we perish: And, Master does it not pertain to thee that we perish? So ought
we, with a filial confidence, to have recourse to our Lord in our temptations,
and to say with the Psalmist, Arise, why sleep thou, O Lord, arise, and
expel us not to the end. Ps. 43.23.
Observe moreover, how our Lord being awakened, reprehended his Disciples for
their little confidence in him. See whether he may not justly accuse you for
the same.

Consider 3. How Christ rising up, Mat. sup.
commanded the Winds, and the Sea, and there ensiled a great Calm: So all
Creatures, even the Irrational, obey their Creator; Man alone is refractory to
his Commands, deaf and obstinate to his Councels, and hard to be gained by any
fair means: Be sorry for having often been such, and be sure to mend your self
for the future: Ps. 94.9.
And even to day if you shall hear his Voice, harden not your heart.

Christ upon the Water.
Mat. 14.22. etc.
COnsider 1. Christ commanded his Disciples to go up into the Boat, and to go
before him over the water, while he himself ascended into a Mountain alone to
pray: In the mean time there arose again a Tempest, the Boat was tossed with
waves, Mar. 6.48.
and they laboring in rowing. Thus we are to suffer temptations, over and over
again, wherein we must not neglect our selves, but take the Oars in our hands,
use all our endeavors, and betake our selves to prayer, and the like. Our Lord
came to his Disciples at last, walking upon the Sea, to show his Power: He will
also be at hand to assist us, and be an helper in opportunities, Ps. 9.10.
in tribulation.

Consider 2. The Disciples seeing our Lord walk upon the Sea, said, that it is
a Ghost. Mat. sup.
So many hold Christ for a Phantasm, solid virtue for old Wives devotions,
interior inspirations for the effects of a melanchollick humor; Others on the
contrary, take their own Fantasies for Christ, their Dreams for Revelations,
their Passions for Virtues, Anger for Zeal, and their own Private Interest for
Gods greater Honor. We must therefore avoid both Extremes, and follow that
counsel of the Apostle, Believe not every spirit, 1 Jo. 4.1.
but prove the spirits if they be of God.

Consider 3. Those words of Christ, It is I, fear ye not. Mat. sup.
It was a sufficient inducement to them of casting off all fear, to hear him
say, It is I; that is, I who but a little before miraculously sed five
thousand; I who allayed the like Tempest, by commanding the Winds and Sea, and
do now walk upon the waters, etc. Rejoice for having so powerful a Helper, and
Refuge, in your necessities.

Peter walks upon the Waters.
Mat. 14.28
COnsider 1. The fervor of S. Peter, who as soon as he understood it was our
Lord, was presently inflamed with an ardent desire of being with him, saying,
Lord, if it be thou, bid me come to thee upon the Waters. A true Lover knows
not how to be separated from the Party he loves, and overcomes all
difficulties, and lets, that hinder their mutual communication: And we may
fitly apply to S. Peter, in this place, those words of the Canticles: Cant. 8.7.
Many waters cannot quench (his) charity, neither shall floods overwhelm it:
See whether you love God in this manner, and not rather permit your self to be
often taken off from his service, for small difficulties.

Consider 2. How S. Peter being bid to come, cast himself into the Sea: But
seeing the wind rough, he was afraid; Mat. sup.
and when he began to be drowned, he cried out to our Lord. So our Lord does
often permit us almost to sink under our tentations, that we may the more
fervently call upon him: But at length he stretched forth his hand to Peter,
and would not let him sink: So he will also do with us, Ps. 36.24.
according to that, When he shall fall he shall not be bruised, because our
Lord puts his hand under: And he sent from on high, Ps. 17.17.
and took me, and he received me out of many waters.

Consider 3. What it signifies mystically to walk upon the Sea: S. Aug. Ser.
13, de Verbis Dom.
The World is like a Sea (says S. Augustine) if you love God, you walk upon
the Sea; if you love the World, this Sea will swallow you up. Examine your self
which of the two you love, God, or the World; it is a dreadful thing to be
swallowed up: Be sure therefore that you walk and trample over this Sea, and be
mindful of what the same Saint says, Every ones inordinate desire, is his
tempest.

Of S. Peter's confessing Christ. Mat. 16. Mar. 8. Luc. 9. Mat: 16.13.

COnsider 1. Jesus came into the quarters of Caesarea Philippi, and he asked
his Disciples, saying, Whom say men that the Son of Man is? For it is good
sometimes to know what men say of us, both that we may come to know, and
correct our defects; and that we may strive to make good, and to perfect in our
selves such things, as are said of us to our commendation; but take heed you do
not desire it out of vain glory, and ostentation. Observe how Christ calls
himself every where the Son of Man, though he were the only begotten Son of
God; and yet worldly men foolishly stand upon their Points, and Titles of
Honor.

Consider 2. The Apostles answer; Some John the Baptist, and other some Elias,
etc. they say not, some a Glutton, others a Drunkard, and other such like
reproaches; to teach us, that slanderous reports ought not to be uttered before
our Brother, not to afflict his mind. Observe how far men were off from the
esteem they ought to make of Christ, notwithstanding that his Miracles did most
apparently evidence his Divinity; that you might cease to wonder if your
Neighbors, or Companions undervalue you, or mistake, in taking you to be worse
then you are: Be content to be such, and no more, then you are in the sight of
God, who sees all things.

Ps. 21.23.
Consider 3. But whom do you say that I am? He puts the question to his
Disciples, as having been long brought up in his School, and consequently bound
to know more of him then the rest: Peter answered, and said, Thou art Christ,
the Son of the Living God; not by Adoption, as others, but by Nature and
Essence, the true Messiah, and Savior of the World. Rejoice for the Divinity
of your Lord and Savior, and stir your self up both to confess him in your own
thoughts and actions, and to bring others likewise to the knowledge and service
of him; according to that, I will declare thy Name to my Brethren.

Primacy is promised to Peter.
Mat. 16.17
COnsider 1. When Peter had made that Famous Profession of his Faith, our Lord
said, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, because flesh and blood has not
revealed to the^, but my Father which is in Heaven. Our Lord pronounces him
blessed, for that the foundation of a happy life is to know Christ: Simon
signifies the same as Obedient; Bar-jona the Son of a Dove, or of Grace: Be
you therefore obedient, and with a Dove-like simplicity, endeavor to comply
with the Divine Grace: Do not mind what flesh and blood does suggest, but what
the heavenly Father does inspire you, that you may also become happy.

Ibid.
Consider 2. Peter's reward: Thou art Peter (that is, a Rock) and upon this Rock
will I build my Church, etc. 1. Christ gives him a Name suitable to his
Office. 2. Upon him he foundeth his Church Militant, and makes him the Visible
Head thereof. 3. He promises him Infallibility, so that the Gate^s of Hell
shall not prevail against him. 4. He promises him likewise the Keys of Heaven;
that is, the Key of Knowledge, to determine matters of Faith without Error,
and the Key of Power to remit sins. Rejoice for these Privileges granted to
the Chief Pastor for your particular, and the whole Churches general good.

Consider 3. In what a miserable state are they that deny this Primacy of S.
Peter, and will not build upon the Rock, which cannot be overthrown, or rooted
up; but upon the Sands of their own judgment, and private spirit, ground their
Eternal Salvation. Desire and seek, with most earnest endeavor, suitably to
your calling, to bring all men to this Rock; and first dispose your self unto
it, by the exercise of Solid Virtues.

S. Peter is reprehended for dissuading Christ from his Passion. Mat. 16. Mar.
7.

Mat. 16.20
COnsider 1. How after S. Peter's Confession of Christ's Divinity, our Lord
commanded his Disciples that they should tell no body that he was Jesus Christ;
both to give example of Humility, and to avoid Ostentation, and withal, for
that it was not seasonable at that time: And presently after, he treated of his
Passion: From that time Jesus began to show his Disciples that he must go to
Jerusalem, and suffer many things, etc. that you might learn in the day of
good things, not to be unmindful of evils, Eccli. 11.27.
as Ecclesiasticus advises; and that it is not enough to confess Christ as
your God, unless you also have an experimental knowledge, and imitation of him
in suffering.

Consider 2. S. Peter hearing this, being zealous for his Master, took Christ
aside, and rebuked him, saying, Lord, be it far from thee, this shall not be
unto thee. This was zeal in him, but an indiscreet one, Romans 10.2
and not according to knowledge, as the Apostle speaks; for he did not as yet
understand, how glorious would be the Ignominy of the Cross. See whether you
are not sometimes carried away with the like preposterous zeal in your actions.

Consider 3. Christ's Reprehension: Go after me Satan, for thou art a scandal
unto me, because thou savourest not the things that are of God, but the things
that are of men. Ponder how dangerous a thing it is, to savor only things that
are of men, and to love honors, riches, pleasures, etc. and not rather those
things that are of God, as labors, crosses, ignominies. Examine your self
whether you do relish spiritual and divine things, and take real g^st in them;
at leastwise make it your endeavor to procure it.

Of Holy Communion. Go show thy self to the Priest. Mar. 8.4.

Consider Christ as a Priest.
Luc. 17.14
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel of ten Lepers, of whom it is
said, Go show your selves to the Priests; And it came to pass, as they went,
they were made clean. As there are several sorts of Lepers in the Body (for
some are but light, and in the skin only, others in the flesh, and mortal) so
there are also different kinds of Spiritual Lepers, or sins: We are all of us
leprous in some degree, having our swellings and spots, rising from the
abundance of peccant humors and affections: Imagine therefore your Soul all
over in a scurf, and become a lamentable spectacle in the sight of God; and
with Naaman the Syrian, 4 Reg. 5.
be desirous to meet with some Prophet that may cleanse you.

Levit. 13.9
Consider 2. The Ancient Law of God: If the Plague of the Leprosy be in a man,
he shall be brought to the Priest, to be condemned as unclean, and to be
separated; in the New Law he is brought to the Priest, to be cleansed: Our
High Priest is Christ our Lord, according to that, Ps. 109.4.
Thou art a Priest for ever, according to the Order of Melchisedech. How
greatly therefore ought you to wish to appear before this Priest in the
Eucharist, who not with water, as Elizeus, but with his own precious blood will
cleanse our conscience (as the Apostle says) from dead works, Heb. 9.14.
etc.

Luc. 17.12 etc.
Consider 3. That you may be perfectly cleansed, you must imitate the example of
the Lepers in the Gospel. 1. You are to go to meet Christ, seeking him with all
diligence. 2. To stand afar off, acknowledging your unworthiness. 3. To lift up
your voice, by fervent prayer. 4. With all humility to implore mercy. Lastly,
To follow the counsel and admonishments of your Spiritual Fathers, and
Directors, according to that, Observe diligently that you incur not the Plague
of Leprosy, but thou shall do whatsoever the Priests of the Levitical Stock
shall teach thee, etc. and fulfill thou it carefully.

Of our Lords Transfiguration. Mat. 17. Mar. 9. Luc. 9.
Part 1.
COnsider 1. Our Lord vouchsafed to manifest his Glory. 1. To confirm the
Apostles in their Faith. 2. To encourage them to carry their Cross, which he
had lately exhorted them to. 3. To give them beforehand a taste of the Heavenly
Joys: He did it on a high Mountain, apart, that we should learn to sequester
our selves from the cares of this world, and climb to the Mountain of
Perfection, if we desire to contemplate the Face and Glory of our Lord.

Thren. 1.12.
Consider 2. Christ would have few Witnesses of his Glory, to wit, only three of
his Disciples; but of his Cross and ignominies, all sorts of men: Therefore
upon the Cross he says by the mouth of the Prophet, O all ye that pass by the
way attend, and see, etc. In th^se three Disciples are deciphered unto us three
Virtues, that accompany Contemplation, and concur to our Souls Transfiguration;
in Peter Faith, in James Hope, in John Charity. See how, and in what degree,
these Virtues are in you.

Luc. 9.29.
Consider 3. And whiles he prayed, the shape of his countenance was altered. Our
Lord was transfigured while he was praying, to teach us, that prayer does
transform and beautify man's Soul, so as sometimes to have influence also upon
the body: so Moses his face was horned (with Rays of Glory) by the
conversation of the talk of our Lord. Exodus 34.29.
Beseech our Lord to alter and transfigure you into another man, that is, to
make you holy; that having cast off all bad habits, you may be made conformable
to his Image and likeness: Be much in prayer, that you may be enlightened,
according to that, Come ye to him, Ps. 33.6.
and be illuminated, and your faces shall not be confounded.

Of our Lords Transfiguration. Mat. 17.
Part 2.
Mat. 17.2.
COnsider 1. The manner of this Transfiguration: His face did shine as the Sun,
and his garments became white as snow. The Evangelist had nothing better to
compare it withal, but it did incomparably exceed both: Congratulate with your
Lord, and his Sacred Humanity, for this array of glory, which ever was his due,
and wherewith he ought always to have been invested; but for our sakes he
eclipsed it. Rejoice that your Beloved is thus white and ruddy, chosen of
thousands, Cant. 5.11 Cant. 6.9.
etc. fair as the Moon, elect as the Sun.

Exodus 4.13
Consider 2. There appeared with him Moses and Elias, two chief Lights of the
ancient Law; to signify, that both the Law, and the Prophets, gave testimony
of Christ. Think how great was their joy to see their Redeemer, so long wished
for by all Nations, and whom they themselves had so often foretold; Send whom
thou will send, and the like. Observe how they were both like to Christ in
their forty days fast, and therefore were also made Companions with him in
Glory.

Luc. 9.31.
Consider 3. The Subject of their discourse; for they told the decease, that he
should accomplish in Jerusalem. Our Lord in the very height of all his glory
discoursed of his ignominious and bitter Passion, that you might see how much
he made of it, and how he bare it in mind and affection, above all Glory:
Galat. 6.14
God forbid that you should glory (as the Apostle says of himself) saving in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. And let not your mind ever be so
transported with joy in time of prosperity, as to put off the thought or memory
of death.

Of our Lords Transfiguration. Mat. 17. Mar. 9. Luc. 9.
Part 3.
Mat. 17.4.
COnsider 1. The excess of joy in the Apostles at so glorious a Spectacle; Peter
said, Lord, it is good for us to be here; and would have fixed his Habitation
there, and have raised three Tabernacles for Christ, and his two Companions.
Think what will be in Heaven, if one single drop of Heavenly Joy could so
inebriate the Apostles, that forgetful of all other things, they would have
remained there for ever: What will the whole Ocean of Joy do in Heaven? Ps.
35.9.
where they shall be inebriated with the plenty of thy house (O Lord) and with
the torrent of thy pleasure thou shall make them drink.

Consider 2. A Voice came from Heaven, saying, This is my well beloved Son,
Mat. sup.
in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. Ponder each word, and how he is the
only begotten Son of the Eternal Father, Consubstantial, and Coeternal with
him, and equally Immense and Omnipotent. See whether you are wont to hear him,
exciting you to perfection, contempt of the world, and abnegation of your self;
say at least hereafter, 1 Reg. 3.10.
with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant ^eareth.

Consider 3. Our Lord, the Vision being passed, forbad his Disciples to divulge
it to any one: Tell the Vision to no body, Mat. sup.
till the Son of Man be risen from the dead; to give us example of Humility;
for that extraordinary Visions, and favors of God, ought to be kept secret,
and not to be discovered, unless some great profit or necessity require it, and
even then, not as our own goods, but as gifts of God, whereof we shall be
demanded an account.

Of the Petition of the Sons of Zebedee. Mat. 20. Mat. 10.
Part 1.
Mat. 20.20
CConsider 1. Then came to him the Mother of the Sons of Zebedee, etc. The
Mother comes to petition for her Sons, what they themselves pretended for; but
they interpose their Mothers prayers, as a Cloak to cover their own ambition:
So men oftentimes make use of others desires, and commands, to cloak their own
pretenses. Observe moreover how the Mother comes in an humble and suppliant
manner, and adoring, presents her Petition; Because Ambition (as S. Ambrose
witnesses) first serves, Ambr. in^ Luc. c. 4.
that it may afterward domineer; it stoopeth to mean Offices, to be served
with honor.

Is. 14.13.
Consider 2. Her Petition: Say that these my two Sons may sit, one at thy right
hand, and one at thy left hand, in thy Kingdom. It Is natural to all to be
ambitious of the first place; this cast the Angels out of Heaven: I will ascend
into Heaven, above the Stars of God will I exalt my Throne, etc. The same
thrust man out of Paradise; You shall be as Gods. Genesis 3.5.
The same assaileth also the Apostles: See whether it has as yet got any hold
of you. How much safer is it to follow the counsel and example of Christ, and
to sit in the lowest place?

2 Cor. 1.^
Consider 3. Christ's answer: You know not what you desire. They who sue for
honors and vanities of this world, truly know not what they desire: It
follows; Can you drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? to wit, the bitter
Cup of Sorrow and Affliction; intimating thereby, that the glory of Heaven
shall be measured to them proportionably to the draught which they shall take
of this Cup; so that the more one shall drink of this, the nearer he shall be
seated to Christ: Wherefore encourage your self to drink manfully of this Cup,
to the very bottom; for that (as the Apostle says) as you are partakers of the
Passions, so shall you be of the Consolation also.

Of the Petition of the Sons of Zebedee. Mat. 20.22 etc.
Part 2.
Phil. 4.13.
COnsider 1. The Apostles readiness to drink the Chalice proposed to them: They
say to him, we can. The like alacrity may proceed from a different spirit. 1.
From Ambition, refusing no labors, that they may come to what they aim at. 2.
Out of a rash Fervor, not knowing what they undertake; as War is sweet to them
that have had no experience of it. 3. From Divine Grace, according to that, I
can all things, in him that strengthens me. Be ashamed of your self, for
being so slack, and that you have not the courage to undertake that for the
Kingdom of Heaven, which others do, without fear or wit, for some vain honor:
You often answer, I cannot; whereas, not ability, but will and resolution is
wanting.

Act. 10.35 Mat. 16.27
Consider 2. Christ seeing this readiness in them, answered, My Cup indeed you
shall drink of, but to sit at my right hand and left, is not mine to give you,
but to whom it is prepared of my Father: Not dissuading them from using their
endeavor to deserve the Chief Seats, but letting them understand, that the
Gifts of Glory are not distributed out of favor, or upon account of some
Temporal Relation, or respect, but in reward only to their Merits; for that God
is not an accepter of persons, but will render to every one according to his
works.

Consider 3. The difference there is between worldly Precedence, and that which
is proper to the School of Christ, which our Lord explicated upon this
occasion: The Princes of Gentiles overrule them, etc. It shall not be so among
you; but whosoever will be the greater among you, let him be your minister;
etc. which he confirms with his own example, who came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister. Let your ambition therefore be for the lowest place in
all occasions, if you desire to be Christ's Disciple.

Who is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. Mat. 18. Mar. 9. Luc. 9. Mat.
18.1.

Mar. 9.34.
COnsider 1. At that hour the Disciples came to Jesus, saying; Who think thou
is the greater in the Kingdom of Heaven? etc. There had a little before been a
contention among them, which of them should be the greater; and each one would
have the first place in Heaven for himself. Thus Ambition insinuates its self
even into spiritual things, and persons; therefore they ask, who is the
greater, etc. And perhaps some one might think, that Rich and Principal men in
this world, were to be preferred before others, also in Heaven.

Consider 2. Jesus calling unto him a little child, etc. said, Unless you be
converted, Mat. sup.
and become as little children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he is the
greater in the Kingdom of Heaven. Think what it is to become a little one: Be
not children in sense (says the Apostle) but in malice be children. A child
prefers himself before none, arrogates nothing to himself, carries himself
lovingly to all, and finally lets himself be ruled and governed by his Parents:
Behave your self therefore after the same manner, if you desire to enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven: Narrow is the gate, and strait is the way that leads
to life; Mat. 7.14.
and therefore none but they that are little, and low by Humility, can enter
through it.

Consider 3. The grievousness of the offense which they commit, that give
scandal to Christ's little ones, that is, are occasion of their spiritual ruin,
either by word, or example: It Is expedient for him, Mat. 18.6.
that a Millstone be hanged about his neck, and that he be drowned in the depth
of the Sea. Take heed therefore lest any one be induced to evil by your
example, Ezec. 3.18
that his blood may not be required at your hands.

Of Holy Communion. The Lord thy God thou shall adore, and him only shall thou
serve. Deuteronomy. 6.13 Is. 45.18. Ezec. 18.4

Consider Christ as your Lord.
COnsider 1. What is read this day in the Gospel. No man can serve two Masters,
Mat. 6.24. God is your only true and lawful Lord: I the Lord, and there is none
other: All Souls are mine; as the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the
Son is mine: No Lord is so perfectly Master of any thing, as God is of you; for
he has an absolute Dominion over you. 1. By the Title of Creation. 2. Of
Perpetual Conservation. 3. Of Purchase, having bought you. 4. Of your own
voluntary subjection in Baptism. Rejoice that you have so great and powerful a
Lord; S. Ambr. in 1 Timothy 1.
for (as S. Ambrose says) it is an honor to be servant to some great Lord.

Deuteronomy. 32.18.
Consider 2. The Dominion over any thing, is nothing else but a right to dispose
of it at ones pleasure: Think therefore how often you have violated this right
that God has in you, not permitting him to dispose of you at his pleasure; and
what is worse, you have been rebellious against him, by sin. O how often have
you sold your self to the Devil, his Capital Enemy? God that begat thee thou
have forsaken, and have forgotten our Lord thy Creator. Think well of this, and
be confounded.

Consider 3. This your Lord will come to you to day, in the Eucharist, to take
a fuller possession of you, as his own; for although he stands not in any need
of you, yet he will have you wholly to himself: The Lord thy God shall thou
adore, Mat. 4.10. and Deuteronomy. sup.
and him only shall thou serve: Wherefore renounce all other Leagues, with the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, which are against him: Present him anew which
the keys of your heart; ask him pardon of your former disloyalty, and let him
freely dispose of you in all things. Lastly, let your care hereafter be to
please him alone, in whatsoever you do; for no man can serve two Masters.

Of Conversions and Cures wrought by Christ.
Of the Conversion of S. Mary Magdalen. Part 1.
Luc. 7.37.
COnsider 1. And behold, a woman that was in the City, a sinner, etc. A sinner,
that is, by dishonesty, although it be not specified, because the Apostle would
not have it named by us; Ephesians. 5.3.
so unbeseeming is the very name, much more the thing is self, in them that
pretend Virtue and Sanctity. It Is probable she heard our Lord preach, and being
touched to the heart with repentance, not expecting opportunity of time or
place, S. Aug. lib. 50. Homil. 13. Eccli. 5.8.
rushed in (as S. Augustine affirms) to the banquet: Wherefore do you
likewise after sin flack not to be converted to our Lord, and defer not from
day to day.

Consider 2. The fervor of her Penance, wherein is discovered unto us an
admirable Faith in Christ, his Divinity, and Power of forgiving sins. 2.
Humility, not caring to suffer confusion before men; she stood behind, beside
our Lords feet, as deeming her self unworthy of his sight. Luc. sup.
3. The greatness of her love, expressing extraordinary signs of grief, with
tears, kissing, and anealing his Sacred Feet. 4. Contempt of worldly things,
making her precious ointments, and her very hair, and eyes, instruments of
Penance, which before had been of Vanity, that she might punish her self in the
same things, wherein she had formerly sinned.

Ps. 61.10.
Consider 3. The Pharisees rash judgment, in reproving Christ for letting
himself be touched by a sinful woman: whence you may learn, that there is no
action so holy, that is not liable to wrong censures. Most true it is, the
children of men are liars in (their) balances, that is, in their judgments;
that you may accustom your self, not to regard them, when they are opposite to
true Piety and Devotion.

Of S. Mary Magdalens Conversion. Luc. 7.
Part 2.
Luc. 7.41.
COnsider 1. Christ's Wisdom in reproving the Pharisee his Entertainer, which he
did with all modesty, and sweetness, as is fitting to do to persons of
Authority, for avoiding offense: He proposes a Parable of two Debtors to one
Creditor; God is the Creditor; all we are Debtors, some more, some less;
neither have we any means to make satisfaction, but by the Merits of Christ:
The greater therefore the Debt is that is forgiven us, the greater obligation
we have of love and gratitude. See how great your Debt is, and consequently
what obligation you have.

Consider 2. Do thou see this woman? Ibid. v. 44.
He confounds the Pharisees, and withal, our pride, by the example of a sinful
woman; for she acknowledging the favor done her in remitting her great Debt,
showed more love then those, who little regarding their lesser debts, were cold
in affection: Ask your self often that question, Do you see this woman? and be
ashamed for being so far behind her in your love to God, and in works of
Penance; who perhaps have received greater favors at his hands: Take heed you
be not one of those, of whom Christ speaks in those words, Publicans and
whores shall go before you in the Kingdom of God. Mat. 21.31


Ps. 31.5.
Consider 3. Magdalens Discharge; Thy sins are forgiven thee. O with what joy
must she needs be filled, when she heard those comfortable words? Ponder the
efficacy of Contrition, which in a moment blotteth our all the sins of ones
former life: Stir your self up to the like, as often as you go to the Sacrament
of Confession; and as you have followed Magdalen in sin, so follow her likewise
in Penance: Confess against thy self thine injustice to our Lord, and he will
forgive the impiety of thy sin.

Of the Samaritan Woman's Conversion. Jo. 4.6. etc.
Part 1.
Sap. 6.14.
COnsider 1. Jesus therefore wearied of his journey, sat so upon the Fountain;
for he traveled on foot like a good Shepherd, seeking his loft sheep; and
among other corporal miseries, admitted also weariness, and thirst. But see
with what patience he endured them both: He sat therefore upon the Fountain,
well knowing what would follow; thereby not so much taking rest, as occasion of
befitting others; for Wisdom preventeth them that covet her, that she may first
show her self unto them. O how often does she prevent you, and you mind it not?

Consider 2. There coming a certain Woman, and a sinner, to draw water, Christ
preventeth her, saying, Gave me to drink: She refuses, and withal accuses
him; How do thou, being a Jew, ask of me to drink? etc. So many reject
Christ, while he moves them interiourly, and seeks to be entertained and
refreshed with their virtues; our Lord did not therefore desist from helping
this sinner, but offered her living water to drink of: Thou perhaps would
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.

Consider 3. The Excellency of this Water (that is, of Divine Grace) which our
Lord promises to his faithful: He that shall drink of the water that I will
give him, shall not thirst for ever, etc. 1. Therefore it quenches our thirst,
and that for ever. 2. It does so fill the Soul, that it lets it not thirst
after any other water, to wit, of earthly comforts. 3. It becomes a Fountain
of all good to the Soul, ever flowing, and giving influence to all virtuous
actions. 4. It springs up unto life everlasting; raising up our thoughts
unto, it, whose pledge it is: Say therefore with the woman; Lord, give me this
water, that I may not thirst, etc.

Of the Samaritan Woman's Conversion. Jo. 4.26. etc.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. The wonderful goodness of Christ, vouchsafing to manifest himself
openly to a sinful woman, saying, I am he (to wit, the Messiah) that speak with
thee. Consider the efficacy of her Faith; she presently went into the City,
leaving her Water-pot behind her, to bring others of the City to the same
Faith: Come, and see (says she) a man that has told me all things, whatsoever
I have done. Such is the fervor of true zeal, which bestirreth it self, and
seeks every where whom it may gain to Christ: If therefore you be enkindled
with true zeal, cast away the Pitcher of terrene affections, and seek whom you
may likewise inflame.

Consider 2. The Woman being gone, the Disciples offered Christ to eat, for it
was that time of the day; but he being intent upon the Conversion of the
Samaritans, whom he did expect, refused, saying, Ibid. v. 34.
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, to perfect his work; that you
may learn to prefer the Spiritual good of your Neighbor, before your own
corporal refection: O that your meat, and drink, your delight, and pleasure,
were only to do the will of your Heavenly Father!

Consider 3. How many of the Samaritans, moved by the Woman's speeches, came,
and were converted, and said to her, That now not for thy saying, do we
believe, for our selves have heard, Ibid. v. 42.
and do know that this is the Savior of the world indeed: Rejoice that your
Savior was manifested to those men, and wish that all the world may come to
his knowledge, and withal, do your utmost endeavor to bring as many as may be
unto him: S. Greg. Hom. 6. in Evang.
If you walk toward God (says S. Gregory) procure not to come to him alone,
without company.

Of the Woman taken in Adultery. Jo. 8.3. etc.

COnsider 1. The Pharisees seeking to entrap our Lord, take occasion of his
Meekness; wherefore they bring unto him a Woman taken in Adultery, with intent,
that if perhaps he should give his Sentence for her dismission, he might be
held for a Corrupter of the Law. So the Devil lays his Snares in that Virtue
wherein we most excel; the Zealous he endeavors to provoke to anger, the
Humble to dejection and pusillanimity, the Meek to remissness, and too much
indulgence; But there is no counsel against our Lord: Pro. 21.30 Job 5.13.
And Christ apprehends the wise in their subtilty.

Luc. 6.36.
Consider 2. Jesus bowing himself down, with his finger wrote in the earth; so
to decline his giving sentence, which might breed contention: Therefore the
Apostle; No man being a soldier to God, intangleth himself with secular
businesses, 2 Timothy 2.4. He did it moreover to teach us, that we ought to
proceed warily, and not with precipitation in such causes: But they still
urging him, He lifted up himself, and said to them, He that is without sin of
you, let him first throw the stone at her: Most wisely; neither clearing, nor
yet condemning her, but pricking their conscience, and moving them to
compunction for their own sins, and commiseration for others. Be ye merciful,
as also your Father is merciful.

Eccli. 34.31.
Consider 3. The Pharisees going away one by one, the Woman remained alone,
repentant for her sin, and probably with an interior Faith expecting
absolution thereof from Christ: Our Lord therefore, understanding by her, that
no body had condemned her, Neither will I condemn thee (says he) Go, and now
sin no more. Observe, and admire the Riches of our Lords Goodness, Patience,
and Longanimity, in bringing you and others to Penance. O how often has he
said unto you, Now sin no more, and yet you have still gone on: A man that
fasteth in his sins, and doing the same again, what does he profit in humbling
himself?

Of the Cananean Woman. Mat. 15. Mar. 7.

COnsider 1. How a Woman of Canaan, a Gentile, came to our Lord, to obtain the
cure of her Daughter; and see how well she prays. 1. With a great Faith,
confessing him to be the Son of David. 2. With profound Reverence; for she fell
down at his feet. 3. With tender Charity, Mar. 7.25.
not begging for her self, but for her Daughter. 4. With great affection and
instance; for, she cried out after our Lord. 5. With admirable Constancy, for
she was often put off, yet she still persisted in her Petition: Such likewise
ought to be your prayer.

Mat. 15.26
Consider 2. How Christ at first answered harshly unto her, and seemingly cast
her off like a dog, saying, It is not good to take the bread of the children,
and to cast it to the dogs; so to exercise her virtue, and crown her
perseverance: God does often do the like with us, because (as S. Gregory says)
He loves to be entreated, he is willing to be forced, Greg. in Ps. 6. Paenit
and even desires to be overcome by importunity. Observe moreover the Woman's
Humility, in not denying her self a Dog, but requesting that which was proper
to dogs, to wit, to eat of the crumbs of their Masters Table. Let your prayer
also be humble; for the prayer of him that humbles himself, Eccli. 35.19.
shall penetrate the Clouds (says Ecclesiasticus) and he will not depart till
the Highest behold.

Mat. 15.28
Consider 3. Christ yielding at length to the Woman's pious importunity, first
commends her Faith; O Woman, great is thy Faith; then grants what she
asked; Let it be done to thee, as thou will. Perhaps your Soul also, like to
the Woman's Daughter, is sore vexed with an evil Spirit. He is sorely vexed, who
yields to his troubles and temptations; but he that overcomes them, is vexed
to his great benefit, and Crown. Beg therefore of our Lord strength, and
courage to resist; and pray, that as it was to this Woman, so it may also be
done to thee as thou will.

Of Holy Communion. Love the Lord thy God, and obey his voice, and cleave to
him, for he is thy life, and the length of thy days. Deuteronomy. 30.20. Aug. tr. 47.
in Joan.

Consider Christ as the Life of your Soul.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel, how Christ raised a young man
from death to life; and that he is the true Life of your Soul, according to
that, Jo. 11.25. I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me,
although he be dead, shall live: And as the body dies (says S. Augustine)
when the soul is departed, which is its life; so the soul dies when it loses
God (by sin) who is its life. Ponder the benefit of Spiritual Life, by
comparing it with that of the body; for what a dead carcass is in the eyes of
men, deformed, loathsome, and useless in all respects, the same is a soul, that
is without grace, in the sight of God.

Ps. 35.10.
Consider 2. Christ, with whom is the Fountain of Life, gives life to dead
Souls, by the Sacrament of Penance; and conserveth the same, and increases it
by the Holy Eucharist: He that eats me (says Christ) the same also shall
live by me. Jo. 6.57.
And again, He that eats this bread shall live for ever. You ought therefore
with a longing desire to expect that hour, wherein this Fountain of Life is to
come to you; and say with the Psalmist, Ps. 41.2.
Even as the Heart destreth after the Fountains of Waters, so does my Soul
desire after thee, O God: My Soul has thirsted after God the living Fountain.

Ps. 20.5.
Consider 3. This Spiritual Life is not bestowed but upon them that ask it, and
that with great devotion: He asked life of thee, and thou gave him length of
days for ever, and for ever, and ever. Moreover, being that the life of the
body is known by its motion and operation, in the same manner the life of your
Soul, which is Christ, 2 Cor. 4.10. 1 Jo. 2.6.
ought to be manifested in you by your works, and chiefly by the imitation of
his life; for he that says he abides in him (says S. John) ought even as he
walked, himself also to walk.

Of the Conversion of Zacheus the Publican. Luc. 19.2. etc.
Part 1.
Sap. 6.13. and 18.
COnsider 1. Behold a man named Zacheus, and this was a Prince of the Publicans,
and he rich, and he sought to see Jesus. The desire of finding Jesus is a rare
thing in rich men; but this was the beginning of Zacheus his Salvation; for
Wisdom is easily found of them that seek her: and the beginning of her, is the
most true desire of discipline. See whether you feel the like desires of
Perfection, and procure to have them.

Consider 3. And he could not for the multitude see Jesus; therefore he went up
into a Sycamore Tree, that is, according to the Greek word, a silly Fig Tree. A
man of that Authority that he was, did nothing regard the Scoffs and Flouts of
the rude people. And you perhaps are not able to see Christ, nor understand his
Divine Mysteries, for the crowd of worldly thoughts: Wherefore retire your self
from them by prayer, and by mortification get up into the silly Fig Tree, that
is, the Cross, which to the Gentiles is foolishness: 1 Cor. 1.23 Greg. l. 27.
Moral. c. 27
For (as S. Gregory says) they who through humility choose that which is folly
to the world, come to contemplate with great subtilty the Wisdom of God himself.

Consider 3. The Charity and Mercy of Christ, in granting Zacheus even more
then he wished, not only permitting himself to be seen by him, but also
inviting him to his conversation and familiarity: Come down in have, because
this day I must abide in thy house: He says, In have; for that the grace of
the Holy Ghost knows not slow delays; and This day, while time is, for perhaps
to morrow you may not have me: And you in like manner, if perchance to day you
shall hear his voice, exciting you to greater perfection, and imitation of
himself, harden not your heart. Ps. 94.8.


Of the Conversion of Zacheus the Publican. Luc. 19.6.
Part 2.
Apoc. 3.20
COnsider 1. Zacheus his Obedience to Christ's Call: And he in have came down,
and received him rejoicing. So ought you to do when our Lord calls, speedily
and with joy to receive him, and to open the door of your heart, as soon as you
hear him knock, lest, if you make delay, he turn aside from you, as he did to
the Spouse in the Canticles, and passed away from her. Cant. 5.6.
Observe how when all saw it, they murmured, saying, that he turned in to a man
that was a sinner. Whence you may see, that even the holiest actions are carped
at by the malicious; for they understood not the zeal of our Lord, who came to
seek, and to save that which was lost.

Luc. 18.27
Consider 2. How Zacheus being at length converted by our Lords speeches, said,
Behold, the half of my goods, Lord, I give to the poor, etc. Here the rich man
despoileth himself of his wealth, and imployeth it partly for the benefit of
the poor, partly in satisfaction for what he had unlawfully got: He overcomes
himself in a thing the hardest of all, the abandoning of riches; but the things
that are impossible with men (says Christ) are possible with God, by his
grace. See whether you have as yet overcome your self, at least in putting off
all affection to riches, and chiefly in denying your own will.

Consider 3. Christ approves of Zacheus his Piety; This day Salvation is made
to this house; that is, to the whole Family, whereof he was Head; so greatly
avails good example in Rulers. Beseech our Lord mercifully to work the like
Salvation in the house of your Soul, especially when he comes to visit you in
time of Mass, either by Sacramental, or Spiritual Communion; whereunto you may
most fitly apply this whole passage.

Of curing the Centurions Servant. Mat. 8. Luc. 7.
Part 1.
Mat. 8.6.
COnsider 1. The Centurions Servant was fallen sick, and his Master being
sollicitous for him, sent Intercessors to Christ, saying, Lord, my Boy lies at
home sick of the Palsy, and is sore tormented. Observe the Masters goodness,
and care for his Servant; as also his Faith, wherewith he believed, that
Christ, though absent, could work the cure. Learn to be ready in works of
Charity, even to your inferiors: If thou have a faithful servant (says the
wise man) let him be unto thee as thy Soul, Eccli. 33.31.
and as a Brother so entreat him.

Consider 2. Christ's Charity and Goodness; I will come and cure him: He
offers more then the other asked, to wit, to come in Person; whereas the
Centurion wished only a single word from him, for working the cure. S. Aug.
Let men be ashamed at their backwardness (says S. Augustine) for that God is
ready to give more, then we to take. Observe moreover, how Christ being an
other time invited to cure a Princes Son, would not go, and now freely offers
himself, without any entreaty, S. Greg. Hom. 28. in Evang.
to go to the Centurions Servant: To beat down our pride (says S. Gregory) who
do regard in men not so much their nature (which is equal and the same in all)
etc. as honors, and riches.

Luc. 7.6.
Consider 3. The Centurion hearing that Christ was coming, sent others to meet
him, saying, Lord, trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy that thou
should eater under my roof; for the which cause neither did I think my self
worthy to come to thee; but say the word, and my servant shall be made whole.
Ponder these words, and admire his admirable Humility, by means whereof, while
he deemed himself unworthy to receive Christ under his Roof, he had now lodged
him in his Heart; that you may also imitate him, especially when you
communicate.

Of curing the Centurions Servant. Mat. 8. Luc. 7.
Part 2.
Luc. 7.8.
COnsider 1. The rest of the Centurions discourse; For I also am a man subject
to Authority, having under me Soldiers; and I say to this go, and he goes;
and to an other come, and be comes; and to my servant, do this, and he does
it: As if he should say, if I who am but an Under-Officer, and under the
command of my Captains, yet can say to my servant, do this, and he does it; how
much more will all creatures obey your Word? An honorable confession of
Christ's Power. Rejoice that he is truly such, and withal be confounded that
servants perform stricter obedience to their Masters in things of this world,
then you perhaps do to God, or your Superiors that are in his place.

Mat. 8.10.
Consider 2. Christ having heard these words, extolled the Faith of the
Centurion, being but a Gentile, above the Israelites: Amen I say to you; I have
not found so great Faith in Israel. Whereupon he adjoyneth; And I say to you,
that many shall come from the East, and the West, etc. but the children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out, etc. The children of the Kingdom of Heaven formerly
were the Jews, but now they are become Outcasts, because they obeyed not Gods
call, and we are made the children of that Kingdom, and after a special manner,
an Elect Generation, and a Kingly Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2.9.
Let us therefore behave our selves worthy of such an honor: Hold that which
thou have (says our Lord) that no man take thy Crown. Apoc. 3.11


Consider 3. How his Request was granted; Go, and as thou have believed, be it
done to thee; Mat. sup. 13
for our Lord will do the will of them that fear him, and will hear their
prayer. Ps. 144.20
Perhaps you entertain in your Soul a Will, or Affection, that lies sick of
the Palsy, that is, seized upon with the Spirit of Sloth, and Sluggishness.
Imitate therefore the fervor and humility of this Centurion, and by means of
your good Friends, that is, the Saints your holy Patrons, beg remedy of our
Lord, but especially when you go to Communion, use those words of the
Centurion, and with like Faith, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter
under my roof. Luc. 7.6.


Of the curing of S. Peter's Mother-in-Law. Mat. 9. Luc. 4. Mar. 1.

Luc. 4.38.
COnsider 1. Our Lord being entered into Peter's house, sound his Mother-in-Law
lying sick of a strong Fever; but the Disciples besought him for her. Observe
the Apostles readiness to intercede for others, and the efficacy of their
Intercession; for she was immediately cured. We all of us have some Spiritual
Fever, or other, being set on fire by the allurements of diverse unlawful
desires. Our Fever (says S. Ambrose) is Covetousness; Ambr. l. 4. in Luc. c.
4.
our Fever is Lust, our Fever is Ambition, etc. See what you are most sick
of, and take the Apostles for your Intercessors, that you may be cured.

Ps. 148.5.
Consider 2. The manner wherewith Christ delivered the sick person; Standing
over her, he commanded the Fever, and it left her. He did not drive it away
with Medicines; as the Physicians do, but by Command alone, to show his Power,
and Divinity. So at other times he commanded the Winds, and Sea, and the
Devils, and they obeyed him; for as the members of our Body obey the Soul, and
move only at her will; so all creatures obey God. Rejoice that you have so
powerful a Lord; He said, and they were made; he commanded, and they were
created: Do you likewi^e procure to obey him in all things.

Pro. 31.17
Consider 3. S. Peter's Mother-in-Law being cured, Incontinent rising, she
ministered to them. She pretended not weakness after her sickness, nor desired
to give her self any more to rest, but presently betook her self to labor and
pains, like that valiant Woman in the Proverbs; She has girded her loins with
strength, and has strengthened her arm. Wherefore it will prove an effect of
your spiritual health, to work fervently, and to be ready for all charitable
offices.

Of a Princes Son restored to health. Jo. 4. etc.

Jo. 4.46, 47.
COnsider 1. There came unto Christ a certain Lord, whose Son was sick at
Capharnaum, etc. and desired him that he would come down, and beal his Son, for
he began to die. Observe how profitable corporal infirmities and afflictions
are, which force us to have recourse to God; for unless the Son had fallen
sick, perhaps the Father had never been brought to the Faith of Christ: So it
is written of King Manasses, while he was Captive, that after he was in
distress, he prayed our Lord his God, 2 Paral. 33.12.
etc. and Manasses knew that our Lord he was God. Therefore take the like
infirmities and afflictions, as so many benefits, and incitements to Virtue:
Their infirmities were multiplied (says David) afterward they made have. Ps.
15.4.


Ps. 43.5.
Consider 2. Christ's answer. 1. He reprehendeth them that seek Miracles out of
incredulity. 2. He refuses to go to the house, where he was desired, for that
it is not sitting we should prescribe God the way and manner of succouring us.
3. Yet he mercifully gives recovery, and health, though absent, the more to
manifest his Power, and to strengthen our Faith; for he it is which commands
the Salvations of Jacob. Learn hence not to seek Miracles, Visions, or
extraordinary favors, but to commit your self wholly to God, as to the way and
manner of helping you: Beseech him, that if you be not worthy that he come to
your house in the Eucharist, at least that he would send aid to thee from the
holy place, Ps. 19.3.
and from Sion defend thee.

Consider 3. The man believed the word that Jesus said to him, and thereby
received health both of body for his Son, and of Soul for himself, and his
whole Family; for himself believed, and his whole Family; so God heapeth
favors upon favors. Beseech him humbly to work also in you perfect health,
both of body, and soul.

Of Holy Communion. Let the King come to the banquet, etc. and to morrow I will
open my will to the King. Esth. 5.8.

Consider Christ as your Souls Guest.
Apoc. 3.20
COnsider 1. What is read this day in the Gospel, how Christ entered into the
house of a certain Pharisee upon the Sabbath to eat bread, Luc. 14.1. He is
also the Guest of our Souls, and he will enter, this day, into the house of
your soul, in the Holy Eucharist, to feast with you, according to that, If any
man open to me the gate, I will enter in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me. Consider therefore attentively the Greatness and Majesty of this
Guest, and take that of the Evangelist as spoken unto you by him, Luc. 17.8.
Make ready supper, and gird thy self.

Consider 2. This Divine Guest feeds (as the H. Fathers teach) upon our
Virtues; Ambr. de bon. Mor. c. 5. Bern. sup. Cant. Sermon 71. Cant. 1.12 Bern.
Ser. 4. de Assump. Genesis 27.9.
but above all, he is delighted with humility; and therefore while he was at
Table to day with the Pharisee, he taught us to choose the lowest place in
Banquets: And the Spouse in the Canticles says, While the King was at his
repose, my Spikenard gave the odor thereof. The Spikenard is a low plant
(says S. Bernard) and Emblem of Humility: Therefore be careful to prepare
such meat for your Guest, as you know he gladly eats; and humble your self
what you can in all things.

Consider 3. The Liberality of this your Guest, who wheresoever he comes,
brings with him gifts, and pledges of his bounty: So this day, in the house
of the Pharisee, he cured one sick of the Dropsy: And if you look well into
your self, perchance you will find that you are taken with the same Disease,
that is, full of waterish humors of worldly affections; whereof an evident
sign is the burning thirst you have after things that are delightful to sense.
Beseech therefore your Divine Guest to rid you of this Dropsy, and say with
the Psalmist, Save me, O God, Ps. 68.2.
because waters are entered into my Soul.

Of the Man sick of the Palsy, Jo. 5.2. etc.
cured at the Pond of Probatica. Part 1.
Ps. 50.21.
COnsider 1. What a benefit God bestowed on the Jews in the Pond of Probatica,
near the Temple, wherein the sheep were washed for Sacrifice. For 1. The Water
was stirred by an Angel. 2. It received thereby virtue to cure all manner of
diseases, in them that entered first after the motion. This was a Type of the
Sacraments of Baptism, and Penarce, wherein Christ's Sheep are washed for the
Sacrifice of Justice; and the which 1. Have a heavenly virtue infused into them
by the Angel of the Testament, Christ our Lord. 2. They cleanse us from all
manner of sin. 3. Not only the first comers, but all, and every one, without
any exception, or cessation. Ponder the greatness of this benefit, and
endeavor to make due use of these Divine Ponds.

Ps. 39.2.
Consider 2. At this Pond lay a great multitude of sick persons, of blind, lame,
withered, expecting the stirring of the Water: So God will have us to expect
with patience his gifts; whence David said, Expecting, I expected our Lord, and
he has attended to me. Among other infirm persons, there was a certain man
there, that had been eight and thirty years in his infirmity, of the Palsy.
The Spiritual Palsy is a dissolution of the Nerves, and Faculties of the Soul,
a defect of spiritual vigor and life, and as it were a deading of the Spirit.
See how many years you may reckon in this infirmity, and seek remedy by the
Baths of the Holy Sacraments.

Consider 3. The goodness of Christ, freely inviting the sick man to his own
cure: Will thou be made whole? God can justify us by himself alone, but will
not do it without our consent: He made you (says S. Augustine) without your
knowledge, but he justifies you with your consent. August. Ser. 15. de Verb.
Apost.
See whether you will, that is, efficaciously, be made whole, for God is ever
ready on his part.

Of the man sick of the Palsy, Jo. 5.7. etc.
cured at the Pond. Part 2.
COnsider 1. Lord, I have no man, etc. He confessed his impotency, for that he
could neither move of himself, to get down time enough into the Pond, nor had
any man to help him; whence he presently received health of Christ; for the
humble confession of our own weakness, is the best disposition to obtain Gods
assistance. Perhaps you have cause to say of your self, I have no man, that is,
I have not the heart nor courage of a man, to overcome my self; though truly,
you have one of Christ our Lord, who is ready to raise you up with his Grace:
You have also. Preachers, Superiors, and Directors, to admonish you, and if
you will your self, also to help you.

Ps. 34.3.
Consider 2. The efficacy of Christ's words, wherewith, without more ado, he
cured the sick man: Arise, take up thy bed, and walk, etc. O Lord, speak so
likewise to me, Say to my Soul, I am thy Salvation. Ponder the man's obedience,
who presently arose up, and though it were the Sabbath day, took his bed upon
his shoulders, and so walked; giving us a perfect example of blind obedience:
Do you therefore, if you be sound, carry your bed, take up the light Yoke of
our Lord, and walk, not in high and strange things, Genesis 17.1.
above your self; but with Abraham, before, or in the sight of God, and be
perfect.

2 Pet. 2.22
Consider 3. Christ after he had wrought the Miracle, shrunk aside from the
multitude; to give us example of shunning the applause of men: Afterward Jesus
finds him in the Temple, and said to him, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no
more, lest some worse thing chance to thee. Imagine the same to be spoken to
you, as often as you go to the Sacrament of Penance: Return not back, like the
dog to the vomit, or the sow washed, into her wallowing in the mire.

Of the Bedridden let down from the Roof. Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luc. 5.
Part 1.
Mar. 2.2.
COnsider 1. There were gathered together a great multitude, to hear Christ in
the house where he was, so that there was no place, no not at the door, and he
spoke to them the Word. Observe our Lords indefatigable Zeal of gaining Souls,
not sparing himself at any time, or place, but freely admitting and instructing
all, even with open doors, that you might learn to bestow your self, 2 Cor.
12.15.
and to be bestowed again, with the Apostle, for the souls of your Brethren.

Luc. 5.18.
Consider 2. And behold, men carrying in a bed a man that had the Palsy, etc.
and not finding on which side they might bring him in, for the multitude, they
went up upon the Roof, and through the Tiles let him down, with the bed, in the
midst before Jesus. Admire their Faith, whereby they undoubtedly believed that
Christ would cure him; so that they refused no pains to bring him to him.
Observe moreover their courage and resolution, in not yielding to the
difficulties that hindered their free access, but breaking their way through
all, so that they accomplished their desire. Bonav. in Luc. 5.
A true firm belief (says S. Bonaventure) is not brought back, or cooled by
impediments, but inflamed. See how you are in like occasions, and how easily
you leave off, for fear.

Consider 3. The Mercy of Christ, saying; Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. Mat.
9.3. Hieron. in c. 9. Mat.
O wonderful Humility (says S. Hierom) a decrepid, and despicable poor man be
calls Son, whom the Priests vouchsafed not to touch. Observe how he remitteth
his sins, which were cause of his infirmity, to teach you, that diseases are
inflicted also for hidden sins, and that when you are sick, you must first seek
your Souls cure, then that of your body.

Of the Bedridden let down from the Roof. Mat. 9. Mar. 2. Luc. 5.
Part 2.
Luc. 5.21.
COnsider 1. The Pharisees murmuring: Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who
can forgive sins, but only God? Condole with Christ for being held a
Blasphemer, and be not troubled if at any time you be treated below your
deserts. Observe Christ's mildness; he is not moved to indignation, he seeks
not to revenge himself, as he could most easily have done, but sweetly
endeavors to bring them out of their erreur: Wherefore think you evil in
your hearts? Mat. 9.4.


Consider 2. Christ in proof of his Divinity, and power of forgiving sins,
presently cured the man, and sent him away free of his Palsy, saying, Arise,
take up thy bed, Ibid. and Luc. 5.24.
and go into thy house. Your house and home is Heaven, here you are but a
Stranger, and Passenger; therefore hasten home, and settle your thoughts,
cares, and desires there, where you are to dwell for ever: Eccles. 12.5.
August. in Ps. 85.
Man shall go (says the wise man) into the house of his Eternity; and S.
Augustine, A House is taken as it were for ever, a Nest is made up but for a
time. Do not therefore make more of your dirty brittle Nest, then of your
stable Mansion House.

Consider 3. The man being cured, Luc. sup.
went into his house magnifying God. It is the proper effect of spiritual
health, to magnify God, and to give him thanks for benefits received: Do you
also magnify God as often as you are dismissed in the Sacrament of Penance,
free from the dead Palsy of Sin; say with David, I will bless our Lord at all
time, Ps. 33.2.
his praise always in my mouth.

Of the Withered Hand cured. Mat. 12. Mar. 3. Luc. 6. Luc. 6.6.

Ps. 143.8.
COnsider 1. It came to pass on another Sabbath, that be entered into the
Synagogue, and taught: And there was a man, and his right hand was withered,
etc. Our most merciful Lord takes hold of all occasions of converting Souls;
wherefore on the Sabbath days he frequented the Synagogues, that being then
gathered together, he might the better reach them heavenly things. In the
Synagogue he found a man, whose right hand was withered; for many there are,
even in Gods Church, that have their left hands ready for mischief, but their
right hands withered, and unable to do any good; And their right hand, is the
right hand of Iniquity. See whether your hand be not thus withered.

Mat. 12.13
Consider 2. Then he says to the man, stretch forth thy hand, and he stretched
it forth, and it was restored to health. Our Lord could as easily have done the
Cure without stretching forth; but he will have us also to cooperate in our
own behalf, according to that of the Prophet, Zachar. 1.3
Convert to me, etc. and I will convert to you. Stretch forth therefore your
hand to good works, to help your Brother, and in frequent prayer to God, and
you will undoubtedly obtain perfect health: Eccles. 9.10
Whatsoever thy hand is able to do, work it instantly, says the wise man.

Ps. 2.4.
Consider 3. The Scribes and Pharisees having seen the Miracle, whereas by
benefit thereof they might have wrought their own salvation, they took occasion
thereby, out of envy, to contrive Christ's death: But he that dwells in the
Heavens shall laugh at them. And Christ, although he could have destroyed them
in a moment, yet he chose rather to bear with them, and withdraw himself for
the time to another place, to teach you meekness.

Of the crooked Woman cured. Luc. 13.11 etc.

Dan. 13.9.
COnsider 1. Christ being again in the Synagogue, according to his custom,
Behold a Woman that had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and she was
crooked, neither could she look upward at all. This infirmity was caused by the
Devil, as Christ himself witnesses; and this either in punishment of sin, as
it was in Giezi's Lepre, or by Gods permission, for exercise of her virtue, as
it happened to Blessed Job. Mystically, the Devil causes the like crookedness
in all those souls which he makes to stoop down to worldly things, and keeps
them so fixedly bent upon them, that they cannot look up, nor raise their
thoughts to Heaven. Of such it is said, They declined their eyes, that they
would not see Heaven, nor remember just judgments. See whether you be not
likewise crookedly bent, in your works and intentions.

Consider 2. The Mercy of Christ, of his own accord calling the Woman to him,
and curing her: Woman, thou art delivered from thy infirmity: And the effect
presently seconded his Omnipotent word; for having imposed his hands upon her,
she was forthwith made straight, and glorified God. Observe and imitate this
Woman's gratitude, who as soon as she saw her self cured, glorified God. See how
much more reason you have to be ever grateful, and to glorify God, who heals
all thine infirmities; Ps. 102.3.
say with David, My strength, and my praise, is our Lord, and he is made unto
me a Salvation: This is my God, Exodus 15.2
and I will glorify him.

Is. 51.7, 8.
Consider 3. The perverse Zeal of the Arch-Synagogue, who had indignation that
Jesus had cured on the Sabbath; as if it were not lawful to do a good work,
although not servile, on the Sabbath day; Thus many pretend Zeal for their
passions: Procure to do all your actions with a sincere and upright intention,
as in the sight of God, and you will not fear what judgments men pass upon
them: Fear ye not the reproach of men, and be not afraid of their blasph^mies,
for as a garment, so shall the worm eat them; and as wool, so shall the Moth
devour them.

Of Holy Communion. Behold my Beloved speaks to me; Arise, make have my Love,
etc. and come. Cant. 2.10

Consider Christ as your Souls Love.
Cant. 5.2.
COnsider 1. What is commanded in this days Gospel; Thou shall love the Lord
thy God from thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind,
etc. Mat. 22.37. God would be our Souls Love; therefore he often calls them
his Beloved, his Spouses, his Sisters: Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove,
etc. And because love is gained by love, Let us therefore love God, 1 Jo. 4.19.
because God first has loved us: Who has loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his blood. Apoc. 1.5.
Never any Mother loved her Child so tenderly, nor Spouse his Beloved, as God
does Man, making himself 1. His Companion. 2. His Food. 3. His Ransom: And
lastly, his Everlasting Reward: so that he most justly deserves to be loved by
you, from your whole heart, with your whole soul, and with your whole mind.

Jo. 14.23.
Consider 2. This your Beloved will enter to day, in the H. Eucharist, the
lodging of your heart, that you may at leisure enjoy his most sweet
Conversation, his chaste Embraces, and affectuous entertainments of Love: If any
one love me, etc. my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and will
make abode with him. Think what a torrent of Heavenly Graces will flow into
your soul, by the benefit of this abode, if you be rightly disposed; for he
says of himself, With me are riches and glory, Prove. 8.18 and 21.
glorious riches, and justice, etc. That I may enrich them that love me, and
may replenish their treasures.

Consider 3. The disposition on your side must be love for love, and that the
greatest you can stretch unto; which consists more in deeds, and actions,
then in words, and affections: whence he says, Jo. sup.
If any love me, he will keep my word; that is, my Commandments, my Counsels,
my Admonition: See therefore how little observant you have hitherto been of
them, and procure that hereafter you may be able to say with the Spouse, My
Beloved to me, and I to him, in willing, and not willing, the same in all
things with him, Cant. 2.16
by a perfect Union of Wills.

Of the Lepre. Mat. 8. Mar. 1. Luc. 5.
Part 1.
Mar. 1.40.
COnsider 1. There came unto Christ a Lepre to be healed. 1. He besought our
Lord with profound Reverence, kneeling down, and falling on his face. 2. With
great Faith, confessing our Lords Power; Lord, if thou will, Luc. 5.12.
thou can make me clean. 3. With Resignation, not asking any thing
absolutely, but conditionally only, If thou will; if it be so pleasing to thy
will: Such ought also to be your Petitions, Humble, full of Faith, and resigned
to the Divine Will: Is. 66.2.
To whom shall I have respect, but to the poor little one, and the contrite of
spirit, and him that trembles at my words?

Mat. 8.3.
Consider 2. Our Lords Clemency: He disdained not the presence and sight of that
loathsome Spectacle, nor did he put off the cure till an other day; and
although he could have healed him with one single word, yet to correct our
niceness in like occasions, he would also touch him; wherefore stretching forth
his hand he touched him, saying, I will, be thou made clean. Observe the word,
I will, as if he should say, I both will, and desire, for my part, for God will
have all men to be saved. 1 Timothy 2.4
See therefore it be not lack of your self, that you are not cleansed from your
spiritual Leprosy.

Consider 3. The spiritual Leprosy of the Soul, which is sin, is like to that
of the body; for both defile the Subject wherein it is, and render it a most
loathsome Spectacle; that in the sight of God, this to the eyes of men: But
that of the Soul is so much the more detestable, by how much the more dangerous
consequence it is of, as disposing to death, not Temporal, but Eternal: Wence
S. Lewis the King with good reason said, as it is related of him, Jon. in Vita
S. Lud. c. 94.
that he had rather incur the Leper of his body, then sin; and that he sharply
reprehended one of his Nobles for making the contrary choice.

Of the Lepre. Mat. 8.4. etc.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. Our Lord having by his Divine Power cured the Lepre, Says to him,
See thou tell no body. Christ knew that he would publish the Miracle to all, as
afterward he did, out of gratitude; neither was there any danger of vain glory
in Christ; yet he did so, for our instruction, teaching us to shun the like
danger, with all our endeavor: For vain glory, as S. Basil says, is a robber
of our spiritual riches, Basil. Constable. Monast. c. 11.
a flattering Enemy of our Souls, the Moth of Virtues, etc. Think with your
self how much you are subject to this Vice in your actions, and take heed it
may not also be said to you, You have received your reward. Mat. 6.5. and 16.


Consider 2. Go show thy self to the Priest, and offer the gift which Moses
commanded for a testimony to them. The Law of Moses reserved to the Priests
the judgment both of the Leprosy its self in case of doubt, and of its cure.
See therefore 1. How observant Christ was of the Law. 2. How he honored those
Priests, although ever most spiteful to him. 3. How much greater Prerogative
did he confer upon the Priests of the New Law, to whom he gave power to cleanse
and take away all manner of spiritual Leprosy: Therefore, do you also, as
often as you find your self infected with the like Leprosy, go, and show your
self to the Priest.

Levit. 14.
Consider 3. The Lepre was also to make an Offering: For in the Ancient Law,
after the shaving of his hair, he was commanded to wash his clothes; and his
body, and to offer a Lamb without spot in Sacrifice. Let your Offering, as
often as you return from the Sacrament of Confession, be a Sacrifice of Praise,
according to that, Immolate to God the Sacrifice of Praise; and withal, Ps.
49.14.
the Immaculate Lamb of God in the Sacrifice of Mass.

Of the ten Lepres. Luc. 17.
Part 1.
Luc. 17.12
COnsider 1. Our Lord passing through the midst of Samaria, and entering a Town,
There met him ten men that were Lepers, who stood afar off, and they lifted up
their voice, saying, Jesus Master have mercy on us. Observe also in these the
manner of praying well. 1. With Humility and Reverence, they stood a far off.
2. Unanimously, and with fervor, they lifted up. their voice; for earnest and
fervent prayer is pleasing to God: wherefore David said, When I cried to him,
he heard me. Ps. 21.25.
3. They say not, heal us, but have mercy on us; only begging mercy of him, and
leaving the whole matter, and manner to God: Do you the like in your occasions.

Consider 2. Whom as he saw, he said, Go, show your selves to the Priests. He
could have healed them at that instant; but he would make trial of their
Obedience, sending them to the Priests, for the greater respect also, and
observance of the Law: Moreover, to teach us, that we ought to repair unto the
Priests, and to disclose our selves to them, as often as we are stricken with
the Leprosy of Sin; and for your part, sleep not so much as one night in this
Leprosy; for what if in that very night God should take your Soul from you?
your Leprosy would stick to you for all Eternity.

Ps. 31.5.
Consider 3. And it came to pass, as they went, they were made clean. Ponder
their prompt Obedience, and the fruit thereof: So it often happens to them
that are tempted, that even while they are but going to manifest themselves to
their Ghostly Father, they find themselves free, and the Enemy gone. So
likewise, those that dispose themselves to Confession, God does often justify
before hand, by Contrition: I said (says the Prophet) I will confess against
me my injustice to our Lord, and thou have forgiven the impiety of my sin: Go
therefore always speedily, that you may speedily be cleansed.

Of the ten Lepers. Luc. 17.
Part 2.
Luc. 17.15
COnsider 1. And one of them, as he saw that he was made clean, went back, with
a loud voice magnifying God. So ought we to be thankful to God, for the
benefits we receive from him, according to that of the Apostle; 1 These. 5.18.
In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God. This is to be
performed. 1. With a loud voice, that is, with a great and hearty affection.
Ps. 33.4.
2. With magnifying God; and with David, exalting his Name for ever. 3. With
due Humility, falling prostrate at our Lords feet, acknowledging our selves
unworthy of his so great mercies and benefits. Aug. in Ps. 49.13.
There can be no Offering made more grateful to God (says S. Augustine) then
that of Thanksgiving.

Consider 2. Of ten that were cleansed, only one returned back: There was not
found that returned, and gave glory to God, but this stranger. Think how few
there are among so many thousands, whom God does daily preserve, and feed, that
acknowledge the Benefit; They take their Meat, which is sent them from Heaven,
even like bruit Beasts, without once lifting up their head or thoughts thither:
I have brought up children, and exalted them, Is. 1.2.
but they have despised me, says our Lord: These carry themselves as
Inhabitants and Sons of the Earth, and as if they had here a settled habitation;
but do you account your self as an Alien, a Stranger, and Pilgrim in this
world, and then you will come to acknowledge Gods gifts, and favors unto you
in all things.

Consider 3. This Stranger, by being grateful for the recovery of his corporal
health, received yet a far greater benefit, the Cure of his Soul, in his
Conversion to the Faith; therefore our Lord said unto him, Arise, go thy ways,
August. l. 2. c. 4. Sap. 16.29
because thy Faith has made thee safe: The other nine probably were Rebrobate;
For the faith of the ungratful shall melt as winter Ye, and shall perish as
unprofitable water: Be not therefore ungrateful to God.

Of the Deaf and Dumb Man. Mar. 7.
Part 1.
Marc. 7.32
COnsider 1. While Christ was passing through Galilee, they bring to him one
Deaf and Dumb, and they besought him, that he would impose his hand upon him.
Ponder how meritorious a thing it is to bring others to Jesus; and excite your
self thereunto, endeavoring, by such means as your Calling does afford, to
bring to Christ those that you shall find spiritually deaf and dumb. Consider
what it is to be spiritually deaf: He is deaf, that gives not ear to the
Verities of Faith, and that hears not the Voice of God, calling and exciting
him to Perfection. See whether you be any thing given to this deafness, and do
not stop your ears to God, lest he do the same to you, according to that, Prove.
1.28
Then shall they invocate me, and I will not hear.

Is. 56.10.
Consider 2. What it is to be spiritually dumb: He is dumb that corrects not his
Brother when he sins, nor hinders his sin when he may; whence such are
called by the Prophet, Dumb dogs, not able to bark: He is dumb that does not
preach Christ to others, when his Calling is such; not openly profess his
Faith, when he ought. Lastly; he that makes not due use of his tongue to the
praise and honor of God, in Divine Exercises of Devotion, in Pious Discourses,
and the like: Woe is me (says Isaie) because I have held my peace: Is. 6.5.
Is. 62.6.
And you that remember our Lord, hold not your peace.

Consider 3. Christ rejected not the distressed man, but took him aside, from
the multitude, and cured him. Do you also retire your self from noise, and
company, to Prayer, and spiritual Exercises, if you desire to be cured by
Christ. Observe how he cured this man, not by his Word only, or Command, as he
did others; but he put his fingers into his ears, and spitting touched his
tongue, etc. Because our Lord does diversely cure, and exercise those that are
his, some more, some less: Submit your self in all things to his Divine
Pleasure, that you may be cured of all your infirmities.

Of the Deaf and Dumb Man. Mar. 7.
Part 2.
Mar. 7.34, 35.
COnsider 1. After our Lord had spoken the word, Be thou opened, immediately his
ears were opened, and the string of his tongue wa^ loose, and he spoke right.
Consider, how that the sign of our ears being opened, is not to contradict, or
resist the Divine Inspirations, but humbly to obey them; according to that, The
Lord has opened mine ear, Is. 50.5.
and I do not gainsay, etc. See therefore, whether the ears of your heart be
open, or whether you be not rather one of those that stop their ears, and will
not hear the voice of the Inchanters, Ps. 57.5, 6.
and of the Sorcerer enchanting wisely.

Jac. 3.6.
Consider 2. How it is said of the cured person, not that he spoke much, but
that he spoke right; that we might learn to have a care of our tongue, which is
(as S. James says) a whole world of Iniquity: He speaks right, that speaks
nothing but the praises of God, or what appertains to Salvation; who speaks
not of Vain, or idle matters, nor utters detraction, nor murmurings. Examine
your self by this, how right you are wont to speak, and remember that as David
says, A man fall of tongue, shall not be directed in the earth. Ps. 139.12


2 Cor. 6.4
Consider 3. Christ likewise here commanded them not to tell any body; to teach
us to shun, what lies in us, the applause of men: But so much the more, a
great deal, did they publish it, and so much the more did they wonder. Neither
were they disobedient in this; because Christ did not Command, with intention
of obliging them, but did therein what on his part was Humility, and they
returned Honor, and Glory, which was but the duty of gratitude, on their part.
Lastly, it is said here of Christ, He has done all things well; that you might
learn not to be content with doing only some things well, neglecting others,
but to do all well: whence the Apostle says, Let us in all things exhibit our
selves as the Ministers of God.

Of Holy Communion. I will love thee, O Lord, my strength: Our Lord is my
Firmament, and my Refuge, and my Deliverer. Ps. 17.2.

Consider Christ as the Strength of your Soul.
Ps. 21.16.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel, Mat. 9.1. etc. Of Christ's curing
the Man sick of the Palsy, etc. The Souls Palsy is an Enervation of Spirit,
and utter decay of its strength, by sluggishness, sloth, and pusillanimity.
Think how far you are gone in this Disease; how weak you are in bearing
Adversity; how faint-hearted in undertaking any thing of difficulty for God;
how inconstant in keeping your good Purposes: Lastly, how slack and remiss, and
even languishing you are, in all matters of Devotion: You may with truth say
with the Prophet, My strength is withered as a potsheard, and my tongue cleaved
to my jaws.

Jer. 16.19. Is. 12.2.
Consider 2. God is properly the fortitude and strength of our Soul; according
to that, O Lord, my force, and my strength: And, Our Lord is my strength, and
my praise. But he does work this effect chiefly in the Eucharist, affording to
the Soul abundant forces to get out of this dead Palsy, to overcome all fears
and difficulties, and to undertake, and go through, with what Enterprise
soever, for Gods sake: Hence it is called, The Bread of the Strong Ones, the
Meat of Great Ones, the Bread that confirms, or strengthens the Heart of
Man; a Type or Figure whereof, was that Loaf of Bread that was brought to
Elias, 3 Reg. 19.8.
in whose strength he walked 40 days, and 40 nights, unto the Mount of God:
Wish therefore with a longing desire for that happy hour, wherein you are to
receive this Divine Food.

Consider 3. That you may be rightly disposed to obtain the Cure of your
Palsy, you must imitate the Faith of this sick man: Go therefore with great
confidence, and put your self into the Arms of the Holy Saints, your Patrons,
but especially of the B. Virgin, that they may conduct and present you to our
Lord: Say with the Psalmist; In thee, O Lord, Ps. 30.2. Ps. 17.35. Ibid. v. 30.
Ps. 30.4.
have I hoped, etc. Thou have put mine arms as a Bow of Brass. And in my God I
shall go over the wall, etc. Because thou art my strength, and my refuge.

Of him that was born Blind. Jo. 9.1. etc.
Part 1.
Ps. 24.18.
COnsider 1. Jesus passing by, saw a blind man from his Nativity: He beheld him
with the Eyes of Mercy, and presently thought of remedy: Beseech him to look
also upon you with the like affection; See my humiliation, and my labor, and
forgive all my sins. We are all blind from our Mothers Womb, born in sin, and
involved in the darkness of Ignorance, through the fault of our first Parent;
but they are blind, after a special manner, from their Nativity, who vainly
boast of their Noble Birth and Parentage, not seeing that Virtue alone (as one
says) is the only true Nobility. Juven. Sat.
Think whether these things have place in you.

Consider 2. The Di^ciples having asked, Who has sinned, this Man, or his
Parents, that he should be born blind? Christ answered, Neither this Man has
sinned, nor his Parents; but that the Works of God may be manifested in him.
Whence you may understand, that Sicknesses and Calamities; are not always
caused by Sin, but are often sent us by God, for his greater Glory, and
exercise of our Virtue; as it proved in Holy Job, Toby, and others: I must work
the works of him that sent me (Christ says) while it is day; that is, while
the day of this mortal life lasts. Much more it behooves you to do the like
works, while your day is, before you go unto the dark Land, Job 10.21
that is covered with the Mist of Death.

Genesis 3.19.
Consider 3. Christ spit on the ground, and made Clay of the Spittle, and spread
the Clay upon his Eyes. He applied a contrary Remedy, to show his Power. If you
desire to be delivered from the Spiritual Blindness of your Soul, lay the Clay,
or Dirt, of your first Creation, upon the Eyes of your Heart: Remember Man,
that dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return.

Of him that was born Blind. Jo. 9.11. etc.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. The Gratitude of this man, in publishing to all the benefit which
he received: That Man, which is called Jesus, made clay, etc. 2. His Constancy
in professing Christ as a Prophet, even before the Pharisees, with danger of
Life, and Fortunes. 3. His Patience in bearing Contumelies, as that of the
Pharisees; Thou wast wholly born in sins, Ibid. v. 34.
and do thou teach us? Such are the affections of a Soul illuminated by God:
Think how you may imitate.

2 Timothy 3.12.
Consider 2. He was presently cast forth of the Synagogue, by the Pharisees, for
speaking so well of Christ; that you might learn to suffer willingly for a good
cause: For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus (says the Apostle) shall
suffer Persecution. Christ neglected not him that was made an Outcast for his
sake, but rewarded him with the gift of perfect faith, seeking after him, and
freely manifesting his Divinity unto him, which he presently falling down, Jo.
sup. v. 38.
adored. Often stir up in your self the like Acts of Faith, and falling
prostrate, adore your Lord.

Prove. 3.7.
Consider 3. The words of Christ reproving the Pharisees pride, who
notwithstanding were wise and quick-sighted in their own opinion: For judgment
came I into this world, that they that see not, may see, and they that see, may
become blind; that is, that Idiots, and simple people, may come to know the
truth; but the wise, and proud men of the world, be stricken blind at the
greatness of his Splendor: Therefore be not wise in thine own conceit, least
thou become blind, and like a blind man run headlong into perdition.

Of the Blind Man of Hiericho. Luc. 18.35 etc.

Ps. 1 18.32
COnsider 1. It came to pass when he drew nigh to Hiericho, a certain blind man
sat by the way, begging. This is a lively figure of a sinner, blind of both
eyes, to wit, of Knowledge, and Love. For 1. He sits in darkness, and takes
rest, and satisfaction in his sordid condition, being habituated in sin. 2. By,
and not in the way, wherein the Virtuous do cheerfully run, according to that,
I ran the way of thy Commandments. 3. He sits begging some petty comfort,
and content from creatures: Think what an unhappy state this is of these blind
men, who see not, though you set before their eyes, the Joys of Heaven, or
Torments of Hell; but, as S. Augustine says, August. Soliloq. c. 35.
they walk through darkcess, into darkness.

Consider 2. The fervor of this blind man, when he heard that it was Christ
that passed by: 1. He cries out, with a strong Faith, professing his Power,
and imploring his Mercy; Jesus, Son of David, have mercy upon me. 2. He
persisteth constant, though others endeavor to hinder him. 3. He increases
his fervor, by their opposition: But he cried much more, etc. Learn Constancy
in the service of God, and mind not them that would draw you off: Learn to
persever in prayer with fervor, and if idle and wandering thoughts of your
Studies, or employments, or of corporal necessities, and conveniences, or the
like, buz in your mind, persist still with so much the greater fervor.

Ps. 12.4. Ps. 17.29.
Consider 3. Christ stood, and asked the blind man, What will thou that I do to
thee? for he gives not his Grace to us, unless we will our selves, and
cooperate with it: The blind man answers; Lord, that I may see. Let the same
be likewise your Petition, Lord, that I may see: See you, and see my self:
Illuminate mine eyes, that I sleep not in death, at any time: My God illuminate
my darkness.

Of the Blind Man of Bethsaida. Mar. 8.22. etc.

COnsider 1. Christ being come to Bethsaida, the Disciples bring to him one
blind, and desired him that he would touch him: And taking the hand of the
blind, he led him forth out of the Town: He is blind (says Glossa) who sees
not what he was, what he is, and what he is to be. Think whether or no you be
taken with this blindness, and withal, take notice, that whosoever desires to
see aright, must permit himself to be led by our Lord, out of Town, that is,
out of the noise of worldly cares, and then he will be enlightened.

Consider 2. Christ did not presently, and by word of mouth only, give sight to
this man, as he did to the former; but spitting into his eyes, imposi^^ his
hands, he asked him if he saw any thing. Thus God does differently illuminate
Souls, some all in a moment, others by degrees: The blind man recovering sight
in this manner, saw men, as it were Trees walking: For to men that are not
thoroughly enlightened by Divine Grace, all worldly things appear greates, and
in a more flourishing condition, then truly they are: And men may be said to be
Trees, for that unless they bear fruit, they will only serve to make fuel for
the fire.

Consider 3. The blind man at last was restored to his perfect sight, so that
he saw all things clearly. Beseech our Lord so to open your eyes, that you may
also see things clearly, and distinguish between true and false, solid and
counterfeited good: Him. fer. 5. ad Lauds.
Many things are set out in false colors, which need to be cleared (Lord) by
your Divine Light. Lastly, it was said to him, Go into thy house: Our house and
home is Heaven; for as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.19.
We are Citizens of the Saints, and the Domesticals of God: Walk therefore as a
Domestic of God, and Son of Light, lest perhaps our Lord strike thee in his
wrath, Deuteronomy. 28.28, 29.
and make thee grope at midday, as the blind is wont to grope in the dark; and
direct not thy ways.

Of the Lunatic Devil. Mat. 17. Mar. 9.
Part 1.
Mar. 9.18.
COnsider 1. The great Tyranny which the Devil exercises upon the bodies of
those, whom God permits them to possess; wheresoever he seized upon this
Lunatic, he dashed him against the ground, made him to foam, to gnash the
teeth, Mat. 17.15.
and to wither; and cast him often into the fire, and as often into the water.
Think if he be so outrageous in this life, where his hands are tied, how much
more will he be so in Hell? where, as the Prophet faith, Is. 34.9.
The torrents thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the gro^nd thereof into
brimstone, and the land thereof shall be into burning pitch.

2 Timothy 2.26.
Consider 2. How the Devil exercises the like Tyranny upon a Soul that is
subject to him: For 1. He makes her Lunatic by Inconstancy. 2. Deaf to the
Inspirations of God, and dumb in his praises. 3. He casts her to the ground
by affection to earthly things. 4. He makes her to foam, and gnash the teeth,
with foul and unruly language. 5. He makes her wither away, by an insensibility
in spiritual things. 6. He often throws her into the Fire of Concupiscence, and
often plungeth her into the waters of fleeting pleasures; that you may learn to
take heed of the Devils Snares, of whom sinners are held Captives (as the
Apostle says) at his will.

Ps. 118.71
Consider 3. This Lunatic was first presented to the Disciples, who
notwithstanding could not cure him: So we must first try humane means, before
we recur to God for a Miracle. The Disciples were not permitted to cure this
man, perhaps, to keep them in Humility: It is good for me that thou have
humbled me (says David) that I may learn thy Justifications.

Of the Lunatic Devil. Mat. 17. Mar. 9.
Part 2.
Mar. 9.19. etc.
COnsider 1. Christ being desired to cure this man, whom the Disciples could
not, he first reprehended their incredulity: O incredulous Generation, how long
shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? Whence you may see how
hateful to God is hardness of belief: And when the possessed man was brought
before him, immediately the Spirit troubled him, and being thrown upon the
ground, he tumbled foaming. How bold is the wicked Spirit, even in the presence
of Christ? that you may not wonder, if perchance he tempt you in time of Mass,
or Communion.

Consider 2. The Power of Christ, casting the Devil out by Command, who
notwithstanding had possessed this young man from his Infancy: Deaf and dumb
Spirit, I command thee, go out of him, and enter not any more into him: Lord,
speak with the same efficacy to my Soul. Observe withal, how the Devil crying
out, and greatly tearing him, went out of him. While he had him, he tore him
not, but when he was forced out; for he is ever most spiteful to us then, when
we leave him.

Eccli. 10.11.
Consider 3. This Disease was hard to be remedied, because inveterate, and grown
up with him from his Infancy: So it is hard to rid your self of Vices, that you
have been long accustomed unto, according to that, Long sickness grieveth the
Physician. Besides, This kind can go out by nothing but by prayer, and fasting;
that you might learn with what weapons you are to fight against the Devils.

Of Holy Communion. Eat, O friends, and drink, and be inebriated my dearest.
Cant. 5.1.

Consider Christ as your Souls Friend.
Mat. 26.50
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel: Friend, how came thou in
hither, not having a wedding Garment? Christ most mercifully inviteth all to
his friendship; and desires, as much as lies in him, to have it with all men;
and endeavored to bring Judas back into his favor, even while he was
practicing Treason against him, saying; Friend, whereto art thou come? Ponder
the greatness of this honor he does us. S. Greg.
We are not fit servants (says S. Gregory) and we are styled friends. What an
honor is this for miserable wretches, made of clay and dirt, to become friends
of the Almighty God?

1 Reg. 18.1.
Consider 2. This Friend of yours will come to day in the Eucharist, to instruct
you with his Divine Wisdom, to enrich you with his Treasures, to defend you
with his Power, and to inflame you with his Love; for among friends all things
are in common: O what a happy hour is this? It is said of the friendship
between David, and Jonathas, that the Soul of Jonathas was joined fast to the
Soul of David. But Christ proceeded much farther, who that he might have the
straighter Union with you, would make himself your meat and drink; that
entering, in this manner, into your very bowels, Cyril Cat. 4.
he might be joined in flesh and blood with you.

Jo. 15.14.
Consider 3. Your preparation for his coming must be a return of love: This it
is, that this loving Friend requires of every one; whence he ordained this
Heavenly Banquet for only such as would return love for love: Eat O (my)
friends, and drink, and be inebriated, my dearest. And to day, in the Gospel,
he condemned to perpetual darkness, the man that came without the Nuptial
Garment of Charity. Love therefore, and do whatsoever ^he shall inspire you;
for you are my friends (says he himself) if you do the things that I command
you.

Of the Woman cured of the Bloody Flux. Mat. 9. Marc. 5. Luc. 8.

Mat. 9.20. Luc. 8.43.
COnsider 1. While Christ was going to raise one from death, Behold, a woman
which was troubled with an issue of blood twelve years, and had bestowed all
her substance upon Physicians, neither could she be cured of any, she came
behind him, and touched the hem of his garment, etc. Observe 1. The admirable
Humility and Reverence of this woman, not presuming to come, but behind him. 2.
Her Confidence, saying within her self, Mat. s^p^
if I shall touch only his garment, I shall be safe. They truly suffer a
spiritual issue of blood, that employ their labors and actions in vain and
perishable things; they spend their substance in vain upon Physicians, that is,
the deceitful allurements of this life, from which they will never receive any
solid profit, or comfort.

Jer. 32.19.
Consider 2. The Woman touching Christ, received perfect health, in reward of
her Faith: How much more might they justly hope for, who do not only touch the
Hem of his Garment, but receive within themselves, in the Eucharist, his whole
Sacred, and All-healing Body, if they would but come worthily to it, and like
to this woman? Observe moreover, how this touch, though most secret, and
insensible, did not escape Christ's knowledge; that you might learn, that no
action of yours, though never so secret, can be kept hidden from God, whose
eyes are open upon all the ways of the children of Adam.

Consider 3. The multitudes did throng, and press upon Christ, and yet he
asks, Luc. s^^^
Who is it that touched me? for the others touched him only Corporally, but
this woman also Spiritually; and therefore received cure: So, many there are
that touch Christ in their actions, especially in the Eucharist, but they do it
without Spirit; Of such the Prophet says, This people approaches with their
mouth, and with their lips glorifieth me, Is. 29.^3^
but their heart is far from me. See whether you be not one of them.

Of raising the Arch-Synagogues Daughter. Mat. 9. Mar. 5. Luc. 8.

Luc. 8.41.
COnsider 1. Behold there came a man, etc. and he was Prince of the Synagogue,
and he fell at the feet of Jesus, etc. Observe how calamities do humble even
Princes, and force them to have recourse to God: Therefore David said, It is
good for me that thou have humbled me: Ps. 118.71 Ps. 31.4.
And, I am turned in my anguish, whiles the thorn is fastened. He beggeth for
his only Daughter, that lay a dying: Your only Daughter is your Soul; see
whether, perhaps, it be not at the last gasp, and upon the very point of deadly
sin, by her overgreat carelessness in venial sins, and beseech our Lord to lay
his hand upon her, and cure her.

Consider 2. Christ's goodness, in going presently with the Prince to his house,
though he could have cured her at distance. Besides, he endeavors, what he
can conveniently, to conceal so singular a Miracle, to give us example of
Humility; and therefore he took with him in company only three Disciples, and
withal, put the Minstrels and multitude out of doors. Learn to sequester your
self from the rabble and noise of worldly thoughts, if you desire to live to
Christ: Wherefore it is said in Job, Job 28.14 S. Greg. ibid.
The Sea speaks, Wisdom is not in me: And by the Sea (as S. Gregory says) is
understood the life of worldlings.

Luc. 8.54.
Consider 3. Christ holding the Maids hand, raised her, saying, Maid, arise.
Thus he raises up the sinner from sin, holding his hand, and directing him to
good works: Then he presently bad, that something should be given her to eat:
Ibid. v. 55.
Whence you may learn, that those who rise out of sin, must have the Spiritual
Food of the Sacraments given them, that they may not fall again. See therefore
that you take this Food often, and in due manner, that you may live for ever.

Of raising the Widows Son in Naim. Luc. 7.11. etc.
Part 1.
Eccli. 38.23.
COnsider 1. Jesus went into a City that is called Naim, etc. And behold a man
dead was carried forth, the only Son of his Mother, etc. Observe how this was a
young man, in the flower of his youth; whence you may learn, that no Age is
secure from death: Imagine him to say unto you, Be mindful of my judgment, for
thine also must be so; to me yesterday, and to thee to day: And think what
would become of you, if you should die this very day: Reflect also, that young
men come sooner to die spiritually to God, then others more ancient; for that,
as S. Hierom says, Hieron. Ep ad Nepot.
Youth undergoeth many conflicts of the body.

Deuteronomy. 32.11.
Consider 2. Our Lord met the Corse, not by chance, but of set purpose, and
offered, of his own accord, without any entreaty, to raise the dead man; As the
Eagle provoking her young ones to fly. O how often has he freely offered you
his assistance, toward all manner of perfection, suitable to your state of
life, and you would it not? Take heed, lest wilfully resisting, and contemning
the mercy he offers you, it be said to you, Prove. 1.
I also will laugh in your destruction.

Consider 3. Christ moved with commiseration toward the Widow, said to her,
Weep not, for that you shall soon be comforted. In the same manner, see you
weep not, or be over-concerned, or grieved for temporal losses, which will soon
have an end; but reserve your tears rather for the Everlasting Damages, that
proceed from your own, and others sins; for of such it is said, Blessed are
they that mourn, Mar. 5.5.
for they shall be comforted.

Of raising the Widows Son in Naim. (...). 7.14.
Part 2.
(...). 16.13
COnsider 1. How Christ came near, and touched the Coffia; and they that carried
it, stood still, and he said, Young man, I say to thee, Arise. He speaks
imperiously, to show that he is Lord of all, That has power of Life, and
brings down to the Gates of Death, and fetches again. The death of the Soul
is sin, and Hell its grave; for the rich man died, (...). 16.22
and was buried in Hell. The Bier, whereon the sinner is carried to Hell, is
his Body; the Bearers, are Vicious Habits: And as the Bier is often set out
with Silk, and Cloth of Gold, though the Corpse within is full of ordure; so the
body of a sinner glistering in Golden Array, covers a Soul abominable to God.
But Christ comes, and touches the Coffin, that is, strikes the body with
some grievous sickness, and by that means brings the sinner to life again.

Consider 2. And he that was dead, sat up, and began to speak, and he gave him
to his Mother. What joy was this to his Widow-Mother? What an astonishment to
the rest of the company? So a sinner reviving in Spirit to God, begins to
speak of such things as appertain to God, confessing his sins, asking pardon,
and extolling so merciful a Lord.

^eg. 1.6.
Consider 3. And fear took them all, and they magnified God: From so great a
Miracle, there arose in the standers by, a fear of offending a Lord of such
power, to wit, a Lord that mortifieth, and quickneth, brings down to hell,
and fetches back again. Think how necessary it is for you to have this holy
fear; for the fear of our Lord hates evil: Prove. ^.13. Eccli. 2.1^.
And, They that fear our Lord, will s^^k after the things that are well
pleasing to him.

Of raising Lazarus. Jo. 11.1. etc.
Part 1.
Jac. 1.15.
COnsider 1. There was a certain sick man, Lazarus of Bethania, etc. Lazarus his
death proceeded from a languishing disease; So likewise from faintness, and
decay in Spirit, if it be not cured in time, follows the death of the Soul:
Concupiscence brings forth sin, sin ingendreth death: The infirmity of our
Nature is the Incentive of Sin, but this hurts none, but those that yield of
themselves; for to them that resist, and sight manfully, This infirmity, or
sickness is not to death, 2 Cor. 12.9.
but for the glory of God; for Power (or Virtue) is perfected in infirmity.

Consider 2. Lazarus being sick, His Sisters sent to Christ, saying, Lord,
behold whom thou love, is sick. They do not prescribe what he is to do; to a
loving friend it is enough to intimate ones necessity: Such ought to be our
prayers, especially in matter of health, or other temporal blessings; for we
know no: whether or no what we ask be expedient for our Souls Salvation.
Besides, Christ went not presently, but deferred going for two whole days,
both to exercise their Faith, and Patience, and to render the Miracle more
Illustrious. So he often deals with you: Greg. 26. Moral. c. 15
The labor of the Combat (says S. Gregory) is prolonged, that the Crown of
Victory may be the greater.

Consider 3. Some dissuaded Christ from returning into Jewry, to cure Lazarus,
for that the Jews had sought for him, to stone him: S. Thomas answered, Let us
also go, to die with him. Such ought to be the courage of an Apostolical man,
Jo. sup. v. 16.
contemning what dangers soever, even death it self, for the good of Souls, and
glory of God: And such fervent acts ought you often to make, that when
Persecution shall arise against you, you may be able to stand in the day of
battle, and not make your life more precious then your self. Ps. 139.8. Act.
20.24


Of raising Lazarus. Jo. 11.33. etc.
Part 2.
Romans 12.15. Heb. 4.15.
COnsider 1. Christ when he was come to Lazarus his Grave, seeing others
weeping, he groaned in spirit, and troubled himself, etc. and wept: Which he
did, both out of Charity, to weep with them that weep; and withal to show,
that we have a High Priest that can have compassion on our infirmities: Then he
bad them take away the stone; and lifting his eyes upward, he prayed to his
Father; to teach us, that we are to take away all impediments of our Salvation,
and to implore the Divine Assistance in all occasions, but chiefly in the
conversion of a sinner.

Consider 2. The stone being taken away, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus,
come forth. Ponder the power and efficacy of his word, which even the dead
obey: For forthwith he came forth that had been dead, bound feet and bands with
winding bands, and his face was tied with a Napkin. This man that lay four
days dead in his Grave, is a perfect Figure of an inveterate sinner, bound and
fettered with ill habits as so many winding bands, muffled with the Napkin of
Blindness, pressed and ^ept down by Custom, as under a ponderous Grave; and
finally, fast shut up, and enclosed, through hardness of heart, as with a
Gravestone; such are almost incorrigible: Therefore Christ cried here with a
loud voice, and does daily call to such, and yet is not heard. Take heed of
such habits, and customs of sin; for (as S. Augustine says) He hardly rises,
that is borne down by evil custom. Aug. c. 49. in Joan.


Consider 3. The Pharisees having heard of this Miracle, Gathered a Council,
and devised to kill Jesus: Whence you may learn, that there is nothing so holy,
no action so good, that is not subject to envy, and harsh censures of
disaffected persons.

Of Holy Communion. Stand and consider the marvels of God. Job 37.14

Consider Christ as the Worker of Miracles.
Jo. 4.48.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel: Unless you see signs, and
wonders, you believe not: Christ did many signs, and wonders, to confirm our
Faith; so that by the Prophet he is called by the Name of Mavelous: Is. 9.6.
Yet he never appeared more wonderful, then in the Eucharist; the which that he
might the more commend unto us, he would make it an abridgment of all his
Miracles, according to that, Ps. 110.4, 5.
He has made a memory of his mavelous works, a merciful, and pitiful Lord;
he has given meat to them that fear him.

Consider 2. In particular, some of the Miracles contained in this Mystery. 1.
As to the substance of bread, which is wholly destroyed at the Priests words,
even the materia prima also, and in place thereof succeeds the glorious Body
of Christ, the very same that is adored in Heaven by the Angels; so that there
never was any so miraculous a Transmutation. 2. As to the Accidents, which
being separated from their Substances, are conserved without any Subject of
Inhesion, as the Rays of the Sun severed from it; and yet they are never the
less active, and do nourish, no otherwise, then if they were Inherent to their
own Substances; and transcending all the power of Nature, they truly produce
Sanctifying Grace in the Soul. 3. As to the Body of Christ, which is here in
manner of a Spirit, whole in the whole Host, and whole in every part thereof;
it is the self-same in several places together, Indivisible, Impassible,
Indeficient, and equally sufficient to one, 3 Reg. 10.20.
and to many: Truly there was not such a work made in all Kingdoms.

Eccles. 7.19.
Consider 3. The necessary preparation for receiving this Miraculous Food, is
the fear of our Lord; for he has given meat to them that fear him: And he that
fears God, neglects nothing that is pleasing to him: Do you therefore do
the like.

Of some Historical Narrations, and Parables of Christ.
Of the Rich Glutton, Luc. 16.19 etc.
and of Lazarus. Part 1.
2 Timothy 6.9
COnsider 1. There was a certain rich man, and and he was clothed with Purple,
and Silk, and he fared every day magnifically. Observe the Vices which commonly
follow Riches, Pride in Apparel, Riot in Feasting, Contempt of the Poor, and
the like, that you may keep your self from the desire of them: For they that
will be made rich, fall into tentation, and the snare of the Devil.

Job 21.13
Consider 2. The rich man died, and was buried in Hell: How sad an Obit to so
pleasant a life? but such, for the most part, is the end of riches, and
pleasures: They lead their lives in wealth, and in a moment they go down to
Hell. Ponder here his torments; for Purple, and Silk, he is invested with
Flames; for Delicious Fare, he is tormented with Intolerable Thirst; for his
Contempt of the Poor, he is now contemned by him; and he that denied the Crumbs
of his Table, cannot obtain one drop of water. Thus the punishments are
proportioned to the offenses: Sap. 6.7.
The Mighty (says the wise man) shall mightily suffer torments.

2 Timothy 3.12.
Consider 3. The just Judgment of God: The rich man is not heard in his
Torments, who neglected to do Mercy in his Jollities: Therefore when he begged,
it was answered him, Remember that thou did receive good things in thy life
time: As if it were not lawful to receive good things here, and there too; and
so it is; For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. Seek not therefore to enjoy prosperity in this life, least you
come to miss of it in the next: Act. 14.21
For by many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

Of the Rich Glutton, and of Lazarus. Luc. 16.20 etc.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. There was a certain Beggar, called Lazarus: Christ vouchsafed to
call the Beggar by his Name, and make him known to Posterity, but not the rich
man; Greg. Hom 40.
for (as S. Gregory says) Our Lord acknowledges and approves the humble, but
the proud he knows not; that you may learn to esteem Virtue, more then
worldly riches, and splendor: The memory of the Just (says the wise man)
Prove. 10.7
is with praises, and the name of the Impious shall rot.

Consider 2. This Saints Patience, whereby he arrived to such a degree of
Sanctity. He was 1. Full of sores, patiently enduring the pain proceeding from
them. 2. Extreme poor, desiring to be filled of the crumbs that fell from the
rich man's table. 3. Contemned by all, And no man did give him. 4. So miserable,
that he was fain to permit the dogs to lick his Sores; and perhaps, by reason
of his weakness, he was not able to keep them off: Who is there now adays that
would prefer such an one before a rich man? and yet this did Christ our Lord.

Number. 23.10.
Consider 3. The happy death of Lazarus, who was immediately carried of the
Angels into Abraham's Bosom. Thus, short are the tribulations of the Just, but
their glory is everlasting: What joys, riches, and honors, did sores, poverty,
and contempt, bring to this Beggar? O let my Soul die the death of the Just,
and my last ends be made like to them. Ponder how unequal were the lots of the
rich man, and of holy Lazarus, after their death; much more, certainly, then
they were in their life time: He was happy for a moment, but everlastingly
miserable; this miserable indeed for a while, but afterward most happy, for
all Eternity.

Of the Prodigal Son. Luc. 15.11 etc.
Part 1.
Eccles. 7.30.
COnsider 1. A certain man had two Sons, and the younger said to his Father;
Father, give me the Portion of Substance that belongs to me: God has two
Sons, the Just, and the Sinner; the Just is Elder, because God made man right
in the beginning, and he always abides in Gods House; the Sinner estrangeth
himself from him, and abuses the gifts which he affords him, both of Nature,
and Grace, living riotously, that is, perversely; they go into a Foreign
Country, whosoever leave God, who is the way: Therefore David, Ps. 118.155.
Salvation is far from sinners.

Consider 2. The Miseries this young man fell into, when he was from his
Father. 1. He began to be in need: So a sinner that estrangeth himself from the
Sacraments, from Exhortations, and from the company and example of the good,
begins to be in want of spiritual sustenance. 2. He cleaved to one of the
Citizens, as a servant; for, whosoever do sin, give themselves over as Slaves
to the Devil; and he imployeth them in feeding Swine, while he makes them, like
to that sort of Beasts, swill themselves with sensual pleasures. 3. Neither
could he so fill his belly, because even all worldly delights cannot satiate
the Souls Appetite.

Js. 28.19.
Consider 3. Returning to himself, he said, etc. Being pressed with Famine, he
comes to himself; because vexation alone shall give understanding to the
sinner, and makes him think how foolishly he has left eternal things, for such
as quickly pass away: How many of my Fathers hirelings have abundance of bread,
and I here perish for famine? Hence he is moved to repentance; I will arise,
and go to my Father. O how often have you followed this Prodigal Child, in
going astray? follow him therefore also in returning, by Repentance.

Of the Prodigal Son. Luc. 15.20 etc.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. The Fathers Bowels of Mercy, who when his Son was yet far off, he
saw him, and was moved with mercy: So Almighty God, with the Eyes of his Mercy,
does look upon a sinner, being yet a far off from him by sin: He invites him to
him by his Exciting Grace; saying, Return, etc. and I will take you. Jer. 3.14.
And as soon as he returns, he meets him, he falls about his neck, he
embraces him, he adorns him with the first Stole of Justice, he puts on a ring
upon his hand, for the exercise of good works, and shoes upon his feet, to keep
him from the dirt of worldly pleasures. O God! is it possible you should bear
such love to a man made of Clay, and that has deserved a thousand times the
torments of Hell?

Number. 11.^9.
Consider 2. The Elder Brother hearing of his Fathers Joy, and Feasting,
murmured for envy. Ponder how easy it is, even among virtuous persons, to be
touched with some litt e envy, or grudge, at another commendation, or
preferment; that you may so much the more carefully keep your self from the
like Infection: You ought rather to wish, with Moses, that all might praise,
and honor God. O that all the people might Prophecy, and that our Lord would
give them his Spirit!

Consider 3. The Fathers mild answer, endeavoring to bring him from his
error; Son, thou art always with me, and all my things are thine: O what a
happiness it is to the Just, to have God always with them? How rich must they
be, that have all things common with God? Learn to rejoice when your Brother is
brought back again to Christ, and endeavor, what you can, to bring very many
to him.

Of him that was wounded by the Thieves. Luc. 10.30 etc.
Part 1.
A Certain man went down from Jerusalem into Jericho, and fell among Thieves,
etc. Consider 1. In this Parable the Fall of Mankind in Adam: Man, in his first
Creation, was ordained to take the course of his life from Jericho, that is,
from this Sublunary World (for Jericho signifies the Moon) to the Heavenly
Jerusalem; but he turning his affections (which are the feet of the Soul) from
Jerusalem to Jericho, fell among Thieves, to wit, the Devils, who robbed him
of Original Justice, and giving him wounds, left him half dead.

Consider 2. The many wounds which our Nature received by that first sin; they
are commonly by Divines accounted to be four in number: S. Tho. 1.2 q. 85. a. 3.
The first is Ignorance, whereby the Understanding is made destitute of that
order which it has to Truth. The second is Malice, whereby the Will is
disordered in the pursuance of good. The third is Infirmity, whereby the
Irascible Power is weakened, in order to what is difficult. The fourth is
Concupiscence, whereby the Concupiscible Power is left in disorder, as to
moderate delight: See how you are maimed in all these, and have recourse to the
Pious Samaritan for remedy; saying with the Prophet, Heal me, O Lord, and I
shall be healed; Jer. 17.14.
save we, and I shall be saved.

Consider 3. Neither the Priests, nor Levites of the Ancient Law, could afford
any remedy to man thus wounded. The Samaritan alone, Christ our Lord, in form
of a Sinner, coming near him by his Incarnation, bound his wounds; and out of
the precious Vessels of the Sacraments, powered in Oil, and Wine: And when he
went for Heaven, he recommended him to the care of Prelates, promising them
reward for the care and diligence they should use toward him. What, will you
return to this Samaritan, for this so great love and mercy toward you?

Of him that was wounded by the Thieves. Luc. 10.
Part 2.
COnsider 1. In this Parable your own, and every sinners fall: They who go down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and turn their affections from heavenly things, to
those of this world, do certainly fall into the hands of Thieves, but not on
the contrary. Ponder how this world is like to Jericho, that is, the Moon, for
its Inconstancy; and think how dangerous it is to travel in a way that is beset
with Thieves: Such is your journey in this life; Because your Adversary, 1 Pet.
5.8. Ps. 9. apud Heb. 10.9.
the Devil, as a roaring Lion, goes about, seeking whom he may devour: He
lies in wait, in secret, as a Lion in his Den.

Consider 2. How the Devil treats such Passengers as deliver themselves up to
him; for he can hurt none, but such as will themselves; he robs them of all
the Ornaments of Grace; he strikes them with desperate wounds of Vicious
Habits, and so leaves them half dead; he is truly half dead, that has but one
half of himself alive, who though he be well in body, yet is dead in spirit,
and to God: See whether you be such; be sorry for having been so at any time,
and have a care you do not any more put your self into the hands of so cruel a
Tyrant.

Consider 3. The great Mercy of our Savior, who approaches near the sinner,
by his holy Inspirations, and chiefly by the Eucharist, to bind up bis wounds,
and cure the infirmities of his Soul: Our Lord shall bind up the wound of his
people, Is. 30.26.
and shall heal the stroke of their wound, says the Prophet. Who would not
confide in such a Physician? he powers Wine, and Oil into the wounds, to teach
us how to cure our Neighbor when he sins; to wit, by tempering Severity
with Mildness: So that in our Correction there be both love, Greg. in Past. p.
2. c. 6.
without remissuess, and vigor, without sharpness.

Of Holy Communion. Forgive us our Debts, as we also forgive our Debtors. Mat.
6.12. Mat. 18.24 etc.

Consider Christ as a Patient Creditor.
COnsider 1. And imagine your self to be that Servant of whom is mention in
this days Gospel, that owed his Lord ten thousand Talents: For the debt of
punishment which the Sinner owes to God for every Mortal sin, is in a manner
infinite; neither is he able to make any satisfaction, although he were to be
sold, and with all that he has, condemned to perpetual Slavery: What then
would become of you, if our Lord should call you to account, this very day? You
are charged with a great Debt, and you are not able to pay.

Ephesians. 2.4. Eccli. 5.4. Ps. 144.8. Joel 2.13. Is. 1.18.
Consider 2. The Depth of Gods Goodness, who is ready to forgive more then man
can possibly owe: whence he is called, Rich in Mercy; A patient Rewarder;
Pitiful, and Merciful; And ready to be gracious upon the malice: And by the
Prophet he even provokes us, Come, and accuse me, says our Lord; if your sins
shall be as Scarlet, they shall be made white as Snow, etc. He will come
therefore unto you, this day, in the Eucharist, which he would have to be as a
Sanctuary, or Refuge, to all his Debtors that are not able to pay: Therefore
David, Our Lord is made a Refuge for the Poor. O how are you to wish for the
coming of so good: Ps. 9.10.
Creditor?

Luc. 6.37.
Consider 3. Out of this Parable, what preparation is required. 1. He is to be
entreated by frequent and earnest prayer: I forgave thee all the debt, because
thou besoughtest me. 2. With profound Humility; for the servant falling down,
b^sought him. 3. You are firmly to purpose amendment in life and manners: Have
patience toward me, and I will repay thee all. 4. You must forgive your
Brother, if you have any thing against him: Ought not thou also to have
mercy upon thy fellow servants, even as I had mercy upon thee? Forgive, and you
shall be forgiven.

Of the Workmen in the Vineyard. Mat. 20.1. etc.
Part 1.
COnsider 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a man, that is an householder,
etc. This Householder is God himself, who although he is Lord of a most ample
Kingdom in Heaven, and in Earth, yet he does so provide for each one in every
particular, and minute thing, as if he were Master only of some little Family:
His Vineyard is the Church, the Vines are all the Faithful, the Workmen are the
Prelates, and others that dress, pruen, and spread the Vines; and even the
Faithful themselves, who are bound to cultivate their own Souls by good works:
What a blessed thing it is to labor in such a Vineyard, under such a Master,
and about such precious Vines?

Consider 2. The solicitude of this Householder, which went out early in the
morning to hire workmen, etc. From the very beginning of the World, from Age to
Age, God never left to call workmen: He calls every man betimes, even from
the very first use of Reason; and although most refuse to come, yet he omits
not afterward to call again, and again, not giving them over to their last
gasp; some he allureth with hopes of reward; That which shall be just, I will
give you: Others he rebukes for their sloth; What stand you here all the day
idle? See whether you have not hitherto been idle.

Pro. 24.31
Consider 3. Part of this great Vineyard are all such as God has placed under
your charge, according to the state and calling you are in; but chiefly your
own Soul. See in what state and condition it is; examine whether it be not like
to that, whereof the wise man speaks in th^se words, Nettles had filled it
wholly, and Thorns had covered the face thereof, and the wall of stones was
destroyed. Think therefore that you are sent into a Vineyard, not into a Garden
of Pleasure; to labor, not to sport, or live at ease; and encourage your self
to undergo great pains and labors, knowing that the reward will be answerable,
Pro. 13.4.
and that the Soul of them that work, shall be made fat.

Of the Workmen in the Vineyard. Mat. 20.8. etc.
Part 2.
Jo. 5.27.
COnsider 1. When Evening was come, the Lord of the Vineyard says to his
Bailiff, Call the workmen, and pay them their hire, beginning from the last,
etc. This Bailiff, is Christ our Lord, whom the Father has given power to do
Judgment, etc. The Evening of our Life, is Death; for all our whole life time
is but as one day, and even a thousand years before Gods eyes, are as yesterday
that is past: Ps. 89.4.
After death, every man receives his hire, or reward; wherein there is not so
much regard had to the time, as to the fervor of working: Whence they that
come in last in their Conversion, shall receive as much as the first, because
they are wont, for the most part, to labor with greater fervor, and humility,
deeming themselves unworthy of any reward; whereas, on the contrary, others are
used to presume of themselves. See whether or no you do not the same.

1 Cor. 13.4. 1 Cor. 12.30.
Consider 2. How the former murmured, saying, These last have continued one
hour, and thou have made them equal to us that have born the burden of the day,
and the heats: Not that there will be any murmuring in Heaven, but for that the
reward of the last comers, that work fervently, will be so great, that if the
state could permit, it would breed envy in the first: It is easy to fall into
the like emulation and grudge, in this life. See whether your eye be not
sometime naught, or malicious, because God, or your Superior, is good to your
Brother: Rather joy in his Preferment; for Charity envieth not, unless it be
virtues, and the better gifts.

Sap. 4.13.
Consider 3. The Parables final clause: So shall the last be first, and the
first last; for many be called, but few elect. They that came last to work,
come first to be rewarded, for their fervor in working: Because God regards
not how much is done (as S. Gregory says) but out of what affection. Perhaps
you may reckon many years of your life time in Gods service, but few of
fervor; rather procure that it may be said of you, In short space he fulfilled
much time.

Of the Invitement to the Wedding, Mat. 22. Luc. 14.
and Supper. Part 1.
Mat. 22.2.
COnsider 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is likened to a man, being a King, which made
a Marriage to his Son. This King is the Heavenly Father, who made a Marriage
between his only begotten Son, and Humane Nature, in the Bedchamber of the
Virgins Womb: The Son espoused to himself the Church, in Faith, and Charity,
according to that, I will espouse thee to me in Faith, Osee 2.20
and thou shall know that I am the Lord; who also espouseth unto himself the
souls of the faithful, and that not of a few only, or of such as are Noble, but
generally of all, that refuse not his Espousa^s: Acknowledge therefore, my
Soul, your Dignity, and behave your self worthy of such a Spouse.

Luc. 14.18 etc.
Consider 2. The King made a Solemn Wedding Feast for his Church; which he set
forth with the Sacraments, as so many Royal Courses, and inviteth all to it;
but most men excuse themselves; some out of an ambitious desire of Rule and
Command; I have bought a Farm, and I must needs go forth, and see it: Others
for their Employment in worldly affairs; I have bought five yoke of Oxen, and I
go to prove them: Some again for carnal pleasures; I have married a Wife, and
therefore I cannot come: Others finally laid hands upon his servants, Mat. 22.6.
and spitefully entreating them, murdered them. The same do they, who
contumeliously reject their Pious Monitors, and stick not to wound, and pierce
them with the Sword of their Tongue.

Consider 3. The madness of men, that leave this Divine Banquet of the Heavenly
King, for vile and transitory things; especially seeing that from this Nuptial
Feast of the Militant Church on Earth, they are to pass to that of the
Triumphant in Heaven. Take heed you let not your self be entangled with these
snares of the world, least you come to be shut out for ever from the Heavenly
Banquet: Luc. 14.15
Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. Aspire therefore,
with all your endeavor, to this happiness.

Of the Invitement to the Wedding, Mat. 22. Luc. 14.
and Supper. Part 2.
Luc. 14.21
COnsider 1. Go forth quickly into the streets, and lanes of the City, and the
poor, and feeble, and blind, and lame, bring in hither, etc. The Divine
Clemency is nothing abated by man's wretchedness, or ingratitude; he provideth
other Guests to come in their rooms; and for the rich, and voluptuous men, that
excuse themselves, he calls the poor, and feeble; that is, such as are free
from worldly incumberances, and impediments: He even compels them to enter,
forcing them, in a manner, by afflictions and tribulations, as so many
Scourges, to make them come to his Supper. Admire the riches of the Divine
Goodness, and beg of him with the Church, that he would also propitiously force
your rebellious will toward himself.

Mat. 22.11
Consider 2. And the King went in to see the Guests, and he saw there a man not
attired in a wedding Garment. This Wedding Garment is Charity, and the Grace of
God; wherewith whosoever is not invested, must not presume to sit at the Table
of the H. Sacraments. Consider how God offers this Garment of Charity to
every one, Who will all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4
and to come to the knowledge of the truth: And yet men out of wretchedness,
often refuse it: But do you earnestly beg it of God, and presume not to come
without it, especially to the Eucharist.

Consider 3. The Kings Indignation against him that had not on his Wedding
Garment: Mat. sup. 13
Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into the utter darkness, etc. The
punishment of a sinner is manifold; the first of perpetual imprisonment in
Hell; the second of horrid darkness, as being deprived of the fight of God; the
third of obstinacy in malice, whence his hands are tied, so that he cannot work
any more, and his feet shackled, that he cannot make escape. Beseech our Lord
to deliver you from all these evils, etc.

Of the ten Virgins. Mat. 25.1. etc.
Part 1.
COnsider 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to ten Virgins, etc. In the Militant
Church there are both good, and bad, wise, and foolish; both expect the coming
of Christ, the Spouse, to Celebrate his Nuptials with the Triumphant Church:
They are like to the foolish Virgins, that have Lamps without Oil, who keep
their Faith, but without Charity, which gives it life: And what can be more
foolish, then to expect a Judge that sees all things, and not to prepare
himself against his coming? See whether you are not guilty of this folly.

Consider 2. The Bridegroom tarrying long, they slumbered all, and slept. By
this is signified the time of our life; wherein, even the good do often
slumber, through carelessness, and negligence, though not mortal: The wicked are
in a dead sleep, by an absolute forgetfulness of God: Take heed even of
slumbering, least thence you come to fall fast asleep, or rather into a
Lethargy: Hearken to the Apostle, rousing you up in those words, Rise thou that
sleep, Ephesians. 5.14
etc. and Christ will illuminate thee.

1 These. 5.2.
Consider 3. And at midnight there was a clamor made: Behold the Bridegroom
comes, etc. Your Judge will come upon you on the sudden, and when you least
expect; that you may learn to be always ready: The day of our Lord shall so
come (says the Apostle) as a Thief in the night. If your Temporal Life were in
danger, and you stood in fear of Thieves, you would certainly keep your self
awake: And can you find in your heart to sleep, being in hazard of Eternal
Life? Wherefore often ring that Peal in your ears, Behold the Bridegroom
comes, least otherwise he find you at unawares: Watch ye therefore (says
Christ) because you know not the day, nor the hour.

Of the ten Virgins. Mat. 25.7. etc.
Part 2.
Ps. 58.7.
COnsider 1. Then arose all those Virgins, and they trimmed their Lamps, etc. At
the news of death, every one commonly bestirreth himself, but they that have
led ill lives, find not the Oil of Charity in their Vessels; neither will there
often be time then to go to the Priests, and to buy it with works of Penance:
They will return at evening (says David) and they shall suffer famine as dogs;
for then they shall be denied that Spiritual Food, which they neglected in
their life time; Gal. 6.10.
Therefore whiles we have time, let us work good.

Is. 35.10.
Consider 2. They that were ready entered with him to the Marriage. Ponder of
what importance it is to be ready at that hour, whereon depends Eternity:
They entered, but with what joy, and congratulating with one another?
Everlasting Joy shall be upon their head; they shall obtain joy, and gladness,
and sorrow, and mourning, shall fly away. Their Lamp there shall shine a
hundred fold, from the Rays of brightness that proceeds from the Bridegrooms
Countenance, and shall send forth flames of most sincere Charity; without
danger of being ever extinguished: Who would not wish to enter in their company?

Mat. 7.21.
Consider 3. Last of all come also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open
to us. They knocked with bare words, not with deeds; therefore they were not
let in: For, Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, etc. but he that does
the will of my Father, etc. he shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Knock
therefore with good works, and that while you have time, that you may be let
in: Terrible are those words, I know you not. Take heed therefore they may
never come to be spoken to you.

Of Holy Communion. Direct me in thy truth, and teach me. Ps. 24.5.

Consider Christ as the Teacher of Truth.
Mat. 22.16
COnsider 1. What is said to day in the Gospel: Master, we know that thou art a
true speaker, and teach the way of God in truth, etc. We all live in great
darkness, in this life, and we want a sure Leader, that may teach us the way of
God in truth; for the wise men of the world do all err: Thy Prophets have seen
false, and foolish things to thee: And the children of men are liars in
balances, Thren. 2.14.
or in their judgments; they deceive, and are deceived themselves; nor can any
man safely rely upon them: Christ alone, of himself, is infallibly true; and
therefore he says, I am the Way, Jo. 14.6. Romans 3.4.
and the Verity, and the Life; And the Apostle, God is true, and every man a
liar.

1 Reg. 9.6
Consider 2. What was said to Saul, when he was out of his way: Behold a Man of
God is in this City, a famous man, all that he speaks, comes to pass without
doubt; now therefore let us go thither, if perhaps he may tell us of our way,
for which we are come. Apply this to the Eucharist, where the Man of God truly
is, yea God himself is truly the Man, who will tell you of your way, for which
you came into the world: Come therefore with a great confidence, for whatsoever
he speaks, does certainly come to pass.

Ibid.
Consider 3. For a due preparation, you must bring with you, as Saul did, some
gift, to present this Man of God withal: Lo we will go, what shall we carry
to the Man of God? And being poor, he gave what he had, to wit, the fourth part
of a sickle of silver: And you, although you be poor, yet you have a Soul
stamped (like a piece of Coin) with the Image of God himself; The light of thy
countenance, Ps. 4.7.
O Lord, is signed upon us: Therefore, as it is said to day in the Gospel, give
him this piece of Coin, whose Image, and Superscription it bears; but let it
be neat, and cleansed from the filth of sin, Romans 8.29
and conformable to the Image of his Son, to whose likeness it was made, and
then he will teach you all truth. Jo. 16.13.


Of the Talents. Mat. 25. Luc. 19.
Part 1.
Mat. 25.14
COnsider 1. A man going into a strange Country, called his servants, and
delivered them his goods. God, as the Universal Lord of all, distributes his
goods among men; for whatsoever we have, either in body, or soul, within, or
without us, natural, or supernatural, all is Gods: O man! What have thou, that
thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7
But God distributes his Talents, or Gifts, whether Natural, or Supernatural,
more to one, fewer to an other, at his pleasure; but he says to all, Occupy,
or negotiate, till I come, Luc. 19.13
that they may make their benefit of what they receive. See how much you have
received for your share, that you may be the better able to give an account.

Mat. 25.16
Consider 2. The due use of these Talents: He that had received the five
Talents, occupied with the same, and gained other five: Likewise also he that
received the two, gained other two: Equal was the industry of both, though in
unequal Talents, and therefore equal also was their reward, because God (as S.
Hierom says) considers not the greatness of the gain, but our good will, and
endeavor. S. Hieron. in c. 25. Mat.
Wherefore you also, although you may think your self to have received few
Talents, in comparison of others, notwithstanding may be equal to them in
reward, if you be equal with them, to your proportion, in the improvement of
your stock.

Consider 3. The powerful Motive of reward to make us labor hard: Because thou
have been faithful over a few things, Mat. sup. 21
I will place thee over many things; enter into the Joy of thy Lord: But what
joy? That which eye has not seen, nor ear has beard, 1 Cor. 2.9
etc. A joy without any limit, or measure, and never to have any end, or
abatement: Be you therefore faithful over that little which God has bestowed
upon you in Wit, Judgment, Science, Health, and the like; employing all to his
glory, that you may deserve to be placed over many things.

Of the Talents. Mat. 25. Luc. 19.
Part 2.
Mat. 25.18
COnsider 1. He that had received the one (Talent) going his way, dug ineo
the earth, and hid his Lords money: So, many seeing themselves not able to
appear exteriourly in point of Science, Virtue, etc. so much as others, fall
into despair, give themselves over to the world, and become slothful, and
careless, in the service of God: The slothful hides his hand under the
arm-hole, Pro. 19.24
neither does he put it to his mouth: But such are called Fools by the Divine
Spirit; Eccles. 4.5.
A Fool foldeth his hands together, etc. saying, Better is an handful with
rest, then both hands full with labor. See whether perhaps you do not the same.

Ps. 140.4.
Consider 2. The slothful servants excuse: Lord, I know that thou art a hard
man, etc. He makes a lie to excuse himself, for our Lord is not hard, but
gentle, and good to all: The same do all slothful people, making excuses in
sins; they fancy vain fears, and dangers, saying, A Lion is in the way, a
Lioness in the journeys: Pro. 26.13
Such often say, I cannot; whereas there wants not Power, but Will. Have a
special care of this slothful humor.

Consider 3. This servants doom: Naughty, and slothful servant, etc. take away
the Talent from him, etc. And the unprofitable servant cast ye out into the
utter darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. He is not damned
(as S. Augustine observes) Because he lost the Talent, Aug. Ser. 10 in Joan.
but because he kept it without making gain. Use therefore all your endeavor
to employ well the Talents which God has bestowed upon you; you cannot want
employment, in what state or condition soever you live, for your own Spiritual
Advantage, Gods Glory, and your Neighbors good.

Of the Vineyard let our to Husbandmen. Mat. 21. Mar. 12. Luc. 20.
Part 1.
Mat. 21.33
COnsider 1. A man there was an Householder, who planted a Vineyard, and made a
hedge round about it, etc. God has planted a Vineyard, his Universal Church,
and has bestowed great care upon it. First, he has made a hedge round about
it, fencing it with excellent Laws, and Precepts, and affording it the
Protection of Angels, against the Incursions of Wild Beasts, the Devils.
Secondly, He dug in it a Press, Instituting the Sacraments, wherein is
contained the precious Blood of Christ, strained out for us, through the Press
of the Cross, and ever flowing for the Remission of our Sins. Thirdly, He built
a Tower to watch in, employing his Divine Providence, both to protect it from
Evils, and to provide it with all good. How happy is it to be placed in such a
Vineyard, under such a Guardian?

Consider 2. Having thus appointed his Vineyard, he let it out to Husbandmen,
that is, to all men, that each one should labor in it, as to his part, or
share; to wit, his own Soul, and such others as are committed to his charge;
which done, he went forth into a strange Country; because he makes as if he
were absent, leaving us to our selves, to work freely, and at our own pleasure:
And although he could have fruit from us by force, yet he expects with
patience: Who then would not admire, and love so great a Goodness?

Consider 3. Almighty God, to put these Husbandmen in mind of their duty, sent
them from time to time Patriarchs, Prophets, and Priests; but all in vain.
Lastly he sent also his own Son, but him likewise they k^lled: Justly therefore
he complains by his Prophet; What is there that I ought to do more to my
Vineyard, Is. 5.4.
and have not done to it? Whence with good reason it is said, The naughty men
he will bring to naught. Mat. sup. 41
See that the same sentence may not also light upon you; and procure to yield
fruit answerable to the Tenure which you hold.

Of the Vineyard let out to Husbandmen. Mat. 21. Mar. 12. Luc. 20.
Part 2.
Jer. 2.21.
COnsider 1. The Vineyard is also the Soul of every Man, and yours in
particular, which the Supreme Householder has furnished with Hedge, Press, and
Tower; that is, with all necessaries, both for your security, and convenience
of yielding fruit in all manner of virtue. Look well into your self, and you
will find, that you are an Elect Vineyard, of which the Prophet speaks; so
that it may be also said of you, What is there that I ought to do more to my
Vineyard, Is. 5.4.
and have not done to it?

Ezec. 18.4 Is. 45.5.
Consider 2. God does let out this Soul of yours to your self; for he reserves
the Propriety to himself: All Souls are mine, etc. And I the Lord, and there is
none else. He lets you therefore to your self, that you should cultivate your
own Soul, like a good Husbandman, and render it fruitful for his service: For
who planteth a Vine, 1 Cor. 9.7
and ea^eth not of the fruit thereof? Therefore our Lord likewise expects
fruit from you: But he goes into a Foreign Country, making as if he were
absent, and leaving you to your own liberty, to do as you please your self: But
woe be to that Vine which brings forth no fruit; for one of these two is due
to every Vine, Fruit, or Fire: Therefore that you may not be in Fire, be not
without Fruit.

Mat. 21.41
Consider 3. God does often send to you his Servants, Preachers, Superiors, and
others, to put you in mind of your duty: He sends also his only begotten Son,
by interior Inspirations, and the Example of his Life, and Passion: Take heed
therefore that you do not, like those wicked Husbandmen, either contemn Gods
Officers, or kill his Son again by sin, lest otherwise the Kingdom of God be
taken from you, and given to another, that will render him fruit in its season.

Of the Bailiff of Iniquity. Luc. 16.1. etc.

Ps. 23.1.
COnsider 1. There was a certain rich man, that had a Bailiff, and he was ill
reported of unto him, as he that had wasted his goods, etc. The Rich Man is
God; for the Earth is our Lords, and the fubtess thereof: You are his Bailiff,
whom God has entrusted with many goods, both of Body, and Mind, Natural, and
Supernatural, that you might employ them well; but by your Misdemeanors, you
have gained the report of an ill Husband, and reputed as a Waster of your Lords
Goods: What a shameful and opprobrious thing it is to play the Cheat with God,
and turn Bankrupt to Heaven?

Jo. 9.4.
Consider 2. Render account of thy Bailiship, etc. When you come to die, you
will be exacted a most strict account of your Bailiship; that is, of your life
and actions; and then you can play the Bailiff, that is, work your Salvation no
longer: The night comes, when no man can work: Wherefore let us do good while
we have ^ime. Wise Stewards often look into their accounts, to see how things
go, that they may be found faithful when they shall be called to account. Do
you the same by a daily and rigorous Examen of your Conscience; for, if we did
judge our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31.
we should not be judged.

Eccli. 37.19.^.^^
Consider 3. How the Steward in this Parable provided wisely for himself, though
deceitfully withal; and therefore Christ commended, not his fraud, but his wit
and forecast. O that we were so wise and provident in procuring the Eternal
Salvation of our Soul! Lament, that the children of this world are wiser then
the children of light in their Generation; and think how you may bestir your
self: The true wise man is wise to his own Soul.

Of the Wise Man, Mat. 7.
and the Fool.
Ephesians. 2.20.
COnsider 1. Christ pronounces him a Wise man, who building his House, lays
the Foundation upon a firm Rock; whence it comes to stand immovable against
all winds, and f^ouds whatsoever. The Rock is Christ, who is also called the
Cornerstone: The Winds, Floods, and Rains, are the several temptations Man is
assaulted withal. He therefore builds upon a Rock, that groundeth his life
and actions upon Christ, and Reasons of Eternity, and thereby is secured from
all temptations; for God is in the midst, and therefore he shall not be moved.
Ps. 45.6.
See whether you do so or no.

Consider 2. He is called a Fool that builds his house upon Sand; For what
can be greater folly, then to be at great expenses in raising a building, that
is ready to fall to the ground by every wind? By the Sand, is understood all
earthly things; and he builds upon Sand, that places his thoughts and
labors upon the fleeting, and transitory things of this life; whence he comes
to be tossed up and down by the winds of Vanity, carried away, and swallowed up
by the Floods of Pleasures, and even quite overwhelmed with the Rains, and
Storms of Adversity, which God uses to send: Therefore the Prophet compares
the wicked to dust, Ps. 1.5.
which the wind drives from the face of the earth.

Eccl. 1.15.
Consider 3. How all men scorn the Name, but most stick not to do the actions of
a Fool: Therefore Solomon says, The number of Fools is infinite, because an
infinity of men build upon Sand. See whether you do not make one of the number,
and observe, that the Winds and Rains were common to both the Houses; so
Temptations do equally assault the Just, and the Wicked: And therefore if you
fall at any time, ads^ribe not the cause thereof to the Temptation, but to the
folly of an ill and groundless Foundation.

Of Holy Communion. Attend unto my help, O Lord, the God of my Salvation. Ps.
37.22.

Consider Christ as the Salvation of your Soul.
Mat. 9.18. Mar. 5.22. Luc. 8.41.
COnsider 1. What is read to day in the Gospel, how Christ raised the Deceased
Daughter of the Prince of the Synagogue, and healed the Hemorroisset of a
Bloody Flux. And lastly, how he used to bestow perfect health to all that came
to him; for Virtue went forth from him, and healed all: Luc. 6.19. Ps. 26.1.
Therefore David says, Our Lord is my Illumination and Salvation, whom shall I
fear? How secure is he that has God for his Savior, and Defender?

Consider 2. This same Lord will come unto you, to day, in the Eucharist: O
what a happiness is this? Look thoroughly into your self, and think what
infirmities you are most subject unto, and how you are assaulted by your
Enemies: Perhaps you will find your Soul, if not quite dead by Mortal Sin, at
least next door to it, by a lingering Consumption of Tepidity: You will find her
perchance to have a Bloody Flux, while she lets the best part of her life
and actions pass from her unprofitably: Wherefore, have recourse unto the Lord,
and God of your Salvation, that he may say likewise to your Soul, Ps. 34.3.
I am thy Salvation.

Consider 3. The preparation you are to make, out of the Gospel. 1. By a most
Profound Humility, imitating this Prince, Mat. sup.
who approached, and adored him; and the Woman who came behind him, and touched
the him of his garment. 2. By a great Confidence; therefore Christ said to the
Woman, Thy Faith has made thee safe: And by the Prophet he says; Jer. 39.18.
Thy life (or Soul) shall be to thee unto Salvation, because thou have had
confidence in me.

Of the Sower. Mat. 1.3. Mar. 4. Luc. 8. Luc. 8.5.

4. Esdr. 9.31.
COnsider 1. The Sower went forth to sow his seed, etc. Ponder the Infinite
Mercy of God; he stands not in need of any fruit that we can yield him, and
yet he vouchsafes most graciously to go forth sundry ways, by Preachers, by
Spiritual Books, by Holy Inspirations, by Superiors, by Directors, by
Examples, etc. to sow in our hearts the Seed of Eternal Salvation: Behold I sow
my Law in you, and it shall bring forth fruit in you. Think what a precious
Seed this is, whose fruit is life Everlasting.

Consider 2. The Earth whereon this Seed is cast, is Man's Heart. But there are
three sorts of Soil, wherein this Seed brings forth no fruit. 1. In the
public high way, that is, in an open heart, exposed to all manner of
distractive thoughts. 2. In a stony soil, that is, in a hard heart, without any
moisture of Devotion. 3. In a field full of thorns and briars, that is, in a
heart choked up with the cares, pleasures, and riches of this life. See
whether the soil of your heart be not such in one kind or other, and endeavor
to rid it of all these impediments.

Consider 3. The property of a good soil, or heart, is to retain the seed, and
yield fruit in patience: It is not enough to receive Holy Inspirations, Luc.
sup. v. 15.
unless you endeavor to retain them; for, whosoever retains not his meat
(says S. Gregory) his life is certainly desperate. Moreover, the field of your
heart must be patient, not only in suffering the Plough, that is, Afflictions,
but also expecting with patience, the Heavenly Dew, and showers of Divine
Grace; for, Luc. 21.19
In your patience you shall possess your Souls.

Of the Cockle. Mat. 13.24 etc.

THe Kingdom of Heaven is resembled to a man that sowed good Seed in his field,
etc. Consider 1. By Christ's own Exposition, the Sower in this Patable is God,
the Field this World, the good Seed the Just, the Cockle the Wicked, the Enemy
the World, the Harvest the end of the World, and the Reapers the Angels: God,
for his part, would have all men good, and for this only purpose affords his
good Seed; but while men sleep, and are careless in the affairs of their
Salvation, the Devil oversoweth Cockle, and of good, makes them wicked. The
Cockle grows together with the Wheat, and is hardly distinguished from it in
the Blade; so the Wicked often times are scarcely discerned from the good in
this Life. See whether you be Wheat, or Cockle; and whether you do sleep in the
main business of your Salvation, lest you come to be overborn by the Enemy.

Mat. 5.45.
Consider 2. The indiscreet Zeal sometimes of the Just, that wish all the Wicked
to be rooted up. Will thou we go, and gather them up? But God does not so, who
makes his Sun to rise upon good, and bad; for he tollerates the bad, expecting
them to do Penance, that so from being Cockle, they may turn to be good Wh^at;
and for that cause will not have them all rooted up. Put on the like affection
of longanimity toward your Brethren, and Neighbors, that are troublesome to
you.

Consider 3. The great difference in the end of this common life, which the
good and the bad lead in this world: Bind up the Cockle, etc. to burn, but the
Wheat gather ye into my Barn: Who would not choose rather to be in this Barn,
then in a Burning Furnace: See therefore you be true Wheat, and suffer your
self to be thrashed, and cleansed from Chaff, by Penance and Mortification; for
you cannot be brought into the Heavenly Granary together with your Chaff.

Of the Mustard Seed. Mat. 13. Mar. 4. Luc. 13. Mat. 13.31

Ps. 21.7. Colos. 2.3.
COnsider 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Mustard Seed, etc. Christ
himself first was this Mustard Seed; because as that Seed is the least, and
commendable neither for its smell, nor outward show, yet it contains within it
self a great natural heat, and sends it forth also outwardly, especially when
it is bruised: So Christ to the outward appearance, was a worm, and no man,
etc. but within him were all the treasures of Wisdom, and Science of God; and
being broken and bruised on the Cross, he expressed the greatest heat of love
that ever was, inflaming the whole world with the Fire of his Charity. Do you
likewise suffer your self to be set on fire with the like heat.

Sap. 5.4.
Consider 2. All the Just in this Life are also Mustard Seed; simple and
contemptible in the eyes of the world, but in a high value with God, and his
Angels; so that the wicked shall say in the day of Judgment, We senseless
esteemed their life madness, and their end without honor; behold how they are
counted among the children of God. Observe moreover, that the Saints do then
show their virtue most, when they are crushed with tribulations; whence the
Apostle, When I am weak, then I am mighty, 2 Cor. 12 10.
etc.

Consider 3. A grain of Mustard Seed cast into the earth, grows into a Tree;
Mat. sup.
So that the fowls of the air come, and dwell in the branches thereof: Such a
grain was Christ, perfectly mortified, and dead upon the Cross, in whose
branches, that is, Doctrine and Example, devout Souls dwell by contemplation:
Under his shadow, whom I desired, Cant. 2.3.
I sat (says the Spouse in the Canticles) and his fruit was sweet unto my
throat. Do you the like.

Of the Leaven. Mat. 13. Mar. 4. Luc. 13. Mat. 13.33

COnsider 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to Leaven, which a woman took, and
hid in three measures of Meal, etc. that is, she wrought it into the whole
Batch of Bread, so to give it its relish. This Leaven, first was Christ, who
being hid in our flesh, rendered the cursed mass of mankind acceptable to God.
Again, he is after a special manner Leaven, in the Eucharist, whereby
penetrating into our heart, he leaveneth, seasoneth, and in a manner Deifieth
the whole man, giving Chastity to the body, and the savor of all Virtue to the
Soul.

Consider 2. Good Leaven likewise are the Good, that live in Communities; for
an exemplar life has a wonderful influence upon men's actions, and after a
secret manner provoking others to their imitation, makes them like to those in
whom they behold it; 1 Timothy 4.12. Leo Sermon. 1 de S. Laurent.
whence the Apostle to Timothy, Be as example of the faithful, in word, in
conversation, in charity, etc. because, as S. Leo says, Examples are more
powerful then words, and it is a more perfect way of teaching by action, then
by word of mouth.

1 Cor. 5.6.
Consider 3. On the contrary, the power of bad Leaven, because it spoileth the
whole Batch; whence the Apostle says, That a little Leaven corrupts the
whole Paste: Even so bad example infecteth them whom we live, and converse
withal; for which respect, we ought to be very cautious, left we make other
men's sins our own; for that they often take their beginning from ours. Look
therefore well about your self, and see whether you are wont to give others bad
example in any kind; for woe be to that man by whom scandal comes. Mat. 18.7.


Of the Treasure hid in the Field. Mat. 13.44.

COnsider 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a Treasure hid in a Field. This
Treasure, says S. Gregory, Greg. Hom 11. in Evang. Mat. 11.25
is the desire of Heaven, or love of Virtue, and heavenly things, and is said
to be hidden in the field of this world; for that all know not the value of it:
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to
little ones: Whence it is, that most men abhor Humility and Poverty, as vile
and contemptible things. Beseech our Lord so to open your eyes, that you may be
able to discover this Treasure.

Consider 2. How this Treasure is to be kept, which a man having found, did
hide it (says Christ) We must therefore lay it up closely in our hearts, and
cover it with the Vail of Humility, from the praises of men, and vain glory,
lest thereby it come to be taken from us, and vanish away. Examine your self
whether you do so, or whether you do not rather vainly boast, and brag at every
turn, for what you think your self to have. Our way to Heaven is beset with
many Thieves, and he desires to be robbed (says S. Gregory) that carries his
Treasure in open view. Hide it therefore what you can, Greg. sup.
that so you may keep it long.

Luc. 14.33
Consider 3. This Treasure cannot be otherwise purchased, then by buying it, and
that with the sale not of some one, or more things, but of all whatsoever we
have: He goes, and sells all that he has, and buyeth it. And Christ in
another place pronounces, Every one of you that does not renounce all that he
possesses, cannot be my Disciple. We must therefore leave all things of this
world, at least in affection, to attain to a perfect enjoyment of Christ; and
think that well left, for which we gain a hundred fold, and that more then a
hundred times over.

Of the Pearl. Mat. 13.45

Luc. 19.13
COnsider 1. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Merchant-man, seeking good
Pearls. We are all Merchants in this life; therefore Christ in the Parable of
the Talents said, Occupy till I come; that is, to judgment. All men indeed seek
Pearls, but some take them for Temporal Enjoyments, others for Learning, and
Sciences, others again for honors, but they are all mistaken; these are false
Pearl, nor have they anything that is good in them, but an outward show;
therefore the Apostle to the rich says, Your riches are corrupt, Jac. 5.2. and
3.
your gold and silver is rusted. See whether you do not affect such kind of
Pearl.

Sap. 7.9.
Consider 2. And having found one precious Pearl, etc. for there is one only
true precious Pearl, Christ our Lord, and the love of heavenly things; All
gold, in comparison of her, is a little sand, and silver in the sight of her
shall be esteemed as clay. There is no comparison between Heaven and Earth, ore
single drop of water, and the whole Ocean, Time, and Eternity; no more is there
between Christ, and all earthly goods whatsoever; and yet as often as you sin,
you renounce Christ for some base thing or other.

Consider 3. Here again it is said, that this Pe^^l is not to be bought without
se^ling all we have: He went his way, and sold all that he had, and bought it.
But happy is he (says S. Gregory) who with all his fortunes is able to buy
Christ: S. Greg. Naz. Phil. 3.8.
Therefore the Apostle; I have made all things as detriment, and do esteem them
as dung, that I may gain Christ. Think with your self whether you do so, and
what a kind of Merchant you are.

Of Holy Communion.
WHen the four and twentieth Sunday after Pentecost comes before the Month of
November, as it falls out when there are eight and twenty Sundaies, then in the
twenty fourth is read the Mass, and Gospel of the third Sunday, which was
remaining after the Epiphany, to wit, that of the Leper, and the Centurion,
Mat. 8. Wherefore then you shall take the Meditation which is for the third
Sunday after Epiphany, and consider Christ as the Physician of your Soul; as is
set down there, page 108.

Of the lost Sheep. Luc. 15.4. etc.

COnsider 1. What man of you having an hundred Sheep, etc. This Man is Christ,
the Sheep are the Faithful: Christ performs to the full all the Offices of a
good Shepherd; he came down from Heaven to feed them; he marks them for his own
with a Divine Character; he leads them by the example of his Virtues; he cures
them of the Infection of Sin; he defends them from the Infernal Wolves; he
provides them rich Pastures of his Doctrine, and Sacraments; and which is
incomparably more, he gives them his own Body and Blood for meat and drink: The
Faithful hear his Voice, obey his Commands, follow him where ever he leads;
they delight in his Pastures, and yield him both the Wool of their exterior
actions, and Milk of their interior, and even their Blood, and Life, and all,
when soever there is any necessity of dying for him.

Is. 53.6.
Consider 2. The strayed Sheep is a sinner, who leaving the company of the Just,
and Obedience to his Pastor, goes his own ways: nothing is more foolish and
miserable then he; he understands not the happiness he enjoys under his
Pastor, he cares not for Spiritual Pastures, he prefers such as are more
pleasing to flesh and blood; he follows him not, nor hears his Call; he esteems
the ways of the Cross, and of Mortification, to be too rough and hard, and
chooses rather to trace the craggy and dangerous ways of his own will: All we
have strayed as sheep (says the Prophet) every one has declined into his own
way. Think how often you have done so.

Consider 3. The great goodness of this Pastor; he seeks after his strayed
sheep; first by himself, while he was in Mortal Flesh, by his exemplar Life and
Doctrine, for thirty three whole years; afterward by Superiors, and
Directors, by Holy Inspirations, by Pious Books, and other means, never ceasing
even to the end of the world; and having found it, most gently and lovingly
takes it up; O Lord, so take and receive me: Ps. 118.179.
I have strayed as a sheep that is lost, seek thy servant, because I have not
forgotten thy Commandments.

Of the Pharisee, Luc. 18.10 etc.
and the Publican.
Apoc. 3.17
COnsider 1. Two men went up into the Temple to pray, etc. Ponder the effects of
Pride in the Pharisee. 1. Because he thought himself perfect, he asks
nothing, neither pardon of sins, nor the gifts of Grace. 2. Under the pretense
of Thanksgiving, he commends himself for his own good works. 3. He arrogantly
prefers himself before others. 4. He contemns the Publican, whom he rashly
judges a sinner. Thus all proud men are blind, and say, I am rich, and lack
nothing: But alas, Thou know not (thou proud fool) that thou art miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked, etc.

Consider 2. The Publicans Humility. 1. He stands a far off, deeming himself
unworthy to approach near to God, or even the Pharisee. 2. He dares not so much
as lift up his eyes, out of confusion for his sins. 3. He knocks his breast with
a contrite heart, and desirous to make satisfaction. 4. He humbly beggeth for
pardon, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner: Such likewise ought to be your
prayer, humble, contrite, and accompanied with purpose of amendment.

Consider 3. Christ's Sentence of both these men: This man went down into his
house, justified more then he, etc. Thus Pride destroyed even those good works
that were in the Pharisee; Humility on the other side, by the help of Penance,
blotted out sin in the Publican: So every one that exalts himself, shall be
humbled, and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted; as it often falls
out even in this life, but most certainly in the next. Think therefore with
your self where you will choose to be humbled, here, or there.

Of the Faithful and Wise Steward, Mat. 24. Luc. 12.
or Servant.
Luc. 12.42
COnsider 1. Who (think thou) is a faithful Steward, and wise? etc. Our Lord
finds few such, therefore he speaks of them in an admiring way: That which he
requires of his servants is: 1. That they be faithful. 2. Prudent. 3. Good to
others. 4. Perseverant, that when our Lord shall come at the hour of death, he
may find them so doing. See how you behave your self in these points, whether
you do faithfully, and to your utmost, promote Gods Cause, or not rather your
own Interest; whether you do your actions with due circumspection and
deliberation; whether you seek to benefit others according to your ability; and
lastly, how firm and constant you are in good purposes.

Luc. 12.19
Consider 2. The evil conditions of the bad servant. 1. He says in his heart,
My Lord is long a coming; and thinks he has a long time yet to live, as did
that other, who said to his Soul, Soul thou have much goods laid up for many
years, etc. 2. He is injurious to others, striking the servants, and
handmaids. 3. He gives himself over to carnal pleasures, beginning to eat, and
drink, and be drunk. Have a care you keep your self from these Vices, and
observe that the beginning of all these mischiefs is a persuasion of long life,
and forgetfulness of what is to befall us in the end.

Consider 3. The reward, and punishment of both these servants: Of the former
it is said, Blessed is that servant, etc. over all things which he possesses,
he shall appoint him, to wit, in Heaven: But of the latter, The Lord of that
servant shall come in a day that he hops not, and at an hour that he knows
not, and shall divide him, to wit, from the company of the Just, and shall
appoint bis portion with the Infidels in Hell. Imitate therefore the first,
least your portion and lot come to be with the last, etc.

Of Girding the Loins. Luc. 12.35 etc.

COnsider 1. Let your loins be girded, and candles burning in your hands, and
you like to men expecting their Lord when he shall return from the Marriage.
Ponder how carefully servants watch for their Masters coming from a
Marriage Feast; such would Christ have us to be against his coming: We gird our
loins (says S. Gregory) when we restrain Luxury by Continency; Greg. Hom 13.
in Evang.
and we hold burning candles in our hands, when by good works we show our
Neighbors the light of our example. See how you perform both these duties.

Phil. 1.23.
Consider 2. That when he does come, and knock, forthwith they may open unto
him: Our Lord comes, when he hasteneth to judge us, at our death; he knocks
when he sends us sickness; the Good, at that time, without delay, and with
great joy, open unto him, having a desire, with the Apostle, to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ. On the contrary, with what an unwilling and heavy heart
do the wicked let him in, when he knocks: Therefore Ecclesiasticus; Eccli.
41.1
O Death, how bitter is thy memory to a man that has peace in his riches?

Consider 3. If the Householder did know what hour the Thief would come, he
would watch verily, and would not suffer his house to be broken up. Death will
most certainly come upon us as a Thief, and break open the house, or habitation
of our body; but what day or hour it will come, is as uncertain: Therefore our
Lord would have us to be watchful, every hour of our life, that we may not be
catched at unawares, in that moment, wherein is turned the Dye of our
Everlasting Doom.

Of the Vine, and its branches. Jo. 15.5. etc.

Ps. 79.12.
COnsider 1. I am the Vine, you the Branches, etc. Christ is truly a Vine, in
regard of that most precious Wine which he powered forth on the Cross, and is
daily presented to us in the Chalice: The Branches of this Vine may be
whosoever will themselves; therefore he inviteth all; and of this Vine it is
said, It extended her branches even to the Sea, and her boughs unto the River;
for he quickneth us all, as so many branches, with the Sap of his Grace, and
with the same nourishes us, and makes us rich, and full of excellent fruit. O
how well is it with the branch that remains and lives in such a Vine?

Consider 3. An evident sign of remaining in this Vine, is fruitfulness: He
that abides in me, and I in him, the same bears much fruit. Wherefore by the
fruit you bear, you may gather whether you remain in him, or no: Besides, Every
branch that bears fruit, the Heavenly Father will purge it, that it may bring
more fruit. The Husbandman purges the branches by Pruning, and Incision; so
God does those that are his, by afflictions, sicknesses, and temptations; that
you might learn to take these things willingly at the hands of God, as helps
toward your spiritual profit.

Consider 3. What becomes of the branch that bears not any fruit: He shall
wither, and they shall gather him up, and cast him into the fire, and he
burns. One of the two (says S. Augustine) appertains to the branch; Aug.
tr. 81. in Joan.
fruit, or fire. Procure therefore to bring forth fruit, and that in due
season; sweet, and not wild grapes; lest otherwise, like a dry withered branch
cut off from the Vine, you become fuel for that fire, which can never be
quenched.

Of the Barren Fig Tree. Luc. 13.6. etc.

COnsider 1. A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and he came
seeking for fruit on it, and found not, etc. This Fig Tree, is every Christian,
planted by Gods own hand, in the Vineyard of his Church, to bring forth fruit
of good works: This Tree God does cherish with the warm Sun, and water with the
showers of his Grace; and if that suffice not, he forces it in a manner to
good, by digging, and laying dung about it; and if neither after all this it
will yield fruit, he bids it to be cut down, and cast into the fire: For every
tree that does not yield good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.

Consider 2. And apply all this to your own Soul, which the Heavenly Husbandman
has planted as a choice Sprig in the Vineyard of his Church, exposed to the
open Sun of his Divine Illustrations, often watered with the showers of his
Grace, and finally provided with all necessaries to bring forth plenty of
fruit, and yet perhaps he may justly say of you; Lo, it is now so many years
since I come seeking for fruit upon this Fig Tree, and I find not; that is, I
find not fruit answerable to my labor, and expectation: What then?

Apoc. 2.21
Consider 3. Let it alone this year also, etc. Who knows whether God has not
prefixed this year, as your last, in hopes of greater fruit; so that hereafter
he will not afford you so many helps of his Grace: God oftentimes gives us
time to do Penance, but if we use it not, he closes his hand, and as it is
said in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 10.6
There shall be time no more, that is, of such abundant helps, without which we
shall not be able to work: Therefore make good use of the time allowed you, and
procure to produce good fruit, and not leafs only.

MEDITATIONS OF SAINTS.
Of the Excellency of the B. Virgin above all Creatures.
COnsider 1. With what pomp and state, of Plate, Perfumes, Tapistry, and other
rich Furniture, worldly Princes are wont to set forth their Bedchamber, and
Rooms of Presence; How much more fitting was it, that the King of Heaven should
adorn the Cabin, wherein he was not only to abide for some time, but of which
he decreed to frame himself a Body. To be Mother of God, is the greatest
Dignity that can possibly be communicated to a pure creature: To her therefore
are due all manner of Grace, and Ornaments, which by the ordinary Power of God,
may be conferred upon any pure Creature: Therefore S. Anselm; S. Ansel. l. de
Concep. V. c. 8.
It was fitting that the Virgin should be adorned with that Purity, then the
which, no greater, under God, could be conceived.

Consider 2. Hence it follows, that whatsoever Internal Grace and Virtue was
bestowed upon any Saint, the same in a much more perfect manner was conferred
upon the B. Virgin: And which is more, diverse Authors affirm, Suar. 3. p.t. 2.
disp. 18. Sec. 4. Barrad. c. 1. l. 6. Cant. 6.3.
And which is more, diverse Authors affirm, that her Grace and Glory alone did
surpass that of all other Saints put together: For it is fit that a King of
Infinite Power and Riches, should bestow more upon his Mother, then all his
Servants besides; therefore it is said in the Canticles, Thou art fair, O my
Love, sweet and comely as Jerusalem; that is, as the whole City of Heaven. And
S. Bernard, S. Bern. Sermon. signum magnum.
To others (says he) Grace is imparted by parcels, but upon Mary the whole
fullness thereof was powered forth.

Consider 3. What Reverence, Confidence, and Love you ought hence to have
toward this Sacred Virgin: Reverence, for the Excellency of her Dignity;
Confidence, for the greatness of her Goodness; Love, for the tender bowels of
her Charity toward us: For she vouchsafes to be a Mother to us all; and the
greater she is, the more tender she is of us: what might you not hope for, if
you had a Mother that were Empress of the whole world? Love therefore, that you
may deserve to be loved, and protected by so powerful a Lady.

Of the Immaculate Conception of the B. Virgin. The work is great, neither is
the habitation prepared for man, but for God. 1 Paral. 29.1.

Ps. 45.5.
COnsider 1. It was not fitting that the Mother of God, should for any one
moment be Slave of the Devil: And if the Ark of God, and the Tabernacle were to
be made of the wood Setim, which would not rot, much more the living Ark, and
Tabernacle of God, ought to be preserved from all Corruption: Therefore the
Highest has sanctified his Tabernacle; so that from the very first instant,
wherein her blessed Soul was united to her Body, in her Mothers Womb, it was
ever true to say, Thou art all fair, my Love, and there is not a spot in thee.
Cant. 4.7.


Ps. 86.3.
Consider 2. She was not barely preserved from all stain and blemish, by the
infusion of Grace; but besides, she received such plenty of Habitual Grace, and
all manner of Virtue, together with the suppression of Concupiscence, and use
of Reason, that even then she surpassed the greatest Saints: Therefore it is
said of her, Glorious things are said of thee, O City of God: And what are
those glorious things? The foundations thereof in the holy Mountains: for that
the foundations, or beginnings of all other men, are laid in Original Sin; but
the foundations of the Blessed Virgin were holy, Suar. 3. p. to. 2. disp. 18.
and equal to the very top of other Saints perfections: And if the very
groundwork were such, what do you think was the height of Sanctity she arrived
unto at her death? By continual increase and addition, proceeding from the
exercise of most intense Acts of Virtue.

Consider 3. How much you ought to rejoice for the Immaculate Conception of
her, that was likewise to be your Mother. Do you also procure, this day, to be
spiritually conceived to God without spot, and so ever after to remain. Rejoice
that you are to feed, in the Eucharist, on the very same flesh, which the Son
of God took from his Virgin Mother; and endeavor to come without the least
spot to the spotless Lamb of the Immaculate Virgin.

Of the Nativity of the B. Virgin. What is she that comes forth as the Morning
rising? Cant. 6.9. Antiph. and Magnif.

COnsider 1. How true is that saying of the Church: Your Nativity, O Mother of
God, has brought joyful tidings to the whole world, etc. For 1. The Blessed
Trinity rejoiced, as for the Coadjutrix of the Incarnation. 2. The Angels for
their Queen. 3. The Fathers in Limbo for the Motheir of their Deliverer. 4. The
Just also in this world, God infusing an extraordinary kind of Joy into their
Souls, though themselves perhaps knew not the cause thereof, as often
happens: The whole world is exhilarated at the break of day, as the
Forerunner of the Sun rising: Mary was the Bright Morning, that brought the
happy tidings of the Sun of Justice: Reverence therefore, and honor her Birth;
and full of admiration, enquire diligently, Who is this that comes forth,
rising as the Morning?

Consider 2. The Virgin being born, her name was called Mary, and that, no
doubt, by Divine Instinct, and perhaps also by express intimation of an Angel;
for, Mary signifies: 1. A Sea Star. 2. A bitter Sea. 3. Lady, or Exalted. 4.
Enlightened, or enlightening: For she is indeed, 1. A Bright Star to them that
sail in the dangerous Sea of this world. 2. A large Sea, of all manner of
Grace, sweet to men, but bitter to the Devils; and in her Sons Passion she was
an Ocean of Grief. 3. Lady of the whole world, In Offic. B. Virg. In Pref.
Miss. de B. Virg. Cant. 1.3.
and exalted to the Heavenly Kingdom above the Quires of Angels. 4. Enlightened
first in her self, she enlightened the world, bringing forth to the world the
Eternal Light, Jesus Christ our Lord. O Mary, Oil powered out is thy name,
illuminating, healing, and comforting our souls.

1 Jo. 3.9.
Consider 3. In imitation of this Virgin, your Mother, you must be born
spiritually to God: to be born in flesh, is not in man's power, neither is it
where, or when he will; but it is in our hands to be born in spirit, by the
Divine Grace. Let this therefore be your birthday to God, and endeavor
hereafter to demean your self worthily, as his Child: Every one that is born of
God, commits not sin. Therefore fly sin, that you may ever remain the Son of
God.

Of the Assumption of the B. Virgin. Who is this that comes up from the
Desert, flowing with delights? Cant. 8.5.

[For the Annunciation, Visitation, and Purification, see in their proper
places.]
COnsider 1. The B. Virgin, though she were free from sin, yet was not so from
death, from which Christ himself would not be exempted: Therefore the end of
her life now drawing nigh, and being admonished by an Angel, of the time of her
departure (as Authors relate) think with what ardent affection she disposed her
self, Metaph^. Niceph. etc. apud Barrad. to. 1. l. 6. c. 11. Cant. 5.8. Ps.
141.8.
by intense acts of love; saying with the Spouse in the Canticles, I languish
with love; and with David, Bring forth my soul out of Prison. And how at last,
the Apostles being all about her, she breathed forth her blessed Soul into the
hands of her Son, who was there present, and invited her to his Glory: O my
Soul, Number. 23.10.
die the death of the Just, and my last ends be made like to hers.

Cant. 8.5.
Consider 2. How that blessed Soul released from her Body, was led by her Son
into Heaven, environed with Angels, singing forth those notes of admiration,
Who is this that comes up from the Desert, flowing with delights, leaning upon
her Beloved? See how she being now entered into the Empyreal Heaven, is
welcomed by the Eternal Father, and the whole B. Trinity, and as Sovereign
Queen, seated in a Throne of Glory, above all Creatures; for, a Throne was set
for the Kings Mother, who sat on his right hand. 3 Reg. 2.19.
The measure of her Glory was proportioned to the greatness of her love, and
Charity; that you might also learn to be fervent in your love to God.

Consider 3. How after three days lying in the Grave, the blessed Body was
united again to the Soul, and with unspeakable pomp assumed into Heaven,
accompanied with the Angels, Juvenal. and S. Damasc. aliique apud Barrad. Cant.
1.3.
and the whole Celestial Court, and Christ himself her Son: O what a Triumph,
what a glory was this! Do you likewise ascend in spirit with your Mother, and
say to her, Draw me after thee; now in affection, afterward in the happy
enjoyment of your company. Rejoice that you are to receive this day a pledge of
her in the Eucharist, for in the Sons Body still remains, in a manner, the
Mothers Flesh and Blood, and endeavor to come with due preparation.

Of the Angels. Part 1.
THat you may be the more stirred up to the Veneration of the holy Angels,
consider 1. Their Natural Excellencies: They are by Nature, 1. Most noble and
pure spirits, most absolute in themselves, without concretion with flesh, or
any corporeal substance. 2. Immortal, and incapable of any decay, or
corruption. 3. Of most sublime with and understanding, comprehending by an
Intuitive knowledge all natural objects. 4. Of most perfect free will, subject
to none but its Creator, and inseparably fixed upon its Supreme Good, which it
has once possessed. 5. In power inferior to none but Divine, and superior to
all that is created.

Consider 2. Their Supernatural Endowments. 1. Of Grace; for in them (as S.
Augustine says) God at once created Nature, Aug. l. 12. de Civ. c. 9.
and infused Grace, together with all manner of Virtue, and that in an eminent
degree, whereby in a moment they merited their Eternal Happiness. 2. Of Glory,
whereby they are in perpetual possession and enjoyment of their Supreme Good,
whence proceed all their other Prerogatives, as of being Peers and Princes of
Heaven, Domestics, Familiars, and Favorites of God, continually assisting at
his Throne, and beholding his Divine Countenance.

Consider 3. These blessed Spirits, though never out of the Center of their
happiness, have a larger Sphere then the Empyreal Heaven; for they are the
Movers of the other Celestial Orbs, and immediately under God do rule and
govern the whole Universe; they are over Kings, Princes, States, and
Magistrates; they defend us from evils, they intercede for us, and present our
prayers to God; they enlighten our Understanding, and inflame our Will toward
God, and heavenly things, etc. Admire, and love the perfections of these
Heavenly Spirits; implore their assistance, and endeavor by purity of life,
and promptness in the Divine Service, to be compartment with them in glory.

Of the Angels. Part 2.
COnsider 1. The H. Angels, though in number almost infinite, are commonly
divided into nine Quires, and three Hierarchies: In the first are the
Cherubins, Seraphins, and Thrones: The Cherubins property is to be inflamed
with the love of God, and to enkindle the same in others: The Seraphins excel
in Wisdom and Knowledge of God, and with the same do enlighten the inferior
Angels: The Thrones are so called, for that by reason of their singular Purity,
Humility, and Justice, God does particularly reside in them as his Imperial
Throne. Apply all this to your self, and endeavor to be a Cherubin in Love, a
Seraphin in the Knowledge of God, and of heavenly things, and a Throne in
Purity of Life, in Humility, and Justice toward God and Man.

Consider 2. In the second Hierarchy are the Dominations, Virtues, and Powers:
The Dominations exercise Command over the Inferior Angels, and direct them in
the Government of the Universe: The Virtues do effect in themselves, and
others, a firm and unchangeable adhesion to God, and all manner of virtue: The
Powers, as their Name sounds, are endowed with power to curb, and quell the
Infernal Spirits. Implore the assistance of this Powerful Hierarchy, that you
may likewise constantly adhere to God, be perfect Masters of your own Passions,
and vicious Appetites; and by a complete Victory over all temptations, subdue
your mortal Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Consider 3. In the third Hierarchy are the Principalities, Archangels, and
Angels: The Principalities do both exhibit in themselves, and cause in others
due Veneration, and worship toward their Lord, and God: The Archangels are
properly Gods Messengers, and Administrators in the highest, and most Important
Affairs, and are special Patrons of Purity: The Angels are all ministering
spirits, sent to minister for them, Heb. 1.14.
which shall receive the Inheritance of Salvation. Be zealous of the Divine
Worship, both in your self, and others, strive to be eminent in Purity, and by
virtuous life and conversation endeavor to be a good Angel, and Minister of
Salvation to your Neighbor.

Of Holy Patriarchs, and Prophets.
COnsider 1. How even from the beginning, and in times of Infidelity and
Idolatry, wherein almost the whole world was involved, God was perfectly served
by the holy Patriarchs and Prophets. 1. They persevered constant in the Faith
and Worship of God, upheld and maintained the same among the people, and
carefully delivered it to their Posterity. 2. They kept true Poverty of spirit,
in plenty of wealth and riches, and made use of what they had, not to vanity
and ostentation, but to the service of God, and benefit of their Neighbor, in
works of Charity. 3. Notwithstanding the multitude of temporal affairs, they
preserved themselves in the holy fear of God, and were despisers of the
honors, which for their place, and deserts were due to them from the people.

Luc. 10.24
Consider 2. They did chiefly excel in an ardent love of Christ, and longing
desires and expectation of his coming: Many Prophets and Kings desired to see
the things which you see, etc. says our Savior himself. And our Lord revealed
unto them many Divine Secrets, and made them privy to the Mysteries of his
Incarnation, and Passion. In this Faith and Hope they lived, and died:
According to faith died all these, Heb. 1113.
not having received the Promises, but beholding them a far off, and saluting
them, and confessing that they are pilgrims and strangers upon the earth. Be
ashamed that your esteem, love, and gratitude, for these benefits graciously
bestowed upon you, should fall short of their affections and desires of the
same only represented to them, and that a far off.

Heb. 11.35, 36.
Consider 3. Their fervor of Charity, and love toward God, wherewith they
constantly endured even the greatest afflictions, and death it self, for his
sake: Others were racked (as the Machabees) not accepting Redemption, that they
might find a better Resurrection: Others (as Jeremy) had trial of mockeries and
stripes; moreover also, of bands and prisons (as Micheas;) They were stoned (as
Zachary;) They were hewed (as Isaie;) They were tempted by allurements of
pleasures (as Joseph;) They died in the slaughter of the sword (as the eighty
five Priests whom wicked Saul murdered.) Learn of these Sobriety and Moderation
in Prosperity, Constancy and Patience in Adversity.

Of the Apostles. Part 1.
1 Cor. 1.27. etc.
COnsider 1. What the Apostles were when Christ chose them; they were poor,
ignorant, ignoble, and contemptible in the sight of the world; and yet our Lord
made choice of them, rather then of others. Admire and reverence the wonderful
Providence of God herein, who (as the Apostle says) has chosen the foolish
things of the world, that he may confound the wise; and the weak things of the
world, etc. that he may confound the strong; and the base things of the world,
and the contemptible, etc. and those things which are not, that he might
destroy those things which are, that no flesh may glory in his sight.

Consider 2. Other particular causes of this Election. 1. That all might know
that the Conversion of the World was the work of God, not of Man. 2. That both
they and we should understand, that they were not called for any deserts of
their own, but by mere favor, and grace. 3. That being by their condition
exempted from the cares of temporal things, they might the better attend to the
preaching of the Gospel. 4. That so they might be fit Preachers of Evangelical
Poverty. 5. That having in themselves experience of humane weakness, and
insufficiency, they might learn to bear with others infirmities: Be humble and
little in your own eyes, that so you may become a fit instrument of Gods glory:
and be not dismayed for your mean parts, and abilities, knowing that God will
supply whatsoever is wanting, if you will but do your endeavor.

1 Cor. 4.1 Exodus 15.27. Exodus 39.10. etc. Lev. 24.5. 3 Reg. 18.31. Paral.
4.4.3 Reg. 10.20. Apoc. 21.14
Consider 3. The eminent Dignity to which they were raised. 1. To be Disciples,
familiar Companions, Friends, and Brethren to the Son of God. 2. To be next
after Christ (who was the Chief Cornerstone) so many Fundamental stones of his
Church, and Princes of his Kingdom. 3. To be the Doctors and Pastors of the
world, the Ministers of Christ, and of the New Testament, and the Dispensers of
the Mysteries of God. These were prefigured by the twelve Fountains of the
Desert Helim; the twelve Precious Stones in the Highpriests Rationale; the
twelve Loaves of Proposition in the Temple; the twelve Stones of which was
built the Altar; the twelve Oxen that sustained the Brazen Sea; the twelve
Lions of Salomons Throne; and the twelve foundations of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, etc.

Of the Apostles. Part 2.
Jo. 14.12.
COnsider 1. The Gifts of Grace, and Power conferred upon the Apostles, suitable
to the Dignity of their Call. 1. Of Consecrating, and offering in Sacrifice the
Body and Blood of our Lord. 2. Of Forgiving Sins, and of opening and shutting
Heaven Gates to men. 3. And 4. Of feeding the Flock, and ruling the Church of
Christ. 5. Of publishing to the world the new Law of Grace. 6. Of working
Miracles, even greater then those of Christ himself: They were endowed with
gifts of Grace above all the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Saints of the Old and
New Testament; so that the Church deservedly applies those words of the
Psalmist to them: Thy friends, O God, Ps. 138.1^
are become honorable exceedingly, their Principality is exceedingly
strengthened.

Luc. 22.28
Consider 2. How the holy Apostles did answer their Call, and cooperate with
their Grace. 1. They left all, and followed Christ at the first Call, and
remained with him in his temptations. 2. By their Apostolical Preaching,
Saintity of life, working of Miracles; by continual labors, persecutions,
sufferings, and death it self, they planted the Faith of Christ throughout the
world, cast down Idols, abolished Vice, and Infidelity, and established Virtue
and Religion: so that there is nothing good, and holy in the Church, which
proceeded not from them; the Constancy of Martyrs, the Justice of Confessors,
the Purity of Virging, the Zeal of Doctors, the Sanctity of Priests, the Rigor
of Moncks, and Religious, etc. ^ook the^^ beginning from them.

Jo. 14.27.
Consider 3. Their Reward. 1. In this life, in the wonderful fruit which they
daily reaped of their labors; and chiefly in the interior Joy and Jub^ly of
heart, surpassing all the joys of the world; Peace I leave to you, my peace I
give to you; not as the world gives, do I give to you; wherein they enjoyed to
the full the hundredfold which Christ had promised them. 2. In the other life,
where they shall sit as Judges of the world, and even of the Angels themselves;
and after a special manner shall eat and drink at Christ's own Table in his
Kingdom, where, above the other Saints, they shall be inebriated with the
pleaty of Gods House. Ps. 35.9.


Of Martyrs.
Jo. 15.13.
COnsider 1. The Holy Martyrs are the Seed of the Church, and Champions of
Christ: Martyrdom is an act 1. Of the greatest Charity: Greater love then this
no man has, that a man yield his life for his friends. 2. Of Invincible
Patience and Fortitude, contemning all manner of torments, and death it self.
3. Of Religion, it being an entire Sacrifice of the whole man, and perfect
Holocaust. 4. Of the perfectest Imitation of Christ: If any man will come after
me (says Christ) let him take up his Cross, Luc. 9.23.
and follow me.

Consider 2. There are diverse sorts of Martyrs: 1. Those who have suffered
death for the Faith of Christ, among Infidels and Heretics; of which sort
there have been innumerable in Gods Church. 2. For defense of the Truth, as S.
John Baptist, Isaie, Jeremy. 3. For the observance of the Divine Law, as the
Machabees. 4. For defense of the Churches Liberties and Immunities, as S.
Thomas of C^nterbury, 5. For their own Piety and Virtue, as Abel the Just.
Besides these, there are other true Martyrs, who though not in their Body, have
suffered interiourly in their Mind: As 1. The B. Virgin, whose soul was pierced
with the Sword of Grief, and is deservedly styled the Queen of Martyrs. 2. Holy
Hermits, Virgins, Luc. 2.35.
and the truly Religious, who all their life time have Crucified their flesh,
with its Concupiscences; among whom, many through the long durance of their
sufferings, have not only equalized, but also surpassed in Merit the sharp
torments of other Martyrs.

Luc. 21.19
Consider 3. Their Reward. 1. Of Heavenly Comfort and Consolation, which was
oftentimes so great, that it made them insensible of their torments. 2. Of
security of their future happiness: In your patience you shall possess your
Souls. Whence S. Augustine; He that prays for a Martyr, does an injury to the
Martyr. 3. Of a special Crown of Glory in Heaven above all other Saints. 4. Of
particular honor which the whole Church does them in celebrating their Feasts
(next to those of the Apostles) both more frequently, and solemnly: So that
most true is that of the Psalmist, Ps. 115.6.
Precious in the sight of God is the death of his Saints. See that you
celebrate aright their Festivities, that is, by imitation of their Vitues; for
(as S. Augustine says) The Solemnities of Martyrs, Sermon. 47. de Sanctis.
are so many Exhortations to Martyrdom, at least of Self-love, Inordinate
Passions, and Vicious Appetites.

Of the Doctors of the Church.
COnsider 1. Almighty God has provided his Church with holy Doctors, whom he
has en^owed with all manner of Wisdom and Knowledge, Humane and Divine; and
this they obtained, not so much by their own sedulous study and labor, as 1.
By continual Prayer, wherewith they humbly begged it of God the Author of all
Science and Wisdom. 2. By Purity of Life, whereby they became pure Glasses and
Myrrours fit to receive the Rays of Divine Light. 3. By Humility, whereby they
submitted both to one another, and to the Sense and Definitions of the Church.
If you desire to partake of their Knowledge and Wisdom, make use of the same
means.

Consider 2. Their Study was not merely to know, which is but an idle
Curiosity, nor to be known, which is Vanity, nor to get, which is base Lucre:
But 1. To further their own Salvation. 2. For the good of their Neighbor. 3.
For the propagation of the holy Faith, defense of the Church, and glory of God.
Examine what your labors tend to, Curiosity, Vanity, or the Glory of God: See
that you employ your Learning, and others Talents, not in devising, or
upholding newfangled Doctrines, but in zealously maintaining the known,
received, and approved Tenets of the Church.

Consider 3. The admirable fruits of their labors. 1. They have illustrated
the whole Church with their holy Sermons, and Writings. 2. They have opened the
sense of Holy Scriptures, declared the Mysteries of our Faith, maintained and
propagated Truth and Religion. 3. They have expelled Ignorance, corrected
Errors, vanquished Infidelity, Heresy and Vice, bringing Infidels to the
Faith, Heretics to the Church, Sinners to Repentance. 4. They have wonderfully
promoted Piety throughout the whole Christian world, by their zealous
Preaching, by their admirable Documents in all manner of Virtue, and by the
exemplar Sanctity of their Life and Conversation: So that the Holy Church does
deservedly apply to them what our Savior said to his Apostles, You are the
Salt of the Earth, etc. You are the Light of the World, etc. Mat. 5.13. and 15.
See how the properties of each do agree with them; consider withal, their
special reward in Heaven above other Saints: They that be learned (in the Law
of God) shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that instruct
many to Justice, D^n. 12.3.
as Stars unto perpetual Eternities.

Of Holy Bishops Confessors.
COnsider 1. Almighty God, out of his Paternal Providence, has raised some
among men, who should be 1. As Fathers to others, in begetting them spiritually
to Christ. 2. As Pastors, by governing, and feeding them with the Pasture of
Divine Doctrine. 3. As Leaders and Guides toward their Heavenly Country. 4. As
Mediators between God and Men, to appease his wrath against them. 5. As Legates
to represent their necessities to God, and to declare his will to them. 6. As
Highpriests, in the name of the whole Church, to do Divine Worship and Honor
to God, to offer Sacrifice, to present our Prayers, Oblations, and
Thanksgivings; and by means of these Duties, to obtain for us the return of
heavenly blessings. These were the proper Offices and Functions of the Holy
Bishops.

Consider 2. In regard the Calling of Bishops is the same with that of the
Apostles, whose Successors they are, God endowed them with special Gifts of
Grace and Virtue, answerable to the Dignity and End of their Calling. Ponder
therefore 1. Their Apostolical Spirit, and Zeal, in all things belonging to the
service of God, and good of Souls. 2. Wisdom in governing their Flock. 3.
Fullness of Faith, and Devotion in themselves, and indefatigable endeavor of
propagating the same in others. 4. Profound Knowledge in Scriptures, 5.
Interior Light, Purity, and Perfection, joined with Eminency of Doctrine, to
purge, illuminate, and perfect Souls committed to their charge.

Heb. 13.7.
Consider 3. How well they corresponded with the Grace of their Vocation, both
as to themselves, and their Flock: For 1. They were Holy, and Irreprehensible,
in their Life and Conversation, as persons of an other world, and consecrated
to God. 2. Notwithstanding their Eminent Dignity, and the honors done them by
men, they were humble of heart, Despisers of themselves, and ambitious of
nothing but to serve, and do good to all. 3. They were poor of spirit, though
in possession of great Revenues, which they employed no: in superfluities upon
themselves, or their Relations, but in relief of the Poor, necessities of
Virgins, Pupils, and Orphans, and in other Works, and Monuments of Piety. As to
their Hock, they were always intent, discharging to the full the abovementioned
Offices of Fathers, Pastors, Guides, Mediators, Legates, and Highpriests, by
Sacrifices and Sacraments, by Incessant Prayer, by Counsel, Exhortation,
Preaching, etc. Remember therefore with gratitude your Prelates (says the
Apostle) which have spoken the word of God to you, the end of whose
Conversation beholding, imitate their Faith, and other Virtues.

Of the Patriarchs or Founders of Religious Orders.
OUr Blessed Lord to maintain in his Church the fervor which he inspired in
the Primitive Christians, has instituted several Religious Orders, as so many
Schools of Evangelical Perfection. For the Founding of these, he raised men
from nothing (as he formerly did his Apostles) and by the Power of his Divine
Grace, made them absolute Masters, and perfect Myrrours of Perfection to their
Followers, choice Vessels of Election to his own Honor, and glorious Champions
to his Militant Church, against its Capital Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil. Ponder therefore, to their honor, and your own spiritual good, the
admirable Virtues which they exercised, in opposition to these three common
Adversaries.

Phil. 3.20.
Consider 1. In opposition to the World, they practiced and taught 1. Perfect
contempt thereof, and of all its Pomps. 2. Holy Solitude, and Retiredness. 3.
Strict Silence. 4. Evangelical Poverty, and that by Vow. 5. Contemplation of
Heavenly things, whereby though living on Earth, their conversation was in
Heaven. 6. Ardent Love of God, by which they lived wholly to him; so that they
might say with S. Paul, I live, now not I; Gal. 2.20. Gal. 6.14.
but Christ lives in me. And with the same Apostle they were truly Crucified
to the World, and the World to them.

Gal. 5.24.
Consider 2. Against the Flesh, they exercised 1. Angelical Purity, consecrating
themselves to God by the Vow of Chastity. 2. Religious Modesty, and Command
over their Senses, and Passions. 3. Regular Discipline, and Rule. 4. Rigorous
Fasting. 5. Continual Prayer, Reading, and other Holy Exercises. 6. Penance,
and perfect Mortification of the whole Man, Interior, and Exterior; By all
which means (as the Apostle speaks) they have crucified their flesh, with the
Vices, and Concupiscences.

Consider 3. Against the Devil, they opposed 1. Profound Humility, and contempt
of themselves. 2. The Vow of Perfect Obedience, requiring of their Followers
entire resignation of their wills and judgments into the hands of their
Superiors. 3. Lively and vigorous Faith, working always conformably to it, and
according to the Principles of Eternal Verity. 4. Inflamed love of God, and
their Neighbor, seeking in all their actions his greater glory, and their
everlasting good; laboring both by themselves, and their Children, to suppress
Infidelity, Heresy, and Sin, with zealous Preaching, Teaching, Administration
of Sacraments, and other Apostolical Functions. Extol the goodness of God,
Honor and Reverence these Saints, and make your benefit of their Example by
Imitation, according to the state of life, and condition you are in.

Of Confessors in General.
COnsider 1. Under the Name of Confessors, are understood 1. Those who have
openly professed the Faith of Christ before Judges, and after Imprisonments,
Chains, Torments, and Banishments suffered for the same Cause, without further
violence, have died in peace. 2. Those who having left all they had in the
world, have consecrated themselves to God in Religion, living in perpetual
Poverty, Chastity, Obedience, and observance of Religious Discipline. 3. All
those, who not being in any of the abovementioned Ranks of Saints, have led
their lives in all manner of Virtue and Sanctity, conformable to their state of
life, and Calling. They are called Confessors, because they confessed Christ.
1. In their heart, believing in him, loving, and adoring him. 2. With their
tongues, continually praising, and blessing him, and giving him thanks for his
benefits. 3. In their actions, keeping his Commandments, following his
Counsels, and laboring in the exercise of good works. Imitate these holy
Saints, and endeavor to confess, and honor God with your whole heart, and in
all your words, and actions.

Consider 2. These Holy Confessors, not content with the bare observance of
Gods Commandments, and Councels, labored to purge their heart and affections
of all whatsoever was not God, by a pure and upright intention of his honor
and service in all things: Their care and study was to regulate their thoughts,
to moderate their affections, to curb their senses, to break self-will and
judgment, and by taming the flesh with fasting, watching, and other corporal
austerities, to bring it to perfect subjection to the spirit, that so they
might serve their Creator with a pure and undefiled heart. For the same end
they gave themselves to the continual exercise of Prayer, and Meditation of
Heavenly things, and led their lives free from worldly cares and cogitations.
Endeavor by the same means to procure this Purity of Heart and Intention,
which these Saints made so much of.

Mat. 10.32 Luc. 12.8.
Consider 3. Of what benefit to the Church, and Merit and God, these holy
Confessors are. 1. For that by the singular purity and integrity of their life,
they easily appease Gods wrath against sinners, and obtain blessings from him.
2. For that thereby, more efficaciously then by words, they Preach the Contempt
of the World, and convince by their own example, that there is no Sex, Age,
Condition or Calling in the Church, which may not by the concurrance with Gods
Grace, easily attain to Virtue and Perfection. Consider finally their Reward.
1. Every one that shall confess me before men, I also will confess him before
the Angels of God, and before my Father which is in Heaven. 2. Of these our
Lord said, That he will gird himself, and make them sit down, Luc. 12.37
at his Nuptial Feast in Heaven, and passing, will minister unto them.

Of Virgins.
COnsider 1. Holy Virgins are those, who notwithstanding whatsoever
enticements, threats, promises, temptations, etc. lead their lives in all
Purity of Body, and Mind; and while they are yet in flesh, emulate the
perfection of Pure Spirits, with this advantage of desert, that what they are
by Nature, these arrive unto by a glorious Victory over their own Nature.
Virgins are specially beloved by Christ; he would have a Virgin Mother, a
Virgin for his Precursor; and among all his Disciples, he loved best the Virgin
S. John: Virginity (as S. Cyprian affirms) is the Flower of the Churches
Offspring, Cypr. de Discipl. and Habitu Virg.
the Glory and Ornament of Spiritual Grace, the Image of God, and the most
Illustrious Portion, or part of Christ's Flock.

2 Cor. 4.7.
Consider 2. Virginity, although it be a special gift of God, is not bestowed
without our concurrance, nor conserved without diligent care; for we have this
treasure in Earthen Vessels. The means therefore to obtain and conserve it are
1. Mortification of the Flesh by Fasting, Abstinence, Watching, and other
Corporal Austerities. 2. Strict guard upon our Senses, which are the gates
through which all evil does enter into our Soul. 3. Command over our thoughts,
neither admitting, nor even disputing with any that are against this Virtue. 4.
The avoiding of all occasions that may bring us into the least danger. 5.
Earnest Prayer to Almighty God, whose gift it is. 6. Humility, not trusting to
our selves, knowing our own weakness. 7. Fear of God. 8. Memory of the last
things.

Apoc. 14.4
Consider 3. The Reward of Virginity. 1. It is sufficient Reward to it self,
freeing the Soul from the Tyranny of the Flesh, and unruly Passions, to which
others are subject, and filling the same with most pure joy, and content, above
all the delights of the World. 2. Virgins after a special manner are Temples of
the Holy Ghost, and Spouses of Christ, with whom he delights to be: Whence
they have that singular Prerogative above others in Heaven, that they follow
the Lamb whither soever he shall go. 3. They have a special Crown in Heaven,
like to that of Martyrs: And S. Ambrose does style Virginity, the Mother of
Martyrs, and a glorious Martyrdom it self. Stir your self up to the love of
this Heavenly and Angelical Virtue, and make use of the means that help to
obtain it.

On the Feast of any Saint.
General Points.
Romans 8.30
COnsider 1. Four things in whatsoever Saint you meditate on. 1. His
Predestination. 2. Vocation. 3. Justification. 4. Glorification; according to
that of the Apostle, Whom he has predestined, them also he has called; and
whom he has called, them also he has justified; and whom he has justified,
them also has he glorified: The Predestination, or Election to Glory, was of
Gods free gift, without any desert of theirs: Ephesians. 1.4.
Before the canstitution of the world, that they should be Holy and Immaculate
in his sight: Their Vocation, in diverse of them, was different; some were
called in their Youth, others in their Old Age; some by Miracle, others
occasionally: But God has been wonderful in all; Their Justification afforded
them great gifts of Grace, and special helps; the chief of which you may
reflect upon more in particular: Their Glorification, chiefly after death, by
Miracles, Visions, the gift of curing Diseases, and the like.

Mat. 16.24
Consider 2. How the Saint, of whom you meditate, answered Gods Call, and
practiced what he required of all those that would follow him, as in set down
in the Gospel; If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross, and follow me. Ponder how he was 1. In the Abnegation of himself, by
mortifying his Flesh, Senses, and Appetites. 2. In carrying his Cross, that is,
in manfully undergoing labors and pains for the glory of God, and suffering
adversities; such as are Sickness, Persecutions, Afflictions, Miseries, etc. 3.
In following Christ, by the exercise of all manner of Virtue, in imitation of
him.

Consider 3. In what particular, and in what manner you are to imitate the
Saint of whom you meditate: Chrysostom. Ser. de Mart. quod imitand. in brev. 7.
No^om^.
Because, as S. Chrysostom says, You must imitate, if you praise, or must not
praise, if you refuse to imitate: And we might be what the Saints are, if we
would do what they did.

FINIS. To the greater Glory of God, His B. Virgin Mother, and all his Saints.
A TABLE OF THE MEDITATIONS Contained in this Book; as they lie in Order,
distributed for every Day of the Year.
From the 1 of November to Advent.
All Saints day. Of Christ in the Eucharist as God Page 1 1. Sunday. Of Christ
in the Eucharist as King Page 2 2. Sunday. Of Christ in the Eucharist as our
Father Page 3 3. Sunday. Of Christ in the Eucharist as our Brother Page 5 4.
Sunday. Of Christ in the Eucharist as our Master Page 6 Of Man's last End. 2.
Meditations Page 7, 8 Of Man's Duty toward God. 2. Med. Page 9, 10, 11 Of the
Sin of Angels Page 12 Of the Sin of our first Parents Page 13 Of the
grievousness of Mortal Sin. 5. Med. Page 14. etc. Of flying Venial Sins. 3.
Med. Page 21. etc. Of Death. 3. Med. Page 25. etc. Of preparing against Death.
2. Med. Page 28. etc. Of particular Judgment. 2. Med. Page 31. etc. Of general
Judgment. 2. Med. Page 33. etc. Of Hell. 2. Med. Page 36. etc. Of Purgatory. 2.
Med. Page 39. etc.

From Advent to Christmas.
1. Sunday. Of Christ in the Eucharist as Judge page 42 Of imitating the Life
of Christ. 2. Med. Page 43. etc. Of Gods Decree concerning the Incarnation. 2.
Med. Page 45. etc. Of the Election of Christ's Mother. 2. Med. Page 47. etc.
2. Sunday. Of Christ as the Expectation of the Gentiles Page 50 Of sending the
Angel Gabriel Page 51 Of the Angels Salutation Page 52 Of the Delivery of the
Message Page 53 Of the B. Virgins Reply Page 54 Of the B. Virgins Consent Page
55 Of the accomplishment of the Incarnation Page 56
3. Sunday. Of Christ as the Anoiuted of our Lord Page 58 Of our Ladies Journey
to Elizabeth Page 59 Of the Virgins Entrance to Elizabeth Page 60 Of the
Canticle Magnificat. Page 61 Of the Virgins stay with Elizabeth Page 63 Of
Saint John's Nativity. 2 Med. Page 64. etc.
4. Sunday. Of Christ as our Souls Guest. Page 66 Of the Revelation made to S.
Joseph. 2. Med. Page 67. etc. Of the Expectation of the Virgins Delivery. 2.
Med. Page 70. etc. Of the Virgins Journey to Bethlehem Page 72

From Christmas to Septuagesm.
On Christmass-day. Of Christ as a little one Page 74 Of our Lords Birth. 3.
Med. Page 75. etc. Of the Shepherds, and their Adoration. 3. Med. Page 78. etc.
On New Years day. Of Christ, as he is Jesus Page 82 Of our Lords Circumcision.
2. Med. Page 83. etc. Of our Spiritual Circumcision. 2. Med. Page 86. etc.
On Twelfth-day. Of Christ as our Sovereign Lord Page 88 Sunday in the Octave.
Of Christ, as Teacher of Justice Page 89 Of the Sages Journey to Jerusalem. 2.
Med. Page 91. etc. Of Herod's Enquiry after Christ Page 93 Of the Sages Arrival
and Adoration at Bethlehem Page 94 Of their Offerings Page 96 Of their Return
Page 97
2. Sunday after Epiph. Of Christ as our Spouse Page 99 Of the Virgins
Purification Page 100 Of our Lords Presentation Page 101 Of what passed with
Holy Simeon. 2. Med. Page 103. etc. Of what passed with Anna. 2. Med. Page 105.
etc.
3. Sunday after Epiph. Of Christ as our Physician Page 108 Of Christ's Flight
into Egypt. 3. Med. Page 109. etc. Of the Murder of the Holy Innocents Page 113
Of Christ's Return out of Egypt Page 114 Of the Virtues which Christ exercised
in his Infancy Page 115
4. Sunday after Epiph. Of Christ as our Souls Tranquillity Page 117 Of Christ's
going up to the Temple. 2. Med. Page 118, etc Of Christ's being sought by his
Parents Page 120 Of Christ's being found by his Parents Page 121 Of Christ's
Return to Nazareth, and Obedience to his Parents. 2. Med. Page 122, etc
5. Sunday after Epiph. Of Christ as the Good Seed Page 124 Of Christ's growing
in Age, Wisdom, etc. 2. Med. Page 12^, etc Of our necessity of profiting in
Virtue. 2. Med. Page 127, etc Of Christ's Life, from the 12th to his 30th Year.
2. Med. Page 130, etc
6. Sunday after Epiph. Of Christ compared to the Mustard Seed Page 132
From Septuagesm to Easter.
Of our Lords Passion.
Things to be noted concerning the Meditations of the Passion Page 134, etc
Septuagesm Sunday. Of Christ as Master of our Souls Vineyard Page 136 Christ
inviteth all to contemplate his Passion Page 137 Of the General Circumstances
of Christ's Passion. 5. Med. Page 138, etc
Sexagesm Sunday. Of Christ as the Seed of Eternal Life Page 143 Of Christ's
foretelling his Passion Page 145 Of Christ's Solemn Entrance into Jerusalem. 2.
Med. Page 146, etc Of Christ's being sold by Judas Page 148 Of the Paschal Lamb
Page 1^9 Of washing the Disciples Feet Page 151
Quinquagesm Sunday. Of Christ as the Light of our Soul Page 152 Of the
Institution of the B. Sacrament. 1. Med. Page 153, etc Of our Lords Sermon
after Supper. 2. Med. Page 156, etc Of Christ's Prayer in the Garden Page 158 Of
Christ's Bloody Sweat, and of the Angel Page 160
1. Sunday of Lent. Of Christ as our Captain Page 161 Of Christ's meeting Judas,
etc. Page 162 Of Judas his Kiss Page 163 Of Christ's casting his Enemies on the
ground, and being taken Page 165 Of Christ's being bound, and of the Disciples
Flight Page 166 Of Christ's being led to Annas Page 167 Of the Blow in Annas
House Page 168
2. Sunday of Lent. Of Christ as the Transfigurer of our Soul Page 170 Of
Christ's Accusation before Caiphas Page 171 Of the Injuries which Christ
suffered in Caiphas's house. 2 Med. Page 172, etc Of Peter's denying Christ. 2.
Med. Page 175, etc Of Judas his Despair Page 177
3. Sunday of Lent. Of Christ as our Souls Guardim Page 179 Of Christ's Journey
from Caiphas to Pilat Page 180 Of Christ's Accusation before Pilat Page 181 Of
Christ sent to Herod Page 182 Of Barabbas preferred before Christ Page 184 Of
the Whipping at the Pillar. 2. Med. Page 185, etc
4. Sunday of Lent. Of Christ as the Food of our Soul Page 187 Of the Crowning
with Thorns Page 188 Lo the Man. 2. Med. Page 189, etc Of Christ condemned to
death Page 191 Of Christ's carrying his Cross Page 193 Of meeting the Virgin
Page 194
Passion Sunday. Of Christ as a hidden God Page 195 Of crucifying our Lord. 3.
Med. Page 196, etc Of Christ's first Word on the Cross Page 200 Of the second
Word Page 201 Of the third Word Page 202
Palm Sunday. Of Christ as a mild King Page 204 Of the fourth Word Page 205 Of
the fifth Word Page 206 Of Christ's last words, and Death Page 207
Maundy Thursday. Of Christ as our Redeemer Page 209 A Summary of our Lords
Passion Page 210 Of our Lords Burial Page 211

From Easter to Whitsontide.
Things to be observed in the Meditations of the Mysteries of the Resurrection
Page 213 Easter day. Of Christ as our Resurrection Page 215 Of our Lords
Resurrection Page 216 Of Christ's appearing to his B. Mother Page 218 Of the
Angels Apparition at the Sepulcher Page 219 Of Christ's appearing to Mary
Magdalen Page 220 Of his appearing to the other Women Page 221 Of Peter and
John at the Sepulcher Page 223
Low Sunday. Of Christ as the Prince of Peace Page 224 Of Christ's appearing to
the Disciples going to Emmaus. 2. Med. Page 225, etc Of his appearing to his
Disciples, S. Thomas being absent. 2. Med. Page 228, etc Of his appearing to
them, when S. Thomas was present Page 230 Of his Wounds showed to S. Thomas
Page 232
2. Sunday after Easter. Of Christ as a good Pastor Page 233 Of Christ's
appearing to seven Disciples Fishing. 2. Med. Page 235, etc Of Christ's
committing his Sheep to Peter Page 237 Of his last Apparition on the Mount Page
238 Of other Apparitions within the 40 days Page 240 Of diverse Circumstances of
Christ's Apparitions. Page 241
3. Sunday after Easter. Of Christ as our Comforter Page 242 Of Gods Benefits;
and 1. Of Creation. 2. Med. Page 243, etc Of the Benefit of Conservation. 2.
Med. Page 246, etc Of the Benefit of Redemption. 2. Med. Page 248
4. Sunday after Easter. Of Christ as our Advocate Page 250 Of the Benefit of
Adoption. 3. Med. Page 251, etc Of the Benefit of the Holy Sacraments Page 255
Of the Benefit of the Angels Custody Page 256 Of the Benefit of the Patronage
of Saints Page 257
5. Sunday after Easter. Of Christ as the Bestower of Gifts Page 258 Of the
Benefit of Prayer. 3. Med. Page 259, etc
On Ascension day. Of Christ as King of Glory Page 263 Of our Lords Ascension.
2. Med. Page 264, etc Sunday in the Oct. of Ascen. Of Christ as a Pledge of
future Glory Page 266 Of Heavenly Glory. 4. Med. Page 267, etc Of the
expectation of the Holy Ghost. 2. Med. Page 271, etc

From Whitsontide to November, or Advent.
Whitsunday. Of Christ as a Fire Page 273 Of the coming of the Holy Ghost. 2.
Med. Page 274, etc Of the gifts of the Holy Ghost. 2. Med. Page 276, etc Of the
fruits of the Holy Ghost Page 278 Of the Life of the first Christians Page 279
Trinity Sunday. Of Christ as second Person of the B. Trinity Page 280 Of the
three Persons in the B. Trinity. 3. Med. Page 281, etc
Corpus Christi day. Of Christ as Instituter of the B. Sacrament Page 284 Of
the H. Eucharist, as compared with Manna. 2. Med. Page 285
Sunday in the Oct. Corp. Chr. Of the Eucharist as a Banquet Page 288 Of the
Eucharist as a Banquet Page 289 Of the Eucharist compared to the Tree of Life.
3. Med. Page 290, etc Of preparation for Receiving. 2. Med. Page 294, etc

Of Christ's Preaching and Miracles.
3. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as a Shepherd, etc. Page 296 Of the
preaching of S. John Baptist. 2. Med. Page 298, etc Of the Jews Message to
John. 2. Med. Page 300, etc Of Christ's Baptism. 2. Med. Page 302, etc
4. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Director Page 304 Of Christ's
retiring into the Desert Page 305 Of Christ Fasting Page 306 Of Christ's
temptations in the Desert. 4. Med. Page 308, etc
5. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as an Offering Page 312 Of the Apostles
first Vocation. 2. Med. Page 313, etc Of the second Vocation of S. Peter and S.
Andrew Page 315 Of S. James and S. John's Vocation Page 316 Of S. Matthews
Vocation Page 318 Of S. Paul's Vocation Page 319
6. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Eucharist, as our Viaticum Page 320 Of three
that offered themselves to follow Christ. 3. Med. Page 321, etc Of the Rich
Young Man's Vocation. 2. Med. Page 324, etc Of our Vocation in general to follow
Christ Page 326
7. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as a good Tree Page 327 Of the Marriage
Feast of Cana in Galilee. 3. Med. Page 328, etc Of casting out of the Temple
the Buyers, etc. 2. Med. Page 332, etc Of our Lords discourse with Nicodemus
Page 334
8. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as exacting account, etc. Page 335 Of our
Lords Sermon on the Mount. 2. Med. Page 336, etc Of the four first Beatitudes.
4. Med. Page 338, etc
9. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as a Merciful Lord Page 343 Of the other
four Beatitudes. 4. Med. Page 344, etc Of those words, You are the salt of the
Earth, etc. Page 348 Of those words, You are the light of the World, etc. Page
349
10. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Propitiation Page 350 Of our
Lords Prayer. 2. Med. Page 351, etc Of other sayings of Christ on the Mount
Page 353 Of sending the Apostles to Preach. 2. Med. Page 354, etc Of their
Return from Preaching Page 356
11. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as Giver of Hearing, and Speech Page 357
Of S. John's Message to Christ. 2. Med. Page 358, etc Of the Martyrdom of S.
John Baptist Page 361 Of five thousand fed in the Desert. 2. Med. Page 362, etc
Of Christ's flying, not to be made King Page 364
12. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as the good Samaritan Page 365 Of
Christ's allaying the Tempest Page 366 Of Christ's walking upon the Water Page
367 Of S. Peter's walking upon the Water Page 368 Of S. Peter's confessing
Christ Page 369 Of Primacy promised to S. Peter Page 370 Of S. Peter's
dissuading Christ from his Passion Page 371
13. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as Priest Page 372 Of our Lords
Transfiguration. 3. Med. Page 373 Of the Petition of the Sons of Zebedee. 2.
Med. Page 376, etc Of the Greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven Page 379
14. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Lord Page 380 Of S. Mary
Magdalen's Conversion. 2. Med. Page 381, etc Of the Samaritan Woman's
Conversion. 2. Med. Page 383, etc Of the Woman taken in Adultery Page 385 Of
the Cananean Woman Page 386
15. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Souls Life Page 388 Of the
Conversion of Zacheus. 2. Med. Page 389, etc Of curing the Centurions Servant.
2. Med. Page 391, etc Of curing S. Peter's Mother-in-Law Page 393 Of a Princes
Son restored to health Page 394
16. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Souls Guest Page 396 Of the Man
cured at the Pond. 2. Med. Page 397, etc Of the Bedridden let down from the Roof.
2. Med. Page 399, etc Of the Withered Hand cured Page 401 Of the crooked Woman
cured Page 402
17. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Souls Love Page 403 Of the Leper.
2. Med. Page 405, etc Of the ten Lepers. 2. Med. Page 407, etc Of the Deaf and
Dumb Man. 2. Med. Page 409, etc
18. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as the strength of our Soul Page 412,
etc Of the Man born blind. 2. Med. Page 413 Of the blind man of Hiericho Page
415, etc Of the blind man of Bethsaida Page 416 Of the Lunatic Devil. 2. Med.
Page 417, etc
19. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Friend Page 419 Of the Women
cured of the Bloody Flux Page 420 Of raising the Arch-Synagogues Daughter to
life Page 422 Of raising the Widows Son in Naim. 2. Med. Page 423, etc Of
raising Lazarus. 2. Med. Page 425, etc
20. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as the Worker of Miracles Page 427
Of some Historical Narrations and Parables of Christ.
Of the Rich Glutton, and Lazarus, 2. Med. Page 428, etc Of the Prodigal Son.
2. Med. Page 430. etc Of him that was wounded by the Thieves. 2. Med. Page 433,
etc 21. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as a Patient Creditor Page 435 Of the
Workmen in the Vineyard. 2. Med. Page 436, etc Of the Invitement to the
Wedding, and Supper. 2. Med. Page 439, etc Of the ten Virgins. 2. Med. Page
441, etc
22. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as Teacher of Truth Page 443 Of the
Talents. 2. Med. Page 444, etc Of the Vineyard let out to Husbandmen. 2. Med.
Page 447, etc Of the Bailiff of Iniquity Page 449 Of the Wise man, and the Fool
Page 450
23. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ as our Souls Salvation Page 451 Of the
Sower Page 452 Of the Cockle Page 453 Of the Mustard Seed Page 454 Of the
Leaven Page 455 Of the Treasure hid in the field Page 456 Of the Pearl Page 457
24. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ, etc. as is set down Page 458 Of the
lost sheep Page 459 Of the Pharisee, and the Publican Page 460 Of the Faithful
and Wise Steward, or Servant Page 461 Of Girding the Loins Page 462 Of the
Vine, and its branches Page 463 Of the barren Fig Tree Page 464

Meditations of Saints.
Of the Excellency of the B. Virgin above all Creatures Page 466 Of the
Immaculate Conception of the B. Virgin Page 467 Of the Nativity of the B.
Virgin Page 469 Of the Annunciation of the B. Virgin Page 51, etc Of the
Visitation of the B. Virgin Page 59, etc Of the Purification of the B. Virgin
Page 100, etc Of the Assumption of the B. Virgin Page 470 Of the Nativity of S.
John Baptist Page 64, etc Of the Decollation of S. John Baptist Page 361 Of S.
Peter, and S. Paul Page 369, etc Of the Vocation of S. Peter and S. Andrew Page
315 Of the Vocation of S. James and S. John Page 316 Of S. Matthews Vocation
Page 318 Of S. Paul's Vocation, or Conversion Page 319 Of S. Mary Magdalens
Conversion Page 382 Of S. Thomas of Canterbury Page 233, and 79 Of the Angels
Page 471, etc Of the holy Patriarchs and Prophets Page 474 Of the Apostles Page
475, etc Of Martyrs Page 478 Of the Doctors of the Church Page 479 Of Holy
Bishops Confessors Page 481 Of the Patriarchs or Founders of Religious Orders
Page 482 Of Confessors in General Page 484 Of Virgins Page 486 Of any
particular Saint. General Points. Page 487
To the Reader.
WHereas the Sundays Meditations throughout the Year, according to the Authors
distribution, are directed chiefly in Order to Holy Communion, with little
reflection upon the proper matter, or subject of the current Gospel; I thought
it would conduce to the general satisfaction of all, to adjoyn in this place
some easy Method, whereby might be assigned to each Sunday its proper Gospel,
which might afford matter both of Mental Prayer, for those who desire to
meditate weekly on the Gospel of the Sunday; and of Discourse, for the benefit
of those who have not always at hand ready matter for their Functions of
Preaching and Exhortation: To which purpose I have here set down a Table
representing 1. Each Sunday according to its order in the Churches Calendar. 2.
The subject of the Gospels. 3. The Chapter and Verse, by which the Gospel may
be found in the Holy Bible. 4. The Page of this Book, which does direct you to
your Meditation. 1. In reference to H. Communion. 2. To the subject of that
Sundays Gospel. And because many Sundays have not in this Journal their proper
Gospel, I have supplied the want, with as many Meditations taken chiefly out of
Buseus, a known and approved spiritual Author.

A Table of the Sundays throughout the Year.
1. SUnday of Advent. Of the latter Judgment, Luke 21. verse. 25. Page 42. see
page 33, 34, 35, 36. also page 31, 32. of particular Judgment.

2. Sunday of Advent. Of S. John's Message to Christ, Mat. 11.2. Page 50. see
page 358, 359, 360.

3. Sunday of Advent. Of the Jews Message to S. John, Jo. 1.19. Page 58. see
Page 300, 301, 302.

4. Sunday of Advent. Of S. John's first preaching in the Desert, Luke 3.1.

Osee 2.14
In the fifteenth year of Tibetius Caesar, etc. the word of our Lord was made
upon John the son of Zachary in the Desert. Consider 1. How S. John's and our
Lords Preaching took their beginning from the Desert; that you should love holy
Solitude, and retiredness, as the fittest disposition to receive Gods
Inspirations; I will lead her (the Soul) into the wilderness, and will speak to
her heart. Think where are now those great ones who are mentioned in this
Gospel; the Roman Emperor, and President, the Tetrarchs, and High Priests;
they are all gone, and their memory is kept here, not for their own sakes, but
to evidence to the world the Incarnation and Passion of our Lord, of which they
were remarkable Witnesses, and Actors. Admire not therefore, nor regard the
greatness and prosperity of such in this life, but rather think what all will
come to (...) last; Prove. 10.7
The name of the Impious shall (...).

Mat. 3.2.
Consider 2. He preached the Baptism of Penance unto remission of sins; that is,
preparing men's hearts to receive the same afterward by the Faith and Baptism
of Christ. Think how important a thing Penance is (...). For that it was the
principal subject of S. John's, of Christ's, and his Apostles preathing; all
crying out to their Auditors, Do Penance. 2. Because we are all sinners, and
stand in need of Penance: If we shall say that we have no sin, 1 Jo. 1.8.
we seduce our selves. 3. For that as Christ says, Unless you have penance,
Luc. 13.3.
you shall all perish. See you also do penance, and yield fruits worthy of
penance, that is, satisfactory works, amendment of life, etc.

^ Cor. 1.30.
Consider 3. Prepare the way of our Lord, make straight his paths; Every Valley
shall be filled, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low, and crooked
things shall become straight, and rough ways plain. Our preparation therefore
against the coming of Christ must be 1. By levelling the Mountains which Pride
and Vanity has raised in out heart. 2. By filling up the empty Valleys of
slothfulness and pusillanimity. 3. By rectifying our crooked intentions. 4. By
correcting the roughness of Anger, Hatred, Envy, and other passions, so as to
become of an even temper, and agreeable conversation with all. Think lastly,
what a happiness is promised us in those words, And all flesh shall see the
salvation of God, that is, Christ Jesus, who is made unto us Wisdom from God,
and Justice, Sanctification, and Redemption.

Sunday within the Octave of the Nativity. Of what passed with Simeon, Anna,
etc. Luc. 2.33. see page 104, 105, 106, 107.

Sunday within the Octave of Epiphany. Of our Lords going up to the Temple,
etc. Luc. 2.42. page 118, etc. to the page 124. see page 125, 126.

2. Sunday after Epiphany. Of the Marriage in Galilee, Jo. 2.1. page 99. see
page 328, 329, 330, 331.

3. Sunday after Epiphany. Of the Leper and the Centurions servant, Mat. 8.1.
page 108. see page 405, 406. and again 391, 392, 393.

4. Sunday after Epiph. Of allaying the Tempest at Sea, Mat. 8.23. page 117.
see page 336.

5. Sunday after Epiph. Of the good Seed and the Cockle, Mat. 13.24. page 124.
see page 453, 454.

6. Sunday after Epiph. Of the Mustard Seed, Mat. 13.31. page 132. see page
454, 455.

Septuagesm Sunday. Of the Workmen sent into the Vineyard, Mat. 20.1. page 136.
see page 336, 337, 338.

Sexagesm Sunday. Of the Sower, Luc. 8.4. page 143. see page 452, 453.

Quinquagesm Sunday. Of Christ's foretelling his Passion, and of the blind man,
Luc. 18.31. page 152. see page 145. and again 415, 416.

1. Sunday of Lent. Of Christ's Temptations in the Desert, Mat. 4.1. page 161.
see from page 305. to page 312.

2. Sunday of Lent. Of our Lords Transfiguration, Mat. 17.1. page 170. see from
page 373. to page 377.

3. Sunday of Lent. Of the Dumb Devil, Luc. 11.14. page 179.

Consider 1. Christ having cast out a dumb Devil, certain of them said, In
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils he casts out Devils. Observe here the goodness
of God on the one side, in doing good to men, and turning out Devils; and the
perverseness of men on the other, in calumniating the good, and ascribing it to
the Devil. Ponder Christ's answer, Every Kingdom divided against it self, shall
be made desolate. Think how your heart is divided, The flesh lusting against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; Gal. 5.17.
and see you bring this in persect subjection to the spirit. Beg of Christ that
in the spirit of God he would cast out Devils, that is, all sin, out of your
heart, that the Kingdom of God may come upon you.

Consider 2. What Christ says, That when the unclean spirit shall depart out
of a man, etc. he goes, and takes seven other spirits worse then himself, and
entering in, they dwell there: And the last of that man be made worse then the
first. Does not the same happen to most men after Baptism by the seven deadly
sins, which they give way unto? Does it not also happen sometimes after a
Conversion from the World, that some return back far worse then ever they were
before? See therefore you keep the Gates of your Senses well shut against the
Devil, and all sin; but be sure, what ever you do, you let not either dwell in
your heart.

Consider 3. The special Blessings attributed to the Sacred Virgin in this
Gospel; the one temporal, and relating to flesh and blood; of which a certain
woman lifting up her voice out of the multitude, said to him, Blessed is the
Womb that bare thee, and the Paps that thou did suck: The other purely
spiritual, of which Christ pronounced, chiefly in relation to his Blessed
Mother, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it.
The first was a singular privilege of the Virgin alone; the other, though hers
also after a more special manner, is common to many, and may be yours if you
will your self: Admire and extol that, with the Woman, and with the Church,
that uses the same words to the Virgin, and make this other your own by
imitation.

4. Sunday of Lent. Of five thousand fed in the Desert, Jo. 6.1. page 187. see
page 362, 363.

Passion Sunday. Of Christ's arguing with the Jews, Jo. 8.46. page 195.

Consider 1. Christ by reason of the Beatifical Vision, and hypostatical Union,
was most holy, and irreprehensible in himself, and irrefragable in his
Doctrine; and by these two Titles of Sanctity and Veracity, deservedly claims
belief of his Doctrine and Authority of rebuking sinners, saying, Which of you
shall argue me of sin? If I say the Verity, why do you not believe me? O that
you could make the like challenge! Think whether you do practically believe
Christ's Doctrine, as to matters of Virtue and Perfection; and whether you do
willingly hear the Word of God, and his holy Inspirations, delivered unto you
in Sermons, Exhortations, Pious Books, etc. and know, that as he that is of
God, hears the Word of God; so he that hears not, is not of God.

1 Reg. 2.30.
Consider 2. The Jews having said, Thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil,
Christ silently bears the first, as a private injury relating only to his
person, as he was Man; but modestly denies the other, wherein was highly
concerned his Fathers, and his own Divine Honor, saying, I have no Devil; but I
do honor my Father. Well therefore might he say, I seek not my own glory;
there is that seeks, and judges. Think how contrary you are in this point to
Christ: Seek in all your actions the greater glory of God, and God will honor
you: Whosoever shall glorify me, I will glorify him. Seek not revenge in
affronts and injuries, but commit your cause to God, who says, Revenge to me,
I will repay. Heb. 10.30.


Consider 3, Amen, Amen, I say to you, if any one keep my word, he shall not
see death for ever. What greater happiness and security can there be then this?
And yet how few are there that are concerned for it? How many that regard the
Maxims, and sayings of the world, more then they do the Divine Words,
Councels, and Promises of Christ? But see that you stick to Christ, and say
with S. Peter; Lord, Jo. 6.68.
to whom shall we go, thou have the words of Eternal Life. Remember and ponder
well what Christ himself said; Mat. 4.4.
Not in bread alone does man live, but in every word that proceeds from the
mouth of God.

Palm Sunday. Of Christ's entrance into Jerusalem, Mat. 21.1. page 204. see page
146.

Easter Sunday. Of the Apparition made to the Women, Marc. 16.1. page 215. see
page 219.

Low-Sunday. Of Christ's Apparition to his Disciples, S. Thomas being present,
Jo. 20.19. page 224. see page 228, 229, 230, 231.

2. Sunday after Easter. Of the good Pastor, Jo. 10.11. page 233.

Consider 1. I am the good Pastor; the good Pastor gives his life for his
sheep: All that have care of others, are Pastors; Superiors of their Subjects,
Parents of their Children, Housekeepers of their Family, etc. and every one of
his own Powers, Senses, Members, etc. We are good Pastors, when we rule,
govern, and maintain those that are under us, with Counsel, Example, food
corporal and spiritual: We are good sheep, when we are innocent, tractable,
obedient, patient, etc. We lay down our lives, when in opposition to the
Wolves, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, we deny our own wills and
judgments, refrain our senses, and choose rather to die, then to offend God
mortally in any of them.

Consider 2. But the Hireling, etc. sees the Wolf coming, and leaves the
sheep, and flies: We are Hirelings, 1. When in out good actions, as Prayers.
Sermons, etc. we seek not Gods-honour, but vain glory, and esteem of the world.
2. When at the Wolfs appearance, by some temptation of the Flesh, or the World,
we make no resistance, nor chastise our body with Mortification, but fly all
Penance, and by too much indulgence give our sheep over to be devoured by their
Enemies; whereby we come both to lose our sheep, and title of Shepherds and
Masters, and to fall into the miserable condition of Slaves; Jo. 8.34.
for every one which commits sin, is the servant, or slave, of sin.

S. August.
Consider 3. I know mine, and mine know me. It is the property of good sheep,
and Shepherd, to know one another: Make it therefore your business, 1. As a
good sheep, to know your Pastor from your Enemy, to understand the Voice of God
by his Church, and your Superiors, to hearken to his Inspirations, to obey his
Counsels and Commands, to acknowledge, and love his goodness and mercy toward
you. 2. As a good Pastor, rightly to understand your self, to know your own
weakness, infirmities, and imperfections; to have an eye upon your interior
powers, to over-see, and rule your exterior senses; say with S. Augustine,
Lord, that I may know thee, and know my self.

3. Sunday after Easter. Christ comfort his Disciples, Jo. 16.16. page 242.

Consider 1. A little while, and now you shall not see me, being taken from you
by my Passion, and Death; And again, a little while, and you shall see me, in
my Resurrection, though but for a little while, because I go to the Father:
Christ here mingleth sorrow with joys; but first sorrow, then joys;
contrariwise, the World first proposes joys, pleasures, and content, but at
last brings all to sorrow and misery: Amen, Amen, I say unto you, that you
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice. Observe the different lot
of Christ's, and the Worlds Disciples, in this life, and choose which you will
have to be yours; but know withal, that your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

Consider 2. Christ compares the Apostles joy for his Resurrection, after
their sorrow for his Passion (the same is of the happiness of the next life,
after the labors of this) to the joy of a Woman after the travel of
Childbirth; because both these griefs are bitter, both short, both full of
danger, and are afterward both turned into joy suitable to their sorrows, and
as there, so here, the cause of pain is also cause of comfort: A woman when she
travelleth has sorrow, because her hour is come; but when she has brought
forth the child, now she remembers not the anguish, for joy that a man is born
into the world. Reflect upon each particular.

2 Cor. 4.17.
Consider 3. What follows: I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice,
and your joy no man shall take from you. Thus our tribulation, which at present
is momentary and light, works above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of
glory in us: On the contrary, the Worldlings for the short and momentary
delight which they enjoyed in this life, are punished with everlasting torments
in the next; whence Job said of them, They lead their lives in wealth, Job 21.13
and jollity, and in a moment they go down to Hell. Imprint in your memory
those words of Abraham to the Rich Glutton; Remember that thou did receive
good things in thy life time, Luc. 16.25
and Lazarus likewise evil, but now he is comforted, and thou tormented.

4. Sunday after Easter. Christ treats of his going, and sending the Holy
Ghost, Jo. 16.5. page 250.

Consider 1. I go to him that sent me, etc. It is expedient for you that I go:
It was also expedient for him, so to take possession of his Glory; but
unmindful of his own, he is concerned for our good. O that you were so for his
honor! If I go not, the Paraclet shall not come to you; but if I go, I will
send him to you. The love which the Apostles are to Christ was mixed with some
humane affection; wherefore to refine this, and make it purely spiritual, it
was necessary he should substract himself from them: If the affection to
Christ's Sacred Humanity was a hinderance to the receiving of the Divine Spirit,
how much more the affection to other flesh and blood, though in spiritual and
holy persons?

Consider 2. And when he is come, he shall argue the world of sin, and of
justice, and of judgment: The Holy Ghost does argue the world of sin (says S.
Bernard) because it dissembles; of justice, Bern. Ser. 12.
which it does not rightly order, while it attributes the same to man, not to
God; of judgment, which it usurps, while it judges rashly, not only of it
self, but of others too. Think what the Divine Spirit may argue you of; bring
your actions to light, and be not of the number of those that do ill, Jo. 3.20.
and come not to the light, that their works may not be controuled; know that
if we did judge our selves, 1 Cor. 11.31.
we should not be judged.

Consider 3. When he, the spirit of truth comes, he shall teach you all truth.
This is a promise made to the Church: He shall not speak of himself, that is,
not only of himself, but also from the Father, and the Son, from whom he
proceeds, and from whom he is sent, but what things soever he shall hear from
them, he shall speak: Think how well grounded the Faith is which you have from
the Church, the Church from the Divine Spirit, the Spirit from Christ, Christ
from the Eternal Father: He shall glorify me, because he shall receive of
mine, and shall show to you; confirming to them the Doctrine of Christ,
perfecting their Understanding, opening the sense of Scriptures, etc. Rejoice
and be grateful for so great benefits bestowed upon the Church for your good.

5. Sunday after Easter. Christ recommendeth Prayer to his Disciples, Jo.
16.23. page 258, 259, 260, 261, 262.

Ascension day. Of the Mystery, Marc. 16.14. page 263, 264, 265, 266.

Sunday in the Octave. Of the H. Ghost, and of the Apostles Persecutions, Jo.
15.26, 27. and 16.1. etc. page 266.

2 Cor. 1.4
Consider 1. When the Paraclet comes, whom I will send from the Father, the
spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall give testimony of
me. Christ to raise in his Disciples a desire and love of the Divine Spirit,
does speak much of him, at his departure; and here he acquaints them with two
chief properties: 1. That he is a Paraclet, that is, Comforter; for he it is,
that comfort us in all our tribulvtion; and the Church calls him, The b^st
Comforter, Seq. in Missa de Spir. S.
and the sweet Guest of our Soul; being indeed a sweet refreshment, tempering
the heats of our concupiscences, and passions; Rest and ease to us in our
labors, solace and comfort in our tears, and afflictions. Invite this Divine
Comforter to your heart, and refuse all other comfort and satisfaction from
creatures.

Jo. 14.6.
Consider 2. The other property of being the spirit of truth. 1. For that he
proceeds from the Son, who is the Wisdom of his Father, the Way, the Truth, and
the Life. 2. Because he is sent to manifest the truth of Christ's Doctrine, of
his being the true Messiah, Son of God, and Savior of the World. 3. For that
he gives testimony of the New Testament, which is of Truth it self, whereof
the Old Testament was but a shadow. 4. For that he is the Author of all truth;
And you shall give testimony. Ponder here the infinite Dignity of the Apostles,
and of their Successors, the Priests of Gods Church, in that they are joined in
testimony of Christ's Deity, and of all the other Mysteries of Faith, even with
the Holy Ghost himself: Admire, reverence, and defend this Divine Authority of
the Church.

Consider 3. Christ forewarns his Disciples of their persecutions. 1. That they
be not scandalized, troubled, or disheartened, when they happen. 2. That they
should know what they were to trust to, and what they were called for, and that
they might not think them to fall out by chance, etc. 3. That they might
prepare, and arm themselves against them with Patience and Fortitude. 4. That
when the hour shall come, they might have the comfort to remember that he told
them: Out of the Synagogues they will cast you: And every one which kills
you, shall think that he does service to God. Think whether you would be
content to be an Outcast, contemned and despised by men, and even to suffer
death for Christ.

Whitsunday. Of the Mystery, Gospel, Jo. 14.23. page 273. etc. to page 279.

Trinity Sunday. Christ Commissioneth his Disciples to Baptize in the Name of
the B. Trinity, Mat. 28.18. page 280, 281, 282, 283. which are of the Mystery.

Consider 1. All power is given to me in Heaven and Earth: Christ had this
Power: 1. As God, from all Eternity. 2. As Man, in the very instant of his
Incarnation, by right of the Hypostatical Union. 3. Through the Merit of his
Passion and Death, as to the perfect use and exercise of it. Hence it
follows, that we have a Triple Obligation of serving him. 1. As our God, by
his Deity. 2. As the Sovereign Lord, and Head of all Mankind, by his
Incarnation. 3. As our Savior and Redeemer, by his Death and Passion: He has
exercised his Power to the full for your good: See that you fulfill your duty
in serving him.

Consider 2. Going therefore teach ye all Nations, baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. By virtue of his Divine
Power he does Authorize and Commission his Disciples. 1. To go and teach what
he had taught them. 2. To Baptize them in the Name of the B. Trinity, that by
the benefit of Baptism, they might obtain Divine Faith, Remission of their
sins, Grace, and Everlasting Glory. 3. To deliver unto them Christ's new Law,
Precepts, and Councels, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you.

Consider 3. And behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of
the world: Christ is with us: 1. As God, by his Immensity. 2. As God and Man,
by his Presence in the H. Eucharist. 3. By Habitual and Actual Grace, enabling
us to act Supernaturally, in order to our End. 4. By a special Providence,
governing and directing every one toward the attaining to the perfection of
their Vocation. 5. After a special manner he is with the whole Church, and
principle Members thereof, assisting them with his Divine Wisdom, and Veracity,
in their Councels, and Definitions, Interpretation of Scriptures, and
Government; and arming them with his Omnipotent Power against Persecutions,
Heresy, and Infidelity; so that the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail
against them. Be grateful for these benefits, and endeavor to be always
present with him in mind and affection.

On the same day, as being the 1. Sunday after Pentecost, the Gospel is chiefly
of Mercy, Luc. 6.36. for which see page 344.

Corpus Christi day. Of the Mystery, Jo. 6.55. page 284, 285, 286, 287.

Sunday in the Octave of Corp. Chr. Of the great Supper, Luc. 14.16. page 288.
etc. to the page 296. see page 439, 440.

3. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the lost sheep, Luc. 15.1. page 296. see page
459.

4. Sunday after Pentecost. Christ teaches, etc. out of Peter's Ship, Luc. 5.1.
page 304.

Consider 1. The multitudes pressing, our Lord went up into Peter's Ship; and
that being brought back a little from the Land, sitting, be taught the
multitudes from the ship. Ponder with what fervor the people did run to hear
the Word of God; be ashamed of your own dullness herein, and eagerness of
hearing Toys, News, and Reports of the World: Christ teaches from Peter's Boat,
from which we are all to take the Word of God, our Faith, and the hopes of our
Salvation, out of which there is none. Observe how the Boat was brought from
the Land, to teach us, that the Preachers Life and Doctrine must not be
worldly, but Celestial.

Consider 2. As he ceased to speak, he said to Simon, Launch forth into the
deep, and let loose your Nets to make a draught. It is Christ that moves our
heart in Sermons, but it is our part to cooperate, to launch forth into the
deep, by proceeding always forwards, and raising our intentions and desires to
heavenly things, and to loose our Nets by a forwardness, and endeavor of
profiting upon all occasions: Peter answered, Laboring all night, we have
taken nothing: Such are the fruits of worldly cares and labors; and in the
Night of Sin nothing is gained in order to Eternal Life: We must therefore
loose our Nets in Christ's Name, and upon his Word, by a sincere intention of
serving and obeying him.

Consider 3. And when they had done this, they enclosed a very great multitude
of Fishes, and their Net was broken: Whereupon Peter fell down at Jesus ka^e^,
saving, Go forth from me, for I am a sinful man. Ponder here: 1. Peter lends
Christ his empty Boat, and receives it full of Fish, and is well enough
contented to have his Net broken in so profitable a service: So ought we, in
temporal losses, that are accompanied with great spiritual gains. 2. Peter out
of Humility falls upon his knees, and is made the Fisher of men? From this
time thou shall be taking men. 3. Upon the same account he wills Christ to go
from him, and thereby came the nearer unto him; for leaving all things, they
followed him. Ponder each particular, and gather something for your own profit.

5. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the observance of the Law, Mat. 5.21. page 312.

Consider 1. Vales^ your Justice abound more then that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The Pharisees did
often fast, they prayed much in the Temple, and in the Streets, they gave the
Tithes of what they had, they gave God thanks for his benefits, they carried
the Law about them, in the Hem of their Garments, etc. Do you do as much? Yet
all this was nothing but an outward show of Virtue, and only ceremonious
observances of their own: The Justice of a Christian must be internal, and
real, consisting in a pure intention of Gods Honor in all things, in the
exercise of Christian Virtue, chiefly of Charity, Patience, Humility, etc. in
subduing our Passions, evil Inclinations and Affections, and the like.

Consider 2. It was said to them of old, thou shall not kill, etc. But I say to
you, that whosoever is angry with his Brother, shall be in danger of judgment,
etc. Ponder the Excellency of the New Law above the Old. 1. That, which was
given to a dull and earthly people, prohibited only gross things; this
forbids even little imperfections. 2. That went no further then the outward
appearance; this passes to the interior affections of the mind. 3. That
proposed no other then temporal reward; this everlasting. Think what perfection
God requires of you, according to your Calling, and be su e you come not
behind the Pharisees, upon peril of your Salvation.

1 Cor. 10.17.
Consider 3. And imprint in your heart and memory those words of Christ: If thou
offer thy gift at the Altar, and there thou remember that thy Brother has
ought against thee, leave there thy Offering before the Altar, and go first to
be reconciled to thy Brother. Fraternal Charity is so necessary, that no
Sacrifice, nor Divine Worship, can be acceptable to God without it; and if this
in the Old Law, how much more in the New? and in the Sacrifice of Mass, and
Communion of the H. Eucharist? which is the Sacrament of Union; for we are one
body, all that participate of one bread. Observe how God vouchsafes to accept
of our poor duties as offerings and gifts, whereas they are indeed his own
gifts, and bringing no good to him from us.

6. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the seven Loaves, Marc. 8.1. page 320.

Consider 1. Jesus calling his Discipees together, he says to them, I have
compassion upon the multitude, because lo three days now they endure with me,
neither have they what to eat; And if I dismiss them fasting into their home,
they will faint in the way. This is a perfect Emblem of our condition in this
world, where, even at the best, we are an object of compassion: The World is a
Desert, an habitation of wild beasts, and void of all good, having nothing
whereon our Immortal Soul can feed, and satiate it self; we are a far off from
our heavenly Country, and ready to saint, and fail in our way home; happy only
in this, if we keep company with Jesus, and can be content to endure with him.

Consider 2. Christ's infinite goodness: 1. In having compassion of their
condition. 2. In consulting with his Disciples for Redress. 3. In making the
multitudes sit down upon the ground. 4. In distributing amongst them that
little provision which he had for himself, and his Disciples; all which he did,
giving thanks, breaking the loaves, blessing the fish, and giving them to his
Disciples. Apply this also spiritually, and acknowledge in the fish, and seven
loaves, the Provision of Grace afforded us in the seven Sacraments; as also the
seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost, whereby the Soul is filled with comfort,
strength, and vigor, to continue the course of our Pilgrimage.

Consider 3. And they took up that which was left of the fragments seven
Maunds. Thus God is always overflowing in his liberality, and gifts toward us;
but how niggard and close-handed are we toward him, and our Neighbor? Observe
here, that the Overplus that we have either in Temporals, or Spirituals, ought
not to be cast away, but gathered together for the supply of others that are
indigent. Lastly, learn this great Lesson, that none will ever be the poorer,
but rather the richer for what they bestow out of pure Charity upon others, for
relief of their corporal or spiritual necessities. See more of the like
subject, concerning the five loaves, page 362, 363.

7. Sunday after Pentecost. Of False Prophets, Mat. 7.15. page 327.

Consider 1. Take ye heed of false Prophets, which come to you in the clothing
of sheep, but inwardly are ravening wolves. False Prophets 1. Are Heretics,
who under the fair pretense of Sanctity, Liberty of Conscience, expounding of
Scripture, etc. preach false Doctrine. 2. All those, which under the pretext of
some good, or Virtue, especially of Prudence and Discretion, preach to us such
things as are more agreeable to flesh and blood: Such are Self-love,
Concupiscence, Passion, Worldly Maxims, Pleasant Companions, the Devil, etc.
Have a care what Prophets you entertain; see they be none of those of whom
Jeremy, Thren. 2.14.
Thy Prophets have seen false and foolish things to thee.

Phil. 3.20.
Consider 2. By their fruits you shall know them. Think what are the fruits of
the abovementioned false Prophets: Obstinacy, Licentiousness, Disorder,
Disquiet, Sting and Wound of Conscience, etc. A good Tree cannot yield evil
fruits, neither an evil Tree yield good fruits: The Tree planted in the earth
raises its branches and fruit upwards; so man, though upon earth, should have
his conversation in Heaven, and produce heavenly fruit: Every Tree that
yields not good fruit, shall be cut down, and shall be cast into fire: Take
warning, and yield good fruit in time; Mat. 3.10.
perhaps the Axe is now put to the root of your Tree.

1 These. 4.3.
Consider 3. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven: Not all
that call upon God by an exterior Profession of Godliness, nor all that
undertake to Preach his Word shall be saved, but those only which bring forth
the good fruit above required, viz. the Will of God, declared unto them by the
Holy Church, Superiors, Directors, Interior Inspirations, etc. This is the
Will of God (says the Apostle) your Sanctification, by supernatural Grace, and
exercise of solid Virtue, according to every ones state and profession.

8. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Bailiff of Iniquity, Luc. 16.1. page 335.
see page 449.

9. Sunday after Pentecost. Of Christ's weeping upon the City, Luc. 19.41. page
343. see page 147.

10. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Publican, and the Pharisee, Luc. 18.9. page
350. see page 460.

11. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Deaf and Dumb Man, Marc. 7.31. page 357.
see page 409, 410, 411.

12. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the man wounded by Thieves, and of the good
Samaritan, Luc. 10.23. page 365. see page 433, 434.

13. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the ten Lepers, Luc. 17.11. page 372. see page
407, 408.

14. Sunday after Pentecost. Of serving God, and Mammon, Mat. 6.24. page 380.

Consider 1. No man can serve two Masters, etc. You cannot serve God, and
Mammon. There are two that would have you for their Servant, God, and the
World; you cannot serve both, because they are opposite to one another; neither
can you serve one, without hating the other: God requires of you, that you
should seek Heaven, contemn Earthly things, embrace Virtue, curb the Flesh,
subdue Sense, etc. The World, on the contrary, will have you seek your own
content, and satisfaction, enjoy the conveniences of this life, neglect
spiritual things, cherish and pamper the flesh, and give full scope to all your
sensual Appetites. Now choose which of these two Services you like best, whom
you will have for your Master, whom you will love, and whom you will hate.

Consider 2. Therefore I say unto you, be not careful for your life what you
shall eat, neither for your body what raiment you shall put on, etc. Christ
persuades us here to cast off all immoderate care of Temporals, which he does
by five convincing Arguments. 1. A Majori. If God has given us our Soul, and
Body, he will also provide us with necessaries for their preservation. 2. A
Minori. If God does so providently feed the beasts of the earth, and adorn the
flowers and grass of the field; what will he not do for his children? 3. For
that all our care avails nothing without Gods Providence, not being able to
add a Cubit to our stature. 4. For that this care is common to Heathens and
Infidels, that know not God, not proper for Christians, that believe and trust
in him. 5. For that God is a loving Father, who cannot know the necessities of
his children, and let them want.

Luc. 10.42 Mat. 13.44, 45.
Consider 3. That most admirable and comfortable conclusion; Seek therefore
first the Kingdom of God, and the Justice of him, and all these things shall be
given you besides: The Kingdom of God is his Glory, and our Everlasting
Happiness; This one thing is necessary; this is the treasure hidden in a field;
this is the precious Margarit, to be purchased with all we have; this ought to
be our prime care, to employ our chiefest thoughts, to take up our best times,
etc. which done, all these things shall be given us besides. O that we had
courage and resolution to perform the first part, and faith enough practically
to believe this latter!

15. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Widows Son of Naim, Luc. 7.11. page 388.
see page 423, 424.

16. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the man cured of the Dropsy, Luc. 14.1. page
306.

Consider 1. And it came to pass when Jesus entered into the house of a certain
Prince of the Pharisees upon the Sabbath to eat bread, and they watched him.
Ponder here the goodness of Christ, not refusing to eat, and converse
familiarly with his Enemies, seeking thereby occasion to do them good; and the
perverseness of the Pharisees in observing and watching him, not to profit, but
to calumniate. Do you observe our Lord in all his sayings, and doings, but so
as to benefit your self, and glorify him; and endeavor to demean your self so
in all your exterior comportment, that you need not fear to be observed and
taken notice of by all, even your Enemies.

Consider 2. And behold there was a certain man before him that had a Dropsy.
Behold your self in this man, and acknowledge with S. Augustine, that you have
a Conscience sick of the Dropsy, S. Aug. 2. quaest. Evang.
thirsting after terrene things; the more you are indulgent to your self, the
more you nourish this disease. Christ feels their pulse, and temper, before he
cures this man; saying, Is it lawful to cure on the Sabbath? but they were
ashamed to discover their malignity openly, and (what e're they thought) they
held their peace: But he taking him, healed him, and sent him away: And to
justify himself, appeals to their own Conscience, what they would judge lawful
in a less concern of their own Ox, or Ass.

Ps. 21.7.
Consider 3. When thou art invited to a Marriage, sit not down in the first
place, etc. but go sit down in the last place, etc. This, as all other things
that he taught, Christ exercised himself; he descended from the highest Heaven,
to the Womb of a poor and humble Virgin; and all his life long chose for
himself, in all occasions, that which was meanest, and became for us the very
Outcast of the people. Ponder well that Golden Sentence, Every one that
exalts himself, shall be humbled; and he that humbles himself, shall be
exalted. First and Last are otherwise taken by God, otherwise by the World; the
lower one is in the Worlds reckoning, the higher he is in Gods account; and on
the contrary. Christ was in the last Rank with the World, but in the first with
God: If therefore you desire to be near Christ in Glory, you must come close to
him in Humility.

17. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the great Precept of Charity, Mat. 22.34. page
403.

Consider 1. A Doctor of Law asked of him, which is the great Commandment in
the Law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole
heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind. We love him with our
whole heart, soul, and mind, when we direct our thoughts, affections, senses,
and actions to him; and when we let no created thing have any place in our
heart, but in order to him, and detest whatsoever is displeasing to him.
Consider the Motives you have to this love: 1. His benefits toward you, in
your Creation, Conservation, Redemption, Sanctification, Gifts of Grace, and
promise of Glory. 2. His own infinite Amiableness, his Bounty, Riches, Power,
Glory, Beauty, etc.

Romans 8.35
Consider 2. This love must not content it self with bare affections, wishes,
and desires; it must pass to action, and both do, and suffer, when occasion is,
for the service and honor of God, that we may be able to say with the Apostle,
Who shall separate us from the charity of Christ? tribulation, or distress,
etc. or danger, or persecution, or sword? It is the property of true love to be
communicative of it self, and what it has, with its Beloved: Give therefore
freely to God your self, and whatsoever you have; and because you have nothing
that you have not from him, return it entire to him again by gratitude, and
faithful use in his service. This is the greatest and first Commandment.

Consider 3. The second is like to this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. Our Neighbor is not one, but every Child of Adam, Friend, and Enemy,
etc. The Rule of our love is no other then our selves; whatsoever therefore you
would have done, or not done to your self, observe the same toward others, out
of love, and for God, and you have observed this Precept: Our Motives are, for
that we are all Created to the same Image of God, Redeemed with the same
precious Blood of Christ, Children of the same Heavenly Father, called to the
Inheritance of the same Kingdom, etc. Make it your whole study to have perfect
Charity toward God, and your Neighbor, knowing that On these two Commandments
depend the whole Law, and Prophets.

18. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Bedridden let down from the Roof, Mat. 9.1.
page 412. see page 399, 400.

19. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Invitement to the Wedding, Mat. 22.1. page
419. see page 439, 440.

20. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Princes Son restored to health, Jo. 4.46.
page 427. see page 394, 395.

21. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Debtor of ten thousand Talents, Mat. 28.23.
page 435.

Consider 1. There was one presented unto his Lord that owed him ten thousand
Talents. This is your self, and every sinner; there is no Debt so great as that
of Sin; think how great yours i; And not having whence to repay it, his Lord
commanded that he should be sold: We have nothing of our own to make
satisfaction of, and by sin we forfeit Grace, Heaven, God, Soul and Body, and
inslave our selves to the Devil. But that Steward falling down before him,
said, have patience toward me, and I will repay thee all. Think how often God
has had patience with you; you may truly say with the Prophet, The Mercies of
our Lord, Thren. 3.22.
that I am not consumed.

Consider 2. And the Lord of that servant moved with pity, dismissed him, and
forgave him the debt. How easily is God satisfied? how great is his bounty who
gives more then is asked, or could be hoped for? He has done the same, and
much more for you; and has not only freed you from the slavery of sin, but
also made you his Adopted Son, and Heir of his Kingdom: When that servant was
gone forth, he found one of his fellow servants, that did owe him a hundred
pence, and laying hands upon him, thratled him, saying, Repay what thou owe;
and notwithstanding the others humble entreaty, went his way, and cast him into
prison, till he repayed the debt. How often do you the same in the petty
injuries done to you?

Consider 3. Thou ungracious servant, etc. ought not thou also to have mercy
upon thy fellow servant, even as I had mercy upon thee? Apply these words to
your self, and take heed of what follows: And his Lord being angry, delivered
him to the Tormentors, until he had repaid all the debt. Ponder well the final
clause: So also shall my Father do to you, if you forgive not every one his
Brother from your hearts. Sins once forgiven return not, but the succeeding
Ingratitude is made the greater, and worthy of double punishment, by the
greatness of the former benefit. This forgiveness must not be verbal only, but
from the heart, and without keeping any grudge.

22. Sunday after Pentecost. Of paying Tribute to Caesar. Mat. 22.15. page 443.

Consider 1. Master, we know that thou art a true speaker, and teach the way
of God in truth, neither carest thou, for any man, for thou do not respect
the persons of men. Here is delivered a perfect description of an upright man:
Think how you are in every particular; whether you be a true speaker: 1. As to
your self, by a right judgment, and estimate of things. 2. In relation to
others, by conformance of your words to Truth, and Conscience; whether you hold
the way of God, or not rather the Maxims and Principles of the World; whether
you care for man, so as to fear, or love him more then you do God; and whether
you respect the person of men, so as to do, or omit any thing for humane
respects, against your Conscience.

Ps. 4.7.
Consider 2. Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar? A pertinent Question, but
proposed with a wicked intention, to entrap him in his speeches; But there is
no Council nor Wisdom against our Lord, who takes them in their own Traps,
proposing to them a question about the Tribute Coin, saying, whose is this
Image and Superscription? Look upon your self, and ask this question, Whose is
this Image? You cannot say it is Cesars, or the Worlds; it is Gods: The light
of thy Countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us: But alas! how deformed is it
become? you have made it the Image of the Terrene Man; endeavor to reform your
self, till Christ be formed again in you; Gal. 4.19. 1 Cor. 15.49.
and as you have born the Image of the Earthly, so hereafter bear the Image of
the Heavenly.

Romans 7.13
Consider 3. Render therefore the things that are Cesars, to Caesar, and the
things that are Gods, to God: God will have us give every one his due; To whom
tribute, tribute; to whom oustom, custom; to whom fear, fear; to whom honor,
honor: Owe no man any thing, but that you love one another. Render your self
therefore, Body, and Soul, with all your Powers, Senses, and Faculties, to God,
whose you are by Creation, Redemption, etc. Render likewise what you owe to
your Neighbor, to wit, Love, and Charity, who is made to the same Image,
Created by the same hand, and redeemed with the same precious Blood with your
self.

23. Sunday after Pentecost. Of the Princes Daughter, and the Hemorroisse, Mat.
9.18. page 451. see page 420, 421, 422.

24. Sunday after Pentecost, or the last before Advent. Of the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and of the Latter Judgment, Mat. 24.15.

Consider 1. When you shall see the Abomination of Desolation, etc. then they
that are in Jewry, let them fly to the Mountains, etc. In the first part of
this Gospel, Christ treats of Jerusalems Destruction, and Desolation; in the
second, of the latter Judgment: Death is the time of man's greatest Desolation,
and the next passage to his particular Judgment, on which depends the General:
Christ therefore warns us to provide for it in time; for when it is once come,
it will then be too late, and we shall be so surprised, that we shall not have
leisure to dispose of our selves, or our goods, as we would: He that is in the
house top, let him not come down to take any thing out of his house; and he
that is in the field, let him not go back to take his coat.

Consider 2. Woe to them that are with-child, and that give suck in those
days. That last day is always at hand, and perhaps this may be it: Woe be to
you, if you labor till now in bare desires, and have as yet brought forth no
good works to light; Pray that your flight be not in the winter: Stir your self
up to Fervor, and have a care Death comes not upon you while you are cold, and
frozen in Gods service; Nor on the Sabbath, while you are in your jollines: You
must be disposed for every hour, for no hour is secure from danger.

Consider 3. There shall be then great tribulation, such as has not been from
the beginning of the world. Such will Death truly be to tepid and improvident
Christians, that have put off till then what they should have done before; the
Body will then be tormented all over with a dreadful Agony, but much more the
Conscience, for then it will have a clearer knowledge of Good and Evil, and
will find the burden of Sin more heavy, and unsupportable, then ever before. If
you be wise, seek to avoid this Tribulation; do now what you would have done
then; avoid now what you would wish then to have avoided.

Faults Escaped in Printing.
IN the Preface, page 14. Margent, Psa. 118.17. read 71. page 34. line 30. of
God. read of God? page 34. Marg. for the first Citation read Luc. 21.11. p. 35.
l. 17. Judge. r. Judge? p. 44, 45. all the Citations lower three lines then
ought, p. 65. l. 14. Title af r. of p. 66. l. 1. Prophet r. Prophet p. 73.
Foxes have holes, etc. r. in the Marg. Mat. 11.4. p. 80. l. 24. robes, r.
robes? p. 169. Marg. The third Station leave out. Page 477. line 29. Virging r.
Virgins. What other Faults have been over-seen, the Courteous Reader may be
pleased to Correct, and excuse.


