engraved frontispiece of portrait of St. Bonaventure Soliloquies Meditations
and Prayers of St. Bonaventure
Cross fecit


THE SOLILOQUIES OF St. BONAVENTVRE, Containing his four MENTAL EXERCISES, AND
Also his Treatise, called, A Bundle of Myrrh, Concerning THE PASSION OF OUR
SAVIOR.

With XIII. Spiritual Exercises of the said St. Bonaventure.

London, Printed for H. Twyford and R. Wingate, 1655.

The Epistle to the Reader upon the Soliloquy of S. BONAVENTURE.
THIs little work which is no less full of learning, then devotion ministers
most copious matter to him that is willing to cherish the light of
contemplation, and the fire of charity. For the Author induces the Soul and
the inner Man interchangeably, the one asking and the other answering, and with
very many sentences of holy Fathers being intermixed, of which (as he says) he
has compiled this Treatise. This he says, that he may easily teach every
one, how by mental Exercise converting the eye of contemplation unto those
things which are within him, unto those that are without him, unto those that
are below him, and to those things that are above him (the mutable good being
despised) he may pursue the Immutable and Eternal good with all the perfection
of his mind. For this Soliloquy has many things taken out of that work of Hugo
de S. Victore de Arrha Animae, to which it is very like.

The Sum of the 4. Mental Exercises of this little Work, are as follows.
The First Exercise. HOw the Soul ought by Mental Exercise to reflect the
Beams of Contemplation to those things which are within her that she may see,
how she is formed by nature, deformed by sin, and reformed by Grace. The
Second Exercise. How the Soul by mental Exercise ought to convert her
Contemplation to to those things that are external, that she may know how
unstable worldly wealth is, how mutable worldly Excellency is, and how
miserable worldly magnificence is. The Third Exercise. How the Soul by mental
Exercise, ought to convert the Rays of contemplation unto those things that are
below her, that she may understand the inevitable necessity of man's death, the
formidable austerity of final judgment, the intolerable pain of infernal
punishment. The Fourth Exercise. How the Soul by mental Exercise ought to
convert the light of Contemplation unto those things which are above her, that
she may know and understand the inestimable value of celestial joy, the
unspeakable delight, and the interminable Eternity.
The Preface.
I Bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole
Family of Heaven and Earth is named, That he would grant you according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner
man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith, that ye be rooted and
grounded love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians:
3.14. to the 20.

Paul the Apostle, the Vessel of eternal Election, the Treasury of divine
Sanctification, the Mirror and Example of heavenly contemplation in his former
words shows us, the Beginning, Object, and Fruit of mental Exercise.

For mental Exercise, to the end it may become pious and wholesome, it is
necessary that it have a power supernaturally stre^gthening, a wisdom
regulating, and a clemency comforting, let therefore the devout Soul, inflamed
with the love of divine contemplation, bow the knees of her mind before the
Throne of the most blessed and Incomprehensible Trinity, let her humbly knock
and discreetly desire,

The strengthening power of God the Father, lest wearied with labor she be
seduced.

The directing Wisdom of God the Son, lest seduced with error, she wander from
the truth.

The comforting Piety and Clemency of the Holy Ghost, lest overcome with
wearisomness she faint.

For every good thing that is given, and every gift that is perfect, is from
above, descending from the Father of lights, and according to S. Augustine, all
our good is either God, or from God, he therefore in the beginning of every
good work is fit to be implored, from whom originally every good thing
proceeds, by whom every good thing exemplarly is produced, and to whom every
good thing finally is addressed.

This is that ineffable Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which
the Apostle speaks of when he says. I bow my knees etc. unto that place. That
ye may be able.

Secondly he shows the Object of this wholesome mental Exercise. The Object
truly of the Exercise of a devout mind is said to be internal, and external,
superior and inferior.

For the devout Soul ought by mental exercise to reflect the light of
contemplation first to her interior thoughts, that she may know, 1. How she is
formed by Nature. 2. Deformed by sin. 3. Reformed by Grace.


Secondly, she ought to convert the light of contemplation; unto those things
which are without her, that she may know, 1 How unstable worldly wealth is. 2
How mutable worldly Excellency is. And 3 How miserable worldly Magnificence is.


Thirdly she ought also to convert the light of her contemplation, unto those
things that are below her that she may understand.

1 The inevitable necessity of man's death. 2 The formidable austerity of final
Judgment 3 The intolerable pain of infernal punnishment.
Fourthly she ought to convert the light of Contemplation unto those things
that are above her, that she may know and taste.

1 The inestimable value of Heavenly Joy. 2 The Ineffable delight, And 3 The
Interminable Eternity.
This is that blessed Cross terminated with four ends, whereon, O Devout
Soul, thou ought continually by meditation to suffer with thy most sweet
Bridegroom Christ Jesus. This is that fiery Chariot, consisting of four
wheels, wherewith thou ought daily in contemplation to mount up unto the
Palace of Heaven, to find out thy most faithful friend. This is that
fourfold Region, East, West, North, South, which thou, O my Soul, ought
daily by Perigrination to enter into, and to seek and find out therein by
speculation thy most dearest beloved, that thou may say with the spouse: In
my Bed I have sought him by night, whom my soul loved. These four the Apostle
seems to insinuate, when he adds. That ye may be able to comprehend with
all Saints, what is the breadth and length and depth and height.

The fruit of this wholesome Exercise (if it be worthy and laudably put in
practice) is eternal felicity which is the best and fairest thing, and of it
self most sufficient, wanting no other thing besides it self. Wherein we
shall see, and shall love, shall call upon and laud in Eternity, (and beyond
Eternity) him that is blessed for ever. This fruit the Apostle promises when
he concludes his speech saying. That ye mighe be filled with all the fullness
of God.

We shall then find this fullness, when God shall be to our will, plenty of
Peace; to our reason, fullness of light; to our memory a continuation of
Eternity. For then God shall be All in All, when from reason all error, from
will all grief, from Memory all fear shall depart, and that shall succeed,
which we hoped for, wonderful serenity, divine pleasure, eternal security.

This Treatise (my Conscience instigating me) I have compiled for the more
ignorant, in plain Phrases, out of the works of holy men, in form of a
certain Dialogue, wherein the Devout soul a Disciple of the Eternal truth by
Meditation asks Questions, and the Inner man mentally speaking answers.

But that we may the better attain to the inestimable Contemplation of this
mental exercise. First let us begin and humbly by Invocation approach unto the
Father of lights: Let Us devoutly bow the knees of our heart, before the Throne
of the Eternal Majesty, and with tears and groans before the Royal seat of
the Judicial Trinity, let Us incessantly pray, that God the Father, by his
blessed Son, would grant us, the grace of mental Exercise in the Holy Ghost,
that we may know, what is the breadth and length, and depth, and height, that
by this we may attain to that which is the end and complement of of all our
desires. AMEN.

The first Exercise.
How the Soul by mental Exercise ought to reflect the Beams of Contemplation
to those things that are within her, that she may see.

1. How she is formed by Nature. 2. Deformed by Sin. 3. Reformed by Grace.
CHAP. I. How the Soul is formed by Nature.
TEll me, I pray thee, after devout invocation of the divine magnificence, and
after an humble imploring of the Eternal wisdom, and last of all after a meek
supplication of the supernal piety and clemency, if I might obtain the grace of
mental exercise concerning the fourfold matter, to wit, longitude, latitude,
sublimity and profundity: tell me, I pray thee, O man, in what order I should
begin, lest I should lose the worth of this Exercise, if I should ignorantly
proceed with an unbefitting course: for (according to S. Ambr.) ignorance or
want of Order perturbs the form of merits: nor is it accounted (according to
the same Author) that there is in us no perfect knowledge of the thing, when we
know what is to be done, and are ignorant in what order to proceed.

Man.
O My Soul, (according to S. Bernard) let thy consideration begin with thy
self, lest in vain thou search into other things, thy self being neglected.
[Idem,] Many men knew many things, and know not themselves, they look into
others and forsake themselves, seeking God by those things that are external,
leaving their internal, in whom God is interior. Wherefore I will return from
the external to the internal, and from the internal I will ascend to the
supernall, that I may know from whence I came, or whither I go; from whence I
am, or what I am; and so by the knowledge of my self, I may ascend to the
knowledge of God. In like manner S. Chrysostom upon S. Matthew says, That the
knowledge of a man's self is not the least part of Philosophy. Item Ambrosius in
Hexameron.


Know thy self O man, what thou art, look that thou consider what enters into
thee in thy thought, what passes from thee in thy discourse. Examine thy life
therefore, O my Soul, by a daily discussion, consider diligently, how much thou
profitest, how much thou art deficient, what thou art in manners, what thou art
in affection, how like or dislike, how near or far off thou art to God. Ever
acknowledge this, that it is much more commendable and better for thee, if thou
know thy self, then if (thy self being neglected) thou know the course of
the Stars, the virtues of Herbs, the complexions of Men, the natures of living
creatures, had the knowledge of all heavenly and earthly things. Render
therefore thy self to thy self, and if not always, yet at least sometimes.
Govern thy affections, direct thy actions, correct thy ways. Therefore O my
Soul, keep the Councels of holy men, and first of all convert the rays of
contemplation to the East region, (that is to say) to the consideration of thy
own condition. Diligently therefore consider how nobly thou art made of God by
nature, how vitiously by thy own will thou art deformed through sin, how
graciously by the divine goodness thou art often reformed by Grace.

First therefore consider how nobly thou art formed by nature. Thy natural
nobility, as I conceive, consists in this, because that there is imprinted in
thee naturally to beautify thee, the image of the most blessed Trinity.
whereupon S. Anselm in his Prosologie says: I confess O Lord, and give thee
thanks, because thou have created me according to thy own image, that I might
be mindful of thee, think of thee, and love thee.

S. Bernard. According to the interior man, three things I find in me, by which
I call to mind, behold and desire God. These three are, Memory, Understanding,
and Will. For when I am mindful of God, in him also I am delighted, for the
memory of him is upon one, when with my understanding I behold him how much in
himself he is incomprehensible, because he is the beginning and end of all
things.

In Angels desirable, because they desire to behold him.

In all his Saints delectable, forasmuch as continually (they being happy) do
rejoice in him.

In all his Creatures admirable, because he powerfully creates, wisely
governs, bountifully dispenses all things.

When I look into these things, him also I desire. When I love God by my will,
I transform my self into him. For this is the power or virtue of love that it
makes thee to be like unto that which thou love. These S. Bernard.

Re-acknowledge therefore O my soul, how wonderful and inestimable a dignity
it is, not only to be a mark of the Creator, which is common to all creatures,
but to be the very Image of him, which is only proper to a reasonable creature.
Praise therefore. O my soul, our Lord; praise thy God O Sion.

Awake and praise, rejoice and be glad, because thou art adorned with the image
of God, made comely with his similitude, partaker or reason, capable of
eternal happiness.

But because these things perhaps not unworthily may be judged mean, if they
should end with death, exult and praise, because beside the aforesaid he has
bestowed on thee an immortal nature, an incorruptible substance, an
interminable durance, a perpetual life. For thou should not be the Image of
the eternal Trinity, if thou could be shut up within the bounds of death. S.
Aug. of the city of God.

O my soul consider that thy Creator after this being, has geven thee a
perpetual being, after this he has given thee power to live, to perceive, to
discern; he has adorned thee with senses, he has enlightened thee with
wisdom. Attend therefore thy comeliness, that thou may understand, what
beauty thou ought to love in thy self, which if thou be not sufficient to
contemplate thy self, as it befits thee, why then at least do thou not weigh
and consider by another man's judgment, what thou ought to esteem of thy
self? Thou have a Spouse, of whose beauty (if thou did not doubt) thou
would know, that so fair, so comely, so only a Son of God would not be
ravished with thy countenance, if a singular comeliness, and above all others to
be admired did not invite him. These S. Aug.

But perhaps these mean things, O my soul who art too ungrateful, do seem to
thee too small and mean, wherefore in the third place hear an admirable
dignity: that thou art of such a simplicity, that nothing can inhabit the seat
of thy mind, nothing can make therein any mansion, but only the simplicity and
purity of the Eternal Trinity. Behold what the Bridegroom says: I (says he)
and my Father will come unto him, and will make a mansion with him. And in
another place in the Gospel, Zacheus make haste to come down, because to day it
behooves me to stay in thy house. For to insinuate into the mind is only
possible to him that created it. For he it is who being more intimate in thy
thoughts, does give himself to thee, as S. Aug. says. Rejoice the refore, O
happy soul, that thou can be an entertainer of such a Guest, S. Bern. O
happy is that soul, which daily does cleanse her heart, that she may receive
God to dwell therein, which host can want no good, because he has in himself
the Author of all goodness. O how blessed is that Soul with whom God has found
rest, which can say: He that created me has rested in my Tabernacle. So that
the Heavens cannot deny her a resting place in Heaven, who has prepared for
himself a rest in this life.

O my soul, thou art too covetous, if the presence of such a Guest cannot
content thee, because I know he is so liberal, that he will give and
communicate unto thee of his good things, that he is so holy, that he will
enrich thee with his gifts. For it would in no wise become so great a Prince,
if he should permit his Entertainer to want. Adorn therefore thy Bed, and
receive the King thy Maker, of whose presence thy whole Family shall rejo^ce
and be glad.

O truly wonderful and very admirable sentence! The King whose beauty the Sun
and Moon do admire, whose greatness the Heaven and earth do reverence, of whose
wisdom the Troops of Heavenly Spirits are illuminated, of whose clemency the
College of all the blessed are satiated; such a one, O my Soul, desires thy
entertainment, thy Supping Parlour more then he coveteth or wishes for a
Heavenly Palace. For his delights are to be with the Sons of men.

But if yet these do not move thee to praise thy Creator, convert the light of
thy contemplation to the fourth benefit, and know, that thy palace is of such a
capacity, that no creature is sufficient to satisfy thy desire, Hugo de Sancto
Victore.

All pleasure, all sweetness, all power, all the abundance of things created
may affect a humane heart, but cannot satisfy it. S. Anselm.

Every Creature which is not my God is to me poverty. And wherefore? Truly
(according to S. Gregory in his Morals) a humane Soul which is made earnestly
to desire God, whatsoever it desires beneath God is less then God, and
therefore by right that suffices her not which is not God.

Now as I think, O my Soul, thou have sufficiently seen thy Nobility, which is
very laudable. Convert now the light of contemplation to thy power, Hugo de
Arrha animae.
above all other Creatures, which truly is admirable. O my Soul, what has thy
Spouse given thee? Behold this World, every thing does direct his course to
that end, that it may serve for they profits, and that it may continually offer
it it self to thy pleasures, according to the distribution of times. See now,
O my Soul, diligently consider, that the Creator thy Spouse and friend has
ordained the whole Fabric of the world for thy service. Behold, the Angels
do cseanse and inflame thy affection, illuminate and inform thy Intellect, do
perfect, and keep thy body. It is a great dignity to have such Doctors,
Comforters, and such Conservers. O my Soul, if thou could perceive with what
joy, and with what gladness they assist our prayers, are present at our
Meditations, with what care they conserve us in Good, with what desire they
expect Us and Our Eternal salvation.

The Heaven seeks to please thee by his motion, the luminaries by their
influence, the Sun gives the day the Moon lights the night, the fire tempers
the coldness of the Air, the Air mitigates for thee, the internal heat of
fire, the water cleanses thy foulness cools the heat of thy thirst, and does
fructify the Earth, The Earrh likewise does bear thee with his solidity,
recreate thee with his fertility, delight thee with his pleasantness. Behold O
my soul thou have briefly run through all, from the Inferior to the
Superior, and have found that every Creature to this end does direct his course
by the Divine ordination, how far they may be beneficial unto thee, and
incessantly offer themselves for thy pleasures. But take heed O my soul, least
thou be called not a Spouse, but an Adultresse, if thou love more the gifts
of the giver, then the affection of the Lover. Saint Aug in his 2. Book of
Confessions.

Woe unto thee if thou wander from his footsteps, if thou love his Invitations
and not him, and do not consider with the understanding of a pure mind, what
that most blessed light does insinuate, whose Invitations and footsteps are
the form and beauty of all Creatures. Yet if by chance thou art ignorant of
thy self, O fairest of Women, Go forth, and hasten after the footsteps of the
Flock, that is, of unreasonable Creatures, who are the Footsteps of thy
Creator, but thou art the mirror of the most blessed Trinity. Therefore thou
art accounted more worthy, and more Excellent then all they. And feed thy Kids
nere unto the Tabernacles of the Shepherd, that is, convert thy cogitations to
the Troops of Angels, to whom in some sort thou now art like in Nature, and
shall be fellow Citizen in Glory.

SOVLE.
NOw I have been sufficiently silent, I have long enough held my peace. Even
now with shamefastness and blushing. I am compelled to confess and say, that
I have little considered this dignity. Alas unhappy soul and miserable that I
am, I have too unworthily prostituted my love. I have not glorified my Maker,
for all these his benefits, I have not blessed my God for all his gifts, and
have not adored him in all my life, but have lived too unworthily and
irreverently, too vainly and negligently. And that I may confess the truth,
(according to Saint Bern.) by how much more perfectly I behold my dignity, by
so much I am confounded, and blush that I have led an unnatural life. For I
fear that the fault is so much the more grievous; by how much my nature is
more worthy and noble. I am afraid that by so much the offense is so much the
more dangerous, by how much the Excellency of him, who is offended is the
greater, I much fear that the Injury is by so much the worse, by how much
greater the benefits of him have been, whom I have wronged.

Alas! Alas! O Lord my God, I now weigh by the dignity of thy substance the
vileness of my malice, by the comeliness of Nature I know the deformity of
sin, by the remembrance of Benefits received, are manifested the Ingratitude
of my Actions. Woe is me miserable soul, now I see, now I know, that whatsoever
I have received for the use of life of the chief Giver, I have miserably
employed them to the abuse of sin and wickedness. The tranquillity of humane
peace, I have converted to the use of vain security; the Pilgrimage of the
Earth, I have loved, as if it should be my perpetual Habitation: the health
and beauty of body, I have subjected to the servitude of my pleasure: the
abundance of plenty I have consumed, not for the necessity of my body, but to
the superfluity of my miserable covetousness. Fair weather and refreshing Air
I have abused to serve me, for the love of earthly delights. I fear alas and
much doubt, least these become Instruments of my punishment which did serve as
evil Instruments to my vices.

MAN.
O My Soul in some sort I now perceive that thy knowledge is good. For I
perceive by thy words that my admonition has not been in vain. It seems to
me by the divine power, thou art somewhat enlightened, and moved by the touch of
the true light. Because (according to Saint Greg. in his Morals.) Every one
whilst he is illuminated by the touch of the true light, he is showed from
whence that Justice is, whereby he is enlightened, what that sin is, whereby
he is blinded. From whence holy men, by how much the higher they profit in the
dignity of virtues with GOD, by so much more clearly they discern themselves
to be unworthy: for they when they approach nearest unto the light, do more
plainly perceive what lay hid within them.

CHAP. II. How vitiously the Soul is deformed by sin.
MAN.
THerefore, O my soul, if being touched with the light of truth, thou know thy
dignity, which hitherto thou have not considered, if thou understandest the
same, whereby thou have offended thy Creator, and have seen, how graciously
thou art framed by Nature, So now how vitiously thou art deformed by sin. St.
Ansolme.
Bring to thy own memory, O wearisome and miserable soul thy enormous offense,
and conduct it even to Heaven with sorrow, and lamentation. Consider, O my
soul, who have forsaken God, and being an Adultress unto Christ, what thou
have done: Thou have forsaken thy chaste love in Heaven, have despised thy
maker, have cast of thy Spouse, have offended thy God, thou have irreverently
used thy holy Angel Guardian. Thou wast once the Temple of God, the Spouse of
Christ, the Closset of the Holy Ghost. Whence is this sudden and quick change?
of a Virgin of God, thou art made corrupted of Satan? of a spouse of Christ,
the Execrable Whore of the Devill^ Remember O my Soul, for what thou have
sold thy beauty, for what thou have cast away thy honor, for whom thou have
so filthily defiled thy comeliness, how great a good thou have sold at so vile
a rate. O my soul, why have thou robbed thy self of so many good things?
wherefore have thou in vain deprived thy self of such honors? why have thou
neglected so many good works? have lived so many years, so many days, so many
hours without fruit?

SOVLE.
I Acknowledge, St. Bern.
O man that thou speak truth, and not unworthily reprehendest me of so great
a Transgression.

O Lord my God, how many times have passed, that I behold, wherein I have lived
before thee without fruit, how shall I subsist? how shall I be able to lift up
my face before thee, in that great and terrible Examen, when thou shall command
all my days to be numbered, seeking fruit therein. O Lord God, why have I at
any time omitted thee, to be conversant in my heart, to embrace thee, with all
my mind, to be delighted with thy sweetness? Where then were all my internal
thoughts when they were not with thee, when every Creature has from thee,
whatsoever he has desirable laudable, or delectable.

Alas O Lord, now I understand, but blush to confess the form and comeliness
of Creatures have deceived my Eye, and I have not considered, that thou art
more beautiful then all Creatures, to whom thou have communicated but one drop
of thy inestimable beauty. For who has adorned the Heaven with stars, the
Air with Birds, the Water with Fishes, the Earth with Plants and Flowers. Men
in body with diverse complexions, in mind with diverse Virtues? Are not, O most
merciful Father these Troops of Heavenly Spirits by thee adorned with diverse
gifts?

O good Jesu, the fountain of all pulchritude, pardon me miserable soul, that
I have so lately known, and so slowly loved thy beauty, wherefore I have most
miserably erred. The sweetness also of the Creatures have deceived my taste,
and I have not considered that thou art far sweeter then honey. For thou have
given to honey and every Creature its sweetness, yea thine also, and there is
not any other sweetness or delight in any Creature, but the little
demonstration of thy sweetness, which thou have laid up for them, that fear
thee, whence it comes to pass, that the sweetness of all the Creatures (if
any one truly consider it) is to no other end, but to invite us to thy
Eternal sweetness. O Jesu the fountain of all sweetness and Piety, pardon
me that I have not observed thy inestimable and mellifluous sweetness in the
Creature nor tasted them with the affection of my internal mind, wherefore I
have most miserably erred and gone astray, and I have filled my soul till now,
with the Husks or drasse of Swine. But alas, I fear as yet, I have not been
fed with the Bread of thy Children, therefore I have always remained empty and
Hunger-starven in the delights of the World. St. Gregory.
Because we will not inwardly taste of thy prepared sweetness, therefore we
hunger-starved and miserable Creatures are in love with our own penury and
wants O most sweet Jesus, S. Aug. in his Book of Confessions.
now I see, now I acknowledge, that all sweetness which is not from thee, has
been to me a great affliction and misery. For thou O most merciful God, even
in my sins wast always present with me, most piously sustaining all my wicked
and evil delights, embracing them with thy most bitter griefs, teaching me by
thy stripes, that if I would have delight without bitterness, I could not have
it but in thee O Lord. But alas, I have not understood this learning, therefore
have I erred, yet in my evil delights I have always feared the betrayer, I
have feared the accuser, I have feared the Reprehender, I have sometimes feared
my Conscience, I have oftentimes feared Infamy, I have sometimes feared Hell;
and yet alas miserable Soul that I am, amongst so many miseries I have not
changed, nor forsaken my own will.

The odor also of the Creature has deceived my smell, and I have been
ignorant, O good Jesus, that thy odor does savor sweeter then all Aromaticall
things. O good Jesus, the fountain of all odor, whose sweetness does make me
continually to run and incessantly to labor after thee. Pardon me that so late
I have known thee, so slowly have run after thee in the savor of thy
Ointments. I think notwithstanding, and by this I do not excuse my self, that
the odor of that heavenly storehouse is not mixed with this earthly stench,
wherewith I was infected.

The false and deceitful sound of the Creatures has also deceived my hearing,
and I have not known nor perceived,

How sweet thy words are to the Palate of thy Elect.

How pleasant thy Councels are to the cares of thy friends.

How light thy Commandments are to the hands of thy Saints.

O Jesus, the Fountain of wisdom, the Author of knowledge, the Giver of chaste
Council, make me yet now at least to hear thy voice, let thy voice sound in my
ears. With how great bitterness do I call to mind that I was deceived by that
most miserable voice of those that sung and said: Come let us enjoy the good
things that are, let us crown our selves with Roses before they wither, and let
not the flower of our time pass us; let us fill our selves with precious wine,
and the best ointments, let us every where leave signs of our joy and
gladness. This voice I have heard and have not understood nor considered that
all things are vain, and to be laughed at. For all these and the like suddenly
have slipped away and vanished like a shadow.

For what have all these vain things brought to their lovers?

What profit then have they had in those things wherein now they are confounded
and ashamed of?

O Lord my God, the light of my heart, the food of my soul, the virtue
affecting my mind, I did not love thee, yet I fornicated without thee, and
those that fornicated with me, they cried ha, ha.

The friendship of this world is fornication without thee. O what is more
miserable then a miserable man, that shows not mercy to himself? But in all
these things thou O most loving God were always present with me, I have often
heard thy voice, I have perceived thy wholesome inspiration, but never
consented. O how often have thou inspired this most wholesome counsel to me?
Thou have sinned, forbear, leave, and blush.

To which I ^iserable soul have followed the custom of St. Augustine, in his
book of Confessions. Sometimes I have answered drowsily, O Lord expect me a
while, suffer me a little, now I will rest from vanity, now I will blush at my
naughtiness, I will forsake all vain and worldly things. But alas! that little
that now had neither mean nor measure, and it was too long protracted.

This sloth is a thing, Item Augustinus.
that murthereth many eternally, and for ever detains them in sins who do not
correct or apply themselves to the voice of our Lord. They hear truly the
voice of secret inspiration, but do not amend their life, saying, to morrow, to
morrow, and suddenly the door is shut, and the sinner remains without, even
without the Arc of the Celestial Country, croaking with the voice of a Crow
for his sins, because he would not lament and mourn with the Dove. Alas how
their own felicity has prostrated many men worse in sins, Saint Greg.
their continual peace has made many men sluggish, and thereby the wicked
enemy has presently, more greivously afflicted them, by how much longer by the
use of quiet he has found them negligent. For whom God does longer suffer that
they may be converted, Item Gregorius.
the more grevously he condemns them, not being converted.

But O man, that I may more perfectly and manifestly discover to thee the story
of my unhappiness, all these were not sufficient to make me enough unhappy,
but alas to make my damnation the greater, worldly delicatnesse did too
miserably deceive my touch, and I was ignorant, O Good Jesu, that thy embraces
were so sweet, thy touch so chaste, thy Familiarity so delightful. For when I
shall love thee, I am clean, when I touch thee, I am chaste, when I shall
receive thee J am a Virgin. Thy Embraces, O most sweet Jesus, do not maculate,
but purisie, thy touch does not defile, but sanctify:

O Jesu the fountain of all sweetness and delight, pardon me, that so lately
I have believed, how much purity, how much dignity, how much sweetness, the left
hand of thy Eternal wisdom and knowledge has, when it is under my head, that
is my reason: and the right hand of thy clemency and affection, when it shall
embrace me, that is, my Will. Woe is me miserable soul, what can be ever
proved so sweet, so pleasant, so delightful and healthful, as to rest betwixt
the Arms of such a Spouse, happily to repose within the kisses of so great a
King and friend?

This sweetness the devour soul perceived when she wished, saying: Lee him
kiss me with the kisses of his lips.

Had the devout soul ever tried these delights when inflamed with love she
prayed, and almost fainting for the desire of her beloved, saying: O that thou
were as my Brother, that sucked the breasts of my Mother! when I should find
thee without, I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised? I would lead
thee and bring thee into my Fathers house, and into the bed of her that bare
me. There thou shall instruct me, and I will cause thee to drink of spiced
Wine, and of the juice of my Pomegranates. In the Canticles.

Who is able to declare, but he that in spirit had tasted, how much sweetness
and devotion this discourse contains, when he well considers, and is
rightly nourished with a devout mind? wherefore I leave the Exposition to the
devout soul.

But O Lord God, if these be so sweet to our thinking of them, how sweet are
they to them that taste them? if so pleasant to him that reads them, how
comfortable will they be by affection, to them that feel them? make me, O most
sweet Jesu inwardly to taste that by love, Saint Aug.
which outwardly I taste by thought: make me to perceive by affection, what I
perceive by my understanding.

Ah O most sweet Jesu, pierce the marrow of my soul with the healthful shafts
of thy love, that it may truly burn, languish and melt, and may faint only
with the desire of thee, and may desire to be dissolved, and to be with thee.
Let it always hunger after thee only, the bread of Celestial life, who
descendest from Heaven. Let it thirst after thee the Fountain of life, the
fountain of Eternal light, the torrent of true pleasure. That it may always
desire thee, seek thee, and may find thee, and sweetly rest in thee. But what
madness; what infernal furies, so long time has hindered such things and such
comforts of my mind, such joys and mellifluous banquets from me

Tell me J pray thee, O man, what is the cause of so great evil, what is the
reason of so much danger, what is the occasion of so great loss?

MAN.
I Perceive, O my soul, that now thou art wearied with labors, now vexed with
sorrow, that thou art not further able to find to whom thou may ascribe the
great evil brought upon, thee J desire therefore, that thou will hear me with
patience, if J shall demonstrate to thee the cause of so great a loss, if J
show thee the Enemy of so great an evil. Now somewhat in part thou have
discovered the enemy, yet perhaps for grief of mind, thou have not considered,
that thou have O my soul, a domestic enemy, an Enemy that is thy friend, an
adversary thy Neighbor, which has rendered thee evil for good, and under
pretense of friendship being thy crueller foe, has deprived thee of all these,
and many more infinite good things.

This enemy (under favor) is thy unhappy and miserable flesh, yet very much
beloved, and pleasant unto thee. This when thou have pampered thou have raised
against thee, thy worst enemy. This when thou have honored, thou have armed
against thy self the cruellest adversary. This when thou have adorned with
various and precious Garments, thou have robbed thy self of all internal
ornaments, knowing not what blessed Saint Gregory says in his Homilies. From
whence, says he, the flesh for a time lives sweetly, from thence the spirit
for ever shall be tormented, lament and bewail. And contrarily: by how much the
more the flesh is oppressed, by so much the more, the spirit rejoices in
Heavenly hope. Wherefore for so great an injury offered to us by thee, I am
not able to contain my self any longer, but will reprove so great an evil,
hitherto in silence dangerously passed over. J know says Saint Bernard, a
certain one, who for many years has lived with thee, has sat with thee at
Table, has received meat from thy hand, and has slept in thy bosom, when she
pleased has had discourse with thee, this one, by Hereditary right is thy own
servant, but because thou have too delicately fed her, and have spared the Rod,
she has lifted up her heel against thee and despised thee, and brought thee
into servitude. And he further adds; O miserable soul and to be pitied who
shall deliver thee from the bond of this disgrace? Let God arise, and let the
armed fall, and let the enemy be bruised.

This enemy J say, is the contemner of God, the friend of the World, the
worshipper of Satan. What think thou of her, if rightly thou conjecturest, J
believe thou will say with me. She i^ guilty of death, let her be crucified.
Do not therefore dissemble, do not defer, do not spare: crucify her, crucify
her. But on what Cross, on the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, in which there
is our health, life and resurrection.

Call to mind therefore, O my soul, thy first beginnings, consider that thou
art marked with the Jmage of God, adorned with his similitude, espoused by
faith, endowed with hope, pre-elected by Charity, redeemed with his blood,
partaker of grace, cepable of Beatitude, what have thou to do with flesh, that
thou suffer these things? if thou diligently weigh its Condition, thou have
never seen a viler dunghill.

If thou would number its miseries, how it is laden with sins, itching
with Concupiscences busied with passions, polluted with illusions, full of
confusion, and replete with ignominy, what other thing have thou of it, but
obscene and unclean thoughts? These Saint Bern.

O divine soul, which art from Heaven, blush to be transformed into the
similitude of a Swine, blush to wallow in the Mire. The same Author on the
Canticles. O my soul, so long as thou art in the flesh, thou art conversant
among thorns, and it is necessary that thou greivously suffer the troubles of
temptations and the stings of resistance. Wherefore it is said to thee: in the
Canticles. As the Lilly amongst Thorns: so is my beloved among the Daughters.
O fair Lilly, O tender and delicate flower, unbeleiven and subverters are
with, thee and thou have thy habitation with Scorpions: See therefore how
warily it behooves thee to walk among thorns.

The flesh and the World, are full of thorns; to walk among these and not to
be hurt is of divine grace, and not of humane power. These Saint Bernard.

And there is another strong and cruel enemy, which by his wonderful craft
dissolveth the Customs of all, breaths cares, searches the affections, and
there always seeks cause to hurt, where he shall observe any one more
studiously, to be busied. For this old Serpent being an enemy of mankind, has
known from the beginning, to whom he may insinuare the inticements of gluttony,
to whom he may pour in the poison of Envy, to whom he may lay the baits of
fair persuasions unto luxury, to whom he may promise the vain allurements of
Pride, he knows whom he may oppress with fear, whom he may deceive with
joy, whom he may seduce with admiration.

He has also some obliged unto him whole Wit and Language he makes use of to
the deceiving of others. O Soul frail to resist, easy to fall, difficult to
rise, how shall thou be able to escape the snares of this cruel adversary,
whom thou know to be endowed with so many subtilties.

SOVLE.
NOw I see, now I first perceive, that as Saint Anselme says, it is the
Custom of sin, which is not easily known of him, who is pressed therewith,
but presently when any one shall begin to alienate himself from it, then at
last he knows in how great obscenity and pollution he has continued.
Therefore because I now somewhat begin to alienate my self from sin, and
thereby I come to acknowledge my self and my sin, I am not further able to
contain my self from lamentation.

O Lord my God thou have impressed in me thy most lovely image, and J have
deformed it with a most hateful Diabolical similitude. Alas! alas! miserable
man that J have imprinted the Image of the Devil on the Jmage of God, why have
J not hated the imitation of him, whose name J do abhor? He has fallen of
his own accord, J willingly have gone astray. He with the bare punishment
preceding proudly has sinned, J having seen his punishment (contemning it)
have sinned. He was once created in Jnnocency, J often times have been
restored. He has raised himself against him that made him, J have raised my
self against him that has made me a new. He has forsaken God, that permitted
him to fall, but I have fled from that God, that sought after me. He remains
in malice, being reprobated of God, I run from God, that mercifully recalleth
me, and though both of us be against God, yet he is against him, that does not
seek him, but I am against him that dyed for me. Behold him whose Image I
abhorred, when as I may find my self in many things far more horrible.

MAN.
FLy, Fly from me O horrible substance, fly from thy self, being terrified of
thy self. Thou shoutest not therefore without sorrow of thy heart, endure thy
horror. If thou do endure, thou know not thy self, This is not fortitude
but dullness of understanding: this is not health but an obdurate wickedness.

SOVLE.
IF I should see my self, it is an intolerable loathing: if I should not see
my self, it is an inevitable death: O how unhappy he is, that is horrible to
himself: but yet he is much more unhappy, who is sensible of death Eternal. O
most meek Father, Saint Anselme in his prayers.
O most clement King. J am not able to hide, J cannot excuse, and yet J do not
a little blush to confess. Now J perceive the Cause of so many Evils, now I
acknowledge what heretofore evilly lay secret.

For my miserable heart so long as it has not cared for the joy to come, Saint
Ber. in his Meditations.
nor has sought after divine Council has been far estranged from it self,
and busied in the love of earthly things, and as long as it has departed from
those, and is involved in these, Vanity has deceived it, Lvxurie has defiled
it, curiosity has withdrawn it: Envy tormented it, Anger did vex it,
Covetousness separated it, Sloth did make it sorrowful, and thus it was
overwhelmed with all vices: because it has forsaken thee our only good, which
was able to have satisfied it.

Let therefore O most merciful God, all my time-evilly spent be forgotten of
thee, and grant that the residue of my time, perhaps too short, and momentary,
may be to thee well pleasing, to me fruitful, and to my Neighbor Edification.

Now O most holy God, for the greatness of the loss which I unhappy and
miserable have miserably incurred, I see and acknowledge that I am not able
sufficiently to bewail my self, and my sin as I have deserved; seeing the
detestation of sin, not unworthily ought to be as great, as the delight was in
our miserable will.

MAN.
O My Soul, if of thy self, as thou affirmest thou art not able, neither
sufficient to lament thy fault, it is necessary for thee to address thy self
to the Son of God thy Savior, do thou not know thou have through him him a
secure access to God the Father? Thy Savior does show his side and wounds to
his Father. Think thou that there shall be any repulse, where there is such
an advocate. In all dangers therefore and distresses, and also in doubtful
things, think on God.

Let him not retire from thy heart, let him not depart from thy mouth.
Following him thou can not stray. Imploring him thou can not despair.
Holding him, thou can not fall, he protecting, thou need not fear, he
being thy guide, thou can not be faint, if he be propitious, thou shall have
pardon.

Doubt not O my soul, Saint Anselm.
and though thou have offended the Father and the Son both, yet both are
merciful, both most holy. Let the guilty therefore fly from the anger of the
just God to the mercy of his son and say, O Son of God, which art become the
son of man that thou may satisfy for the sin of man, either have mercy on
me a wicked sinner or show me one more merciful to whom I miserable soul may
address my self.

SOVLE.
O Man, how cordial thy council is, how comfortable thy speech is to me a
miserable soul! because when I rightly look unto my sin, then I find, then I
know that I have stained the Elements by my sins, defiled the Heavens,
darkened the Stars thereof, tormented the damned in Hell, troubled the Saints
in Heaven, irreverently used the Angels ordained for my custody. Wherefore I
fear to seek help from all these. And because the just have justly disdained
me, I do not presume to fly unto them.

MAN.
O My Soul, too great is thy fear, although thy humiliation be acceptable.
Know thou not that many of the Saints have sinned, who have learned in their
great offenses, how they ought to have pity on us sinners? Reflect on Moses
that exceeding great Prophet, doubting of the divine power. Think on David the
holiest of Kings; sinning against the Divine Law in Adultery and Murder.
Remember Solomon the wisest, adoring vain and most wickd Idols. Call to mind
Manasses the wickedst King who had sinned more then all the Kings of Israel who
said, I have sinned above the number of the sand of the Sea, and I am not
worthy to see the height of Heaven, in respect of the multitude of my
Iniquities, reflect always on these obtaining Pardon. But to what end shall I
say more of the Saints of the old Testament.

Consider now and reflect on a few of the Saints of the new Testament. Look
upon the Matthew sitting in the Custom House, the Publican sinner, and received
to be a Disciple: Look upon Paul stoning Stephen and chosen to be an Apostle.
Look upon Peter, denying Christ, and by and by obtaining pardon. Look upon the
Soldier crucifying Christ, and yet not despairing of the divine mercy. Look
upon the Thief hangon the Cross, and obtaining pardon. Last of all, consider O
my soul, that that famous and unclean sinner Mary Magdalen becoming so
singular and special a lover of Christ. For all how many soever they be which
now reign with God, have in times past either sinned like us, or at least they
might have sinned, if the divine clemency had not preserved them from sin.
Because to whom soever it was granted, that he could not at all sin, this was
not of nature, but of Heavenly Grace.

SOVLE.
EVen now I securely implore the Prophets and Kings, even now I boldly call
upon the Apostles and Martyrs: I constantly mediate the most blessed Son of
God. For I know that he is so Holy, sweet and favorable, that he cannot be
named but he inflames, nor thought upon, but he recreates the affection of
them that love him. For this is he that has procured Health for all, These St.
Bern.
and has obtained reparation of the whole world.

O God my Savior wonderfully singular, and singularly wonderful, by whom the
Elements are renewed, the infirm are healed, Saint Anselme
men are saved and Angels are restored! O my Redeemer, from whose abundance of
plenitude sprinkled about, every Creature is revived. O blessed fountain of
Life and Health, by thee we have access to the through Grace, and by thee even
God himself does receive us: who has given thee to us. Let thy integrity
excuse the fault of our Corruption, to him let thy humility, obtain pardon for
our vanity, give us of thy grace here, and vouchsafe to make us partakers of
thy glory hereafter.

CHAP. III. How the Soul is reformed by Grace.
EVen now, as I think, O my soul, in some sort thou have converted the beams
of thy contemplation to perceive, how the soul is informed by nature, and how
deformed by sin: now convert thy mind, as I hope, cleansed from filth by
contrition, to behold, how thou art reformed by Grace. Yet thou ought to
know, by how much the more perfect the darkness of thy understanding is wiped
away by the bath of contrition, by so much the clearer the benefit of divine
reparation is beheld.

For (according to Saint Augustine) sin is a darkness whereby the
understanding is dulled, and the whole inferior man is overclouded. Wherefore
it is necessary that by so much more carefully the mental Eyes are to be
continually cleansed from the darkness of sin, by the tears of compunction, by
how much the more the light of contemplation is darkened thereby.

Therefore now, O my soul, being purified in thy affections, direct the light
of contemplation to behold, how by the profound clemency of God, how by the
high wisdom of God, how by the wonderful power of God, thou art reformed by
Grace.

First consider, how by the benefit of Redemption, he has freed thee from
original sin, know thou not that by original sin, thou were robbed of
all natural and spiritual gifts, brought into subjection by the power of the
Prince of Darkness, repulsed and exiled from thy Country?

But (according to Saint Bern.) that singular and excellent Majesty, would dye,
that we might live, serve that we might reign, be banished, that we might be
restored to our Country, and he has subjected himsele to all base works, that
he might place us above all his works. For the son of man came to seek and
save what had been lost, I say, that he might humble thee being proud.

For this the only Son of God, St. Greg. in his Register.
has taken upon him our infirmity, for this he being invisible, has made
himself, not only visible, but also has appeared despised, for this he has
suffered scornful reproaches, contemptible derisions, tormenting passions,
that he an humble God might teach man that he ought not to be proud. God has
despised all earthly Goods, Saint August.
that he might show us how to contemn all ours, he has sustained all earthly
evils, that he might teach us how to bear them; so that Felicity ought not to
be sought in the one, nor Adversity be feared in the other.

Secondly he came, Saint Aug.
that he might reconcile thee to his Father. When thou were an enemy to the
Father I have reconciled thee, when thou were afar of, I came that I might
reduce thee, when thou wanderdst among Mountains and deserts, I have sought
thee. Amongst Rocks and Woods I found thee, upon my Shoulders I have carried
thee, I have restored thee to my Father, I have labored, I have swet, I have
exposed my head to Thorns, my hands to Nails, I have suffered my side to be
opened with a lance, I have poured out my blood for thee, and I have been
torn in pieces with all these (I will not say) Injuries, but Austerities, yet
alas through sin, thou seperatest thy self from me.

Thirdly he came, that being sold, Saint Aug.
he might redeem thee. Let us admire, give thanks, love, praise, adore.
because we are called by the death of our Redeemer, from death to life, from
darkness to light, from exile to our Country, from Corruption to incorruption,
from misery to Glory, from lamentation to joy. O wonderful and unheard of
mixture! St. Gr. Nazianzen
he that is the Creator, is become a Creature, he that is Immense is
apprehended, he that is rich toward all men is become poor. He has taken the
form of my flesh, that he might repair the Image which he had made, that he
might endow mortal flesh with immortality.

A wake now O my soul, look upon the face of thy Savior. Behold that face in
times past full of light with very much splendour, now veiled for thee, contrary
to Charity. Beautiful with comelyness now swollen, contrary to comeliness:
esteemed for sweetness, now spit upon, contrary to favor, desirable for love,
now made abominable, contrary to desire.

See now, O my Soul, and diligently consider the strange and unheard of
wonders our Lord has done upon earth. God is mocked that thou may be
honored, the Innocent is whipped, that thou may be comforted, the just is
crucified, that thou may be freed, the Immaculat Lamb is slain that thou
may banquet. Blood and Water are launced from his side that thou may
drink, etc.

Look therefore into the price of thy Redemption appeasing the offense of
prevarication. Behold the example of Information, giving help of
sanctification. Behold the aid of protection, laying open the Gate of
Imprisonment receive the reward of retribution bringing the grace of
Justification.

Behold O Soul too delicate, by continual contemplating, and do by perfectly
imitating according to the example of consummated Justice, that which is showed
thee in the Mountain, that is to say, in the most victorious passion of Christ.

Do thou not consider that thou art puffed up with corporal delights, and
Christ thy Lord, thy King thy spouse, thy Master and Friend is afflicted with
all kind of pains, in every part of his Senses, by all sorts of men? The King
mocked him, the chief Ruler Judged him, the Desciple sold him, the Apostles
left him, the chtefe Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees delivered him, the
Gentiles whipped him, the rabble rout and common People, condemned him, the
Soldiers crucified him. Saint Bern.

That head feared by Angelical spirits is Crowned with Thorns, that face more
beautiful then the sons of men, is spit upon by the Jews: Those Eyes
clearer then the Sun wax dim in death: Those Ears which hear Heavenly
Hymns, hear the outrageous infultings of sinners. That mouth which
instructs Angels it moystned with Vinegar and Gall; Those Feet, whose
footstool is adored, (because it is holy) are fastened to the Cross: Those
hands that have framed the Heavens are extended on the Cross, and fastened with
Nails, his body is beaten, his side opened with a lance. And what more? There
remained not in him any thing free, but only his Tongue that he might pray for
sinners, and commend his Mother to his Disciple. These Saint Bern.

And what more? O faithful soul our Savior with none of these intisements,
of his adverse Enemies cold be withdrawn from the care of our Salvation. But by
how much the more his Aemulation is shown: by so much, if we despise this, the
more grievous damnation follows us.

SOVLE.
O Man I have been long silent, because those things which thou have proposed,
both with joy and grief I have received with a devout mind: Rejoicing
therefore I will rejoice in our Lord, because he has loved me so much, that he
spared not his only begotten Son for me. O inestimable love of Charity thou
have delivered thy Son, that thou might redeem a handmaid, and yet not
worthy the name of a handmaid.

O Lord Jesus Christ, who for me have not spared thy self, so vulnerate my
heart, and so Inebriate my mind with thy blood, that what way soever I shall
turn my self, I always may behold thee Crucified, and whatsoever I shall
look upon may appear to me ruddy with thy blood: that so I may wholly intend
thee, that I might not find any thing beside thee, nor behold any thing but thy
wounds. This is my comfort, I have crucified my self, O Lord, with thee: and
let it be to me intimate affliction to mediate upon any thing except thee.
There is no Affection greater no charity more sincere, Hugo de Sancto Victore
no love stronger, the Innocent has dyed for me, finding nothing in me, that
he might love. But alas! as often as I consider this wonderful favor of
divine Piety toward us, I am not a little confounded and ashamed of my too
much Ingratitude.

MAN.
O My Soul thou have forsaken thy Spouse, Hugo de Arrha Animae:
thou have prostituted thy love, and have not given thanks for these great
benefits: yet that he might release thee from thence, whence thou had fallen,
he has pleased to descend and piously to suffer, that which thou did endure.
Think therefore how much he loved thee, which by no way but by dying would free
thee from death.

Wherefore, O my soul, by how much the more worthy thou know the benefits
of thy Redeemer are, by so much the sins of thy Ingratitude are the worse:
See therefore that thou be not ungrateful on whom so many benefits are
bestowed: for the sin of Ingratitude is very great, because (according to
Saint Bern.) Ingratitude is as it were a burning Wind, drying up the Rivers of
divine mercy, the fountain of clemency, the torrents of Grace.

Consider therefore, O my Soul, often ponder and revolve in thy mind the
horrible sentence which is pronounced against ungrateful persons in the Person
of our Savior, saying. O Soul see how great things I suffer for thee, I call
unto thee, who dye for thee, See the pains wherewith I am tormented: See the
Nails wherewith I am pierced, hear the reproaches wherewith I am confounded.
But although the external grief is great, yet the Internal torment is far
greater, when I find thee so ungrateful, and else where: It is inveighed
against ungrateful men in the person of Christ saying. Et alibi Bernard.
O my people what have I done unto thee, or in what have I molested thee,
answer me? What is the cause thou would rather obey my Enemy then me?
Consider that I am he, who have created thee: I have enriched thee with all
good things; if these be accounted but little to ungrateful persons, yet I
have redeemed thee with my most precious blood. Ah! O my soul, let not these
things depart from thy heart, slip from thy mouth, always render thanks, never
cease to bless, and magnify the only begotten Son of God for these his
great benefits. Let they dearly beloved be for all these benefits sometime to
thee a Bundell of Myrrh in thy heart, sometime joy in thy mind, praise in thy
mouth, Melody in thy Ear.

SOVLE.
NOw I am not able longer to contain my self, tell I pray thee: what shall I
render our Lord for all that he has bestowed on me?

MAN.
O My Soul, as St. Bern. says, In his Meditations.
thou owe to him thy whole life, and not unworthily, because he laid down his
own life for thee, and has sustained cruel torments that thou might not
endure eternal punishment.

What therefore can seem hard unto thee, when thou shall call to mind, that he
that is comely, in the favor of God would be crucified for thee? O how undue a
pity, how free a favor, how unlooked for a Charity, how wonderful a
sweetness is it! that the King of Glory should dye, and be crucified for a most
despicable worm. O how sweet a friend, how strong a helper, how wise a
reconciler is this.

SOVLE.
O Man, J confess and truly acknowledge if J had the lives of all the Sons of
Adam in me, all the days of an Age, the endeavors of all men that are, have
been or shall be, it were nothing in comparison of that, which my Spouse has
sustained for me which the Son of God has suffered for my sins. When as
therefore J shall give all that J am, and whatsoever I am able, it will not be
as a starr to the Sun, as a drop to an Ocean, or as dust to a Mountain?

MAN.
O My Soul, because I now begin to consider that (the Eye of Contemplation
being more perspicuous) thou acknowledgest the Grace of divine redemption,
whereby thy Spouse has delivered thee from original sin, yet a little now I
will begin to speak for my God, and show thee to that heap of divine mercy
whereby thou art freed from actual sin also.

Convert therefore the light of Contemplation, unto the benefit of
justification and consider the favor of thy Lord, how paternally by secret
inspiration he has recalled thee from sin, how sweetly and how lovingly he
has recalled thee, comforting thee by internal communication, saying, Return,
Return, O Shunamite (that is) O soul by sin miserably infected, captivated
or mortified. Return says he, O Soul to me, I am thy Creator, return, I
am thy Redeemer. Return, I am thy Comforter: And if these seem but little,
return last of all, because I am thy very liberal rewarder: Return therefore
to me, I am he, that have so nobly created thee. Return I am he, who so
mercifully by my most bitter death have delivered thee from eternal damnation.
Return to me, I am he that so manifoldly have enriched thee with spiritual
and corporal good things. Return at last to me, O soul, I am he, who so
liberally have now rewarded thee, by prepared felicity. Return, says he,
from the sin of thought. Return from the sin of Speech. Return from the
sin of Action Return from the sin of Custom. Return to me, O Soul, the
Saints with great desire expect thee, and at thy coming the Angels rejoice.
Return, Jesus Christ calls thee with hands extended on the Cross Return the
Abiss of the whole Trinity wait for thy return; O Soul, if thou well
remembrest this is the voice of thy welbeloved invi^ing thee.

Consider now, how great has been the longanimity of him expecting thee, O
what a long time he has expected thy coming, alas what a time has he
suffered thee, in thy sins! O how many, and for what has he damned for their
sins before thy conversion, yet mercifully has he expected thee always
sinning. Return yet O Soul, Christ expecting thee on the Cross, has his head
inclined to kiss thee a a sinner, and unclean: has his Arms stretched forth
to embrace thee, his hands open to forgive thee, his body extended wholly to
bestow himself upon thee, his feet fastened to remain with thee, his side
opened to suffer thee to enter therein. Be therefore now O my soul a Dove
nesting in the crevices of the Rock, fly into the hollowness of his hands,
fly into the wounds of his feet, fly into his side, there is thy rest, there
is thy security. These Saint Bern.

O my soul, if thou could worthily think, how many and what sort in
comparison of thee are rejected, Hugo de S.V.
which have not deserved to attain unto that Grace given thee. Therefore thy
Spouse has elected and preelected thee, he has chosen thee in all, he has
taken thee from all, he loved the before all.

Art thou ignorant how foul thou were before, how polluted and dissolute thou
remaindest before? He has washed thee with the water of Regeneration, he has
fed the with the food of his most sweet body. He has clothed thee with the
Garments of Virtue, wherewith thou might cover and adorn thy nakedness. He
has bestowed on thee the sweet smelling Odours of good works, whereby thou
might eschew the stench of sin: he has given the a mirror, even the
Scripture wherein thou might see thy self. Thus far Hugo.

O my soul, thou have seen the longanimity of him. Expecting thee. Even now
convert the light of thy contemplation to the mercy of him justifying thee.
Think diligently from whence after all these things is this so inestimable a
favor, that thou deservest to be his Bride, on whom the Angels desire to look.

What therefore will thou give unto our Lord for all these things which he has
given thee? For he has given thee by Grace, that thou may be a Companion of
his Table, a companion of his Kingdom, a companion of his Bed, See with what
Arms he is to be embraced of thee, with what lips he is to be kissed, who
has esteemed thee at such a rate, that he would cleanse thee with his blood,
and for thee take upon him the sleep of death.

SOVLE.
I Confess now and acknowledge, I approve and understand that I have received
much more then these from my God, but that I have repayed for all these nothing
worthy so great benefits.

Wherefore Saint Bernard says; I will sing the mercies of our Lord for ever,
for that I consider six mercyes done unto me.

1. That he has preserved me from many sins.

2. That he has not presently condemned me sinning, but I prolonging my
iniquity he has prolonged his Piety and Compassion.

3. He has changed my heart, that those things might be sweet unto me which
formerly were bitter.

4. That he has mercifully received me repenting.

5. That he has given me ability to forbear and amend.

6. That he has given me hope to that I shall be pardoned.

Tell me now, O man, concerning this divine clemency, what I shall render to
our Lord for all these things, least I be found unworthy to receive, if I shall
be found ungrateful for those that are received? What therefore shall I render
to our Lord, but that I shall love and give thanks, confess and sing praises to
his eternal and blessed name? because he is so ready to forgive me my evils,
and bestow upon me such inestimable good things: I attribute it to his grace,
that he dissolves my sins like Ice, I attribute it to his grace, what evils
soever I have not committed, and therefore I count all things to be forgiven
me, whatsoever he being my guide, were not committed by me. Saint Aug. in his
book of Confessions.

MAN.
O My soul, know that whatsoever thy beloved has bestowed on thee, whatsoever
he has sustained for thee, he has consumated the whole in perpetual charity,
wherewith he has loved thee, wherefore as I think, whatsoever is given of love
only, is repayed neither better, nor more decently then by love.

SOVLE.
BEhold, O Lord my God, if these things be so, how much ought I unhappily and
miserable soul love my God, who has created me, when I was not, has redeemed
when I should have perished; and has delivered me from many dangers: when I
did wander he reduced me, when J was ignorant, he taught me, when I sinned he
corrected me, when J was sad he comforted me, when J stood, he held me, when J
fell, he lifted me up, when J went, he led me, when J came, he received me

These and many other things, God has done for me; of which it shall be
pleasant unto me always to speak, always to think, always to give thanks.
God grant that I may be able to laud and love him for all his benefits. For
truly (according to the Author of the Spirit and Soul) he governs all
things, he fills all places, he is every where present, taking care of all,
and providing as well for every one in particular, as for all, yet so I see him
wholly employed for my custody, as though he had forgotten all, and would have
care of me only. For thus he does exhibit himself present unto me he always
offers himself prepared, if he find me ready, that whenever I turn my
self, he will not forsake me, unless I first forsake him. Neither have I
wherewith to repay him for all these, but only that I love him:

O good Jesus, how often after immense and innumerable tears, how often after
diverse sobs and groans have thou anointed me being wounded, and almost at the
point of despairing, with the unction of thy mercy, and have gladly received me
almost altogether fainting, nor yet have thou forsaken me, presuming of pardon.
But above all these O Good Jesus, the Cup of thy passion, which thou have drunk,
being the work of our Redemption, which thou have undertaken, not unworthily
does render thee Amiable unto me.

For this is that which chalengeth to it self all my love, this is it, which
more fairly allureth, more justly binds, and more vehemently moves my
devotion. For where thou have humiliated thy self, where thou have put from
thee thy natural brightness, there Charity has more appeared, and Grace has
more amply shined.

I charge you (says the Soul) O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, In the Canticles.
if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him, that I am sick of love. The Soul
does not hyde whom she loves, because she believes him present to all whom
she does not let pass from her thoughts. I love thee O Lord, and love is
impatient, which cannot be pacified with tears, until that be granted unto it,
which it is in love withal. Nothing com forteth its sorrow, so long as it
beholds not, what it desires.

SOVLE.
BUt whether or no, O Man, is he held to love God, who rejoices that he in no
wise has committed such things, as I have committed?

MAN.
O My Soul, let not any one scorn thee, it is convenient that the sick be
cured of him, from whom it is appointed that he should not be sick, or perhaps
that he might more cautiously avoyde greater troubles. And therefore even so
much, yea truly the more let him love God: because by whom he perceives me,
to be deprived of so great pains of my sins, by him he perceives himself
not to be entangled with so great greifs. Saint Augustine libro Confessionum.

Although without the love of Charity, St. Hierome.
every one may rightly believe, yet he cannot attain unto Beatitude: because
such is the force of Charity that even Prophecy and Marytrdome without it, are
esteemed as nothing, no Virtue can Equal Charity. For Charity obtains the
Excellency of all Virtues.

O my God, give thy self unto me, St. Aug.
Render thy self unto me, I love thee, and if that be too little, I will love
more forcibly. I am not able to limit, that J might know how much J want of thy
love, to that which is sufficient, that my life might run into thy embraces,
and not to divert until it were hidden in the secrets of thy Countenance. This
J only know, that whatsoever J have without thee, and all plenty which is not
my God, is poverty.

SOVLE.
NOw therefore O Man, seeing as thou say J ought to love my beloved Lover
for all these things, tell me, J pray thee, how much and in what manner J may
love him, to the end J may repay the multiplicity of his so great an Affection?

MAN.
O My Soul, St. Bern.
although (according to Saint Bern.) the cause of loving God, be God himself,
yet the method to love him, is to love him without method, notwithstanding we
can find, by the Revelation of holy Scripture a certain method. For he that
has given thee love, has showed thee a manner how to love, saying. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and withal thy
strength. Love therefore O my soul, with a singular love God the Father, who
has so nobly created thee of nothing. Love God the Son, who so inestimably
has reformed thee in dying for thee. Love God the Holy Ghost who so
mercifully, and so sweetly by often comforting thee, has preserved thee from
sin, and has strengthened thee in Good. Love therefore God the Father
valiantly, that thou may not be dangerously overcome by any other strange
love. Love God the Son wisely, that thou may not be craftily seduced by
any other love: Love God the Holy Ghost sweetly, that thou may not be
poysonously infected with any other strange love. Or thus (according to Saint
Bern.) Learn of Christ, O Christian soul, in what manner thou ought to love
Christ. Love sweetly, wisely and valiantly. Sweetly; That all other love may be
base to thee in respect of his love, and let him only be to thee Honey in thy
mouth, melody in thy Ear, and Jubilee in thy heart. Love him wisely, that thy
love may continually burn in him only and in no other. Love valiantly that thy
frailty may joyfully undergo all sharp and bitter torments for him, that thou
may say. My suffering is scarce the space of an hour, or if it were more I
feel it not, for the love I owe him. These Saint Bern.

Thus let a Christian by love toward Christ continually resolve, Saint Hiero.
that he may willingly endure all things for him, until he shall come unto
him. Let us love Christ and always seek to cleave fast to his embraces, and
every thing shall seem easy that is difficult. Saint Ambrose. O my soul
always keep in thy mind, how sweetly Christ loved thee in his Incarnation, how
wisely in his Conversation, and how valiantly in his Passion. There is no love
greater no Charity more sincere, no Affection stronger, the Innocent has dyed
for thee, finding nothing in thee that he might love.

SOVLE.
TEll me, I pray thee, O man, under favor, I ask not out of curiosity, but of
humility, not of presumption but rather of Devotion: what is it that I love
when I love my God Hugo de S.V.

MAN.
O My soul, if thy Question were presumptuous then it were too vicious, but
because it has it original from devotion, it deserves a devout answer.

Hear therefore, In his Book of Confessions.
what that great Lover of God, Saint Augustine says. When I love my God says
he, I love not a form or comeliness, not time nor the Candor of that light,
which is lovely in sight, nor ^weet Melodies, nor unguents fragrantly senting,
nor Manna, nor Honey, nor bodies acceptable to the Embraces of the flesh. These
things I love not when I love God. But what do I love? I love a certain light,
a certain voice, a certain odor, a certain food, a certain Embrasing of my
inner man. Where there is something shyneth to my soul, which no place can
comprehend, where there is something sounds, which time is not capable of,
where there is something casts an odor which a blast cannot disperse, where
there is something savours, which Appetite cannot diminish: where there is
something cleaves fast, which saciety cannot pull away.

SOVLE.
TEll, I pray thee, O man, yet a little of the virtue of Charity, which being
known the mind may more strongly be enflamed in the love of God.

MAN.
Truly O my Soul, the fruit of Charity is great, but hidden. For (according
to Saint Augustine) it endures adversity, it mitigateth prosperity, it is
strong in hard suffering, pleasant in good works, most safe in temptation, most
liberal in Hospitality, amongst true friends most mercy, amongst false most
patient. It is secure among reproaches, liberal to them that hate it, pleasant
in time of Anger, innocent among treacheries, weeping at iniquity, taking
comfort in truth, St. Aug. in praise of Charity.

O happy love from whence arises strength of Manners, Saint Bern.
purity of affections, subtilty of understanding, sanctity of desires,
clearness of works fruitfullnesse of Virtues, dignity of merits, sublimity and
height of rewards and honors. O sweetness of love, O the happy love of
sweetness, let my heart feed on thee, and let the bowels of my soul be
replenished with thy Nectar. O my soul, how sweet is the food of Charity,
which refreshes the weary, strengthens the weak, and exhilerateth the
sorrowful. For it makes the yoke of truth sweet and his burden light: I
confess O Lord, I have not sustained the weight and heat of the day, but I
carry a sweet yoke and a light burden. For my work is scarce the space of an
hour, and were it more, I perceive it not in respect of thy love. But what is
more? O my soul such is the force of love, that it is necessary thou be like
unto that which thou love, and to whom thou art joined by affection: in some
sort by the society of love thou shall be transformed in to its similitude.

The end of the first part.
The Second Exercise:
How the Soul by mental Exercise, ought to convert her contemplation to
things that are external, that she may know.

1 How unstable worldly wealth is. 2 How mutable worldly Excellency is, etc. 3
How miserable worldly Magnificence is.
CHAP. I. How unstable worldly wealth is.
SOVLE.
NOw I see, how miserable every soul is, setting her heart on worldly things,
which are attained with labor, possessed with fear, lost with grief. But
blessed is he that loves thee O Lord, and an enemy for thee, and a friend in
thee: for he only loses no dear friend, to whom all are dear in thee; for
no man loses thee, but he that forsakes thee, and he that departs from
thee, whither goes he, but from thee, being pleased to thee being angry? These
Saint Aug.

O Charity which always burnest, and are never extinguisned, My God who art
Charity it self inflame me. Thou command that I should love thee, give me
what thou command, and command what thou please. Thou command truly
that I should contain my self from the concupiscence of the flesh, from the
concupiscence of the Eyes, and from the Ambition of the World.

He loves thee less O Lord, St. Aug. St. Hier.
which loves any thing with thee, which he loves not for thee. O man let us
(always) love Christ, and let us ever seek to cleave to his embraces, and
every difficult thing will seem easy.

MAN.
O My soul, now I perceive that thou acknowledgst how happy and how blessed he
is, who is wholly, sixth by love in the only desire of eternity, who is puffed
up neither with prosperity, These S. Greg. in, his Moralls.
nor is danted with Adversity, and while he has nothing in this world, that he
loves; has likewise nothing the rein that he fears. Convert therefore now O
my Soul, thy contemplation to those things which are without thee, that is to
to this sensible world, that thou may despise both it, and those things that
are therein, so that it being despised, thou may be more inflamed with the
love of thy Spouse. For thou love him the less, if thou desire any thing
with him, which thou love nor for him, and in him. For by so much (according
to Saint Gregory) every one is separated from the supernall love, by how much
he is delighted with any thing below him and he is sooner converted to God, who
has not any thing in this World, wherewith he may be delighted.

And every one by so much is separated from the love of earthly things,
According to the Gloss on Exodus St. Aug.
by how much he is elevated to the only love of the eternal. Let all other
creatures therefore be of small esteem unto thee, that thy Creator only may be
sweet in thy heart.

Weigh therefore and always consider not only by hearsay, but by experience,
not only by relation, but also by Action, how unstable worldly wealth is, how
mutable worldly excellency is, how false and deceitful worldly glory is. For
every thing that is here eminent, is more enthralled with sorrow, then it can
be delighted with honor. Saint Bern.


Behold the lovers of this World walk about the affairs thereof, some seeking
riches, other honors, others Glory: But what shall I speak of Riches which are
gotten with labor, possessed with fear, lost with grief? Or what shall I say
of honor? Thou art seated in a high place, but whether or no shall thou not be
judged of all, yea tormented of all? whether or no can any one be in honor
without fraud, in Praelacy without tribulation, in height without Vanity: What
shall I say of Glory? It is nothing else, but a certain vain tickling of the
Ears, and can that be without censure? Behold whom thou have outgone, and
think that thou have given them in all things cause of Envy. So often I am like
the Apostate tatae Angel, Saint Bern.
as often as I desire to be above others. For nothing is swifter then the World
and the things thereof, which when we desire to hold we loose. Saint Hiero.
Thou have seen Emperors, thou have seen Commanders, thou have seen Armies,
Victories and Triumphs, yesterday they were, to day they are not, yesterday
they flourished as as a flower, to day they are withered as Hay, nothing
therefore is good, but what is perpetual.

SOVLE.
O Man, if these things be so, what is it that miserable men do seek, whilst
they desire the vanities of the World? O how much they are blinded that seek
the Glory thereof. Some whilst they look upon the Glory of some eminent men,
they esteem it some great thing, and wish that they may deserve the like. But
when they behold them in dying, they confess with lamentation how vain their
Glory was, and say. Behold what a nothing man is.

MAN.
O Most dear soul, and what are all worldly things, but certain vain
dreams, and what has Pride, or the glorying in riches, profited their lovers.
For they have all passed away like a shadow, and like a Ship floating on the
Ocean, whose tract is not to be found for they are consumed in their
wickedness. Alas how many have there been, which have left no sign of their
being? Where are the Princes of the Nations, and those that ruled the beasts of
the Earth? who treasured up Silver, and heaped up Gold, who built Cities and
Castles who have conquered Kings, and Kingdoms by War. Where is the wise man?
where the Scribe? where the Inquisitour of this World? Where is Solomon the
most wise? Where is Alexander the most puissant? Where Samson the most strong?
Where is Absalon the most beautiful? Where is Assuerus the most glorious? Where
are the the most potent Caesar's? Where the Kings? Where are the famous Princes?
What has vain Glory, short mi^th, the power of the world, a great Family, the
pleasure of the flesh, the falsity of riches, the sweetness of concupiscence
profited them? where is their laughter? where their joy? where their glorying?
where their Arrogance? Behold the nobleness of blood, the fairness of Body,
their elegant feature, their youthful comeliness; their Possessions, their
mighty Palaces, their Furniture, and add also the wisdom of the World, yet
all these things are but of the World, and the World loves what is his own,
and yet they do not long subsist therein. For the World shall pass away and
the Concupiscence thereof.

Thou therefore, Saint Bern.
if thou rightly understandest, if thou can rightly see, leave to follow such
things, which it is a misery to obtain, which possessed do burden, being loved
do defile, and being lost do torment. Leave thou therefore all these things for
him, who is above all.

Fly therefore, I say, fly, O my Soul to the City of Refuge, that is to a
Religious life, where thou may do Penance for sins past, and obtain
grace for the present, and happily obtain the future Glory. Let not the
remembrance of thy sins hinder thee, for where Iniquity has abounded, Grace
also is accustomed to Superabound. Let not the very austerity of penitences
deter thee. For the sufferings of this life are not sufficient to satisfy for
the fault past which is remitted, for the present Grace which is given; and for
the future Glory which is promised.

CHAP. II. How mutable worldly Wealth is.
SOVLE.
NOw I acknowledge the falsity and instability of the World, but I know not how
I am captivated that as yet I am not able to divert my thoughts from it.

MAN.
TRuly, O my Soul, if thou would diligently and prudently consider thy
danger thou incurrest by living in the World, without doubt thou would
restrain thy mind from the Vanities thereof. For troublesome and very dangerous
is this worldly conversation, because (according to Saint Bern.) Chastity is
hazarded in delights, humility in riches, Godliness in much business, Truth in
much babbling CHARITY in this wicked Age. O weak and infirm Soul, which art so
apt to be deceived, so prone to fall, so difficult to rise. Do thou not know,
That as it is a hard thing to preserve a Tree placed in the high way having
fair fruit, until they be ripe. So it is a difficult thing for a man living
according to the World to maintain Justice immaculate, even unto the end?
These St. Chrysostom.

The snares of this World are accompanied with true austerity, St. Aug. in a
certain Epistle.
but with false delight, with a certain sorrow, but with an uncertain
pleasure, with hard labor, but with a fearful rest, with a full misery, but
with no beatitude, and with a vain hope. O my soul if thou would consider
this, thou would despise the World and all things that are therein.

And what is it O most dear Soul that thou love? what is it that thou
desire, what is it that thou seek in the World? If thou love Prelacy,
what other thing do thou but confound thy life? Do thou not know, that the
chiefest honor, and a base mind, that the first seat and the worst life, a
Sophysticall tongue and an idle hand, much babbling and no fruit, a grave
Countenance, and a light carriage, great authority and a wavering instability
is a monstrous things Saint. Bern.

But perhaps thou would say, truly I desire Prelacy, but I intend to live
well and piously therein. I commend it but I seldom find, what I willingly
would commend; wherefore I always fear that which Saint Gregory relates: The
deserts of Rulers and Subjects are so linked together, that oftentimes by the
fault of them that rule the Subjects lives are the worse. And oftentimes by the
faults of the commonalty, the life of the Pastors may fail.

If thou seek the wisdom of this World, Saint Bern.
O to what a danger do thou expose thy self. Alas how many and what great
ones has the cursed wisdom of the World supplanted, and has extinguished a
divine spirit conceived in them, which our Lord, would more vehemently have
enflamed. Do thou not know, that the wisdom of the World is earthly,
sensual and Diabolical, an enemy of health, a destroyer of life, and the
Mother of lust.

St. Aug He that seeks health without his Savior, and thinks that he can
become wise without the true wisdom, is not sound, but sick; is not wise, but
fooilsh, and he continually is involved in misery. For he that profits in
knowledge and not in good life, is far from God as says Algazel. Therefore
thou that desire to be wise, learn on Earth such wisdom as the knowledge
thereof may persevere with thee in Heaven. Study here how thou may obtain
to that which once to have seen is to have learned all things.

This is that eternal Truth, without which to know every thing, is but
foolishness, which only to know, is perfect knowledge. S. Hierome.

St. Aug. O how unhappy a man is he, that knows all other things and knows
not thee.

For blessed is he that knows thee, though he be ignorant of all other
things. For if he has known both thee, and other things, he is not more happy
for those, but blessed for the knowledge of thee only.

St. Anselme, But perhaps O my soul, thou love worldly wealth, worldly Pomp
and carnal delights, and for this only thou unwillingly leavest the World, yet
consider that all these are but frail and transitory. Tell me where are the
Monarchs? where the Princes? where those Lovers formerly spoken of? I am afraid
that most of them alas are utterly undone and gone to Hell. What does Pride now
profit them? what the vaunting of riches? For he that loves the world more
then God, his life better then a Cloister, Gluttony better then abstinence,
Luxury better then Continency, follows Satan and shall go with him to eternal
punishment. They that flourish with the felicity of this World, St. Aug.
do perish by the power of God: they flourish for a time and perish eternally,
they flourish with deceitful goods, but are really tormented.

If it delight us to have any thing in this World, let us with a ready will get
into the favor of him, that possesses all things, and in him we shall have
whatsoever we happily and holily desire. For wealth harmeth nor the rich man,
if he use it well, nor does poverty make the poor man commendable, if in his
poverty he takes not heed of the filth of sin.

But yet, St. Bern.
O my soul thou shall find, what thou may object, saying. I despise the
World but I am not able to forsake my friends Parents and kinrod. O my Soul,
this objection is frivolous. This is a faithful speech and worthily to be
received. Though thou say it is a wicked thing to despise Father or Mother, yet
it is most holy, for the love of Christ. O cruel Father, O monstrous Mother,
yea not Parents but destroyers, who would rather have thee to perish with them,
then to reign without them. Although thy Mother with dangling hair, Saint
Hierome.
and her Garments rent, show thee the Paps wherewith she had brought thee up.
And though thy Father lie in thy way, yet go on, with dry Eyes and fly unto
the banner of the Cross by thy contemned Mother, and by thy Father trodden
upon. It is the only sign of Piety, to have been cruel in these things. Do
thou not know O my soul, that he that has Jesus, has a Father and Mother,
and every one a friend? why followest thou the dead, follow the living, and
suffer the dead to bury their dead.

SOVLE.
NOw I perceive by thy words, O man, and I know by many experiments that the
World also in it self withers, but yet alas it florisheth in the hearts of
many, who love the bitterness thereof, following it flying, embracing it
sliding away, tell me then what is the reason of so great a blindness.

MAN.
O my soul, Saint Hierome.
art thou ignorant, that thou art created so delicate and so noble of thy
Spouse, the Author of all things, that it is unpossible for thee to be without
love? It is a hard thing for a humane soul not to love, for it is of necessity
that our mind should be drawn to some affections. Wherefore (according to
Saint Bern.) It likewise behooves thee that thou be delighted either in the
highest things or the lowest. Therefore (according to Saint Gregory) because
there are some, which neglect their own life, whilst they desire transitory
things and understand not the Eternal, and if they do understand, ye despise
them, and feel not the grief whilst they are wounded. Wherefore alas
miserable men they think themselves to be in good case, loving this Exile, as
their Country, and rejoicing in blindness, as in the clearness of light.
Contrarily the minds of the Elect, whilst they behold all transitory things as
though they were none at all, do enquire to what end they were created. And
when nothing can suffice their affections without God, they repose in the only
contemplation of their maker, desiring to be present with the Heavenly
Citizens, and yet being placed in the World, they rise above the World;
Sweetness seems to be in humane things, yet but to those, These St. Gregory.
Idem upon Ezechiel.
which never tasted the sweetness of Heavenly. Because whilst the humane mind
understands but a little the Eternal, by so much the sweeter he reposeth in
temporal. But now if any one had cordially tasted, what the sweetness of
Heavenly reward is, look by how much the sweeter it becomes, which he
perceives inwardly, by so much the more every thing is converted into
bitterness which outwardly he sustaineth.

CHAP. III. How miserable worldly Magnificence is.
SOVLE.
DO not, I pray the, O man, prolong to declare unto me something of worldly and
heavenly Joy, to that end that the nature of both being more perfectly known, I
may more truly despise the one, and more carefully apply my self to the gaining
of the other: because as I think, that as the good is not loved unless it be
known, so the evil is not avoided unless it be understood.

MAN.
O My Soul, I consider that worldly Joy (if truly it may be termed a joy and
not rather an unknown scourge) is never truly perceived,, but when it is
perfectly despised. Wherefore as it is related by the true contemners of the
World, Worldly joy is most especially held contemptible for five things. First
because it has a baseness in it is object? For what is the joy of the world?
Saint Aug. answers, an unpunished wickedness, that is to say, to be
inebriated with Luxury, wholly to be busied in Banquetings, to continue in
vanities, and to suffer no evil in this life for these things. For evil
people think themselves to be in delights, when they are not corrected for
their wickedness. And they know not, that there is nothing more unhappy then
the happiness of Sinners, whereby penal infirmity is nourished, and an evil
will is strengthened.

2: It has impurity in its subject. For the soul defiled with sins, is the
subject of worldly joy, which gladdeth when it shall do wickedly, and rejoices
in the worst things. Wherefore Saint Hierome says well; That to laugh and
rejoice with this world, is not the Act of an understanding man, but of a mad
man. Truly O my Soul, a clean heart is not glad and jocund with this unclean
world, but with God and in God.

3. It has a shortness in it self, because the joy of an Hypocrite is like a
minute. The world is this Hypocrite, whose joy is like a point, which is
neither broad nor long, nor high nor low. The joy of the world is a vanity,
Saint Aug. upon Saint John.
which with a great desire is hoped for, that it may come and when it does
come, it cannot be stayed. O my soul how short, how frail and how transitory
is worldly joy. For short are the days of Man as Job says.

4. They have sorrow in the end, because alas they miserable men wast their
days in pleasure, and at an instant they descend into Hell. For the end of
such joy is sorrow. Yea O my soul, if thou be able to discern, such joy has
always sorrow mixed with it, because ever of necessity the Guilty Conscience
fears cruel things. Art thou ignorant, O my soul, that the joy endures no
longer, which is in eating and drinking; then the sorrow continues which is a
hungring and thirsting. And so of all other things.

5. It has great misery in its own Affection, because it is a hindrance of
spiritual joy: O my soul, acknowledge how wretched this world is, and how
miserable they are that follow it. For men have always excluded worldly joys
from a blessed life. St. Bern. O how base and unprofitable worldly comfort is,
and which is more to be feared, because it is an Impediment of true and holy
consolation. Refuse therefore, O my soul, to be delighted in the World, if
thou will be comforted in the remembrance of God. Let all things created be
vile unto thee, that thy Creator may be sweet in thy heart. Saint Aug:

SOVLE.
NOw I despise the world, now I acknowledge the false joy, the true sorrow, the
false sweetness, and the true bitterness thereof, and for this not unworthily
I contemn all these things according to thy Council. But because as thou
affirmest, I am not able to be without love, tell me I pray thee; what shall I
do? whither shall I turn my self? where shall I find a fit love?

MAN.
O My Soul, if thou should perfectly know thy self by the knowledge
thereof thou would despise the world, and all things therein, and thou
should learn what a Consolation thou ought not unworthily to affect in
thy love. O my soul, if thou should understand thy self to be of a Heavenly
Nature, without doubt thou would abhor earthly consolation. Blush
therefore to be comforted in filthiness, which art of Heaven. Blush to be
delighted with the basest things, which art not able to be satisfied, but in
the chiefest. Thou art as I think of a Heavenly Nature, and do desire, and
seek, as I believe, naturally (if carnal madness would permit thee) Heavenly
consolation. O how sweet and delightful it would be (the seasoning of divine
love joined therewith) to live according to Nature, if carnal foolishness
would suffer us, which being cured, Nature presently is delighted with natural
things.

SOVLE.
ANd what is it properly, to live according to Nature.

MAN.
TO live according to Nature most properly, is to lead a Heavenly life on
Earth, to return from things external to the internal, and to ascend from
the Internal to the Supernall, and to do all things according to the most
noble part which exceeds in man, that is according to his understanding. Haec
Philosophus 4 Ethicor.

SOVLE.
CAn any one on Earth, and in this vale of tears lead an Heavenly life?

MAN.
O My Soul, if thou doubtest and wonderest at my words, as at the words of a
sinner. Yet hear Saint Aug. and Paul the Apostle. Behold what Saint Aug.
says, when we apprehend any thing that is eternal either by knowledge or
love, then we are not in this world, whence it is as the Apostle says. Our
Conversation is in Heaven. O my Soul think therefore, that thou art more
truly there, where thou love, then where thou do inanimate: because
whatsoever thou love, by that very power of affection thou art transformed
into its similitude, if therefore thou contemplatest Celestial things, if thou
love Heavenly things, how is it now that thou remainest not in Heaven, who
art in this life, resembling celestial spirits?

SOVLE.
ALas! Alas! now miserable and unhappy that I am, know perceive my self for a
long season to have been miserably blinded, who for so long a time knowingly
have erred in temporal and earthly things; entangling my self by love in
worldly and base things, from which I have received very little comfort, but
much grief, and some confusion, but very little joy, yet various and often
great sorrow of heart. Tell me therefore I pray thee, O man, what is that
Heavenly consolation, and how by any means I may be able to attain to it in
this vale of tears and misery?

What is that which I find in my God, when so willingly and so easily I
contemn all things for him, when I say within my self with joy: O God of my
heart, O God my portion for ever? What is that, which I taste in that most short
hour in my beloved, when with all my strength, I desire joyfully and heartily
to endure all sharp, bitter, and austere things for him and say: It is good for
me to cleave to God. And who shall separate me from the charity of Christ?

MAN.
O My Soul, this consolation (according to Saint Bern.) is nothing else, but a
certain love of Devotion, proceeding from the hope of Pardon, and taste of the
good, though but little and a most certain sweet Delectation, wherewith our
bountiful God recreateth the afflicted soul, whereby the soul is invited to
seek God, and is vehemently provoked to a divine love. Hugo de S. V.

O my soul, what think thou is so sweet and so pleasant, that is accustomed
to move the devout souls in the remembrance of their beloved, and so sweetly
affect them, that now they altogether begin to be rapt and alienated from
themselves? The conscience is exhilerated, and the memory of all their greifs
is forgotten: The mind rejoices, the understanding waxes clear, the heart is
illuminated, and the affection is made jocund. Now they know not, where they
behold themselves, and as though the embraces of love, hold something within
them and they are ignorant what it is, and yet they earnestly desire with all
their force to retain it. The mind delightfully struggles in some sort, least
it should depart from it, as though it should find the end of all its desires
therein.

St. Bern. Sometimes as though Hood winck^, O good Jesu, thou sendest me,
desiring thee, into the mouth of my heart, yet to know what it is that I feel,
it is not lawful for me, For truly I perceive a savor, being so comfortable
a sweetness, that if is were perfected in me I should seek nothing else Is not
this the Jubilee of the heart?

St. Gregory. Jubilee is said to be an unspeakable joy of the mind, which
cannot be hidden nor uttered in words. Yer notwithstanding it may be shown by
some motions, though not expressed by any proprieties. Wherefore the Psalmist
says. Blessed is that people that knows Jubilation. He does not say who
speaks, but who knows: because Jubilation truly may be known by the
understanding but cannot be expressed by word or speech.

St. Bern. For when I perceive this savor, thou suffer me by no sight of
the Body, by no sense of the soul, by no understanding of the Spirit to
consider what it is when I shall receive it, and am willing to ruminate
thereof, and to judge the sweetness of it, it presently slideth away, yet truly
I swallow it in hope of eternal Glory, but by long ruminating of the virtue of
its operation, I desired to infuse it into all the veins and marrow of my
soul, as though it were a certain vital Juice, that it might deceive it of
all other affections, and it might only savor that, but presently it hasteneth
away, and when with Inquisition or acception, or the sight there of I gladly
desire more strictly to commit some formal imprinted lineaments thereof to
memory, or otherwise to help my forgetfulness by writing, by experience: I am
compelled to confess that of the Gospel: Thou know not from whence it
comes, or whither it goes.

What Declaration, O my Soul, do thou think is there so sweet and so
pleasant. Truly this is the divine consolation.

SOVLE.
O Man, who will bestow this upon me, that this so un-experienced a consolation
may enter into my heart, that I may forget my miseries, and may despise worldly
comfort, and may happily begin to be estranged from my self?

MAN.
O My soul, Great is that which thou desire, it is an inestimable gift which
thou wishest for, wherefore as I suppose, it cannot be obtained by humane
endeavor it can scarcely be gotten but by humble prayers to God, and of those
that are worthily disposed, by the only grant of divine mercy. For all Gold in
comparison of it, is but as a little sand, and silver compared to it, is
accounted as nothing.

SOVLE.
O Man, tell me I desire thee, what manner a one ought that disposition to be,
wherewith the affection of him that prays ought to be disposed for obtaining
of it?

MAN.
OF this matter much might be spoken of them that have tried it, but that I
acknowledge my self unexperienced, yea I blush to speak a few things. Wherefore
I fear least it should be objected against me.

Wherefore do thou relate what thou have not tasted? Wherefore like an
unworthy man do thou praise, what thou art ignorant of?

SOVLE.
O Man fear not, but with reverence and Humility devoutly propose what thou
have both heard and read. For there are many that have to the profit of others
determined of great and high matters which they have not learned of their own
experience but by the knowledge of others.

MAN.
NOw I shall speak with some boldness; for those abilities, which lack of
knowledge denies, Charity supplieth. Wherefore as I think, so I relate, I think
(under favor of a better Judgment) if thou will prepare thy self to taste this
Celestial Sweetness, thou ought to be cleansed, exercised, and lifted up.
In the first this Heavenly sweetness is smelled, in the second is is tasted,
and in the third sometimes even to inebriation it is taken and swallowed up.

First I say, thou ought to be cleansed from sins, from inordinate
affections, from temporal consolation, and from the inordinate love of
Creatures; because (according to St. Bernard) he erreth altogether that
beleiveth that he is able to mix the Celestial sweetness with this dust, that
divine Balsom with this venomous Joy, those Graces of the Holy Ghost with the
Allurements of this world. But after the Soul shall be purged by such things,
cleansed from tear-distilling groans, and purifyed by sorrowful sobbings,
because as St. Aug says, it is convenient that that mind should always find
sorrow in it self, who forsaking his Creator, did always seek joys in
himself, and in the Creature.

Excellently therefore St. Gregory in his Morals speaks of that Sentence of
Job. I sigh before I eat. It is the office of the Soul to eat and to be fed
with the Contemplations of supernall Light: Let it therefore sigh before it
feed, because he that does not humiliate himself in this Exile by the bewailing
of Heavenly desires, cannot taste the joys of the eternal Kingdom. For they are
barren of the food of Truth, who are delighted in the scarcity of this
Peregrination.

2. The mind ought to be exercised in the acting of good things, and in the
suffering of evil. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Because those whom the love of truth moves to affection, the refreshing of
Consolation feeds. St. Bernard; O good Jesus how often after innumerable
tears and groans, have thou anointed my wounded Soul with the Ointment of thy
merey, and sometimes almost despairing have received me, and being comforted and
presuming of mercy have utterly left me? Behold in what manner the reward of
good things is in it self, wherefore truly though in the beginning the way be
straight which leads to life, yet in process of time, it is enlarged with the
sweetness of inestimable love. O how blessed therefore is the consolation which
divinely is infused into them that suffer for Christ.

The third thing wherein the Soul is inebriated with this sweetness is the
elevation of the mind, when happily the Soul is drawn form earthly delights,
and after a certain wonderful manner is elevated above it self, above the
world, yea, above every Creature, that now the Soul can say, The King has
brought me into his Wine-Cellars. This is that Wine-Cellar wherinto the Soul is
brought, where she shall drink of the seasoned wine of the Inestimable Deity,
and of the most pure Milk of the incontaminated Humanity. Hence O my Soul his
Friends drink, but his most dearest Beloved are therewith in ebriated. O happy
drunkenness which is accompanied with so chaste and holy a sobriety of mind and
body. Hence it is that the Soul like a drunken man is made gladsom and joyful
in adversity, strong and secure in dangers, wise and discreet in prosperity,
free and pious in pardoning Injuries, and at last lying drowsy and sleepy in
the divine Embraces, when the left hand of the Spouse does friendly bear up
the Bride under her head, and the right hand of the lover familiarly embraces
his Beloved.

SOVLE.
O Man, I confess with humility and reverence, that sometimes that happened unto
me, though alas very seldom; That with great violence about the beginning of my
conversion, I have drawn my mind from earthly things, and with very much
endeavor have lifted it up to contemplate on Heavenly things: I have entered
with trembling, I have gazed about me with blushing, I have seen the Quier of
Angels, the Palaces and Joys of the Patriarks, and Prophets: I have beheld the
Tabernacles of the Apostles, the Feasts of Martyrs, the Solaces of Virgins and
Confessors. Surely I have craved the Alms of some comfort from every one of
them, I have desired the crumms falling from the Table of their Lord, yet I
have not obtained them. But which is most lamentable to be heard, by and by I
have been repulsed of all of them as a stranger, and one unknown. What therefore
has the laborious elevation of the mind profitted me, when no comfort has
succeeded it.

MAN.
O My Soul, this so comfortless a repulse was not without cause. I believe this
was the cause, for that thou would be a Companion of Comfort, befort thou
were a Companion of Suffering. Thou would be a partaker of remuneration
before thou were an Imitator of virtue. Strive therefore first to be a
Companion of Angels by purity and innocence, a companion of the Patriarks and
Prophets, by humility and confidence of belief, study to be a Daughter of of
the Apostles and Martyrs, by charity and patience, a Daughter of the Confessors
and Virgins, by Piety and Continency, and then be confident that in this thy
Exile, thou shall with the Prodigal Child obtain Alms of thy Heavenly Father.

SOVLE.
O Man, now I acknowledge how vain and unsavory all transitory things are, and
for this I despise the World, I little esteem the comfort thereof, and I fly and
contemn worldly joy as Death bringing poisons, also I bewail my self past as
death, and I wash and cleanse my miserable mind with groans and tears, and if
at any times betwixt tears and groans, I perceive the odor of Divine
Sweetness, though but a little; notwithstanding as yet I unhappy and miserable,
hungry and thirsty taste not the food of the Angels, and the Wine of thy
Friends. St. Bern. As yet O Lord my God, my heart has not come near unto the
Abundance of thy Sweetness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee.
For outwardly I am comforted, howsoever with the Sent thereof, because it is
sweeter to me then Balsom, or all other Perfumes whatsoever.

O Lord God, if the smell thereof be so excellent, how pleasant is the taste of
thy sweetness? If a little taste be of such virtue, how much joy has the Happy
inebriation therewith? O who will grant it unto me, that thou may come into
my heart, and that thou may inebriate me with thy Wine, and I may embrace
thee O my God.

MAN.
O Devout Soul (I speak under correction) you are too covetous, St. Aug.
and I would to God you were not too presumptuous. Examine your strength,
consider your vileness, weigh your virtues, and then if it please you, it may
suffice you rather humbly to run after the Odor of the Divine Ointments with
the young men, then presumptuously to rely on your own merits, ask that which
you about your merits have not deserved.

SOVLE.
O Man how harsh and burdensome a Comforter art thou to me a miserable Soul? How
niggardly a Dispenfer (if it be lawful to say so) are thou of the Divine
Bounty. I boldly speak it, I am not able to refrain, the smell thereof does
not suffice me, a little taste does not fully refresh me, but affect me, my love
coveteth and requires Inebriation. I know him that says, Drink ye my
Friends, and be ye Inebriated O my dearest Beloved; Though the unworthyness of
the Asker do depress, yet the piety of the Promiser raises hope.

O man, how can I doubt but that he is ready to give me his good things, who
has not disdained to suffer me my evils.

Art thou ignorant of that which thou have taught many of the goodness of God,
which thou have learned of Saint Augustine, thus speaking: Do vera Religione.
Let humane slothfullnesse blush, God will bestow more then man dares ask? God
has given us a pledge of this Spirit, wherein we may feel his sweetness, and
may taste of the very fountain of life, wherein we may be sweetened and moystned
with a sober ebriety, like unto a tree that is planted by the running streams.

St. Chrysostom. Nothing makes the Omnipotency of God more manifest, then
that he makes those omnipotent that hope in him: for no deceit, no snare or
allurement shall be able to deject the mind relying on God through hope, or
overcome him persevering. Now let humane despair be ashamed, and cursed be the
fear of cowardlinesse which beleiveth that he can deny or withhold his
benefits from them, being rich and very liberal to all those that call upon
him, and put their perfect hope in him. For has not the eternal Father in
whom there is no change, of his sole exceeding great bounty sent his only
begotten Son, in whom he has given all that he had, all that he would, all that
he was? So that if his liberality should now diminish his infinite goodness,
perhaps our infirmity and weakness not unworthily would stagger. But because
he is good of himself, and not by any accidental good he is not by the
communication of his goodness diminished, nor by Addition of any others
goodness, augmented.

MAN.
O my soul, Great is thy faith, thou art very strong in hope and confidence;
And although the hope, which proceeds from the promise of God, and a holy life
and conversation be worthy of praise, and ought to be eternised; yet truly I
council thee before thou scendest to get Inebriation into thee, that thou
first wholesomely descend below thy self by the consideration of thy self,
that thou may learn reverently to fear thy Spouse, before that thou
beginnest to enter into his secret Bedchamber, whom thou ought not only to
fear when he is angry, but also when he does most sweetly and delicately
cherish thee.

The end of the second part.
The third Exercise.
How the Soul by mental Exercise, ought to convert the beams of
Contemplation to things below her, that she may understand.

1 The Inevitable necessity of man's death. 2 The Formidable austerity of final
Judgment. 3 The Intolerable pain of Infernal punishment.
CHAP. I. Of the Inevitable necessity of Man's death.
SOVLE.
TEll me I pray thee, O man, what are those Inferior things, to which my
consideration is to be converted? I hasten to ascend, I seek Inebriation of the
divine comfort, I am not able long to rest on those things which are below me.
Even now I desire O Lord my helper thy beloved Tabernacles, I covet with all my
strength to dwell in the Courts of our Lord.

MAN.
THese are the Inferior things, O my Soul, that thou may convert thy self
unto, and may see the inevitable necessity of Death, and may lament all the
infallible equity and truth of the Divine Judge, and may tremble and be
afraid of the intolerable austerity of infernal punishment. Consider
therefore often, weigh and revolve diligently that death cannot be avoided,
that the hour of death cannot be discovered, that the time pre-ordained of God
cannot be altered.

Isidorus, In humane things nothing is more certain then death, nothing more
uncertain then the hour of death: it has not any pity on Poverty, it is not
afraid of power, it respects not the excellency of manners or kindred, it
spares not youth or age, it is at the old man's gate, and at the young man's
heels.

SOVLE.
I Understand that our life is nothing else but a passage to death; Why then
are temporal things loved, which for such an uncertain time are possessed? Why
desire we this life to continue so long, wherein, by how much the longer we
live, by so much the more we sin; by how much our life is prolonged, by so much
the more numerous is our transgression? for daily evils increase, and good
things are diminished. For who is able to consider, how many evils we commit
in a moment of time, or how many good things we neglect? For truly it is a
great sin, when we neither do good, nor think of good, but suffer our mind
to wander after vain and unprofitable things.

MAN.
AS St. Gregory says, Carnal minds, O my Soul, for that cause love temporal
pleasures, because they consider not how fleeting this life is; For if they
should but look into the swiftness of the passage thereof, truly they would
not affect this so little enduring a prosperity. My life is like to one
sailing, for whether I sleep or watch, I am still hastening to my end. O present
life how many do thou deceive, which whilst thou flyest art nothing, when
thou art seen but a shadow, when exalted, but a fume, to fools pleasant, to
wise men bitter, they that love thee know thee not, they that fly thee only
understand thee. To some thou promisest thy self for a long season, that thou
may deceive them, to others for a short time, that thou may bring them into
despair.

With continual meditation let us exercise our understanding, Author de
spiritu and Anima.
and let us consider our miseries. With sorrow we entered this life, with labor
we live therein, with fear go out thereof. St. Bern. How many of us have lived in
this Region of the shadow of death, in sickness of body, in conflict, and in
the place of tentation, if we diligently take notice thereof, we miserably
labor with a threefold discommodity. For we are easy to be seduced, weak to
resist, and frail to operate.

SOVLE.
NOw I see, that he lives unprofitably in this world, that hastens not to gain
that, whereby he may live for ever. Therefore it should not be any ones care to
live long, but rather that he may live well: Because although it may be granted
to any one that he live well, yet it is certain that it is not granted to any
that he may live long. St. Bern. Therefore that is a secure life where the
conscience is pure, where death is expected without fear or trembling, is
wished to be at hand with delight, and received with devotion.

MAN.
O My Soul, if thou understandest these things to be so, hear my council, and
in this life, so long as it lasts, prepare for thy self that life which
lasts eternally. Whilst thou art in the flesh die to the World, that
afterward thou may begin to live in God. Understand that there is no one
that admits death approaching merrily and jocundly, but he that has
prepared himself thereto by good works, whilst he lived, give attention to that
of Seneca. The indiscreet man, that is, the sinner and the guilty man begins
his death in dying; but the wise man and virtuous overcomes death by death.

SOVLE.
O Man J perceive that the death of good men is blessed, and the death of
Sinners unhappy and miserable.

MAN.
O My Soul (according to St. Bern.) the death of the just man is good in
respect of rest, better in respect of change, the best in respect of security.
Contrariwise the death of Sinners is most miserable, and well may it be termed
the worst, evil, in the loss of the world, worse in the separation of the
flesh, but the worst in the double sorrow and suffering of the Worm and fire,
and that which is worst of all, is in the privation of divine Contemplation.

CHAP. II. Of the Formidable austerity of the final Judgment.
SOVLE.
NOW thou have spoken sufficiently of death, so also speak of the state of
final Judgment.

MAN.
O My Soul J do what thou exhortest, yet J entreat thee to hear with patience.
Thou ought to know, that although it be a horrible thing to meditate on
death, yet to meditate on the state of final Judgment, as I am persuaded it is
no less formidable, because there is not any that then shall be able to deceive
his Wisdom, to alter his Justice, to incline his Clemency, to avoid the
sentence of revenge and just retribution. St. Bern. Consider therefore, O my
Soul, with trembling, how it shall be with theein the last day, when thy
Conscience shall speak against thee of thy thoughts, when the Elements shall
accuse thee of all thy Actions, when the Cross of Christ shall be carried for a
testimony against thee, when his stripes shall cry out against thee, his wounds
plead against thee, his nails speak against thee, his scarrs complain against
thee. O Anguish! hence shall proceed the accusing sins, from thence terrifying
justice, within a burning Conscience, below the horrible Chaos of Hell, above
the angry Judge of just Judgment, without the flaming World, within the
fearful justice of the Judge. And if then the just shall scarcely be saved,
where shall the wicked man and sinner appear? Where shall they hide themselves?
To lie hid impossible, to appear is intolerable.

O sinful Soul, Anselm in meditationibus.
unprofitable and dry wood, adjudged to eternal flames what will thou answer at
the day, when all the time bestowed on thee shall be even to the twinkling of
an eye exacted, how thou have spent it? Ah, Ah! O my Soul, what shall then
become of vain and idle thoughts, of light, sportfull and ridiculous words, of
unprofitable and unfruitful works.

Woe is me, St. Amb. on St. Luke.
if I shall not lament for my sins; woe is me, if I shall not rise at midnight
to confess to thee. Now the Axe is laid to the Tree, let him, that may, bring
forth fruits, the works truly worthy of repentance. O my Soul, whether thou
wakest or sleep, let that horrible Trumpet always sound in thy Ears. Arise
ye dead and come co judgment. O my Soul never let this pass from thy memory,
Go ye cursed into fire everlasting: Come ye blessed receive a Kingdom. O what
can be thought more lamentable or more terrible then, Go ye? And what can be
expressed more pleasant then, Come ye? They are two Voices, then the one whereof
there is nothing can be heard more horrible, then the other nothing mre
delightful. O my Soul, now separate thy self from the world, that hereafter
thou may abide with Christ. Now fly the world, that thou may follow God;
Now forsake the Companies and Societies of wicked people, that hereafter thou
may be able to follow the Troops of Saints.

CHAP. III. Of the intolerable pain of Infernal punishment.
MAN.
AFter all these, convert thy Contemplation to the torments of Reprobates, take
notice how various they are, how sharp, how intolerable. St. Bernard to
Eugenius.
I am afraid of and am astonished at the gnawing Worm and never dying death. O
infernal Region to be flyed, where there is flaming fire, chilling cold, the
immortal Worm, intolerable stench, and brusing mallets, palpable darkness,
confusion of Sinners, and intangling of Fetters, and the horrible sight of
Devils.

Woe be to him for whom the gnawing worm, St. Aug. in quodam sermon.
burning flame, thirst without drink, weeping and gnashing of teth, continual
tears shall be prepared, where death is wished for, but shall not be granted,
where there is no order, but ever lasting horror does inhabit. What do thou
think then shall be the sorrow? what the grief? what the lamentation? when the
wicked shall be separated from the company of the just, and shall be delivered
to the power of Devils, and shall go with them to everlasting punishment, and
shall for ever be with them in lamentation, mourning and groaning without end,
far from the joys of Paradise, never to receive comfort, or recreation, but to
be tormented for many thousands of years, and yet alas most miserable never to
be released. There the tormentor and Punisher shall never be weary, there he
that is tormented shall never dye; For so shall that fire consume that it shall
always notwithstanding preserve life: they shall so suffer old torments, as if
they were always renewed; they shall always so live without hope of pardon or
mercy, as they should die notwithstanding: they shall so dye, as notwithstanding
they may never be consumed.

SOVLE.
O Man, wherefore is death, as thou say, in Hell sought for and not found:
And wherefore is that punished eternally, which was committed temporally?

MAN.
BEcause, according to Sr. Gregory, to whom life is offered in this world, and
they would not receive it, in Hell they shall seek death, and shall not find
it. idem. The wicked willingly would live eternally, that they might persist in
their Iniquities for ever. Therefore it pertains to the justice of the just
Judge, that they should never want punishment, whose mind in this life would
never want sin.

St. Hierome. O death how sweet will thou be to those to whom thou have been so
bitter, they only desire thee, who so vehemently have hated thee. O my Soul, if
these before spoken of seem so terrible unto thee, hear those things which are
more harsh then all these.

If thou sest before me a thousand Hells, St. Chrysostom. upon St. Matthew.
I do not so much weigh them, as to be expelled from the pleasure of that
glorious Society, and to become hateful to my Creator. O my Soul, Hell is
terrible, but more terrible is the angry countenance of the Judge, but that
which surpasses all terror is, the perpetual elongation from the
Contemplation of the most sweet and most blessed Trinity. To be excluded from
the eternal good, and be estranged from that which God has prepared for them
that love him, does beget so much torment, that if outwardly no torment or
punishment should torment, this only was sufficient, and it would be better to
endure a thousand thousand flames, then to behold that most meek face of Christ
angry, and from it to be eternal separated. O if God has dealt thus with the
Angels growing proud, what shall become of Earth and Ashes? He was proud in a
Celestial Palace, but I upon a Dunghill. Who will not affirm that it is more
tolerable in a rich man to be proud, then in a poor man? Woe is me if pride be
so austerely and harshly punishable in an Angel, how in me miserable and poor,
is it to be adjudged?

O merciful Jesus, for thy names sake grant me thy mercy, and pardon me proud
provoking thee. Behold me miserable humbly calling upon thee, and acknowledge O
most benign God, what is thine, and wipe away what is any others. Have pity, O
Lord, whilst there is time of pity, least thou condemnest me in the time of
judgment. True it is, These St. Anselme in his meditations.
that my Conscience has deserved damnation, my repentance suffices not for
satisfaction, yet certain it is, that thy mercy is above every offense.

Do not O Lord, St Aug. in his meditations.
so look into my evil, that thou may forget thy own goodness. O good Lord,
if I have committed that whereby thou may condemn me, thou have not lost that
wherewith thou may save me. St. Gregory in Hom.
O if man could but understand how admirable that is; Behold the Spouse comes,
How pletsant? Those that were prepared entered with him to the marriage. How
bitter? And the Gate was shut. O my Soul, what is more? Consider how great an
evil it is to be separated from the face of Christ, to be excluded from that
joy of divine Contemplation, to be deprived of the most blessed Society of all
the Saints, to dye an everlasting life, and to live an eternal death, to be
plunged in the bottom of a restless Gulf, for ever to be torn in pieces with
consuming worms, and yet the torments not to end, to suffer the noise of raging
flames, to be blinded with the bitter mist of the sulphurous smoking Pit, not
to perceive that which enlightneth, but to perceive that which tormenteth.

St. Aug. Such shall be the power of grief in the infernal deep, that it
admits no other intention of thought within it self.

SOVLE.
NOw I tremble with fear, now I faint with the horror thereof. Tell me I pray
thee, O man, to what purpose is so lamentable a Meditation?

MAN.
O My Soul, I think that the continual and devout meditation of the
prescribed, is the sinners medicine, and wholesome encourager and provoker to do
all good things, and to sustain all evil.

Thou fear watching and the labor of thy hands, St. Bern. inquadam Epistola.
but these are but easy to any one meditating on perpetual flames. The
remembrance of that darkness makes a man not to abhor Solitude; yet if thou
leasurely think on a future discussion of thy words: silence shall not
displease thee, that weeping and gnashing of teeth being often brought before
the eyes of thy understanding, do render unto thee equal rest and peace. St.
Aug. inquodam sermon.
A man's understanding being overcome with the inticements and concupiscences of
this world, flies all labor, desires pleasures, and can scarce be brought to
this, that he can refrain the customs of his former life. But when he shall
begin to think on the necessity of future judgment, he induces a voluntary war
on his passions, moved either by hope of reward, or for fear of punishment, he
does violence to his former desires, and earnestly contendeth to overcome
himself: Whence comes these Verses: O foelix mortale Genus, si semper haberet
Aeternum prae mente bonum, finemque timeret.
Right happy is that man that ever has
The eternal good in's mind and fears his death.


The fourth Exercise. How the Soul by mental Exercise, ought to convert the
light of Contemplation to those things that are above her, that she may know
and understand.
1. The inestimable value of Celestial Joy. 2. The unspeakable Delight, and 3.
The interminable Eternity.
CHAP. I. Of the Inestimable value of Celestial Joy.
SOVLE.
EVen now, O man, thou have sufficiently affrighted me miserable soul, being
prostrated in this vale of tears, although thou have taught me not
unprofitably, have mercy also now on me most miserable, and do what thou long
since have promised. Speak a little of the perpetual felicity, if happily I
may be able to receive thereby some comfort of mind, for that it is delightful
to use change, because according to Saint Aug. It is always well done whether
it be by punishing, or pardoning, or by terrifying, or comforting, so that
there by the life of man may be amended.

Consider O man, how noble the mind of man is, often times it is more easily
persuaded with easy and pleasant things, then by terrible and adverse,
oftentimes it is more allured by promises and things comforting, then it is
enforced by threats and terrors. Wherefore our Sister the Spouse desired to be
drawn with the odor of Celestial Unguents, with the savor of divine graces,
and so to run with the Spouse, and now not out of fear, but love
delightfully to walk in the way of his Commandments.

MAN.
O My Soul, it is true I confess which thou say, but alas there are many
which will not, imitate God in Prosperity. Wherefore it is convenient that they
be terrified in Adversity. For there are many, which either for blindness
understand not the divine Graces, or for negligence loose them in vain
Employments. Wherefore, as I believe God out of the abundance of his Infinite
goodness would always be ready rather to favor them with Consolations, then
to affright them with austerities, if men were rightly disposed, that they
might receive his divine consolation: which is so precious and delicate that by
no means it is fitting or expedient, that it should be indifferently bestowed
on all. Thou therefore, if thou aspirest, after all these things proposed unto
thee, see that thou have a pure understanding, and a well disposed affection,
because the chiefest good is not discerned according to Saint Aug. but by the
clearest understandings, and I think it is much less tasted, but by very well
disposed affections. For it is of many men in this life clearly discerned, of
whom nevertheless it is in no wise tasted.

Wherefore Saint Aug. says O Lord make me I desire thee to taste that by
affection, which by my intellect J understand: make me to perceive that by
love, which J perceive by knowledge.

SOVLE.
TEll me J pray thee, O man, what dispositions ought to proceed in affection
and understanding, that at least to a little Excess of mind J may be able to
taste in contemplation the Celestial sweetness?

For J have long ago exercised my mind in speculation, and alas as yet, my
fear is, that J have never felt the least drop of that Heavenly sweetness, J
have read many things of the lives and conversation of Saints, many things of
Nature, of the operations and orders of Angels, also I have read some things of
the inestimable unity of the Divinity, of the Incomprehensible Trinity of the
Godhead, more of the inestimable happiness of all the blessed, and when with
all my endeavors I have employed my mind to the former studies, alas I have
remained, yet Hunger-starven and empty, and have always cried out with blessed
Saint Aug. Make me O most merciful Father to taste by affection, what I
perceive by my understanding, and yet I have not profited: Also oftentimes
being wearied with long study and angry at my self, I have cried out with the
Prophet, expecting the Crummes which fall from the Table of their Lord in that
Heavenly Court: How long O Lord, will thou forget me for ever? How long do
thou turn thy face from me? For though I have Judged my self unworthy to eat
of the bread of thy Children, yet I have expected with earnest desire, to eat
at the least of the Crummes falling from their Table, but alas! though with
with open mouth I have earnestly expected, yet I have always been frustrated.

MAN.
O My soul, the former things which thou have most lamentably complained of,
happen by a two fold reason. Sometimes of the very pious and wholesome
dispensation of the divine goodness. In his Morals
Whereupon Saint Gregory The just God is wont to defer the complaints of them
that Petition him, for a time that their desires might increase, to that end
they may rather be heard for their good, by how much the sooner they are not
heard at their desire. Holy desires increase by delays, Item in Homilia
for if they faint, at the denial thereof, they were not desires. For although
God of his goodness is most clement, notwithstanding sometimes it happens
that he protracteth that, which he most willingly would give, that thou may
learn earnestly and ardently to desire great things, and more carefully to
preserve them obtained, with thanksgiving. Also sometimes he prolongs his
benefits by reason of the inordinate disposition of the Asker. He is
altogether our of the way that thinks any one can mix that Heavenly
sweetness with this dust, that divine Balsome with this poisonous joy, those
Graces of the Holy Ghost with the allurements of this World.

But now O my soul, that I may not longer keep thee in dalliance, nor longer
afflict thee by expectation, cleanse thy understanding from vain and
unprofitable Fantasies, from natural and curious reasons, from extravagant,
and overmuch curious employments in the sciences. Also cleanse thy affection
from sin, from the sequel of sin, and from the occasion or cause thereof.
Lift up thy reason, dilate and declare thy affection, enter into the joy of thy
Lord, which neither Eye in this life has perfectly seen, nor ear has heard,
nor has it ascended into the heart of man. Be vehement therefore O my soul,
in the love and desire of the supernall life of the Saints, where there is
action not laborious, rest not Idle or slothful, where there is life without
defection or revolt divine praise without cessation. Haec Aug.

Saint Bern. Rejoice therefore and be glad, and consider the reward of thy
labor, which truly is so much, that it cannot be numbered, so great, that it
cannot be measured, so precious that it cannot be terminated:

SOVLE.
O Man, thou have now spoken much in general, tell me I pray thee, of all in
particular, because we understand those things better, which are particularly
distinguished, then those which a generally related.

MAN.
O My Soul, What can I say, when I behold the future joy? Now I almost faint
with admiration, because the joy shall be within us and without us, under us
and over us, nigh us and round about us: Thou shall therefore rejoice in all,
thou shall rejoice of all. Thy joy I believe is prefigured in the Apocalipse,
by that blessed woman, which was clothed with the Sun, and the Moon was under
her feet and a Crown of twelve Stars about her head. This woman as I think is a
blessed Soul the Daughter, Bride, and Queen of the eternal King. A Daughter
by the Creation of Nature, a Bride by the Adoption of Grace, a Queen by the
Collation of Glory. This Soul is well said to be clothed with the Sun, because
she is adorned with the Splendour of divine cleerness, crowned with the Dignity
of eternal felicity. In which happiness for the special comeliness, there are
12: Joys, figured by the Stars by which the Celestial happiness is beautified
and adorned.

These joys, O my Soul thou oughest daily, and devoutly to contemplate and
seek no consolation of thy present misery and sojourning, and in hope patiently
and joyfully to sustain all tribulation of this present life. O my Soul thou
should not be perplexed if evil men flourish in this world and thou suffer,
Beda.
that they shall rejoice and that thou shall be vexed. Alas wicked men have no
share in the celestial joy, neither should thou care if thou should have
no share in this world, but by the hope of that joy at which thou aimest thy
Affection may joyfully and patiently endure whatsoever happens to thee in the
way of adversity. Haec Beda. St. Ber.
O my Soul, if at any time worldly joys, the false glory, the short and frail
power thereof, delight thee, recall thy mind from them, and thou will esteem
all as dung.

St. Hierom. Run therefore O my Soul not with the paces of the body, but with
affection and desire, because not only the Angels and Saints, but also the
Lord and Master of Angels and Saints epxects thee: God the Father expects thee
as his most beloved Daughter, God the Son expects thee as his sweetest Bride,
God the Holy Ghost expects thee, as one most dearly beloved unto him; God the
Father expects thee, that he may constitute thee the Heir of all good things,
God the Son expects thee, that he may offer thee to God the Father as the
fruit of his Nativity, and the price of his most precious blood, God the Holy
Ghost expects thee, that he may make thee partaker of his eternal Beatitude
and Swetness.

That most blessed Family of all the Celestial Spirits of the eternal King do
expect thee, that they may receive thee into their College therefore desire
thou their Society above all things, thou should come thither with great
modesty if thou had loved it in this vale of tears. As often therefore as the
vain Ambition of this World delights thee, as often as thou shall behold any
glorious Creature therein, presently fly up to Heaven, and begin to be what
thou art to be. Truly I believe, O my Soul, if thou would continually keep
these heavenly joys in thy mind, thou would build a certain Suburbs of the
celestial Kingdom in his Exile, wherein daily thou might spiritually by
Assay, taste that eternal sweetness, for when we settle in our thoughts any
thing that is eternal, even then we dwell not in this world but in Heaven. So
great, O my Soul, is the force of thy love, that thou live there more truly,
where thou love by contemplation, then where thou art but by Essence. This O
most dear Soul is the kingdom of God, which is within us, which alas we
miserably neglect, when outwardly we are given to idle and vain things, We
disperse St. Grego. our selves abroad, in not caring for the Kingdom of God
which is within us, we seek abroad for Consolation from idle things and
deceitful Fopperies, so that now we have lost the Devotion of our ancient
Religion even so that we retain not the form thereof.

Thou therefore, O my Soul, the Daughter of the Eternal King, hear with a
devout mind, and incline thy Ear to holy and health-bringing counsels. Behold
by contemplation the comfort of the Celestial Kingdom, forget by contempt and
detestation thy People and thy Fathers house, that is to say, the World, the
Devil, thy self, and vain Ambition.

See therefore and devoutly consider, how those divine and Heavenly Spirits
which have escaped the danger of this present life and misery, although they
can never convert themselves from that splendor of that eternal Son,
sometimes notwithstanding they convert the light of their contemplation to
things below them, sometimes to things above themsometimes to things interior,
and sometimes to things exterior. They convert themselves, I say, to things
below them, and rejoice for three reasons.

First, That they have overcome by the divine power such impious, horrible, and
cruel enemies.

Secondly that they have avoided all their defects and sins, either by the
divine wisdom, or long ago have amended their faults and transgressions.

Thirdly, That they have escaped such lamentabe and eternally interminable
torments by the divine mercy and clemency.

O my Soul, With how great Joy think thou do they daily rejoice, when they
perceive so many to be overcome of the flesh, the world and the devil, so many
to be defiled with such diversity of sins of which they shall never obtain
pardon, so many without end, eternally to be damned: Truly then I believe to
have passed from death to life, redoubleth the joy of life.

O Lord God, if the danger in war be now so grievous, how great shall the joy
be in Triumph, when after the world is overcome and utterly vanquished, wicked
Pharaoh and his Army being drowned in the Red Sea, all the Elect shall hold
their Timbrels, playing, singing, praising and blessing our Lord, saying with
one voice: Let us sing unto our Lord for glorious, etc.

Then two Cherubims shall be framed, that is to say, two quiers of the elect,
to wit the Innocenes and Penitents, the one answering the other, Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of the Sabbath.

Holy God the Father, that have powerfully delivered us from the world, the
flesh and the devil.

Holy God the Son, which have so wisely justified us both from the sin and
punishment.

Holy God the Holy Ghost which have so mercifully preserved us from the
Eternal Torments.

All the Earth is full of his Glory, who has called us from the misery of the
world to the joys of the celestial Kingdom.

O my Soul, what a one shall that day be unto thee, when thou shall be assumed
into this quier, when all thy torments, if thou shall live well, if thou will
patiently suffer, shall be converted into Eternal Jubisee? Then thou shall
praise with exultation the Lord thy God for all these things, saying, I will
sing the mercies of our Lord for ever. Then which Song according to Saint Aug.
that is fung to the praise of the glory of Christ, by whose precious blood we
are delivered, nothing shall be more pleasant to that City, nothing more sweet.

Thou therefore when thou art tried with Temptations, when thou art overcom
with Persecutions, and when thou art molested in this World with diverse
Tribulations, then mentally fly into Heaven, and consider that this is no other
thing but the Subject of eternal joy, and then the consideration of the
Reward, lesseneth the violence of the punishment.

If we would consider what and how great the Rewards are, which are promised us
in Heaven, all things on Earth would seem vile in our mind and truly not only
the goods which delightfully we possess but also the evils which lamentably
we sustain. The troubles of this world are not equivalent to the fault past
which is forgiven, to the present Grace which is bestowed and for the future
glory which is promised, which thou then O my Soul, with joy shall possess when
thou perfectly understandest, that thou have lived in the world with so great
danger, wherewith the most are oppressed, that thou have overcome the
deceitful wiles of Satan, wherewith many are deceived, that thou have escaped
the eternal torments wherewith innumerable are afflicted.

CHAP. II. Of the ineffable Delight.
SOVLE.
O Man, how sound and wholesome is thy Consolation, for when I consider these
things which thou have proposed, by hope, I receive very much comfort. But, O
Lord God, what think thou shall then that be, when I shall truly possess that
which now I but hope for.

MAN.
O My Soul, These are but little, which thou have heard, yea comparatively
they are as none which thou have mentally perceived, but erect the eyes of thy
understanding a little, and weigh and devoutly consider, how great the joys
are, which thou shall perceive by these, which are nere unto thee.

Attend therefore and consider the beautiful place which the divine wisdom
has built for thee. Consider also the delicate food, the curious bravery, the
precious Treasure, which the eternal power has gathered for thee. Consider
likewise the renowned College, with whom thy mind shall eternal rejoice, by
the divine clemency, O my Soul, consider how glorious, how renowned, how
gladsome that house of God is, the Heavenly City, the secure mansion, the
Country coutaining all that delights.

Consider how clear, how light, how glorious that City is, which needs
neither Sun nor Moon, that they may shine therein, but the Lord himself the
Sun of Justice, the Candor of Eternal light, is the light thereof, and the
Lamb is the Lamp thereof. O my Soul, consider how high, and how spacious how
fair and how beautiful, how comely and how renowned that City is, which the
most blessed Trinity of himself adorneth, O City of God how glorious are the
things which are spoken of thee? O Israel, how magnificent is the house of God,
and great is the place of his possessions, O my Soul, contemplate there, the
Tabernacles of the Patriarcks and Prophets, the Habitacles of the Apostles and
Martyrs, the stately and lofty Chambers of the Confessors and Virgins, the
Palaces of the most heavenly Spirits, that most beautiful Throne of the most
blessed Trinity; O my Soul, though thou art here corporally, yet be there
mentally O my Soul fly over all things, search all things, visit all things,
enter into all the Gates in order, until thou shall come into the Palaces of
the highest King, let thy mind St. Aug. be there, and here shall be thy rest. O
my Soul, willingly endeavor to be stayed, willingly to be conversant in that
holy City, because there is life without death, youth without old age, light
without darkness, peace without disturbance. For my People shall sit in a
Tabernacle of confidence, and in a rich rest, says our Lord.

Secondly consider the delicate food, the curious bravery and the precious
treasure. And who shall there be out food, but that most blessed Lamb, that
pure, and Immaculate Jesus, the Son of God the Father, of whom they shall
administer, most excellent dainties to the holy spirits in all sufficiency?
very excellent truly of the most pure humanity, but most of the more then most
blessed Divinity. For then the soul shall enter in to taste the Divinity, shall
go forth to taste or assay the humanity, and she shall find a Pasture full of
all sufficiency and satiety. O how blessed are they that shall be called to the
marriage e-Supper of the Lamb. There also a blessed life is drunkin its
fountain. Whereupon sometimes part thereof is sprinkled as it were on this our
humane life, whereby we may become, in temptations, stronger, mere Just,
temperate, and wiser. There always thirst and satiety are joined together: but
after a wonderful manner necessity shall be far from thirst, and loathing far
from satiety For they shall be inebriated. with the plenty of thy house, and
thou shall give them to drink of the Torrent of thy pleasure according to the
Prophet.

SOVLE.
ANd when shall this be?

MAN.
I Believe nor before that time, Manciple.
until when that sweet dispenser of the highest King, the splendor of the
Paternall glory, the candor of the eternal light, the Figure of the divine
substance, the mirror without spot of the extraordinary Godlike clearness, on
whom all those celestial spirits desire to look, when such a one, and so great
a one shall gird himself, and shall make them to sit down, and personally
passing by them shall minister unto them.

O my soul, here devoutly consider how great joy those good spirits shall then
conceive, of so stupendous a dignity of him that serves them, of so admirable
a charity of every particular companion banqueting, of the plenty of very
delitious dainties, of the numerous Assembly of the servitours, of the sweet
sounding-Eccho of the Musical Instruments, and of others playing, singing and
praising the King of Glory, God the Son of God.

In this great Celestial and admirable banquet, thou shall hear Angels
rejoicing Virgins dancing, Apostles, singing, Martyrs sporting Confessors
praising, Patriarchs and Prophets making merry all the Saints and Elect of God
unanimously collauding the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and with one
voice saying: Holy, Holy holy Lord God of Sabath all the Earth is full of thy
Glory.

O how glorious is that Kingdom wherein all the Saints reign with Christ,
clothed with white stoles, following the Lamb which way soever he shall go. O
my soul, how can there be the want of any good, when there is such variety of
matter for the rejoycer. For then shall be opened all those treasures of the
Eternal God, where there are all riches, all delights laid up, and diverse and
precious gifts shall be given to every one according to their deserts; But if
yet these are not sufficient, consider in the third place all the College of
Saints nere unto thee, which the Divine clemency has assembled together for an
addition of thy beatitude. Because the possession of any Good, is not pleasant
without a Companion, as says Seneca.

See then what tongue or what understanding is able to conceive how great the
joys are of that supernall City, to be present with the Quiers of Augels,
always to assist with the most blessed Spirits the glory of our Creator, and
never to depare from the most blessed society of them, but continually with
them, and of their joy to rejoice for ever. Saint Anselme.
For there all are known of every one, there every one are known of all. Nor
shall it be a secret to any of them to know, of what Country, of what Nation,
of what kindred every one is borne. For there shall be so blessed and perfect a
charity of the Just, that every one of them will love his Neighbor as much as
himself. Whereof that inestimable good shall follow, that every one shall so
rejoice at the joy or good of another, as though it were of his own merit.
Therefore when there is such an innumerable number of the Elect, who think
thou, is sufficient to declare the joy of the blessed? St. Hierome describing
these Joys says, Go forth I pray he, O my soul, In the end of an Epistle to
Eustochius.
a little from the Pavilion of thy body, that standing in the door thou may
perceive the Glory of God passing by, and before thy eyes describe the reward
of thy present labor. What a day shall that be unto thee, when out Lord shall
meet thee accompanied with his Heavenly Quier, when the Spouse himself shall
meet thee with all his Saints, saying. Arise, come, make have my beloved, my
dear, my Dove, now the Winter is over, the shower is gone and past. Then the
Angels shall admire at thy Glory, saying: Who is this that ascends from the
desert, flowing with delights, and leaning on her beloved? The Daughters of
Sion shall see thee and praise thee. Then those 144 thousand in sight of the
Throne and Elders shall hold their Harps, and sing a new song. Then thou shall
fly securely into the embraces of the Spouse, saying with Jubilation: I have
found him whom my Soul loves, I have held him and will not let him depart.
Haec Hieronimus.

Then those seven Sons of that great Job, who is more excellent then all that
remain in the blessed Eastern Region, every one on his proper day shall make
Feasts, and shall invite thee, their Sister, thee their Companion. And every
one of them shall say unto thee: Drink now and sit down with pleasure, for thou
have found favor of the highest Prince. And thou shall answer with Joy,
saying: I will drink and become merrier, because to day my soul is magnified,
more then all the days of my life. O truly unheard of magnificency. O joyful
and pleasant Excellency, the like whereof was never heard on Earth. I believe
that all the Pomp of this World in comparison thereof would scarce be as a
little drop.

SOVLE.
O Man, now I have long held my peace, now I have been sufficiently silent,
because those things which thou have proposed. I have heard with exceeding much
delight and admiration, Do not prolong me I pray thee, but expound to me more
particularly and perfectly, something of this banquet of the Heavenly spirits,
for that a little before thou have touched something thereof, but have passed
them over toe quickly.

MAN.
O My Soul, I would rather again pass over with silence what thou requirest,
then with a polluted tongue utter the least thing of the Celestial secret
mystery, yea, or conceive in mind, because I that am alas as yet too often
entangled with worldly and superfluous things, that am alas as yet with other
worldlings fed, O pity! with husks of swine? I very much blush and am
confounded to discourse of such familiar operations of the divine Spirit: Yet
because I am not able to contradict thy pious desires, I will speak briefly
what some times the Holy Ghost instigating me, though unworthy I often mentally
think of For although in that celestial Court, where fullness of all good is
perfectly in all of them, although there for the difference of merits, some
things are bestowed in excellency, yet nothing shall be possessed (according to
Sr. Gregory) there particularly of the exceeding greatness of the inestimable
divine piety. For all things are common to all in respect of him, who is all in
All: For there the Virgin shall rejoice at the merit of the holy Widow, there
the Widow shall rejoice at the privilege of the Chaste Maid, There the
Confessors shall be made glad at Triumph of the Martyr, there the Martyr shall
dance for joy at the Crown of the Confessors, there the Prophet shall give
thanks for the pious and holy conversation of the Patriarchs, there the
Patriarchs shall be glad for the faith and speculation of the Prophets, there
the Apostles and Angels shall rejoice at the merit of all that are inferior
unto them, there all the inferior shall make joy for the glory of all those
that are above them: For from that tie and bond of holy and perfect Charity, it
shall come to pass, that every one shall have that within another which he has
not of his own merit.

SOVLE.
O Man, as yet these are not sufficient to ease my mind, wherefore I pray thee
do not pass over to explicate some things particularly and distinctly of the
forsaid banquet.

MAN.
O My Soul, Thou have known, that as we are able, though unperfectly we
resound or Echo forth the high mysteries of God, nor is it a wonder, seeing we
are very unapt to understand, how should we be sufficient to speak, when those
things, which blindly we contemplate are truer then they can be understood, and
they are more truly understood then they can be expressed by words?
Notwithstanding that I may not protract thee too long, hear what my Intellect
imagines, although as yet my affection tastes but little. I think that those
seven Sons of whom we have before mentioned, are all the Saints and Elect
spirits of God, the heirs and sons of the most Omnipotent Father. These do
make banquets every one at appointed time, when they feed one another with
Heavenly joys, wherein of their own merits, every one particularly no prefer
or give, most delicious dishes according to the Glory bestowed on them.

In the first day therefore, the first begotten, that is that number of
Heavenly Angels who not unworthily are entitled the first borne, because they
are the first in Creation and consersation with God, from whom they have never
departed by sin, but always with constant Charity have cleaved unto God the
Father, and before all have happily possessed that blessed Heritage of the
Celestial Kingdom. These O my Soul, bestow upon thee in that feast diverse
delicious, and precious dishes, when every order does administer particular
Joys, from that which it more excellently has received of his reward.

Now weigh O my soul, what dainties those high Seraphicall spirits bestow on
thee, who are so nigh unto the eternal Father, that there are no other spirits
as a Medium between him and them, who do more immediately contemplate him, and
more perfectly enjoy his eternal good things. What joy think thou do these
give of the nobleness of nature, what of the clearness of Contemplation, what
of the sincerity of love?

These therefore, that is, those that are nominated Seraphims do adorn this
banquet with the ardour of divine Charity. The Cherubims with the splendor of
eternal cleerness: The Thrones with the equity or uprightness of the divine
Majesty. Dominations also glorify this banquet, by the excellency of ruling
over others. The Principalities by the magnificence of taking charge or
councelling the inferiors. The Angels by the authority of expelling evil and
malign spirits:

The Arch-Angells by the dignity of declaring high mysteries: The Angels by
the Agility of reveiling the lesser secrets of the divine knowledge. Behold
thou see how every one particularly does feed the minds of the Saints, with
Celestial joys, with such things, which they have received in that Celestial
Court. Nor is it to be marvelled at, that these spirits do give unto us for our
joy, these things before spoken of, and many other, as yet more unknown unto
us, who so faithfully, so sweetly, and so lovingly do guard and preserve us in
this vale of tears, and with all their power earnestly desire to bring us to
that Country of eternal beatitude.

St. Bern. O if any one could know in what manner they prevent us, the chiefest
being joined to the singers in middle of the young Virgins playing on
Timbrells, he should see forthwith with what care, or with what respect, they
are amiddest them singing, are present with them praying, are in them
meditating, are over them or remain with them reposing, are present with them
for their help.

O Empty and ^^ngerstarven soul, if thou could but inwardly receive one
crumme falling from the Table of their Lord in this Banquet, I think from that
present thou would impapatiently endure this peregrination. I think if thou
had but tasted one drop of the Wine of their drink, thou would loath and
disdain all the sweetness of this world, St. Greg. in his Morals.
if the heart understand by taste once and be fastened in celestial things it is
by and by discerned how abject and base those things are, which before seemed
of great account.

O my beloved soul, what shall I say of the Banquet of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. Virgins, which by other six Sons are
not unworthily prefigured? For every one of these will render so many dishes in
this feast, as he had virtuous works in this life. And who is able to declare,
how great joy every soul shall receive of the most perfect humility of the
holy Patriarchs of the most certain confidence of the Prophets, of the most
ardent charity of the Apostles, of the couragiousnesse and patience of the
Martyrs, of the Piety and clemency of the Confessors, of the Chastity and
continency of the Virgins? and the same Saint Gregory says. Truly my voice and
tongue fails, In a Homily on St. Luke.
because my understanding is not able to comprehend, how great joy, it is to be
present with the Quires of Angels, to assist with the most blessed spirits the
Glory of our Creator, to discern the countenance of God present, to see the
unlimited light, to be affected with no fear of death, to rejoice and be glad
at the gift of perpetual incorruption. O how happy will that day be unto thee,
when thou shall return to the Heritage of thy Fathers, and when thou shall be
received of them all with an inestimable joy, and happily brought into the bed
of the highest King.

Rouse up thy self, O my soul, and with that famous Queen of Sheba ascend
into that Heavenly Jerusalem with the perfumes of virtue, with the treasures
of good works, with great preparations of Celestial desires and diligently
contemplate every particular, and behold, that truth exceeds fame, that the
glory exceeds all report; if perhaps by the greatness and nobleness of
admiration, thou can be ravished of thy humane spirit, and after a certain
wonderful manner be transformed into a divine spirit, that thou may begin
to cry out with St. Peter in great Jubilation of heart: O Lord, it is good that
we remain here, here is our Father, here our Sister, here our Brother, here
our Country. O Lord permit us to be here, and never to depart from hence.

St. Amb. Let us fly, O my soul, into our most true Country, because there is
our Country, for that which we were created, there our Father by whom we were
created, there is that Jerusalem that Heavenly City, which is our Mother. O my
soul, thy love here in this mortal life ought to be so great, Saint Ansel.
and desire to come to that, for which we were created, and so great thy
grief, because as yet thou art not there, and so great thy fear, least
perchance thou never come there that thou oughtst to feel no Joy, but from
these things which do either bring thee aid, or hope to come thither.

CHAP. III. Of the Interminable Eternity.
SOVLE.
O Man, whilst that sometimes I think of these things, whilst that silently I
consider with my self what is that which then shines in me and wounds my
heart without hurting me, and I am afraid, yet am inflamed. I admit sometimes
mentally into my affection something which is unusual, St. Aug.
but I know not what sweetness it is, which if it were perfected in me, I know
not what it shall be, that this life shall not be. But I fall into a relapse
with ponderous burdens, and am swallowed up with my wonted cares. Here I am
able to be, but not willing, there I am willing to be, but am not able,
miserable in both. Haec August.

MAN.
O My Soul, consider that these celestial things can not so much as be thought
upon of those that are worthily disposed, without foretasting of the
sweetness. But I am ignorant what that shall then be, when they can be
perfectly without intricacy tasted or perceived in thee, wherefore it is not to
be marvled at, if the foretasting of such things, cause in thee a weariness of
this Exile; because nothing is more bitter, then after that the Soul has been
accustomed to be comforted with the joy of such delights, if again it shall
begin to be entangled with worldly and transitory things.

From hence it is. that the Soul labors, struggles and is vexed, there she
always desires to be, and yet it suffices not, here she is compelled to be,
yet after this, she endeavors to ascend to that which she has already
tasted, for now having tasted of the Spirit, all flesh is distasteful.

Thou have seen the joy of the blessed from these that are below thee, and from
these which are near thee, now behold if thou can, what joy is to come from
these which are within thee. For man shall be rewarded in body and in mind, and
with the eternal and inseparable union of these two, for our body is composed
of four Elements, wherefore it shall be remunerated with four gifts of Nature,
the Earth then shall have eternal immortality, the water all manner of
impassibility, the Air exceeding great agility, and the fire most transparent
and bright shining clearness: then shall the Just shine like the Sun, and shall
run like sparkles among the reeds for God will wipe away all tears from the
eyes of his Saints, and then there shall not be any more, either lamentation,
or roaring or grief but everlasting peace, and gladness: In this sempiternall
Kingdom, the hearts of the blessed shall shine in clearnes one against
another, and shall in purity be transparent, there every ones Countenance is
beheld, and conscience penetrated, there the bodily substance of any one hides
not his intent from the eyes of another: Also at an instant wheresoever the
mind would be, there the body shall be also presently. St. Aug. For as then the
mind most perfectly obeys its Creator so also the body shall most readily obey
its Moover. God will make the Soul then so powerful, that from the most full
beatitude thereof it shall return into the body, from the superabundance
whereof, it shall receive the vigor of impassability, the splendour of
clearness, the aptitude of subtilty, the promptitude of agility, there all the
senses shall be employed in their proper actions, for there the eye shall see a
most beautiful comeliness, the taste shall feel a most most sweet Savor, the
sense of smelling shall be perfumed with a most pleasant odor, the touch shall
embrace a most delicious object, the Hearing shall be changed by a most
delicate Sound, for there when the mind is ravished by exultation, the Tongue
is elevated into a Song of praise.

SOVLE.
O Man, I have heard these wonderful things long ago, and seeing that these
are all true, what other thing is this present life but a certain shadow of
death.

MAN.
O My Soul, thou have said well, because temporal life compared to the
eternal, is rather be called death then life, for what other thing is this
defect of our daily corruption, then a certain prolongation of death, therefore
holy men, because they incessantly look into the shortness of this life, live
as though they were daily dying, and therefore more carefully prepare
themselves, not minding an abode, be cause they always consider that all these
things are nothing in the end. But men carnally minded therefore love things
present frr that they never weigh how fleeting man's life is, for if they should
look into the swiftnes of their passege, yea they would in no wise love this
prosperity. Haec Gregorius.

Let therefore O my Soul the love of this present life pass from thee, and
let the fervency of the life to come take place, where no adversity disturbeth,
noe necessity distresseth, no trouble disquieteth, but ever lasting gladness
reigns, and consider how great the future felicity is to be, where there
shall be no evil thing, nor good thing shall be hidden, all being imploeyd to
the praises of God, who shall be All in All for there shall be no end of rest,
nor shall any want pinch there our being shall have no Death, our knowledge
shall have no Error, our Love shall have no offense.

There all slowness all corruption, all deformity, all infirmity shall be
absent. There is a new Heaven and a new Earth, there we shall be like unto the
Angels of God, and although not in age, yet truly in happiness.

St. Aug. O my Soul, Thou should embrace that Life, where there is Life
wthout Death, Youth without old Age, Joy without Sadness, Peace without
Discord, Will without Injury, Light without Darkness, and a Kingdom without
Change.

Consider how much the spirit may rejoice, when it shall resume such a body as
now thou have heard, not such a one as thou have sustained with great grief,
and have overcome with great strife, of whom oftentimes thou patiently
impatient, and meekly angry have said to thy self: Who will free from the body
of this death? Not surely such a one, but now perfectly obeying and spiritual,
such a one I say, such a one, which shall be to thee for a comfort of
contemplation and for an augmentation of Eternal felicity.

SOVLE.
I Cannot sufficiently admire all these things, yet in respect of the magnitude
of admiration, I faint in the search thereof. Notwithstanding one thing I
desire to know, in what manner the mind which in this present life is held
under by the body from the contemplation of God shall there be assisted by it
in contemplation.

MAN.
O My Soul, this thy Question is scrupulous, but fithence it is more curious
then devout, the answer shall be short. For the soul shall then by the divine
power have another manner of form to understand then in the passage. Nor is it
to be wondered at, if for the time and place he alter and change the order and
form of action in the Creature, who is the framer and Author of universal
Nature. For in things mutable, the whole being of the thing done is in the
power of the Doer. It is certain that the Soul would never desire resumption
of body, if being resumed, though never so glorious, it should hinder divine
contemplation. For according to the opinion and doctrine of St. Augustine those
holy souls earnestly desire resumption of Body, and expect an iterated Union
thereof, because their felicity cannot be consummated without it nor their
pleasure satisfied without it. For the soul does so vehemently desire the
body, that in some sort it also hinders and retardeth it is contemplation:

St. Bern. O miserable stinking and loathsome flesh, rom whence is this thy
Glory, that the holy souls whom God has marked with his own Image, has
redeemed with his own blood, do desire thee, do expect thee, and their
happiness cannot be consummated (without thee) nor their sweetness satisfied
without thee? St. Augustine to this.

When the soul shall receive this body, not now carnal, but spiritual, she
shall possess the perfect form of her nature, obeying and commanding, revived
and reviving. Then it shall come to pass with unspeakeable felicity, that that
is to her a glory, which was before to her a burden.

O my soul, consider what a glory that shall be then unto thee, when thou
shall be arrayed and invested with those new and pure Robes of honor, adorned
with all precious stones, that is with a glorified body, wherein there shall
shine so many most precious Jewels, as there are virtues in thy mind. Then I
believe thou will sing unto our Lord with Jubilation a new Song saying:
Rejoyceing I will rejoice in our Lord because he has attyred me with a Garment
of health, and has compassed me about with a Vestment of gladness, and as a
spouse has graced me with a Crown.

Yet in the third place view and diligently consider, that if thou art to have
so great joy, as from another, what shall thou receive from thy own? for who
can be able to declare how great joy, how stupendous a glory, how
incomprehensible a praise and magnificence thou art to have of the most blessed
Trinity, of the most happy Society of all the Saints, for that thou have so
manfully overcome thy own body with the shield of Chastity and Continency: For
that thou have so potently vanquished the world with the sword of poverty and
Indigency, for that thou have so valiantly put to flight the worst of devils
with the spear of Humility and Obedience, for that thou have so powerfully
withstood and resisted all thy evil Thoughts, all thy Passions, all thy
dissolute Manners, consider if thou can, how much glory thou art to have from
those, whom by Word and Example tho^ have exhorted to a virtuous life. And what
is more? thou shall receive a special and an eternal praise for all the
virtuous thoughts, speeches and actions, and that which shall be wanting unto
thee in thy self, that celestial and divine society of the blessed, will with
mutual charity fulfill and supply, because every one shall there receive from
his Neighbor what is deficient unto him in his own merit: O my Soul, when
Adversity happens unto thee, though thou piously think of these things and keep
them in mind when thy body greives or overchargeth thee, fly mentally unto
these, when the world rage, have recourse unto these, and when Satan lies in
wait for thee, recreate and mitigate thy mind with these, for our light
affliction which is but for a moment works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory. But because truly that is the only and true joy which
is conceived not of the creature, but of the Creator, to whom all pleasure,
otherwise compared is a Sorrow, all sweetness, grief, and to conclude, all
that can delight, is but troublesome, according to St Bern.

Therefore I counsel thee, O my Soul, that now by the aforesaid, as though
moved, disposed, and invited, thou convert thy self to thy Creator, and thou
art diligently to weigh and consider, how great joy those blessed Spirits
receive from him, because all joy proposed, is either accidental, and for
that, does not satisfy, but only move or encourage, as is that which the
blessed Spirits receive from these that are below, or near unto them, or it is
consubstantiall, and for that it suffices nor, and yet it affects, as is
that which they conceive from these which are within themselves. For this joy
which they draw from them that are above them, is only termed substantial,
because by this only the rational desire of the creature is satisfied, All the
joy, all the sweetness, Hug^ de S. V.
all the pleasantness of things created may affect a humane heart, but cannot
satisfy it.

SOVLE.
Tell me I pray thee O man what and how great is that joy? because I desire this
only, this is it which I earnestly covet above all, for that I know that these
things are not only sufficient, although they might be had without it, but also
do leave the Soul empty, hungerstarven and miserable.

MAN.
O My Soul, Thou see what, and how great that joy is, I have asked and
examined all my inmost thoughts and they are not sufficient to tell me, for if
all St. Anselme that are before spoken of are good and pleasant, consider
seriously, how great that delightful good is, which contains in it self the
pleasure of all good, not such a one as we experience in things created, but
differing as much as the Creator differs from the Creature, he that shall
enjoy so great a good shall be what he will, and what he will not, he shall not
be.

Caesarius. It is more easy to obtain a good life then to express it, whose
course is without end, use without loathing, refection without meat, having
always after ancient and perpetual joys, new delectation, and a continuated
felicity without fear of loosing.

St. Aug. He is the Reward of virtue, who has given virtue, and has promised
himself, then which nothing can be greater or better. For what other thing is
it that is spoken by the Prophet, I will be their God, unless I be, whence
shall they be satisfied, I will be whatsoever, is honestly desired of all? De
Civitate Dei.
he is the end of our Desires, who shall be seen without end, shall be beloved
without contempt, shall be praised without wearisomness, this Gift this
Affection, this Action, shall truly be All in All.

I think notwithstanding, (that I may not overlong protract thee) although
truly, that be an inestimable and unspeakable joy, yet I conceive i^proceedeth
of a threefold cause, and a triple joy shall make glad, and delight those
blessed Spirits, for they shall delightfully rejoice, in the perfect and most
excellent contemplation of the divine clearnes, they shall sweetly rejoice in
the mellifluous and most pleasant taste of the divine goodness, they shall
eternally rejoice in the quiet and most secure embracing of the divine Majesty.
For thou know, O my soul, that thou excellest in thy substance with three
natural powers, for thou have a rational power which is not perfectly
illuminated, but by the manifest knowledge of the first Truth, and a
concupiscible power, which is not satisfied but by the perfect love of the
chiefest goodness, also an irascible power, which is not quieted, but by the
secure comprehension of the Divine Majesty. Of these three blessed Saint
Bernard speaks upon the Canticles, He that replenisheth thy desire with good
things, shall be to thy reason fullness of light, to thy will fulness of
peace, to thy memory a continuation of Eternity.

Why art thou sad O my soul? and wherefore do thou trouble me? hope in God,
because yet I will confess unto him; when all error shall depart from thy
reason, all grief from thy will, all fear from thy memory, and that shall
succeed which we hoped for, wonderful quietness, full sweetness, and eternal
security. O my soul, how much think thou, shall their joy and gladness be,
who perpetually contemplate this mirror of Eternity, wherein all things past,
present and to come, which do appertain to the chiefest beatitude, are most
manifestly beheld; St. Aug. When we shall arrive at the supernall light of the
Father of lights, we shall understand all that can be in the creatures. Then the
Just shall know all that God has made to be known. And what is that they
cannot know, who see him that knows all things. Saint Anselme.

SOVLE.
ANd how can simplicity admit this?

MAN.
EVen as by a looking-Glass a threefold vision is demonstrated unto us, Fulgen
tius.
in that we see one selves, the Glass and whatsoever is present, so by the
mirror of divine clearness, we know God himself, and whatsoever is present,
that is our selves and all creatures.

SOVLE.
O Blessed truth I now perceive, that to be wise without thee, is to be
foolish, and to know thee perfectly is to become wise.

MAN.
O My soul, those things which thou desire naturally to know, earnestly
endeavor to see in this mirror, seek continually to study and read therein:
because to have seen this once, is to have learned all things. Truly Plato's
Contemplation, 1 Theory. 2 Theoremes. 3 Scrutineis.

Aristotle's Philosophy, Empedocles Speculation, Hypocrates Searches, Ptolomies
Astrology etc. shall be seen there, and accounted but foolishness: Because
whatsoever we understand here concerning the truth, is the least part of those
things which we are ignorant of. But then, O my soul, thou shall see, and
abound, and thy heart shall admire and be enlarged.

SOVLE.
AND WHAT SHALL I SEE?

MAN.
THe King of Heaven in his Glory: Beda. The splendor of eternal pulcritude is
of such and so great pleasantness, and of so great sweetness, that the very
Angels themselves, who are incomparably more clear then the Sun, cannot be
satisfied therewith. Therefore thou shall then abound with delights in the
admirable and wonderful knowledge of the Divine cleernesse, thou shall admire
at the delightful consideration of thy own glory, thou shall be enlarged in
the perfect speculation of all Creatures. O stupendous and admirable
Contemplation! O sweet and delectable consideration! O joyful and unspeakable
speculation!

O Lord my God, how worthily is it spoken of thee: One day in thy Courts is
better then a thousand elsewhere. Because according to Saint Augustine, so
great is the beauty of Justice, so great is the pleasure of the Eternal light,
that although it were not lawful to be delighted there, in more then an hour
of one day, for this only innumerable days of this life, though full of
delights, and on every side abundancy of temporal good things, should rightly
and worthily be despised. For it is so beautiful and sweet, that it being once
seen, nothing more can be desired, and it excels all other desires.

SOVLE.
ANd is there no other thing, whose Vision delights? whose Contemplation
makes glad?

MAN.
O My Soul, although these above be sufficient, if there were no other thing
there, yet there remains one thing, (though I should for bear to speak of the
sweet and pleasant vision of all the others almost innumerable) which
wonderfully gladdeth the minds of all the Celestial Spirits, and after a
certain wonderful manner, I know not with what inestimable joy inebriateth
every blessed creature, to wit, to see the exceeding glory of our Heavenly
Father, and the glorified humanity of his most blessed Son. Who, O my soul,
is sufficient, as to think, how great joy it begets to see the Vi^gin Mary,
not now lying with her Infant crying in the Manger, not now going about
weeping, seeking and saying: Have ye not seen him, whom my soul loves? when
she had lost her most beloved Infant for three days but now looking on him
with Eternal Joy? For now she shall not be troubled as flying into Egypt
from the face of Herod, because he is ascended into Heaven, but Herod into
Hell: Now she is not troubled about many things, which the Jews have done to
her Son because all things are subject to him: Not now surely watching,
crying out, complaining, and saying: Who will grant it me, that I may dye for
thee O my Son Absalon? when she stood near unto her only Son, hanging and
dying on the Cross: now not lamentably lamenting when the Disciple was given
her instead of her Master, a Servant in stead of her Lord, a Creature in stead
of the Creator, as though it were, a stranger instead of her only and most
sweet Son: But now she that in times past was so miserable for us being full
of so great sorrow, is inestimably exalted above every Creature reigning with
Christ in the Palace of the exceeding blessed Trinity, singing, rejoicing, and
saying: I have held him and will not part from him: And Christ himself saying.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will refresh you.

And this: Come unto me all ye that desire me, add ye shall be filled from my
Generations.

O my Soul, devoutly consider in thy mind, what a joy, full of all sweetness
it is to behold a man the Creator of man, a woman the Mother of the Creator of
all, our Brother in times past, lost, abject and despised, now found, now
returned, now Reigning, now commanding all. O that thou were as my Brother
sucking the breasts of my Mother, when I should find thee without, I should
kisle thee with the kisses of devotion, I would embrace thee with the embraces
of love, yet ^ should not be despised, I should lead thee into a Chambe^ with
delight of the sweetest fruition?

This fruition that devout St. In his Meditations. Anselme
desired, when he said O most sweet Infant, when shall I see thee? when shall I
appear before thy face? when shall I be sarisfied with thy comeliness? when
shall I behold thy wished for Countenance? on whom the Angels desire to look:
woe be to that soul that loves not thee, that seeks not thee, who if she love
the World, she is a slave to sin, she is never quiet or content, never
secure. Let nothing I beseech thee please me without thee, let nothing be sweet
unto me, nothing comely, let no precious thing content me besides thee; Let
all things be vile unto me, except thee. Whatsoever is against thee, let it be
troublesome unto me, and let thy will and pleasure be my indefatigable desire;
Let it greive me to rejoice without thee, delight me to rejoice with thee, and
to weep with thee. O good Jesu, if it be so sweet to weep with thee, how
pleasant is it to rejoice with thee.

SOVLE.
O Man, Now I languish with Love to see our Lord my Creator, I faint with
ardent desire to see Jesus my Brother and my Redeemer, now being wounded, with
desire, I sigh and groan to behold that glorious Virgin, Mother of my Redeemer.
O good Jesus, when shall I see my Joy which I desire? O when will his glory
appear which I hunger after? O when will my Comforter come, which I expect? O
that at any time I shall be inebriated with the plenty of his house for which I
sigh after! Now every Creature is troublesome to me to behold, because far
incomparably shall that beauty excel? from which all these things proceeded.

MAN.
O My Soul, expect with patience, that thy desires may increase, because it is
written, After a while and ye shall not see me, and again, after a while and
ye shall see me.

SOVLE.
O Long while, O a little too prolixe, for although thy merits be little, yet
notwithstanding large are thy desires.

MAN.
O My Soul, if thy desires seem unto thee large and great, wherewith thou art
inflamed to contemplate the Eternal glory and charity, with how great a desire,
think thou, ought thou to be inflamed perfectly to love God, the eternal
goodness, and eternally to possess the highest Majesty? if thou should not
love all these things, how can thou rejoice in the Vision? Although thou
should well see and understand them, and should not possess them
securely, how should thou continue blessed, St. Aug. There therefore we
shall be at leisure, and shall see, shall see and love, shall love and possess,
for he is the end of our desires, who shall be seen without end, shall be loved
without tediousness, shall be prais^d eternally without wearisomness, for there
one and the whole virtue is to love, what thou see, and the chiefest felicity
is eternally to have what thou love, there a blessed life is fully and
perfectly drunken from its very fountain, wherefore after a certain wonderful
manner, both an innated thirst, and also a Satiety is delectably varyed by
course, but necessity is far repelled from thirst and loathing is far removed
from satiety.

In fine prosologion. But that I may not, O my Soul, now longer keep thee in
suspense, hear what that devout Anselmus says, of all the former Heavenly
joys, stir up thy self now, O my Soul, and lift up thy whole understanding,
and as much as thou art able, consider attentively how delightful that good is
which contains the delectation of all good things. If a created life be
delightful, how pleasant is the creating Essence? if a made health be pleasant,
how pleasant is that health which maks all things: If the knowledge of the
creatures be amiable, how pleasant is that knowledge which is of things
created? why therefore do thou wander through many things, seeking Goods
created? love one in whom are all, If Beauty delight thee, the Just shall
shine as the sun, if Liberty or strength, they shall be like unto the Angels of
God in Heaven, if long and healthful lifethere is eternal, health if satiety
or excess, they shall be satisfied of the glory, and they shall be inebriated
with the fullness of the house of God, if melody, there the Angels do sing, if
society and freindship, there is the society of the Saints, and all of them of
one mind, if honors and riches, glory and riches are in his Court, if security
and certainty, there is the eternal longitude of all times and ages.

O humane heart, O poor and needy heart, O heart experienced in cares, yea
overwhelmed with sorrows, how much would thou rejoice, if thou should
abound in all these, enquire of thy inmost thoughts, if they be able to
conceive there so great joy, of their so great a beatitude. But if man of so
great a beatitude can scarce conceive his own joy, how shall he be capable of
so many joys, as is the number of the Elect, where every one loves his
Neighbor as much as himself. And does so much rejoice at his joy, as he loves
him? so also every one does more rejoice without question of the Felicity of
God, then either of his own or of all the Elect. Because even as he loves God
with all his heart, with all his soul, and with all his power; So the whole
heart, the whole Soul, the whole mind, is not sufficient to the fulness of
that joy, because they shall rejoice, so much as they loved, they shall love so
much as they shall behold. Truly neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard,
nor has it entered into the heart of Man, how much the Saints of God shall love
thee and know thee.

I beseech thee, O my God, that I may know thee, that I may love thee, and that
I may eternally rejoice with thee. And though I cannot fully in this life, yet
at least, let my knowledge and love of the increase here, that there my joy may
be full. Here let that be in hope there let it be in possession. O Lord and
Father here thou command by thy Son, yea thou councellest us to ask, and
promisest us we shall receive, that our joy may be full: I beg O Lord that
which by thy admirable Counselor thou councellest to ask, and promisest us to
receive that our joy may be accomplished, let my understanding meditate of
this, let my mouth discourse of this, let my Tongue speak thereof, let my Soul
hunger after it, let my flesh thirst after it, until it shall enter into the
joy of my God, who is the Trinity and Unity blessed for ever. Amen:

The end of the last part.
The humble and Contrite sinners thankfulness to Almighty God for his mercy and
goodness toward him.
O Eternal God my Creator, behold me wretched sinner thy poor Creature,
prostrate at the seet of thy mercy, craving pardon most humbly of thy Divine
Majesty for my horrible ingratitude toward thee, in that being made by thee of
nothing to thy own Image, and ordained to enjoy thee eternally, I have made no
account of thee, but preferred every trifle before thee, and heaped sin upon
sin with extreme contempt of thy Justice, and abuse of thy mercy,
longanimity and patience. Therefore how admirable has thy clemency been
toward me, in that thou have forborne to pour down thy vengeance upon me, to
strike me with sudden death, and to cast me headlong to Hell, as thou have
done many others, not so grievous sinners as I, whiles nevertheless thou have
spared me. But seeing it has pleased thee, out of thy infinite goodness, now
to open my eyes, and to discover unto me, both the horror of my own
Conscience, and the bottomless pit, whereinto I was ready to fall, vouchsafe I
beseech thee, to consummate and perfect thy own good work in me, giving me an
humble and contrite heart, that my eyes may be conduites and fountains of
Water, to bewail my sins, that my tears may be my Bread day and night, and
that I may bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, that thy Justice being
satisfied, by the merits of thy Son and my Savior, the inevitable and
dreadful hour of my death, may serve me for a happy and sure passage to those
everlasting and incomprehensible joys, whereto out of thy infinite mercy thou
have ordained me. Amen.

F. Fits-Herbert.

A BUNDLE OF MYRRH.
Concerning the Passion of Christ made by St. BONAVENTURE that famous Dr. of
the Church.
This Tractate is devout and full of all piety, wherein a Bundle of Myrrh is
put between the breasts of the spouse, that the study of virtues, and the
desire of compassion to the sufferings of Christ may be increased.
The first Bundle. Of our Lords Praying in the Garden, and of his taking.
MY beloved is to me a Bundle of Myrrh, he shall rest betwixt my breasts, The
devout soul speaks thus, signifying the bitterness of the passion of Christ
that she moreover continually bears about this, gathered to gether in her
breast. And as thou also, whosoever thou art that desire to reform thy
memory by the meditation of Christ's passion, may have these bundles in
readiness, which may rest in thy memory; The passion of Christ here handled,
we have compendiously compiled, only in order of the Evangelists, that from
these few, the work, the manner and the Cause, thou may have matter copiously
to meditate and may from these few collect many more.

Think therefore and consider how in that Sollemne Supper, Above spoken of.
whereof it is spoken of before being celebrated and a hymn said, Christ God
and man seeing his time to approach, rise up that he might go to the Mount,
this is the work which he did.

Consider the manner how he carried himself within and without, going he
foretold the flight of his Disciples: He affirmed that Peter should thrice deny
him, and other things he spoke; and again consider this work.

Consider also how he declared those words with exte^iour love, and with how
great interior affection he disclosed them. Thus thou may do every where,
neither is it needful always to repeat them.

Taking with him Peter, James and John he says; my Soul is sorrowful even
unto death; leaving them, he prays alone on the Mount, The third time of his
prayer being ended, through the imagination of death, and internal grief and
fear, his sweat is made like unto blood, demonstrating his unspeakable pain
thereby; for we read no such thing of any other: Then one Angel comfort his
Lord.

Consider how Christ met his Enemies, and of his own accord offered himself,
and with his word prostrated them upon the earth. Afterward he is kissed of
Judas, apprehended by the Jews, drawnbound, and lead unto Annas house, and all
his Disciples fled. And let this be one bundle for thee to keep in memory.

And here if it pleases thee, thou may look upon Christ what he was that
suffered these things, and thou may commit thy self unto him by assent of
reason. Believe there fore and think that he is truly the Son of God, the
Beginning of all things, the Savior of all People, and the rewarder of all.

The Second Bundle. Of the mocking of him before Annas, and Caiphas, and Peter
denying him.
BEfore Annas speaking the truth he is smitten of a wicked Servant.

Think here of the work, the manner and the cause, or at least some of them as
it likes thee. After this in Caiphas house, where the Scribes and Pharisees
expected him, he is led scorned and stricken, as if he were a blasphemer. A
false witness is sought for, and is not found, he is adjured of the high
Priest, thrice denied of Peter, But Christ looking back on Peter, constrained
him to go forth, and to weep most bitterly, morning being come, he is brought
bound unto Pilate: Think on the manner, how they brought him, because it was in
the worst kind, as though he were a thief and a malefactor, etc. Judas
perceiving that they intended to put Christ to death, repented so much in
himself that he had betrayed so good a man, hanged and himself, brought back
the money, wherewith a field was bought, as the Prophet Hieremie foretold:
Before Pilate he is many ways falsely accused, he is sent unto Herod, of him,
he is scorned at as a fool:

Here most diligently consider, what he is that suffered, and make thy self
like unto him, that thou may partake in sufferance with the most innocent,
most meek, most loving, and most noble. And let this be the second bundle:

The third Bundle. Of his Crowning and Crucifying.
AFter this at the Jews request, Pilate dismisseth Barabbas and delivers
Jesus to be crucified, being overcome by the importunity of the Jews and the
fear of Caesar. Then Jesus after the manner and form of a King is diversely
scorned, is roabed with a mantle, crowned with Thorns, stricken with a Reed
and as a King is adored in scorn. Here O man, think on the manner, consider
the cause, to wit, how Christ carried himself, and how the Jews behaved
themselves, the cause why he suffered so great torments, going that he might be
crucified, carrying his own cross, the peopl following, and the women weeping,
to who^ he said weep not for me, but weep for your selves. He is crucified on
Mount Calvarie. And here diligently consider the manner of his Crucifying. For
they either first raised up the Cross, and Christ ascended thereon, or surely
they put the Cross on the earth, and there fastened him thereon with nails.
For there appears no other manner. And here in the third place it is
convenient more particularly to consider, how great he is that suffered so
great things, that thou may go forth to him by viewing him with admiration,
because he is infinite in power, in comeliness, in happiness and in Eternity

Admire therefore, that Majesty should be annihilated, that Beauty should be
discolored, that Felicity should be tormented, that Eternity should dye, and
this is the third bundle.

The fourth Bundle. Of those things which were done whilst Christ hanged on the
cross, and of the giving up of his Spirit. Christ hanging on the Cross
thirsts.
Think on the work how Christ hanged, think on the Manner and Cause, consider
that he thirsted, prayed for his Crucifiers, he is blasphemed on the Cross,
he is mocked of them that pass by, of the Rulers, of the Theif. A true and
indeleble Title is written. Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. His doleful
Mother stands under the Cross, whom he pitieth, and commends her to John,
darkness is made. At last evidently showing how great his pain was, and that
his humanity was forsaken, in that, that there was no assistance of his
superior powers or faculties, in which it resided, unto the inferior, in
which he suffered, Crying out.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Having taken Vinegar, now all
things being consummate, that nothing remained to be done, crying with a loud
voice, he gave up his Spirit, signifying, that as long as he pleased, so long
he could live, and that no one could take from him his Soul, but that he laid
it down of his own accord. And here thou oughest to consider, in what manner he
suffered, being clothed in thy form or likeness: For he suffered like unto a
true Lamb, most freely in respect of himself, most obediently in respect of his
Father, most wisely in respect of his Adversaries.

Study therefore to put on the habit, according to the representation of that
form he put on, to wit, of Bounty, Severity, Humility, and perfect Knowledge or
Prospicacity And this is the fourth Bundle.

The fifth Bundle. Of those things which were done after his death hanging yet
on the Cross.
THe bones of the Theivs were broken, a bone of Christ was not bruised, least
the Effigies thereof might be made void. His side is opened, from whence the
Sacraments of the Church do flow, the vail is rent asunder, the Graves of the
dead are opened, that thereby they might rise again with Christ in the day of
his Resurection.

Here consider how great he is that suffered for thee, and imb^ace the Cross
with desire of suffering, that even as he has suffered Injuries, Reproaches,
Mocks, Torments, so by imitating the Passion of Christ, embrace thou for him,
all Sufferings full of Injuries, Reproaches, Scorn, and Torments. And this is
the fifth Bundle.

The sixth Bundle. Of the seven Seals opened by the passion of Christ.
THE Passion of Christ does not only reform the memory by devout Meditation,
nor only inflame the desires unto Devotion, but moreover principally
illustrateth the understanding, and leads it to the knowledge of Truth. Even as
in the knowledge of the whole frame of the World, there were seven things shut up
before the passion of Christ which now are opened.

The first Seal was the admirable Excellency of the Godhead, who by the Cross
has manifested himself to be the chief wisdom, in that, that he has destroyed
the Devil with the great Justice, in as much as he has paid the price of our
Redemption, the greatest mercy, because he has given his Son for us.

The second Seal, was the intelligible Spirit, which is manifested by his
Suffering, of how great bounty he is in respect of the Angels who permitted
Christ to be crucified, of how great dignity in respect of men, for in regard
of them, Christ was crucified; of how great cruelty, in respect of the Devils
who caused their Lord God to be crucified.

The third Seal, is the sensible World, which by the death of Christ, is
prooved to be a place of Darkness wherein Blindness reigns, because it
knew not the true Light, wherein barrenness reigns, because it reputed
Christ as unprofitable, Impiety and wickedness, in that it condemned the
Innocent.

The fourth Seal was Paradise, which by the Cross appears to be a place of
Glory, of Gladness and of plenty therein, in respect that Christ for the
restitution thereof, is made vile poor and miserable.

Fifthly, by the Death of Christ, Hell is manifested to be full of all penury,
viseness and poverty, because he has suffered these things for the
exterminating of sin, much more the damned shall suffer these, for the just
retribution of works.

The sixth Seal, was the ^audable virtue, by which the Cross of Christ, is
prooved to be precious, beautiful, and profitable; precious, because Christ
would loose his corporal life, before that he would contradict virtue;
Beautiful, because he shined much in his very reproaches, profitable, because
one perfect act of Christ's virtue ransacked Hell, opened Heaven, restored that
which was lost.

The seventh Seal is opened by the Cross, and therein appeared, how detestable
the culpable guiltiness is, when for the Remission thereof it needed so great a
price, so grand a Sacrifice, so difficult a medicine.

The seventh Bundle.
Of the Resurrection, Ascension, and sending of the Holy Ghost.

AND the third day, Christ the Conqueror of death rise again, and showed how
that we are to rise again also. If therefore thou have suffered with Christ
suffering, now rejoice with him rising again, consider devoutly in what manner
the Soul of Christ descended into Hell, what it did there, and of the joy of
the holy Fathers, and of the Sorrow of the Devils. Think of the fear of the
Keepers, think of the watching of the Angels about the Sepulcher, how one
only now is reported to fit and then to stand upon the stone, now in the
Sepulcher, then two, and these diversely, whereby is shown the multitude of
Angels about the Sepulcher, and the several uisitations of the women. Think
how Love and Desire constrained Mary Magdalen and other weomen, often to run
and to visit the Sepulcher of our Lord, think upon the diverse apparitions of
Christ. Think upon the sweet discourses of him with his Disciples, Consider,
why Christ would appear in Galilee, but that thou ought to fly from vices,
whereupon the Passover is called a passing over. But in Galilee, that is in the
transmigration and change of our bodies, we shall behold and see Christ in the
Kingdom of Heaven after the general resurrection.

Forty days after the Resurrection, Christ ascending on high, lead the
Captivity of the holy Fathers captive. Meditate on the glorious procession of
them that ascended with Christ: for the Saints followed him, the Angels came to
meet him, and then they did frame those Questistions among themselves, whereof
the Prophet Isay speaks: who is this that comes? etc. Think of the sorrow of
the Apostles, and the joy of the Angels. Think how the Angels returned to
comfort the Apostles. Learn thou to ascend to Christ, but let it be by the
ascendings before spoken of, that thou may here leave vice; because no vice
ascends with our Savior, as Saint Augustine says.

After that, our Lord sent from Heaven the Holy Ghost in fiery tongues. See and
behold how the Apostles were afterward comforted and grounded in Charity.
Meditate why the Holy Ghost appeared in fire, why in tongues, why in both
together, and why in the form of other Creatures, and study to obtain in thy
self the proprieties of such things. Consider the effects and gifts of the
Holy Ghost, and many other such like things concerning the sending of the Holy
Ghost, and the signs of him fighting against Gluttony, to wit, sleep,
hardness of heart, Idleness, Malapartness of laughter, contradiction and
Insensibility.

SPIRITUAL EXERCISES.
IN this little work our Author proposes thirteen spiritual Exercises and to
the last he annexeth a certain short form taken out of Saint Bernard whereby
we may climb from External, to the Internal, and from these to the
supernall. All which truly by how much the shorter they are proposed of the
Author by so much the oftener they ought to be exercised o^ us.

That thou may be preserved in virtues it is necessary for thee to have
spiritual exercises wherewith thou may employ thy mind, because unless
thou do so thou can not persevere in virtues.

First therefore thou shall exercise thy self in Prayer after this manner and
fervently at these times.

Before the beginning of every work or Act thou shall call upon our Lord, and
shall pray a little with some such short Prayer. O God make have to help me.
Have mercy on me O God, or the like. Also whenever thou hear the Bell to
toule, thou shall pray, or when thou hear it to strike the hours, fervently
thou shall make secretly within thy self these Prayers, and thou shall do it
so, that though thou be nere unto others, they shall not perceive that thou
prayest.

Thy second Exercise shall be this, to wit, that thou earnestly determine
whenever thou hear the Bell toule generally to amend thy self, and pray
to God that thou may.

Before thou beginnest any notable work, thou shall briefly consider, how thou
have determined to carry thy self in thy former purpose.

In like manner every morning thou may consider how thou would behave thy
self the whole day, and this before thou do thy outward Actions, and when
thou do any Act, thou shall briefly weigh how thou have purposed.

Also three or four times a day, thou must vehemently set thy self against
Pride.

Thy third Exercise shall be, the meditation of some good thing, when time
admits. For thou shall have every day one special memorial, whereof thou
shall often think, and to what course thou intendest.

For on Sunday thou shall have for thy memorial to think on the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Monday of the last Judgment. Tuesday of the benefits of God. Wednesday of
Death. Thursday, of the pains of Hell. Friday, of the passion of our Lord.
Saturday, of their own sins.
Nothwithstanding, Thou shall consider every day together, of the passion of
our Lord, with the matter of the day, and the benefits of God. And in every
hour of the morning, as of the prime, Terse, etc. thou shall think and
consider something of the passion of that hour, mixed with the matter of the day.

Thus therefore by purposing and Acting, I hope that thou will competently
spend thy time.

Thy fourth Exercise shall be, That thou daily exercise thy self in humble
and abject works, always to choose the lowest place, and with all thy heart to
despise thy self, and to esteem thy self unworthy any praise, but to ascribe
all to God, nor shall thou care whether thou art praised or dispraised. Be
mindful and look into thy self, and thou shall find, that thou art unworthy of
any esteem, but most worthy of all Reproach: For when thou art near unto
others, thou art to carry thy self silently, courteously, and modestly, yet so
as it may become thee.

Thy fifth Exercise shall be, that thou shun all signs of Pride, to wit,
clamor in speech, and so of all other things.

The sixth Exercise shall be, that thou often consider, wherein thou carriest
thy self evilly wheresoever thou shall be and thou shall not suffer any little
vice pass over without Judgment, because he that does not weigh little faults
falls often into greater.

The 7th. Exercise shall be, that chiefly wheresoever thou shall be thou keep a
Guard on thy Eyes: because from the not looking to them, infinite mischeifs and
evils proceed. Therefore have an especial care unto thy Eyes.

The 8th. Exercise is to consider the good Actions of others and not the evil.
For when thou see or perceivest any one to sin thou shall think that if he
should have so much Grace from God as thy self, much more fervently he would
amend himself then thou. And if thou perceivest any one to do any good, thou
shall consider how thou may imitate that good.

Thy 9th. Exercise shall be* that all that thou see and, hear from men
that thou Conster it to the best, and so thou shall not be censured.

Thy 10th. Exercise shall be, that always wheresoever thou shall be, thou
may carry thy self mannerly and decently in thy outward carriage, least thou
may give an ill example to others, because the external indecency is a sign
of an indevout mind.

Thy 11th. Exercise shall be, that always wheresoever thou art, thou may
take heed, that thou do not that thing, whereby thou may give an ill
example to any one, or wherein any may interpret ill of thee, because it is
very dangerous to show an ill example to others.

The 12th. Exercise shall be courageously to resist temptations, and to
abstain and withdraw thy self from carnal concupiscences: because in them
there is no health.

The last shall be, that thou may always stand in fear, and carry thy self
modestly, and so keep thy self being alone, as when thou art with others. For
God sees all things which thou do.

Thou shall study to perform these Exercises commonly as much as in thee lies,
and thou shall diligently entreat our Lord, that he will give thee grace to do
them, because without him thou can do nothing, etc.

I will return from things external to the Internal, and will ascend from
the internal to the supernall, that I may know from whence I come, or whither
I go, what I am, and from whence I am, that so from the knowledge of my self,
I may be able to come to the knowledge of God. For by how much I profit in mine
own knowledge, by so much the nearer I come to the knowledge of God. From
whence do I come, according to the exterior man from those Parents, who caused
me to be damned, before I was borne, they being sinners have begotten me a
sinner in their sin, and in sin have nursed me, what am I? A man of a
slippery humor, for I am in a moment of conception conceived of humane seed,
moreover this Spume being coagulated by increasing a little, is made flesh;
afterward, lamenting and wailing, I am delivered to the exile of this World,
and behold now I waxing greater, am full of Iniquities. Incontinently I shall
be presented before the severe Judge Then it shall be said of me; behold the
man and his works. Consider those things more seriously.

DEO GRATIAS. AMEN.
FINIS.

