A Short ACCOUNT OF THE LATTER END AND Dying Words OF FRANCIS HOWGIL, Who dyed
a Prisoner for the Testimony of Jesus, in Appulby the Twentieth Day of the
Eleaventh Month, 1668.

The Memorial of the Just is blessed; the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting
Remembrance: But the Name of the Wicked shall rot. This is Printed and
Published in the Year 1671. for Friends, at the desire of some; because many
have not seen it (nor could so well have it) in Manuscript.

A Short ACCOUNT OF THE LATTER END AND Dying Words OF FRANCIS HOWGIL,
AS for the time of dear F. Howgil his Sickness (which he endured with much
Patience and Cheerfulness) he begun the Eleaventh of the Eleaventh Month,
1668. (and continued till the Twentieth Day of the same Month) and then
departed this Life; having then, for the Testimony of Jesus, been Prisoner Four
Years and Eleaven Months: He was not unsensible of the Decay of his outward
Man some time before, which moved him to a disposal of his outward Estate, and
the setting of his House in order: His Love was very dear to his Brethren and
Fellow Laborers, with whom he had labored and traveled in the Work of the
Ministry; In Testimony whereof, he left to each of them something, as a
Remembrance of his Love; and also was mindful of the Church, and left a Legasie
to be distributed amongst the Poor of the Household of Faith in these Parts.

And though the Time of his Departure did draw very nigh, and his Sickness
increased, yet in all that time he was in perfect and good Remembrance, and
oftentimes very fervent in Prayer, and uttered many comfortable Expressions, to
the great Refreshment of those who were with him.

And about two days before his going hence, being attended by his Dear Wife,
and several Friends, he begun to say unto them, Friends, as to matter of words,
you must not expect much more from me; neither is there any great need of it,
as to speak of Matters of Faith to you, who are satisfied; only, that you
remember my Dear Love to all Friends, who enquire of me; for I ever loved
Friends well, or any in whom Truth appeared. And truly God will own his People,
as he has even hitherto done, and as we have daily witnessed; for, no sooner
had they made that Act against us for Banishment (to the great Suffering of
many good Friends) but the Lord stirred up Enemies against them, even three
great Nations, whereby the Violence of their Hand was taken off: And I say
again, God will own his People, even all those that are faithful. And as for
me, I am well, and content to dye; I am not at all afraid of Death. And truly
one thing was of late in my Heart, and that I intended to have written to G. F.
and others, even that which I have observed, which thing is, That this
Generation passes fast away; we see many good and precious Friends within
these few Years have been taken from us, and therefore Friends had need to
watch, and be very faithful, so that we may leave a good (and not a bad) savor
to the next succeeding Generation; for you see, that it is but a little time
that any of us have to stay here.

And often, in the time of his Sickness, he said, He was content to dye, and
that he was ready; and praised God for those many sweet Enjoyments and
Refreshments he had received on that his Prison House Bed, whereon he lay;
freely forgiving all who had a hand in his Restraint.

And he said, This was the Place of my first Imprisonment (for the Truth) here
at this Town; and if it be the Place of my laying down the Body, well, I am
content.

Several Persons of note, Inhabitants in Appulby aforesaid, as the Mayor, and
others, came to visit him; some of which praying, That God might speak Peace to
his Soul (he sweetly replied, He has done it) and they all spoke well of him:
So that he has left an exceeding good Testimony for the Lord in this Place, to
the great Honor of Truth, and our mutual Comfort.

And a few Hours before his Departure, some Friends (who lived several Miles
from that Place) came to visit him; he enquired of all their Welfare, and
prayed very fervently (with many Heavenly Expressions) That the Lord, by his
Mighty Power, might preserve them out of all such things as would spot and
defile.

And a little after, he was saying something concerning Weeks (or a Time) after
which Persecution should be ended; but his Weakness was so great, and his Voice
so low, that it was not fully heard by us.

A little season after, he recovering a little strength, further said, I have
sought the Way of the Lord from a Child, and lived innocently, as amongst men;
and if any enquire concerning my Latter End, let them know, that I dye in that
Faith in which I lived, and suffered for.

And after these words, he spoke some other in Prayer unto God, and sweetly fin
shed his Course in much Peace with the Lord, as we that were present had clear
and perfect ground to believe; he being all along in a precious Heavenly Frame
of Spirit, and was filled with the refreshing Presence of the Lord, which we
always felt to abound in him to his very last.

F. H. dyed the 20th of the 11th Month, 1668. in the Fiftieth Year of his Age.

John Bolton of Bongale in Westmoreland, Edward Guy, Anthony Pinder, Thomas
Longhorn, Richard Pinder, Thomas Carleton.

Appulby, the 20th of the 12th Month, 1668.
THE END.

