THE Cure of Old Age, AND Preservation of Youth.

By ROGER BACON, A Franciscan Friar.

Translated out of Latin; with Annotations, and an Account of his Life and
Writings.

By Richard Brown, M. L. Coll. Med. Land.

ALSO A Physical Account OF THE Tree of Life, BY EDW. MADEIRA ARRAIS.

Translated likewise out of Latin by the same Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Flesher at the Angel and Crown, and Edward Evets at
the Green Dragon, in St Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

THE CURE OF OLD AGE, AND Preservation of Youth.

SHOWING How to cure and keep off the Accidents of Old Age; and how to preserve
the Youth, Strength and Beauty of Body, and the Senses and all the Faculties of
both Body and Mind.

By that great Mathematician and Physician ROGER BACON, A Franciscan Friar.

Translated out of Latin; with Annotations, and an Account of his Life and
Writings.

By Richard Brown, M. L. Coll. Med. Land.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Flesher at the Angel and Crown, and Edward Evets at
the Green Dragon, in St Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Here impart to you the Improvement (or rather the Recovery) of a most useful
piece of Knowledge, an Addition to your Days and the Comfort thereof: Wherein,
beside the Exact Course of living prescribed by Physicians for above two
Thousand Years, you will find both Medicines and a Method whereby to cure all
Ails coming through any little deviation from that exact Course, which is so
difficult, if not impossible, to be observed. But indeed the most use so small
Endeavors toward the Observation of any wholesome Rules, that we may with
reason conclude the World is in prosecution of a Course rather how to dye than
live. Men will close their own Eyes, when, would they but open them to a right
Information, they might live more, and more happy days. And you perhaps will
maintain, that The whole have no need of a Physician, but they that are sick:
But I may rejoin to the Saying, That your Health, I doubt, is in a Pharisaical
condition; and when you have read this Book, I doubt not, but you will abate
your Opinion. For, beside that Aptitude and Inclination to some Disease, which
(though latent to you, yet manifest to a Physician) may be in you, from the
very moment of your Nativity, you make every day a considerable step toward Old
Age, which is it self a Disease. And now, Sir, how do You? You find no Pain,
and think all is well. A Physician seems as useless as a Captain in time of
Peace. Indeed when a Disease invades you, the Physicians are commissioned to
give Battle to it; but when the Brunt is over, they must quit your Service,
whilst You, like supine Men and secure, consider not, that Fortification, a
main point in the Art of War, is most properly exercised in Peace, and that it
is too late to build the Walls, when the Gate should be shut against the Enemy.
Whereas, I am persuaded, were men as careful in preserving their Health, as
they are sollicitous for the recovery of it, they might often multiply the Sum
of their Years, and live the Product without a Disease. And I count it a Piece
of Skill in a Physician far surpassing the most admirable Cures, to preserve a
Man from all Diseases. Which Hippocrates and Galen, both Men of a weak
Constitution by Nature, preserved themselves from by their Art till above an
hundred Years of Age. And had not both these great Physicians been more engaged
on the Offensive than on the Defensive part; for so many Cures which took up
their Endeavors, they might have added as many Years to their own Lives, had
they been bent that way. But alas! Health with Virtue, and Diseases with Vices,
run parallel. For as Lawgivers have better provided for the Punishment of ^he
bad, than for the Encouragement of the good; so Physicians take abundant Care
of the Sick, but seldom visit those in Health, whom so to preserve would be
the most glorious Act of the Profession. And this is the Task of the first of
these Treatises.

The second considers Man in his Immortal Capacity, and gives a most rational
Description of the Tree of Life. I must acknowledge, the vast and general
Prospect and Care all of Humane Race have to Futurity beyond confinement, argue
to me an innate Option in them of Immortality, which God, when he had commanded
Nature to implant, would never in his Goodness have denied, had not Man
frustrated himself by his own Folly. Now though I could be willing enough to
find out a way to immortalize Flesh and Blood; yet I will neither be so vain,
as with Erasistratus to promise such Immortality to my self or others; nor
shall I be so bold as to encounter for it with the Flaming Sword: The term of
my Hopes is, by a lawful course of Nature to obtain a Reprieve of the deserved
Sentence passed by our offended God, at least by Temperance and Medicines to
avoid many Troubles, till it shall please him to sign the Execution. This
Treatise may serve as a Theory to the preceding Practice, and to illustrate on
what Principles the former proceeds. For as a Corollary it assigns very
probable Reasons for the great Age of the Antediluvians. And since the Tree of
Life is not it self attainable, a Quid pro Quo to prolong our Lives, which we
cannot perpetuate, may be of good Use.

The Author of the first Treatise was our own Countryman, of whose Life I next
give you some Account.

The second was writ by a Foreigner, of whom also in its place I give you what
I know. But their Books bespeak best the Authors Worth; I therefore recommend
the Perusal of them to your Consideration.

As for the Commentator, he hopes, his publishing so useful (but intricate) an
Author, may atone for what is said besides.

Richard Brown.

THE LIFE OF Roger Bacon.
ROger Bacon was born near Ilchester of a Gentleman's Family. He studied in his
younger Years Grammar and Logic at Oxford, and gave good Hopes what he would
prove, by the incredible Progress he made therein in a short Time. He, thus
improved, applied himself to Philosophy and the Search of Nature's Secrets, and
made good Progress under his Tutors, whereof Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury
was one. Having got a good stock here, he and several other Learned Men in his
Company traveled to Paris, which was then a la mode at Oxford. Some say, that
at his Return, through the Persuasion of Robert Grosthead he became a
Franciscan Friar in a Convent at Oxford; others say, that he was a Friar before
he went to France.

He laid aside all Ambition and Covetousness, and applied himself to the
diligent Search of Nature, and the Knowledge of Tongues and Arts. He was
intimate with a great many Learned Men, and some Rich: For when he had cast
with himself, what Instruments he wanted for making of Experiments, he found,
without a better Purse he could do nothing. But his Credit and some Men's
Generosity was so good, that he in twenty Years time expended in Books of
Curiosities and in making natural Experiments above two Thousand Pounds, a vast
Sum of Money in those days. He was of that Noble and Public Spirit, that he
not only freely imparted all his Secrets, but was overjoyed, when he light on a
Man that was but of any Capacity to understand him. He either followed or
rather invented such a Method in his Studies, as by it he discovered unknown
things in Nature, and did such Wonders, that not only the Vulgar, but even some
Learned Men thought him a Conjurer. Some report he made a Brazen Head that
spoke, and think he did it by the help of the Devil. But Albertus Magnus did
the same, and Boethius the like, without any other Magic than Natural. For
Cassiodorus writes thus to Boethius: Tuae artis Ingenio metalla mugiunt,
Diomedes in aere gravius buccinatur, aeneus Anguis insibilat, Aves simulatae
sunt: Et quae vocem propriam nesciunt habere, dulcedinem Cantilenae probantur
emittere. i. e. By the Ingenuity of your Art, Metals roar, Diomede in Brass
sounds a hollow Charge, the Brazen Serpent hisseth, Birds are counterfeited:
And things that have no Voice of their own, are made to sing melodiously. And
well might so learned a Man as Bacon be then taken for a Magician; when in the
Dawning of our more learned Day Reuchlin for his skill in the Hebrew, and
Budaeus in the Greek Tongue, were looked upon by the unlearned silly Monks to
be Conjurers.

But such was the stupid Ingratitude of Bacon's Age, that it almost repented
this Learned Man of his Knowledge: For his own Order would scarce admit his
Books into their Libraries. And great was this poor Man's Unhappiness: For being
accused of Magic and Heresy, and appealing to Pope Nicolas the fourth, the
Pope liked not his Learning, and by his Authority kept him close Prisoner a
great many Years. Some say at last through the Mediation of some great Men he
obtained his Liberty. Others say he died in Prison, either through Grief, or
his hard Usage. However it was, he died in the Seventy eighth Year of his Age,
Ann. Dom. 1292. and was buried in the Franciscan's Church in Oxford. Thus did
the gross Ignorance and Malice of those Times prevent this knowing Man in
making the greatest of his Experiments, i. e. in extending the Period of his
Days as far beyond the common Age of Man, as in Knowledge he surpassed the
common Standard; an eternal Monument whereof this present Treatise will be.

He wrote a great many Books on diverse Subjects in Divinity, Physic, Optics
and Philosophy, wherein he discovered many Secrets. He published a Latin, Greek
and Hebrew Grammar, and wrote much in Chemistry, Cosmography, Music,
Astronomy, Astrology, Metaphysics, Logic, and Moral Philosophy. He proposed
the Emendation of the Julian Calendar to Pope Clement the fourth;
Middleburgensis used Bacon's Arguments to Pope Leo the tenth: And Copernicus by
the help of Middleburgensis rectified it for the Council of Trent, the ninth
Year of Gregory the thirteenth, Ann. Dom. 1581.

He was the greatest Critic of his Age, and complained lamentably of the
Ignorance of his Cotemporaries: For he says, that there were some saucy
Youngsters, who were then created sine Art ulla Artium Magistri, and sine
Doctrina Doctores; amongst whom Ego currit was Grammatical Latin current, and
Contradictoria possunt esse simul vera true Logic. And he spared neither the
Ignorance nor the ill Lives of the Clergy, no wonder then he was so ill treated
by them. He highly condemned the Divinity Lectures of his Time, as spoiled by
the bad words and worse Sense of the Civil Lawyers, and complains that not a
Man in England besides Grosthead, and two or three more of his acquaintance
understood the Hebrew or Greek Tongues; and that he could not meet with one
good Translation of the Scriptures.

But since he had discovered them to be no Witches, they would prove him to be
one. And it seems on some malicious Pretense they took from him his Books and
Writings long before Pope Nicolas cast him in Prison; whereupon he complained
in these words to the preceding Pope Clement the fourth, who was his friend.
Praelati enim and Fratres, me jejuniis macerantes tuto custodiebant, nec
aliquem ad me venire voluerunt, veriti ne scripta mea aliis, quam Summo
Pontifici and sibi ipsis pervenirent. For the Prelates and Friars have kept me
starving in close Prison, nor would they suffer any one to come at me, fearing
lest my Writings should come to any other than the Pope and themselves.

Now the true Reason of his great Misfortune was this. He had been intimate
with that Learned Prelate and true English man Robert Grosthead, Bishop of
Lincoln. This Bishop observing the Popes Tyranny in England (for he lived in
King John's time who acknowledged this Crown feudatory to the Pope) forbore not
to admonish that Romish Tyrant by Letters openly, and to declare to his
Friends, that the Pope was Antichrist. The Pope excommunicates the Bishop, he
appeals from the Pope's to Christ's Tribunal, and dies about two Years after.
Now Bacon knowing all this as well as the Bishop, was, very like, much of
Grostheads Opinion: This then was the Heresy, this the casting of that Figure
which made him guilty of Witchcraft.

Many of Bacon's Works, and of Grosthead's also, curiously written and well
bound, were by some ignorant Men, that would be accounted Scholars when they
could not understand them, condemned for Books of the Black Art; and so
fastened with long Nails to the Boards, they either became Food for Worms and
Moths, or rotted with Mould and Dust. Leland says he wrote many Books, but
that it is more easy to make a Collection of Sibylla's Leaves, than to get but
the Titles of all his Books.

He complained much of the Neglect of Chemistry and Philosophy in his days. In
his Book De utilitate Scientiarum he writes thus. But by this means Philosophy
not only became suspected, as if it hindered the Faith of Christ; but was
condemned by the Justice of those Laws, that were for the Defense of the
Commonwealth from the contrary Opinion. It seemed, by foretelling things to
come, by discovering Secrets for the time being, and by wonderful Work's above
the power of Nature and Art as they work commonly, to contend with the
Preachers of the Faith, whose Property it was, not by Nature and Art, but by
the Power of God to give out their Philosophy of future things, to produce
Secrets and raise Miracles: For, that the Power of Philosophy can do wonderful
things, such as the common sort not only of Laics, but of the Clergy, will
reckon for Miracles, the things following will declare, etc.

But that we may give to God the things that are Gods, as well as to his
Handmaid hers; the Words of Steuchus are considerable. How the Visions of the
Prophets are made, He knows, who is Lord of the Prophets^ I think some Angel
used to appear to them and inform them of things to come, not that they foresaw
things future by any Conception, ^ut when the Angel spoke, they beheld the
Secrets of Futurity. Also the Foreknowledge of future things was another way,
when the Representation of the things were seen present, as the burning or
Destruction of some City. For the thing exhibited it self to their Minds after
some Divine way, as Moses's Rod was turned to a Serpent, and the ultimate Cause
of these things is God, who can do these and greater things. There are five
sorts of Prophecy. 1. By Vi^ion, when we see a thing by Visions. 2. In a Dream,
which may also be by Vision. 3. In a Riddle, as when Ezechiel and John eat the
Book. 4. By Figures, i. e. When we see Armies, Dances, Shows, or any other very
remarkable thing. All these Ways are made by the Resolution of the Body,
whether Sleeping or Waking, when the Sense of all terrene things is taken away;
so that we neither see with our Eyes, nor hear, nor touch, and the whole mind
is rapt to those Visions. Therefore the last is the best kind, which is not
made by Resolution, but is a Speaking with God, the state of the Body being not
at all changed; which I think happens but to few. And this is that kind of
Prophecy, wherein God bespeaks the Holy Angels and Archangels. For all
Correspondence with God, all Familiarity, all Speaking with him is called
Prophecy. Therefore the Holy Angels do draw all knowledge of future things from
that Eternal Wisdom, because of their continual Presence, Divine Familiarity,
and most Sacred Friendship with God. Of which thing he made Moses partaker, of
a thing truly admirable, and desirable far above all Riches, in which (I think)
Divine and unheard of Pleasures must consist. Now if we desire to mount
thither, to make our selves like the Angels, no Stain in our Souls, no Deceit,
no Cheats, no Wickedness must appear. In which things the purer any Man is, the
nearer will he be admitted to those eternal Pleasures.

And yet we find this Man, who spoke thus with God mouth to mouth, apparently,
and not in dark speeches, he that beheld the Similitude of the Lord, was
learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, which was Astrology, Physic, and
Natural Magic. So that in the Law of Moses we may observe much of Astronomy
and Physic. And it is no Diminution but rather an Advancement of God's Glory
to be versed in the Works of his Hands, since the greatest Prophet, a familiar
Friend of God, was so great a Naturalist. So great that he was an hundred and
twenty years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural Force
abated. And let no Man object, It was Miraculous. His Death indeed was such:
For the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach, that thou must dye;
even when these vivacious Symptoms argued the contrary. But the Length of his
Life and Vigor of his Old Age, was (I judge) an effect of his Skill in Nature,
and no more miraculous; than the many Centuries, which the Antediluvians lived.

Now all the Books Bacon writ, I believe are not in Being; and what do Survive
the injury of Time, are difficult to be procured. For they lie hid in
Manuscript, and either through the Envy or Ignorance of the Owners are
suppressed. Whoever therefore would merit from the Learned Republic, let him
rescue the Offspring of so great a Citizen as Roger Bacon from hostile
Oblivion, where he finds one yielding to it, and he can not want a literary
Mark of Honor. Nor let any Profession hold himself excused: For this Learned
Man being Master of the whole Encyclopaedia, he was able by one Faculty to
correct another, and so to write excellently in all. That therefore you may the
better be enabled to know his Works, I shall give you the Titles of many of his
Books, as Johannes Balaeus, de Scriptoribus Angliae, has transmitted them to
us. This choicest and most useful of all his Pieces de retardandis Senectutis
malis, Quem nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas, I have made English,
that Ore legate populus, perque omnia secula vivat. This Book Bale mentions
amongst these following.

De Visu and Speculis, lib. 1. (sic incip.) De Speculorum miraculis volente
Deo. De utilitate Astronomiae, li^. 1. Post locorum Descriptionem debent.
Introductionem in Astrologiam, lib. 1. Fusius quidem dictum de Astron.
Descriptiones locorum Mundi, lib. 1. Ad haec autem quod certius and pla. De
Philosophorum Lapide, lib. 1. De multiplicatione Specierum, lib. 1. Primum
capitulum circa influentiam. Perspectivam quandam singularum, lib. 1. Hic
aliqua dicenda sunt de perspe. Perspectivam distinctam, lib. 3. Propositis
radicibus Sapientiae tam. Artem experimentalem, lib. 1. Positis fundamentis
primis and. De Prolongatione Vitae, lib. 1. Communia naturalis Philosophiae,
lib. 4. Postquam tradidi Grammaticam secund. Computum Naturalium, lib. 1. Omnia
tempus habent suum, juxta. De morali Philosophia, lib. 1. Manifestavi in
praecedentibus loc. Logicam quandam, lib. 1. Introductio est brevis and aperta.
Antidotarium vitae humanae, lib. 1. In posteriora Aristotelis, lib. 2. Dictum
est de Syllogismo in univer. De operibus naturae occultis, lib. 1. Superius
quidem dictum est, quid. De Coelo and Mundo, lib. 2. Prima igitur veritas circa
cor. Leges Multiplicationum, lib. 1. Expletis quatuor partibus terti.
Cosmographiam, lib. 1. De forma resultante in Speculo, lib. 1. Quaeritur de
forma resultante in. De perspectiva continua, lib. 1. Cupiens te and alios
sapientiores. De fluxu, and refluxu Maris, lib. 1. Descriptis his figuris circa
modum. De fluxu Maris Britannici, lib. 1. Visis effectibus illis, qui ex. De
Regionibus Mundi, lib. 1. Summam Grammaticalem, lib. 1. Oration Grammatica aut
fit medium. De constructione Partium, lib. 1. Ad completam cognitionem
construc. De valor Musices, lib. 1. Secundum Boetium and caeteros Authors. De
gradibus Medicinalibus, lib. 1. Omnis forma inhaerens recipit intens. De
ponderibus, lib. 1. De universali regimine Senum, lib. 1. Summa regiminis
universalis est haec. De erroribus Medicorum, lib. 1. Vulgus Medicorum non
cognoscit. De vigore Artis and Naturae, lib. 1. Vestrae petitioni respondeo,
quemadmodum. De Regibus Mundi, lib. 1. Compendium Studii Theologici, lib. 5.
Quoniam autem in omnibus causis. Ad Clementem IIII. Romans Pontificem, lib. 1.
Sanctissimo patri Domino Clementi. Lauds Mathematicae Artis, lib. 1. Post hanc
Scientiam experimentalem. Speculum Alchimiae, lib. 1. Multifariam multisque
modis loquens. De radiis Solaribus, lib. 1. De utilitate linguarum, lib. 1.
Multae praeclarae radices ex manif. Pro conservatione Sensuum, lib. 1. Cogito
and cogitavi ab initiis primorum. De locis Stellarum, lib. 1. Quoniam infinitum
est discernere. De Secretis, lib. 1. Interrogatione tuae respondere consti. De
aspectibus Lunae, lib. 1. Rogerinam majorem, lib. 1. Sicut ab antiquis and
caet. Rogerinam minorem, lib. 1. Humana Natura, and caet. De Geometria, lib. 1.
Grammaticam Hebraicam, lib. 1. Grammaticam Graecam, lib. 1. De causis
ignorantiae humanae, lib. 1. De Materia prima, lib. 1. De septem experimentis,
lib. 1. De Passionibus animae, lib. 1. De Speculis ustoriis, lib. 1. De
Intellectu and Intelligibili, lib. 2. De Somno and Vigilia, lib. 2. De
Metaphysica, lib. 1. De utilitate Scientiarum, lib. 11. Contra Necromanticos,
lib. 1. In opera Virgilii, lib. plu. De Speciebus, lib. 1. De copiae vel
inopiae Causis, lib. 1. Documenta Alchimiae, lib. 1. De coloribus per artem
fiendis, lib. 1. De Sculpturis lapidum, lib. 1. De universalibus, lib. 1 De
Centris gravium, lib. 1. Parabolas de Quadratura, lib. 1. In Avicennam de
Anima, lib. 1. Venti novem districtiones, lib. 1. De rebus metallicis, lib. 1.
De impedimentis Sapientiae, lib. 1. Commentarios Sententiarum, lib. 4. De art
memorativa, lib. 1. Prognostica ex Syderum cursu, lib. 1. De planis, lib. 1. De
situ Palaestinae, lib. 1. De locis Sacris, lib. 1. De Miraculis rerum, lib. 1.
Ad Epistolam Bonaventurae, lib. 1.
Et alia adhuc plura.

The Greek and Latin Physicians, which Bacon makes use of, are so well known,
nothing need be said of them; But because the Arabian Physicians, whom he often
quotes, are more strangers to us, I shall give you a very brief account of
them, to let you see our Author was not conversant with mean ones.

Isaac Beimiram, the Son of Solomon the Physician. He flourished about the Year
of Christ 1070. After Johannes Serapio's time. He writ much in Physic, as of
Fevers, of Urine, of Diet, of the Stomach, beside several Tracts in Philosophy.
Hali Abbas, Scholar of Abimeher Moses the Son of Sejar. He writ a Treatise de
Regali Dispositione in Twenty Books, translated by Stephen his Scholar in
Antioch^ out of Arabic into Latin. An. Dom. 1127. Avicenna, sometime called
Abohali, was of Sevil in Spain, a very Learned Man, and a great Physician. He
writ much in Physic and Chemistry. Averroes was a Physician of Corduba,
surnamed the Commentator, an excellent Philosopher, but a Mahumetan. He
flourished Anno Dom. 1149. Rasy, Rasis, or Razes, an Arabian Physician,
sometimes called Almansor. He is sometime called Albubetri Arazi filius
Zachariae Rhazae experimentatoris. Johannes Damascenus the Son of Mesues writ
much de re Medica. He flourished Anno Dom. 1158.
THE TABLE.
A
ABishag 110 Accidents of Old Age. 22 Adam 8, 9, 11, 21 AEson. 68 Ethiopian
Dragon 113, 119 Agallochum 87, 92 Age, the Causes 1 the Remedies 11 Air 3, 9,
21, 39, 58 Ale 112 Almonds 140 Aloe Hepatica 83 Amber 155 Animal Faculty 123
Aristotle 66 Aromatic Medicines 74 Arsenick 79 Artefius 65 Aurum fulminans 91
B
BAlm 125 Bathes 85, 141 Beef 139, 151 Beer 112 Bezoardicum Solare 156 Birds
139 Bleareyedness 32 Blood, how moved 128 Bloodletting 78, 142 Bole Armenick 28
Borage 97 Boiling 127, 131 of Pheasants 151 Brandy 112 Bread 54, 127, 139, 149
Breathing shortness of it 33
C
CAEsar 71 Calves 139 Camphire 79, 81 Cataline 133 Causes six not natural 12
their proportion hard to be found 13 Chaldaean Wise Men 61 Cheerfulness 129
Cheese 140 Chickens 149 Choler 133 Christmas Rose 92 Circle, ^ its Quadrature
66 Citrul seed 84 Cleanness of Skin 126 Clearness ibid. Clyster 84 Cogitation
47 Concoction 4 Cosumptive Person 80 Conversation 128 Coral 21, 70, 76 Cordials
75, 77 Countenance 133 Cucumbers 153
D
DAniel 132 David 109 Diacyminum 139 Diet, negligence therein 7, 14 Digestive
Power in every Member 25, 26 Dill 79 Dinner 140 Discourse 128 Dragon 113
Dropsies 139 Drunkenness 79 Dwelling ibid.
E
EGgs 54 Elder Water 79 Excoriation 116, 145 Exercise 141, 142 Experiment 9
F
FAculties, weakness thereof 35 their seat 50, 51, 52 Ferrum fulminans 91 Figs
140 Fish 54, 78, 141 Flesh 54 Forced Ground 67 French Physician 153 Fruit 78
G
GAmes 128 Garlic 128, 140 Geese 150 German Lady 118 Goats 151 Gold 21, 70,
76, 87, 156 Grapes 140 Greeks, their knowledge 62 Grewel 78 Greyness 23
H
HEat, natural how diminished. 2 causes of its diminution 3 its seat 6, 10
Hellebore 85 Honey 79
I
JAundice 129 Ignorance 1 Imagination 48 Incontinence 103, 111 Indicantia 95
Indigestion, how cured 143 Infection 1 of the Skin 129 Iron 87, 91
K
KIds 139, 149, 150
L
LAmb 139, 150 Laughter 80, 81 Lessius 67 Lice 116, 145 Life long its causes 62
its abbreviation 63 its Term 65, 66 Lignum Aloes ^1
M
MArle 58 Meat and Drink 53 from Animals and Vegetables ibid. causing Old Age
78 Medea 68 Medicines, why used by the Ancients ^4 not to be used without diet
ibid. when of no use ibid. outward why invented 27 when to be used 28 secret
their use 143, 144 chargeable ibid. Melons 140, 152 Memory 47 Milk 78, 80
Miracles 94 Moisture, external 3 internal 5, 6 natural 2 extraneous ibid.
natural what and where it is 6, 10 things that defend it 69, 70 Moist herbs 78
Monks their imposture 93 Moonwort 97, 98 Mountebanks 21, 122 Mulberries 140,
152 Mushromes ibid. Music 128 Mustard 140 Myrobalans 79, 84
N
NAstiness 39 Negligence 1 Nutritives 55 Nuts 140
O
OBscurity, why used by the Author 16 Old Age its causes 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. what
things refresh and recreate it, and hinder its Accidents 82 Old men, how purged
83 how revived 111, 112 their meat 139 Onions 140 Ordering ones way of living
11 Orvietan 122 Oil of Elder 79 Oils 95, 96, 124, 125, 126 Ointments ibid.
P
PAleness 31 Partridge 139 Passions 128 Patriarchs, their Lives 7 Peach Tree
26, 29 Pepper 128 Perl ibid. Pheasants 139, 151 Phlegm 4, 32, 82 its causes 4
Pilulae de Mastiche 82 Pitch 125 Plague 41 Plants, their kind 60 Plucking off
the hair 79 Pope 20 Preservatives of Youth 95 Properties of things 11 Pullets
139 Pulse 127, 132, 133 Purging, 61 when necessary 27 when hurtful 84
Putrefaction, how hindered 146
Q
QVacks 22, 91 Quicksilver 79 Quintessence of Man's Blood 108
R
RAisins 140 Refreshment speedy 78 Regiment 64 of the Author how different from
that of the Ancients 136 Renovation of Man 61 Restoratives 99 Roses 89 Rosemary
92 Rose of Jericho or S. Mary a cheat 92, 93, 94 Rosewater 79 Ruddiness of Skin
126 Rue 83, 90
S
SAffron 75, 128 Sage 146 Sapphire 108 Sappho 151 Scabs 145 Scarification 61
Secret, concealed by our first Parents 17 Secresy 153, 154 Senses, their hurt
35 internal 44 how refreshed 143 Serpent 113, 119 Sicilian Husbandman 75
Signature 22 Silk 92 Six causes 12, 20 difficult to find out their proportion
13 medicines supply that defect ibid. Skin, how preserved 130 Sleep, want of it
33 Snake 117, 121 Soil 57 Sparrows 139, 151 Spike Celtick 97 Spikenard 146
Spitting 32 Stagg's heart, its bone 21, 70, 76 Strength, its infirmity 34
Succinum 155 Sulphur 79 Sun 59 Sweat 61, 116, 145
T
Taste ^7 Tavern-haunters 113 Terra Sigillata 28 Toil of Body and Mind 3
Touching of cold things 79 Treacle 122 Tree of knowledge 111 Trifera 79, 85
V
VApors 38 Veal 150 Vegetables 56 Venus 78, 102 Viper 21 its preparation 114,
1^5 its property 115, 116 when and how to be taken 117, 118 its number of
teeth, description, conception and birth 120, 121 Virgin 99, 100, 101, 109,
110, 111 Virtue may be separated from its body 17, 18 Unction 61 Understanding,
when rational 40 Usefulness of the Treatise 134
W
WAshing 79 Water 78 Water-Melons 91 Wax 125 Wheat 78 Wine
54,57,103,104,105,106,107,112 Wiping 79 World, its age 1, 6 Worts 140
X
XYloaloe 145
Y
YOuth, how preserved 95 how recovered ibid.
THE CURE OF Old Age, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Causes of Old Age.
AS the a World waxes old, b Men grow old with it: not by reason of the Age of
the World, but because of the great Increase of living Creatures, which infect
the very Air, that every way encompasseth us, and

Through our c Negligence in ordering our Lives, and

That great d Ignorance of the Properties which are in things conducing to
Health, which might help a disordered way of Living, and might supply the
defect of due Government.

From these three things, namely, Infection Negligence and Ignorance, the
Natural Heat, after the time of Manhood is past, begins to diminish, and its
Diminution and Intemperature does more and more hasten on. Whence, the Heat by
little and little decreasing, the Accidents of Old Age come on, which Accidents
in the very Flower of Age may be taken away; and after that time may be
retarded; as also may that ^wift Course, which hurries a Man from Manhood to
Age, from Age to Old Age, from Old Age to the broken strength of decrepit Age,
be restrained.

For the Circle of a Man's Age grows more in one day after Age to Old Age, than
in three days after Youth to Age; and is sooner turned from Old Age to decrepit
Age, than from Age to Old Age.

Which Weakness and Intemperature of Heat, is caused two ways: by the Decay of
Natural Moisture, and

By the Increase of Extraneous Moisture.

For the Heat exists in the Native Moisture, and is extinguished by external
and strange moistness, which flows from weakness of Digestion, as Avicenna in
his first Book, in his Chapter Of Complexions, affirms.

Now the Causes of the dissolution of the Internal Moisture, and of the
External's abounding, whence the Innate Heat grows cool, are many, as I shall
here show.

First of all, the Dissolution of the Natural happens from two Causes: One
whereof is the circumambient Air, which dries up the Matter: And the Innate
Heat, which is inward, very much helps toward the same: For it is the Cause of
extinguishing it self, by reason it consumes the matter, wherein it subsists;
as the Flame of a Lamp is extinguished, when the Oil, exhausted by the Heat, is
spent. The second Cause is the toil proceeding from the Motions of Body and
Mind, which otherwise are necessary in Life. To these accrue Weakness and
Defect of Nature, which easily sinks under so great Evils, (as Avicenna
witnesses in his first Book Of Complexions of Ages) not resisting those
imperfections that invade it. Now


The Motions of the Mind are called Animal, when the Soul especially is
exercised:

The Motions of the Body are, when our Bodies are tossed and stirred of
necessary Causes ill proportioned.

External Moisture increases two ways; either from The use of Meat and other
things that breed an unnatural and strange Moisture, especially Phlegmatic,
whereof I shall discourse hereafter; or from Bad Concoction, whence a feculent
and putrid Humor, differing from the nature of the Body, is propagated.


For Digestion is the Root of the Generation of unnatural and natural Moisture,
which when it is good breeds good Moisture, when bad a bad one, as Avicenna
says in his fourth Canon of his Chapter Of things which hinder gray Hairs. For
from wholesome Food, ill digested, an evil Humor does flow; and of poisonous
Meats, and such as naturally breed a bad Humor, i^ well digested, sometime
comes a good one.

But it is to be observed, that not only Phlegm is called an extraneous Humor,
but whatever other Humor is putrid. Yet Phlegm is worse than the other
external Humors; in that it helps to extinguish the Innate Heat two ways,
either By choking it; or By Cold resisting its Power and Quality; so Rasy in
his Chapter Of the benefits of Purging.


Which Phlegm proceeds from faults in Meats, negligence of Diet, and
intemperature of Body; so that this sort of external Moisture increasing, and
the Native Moisture being either changed in Qualities, or decayed in Quantity,
Man grows old, either In the accustomed course of Nature by little and little
and successively; when after the time of Manhood, that is, after forty or at
most fifty Years the Natural Heat begins to diminish: Or Through evil Thoughts
and anxious Care of Mind, wherewith sometimes Men are hurt. For Sickness and
such like evil Accidents dissolve and dry up the Natural Moisture, which is the
Fuel of Heat: and that being hurt, the force and edge of the Heat is made
dull. The Heat being cooled, the Digestive Virtue is weakened; and this not
performing its Office, the crude and inconcocted Meat putrefies on the Stomach.
Whereupon the external and remote parts of the Body being deprived of their
Nourishment, do languish, wither and dye, because they are not nourished. So
Isaac in his Book Of Fevers in the Chapter Of the Consumption does teach.


But it may be queried, What this Moisture is, and in what place it is seated,
whereby the Natural Heat is nourished, and which is its Fuel? Some say, that
it is in the Hollow of the e Heart, and in the Veins and Arteries thereof, as
Isaac in his Book Of Fevers, in the Chapter Of the Hectic. But there are
Moistures of diverse kinds in the Members which are prepared for Nourishing, and
to moisten the Joints. Of which Humors may be that is one which is in the
Veins, and that another which like Dew is reposed on the Members, as Avicenna
says in his fourth Book in the Chapter Of the Hectic. Whence perhaps the Wise
do understand, that all these Moistures are Fuel to the Native Heat; But
especially that which is in the Heart and its Veins and Arteries, which is
restored, when from Meats and Drinks good Juices are supplyled; and is made
more excellent by outward Medicines, such as Anointings and Bathings.

NOTES on CHAP. I.
a This Year 1682. with the Astrologers is celebrated the Climacterick grand
Conjunction of the highest Planets. And Divines after St. Peter's Chronology do
reckon that the Sabbatical Millenary is not far off; nor without great reason.
For if Moral Symptoms, such as Nation's rising against Nation, Divisions in
Families and between Friends, do portend the last days, we must conclude the
World in its testy old Age, and that that day, the Angels in Heaven, no nor the
Son of Man himself, knew not of, is coming on.

b The Lives of the Patriarchs before the Flood were almost a thousand Years.
Near the Flood men lived but about Ten pro Cent. to what they did before. And
David in his time allowed, a strong Man might make a shift to creep to
fourscore. Yet I concur with the Author, that in those Scripture-Instances, as
also in our own Case not so much the decay of Universal Nature, as the good
Pleasure of her God is seen in permitting Men, for the Reasons assigned by the
Author, to be cut short in their lives.

c This Negligence is most perceived in our Diet: for it is impossible good
Blood or Humors should be bred, when we heap Dish upon Dish, Sauce upon Sauce,
Fruit upon Fruit, Raw upon Roast, Roast upon Raw, Baked upon Boiled, Boiled
upon Baked, Sour upon Sweet, and Soft upon Hard. Horace l. 2. Satyr. 2. in the
Roman Luxury lasheth this fault in all others.

-- nam variae res
Ut noceant homini, credas, memor illius escae,
Quae simplex olim tibi sederit, at simul assis
Miscueris elixa, simul conchylia turdis,
Dulcia se in bilem vertent, stomachoque tumul^tum
Lenta feret pituita. Vides ut pallidus omnis
Coena desurgit dubia? quin corpus onustum
Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam aurae.
-- For you know,
Much harm to us from various Meats does flow.
Think on that only Dish, which was your Fare,
How blithe and healthy after it you were:
But when men fell to mingling Roast and Boiled,
And Fish and Fowl together, Health was spoiled.
The Sweet Meats turned to Choler and tough Phlegm
Bred a disturbance in the Maws of them:
Observe, how pale and sick a Man does rise
From Board, confounded with varieties?
Nay, when the Body's overcharged, the Mind
Is also in the Discomposure joined,
And on the ground inhumanely does roll
That part of Heavenly Breath, the precious Soul.
d We that believe the Holy Scriptures know, that God first planted all Plants,
and made all Living Creatures: For before Man was made, all Plants, Shrubs and
Trees sprung out of the Earth, endowed with their genuine Virtues and
Faculties, every way complete by the sole power of God's Word. Which things
when God had brought to the first Man Adam, to see what he would call them;
Adam out of that unspeakable Wisdom and Knowledge in the Nature of things,
which God had given him, gave them Names, and whatsoever Adam called every
thing, that was the Name thereof. Now God that made the Properties of things,
invented them, and communicated of his own knowledge to his Image, Man. And
notwithstanding that by Man's transgressing God's Command, he lost his Original
Righteousness, and impaired his Wisdom; yet it is evident he retained the
knowledge of the Virtues of things. For otherwise how could he in the sweat of
his face eat his Bread, if he knew not what to make it of? And whereas God
allotted him the Herb of the Field for his Food, he must of necessity know the
Virtues of Herbs, else he might for his repast eat his mortal bane. So with the
Knowledge of his Evil he had this Good left him.

But with his Posterity it fared worse. Their Infant-Knowledge only aped their
Fathers, and had no connate Idea's of the Virtues of things: But took all upon
the Word of Tradition or some Empirical Experiment. And since we cannot derive
the Pedigree of our Knowledge so high as Solomon (whose Inspired Herbal, could
it be found, might be a good Succedaneum to Adam's Onomasticon) we find our
selves very far from reading it on Seth's Pillars: Only with astonished
Ignorance we may see its Epitaph in Confusion on the Plains of Shinar. For we
are more wise in Tongues than Things, and are a sort of Philologick
Philosophers, whose Knowledge is Various Readings. And so no wonder if our
skill fail us.

e Roger Bacon in his Perspectives, Did. 1. Cap. 5. speaks thus. But that all
doubting may be removed, it ought to be considered that the Sensitive Soul has
a double Instrument, or Subject: One is Radical and Fontal, and this is the
Heart, according to Aristotle and Avicenna in his Book Of the Soul. Another is
that which is first changed by the Species of Sensibles, and wherein the
Operations of the Senses are more manifested and distinguished; and this is the
Brain. For when the Head is hurt, there happens a manifest Hurt of the
Sensitive Powers; and the Hurt of the Head is more manifest to us than that of
the Heart, and therefore according to the more manifest Consideration we shall
place the Sensitive Powers in the Head: And this is the Opinion of Physicians,
not considering that the Fontal Original of the Powers is from the Heart. But
Avicenna in his first Book Of the Art of Physic says, that although to Sense
the Opinion of Physicians be more manifest: Yet the Opinion of the Philosopher
is truer; for all the Nerves, and Veins, and Powers of the Soul arise first and
principally from the Heart, as Aristotle in his Twelf^h Book Of Animals
demonstrates, and Avicenna in his Third Of Animals does show.

CHAP. II. Of Remedies against the Causes of Old Age.
HItherto we have discoursed of the Causes of Old Age: Now we must speak of the
Remedies which hinder them, and after what manner they may be hindered.

Wise Physicians have laid down two ways of opposing these Causes:

One is the Ordering of a man's way of living:

The other is the Knowledge of those Properties, that are in certain things,
which the Ancients have kept secret.

Avicenna teaches the Ordering of Life, who laying down, as it were, the Art
of Guarding Old Age, orders that all Putrefaction be carefully kept off, and
that the Native Moisture be diligently preserved from Dissolution and Change,
namely, that as great a share of Moisture may be added by Nutrition, as is
spent by the flame of Heat and other Ways. Now this care ought to be used in
the time of Manhood, that is, about the fortieth Year of a man's Age, when the
beauty of a man is at the height.

These Ways of repelling the Causes of Old Age do something differ one from
another.

For one is the Beginning, the other the End: One begins, the other makes up
the Defect thereof; but each brings great assistance to the turning away of
these Evils. By one Way alone the Doctrine of the Ancients will not be
completed: By the Knowledge of each both our Endeavors and theirs may be
perfected.

The Doctrine of soberly ordering ones Life teaches how to oppose, drive away
and restrain the Causes of Old Age.

And this it does by proportioning the a Six Causes, distinct in kind, which
are reckoned necessary to fence, preserve and keep the Body; which things, when
they are observed and taken in Quantity and Quality, as they ought, and as the
Rules of Physicians persuade, do become the true Causes of Health and Strength:
But when they are made use of by any man without Regard had to Quality and
Quantity, they cause Sickness, as may be gathered from Galen's Regiment with
Haly's Exposition, where he treats Of the Regiment of Health.

But exactly to find out the true Proportion of these Causes, and the true
Degree of that Proportion, is very hardly, or not at all to be done, but that
there will be some Defect or Excess therein. Thus the Sages have prescribed
more to be done, than can be well put in practice. For the Understanding is
more subtle in Operation, so that the true proportioning of these Causes seems
impossible, unless in Bodies of a better Nature, such as now are rarely found.

But Medicines obscurely laid down by the Ancients, and as it were concealed,
whereof Dioscorides speaks, do make up these Defects and Proportions. For who
can avoid the Air infected with putrid Vapors carried about with the force of
the Winds? Who will measure out Meat and Drink? Who can weigh in a sure Scale
or Degree Sleep and Watching, Motion and Rest, and things that vanish in a
moment, and the Accidents of the Mind, so that they shall neither exceed nor
fall short? Therefore it was necessary that the Ancients should make use of
Medicines, which might in some measure preserve the Body from Alteration, and
defend the Health of Man oft-times hurt and afflicted with these things and
Causes, lest the Body utterly eaten up of Diseases should fall to ruin.

Now for the benefit of your b Excellency I have gathered some things out of
the Books of the Ancients, whose Virtue and Use may avert those Inconveniences,
this Defect and Weakness; may defend the Temper of the Innate Moisture; may
hinder the Increase and Flux of Extraneous Moisture; and may bring to pass
(which usually otherwise happens) that the Heat of Man be not so soon
debilitated.

But the Use of these things and Medicines is of no use, nor any thing avails
them that neglect the Doctrine of the Regiment of Life. For how can it be, that
he who either is ignorant or negligent of Diet, should ever be cured by any
pains of the Physician, or by any Virtue in Physic? Wherefore the Physicians
and Wise men of old time were of opinion, That Diet without Physic sometimes
did good, but that Physic without due order of Diet never made a man one jot
the better.

Thence it is reckoned more necessary that those rather should be treated of
which cannot be known unless of the Wise, and those too of a quick
Understanding, and such as study hard, and take a great deal of pains; than
those things which are easily known, even as a man reads them.

As for my own part, being hindered partly by the Charge, partly by Impatience,
and partly by the Rumors of the Vulgar, I was not willing to make Experiment
of all things, which may easily be tried by others; but have resolved to
express those things in obscure and difficult terms, which I judge requisite to
the Conservation of Health, lest they should fall into the hands of the
unfaithful.

One of which things lies hid in the c Bowels of the Earth:

Another in the d Sea:

The Third e creeps upon the Earth:

The Fourth lives in the f Air:

The Fifth is g likened to the Medicine which comes out of the Mine of the
Noble Animal.

The Sixth comes out of the h long-lived Animal.

The Seventh is that whose Mine is the i Plant of India.

I have resolved to mention these things obscurely, imitating the Precept of
the Prince of Philosophers to Alexander, who said that He is a Transgressor of
the Divine Law, who discovers the hidden Secrets of Nature and the Properties
of things: Because some men desire as much as in them lies to overthrow the
Divine Law by those Properties that God has placed in Animals, Plants and
Stones.

But some of these things stand in need of Preparation: Others of a careful
Choice.

Of Preparation, lest with the healthful part Poison be swallowed down:

Of Choice, lest among the best those things that are worse be given, and those
that are more hurtful be taken.

For in whatsoever thing the most High GOD has put an admirable Virtue and
Property, therein he has also placed an Hurt, to be as it were the Guard of
the thing it self. For as he would not have his Secrets known of all, lest Men
should contemn them; so he would not have all Men be Adepti, lest they should
abuse their Power. As is manifest in the Serpent, Hellebore and Gold. From
which no man can fetch any noble or sublime Operation, unless he be wise,
skilful, and have of a long time experienced them.

Besides, wheresoever GOD has placed such as unspeakable Virtue, he has added
a certain Similitude, that every Man, who is of a clear and vivacious Wit and
Understanding, may conceive its Operation.

For most things act what they are said to act, either by their Form, or their
Matter, or their Essence, or their Heat, by their Durability and long Keeping,
or by Cor^uption.

For that preserves another thing which is long preserved it self, and that
corrupts another thing which is quickly corrupted it self, and it acts that
thing, according to whose Similitude it is denominated, or like as it is
formed: And this is a Secret which our l First Parents wholly kept secret, and
to these our very times still remains secret.

But we must m observe, that in some of the aforesaid things and Medicines the
Virtue may be separated from its Body; as in all Medicines made of Plants and
Animals.

From some it cannot be separated, as from all those things that are of a thick
Substance, as Metals; and what things soever are of the kind of Stones, as
Coral, Jacinths, and the like. And these are to be subtly powdered in the
last degree; and this properly agrees with our Intent, that i^ may come to its
proper end of Elongation^ as Avicenna says in his second Canon O^ the judgment
of Medicines that are out^wardly applied.

But this Powdering cannot be made in Metals, except by Burning. Which Avicenna
affirms in his Chapter Of the Lepros^ concerning the Preparation of Gold an^
Silver; and in his fifth Canon, where Consectio Hyacinthi is shown.

But certain other Men have given Rule^ how to dissolve Medicines of thick
Substance, as Aristotle says, according to Isa^^ in his Degrees, in his Canon
Of Perl, speaking thus: I have seen certain Men dissolv^ Perl, with the Juice
and Liquor where^^ Morphews being washed, were fully o^red and made whole.

But in Medicines which are mixed to the^ Plants and Animals, a Separation of
the Virtue from the Body it self may be made^ And their Virtue and Matter will
opera^^ stronger and better alone, than joined with their Body.

Because the Natural Heat is tired, whilst it separates and severs the Virtue
of the thing from the Body which is hard and earthy: And it being tired, the
Virtue will with greater Difficulty be carried to the Instruments of the
Senses, so as it may be able to refresh them, and destroy the superfluous
Moisture, and penetrate to the Members of the fourth Concoction, that it may
strengthen the digestive Power of the Flesh and Skin.

From the Weakness whereof certain Ac^idents of Old Age do proceed; as is
manifest in the Morphew: because that the Natural Heat of our Body is not
always so sufficiently powerful in all Medicines, as to separate the Virtue
from its Terrestrial Body.

But when the Virtue alone is given without the Body, the Natural Heat is not
tired, nor is the Virtue of the Medicine by frequent Digestion destroyed in its
journey, as it were, while it is carried to the Similar Parts and the
Instruments of the Senses: and so the Virtue of the thing will complete its
Operation, while it does not tire the Natural Heat.

And Galen agrees with this, as Isaac testifies in his Canon Of the Leprosy,
saying, I never saw a man so infected cured, but one that drank of Wine,
wherein a Viper had fallen.

And Johannes Damascenus in his Aphorisms: Therefore it was necessary for the
purging of the Humors driven down, that the Medicine according to the skill
and pleasure of the Physician should be turned into the Likeness of Meat.

Another has said, That that Physic which should pass to the third Digestion,
should be greedily received, according to some, with a thing of easy
Assimilation, such as Milk and the Broth of a Pullet.

NOTES on CHAP. II.
a These six Causes are called by Physicians Sex Non-naturalia. They are, 1.
The Air, 2. Meat and Drink. 3. Motion and Rest. 4. Sleep and Watching. 5.
Excretion and Retention. 6. The Passions of the Mind.

b The Learned are of opinion, that this Book was written by our ingenious
Author to Pope Nicolas the Fourth, to atone his enraged and angry Mind. For
this Pope kept him in Prison some Years.

c Gold.

d Coral.

e The Viper.

f Rosemary.

g See the twelfth Chapter.

h The Bone of a Stags Heart.

i Lignum Aloes.

k Here our incomparably learned Author, whether he gives greater encouragement
to true Physicians and Chemists, or Discouragement to Mountebanks and ignorant
knavish Chymicasters, is hard to conclude. For who greater Violaters of the
Divine Law, and more Enemies to Mankind, than cheating Cutthroats, that by
their pretended Secrets and their Universal Remedies bring an Epidemick
Calamity on the deluded Multitude? Or whose Wit and Parts more useful than his,
that can with the Great Mithridates make the strongest Antidote out of the
rankest Poison; or with our Author get that Wisdom, in whose lest hand are
Riches, and in her right hand length of Days?

l Our First Father Adam in the state of Innocence had the absolute knowledge
of things natural, and gave to every thing its proper Name expressing its
inward Nature: But this natural Magic of knowing the Virtue by the Signature,
is by our Author lamented as from the beginning to his Time behind the Curtain.
Yet it has been cultivated by some since, so that by comparing the Uses of
most Simples with their Physiognomick Lineaments, you would conclude God and
Nature had designed these for Tokens of their Specific Virtues, and admirable
Uses. And the Earth is such a Storehouse, that were but the Virtues of all its
Stores known, nothing would be impossible to the Intelligent.

m Here is a Pharmaceutice Rationalis so well grounded both as to the
Preparatory and Administrative part, that it may deserve the Consideration of
all Sons of Art, and defy the Apprehension of all Block-headed Quacks.

CHAP. III. Of the Accidents of Old Age and the Causes of them, and the Signs
of Hurt in the Senses, Imagination, Reason and Memory.
THE Accidents of Age and Old Age are, Gray Hairs, Paleness, Wrinkles of the
Skin, Weakness of Faculties and of natural Strength, Diminution of Blood and
Spirits, Bleareyedness, abundance of rotten Phlegm, filthy Spitting, Shortness
of Breath, Anger, Want of Sleep, an unquiet Mind, Hurt of the Instruments, that
is, of those, wherein the Animal Virtue does operate. Now of all these let us
see from what causes each Accident derives its Original.

And in the first place discoursing of Gray Hairs we shall take notice of this,
namely, that some of these Accidents happen even to Young Men before the time
of Manhood, and then they are not called the Accidents of Age, but Infirmities.

The Accidents of Age begin in some at the time of Manhood:

In others at the time of Age, according to the Power of the Native Moisture,
and the Government of every Wise Man:

And in some they use not to come till very Old Age.

The Principal Cause of all these is Weakness of the Innate Heat, which is
caused two ways, as was said before.

Greyness arises from putrid Phlegm coming out of the Regions of the Brain and
Stomach, as Isaac says; and not from Phlegm alone, but it proceeds from any
other putrid Humor whatever, as Avicenna says in his Chapter Of the
Complexions of Ages.

Now this putrid Humor is generated many ways:

Sometimes by eating of certain things that breed a putrefying Humor, which is
the Cause of Old Age, as hereafter will appear.

Sometimes from the Weakness of Natural Heat, which rules in the Body, and from
Abundance of Cold, as Aristotle says. For the Implanted Heat being dulled
digests not Food, as it used; Whereupon a Watery Humor a little warmed with
strange Heat abounds, and causes this Greyness, as Haly says in Galen's
Regiment, where he treats of the Regiment of Old Age.

Sometimes from too great Access of external Heat. For in his eleventh Chapter
of his History of Animals the Philosopher there says, that Hairs that are
covered are sooner gray than those that are seldom covered. For the Covering
keeps off the Wind, and the Wind hinders Putrefaction.

Sometimes Greyness, and Putrefaction of the Humors arises from the Infirmity
of the Skin: As in the Morphew, when through the Weakness of that Member, the
Nourishment is not concocted.

For there is in every Member a Digestive Power and Heat, which the Soul uses
as an Instrument in performing its Operations.

Hence it is that an evil Constitution happens in some of the external Parts,
when the inward Parts are not hurt, and do perform aright the Offices of Nature.

But it is to be observed, that the Hairs of the Temples wax gray sooner, and
those of the hind parts later: Because in the fore part there is much Moisture,
therefore it sooner putrefies. And when this happens in the Hairs, after it is
once come, it will hardly be removed; but it is a thing less difficult to put a
stop to it before it come.

But it often falls out, that many men laboring under some Infirmity, have
their Hairs wax gray; in whom, after they have recovered their Health, the
Hairs return to their former Disposition.

Here the cause is, the Weakness of Natural Heat in concocting the Nourishment
in the external parts; and when Strength and Health return, the Hair grows
black.

But Avicenna says in his fourth Canon Of the Disposition of those that are
recovering their Health, that therefore the Hairs wax white, because they are
deprived of their Nourishment, by reason the Innate Moisture goes out and is
dispersed, which whilst it abides within causes the blackness of the Hair; as
is manifest in Corn, which is dried, and grows white by ripening: afterward
when it is wet with Dew, its Greenness returns.

Besides, there is in every Member a natural Power residing, which according to
its Complexion turns the Nutriment into the Likeness of that Member, and
differs from that Power, which turns the Nutriment into the Likeness of another
Member, and from this Diversity a Weakness in the Skin proceeds, as Avicenna
says in his first Canon Of Natural Powers. But when the Virtue of the Member
is weak, it infects and corrupts the nature and wholesome Juice of the Aliment
that flows thither. Which being corrupted, all things that penetrate into that
Member, are depraved^ Like as a good Constitution does alter even bad and
unwholesome Food, so that it becomes good, apt and convenient for nourishing
Nature.

Galen reports, according to Avicenna in his first Canon Of the Morphew, that
there is a certain a Tree, which at its first growth is deadly and poisonous:
yet it may be changed so as without any danger it may become wholesome Food.
And this is done by the planting of it. As there is a Tree in Persia poisonous,
and whose Fruit is hurtful; but being removed into Egypt, and planted there,
its Fruit is safely eaten; and being brought back again into Persia, it obtains
its former poisonous Quality.

For this Cause Medicines were invented that might be applied to the outward
Parts, as Bathings and Anointings. For such Medicaments are more useful to
remove Diseases which arise from the Hurt of the fourth Digestion, than inward
ones: Because the Virtue of Medicines taken inwardly is rendered so dull and
weak of the first and second Digestion, that when it arrives at the fourth
degree of Digestion, it is so broken, that it cannot at all profit, as Avicenna
says in his Canon Of Weariness and Old Age. And so Anointings do strengthen
the Virtue of the fourth Digestion.

Which I think to be most true, by reason outward Medicaments are nearer the
Places affected; especially if the Humor be purged, or do not offend in the
inner Parts.

But if the Humor aforesaid offend, first of all the Body must be absolutely
purged of it.

Then the Skin must be made cleaner by a long Effusion and Provocation of
plentiful Sweat. And

Thirdly, The Virtue in that Member, which is ill affected, must be refreshed:
Because if the Medicine avail not something toward the strengthening the Virtue
of the Part, the Humor will abound again and prevail the more: And that
especially, when Melancholy Humors bring the Hurt.

But some have said, that fully to drive away these Humors, the Virtue of
Laxatives, without their Body, is sufficient. For the Power of Laxatives
operates more when freed from the Lump of Body than joined with it; and this is
that which Avicenna says in his first Canon in the Chapter Of the Disposition
of Purging Medicines.

Then we must apply such Medicines outwardly, whose property it is, to temper
the Essence of the Member and its Constitution; and to hinder that the
scattered Relics of the superfluous Humor be not received of that Member, as
Terra Sigillata, Bole Armenick, and such things use to do, either through some
Operation that is in them, or for the Similitude and Equality of Complexion,
for that it cools what is too Hot, and heats what is too Cold. Which Galen
thinks very likely in the Oil of Roses, as Avicenna says in his first Canon Of
the Operation of particular Medicines.

This Accident, I say, of Greyness renders a Man more deformed, and is more
apparent than any other in the Body.

I have studiously searched its Cause and Original. And wise Physicians have
laid down the Cause and Remedy of these Accidents in their Treatise of
Preserving Beauty: For at the Approach of these b Deformity is caused, and
through their Delay in the time of Manhood is a Man's Comeliness. For this Age
by Avicenna is called the Age of Beauty.

NOTES on CHAP. III.
a Of this Tree Dioscorides speaks in his first Book, Chap. 147. in these
words. The Peach Tree is a Tree in Egypt, bearing Fruit fit for Food, good for
the Stomach: Wherein Spiders called Cranocolapta are found, especially in
Thebais. The dry Leaves reduced to Powder, and applied, stop Eruptions of
Blood. Some have declared that this Tree is destructive in Persia, and being
translated into Egypt, it changes its Nature; and is made use of for Food.

b Theophrastus in his Character of Flattery has these Words, What a Reverend
Gray Beard you have got? And yet You, if any Man, considering your Years, have
your Hair black. And to be long in growing gray was ever accounted an Argument
of a lusty and vivid Old Age. Therefore effeminate Men were as careful to hide
their Gray Hairs, as Women their Wrinkles; as Plautus and Martial do testify.

CHAP. IV. Of the Wrinkles of the Skin, Paleness, rotten Phlegm, Bleareyedness,
Shortness of Breath, and other things, which especially have relation to the
Body.
WE have already spoken of the Causes of one Accident, namely, Greyness, now we
must treat of the Wrinkles of the Skin, Paleness and other things, which
especially have relation to the Body.

These Evils betide Men sometimes before the stated Time, sometimes at their
due season.

Wrinkles of the Skin are contracted either from the Flesh extenuated, whence
there remains a loosning of the Skin; Or

From the Want of Flesh, and hence comes the shriveling of it. And Aristotle
says in the end of his fifth Book Of Animals, that this comes through the
Putrefaction of the Humor. For he says, that Wrinkling which befalls Bodies
is unlike to Slickness: because if the Vapor be concrete, thence is caused
Slickness, and it putrefies not, nor do Wrinkles arise.

This Accident often happens to them that are as it were burnt up in the Fire,
and do handle things belonging to the Forge, as is evident in the Smiths Trade:
For the Use of these things dries exceedingly, and makes the Face pale, and
full of Wrinkles. Therefore those Dames that are over-careful of their Beauty,
use to turn away their Face from the Fire. But those things which remove the
Wrinkling of the Skin you shall find hereafter in that Chapter, wherein the
things are declared, which use to render the Skin delicate for Youthful Beauty,
Cleanness, and Redness.

Paleness also according to some is a Companion of Old Age, which falls out in
Young Men from superfluous and redounding Phlegm; in old Men from want and
diminution of Blood and Spirits, or from Infection of the Blood.

Diminution of the Blood and Spirits is from the Diminution of the Natural
Moisture; because the Root, and as it were the Fountain of it, is in the Blood,
principally in that of the Heart, and secondarily in that which passes through
the Veins and Members: The Blood being diminished, the Spirits are diminished
also, which abide in the Blood as in their Subject. And Blood is restored by
those things, which refresh the innate Moisture; and the Blood being augmented,
the Spirits are made more lively.

Plenty of rotten Phlegm, filthy Spitting, and Bleareyedness are Accidents of
Age, which happen from an unnatural Moisture; and especially Phlegmatic: And
that Moisture flows sometimes from the Superfluity of the fourth Digestion,
and is cured by things purging, consuming and drying up Phlegm, as we shall
hereafter teach.

Those things especially help Bleareyedness, which swim in the Sea, and which
live in the Air.

Those things are a Cure for filthy Spitting, which purge and open the Breast,
as Diairews and Diaprassium. Purging of Phlegm from the Head and Stomach
conduces very much toward the cleansing of ropy Phlegm; although in Young and
growing persons these things happen sometimes from the superfluity of the Blood.

Insomneity, if I may so speak, Shortness of Breath, Anger, Disquiet of Mind,
are Accidents of Age: among which Weakness of Breathing happens through the
Straitness and Coarctation of the Passages of the Lungs, which is caused either
by too much Dryness, or excessive Moisture.

But we must remedy this Evil or Accident by the help of those Medicines, that
the Wise have ordered to be taken, in their Treatise of Diseases which befall
the Instruments of Breathing. For Avicenna in the same Treatise affirms, that
Saffron has a Property to open and refresh the Instruments of Breathing.

Want of Sleep, Disquiet of Mind and Anger befall Old Men and the Decrepit; and
sometimes Young Men, from Melancholic Fumes ascending to the Brain, as also
hindering the Organs of the Senses. And therefore in their Books of Regiment it
is ordered by Physicians, that Old Men avoid Phlegmatic, and likewise Sour
Meats. Horehound very well prepared helps this Di^po^ition, and to eat Sallet
of Lettuce strowed with Spice, as Galen says, according to Avicenna in his
Chapter Of Sleep. But against Anger, Want of Sleep and Talkativeness, let the
Operation and Action of the Soul, Joy and Mirth, and other delectable things be
made use of.


CHAP. V. Of Weakness of Strength, and Faculties of the Soul.
WEakness of Strength and Faculties is an Accident of Old Age.

Infirmity of Strength proceeds from a strange and unnatural Moisture softening
the Nerves; or

From over much Dryness, whereby the Nerves are contracted, and therefore
weakened; or

From the Concussion of the Nerves, as it often falls out in Soldiers
exercising the sharp and dangerous Feats of War. For I have seen many men
vigorously striving in the Combat, who being thereby weakened, lost the Garland
of the Contest.

When the Weakness has its Original from Dryness, that Medicine is useful,
whose Root is of the Indian Plant.

When from Moisture, Meat made of the Vegetable Medicine may be profitable for
the hurt strength.

But the Weakness of the Faculties sometime arises from the Moisture
superfluous,

Sometime from it deficient.

These Faculties although they may seem to be many; as the Appetitive,
Digestive and Sensitive, because they have got many Names; yet the Faculty is
truly one, as Johannes Damascenus affirms. And because this one Faculty is wont
to perform different Offices in different Members, it is called by diverse Names.

But by what Ways these Faculties may be recreated, and being weak may be
strengthened, I will show hereafter in the Chapter Of Repairing the Faculties.

The Hurt of the Senses is an Accident of Sense, which often falls out even in
young men.

This sometime happens in the Occult,

Sometime in the Manifest Organs of the Senses.

When these Hurts are made in the Manifest Organs, they may be cured in the
same manner, as the Wise have prescribed in the proper Chapters of those Hurts.

When this Hurt happens in the Occult Instruments, it is made in three Parts of
the Brain, wherein the Animal Power does operate, namely in the fore, middle
and hind part, which parts by Avicenna are called the Ventricles of the Brain.

In the hind part Oblivion and Remembrance is made by the Soul. Of which things
Royal Haly speaks in his first Discourse of his Theory, saying, That Old Age is
as it were the House of Forgetfulness.

But Seneca affirms the contrary, namely, that when a man grows old, if he have
formerly well exercised the Instrument of Memory, he will not be of a less
Memory, than when he was a Young Man. Whence it happens that by long Exercise
of one Instrument, the Force and Property of another is abated; as is daily
experienced in Men of good Inventions, and Men of good Memories.

But the Hurt which happens in the first and second Ventricles of the Brain,
wherein Imagination and the Distinction of things is made, is a Harm which
falls not out on the Score of the Rational Soul, but on the Score of the
Instruments wherein the Soul operates.

Now the Hurt of Imagination is said to be made two ways; In the Instrument of
the Brain, wherein false things are feigned, And in the Visory Nerve, which
brings Light from the Eye. And therefore the Son of the Prince has laid down
two Chapters Of the Hurt of Imagination. One among the Diseases of the Head.
Another in his Treatise Of the Eyes.



For this Hurt arises in these parts of the Brain, and not in the Organs,

Sometimes from an Internal,

Sometimes from an External Cause.

From an Internal Cause two Ways, Either by Nature, when a Man is so hurt from
his Mothers Womb, as soon as he is born into the World, and then the Hurt is
incurable; Or by Accident, and so it is made two Ways, By things coming from
within, and that sometime From evil Humors, which do cause Infirmities of Body
and Diseases; and then the Hurt is said to come from the Humors, which are in
the Brain it self: Sometime



From some other Member ill affected by a blow or some other Cause.

But whatever Humor it be, so it be a bad one, it hurts and stops up the
aforesaid parts of the Brain. Which same Humor is bred of ill Food, that is,
Melancholic and Phlegmatic, as also of Indigestion and sour things, and such
as are dried in the Smoke, and the like.

The Operation of the Soul is hindered also from an outward Cause, and that many
Ways,

Sometimes from stinking Vapors, which infect the Body, and stop up the Organs
of the Senses.

Among which Vapors those are worse, which come out of things diseased and
laboring of Superfluity, and out of dead Carkases themselves, by reason of the
Likeness they have with Humane Bodies. As of old it happened after a bloody War
in AEthiopia, wherein were many dead Bodies, out of which a Pestilential Vapor
came even to the Land of the a Greeks; Whereupon so great a Mortality raged
among the Grecians, that in those who did escape, there remained a
Forgetfulness both of their own and their Childrens Names. Which Galen affirms
according to Avicenna in his third Canon in the Chapter Of Signs gathered from
the Operations of Animals.

An hurt of the operation of the Soul sometimes happens also

From a thick and troubled Air: And this is the Cause that the Eastern People
are more acute and subtle than other Men, because of the Want of Vapors. For
they have a most subtle and pure Air. As is also manifest in our own People:
For at a time when it is clear, they have their Acuteness of Mind more prompt,
and their Wit more quick in searching out of Matters, than when it is cloudy.
For a troubled Air dejects the Soul, makes it sad, and blends the Humors.

But there is a difference between a Gross and a Troubled Air.

A Gross Air is that which is something thick in Substance:

A Troubled Air is that which is mixed with the Parts of another thick Substance.

Which thing is apparent from the small Stars, which do appear and shine a
little; but withal they twinkle and tremble. The Reason is, because there are
many Exhalations and plentiful Vapors, and but few Winds stirring. So says
Avicenna in his first Book Of the Operation of Aerial Qualities.

This Impediment likewise happens through Neglect of cleansing the Body
inwardly and outwardly. For outward Nastiness will obstruct and stop up the
Pores, and will hinder Nature from casting out new Excrements.

Sometimes also this Hurt arises from Diseases: Because it is impossible that
a Sickly Man should have his Sense sound: For in our first Discourse of its
Disposition it is said, That Sense is not perfect, nor the Understanding
rational, except in time of Health; nor will there be any Soundness of the
Rational Soul, but by the Soundness of the Vital and Animal Power, as Aristotle
says in his Book Of the Secrets of Secrets.

So that there is no Way to know and understand any thing aright, but by the
Force of a clear Intellect: There is no Force and Power of a sharp Intellect,
but by Health: There is no Health, but by an AEquality of Complexion: There is
no AEquality of Complexion, but by a right tempered Harmony of Humors.

And therefore GOD most High has delivered and revealed to the Prophets his
Servants, and to some other Men, whom he has illuminated with the Spirit of
Divine Wisdom, a Way for the Temper and Conservation of the Humors.

NOTE on CHAP. V.
a Our Author here intends the great Plague of Athens, curiously described by
Lucretius, Lib. 6.

A Plague thus raised laid learned Athens wast,
Through every Street, through all the Town it past;
Blasting both Man and Beast with poisonous wind,
Death fled before, and Ruin stalked behind,
From AEgypt's burning Sands the Fever came,
More hot than those that raised the deadly Flame,
The Wind that bore the Fate went slowly on,
And as it went was heard to sigh and groan:
At last the raging Plague did Athens seize,
The Plague, and Death attending the Disease:
Then Men did dye by heaps, by heaps did fall,
And the whole City made one Funeral.
First fierce unusual heats did seize the Head,
The glowing Eyes with bloodshot Beams looked red;
Like Blazing Stars approaching Fate foreshow'd,
The Mouth and Jaws were filled with clotted Blood;
The Throat with Ulcers, the Tongue could speak no more,
But overflowed and drowned in putrid gore,
Grew useless, rough, and scarce could make a moan,
And scarce enjoyed the wretched power to groan.
Next through the Jaws the Plague did reach the Breast,
And there the Heart, the Seat of Life possessed;
Then Life began to fail, strange Stinks did come
From every putrid Breast, as from a Tomb,
A sad Presage that Death prepared the Room!
The Body weak, the Mind did sadly wait,
And feared, but could not fly approaching Fate:
To these fierce Pains were joined continual Care,
And sad Complainings, Groans, and deep Despair:
Tormenting, vexing Sobs, and deadly Sighs;
Which raised Convulsions, brake the Vital Ties
Of Mind, and Limbs; and so the Patient dies.
But touch the Limbs, the Warmth appeared not great,
It seemed but little more than natural heat:
The Body red with Ulcers, swollen with Pains;
As when the Sacred Fire spreads o'r the Veins:
But all within was Fire, fierce Flames did burn;
No Cloths could be endured, no Garments worn;
But all (as if the Plague that fired their Blood,
Destroyed all Virtue, Modesty, and Good:)
Lay naked, wishing still for cooling Air,
Or ran to Springs, and hoped to find it there:
And some leaped into Wells, in vain: the Heat^
Or still increased, or still remained as great:
In vain they drank, for when the Water came
To the burning Breast, it hissed before the Flame^
And through each mouth did Streams of Vapors rise,
Like Clouds, and darkened all the ambient Skies^
The pains continual, and the Body dead,
And senseless all before the Soul was fled,
Physicians came, and saw, and shook their Head:
No sleep; the pained and wearied Men's delight:
The fiery Eyes, like Stars, waked all the Night.
Besides, a Thousand Symptoms more did wait,
And told sad News of coming hasty Fate:
Distracted Mind, and Sad and Furious Eyes,
Short Breath, or constant, deep and hollow Sighs;
And buzzing Ears, and much and frothy Sweat
Spread o'r the Neck, and Spittle thin with heat,
But salt and yellow, and, the Jaws being rough,
Could hardly be thrown up by violent Cough:
The Nerves contracted, Strength in Hands did fail,
And Cold crept from the Feet, and spread o'r all:
And when Death came at last, it changed the Nose,
And made it sharp, and pressed the Nostrils close:
Hollowed the Temples, forced the Eye Balls in,
And chilled and hardened all, and stretched the Skin.
They lay not long, but soon did Life resign,
The Warning was but short, Eight Days, or Nine:
If any lived, and 'scap'd the fatal Day,
And if their Looseness purged the Plague away,
Or Ulcers drained, yet they would soon decay:
Their Weakness killed them; or their poisoned Blood,
And Strength with horrid Pains through Nostrils flowed.
But those that felt no Flux, the Strong Disease
Did often descend, and wretched Members seize;
And there it raged with cruel Pains and Smart,
Too weak to kill the Whole, it took a Part;
Some lost their Eyes, and some prolonged their Breath
By loss of Hands: So strong the Fear of Death!
The Minds of some did dark Oblivion blot,
And they their Actions, and themselves forgot.
CHAP. VI. Of the hurt of the inner Senses and the Brain.
SINCE I have already explained almost all the Causes of Age, and Old Age, as
also the Hurts of the exterior Senses; now we must treat of those kind of
Hurts, wherewith the a Senses residing in the Brain are affected.

Which come to pass for two Causes, and are known three Ways, as Avicenna says
in his third Canon, in his Chapter Of the Hurt of the Senses.

They are known by three Ways, that is, by three kinds of Signs, which are not
Signs of Diseases, that hinder Sense, to wit, of the Permutation of sense, of
the Alienation of it, of Folly, of Madness, of a broken Memory, and of a
depraved Imagination:

But I mean those for Signs, which are not truly Diseases, but happen as Hurts
in the Senses, yet are reckoned among Diseases.

When we say [ In the Senses] Understand by Senses, the Instruments wherein the
Soul operates Sense.

Whereas before we said, that this Hurt was produced by two Causes,

One of them is that which happens on the Score of the Rational Soul when it is
weakened. For the Intellect being hurt, and as it were roving upon all manner of
Thoughts, the Internal Sensations do deviate: But while Health is preserved in
Man, no Hurt falls on the Intellect, nor therefore on the Sense.

Another Cause is, when in a sound Man some Hurts befall the Senses, which are
not made on the Score of the Rational Soul alone, but on the Score of those
Instruments, which by Avicenna are called the Ventricles of the Brain, without
which the Soul is neither able to imagine, nor discern, nor remember.

And the Regiment contrived in this Epistle, will easily instruct a Man to
remove such Hurt, to preserve the Faculty, so as to discern more subtly, and
to remember aright, also how to defend that no hurtful thing do fall into these
Cells or Ventricles of the Brain.

From these things it may appear to your Clemency, by what means our
Forefathers being soundly Wise obtained a clear Sharpness and Force of
Intellect, able to pierce into the Secrets of things: because, namely, they
observed the Health not only of their Body, but the Regiment of the three
Instruments of the Head; and made use of the Properties of certain things,
which afterward they altogether kept secret, lest they should come to the Hands
of the Unfaithful.

And that this is possible, easily appears. The Prince of Philosophers in that
Book which he published to gratify the Request of Alexander, says plainly,
That nothing is difficult to the power of Understanding, and that all things
are b possible in a way of Reason. And in the Secrets of Hermogenes, according
to Aristotle, it is said, That the chief, true and perfect Good is a clear and
full Light of Understanding. And therefore Seneca said, That Divine Seeds were
disseminated in Humane Bodies, namely, Sense and Understanding. Now if he that
has these Seeds be a good Husbandman, things, like their Original, will grow
up; and if a bad one, he produces no other thing than what a barren Field does
yield.

I have also found this, That there is an admirable Virtue placed in Plants,
Animals and Stones: Which is partly hidden from the Men of this Age; from the
Property of which things Philosophers have obtained a Clearness of
Understanding.

As for what concerns the Memory, the Signs which show the Damages of a hurt
Memory, as the Son of Abohaly writes, are

When the Sense of Man is safe, and the Imagination of Things and Forms in c
Sleep and Waking is sound; if Remembrance be not easy, the Memory is hurt. And
then

If what a man has invented formerly, he be not able when he has Occasion for
it, to call it to Mind, and the Imagination be safe, it is very likely the
Memory is hurt, and that the fault lies in the hind part of the Head.

But the Signs of the Cogitation, that is, of the middle Part's being hurt, are
these;

If there be no Impediment in the Memory, and if a Man speak those things that
ought not to be spoken, and fear those things which he ought not to fear, and
think that to be good which is very hurtful, and judge that may be hoped which
it is not lawful to hope for, and acts things not to be acted, and enquires
into things which ought not to be enquired into, and if he can call to Mind
whatsoever he pleases, then the Hurt is in the Cogitation, that is, the middle
part of the Brain.

Finally, Signs of a hurt Imagination are these; namely,

If a Man's Memory and Talk be as they ought to be: if he contradict not the
things which he did himself; if he speak not those things which seem contrary
to Reason; if he imagine not things not sensible; if he collect many things, if
while he sees Particulars he see falsely, namely, Water, Fire, and the like; if
he imagine weakly concerning the Forms of things in Sleep and Waking, then the
Hurt is in the Imagination and Forepart of the Brain.

If two or three of these things be complicated, then the Hurt is in two or
three Parts, that is, in the recesses of the Brain.

And when any of these things enclines to Diminution, the Disease is from Cold;
if to Permutation, it is from Heat.

But some have thought that the Defect and Diminution of these Operations
arises from the Diminution of the Substance of the Brain.

I have diligently collected the Cure of these Hurts from the Tables of the
Parts of the Head, which the Son of the Prince Abohaly published in his Book Of
the Support of the Art of Physic. And besides, I have laid down this way of
Cure how it must be used, in the End of this Epistle; and there you shall find
most fit Medicines for to cure this foresaid Accident.

For especially for this Accident, and in the second place for others, I
composed this Epistle at the Persuasion of two Wise men in Paris.

For not only the Aged, but even Young Men for want of Regiment, and through
Ignorance of certain things, as is daily manifest, being made in a manner
blind, are miserably hurt.

And now we have finished the first part of this Epistle, concerning
Speculative Knowledge: We must next speak of Operative or Practical Knowledge.

NOTES on CHAP. VI.
a Here Sense seems comprehensive of Reason. And this old Hypothesis of various
Faculties, and their as various Seats, bears a most harmonious Concent to
Reason and the newest Anatomick Phenomenon. For neither do I think Faculties
unnecessarily multiplied in this place; nor yet their Receptacles unduly
assigned them.

If the Author's Imagination, Cogitation and Memory, that is, the Moderns
Common Sense, Judgment and Memory, had been the same Faculty, he had such skill
in the several Phases of these Luminaries (as Dr. Smith in his Portraicture of
Old Age calls the Faculties of Man's Soul) that he would never have parcelled an
Individuum into many distinct Species by Apparency. For we may remember, that
in the foregoing Chapter he likes not Distinguishing between the Appetitive and
Digestive Faculty, but thinks them one. And since Reason as well as so great
Authority countenanceth this Triplicity of Faculties, I shall take leave to
dissent from two Learned Men, a Physical Divine and a Theological Physician, i.
e. Dr. Reynolds in his Treatise of the Passions, and the forecited Doctor
Smith; and embrace the old Opinion.

Were there not a Defect in one Faculty when another is perfect in its
Operations, I should think many the same one Faculty; But Experience showing
one Perfect, when at the same moment another is Defective, I take such as
Distinct. We may indeed refer in gross all Faculties of Man to the Soul, and so
make them one. But if according to common acceptance, Seeing and Hearing be
distinct, and those Faculties differ, that operate by differing Organs, we
shall be of the Author's judgment, when we consider the Regions assigned each
Faculty.

The Evisceration of the Brain shows us various Ventricles near the Origination
of the Nerves. Now the Nerves being the Inlets of all Ideas, it is not unlikely
that the Ventricles are the Receivers. But whether in the Ventricles or in the
Parenchymous Part of the Brain these sensible Ideas be concocted into other
Notions, or where the Soul keeps her Elaboratory of Reason, I am not so
absolute in usu Partium as to be able better to determine, than according to
the probability of this Hypothesis. For

Consider the Eye, the principal Negotiator for the Imagination, it has its
Visory Nerves in the foremost Place, assigned to Imagination: But its Motory
Nerves are near the Middle or Seat of Judgment, nay the Pathetick Nerves dare
not cast a Glance without judicious leave. In the very middle or place of
Judgment are the Nerves, which be the Moderators of the Countenance and the
Tongue, the truest Indices of Discretion and Understanding. Then the Auditory
Nerves are placed behind, and seem to carry their Ideas to the Cell of Memory,
the proper Receptacle of Audibles. Behind these indeed come other Nerves; but
they are only Mancipia Rationis, and do obsequiously put in Execution the
Dictates of the Higher Powers.

Now if after this Anatomical Account Imagination, Judgment and Memory improve
or impair according to the Good or Hur^ that the fore, middle or hind part of
the Head receive, we may as rationally conclude on the Seat of each Faculty, as
Galen did on the Motory of the Hand, when he cured its lost motion by
Application to the upper part of the Spine.

b Our Author has made a large Progress toward the making of this good in
his Book Of the Wonderful Power of Art and Nature.

c Hippocrates in his Book Of Dreams takes very rational Presages as well as
Diagnosticks of the state of Man's Health from the dark Visions of the Night;
and so a Man may deal in Oneirocriticks without danger o^ Superstition or
Shadow of Necromancy.

CHAP. VII. Of Meats and Drink, which do more agreeably restore the Natural
Moisture, that daily is consumed.
a MEats and Drink, which more agreeably restore the Natural Moisture, which is
daily wasted, are many: And this Restoration is various, according to the
variety of Constitutions, and according to the goodness of Juices in Meats and
Drinks, as Pliny says, and especially after the time of full Growth.

Now some good Juices proceed from Vegetables as well as from Animals, but none
from Minerals, as the Son of the Prince Abohaly maintains in the Preface of his
Regiment.

But the Natural Moisture which is daily wasted, may by b Diet and a right
Course of Moderating ones Living be restored.

Which Course ought to consist, as much as may be, of things of a good Juice,
and of other Virtues.

But according to Pliny those good Juices are better, which either Increase, or
Repair the Natural Moisture.

And of those, some do render it purer: Some do make it stronger and more
remote from Corruption.

And therefore things of good Juice do differ among themselves. For what do
proceed from Animals bred on a fruitful Soil, do render the Natural Moisture
more Sincere, and free from Destruction.

For Bread, Fish, Flesh and Wine, although they afford a good Juice; yet
sometimes they breed bad Humors.

But Bread yields a Moisture safer from Destruction than Flesh; And Flesh
produces a Moisture more remote from Corruption than Fish: Wine of the Vineyard
affords one more remote than Drink made of Oats, or Apples, or Barley, or of
other things.

For although in all the things aforesaid there may be found Food of a good
Juice; yet Wine breeds a more durable Moisture than any other Drink.

But Flesh and Wine and Yolks of Eggs are more apt to breed good Blood, than
other harder things. And they are fit for Old Men, because Old Men want
Restoration of Blood and Spirits. And the chief Goodness of Regiment in them,
is that which heats and moistens, from Nutritives, Bathes, Drink, long Sleep,
long Lying in Bed, from Provocation of Urine and Expulsion of Phlegm.

And Prince Abohaly says in his first Canon, in the Chapter Of the Regiment of
Old Men, that Nutritives ought to be such as neither breed Melancholy, nor
Phlegm, nor any sharp Humor; as is the Flesh of Pullets, Partridge, Sucking
Kids, Calves and Lambs; hot, temperate, and moist Electuaries, and some
Simples, amongst which are the better sort of Pine and Fistick Nuts (for they
restore the natural and innate Moisture) and a certain Electuary made up of
them and artificially prepared, and taken in great Quantity with Sugar of
Roses. Whereof Avicenna speaking of the Consumption makes mention saying, that
a Persian Woman, whose Grave was dug, and her Funeral prepared, by this
recovered her Health, and restored her Natural Moisture.

But remember how I said, that, according to Pliny, things of a good Juice
restore the Natural Moisture, and yet such as is often presently wasted, for
this Reason; Because bad Chyle is bred sometime from things of a good Juice in
a hot Stomach, for that sometime the Meat is adust, as Royal Haly says in his
Canon Of the Regiment of Meat: And also from Meats, that of their own Nature do
breed a bad Moisture.

Sometimes this happens in things of good Juice, which are of the rank of
Animals.

It is of great moment that the Feeding of these living Creatures be good; as
in Fish and the rest of Animals.

For I have seen Chickens fed with Grapes, harder of Flesh, and more difficult
of Concoction, than were most Waterfowl.

The like one may see in Fish, as is apparent in Pikes: for they are not fed as
other Fish; and therefore these breed better Food, which are themselves better
fed.

And not only their Food is to be considered, but the Place wherein they are
brought up. So we have seen Fish living in a muddy and foul Water, which of
their own Nature use to breed good Food, have notwithstanding produced very
bad; And on the contrary.

But in Vegetables four things are to be considered.

The Soil, The Air, The Distance of the Sun, and The Kind of the Plant.
The Soil is considerable: Because Plants that grow in a c dunged Soil, have
Fruit which sooner putrefies, than such as grow other where.

The same may be said of Bread-Corn and other Grain. As is also evident in the
Wine of that Vineyard which is nourished by the Juice of a dunged Earth: For
that sort of Wine sooner decays than any other, and becomes dreggy.

Whence it fell out that a certain King drunk heartily of the Wine of a certain
Husbandman's Vineyard, and when this Husbandman heard that the King was
delighted with the Pleasantness of his Wine, he bethought him of husbanding his
Vineyard more wisely, and he dunged it: After some space of Time the Wine began
to be worse and to decay, and to have a worse flavor.

For a good Taste is the truest Mark of good Meat and Drink, that breed a
natural Moisture, as Isaac speaks in his Book Of Diet, in the Fifth Tract Of
Fish, saying, That all Meat by how much the more savoury it is, by so much the
better it nourishes.

And things growing in a Soil not dunged, do not so easily putrefie, as those
do which grow in a dunged Soil.

For (which makes for this Purpose) I saw a certain Mountain in some part of
France, where Corn was kept without Damage in Granaries for six or eight Years:
For that the Nature of the Earth alone is much better (than when forced with
Dung) for bringing forth Fruits.

I have also seen in some Vineyards, propagated as it were of the same Seed and
Original, and planted but a few Paces Distance, this to happen, that one
produced Wine twice as strong and heady as the other; which was from the
natural Virtue of the Ground from whence the Vineyard had its nourishment. For
there was white Marle, which is said to be better than any other for to yield
good Nourishment, by reason it is always fruitful.

A good Air is also to be observed: For Herbs and Trees, which grow in a good
Air, are more remote from Corruption, and always are of a more vehement, and
stronger Virtue.

And this therefore comes to pass, by reason of the Wind, that does there more
freely pass and blow upon all things, drying up Putrefaction. Whence it is,
that Avicenna in his first Canon affirms, that Plants growing in Windy and
Mountainous Places, are of a stronger and more unshaken Virtue.

I saw a Mountain in the Province of the Romans, wherein the Air was so pure,
and the Plants of so great Goodness, that diseased and infected Cattle were in
a small space of Time cured by them. And the same may be said likewise of
Animals living in Mountainous Places.

Thirdly, The Distance of the Sun does concur in the Generation of Plants. For
Plants that grow in Places remote from the Sun, have their Fruit more crude,
neither continuing so long without rotting, nor growing so hard as to be
defended from Putrefaction. Therefore they breed a Humor more obnoxious to
Corruption. As is manifest in Vineyards that are found in some part of the
Kingdom of France, and in some parts of Germany, whose Grapes being laid on the
Ground, especially in Summer Time, are corrupted. The Reason is, because the
Water being made sour, is not all turned into Wine. And therefore Isaac lays
down this as a Property of Wine, namely, That mere Wine mixed with Spring Water,
which has no external Vapor any way mixed with it, is more powerful and
strong, than Watrish Wine without Mixture. Because in Watrish Wine there is a
sour Water; in a Strong and (as they call it) Vino^ Wine the Sowreness is
expelled by the Heat of the Sun. But a high and frequen^ Boiling of Wine, while
it is new, will take away that Defect; as also hot Earth or Gravel will help
the Heat of the Sun, deficient through its great Distance.

Whence it easily appears, that the Presence of the Sun operates much, and that
its Distance effects much in many things.

For those Countries that are farther from the Heat and Circumgiration of the
Sun, want many sorts of Plants, as Olives, Figs, Pomegranates; and their Wines
also are not so permanent as in hot Countries, where sometimes they are kept
for ten Years.

Fourthly, We must consider what Kind the Plant is of; Because, although the
three foresaid things concur, if the Plant be of a bad Kind, they effect or
avail nothing.

Which is made manifest in some Kind of Grapes, that seem fairer to the Eye
than others; yet Wine made thereof is corrupted in a shorter Time, nor is it of
the like Relish, nor of so much Goodness in Breeding good Humors.

And thus we see the Native Moisture may be restored, and when almost lost may
be renewed by good Juices produced of Animals and Plants.

But some among the Chaldean Wise Men have believed, that all the Moisture of
the whole Body, the Old being purged out, might easily be changed, and a new
one be made. When to wit,

The inner Moisture is purged by Medicines;

The outer in the Skin and Flesh by Sweat, Unction and Scarification.

This Moisture also is restored by things of a good Juice artificially prepared
for eating, wherewithal Medicines may be likewise mixed, that are not subject to
Putrefaction.

And the exterior Moisture being thus evacuated by Sweat, and the interior by
Medicines, it is requisite that this other Moisture, sprung of the aforesaid
Meats, be long preserved from Corruption.

And so the Old Moisture being subtracted, which was as it were all consumed, a
new Moisture will be bred, the Man renewed, and his Life be made the longer:
Which thing the Ancients did; and which even at this Time some Wise Men among
the Chaldees know how to do. Of whose Way and Wisdom I am not altogether
ignorant. And this was said to be done to a eertain d German Captive by some
Wise Men in Arabia.

But e Ovid says, that he did this by one Medicine made up of many Medicines;
although some are of the opinion it is fabulously reported.

From these and from other things (most Excellent Prince) it may easily appear
to Your Clemency, by what means Men of former Time were long-lived, namely,

Because their Way of Living was more temperate.

Because their Food and Nourishment augmented the Natural Moisture, and
preserved it long from Corruption.

And then, because there was a greater Purity of Air.

Moreover, because they better knew the Properties of Things, which guarded the
State of the Body, that it was not presently dissolved.

The Knowledge of which things came imperfect to the Greeks, and so to us.

After we have seen what Meats and Drink restore the Native Moisture, we ought
to consider what things they are that defend that Moisture, and protect it from
Dissolution.

NOTES on CHAP. VII.
a The Reasonableness of the due Observance of Diet is most argumentatively
inculcated by our Author in his Book Of the Wonderful Power of Art and Nature,
in words to this purpose: The Possibility of Prolongation of Life is confirmed
by this, that Man is naturally immortal, that is, able not to dye: And even
after he had sinned, he could live near a Thousand Years, afterward by little
and little the Length of his Life was abbreviated. Therefore it must needs be,
that this Abbreviation is Accidental; therefore it might be either wholly
repaired, or at least in part. But if we would but make Enquiry into the
Accidental Cause of this Corruption, we should find, it neither was from
Heaven, nor from ought but want of a Regiment of Health. For in as much as the
Fathers are corrupt, they beget Children of a corrupt Complexion and
Composition, and their Children from the same Cause are corrupt themselves: And
so Corruption is derived from Father to Son, till Abbreviation of Life prevails
by Succession. Yet for all this it does not follow, that it shall always be cut
shorter and shorter; because a Term is set in Humane Kind, that Men should at
the most of their Years arrive at Fourscore, but more is their Pain and Sorrow.
Now the Remedy against every Man's proper Corruption is, if every Man from his
Youth would exercise a complete Regiment, which consists in these things, Meat
and Drink, Sleep and Watching, Motion and Rest, Evacuation and Retention, Air,
the Passions of the Mind. For if a Man would observe this Regiment from his
Nativity, he might live as long as his Nature assumed from his Parents would
permit, and might be led to the utmost Term of Nature, lapsed from Original
Righteousness; which Term nevertheless he could not pass: Because this Regiment
does not avail in the least against the old Corruption of our Parents. But it
being in a manner impossible, that a Man should be so governed in the
Mediocrity of these things, as the Regiment of Health requires, it must of
necessity be, that Abbreviation of Life do come from this Cause, and not only
from the Corruption of our Parents. Now the Art of Physic determines this
Regiment sufficiently. But neither Rich nor Poor, neither Wise Men nor Fools,
nor Physicians themselves, how skilful soever, are able to perfect this
Regiment either in themselves or others, as is clear to every Man. But Nature
is not deficient in Necessaries, nor is Art complete; yea, it is able to resist
and break through all Accidental Passions, so as they may be destroyed either
all together, or in part. And in the Beginning when Men's Age began to decline,
the Remedy had been easy: but now after more than five Thousand Years it is
difficult to appoint a Remedy. Nevertheless Wise Men being moved with the
aforesaid Considerations, have endeavored to think of some Ways, not only
against the Defect of every Man's proper Regiment; but against the Corruption of
our Parents. Not that a Man can be reduced to the Life of Adam or Artefius,
because of prevailing Corruption: but that Life might be prolonged a Century of
Years or more beyond the common Age of Men now living, in that the Passions of
Old Age might be retarded, and if they could not altogether be hindered, they
might be mitigated: that Life might usefully be prolonged, yet always on this
side the utmost Term of Nature. For the utmost Term of Nature is that which was
placed in the first Men after Sin: and there is another Term from the
Corruption of every ones own Parents. It is no Man's Hap to pass beyond both
these Terms: but one may well the Term of his proper Corruption. Nor yet do I
believe that any Man, how Wise soever, can attain the first Term, though there
be the same possibility and aptitude of Humane Nature to that Term, which was
in the first Men. Nor is it a Wonder, since this Aptitude extends it self to
Immortality; as it was before Sin, and will be after the Resurrection. But if
you say, that neither Aristotle, nor Plato, nor Hippocrates, nor Galen arrived
at such Prolongation; I answer you, nor at many mean Truths, which were after
known to other Students: And therefore they might be ignorant of these great
things, although they made their Assay. But they busied themselves too much in
other things, and they were quickly brought to Old Age, while they spent their
Lives in worse and common things, before they perceived the ways to the
greatest of secrets. For we know that Aristotle says in his Praedicaments,
that the Quadrature of the Circle is possible, but not then known. And he
confesses that all Men were ignorant of it even to his Time. But we know that
in these our days this Truth is known; and therefore well might Aristotle be
ignorant of far deeper Secrets of Nature. Now also Wise Men are ignorant of
many things, which in time to come every common Student shall know. Therefore
this Objection is every way vain,

b Lessius his Quantity of Diet with the Authors Quality might effect, what we
scarcely dare expect, toward attaining of this Longaevity.

c Hence it is very observable, how in populous Places, besides the Infection
of the Air mentioned in the first Chapter of this Book, the Fields are so
forced for Herbage for Cattle, which feed Men either with their Milk or Flesh;
and there are so many hot Beds in Gardens and Orchards, which also supply Men's
Tables, that our Food being of so corrupt an Original, it can be no Wonder to
see the great Disparity between Burials and Christnings in the Registers. And
though in such Places fewer gray heads be seen than in the Country; yet it is
because in populous Places fewer arrive at this infirm Maturity.

d Our Author in his Book of the Wonderful Power of Art and Nature, says thus,
It is proved by the Testimony of the Popes Letters, that a German, who was a
Slave among the Saracens, took a Medicine, whereby he prolonged his Life to
five Hundred Years. For the King that kept him Prisoner received Ambassadors
from a great King with this Medicine; but because he mistrusted them, he made
trial of his Present upon this Slave. And Artefius more than doubled the
Germans Age.

e The Poet having made a Discovery of some odd Ceremonies, how Witches cure
Agues, and what Verse can do; sets on the Kettle for Medea, to parboil old
tough AEson to more tender years. Ovid Met. Lib. 7.

Mean while in hollow brass the Medicine boils,
And swelling high, in foamy bubbles toils.
There seeths she what th'AEmonian Vales produce,
Roots, Juices, Flowers, and seeds of Sovereign use:
Adds Stones from Oriental Rocks bereft,
And others by the ebbing Ocean left;
The Dew collected e're the Dawning springs;
A Screech-Owls flesh with her ill-boding Wings;
The intrals of ambiguous Wolves, that can
Take and forsake the figure of a Man;
The Liver of a long-lived Heart: then takes,
The Skaly skins of small Cyniphian Snakes.
A Crow's old head and pointed beak was cast
Among the Rest, which had nine Ages past.
These and a thousand more without a name
Were thus prepared by the barbarous Dame,
For humane benefit. The Ingredients now
She mingles with a withered Olive Bough.
Lo, from the Caldron the dry stick receives
First Verdure, and a little after Leaves;
Forthwith with over-burthening Olives decked.
The skipping Froth, with under-flames eject,
Upon the Ground descended in a Dew;
Whence vernal Flowers and springing Pasture grew.
This seen, she cuts the old Man's Throat, out scrus'd
His scarce warm Blood, and her receipt infused,
His Mouth or Wound sucked in. His Beard and Head
Black Hairs forthwith adorn, the hoary shed.
Pale Color, Morphew, meagre Looks remove;
And under rising Flesh his Wrinkles smooth.
His Limbs wax strong and lusty. AEson much
Admires his Change; himself remembers such
Twice twenty Summers past: withal, indu'd
A youthful Mind, and both at once renewed.
CHAP. VIII. Of those things that defend the Natural Moisture, when bred, and
restrain it from Dissolution, and that render it more sincere, when restored.
THings that defend the Natural Moisture from Dissolution, and when restored,
that render it more sincere, are three.

One whereof a swims in the Sea.

Another is b hid in the inmost Recesses of the Earth.

The third is usually c found in the Bowels of the Animal, that lives long.

These three do not only defend the Radical Moisture from Dissolution, but they
preserve it and its Natural Heat in good Temper: So that they depart not from
their Temper and Harmony, and while these two are not changed, there need be no
fear of Sickness in Man.

For in these two Health and length of Days do consist, as Aristotle says in
his Epistle to Alexander.

Although these Kind of Things be known, nevertheless they ought to be, most
accurately chosen and skilfully prepared: for all the Secret is in their
Preparation, which the Wise have concealed, because they are of a thick
Substance, and must be very finely ground.

For the Son of the Prince Abohaly says in his second Canon in the Chapter Of
the judgment of certain Medicines, that all Medicines of a thick Substance must
be ground as fine as can be; and good reason, since our Intention is, that they
should come to the utmost End of their Journey, and that they should pass to
the fourth Digestion, and to the Heart and Members of Similar Parts.

But these forementioned things stand in need (as I said before) of Choice and
of diverse Preparations, one of which may be better than another, and the last
or third the best.

But the Medicine which is found in the Bowels of the long-lived Animal, is a
Gristle which will weigh above one Scruple, which in almost all other Creatures
is Blood.

One of these Animals was found in our Time, about whose neck there was a
golden Collar put, wherein was written, Hoc Animal fuit positum in hoc Nemore
tempore Julii Caesaris, i. e. This Animal was put in this Wood in the time of
Julius Caesar.

This Medicine, cold of it self, if it be mixed with hot Cordials, preserves the
Moisture, that it be not dissolved, and the Natural Heat, that it be not
extinguished.

As to that which swims in the Sea, some say it is cold, some will have it
temperate in Complexion. And Isaac discoursing of it, affirms, that it
clarifies the Blood, especially that of the Heart it self, and discusses and
attenuates its gross Nature, it dries up Defluxions and hurtful Humors in the
Eyes; it is very good for those that are troubled with the Palpitation of the
Heart, and for the fearful and suspicious, who are troubled with Melancholy.
And others have thought that it is very good for those that are troubled with
the falling Sickness, and that it causes a Man to vomit congealed and clotted
Blood, whether from a Wound or from any other Cause, if the Powder of it be
taken in Drink; and if it be mixed with any other Liquor, it will cure the Ails
that come of the fourth Digestion, if the Skin be washed therewith, such as are
the white Morphew.

But that Medicine which by Nature is wisely enough laid up in the Bowels of
the Earth, has this Property, that it keeps the Natural Moisture from being so
soon corrupted; and it also retains it in its natural Temper, and most
commodiously fenceth the Native Heat, that it contract no strange Quality, and
it recalls all things intemperate in the Body to a Temper. And Isaac says in
his Book Of the support of the Art of Physic, that it has Power to help a
weak Stomach, the fearful, and such as are troubled with the Passion of the
Heart; and is an excellent Cure for them that are polluted and infected with
Baldness and the Leprosy.

And the Prince says, that this best of Medicines is very profitable for
Headaches and the shaking Palsy; and also for those that by night being
mischievously fascinated in their Brain, out of Madness talk to themselves.

Nor is it to be wondered, that this Medicine can do such great things, because
the Son of Zacharias says it is temperate in the tenth Degree, and surpasses
and exceeds all others in Temper. For there is in it an equal and right Nature,
and it is not subject to the Corruption of any of the Elements.

Whoever therefore does earnestly desire to preserve any Humane Body perfect in
Health and unhurt, and to hinder, that the Internal Moisture be not easily
diminished; to renew the Moisture it self; when renewed, to defend it from too
quick and hasty Destruction, and so to cherish the Powers of the Body, as that
they may not be hurt of these Six Causes that continually change the State of
the Body, let him most studiously seek out this thing. For it will easily
perform all these things, as Aristotle says in his Book Of the Secrets of
Secrets; nor will it suffer Men's Health to be endangered or overthrown by these
Causes ill proportioned.

For these Causes do very much Harm to the Complexion and Composition of the
Body, as was said before in the Chapter Of the Causes of Old Age.

Aristotle thinks it impossible, that Medicines so fading and so soon
perishing, should be able to preserve Men's Bodies in Health, that they be not
dissolved before the Time, or that they should repel and restrain all the
Accidents of Old Age. But Physicians believe they are able to do this, and that
with Aromatic Medicines, which also are subject to Corruption. Therefore this
to me seems possible.

For this Medicine does admirable things when it is well prepared, and very
well drawn out: And when it is made after the best preparation, it produces
sublime Operations. And in this is the whole Secret of the Ancients.

Know you therefore (most Gracious Prince) that the Uses of the things
aforesaid are great; and understand, that they can easily retain the Natural
Moisture and Heat in Temper.

And may be that Water was of this kind, which an aged d Husbandman in the
Kingdom of Sicily being weary at Plow did drink. He thought it was like
yellowish Water, and after he had greedily swallowed it up, being warm with the
Heat of his Labor, he was so changed in Complexion and Strength, that he
became as it were of about thirty Years of Age, and was endowed with better
Judgment, Memory and Understanding, than he had before. He lived after that at
the Kings Court fourscore Years.

Some Wise Men have asserted, that some e Cordial Medicine ought to be mixed
with these Medicines, such as Saffron and Musk.

For Saffron carries Medicines to the Heart, cures its Trembling, takes away
Melancholy and Care, refreshes the Brain, cheers the Soul, begets Boldness; and
then especially, when it enclines to Redness, having a Sphaerical shape, as we
have said formerly.

After we have seen what things they are, which defend the Native Moisture,
that it do not quickly suffer dissolution, and what things generate it anew, or
when renewed, do make it more sincere, and preserve its due Temper of Heat; now
we ought to consider, what things they are that hasten untimely Gray Hairs, and
other Accidents of Age and Old Age.

NOTES on CHAP. VIII.
a This is Coral, which is most certainly bred of a petrifying Juice: But
whether this Juice sprout of it self into a Stony Shrub; or whether it first
take a Wooden Form and after turn into Stone; or whether it penetrate and
transmute some dead Plant found in the Seawater, and so retain its Shape, is
altogether doubtful. The Reason is, because there are Branches of Coral found,
whose Substance partly resembles Wood, partly Coral. Some report as if there
were Coral-Berries. There is Coral of diverse Colors; but red is the best.

b Here Gold is meant, which is the most noble and solid of Metals, yellow of
Color. bred of the best digested and fixed Principles.

c Here is meant the Bone of a Stags Heart, which is either made of the Root of
the Aorta, or of the Tendon at the Base of the Heart, that in Time becomes hard
and turns into Bone. All these three are reckoned among the highest Cordials
and Alexipharmaca, that are yet known to any Physicians, who concur with our
Author in the Virtues of them.

d The Author in his Book Of the wonderful Power of Art and Nature speaks thus,
A Countryman as he was at Plough, found in the Field a Vessel of Gold with
Liquor in it, and thinking it had been the Dew of Heaven, he washed his Face and
drunk. And being renewed in Spirit, and Body, and Goodness of Wisdom, of a
Cowherd he was made Groom Porter to the King of Sicily, which happened in the
Time of King William.

e All Cordials are in some Men's Opinions Spices. For Spices are grateful to
Nature, and by reason of their Fragrancy do penetrate quickly, even if but
outwardly applied. They quickly refresh the Spirits. Now

Whatever Medicines are amicable to Nature, are fragrant, and with Ease and
Speed refresh the Spirits, are true Cordials.

But, Spices are such;

Therefore true Cordials.

The Major is from Hippocrates. And Spice may be defined a Vegetable, Animal,
or Mineral (if Chemistry can afford such) that is sweet in Smell and Taste. The
Minor may be proved by Induction. And all fragrant things may be reckoned
Spices. Helmont is of Opinion in his Tract of Butler's Stone, that the Virtue
of Cordial Medicines consists in Smell. The Aromatic Compositions of the
Ancients for Cordials prove this. Sennertus will allow neither Food nor Physic
to be restorative, but what is Aromatic. And Hippocrates in his Book of Food
bids them that want present Refreshment, use a liquid Medicine; but if one
would restore with more Speed, do it by Smell.

CHAP. IX. Of Meats and other things which do especially introduce and hasten
the Accidents of Age and Old Age.
THings which cause Greyness and other Accidents of Age are these, Fruit, Fish,
moist Herbs; a all kinds of Milk, Wheat boiled with Water, Grewel, frequent and
daily drinking of Water, overmuch Use of sweet Water, frequent Sports of
Venus, immoderate Blood-letting. For these things dissolve the Native Moisture.

And also superfluous Drunkenness, plucking off the Hair, Touching of cold
things, and Washing with them, such as is Oil of Elder, Rose Water,
Elder-water, b Camphire. Frequent Washing hurts, now and then it does no harm,
if the Face be wiped with a Cloth. For Wiping is of much Force. To these we may
reckon the Smell of cold Dill, and its Powder, the Smell of Sulphur and its
Smoke, the Steam of Quicksilver and Arsenick, dwelling in cold and very moist
Places.

And he that desires to avoid Grey-headedness, let him shun moist Meats, let
him often provoke Vomit, when he is full, let him take Trifera, which is made
up of Black, Emblick and Bellirick Myrobalans, and of other things that hinder
Greyness. Also let him not gorge himself with Wine, let him mix Water with his
Honey, let him abstain from Meats that breed Phlegm, let him live content with
fried and roast Meats, and let him use the Water of Vetch.

All these things, as Rasy says in the Chapter Of Adorning the Hair, are a
Cause that the Blood enclines to Choleric Dryness, and that it becomes thick;
and they utterly overcome Phlegm.

For Avicenna says in the Chapter Of Things that hinder and keep back Gray
Hairs, that while the Blood remains fat, thick, hot and clammy, the Hairs are
Black; and when it is Watery, they wax Gray.

Aristotle also in that Book which he wrote almost in his Old Age, incited
thereto at the Request of Alexander, affirms, that c Laughter also is a Cause
of Old Age and hastens on its Accidents.

We have spoken of the Causes, now let us discourse of the Remedies that purge
those humors, which are so troublesome to Men, and which bring on the most
miserable Accidents of Old Age.

NOTES on CHAP. IX.
a Formerly our Author attributed Greyness to Phlegm, here he reckons up the
Causes of Phlegm. For all these either cool or moisten, or do both. And Milk,
though a Cure for an Hectic or Consumptive Person in both these respects (he
being hot and dry) yet it is not proper for all Men, especially when the
Inwards are distempered or in a Fever: for it is very apt to corrupt. Besides
it is above all other Phlegmaticks an Enemy to the Head, the Seat of Phlegm
according to Hippocrates, and therefore to all the nervous kind. Thus does an
Infant anticipate Old Age in the Causes, and whiten its Locks in the Nurses
Milk, before they be grown.

b It would make a Man laugh to see some Ladies laterem lavare, while by their
Camphorate, and (as they think) youthful Wash^es, they hasten that Deformity
they would thereby prevent. And illiterate Chemists would make as good sport,
did not their Tragical Miscarriages beg your Pity. For what more miserable than
to seek their Panacea's, their Tree of Life; in the mortal Fumes of Mer^ury,
Arsenick, Antimony, and such things?

c Laughter may very reasonably be thought ^ Cause of Old Age: because it is so
prodi^al of the Vital Flame, that as burning Spi^its blaze out their
efficacious parts, and leave ^nly a vapid Phlegm behind; so in the midst ^f
Laughter the heart may be sad, and these Sanguine Flashes go out in gloomy
Melan^holy, the Aged Humor.

CHAP. X. Of things which refresh and recreate Old Age, and hinder its
Accidents.
ALL Wise Men who have discoursed of this Matter, do unanimously agree in this;
That those things which purge Phlegm, do cast out the humor, which is the
cause of Greyness and the Original of the Accidents of Old Age.

But Avicenna in his first Chapter Of the Complexions of Ages and Kinds
affirms, that not only Phlegm, but that all strange and extraneous Humors are
the Causes of these Accidents. I judge this to be true; but it is Phlegm
especially that does the thing.

Therefore a Vomit is useful, especially afternoon, as Avicenna says in his
fourth Tract Of Adorning: Neither ought a Man to take a Vomit every day, but
once or twice a Month, as Rasy teaches in his Regiment, in his Book to
Almansor, in the Canon Of Vomit. And so all the Latin Physicians do agree in
this.

Galen's Purge is Pilulae de Mastiche and Aloes: For they purge Phlegm, as
Isaac says in his Book Of Greyheadedness.

Also the Purge that Haly appoints, and Avicenna likewise, has this Property,
namely, to purge gently the hurtful Humors, without any harm to the Native
Moisture. And therefore Purging is proper, which we ought to use in extruding
these kind of Humors; and it must be understood of that Purgation, wherein
there is no Laxative but Aloes. And such Aloes ought to be Hepatica, as says
Royal Haly.

Its Attraction is not from far and remote Parts, but from those it meets in
its way, that is, from the Stomach and Guts, and the remoter Place of its
Attraction is the Liver without the Veins, as is manifest in the second Canon,
in the Tract of Hierae.

It seems also very likely that every b kind of Rue has the Power of Purging
these things. For Aristotle in his Epistle to Alexander appoints, that he
should take Rue every Morning. He says that Rue drives away the Phlegm of the
Stomach, that it is the Life of the Liver, that it stirs up the Natural Heat,
and dispels Windiness. Haly also says this in his Regiment.

Old Men ought to be purged, not with sharp and violent Purgatives, but with
milder, as with Broth of Pullets, etc. and other gentle things as with
Myrobalans, Chepuli, and many of the same kind.

Besides, c Citrull-Seed is useful in purging the Reins and cleansing of
Humors. Rue also purges the Head and Reins, Stomach and Liver, as we have
said before.

A Clyster also that purges Phlegm well, restrains the Accidents and
Weaknesses of Old Age, as Avicenna says in his Canon Of things that keep back
Gray Hairs: In which Clyster these things ought properly to be, Mercury, Dwarf
Elder, and Elder, so they be well mixed and strained in the Clyster. Such a
gentle Clyster is very profitable for Old Men, whose Nature is weaker.

But it should seem, that every Purgative rather brings on than restrains Gray
Hairs, and provokes the Accidents of Old Age, so that they approach the sooner,
rather than it puts any stop to their coming, because Hippocrates affirms, as
Avicenna testifies in the Chapter Of Exercise, that Purging Physic draws from
the Body the greater share of the Natural Moisture, which is as it were the
Substance of Life.

This is true, if such Physic be administered, as does indifferently purge d
every Humor; or if it be given to such as are e well enough in Health, and do
not lack the virtue of a Medicament.

Black Hellebore also well prepared does separate the Humor, that is the Cause
of these Accidents; and Avicenna says, that its Nature is to change the evil
Complexion of the Body, and to bring on a better.

The Use also of Bathes is profitable for a fasting Stomach: for it consumes
the Phlegmatic Moisture, especially in those that are of a cold Constitution.

In like manner Gargarisms, as Aristotle says in his Book Of the Secrets of
Secrets.

Old Men also are to be bathed fasting, especially they that are Phlegmatic.
For it is better that a Man should receive from the Moisture of the Bath, than
the Bath from the Moisture of a Man's Body.

But the Bath draws the Humors to the Superficies and Skin of the Body; and
therefore seems rather a Cause than Impediment of Greyness, and rather to make
Men gray than to preserve them from Gray Hairs.

Therefore we have added, that Fasting must precede, and Evacuation of
Superfluities be before Bathing, as Hippocrates says.

Trifera of Black, Emblick and Bellirick Myrobalans is one of those things
which averts the Infirmities and Accidents of Old Age, as Rasy affirms in his
Tract Of Adorning the Hair; also an Electuary of Indian Myrobalans with Sugar
keeps back Gray Hairs, as Rasy says in his Book to Almansor. Chewing of
preserved Myrobalans is a Cause, that the Hairs do not so early put on
Greyness. Avicenna also testifies this in his Canon Of Things hindering Gray
Hairs. And if chewing of Myrobalans and Chepuli preserved be daily used, Youth
is more easily preserved.

For this Trifera operates by drying up the Phlegm; and that the more, if the
Pine-Nut be added, which is hot and moist in the third, according to some in
the second Degree: but a small Quantity is to be added.

For it has the Property of drying up the corrupt Moisture, of breeding a good
one, of making that fat, and of strengthening a sick and debilitated Body: It is
good for the Cough, and putrefyed Humors in the Lungs, it cleanses the Humors
in the Reins and Bladder, it prevents Ulcers of the Bladder, and removes the
Stone. It is a Medicine most fit for Old Men, and for them that have a cold
Complexion: It must be taken after Meat: It has more Virtue when fresh than
old; and (which is a Wonder among the Secrets of Nature) it may be both Meat
and Medicine:

Meat, in that it restores the Natural Moisture;

Medicine, in that it dries up and cleanses all strange and foreign Moisture.

Evacuation of the Preternatural Humidity is performed by any Medicine
whatever, wherein are put the f Skales of Iron; but with more ease and better,
where there is Gold well prepared, as Avicenna says in his Tract Of Things
which keep back Gray Hairs.

For Gold has the Virtue to divide and separate the Phlegmatic Matter from
the true and useful Humor of the Body.

That Medicine also whose g Mine is the Indian Plant, casts out the redounding
Plenty of Phlegm. Of which the Prince speaks, saying, That it is of a hot and
dry Complexion in the Second Degree, of subtle Operation and Complexion; it
opens Obstructions, drives away Wind and Vapors, strengthens the Bowels,
bridles and restrains Anger, removes strange and hurtful defluxions of the
Humors, refreshes the Nerves, and bedews them with a thin and subtle Moisture;
it is very good for the Brain, it sharpens the Senses, chears the Heart it
self, and has also a Virtue to stop immoderate Urine and the Melancholic
Dysentery.

Isaac speaks thus of it, It strengthens all the inner Parts, expells the
Superfluities of the Body, opens the Obstruction of the Liver, and helps the
Superfluity and Defect of the Bladder.

That is to be made choice of, which is of a blackish Inside and Outside, which
contains as it were a Horny Hardness. The best is easily known: for being cast
into Water it easily sinks to the Bottom.

The Medicine which lives h in the Air has a Property of Strengthening,
Dissolving, Attenuating, Cleansing and Consuming; It strengthens the Heart and
all the principal Parts, it dissolves, attenuates, cleanses and consumes
superfluous Phlegm, and Melancholy, wheresoever it abounds in Man's Body, but
especially if it be in the Stomach and Brain. Whence it is said to have an
unspeakable Virtue against the Passions and Troubles of Old Age, whether it be
taken in Meat, or in Drink, or in an Electuary.

It is read in some Book of the Latins, that a certain Queen wrote to another,
that this was good against Old Age, that it did help the Melancholic, and
Persons troubled with the Passions of the Heart.

Also an Indian King wrote to another Prince, that he had no Treasure within
the Confines of his Kingdom preferable to this Plant.

Of it is made an Oil most profitable for the Sight, and most adverse to the
Accidents of Old Age.

It is said to live in the Air, because without the Air it receives not
Nourishment.

This is manifest in i Roses, which in the Spring are bent back under Ground,
and may be kept to Mid-Winter.

The Property of its Flower does not abide above a Year: As the Moon
increases, its Flowers increase, and indeed as the Moon decreaseth, its
Flowers decrease. In Spring Time at the increase of the Moon its Flowers are to
be gathered; and in this Plant there are Ten Properties or Virtues.

The Medicine which lies hid in the Sea agrees with and may be mixed these
aforesaid: for it is of admirable Virtue and Efficacy against those Passions of
Age and Old Age, as Experience shows.

It is hot and dry in the Second Degree, as Isaac affirms; it strengthens the
Stomach, the Senses, and all the inner Parts. It very much helps against
Fainting and the Falling Sickness, if it be given to the Patients in the Winter
or Springtime, so long as it does keep.

The Use of the aforesaid Medicines will not do so much good in a hot Season k
and Complexion, unless as much of a cold and moist thing be mixed with them, to
temper their Heat and Dryness; also a little Saffron must be added.

We have done with the things which purge and waste those Humors, whence do
flow all the Accidents of Old Age.

NOTES on CHAP. X.
a Here this great Chemist shows himself as great a Rationalist as Galen
himself; and he proceeds in the readiest Method and with the choicest
Medicines, that the most famous Physicians, whether Greeks, Latins, or
Arabians, could furnish him withal.

b There be three kinds of Rue, i. e. Garden-Rue, Wall-Rue, and Goats Rue, all
of them Herbs of great Efficacy and Use in Physic. But perhaps our Author
means principally Garden-Rue, which is of two kinds, narrow, and broad-leaved.

c The Seeds of Citrulls or Water-Melons are Diuretic, Opening, and take away
the Sharpness of Humors, they cleanse the Reins and Bladder, and lay the
Effervescency of Blood and Choler.

d Here the Panchymagoga, Pills and Elixirs of our Quacks, and

e Here their general Directions for such their Trash are sufficiently
exploded. For it requires the deliberate and particular Consideration of the
best Physician, whether to purge his Patient at all, and (if requisite) with
what sort of Physic, and where to terminate the Dose. Of how many Murders then
must they be guilty that let fly their poisonous, ill-prepared and worse
proportioned Doses at a venture among the Multitude, upon their own and their
poor deluded Patients small Discretion when and how to take them?

f Iron consists of a more crude Mercury and Sulphur than Gold does; but comes
very near Gold, if well prepared: For as when the Body of Gold is opened, it
becomes Aurum fulminans, so Filings of Iron or Steel dissolved in Aqua Fortis,
and precipitated with Oil of Tartar, become Ferrum fulminans, and opening as
the other is. And without doubt well prepared Chalybeates cautiously
administered are very advantageous to many Patients.

g This is the Ancients Agallochum, the Moderns Lignum Aloes. It is a Wood that
is brought from India and Arabia, speckled, of a sweet Smell, in Taste
astringent, with some Bitterness; it is clothed with a Skin, more truly than
with a Bark, a little parti-colored. But Garzias will have it a Tree like an
Olive Tree, sometimes less, which grows no where but in India. There are
several sorts; but our Author gives you the Marks of the best.

h Some think here is meant Rosemary, others a kind of Silk: Both which
(especially the former) all Physicians account great Revivers of the Spirits.

i Our Author seems here to intimate something of a Christmas Rose; which to
him was a Work of Nature; to the Monks a Miracle. Like the Rose of Jericho or
S. Mary, which the Monks will have to be a Rose: But is indeed a sort of
Treacle-Mustard. Their Argument taken from Ecclesiastic. 24. 14. As a
Rose-Plant in Jericho, is false: For this Plant grows not about Jericho, but in
Arabia Deserta on the Shore of the Red Sea. And that Place in Apocrypha must be
understood of Red or Crimson Roses. And then its Effect is a Cheat. For Women
use it out of an Opinion, that at the Time of Travel it will show the hour of
Birth. Seeing (as they are verily persuaded) if it be put in Water it opens
not, before the Child begins to be born, and does open the inner Orifice of the
Womb. But this supposititious Rose put in Water at any Time opens it self,
and not only on Christmas-Eve and at the Time of Birth. Nay, it has opened it
self, when the Child has been dead in the Womb. O wonderful! that such^
Superstitions should prevail amongst People called Christians; and yet it has
crept into the hearts of silly Women, That a Rose of Jericho (especially if
consecrated by the Pope) can do more than the Divine Power. Bellonius Obs. l.
2. c. 86. p. 338. elegantly describes it. The Plants which grow on this Plain
call to mind a certain little Plant, which some Impostor Monks have named the
Rose of Jericho; whose Root being put in Water, because the Plant does open,
they have taken some tolerable pretext for their Imposture: And to cause
Admiration in the Spectators, they affirm that it only opens on Christmas-Eve,
and when a Woman is in Labor. And they that know not the Nature of it, think
it can open at no time else; but they are deceived. And Cornutus c. 45. De Pl.
Canad. p. 114. gives the Reason why it opens it self: Nor does Water this in
green Plants only; but in the dry also, which we may see in the Rose of
Jericho, thirty years after it is pulled up, whose Root, if you wet with Water,
the Plant which had its Branches wound on a heap, shrivel'd, dry and dead;
presently its Arms do revive, and the contracted Flowers expand themselves by a
certain stupendous Miracle of Nature; whereby Midwives impose on poor teeming
Women, when they affirm that this therefore happens, because the time of Birth
is at hand: But it is a Story: for the same happens at any time, if it have
Moisture. Now by what reason Water applied fresh to the dry Rose of Jericho
causes it to bud and blossom; by as great reason may the new-admitted Air
revive the Rose-bud, buried in the Earth some Months before: For Nature, the
main Impediment removed, will proceed on her Work, and may begin to perfect
that in December, where She left off (being stopped by Art) in March or April
before. And by such artificial Methods, I believe, were those sudden (but
reputed Magic, or Miraculous) Productions of Plants and Animals procured,
which have characterized so many Devils or Saints to the less-considering part
of Mankind, but in reality were only the Casts of the subtle Artists Skill in
Nature.

k This great Physician here intimates to us, that one Salve will not serve
every Sore; but that all Indicantia are to be considered, before the most
curious Analeptick be given. And then according to the Temper of the Season and
the Patient, he orders other Simples to be mixed with it to qualify any Excess:
Which is one great Reason why Physicians compound their Medicines.

CHAP. XI. Of those things which preserve Youth, and cause Gray Hairs to fall,
and Black or Youthful ones to come in their room.
ALL hot Oils preserve Youth, so far as they hinder the Falling and Greyness of
the Hair.

Oil of Gith especially does this, and Oil of Costus, as Avicenna says in his
Treatise Of Oils, and of things that keep back Gray Hairs. Oil of Costus taken
in Drink hinders Old Age, as Rasy says in his Book to Almansor.

Oil of unripe wild Olives preserves the Hair, if it be used daily, as is said
in his second Canon, in the Chapter Of Olives.

Likewise washing with Water and Oil hinders hoariness, as Aristotle says in
the End of his Book Of Animals.

And if all hot Oils do this, we may reckon into the number Oil of Balm, Oleum
Benedictum, and that which by Art is made of Bricks.

These things preserve the Hair.

But something must be said of those things that a root out the Gray Heirs, and
bring new and youthful ones. For Abohaly speaks of these things in his fourth
Book in the Chapter Of things that hinder Gray Hairs.

Now amongst the things that Men have experienced before our Time, and do
experience in these very Times of ours, these are some;

Red Dragantum and Albalcae of each one dram: for they strip off the Gray
Hairs, and in their stead do plant Black and Youthful ones.

Nevertheless no Man is able to bear or endure this, but he that has a strong
and moist Body.

And moreover we must see to administer it after the giving of some other
Medicine that cleanses and moistens the Lungs.

Now Isaac says, that if men drink Borage boiled with Water and Sugar or
Honey, it does excellently cleanse the Pipes of the Lung^.

Also Celtick Spike drunk with Wine frequently, does render the Breast and
Lungs clean; and many other things, that are delivered in the Books of
Physicians, effect this; As

A b certain Herb like unto Marjoram, whose Leaves are of a Blue or Sky Color,
and round as a Penny: Which increases as the Moon increases, and decreaseth
as she decreaseth. It grows on Mountains and Rocks of Rivers; it has one Leaf
successively after another; sometime it remains bare, its Flowers are of an
Orange Color, as is there said. If any one shall take of this Plant to the
weight of a Pease, and as much of the Cuttle-fish, and stop it up close in a
Vessel three Days, and drink it for some days with Cows Milk instead of Food,
the Gray Hairs will shed, and Black ones come in their room, and the Man will
become more juvenile.

I have not tried these things; But this Accident may be removed for a time,
and how it may be done is found in Physic Books.

NOTES on CHAP. XI.
a How to do this is now well known lippis and tonsoribus and to all
Peruke-makers and Instruments of Luxury in Europe.

b Some think this to be the Wonderworking Moon-wort of the Chemists, or the
Moon-rue of the Germans. It grows in high Woods, it has a round Stalk and only
one Leaf, dissected with five or seven Gashes on each side, almost like Rue,
with a great deal of small Seed on the top of the Stalk. The Root has a great
many Fibers like Broadleaved Plantain. It is to be found in July and not after.
It is called Moon-wort because (as some say) it increases and decreases with
the Moon; and how many days the Moon is above the Earth, into so many Gashes is
its Leaf indented. Others would have it to be Bolbonac: But this it cannot be;
for the Fruit, not the Leaf, of Bolbonac is round, nor does this increase and
decrease with the Moon as Moon-wort is said to do.

CHAP. XII. Of things which restore and strengthen the Natural Heat, weakened by
the Course of Nature, that is, by Dissolution of the Native Moisture, and
Augmentation of an Extraneous one.
I Have read many Volumes of the Wise, I find few things in Physic, which
restore the Natural Heat, weakened by Dissolution of the Innate Moisture, or
Increase of a foreign one.

But certain Wise Men have tacitly made Mention of some Medicine, which is a
likened to that which goes out of the Mine of the Noble Animal. They affirm
that in it there is a Force and Virtue, which restores and increases the
Natural Heat.

As to its Disposition they say it is like b Youth it self, and contains an
equal and temperate Complexion.

And the Signs of a temperate Complexion in Men are, when their Color is made
up of e White and Red, when the Hair is Yellow, inclining to d Redness and
Curling.

According to Pliny, when the e Flesh is moderate both in Quality and Quantity,
when a Man's f Dreams are delightful, his Countenance g cheerful and pleasant,
and when his h Appetite of eating and drinking is moderate.

This Medicine indeed is like to such a Complexion: For it is of a temperate
Heat, its i Fume is temperate and sweet, and grateful to the k Smell. When it
departs from this Temperature, it departs so far from its Virtue and Goodness.

This Medicine does therefore temperately heat, because it is temperately hot:
It therefore l heals, because it is whole: When it is sick, it makes a Man
sick: When it is distempered, it m breeds Distempers, and changes the Body to
its own Disposition, because of the Similitude it has with the Body.

For the Infirmity of a Brute Animal rarely passes into Man, but into another
Animal of the same kind: But the Infirmity of a Man passes into Man; and so
does n Health because of Likeness.

Know (most Gracious Prince!) that in this there is a great Secret. For Galen
says, that whatever is dissolved from any thing, it must of necessity be
assimilated to that thing: As is manifest in Diseases passing from one to
another; such is Weakness of the Eyes, and Pestilential Diseases.

This thing has an admirable Property, for it does not only render Humane
Bodies harmless from Corruption, but it defends also the Bodies of Plants from
Putrefaction.

This thing is seldom found, and although sometime it be found, yet it cannnot
commodiously be had of all Men. And instead of it the Wise do use that
Medicine, which is in the Bowels of the Earth complete and prepared, and that
which swims in the Sea, and that which is in the Square Stone of the Noble
Animal: so that every part may be free from the infection of another.

But if that Stone cannot be acquired, let other Elements separated, divided
and purified be made use of.

Now when this thing is like to Youth, that is, of temperate Complexion, it
has good Operations: If its Temperature be better, it produces better
Effects: Sometimes it is even in the highest Degree of its perfection, and then
it operates best; and then there is that Property, whereof we have spoken
before.

This differs from other Medicines and Nutriments, which heat and moisten after
a certain temperate manner, and are good for Old Men. For other Medicines
principally heat and moisten the Body, and secondarily they strengthen the
Native Heat: But this does principally strengthen the Native Heat, and after
that o refreshes the Body by moistening and heating it. For it reduces this
Heat in Old Men, who have it but weakly and deficient, to a certain stronger
and more vehement Power.

If a p Plaster be made hereof and applied to the Stomach, it will help very
much: for it will refresh the Stomach it self, and excite an Appetite; it will
very much recreate an Old Man, and change him to a kind of Youth; and will make
Complexions by what means soever depraved or corrupted, better.

Many Wise Men have spoken but little of this thing, they have indeed laid down
another thing like it, as Galen in his fifth Book Of Simple Medicines, and
Johannes Damascenus in his Aphorisms.

But it is to be observed, that q Venus does weaken and diminish the Power and
Virtue of this thing.

And it is very likely that the Son of the Prince, in his second Canon Of the
Operations of Simple Medicines, spoke of this thing, where he says, that there
is a certain Medicine concealed by Wise Men, lest the r Incontinent should
offend their Creator.

There is such a Heat in this thing, as is in Young Men of a Sound Complexion,
and if I durst declare the Properties of this Heat, this most hidden Secret
should presently be revealed.

For this Heat does help the Palsical, it restores and preserves the wasted
Strength of the Native Heat, causes it to flourish in all the Members, and
gently revives the Aged.

In like manner, because of Similitude, let the Square Stone of the Noble
Animal, the Mineral Sun, and the Matter which swims in the Sea be made use of.
These three things well prepared are assimilated to the Native Heat of a
healthy Man.

The Ancient Sages have also reported, that there is another kind of Medicine,
which is able to perform this, namely,- s Wine artificially mixed and prepared,
whereof there are five Properties, as Galen says.

Wine mixed with Water, 1. Heats the whole Body.

2. As it were pierces the Members.

3. Tempers the Humors.

4. Excites Natural Heat.

5. Chears the Heart; which I think is to be imputed to the Wine not the Water:
And it must be understood of that Wine which is t strong, and is found in Syria.

Also Royal Haly in his Chapter Of Old Age, where he discourses of Drink,
speaks thus, If any one use it, according to the Measure, and at the Time he
ought, it will strengthen the Native Heat, and diffuse it through the whole
Body; it will disperse Choleric Humors, and temper them by purging by Sweat
and Urine; it will make a hard Nature softer; and will moisten, when through
too violent Labor Dryness does happen. It begets Cheerfulness and Joy, and
mitigates Melancholy.

It is said also, that the white and subtle should be drunk with a great deal
of Water, especially when the ripe Age of Man, and the time of full growth is
come.

But Sour and Old Wines are to be avoided: If Men be of necessity forced to
drink such Wines, let them be dashed with sweet Water and Warm; and before they
be drunk, let them stand mixed for six Hours.

For Isaac does thus speak of strong Wine mixed: Wine mixed does cool hot Bodies,
moisten the dry, make dry the moist, and produce contrary Operations. Whence
the Ancients likened it to the great Treacle, because one may see two contrary
Virtues latent in it.

We would have all understood of strong Wine mixed, wherein are five Properties,
u Color, Smell, Taste, Substance, Age.

A Man ought to drink that Wine, which is yellowish.

Haly affirms, that Wine should be drunk, whose Color enclines to Redness.

Avicenna says, Red is most eligible, which is clear of Substance, in Taste
neither bitter nor sweet, but Pontick. But if it seem too Vinous, it ought to
be mixed with Spring Water, where there is no extraneous Vapor.

Royal Haly says, that Old and Sour Wine should be avoided.

Isaac thinks, that after a Year is over, the Goodness and Strength of the Wine
does begin.

None almost do speak of the space of Time, wherein this Mixture should be
made, except Royal Haly, who seems to have spoken well in his foresaid Canon Of
Old Wine: For unless Wine remain for some Time mixed, the Wine by Digestion in
the Stomach will be separated from the Water.

For the hot and fiery part ascends, and the Earthy will remain in the Bottom
of the Stomach, as appears by a Glass-Vessel full of Red Wine; so that if Water
be poured upon it, and the Vessel closed, that no Air can get in, you shall see
the Water sink to the Bottom.

But this Clashing of the Wise about the Color and Season of Wine is not
worthy so great Admiration, seeing that diversity of Soils does often cause it.

For the Virtue of Plants is various according to the Variety of Places and
Provinces, as Haly says upon Galen's Regiment, where he speaks of the
Correction of Medicine.

Aristotle Of the Secrets of Secrets affirms, That Wine should be drunk by Old
Men, and them that plentifully flow with Phlegm; he thinks it hurtful for the
Young and Hot.

Red Wine increases Blood more than White, and is in some measure better than
all Wine, and more agreeable to Men's Complexions, such namely as grows on a
Soil enclosed between Hills and Dales, whose Clusters are of a good Sweetness
and Maturity, in a subtle and pure Air, and which are not gathered before the
Force of their Substance be rebated, their Color become Golden, namely, a Mean
between Red and Yellow, their Taste sharp, pungent and delectable, and before
their Substance be clear.

When the Wine shall be such, let a Man drink as his Age and the nature of the
Season will permit.

For then it will preserve the Stomach, strengthen the Natural Heat, help
Digestion, defend the Body from Corruption, carry the Food to all the Parts,
and concoct the Food till it be turned into very Blood: It also cheers the
Heart, tinges the Countenance with Red, makes the Tongue voluble, begets
Assurance, and promises much Good and Profit.

If it be overmuch guzzled, it will on the contrary do a great deal of Harm:

For it will darken the Understanding, ill affect the Brain, render the Natural
Vigor languid, bring Forgetfulness, weaken the Joints, beget shaking of the
Limbs and Bleareyedness, it will darken and make black the Blood of the Heart:
Whence Fear, Trembling, Weakness of the Genitals, and the Destruction and Ruin
of the Seed do arise.

And, which is worse, it breeds the w Leprosy, and so imitates the Nature of
the Serpent, which taken immoderately, and not as Physicians advise, is mortal:
of which well prepared, Antidotes are made that cure Diseases.

NOTES on CHAP. XII.
a Some would have this to be Quintessence of Man's Blood: But what the Author
speaks of, cannot be predicable of any Quintessence: For his Arcanum is applied
Plasterwise, Quintessences are taken inwardly. Neither does he mention any
Preparation of it at all, but gives only the Virtues of it in puris naturalibus.

Some might imagine it a Precious Stone, that turns its Orient Splendour into a
sordid pale Blush at the Venereal Pollutions of its Possessor. But no one can
imagine that the Sapphire in a Ring can contribute to the Guilt of the
Incontinent otherwise, than as sometimes it is the Price of their Iniquity,
which its fading does betray.

Now our Author declaring he could meet but with little of it in Physic, I
guess we must have recourse to Divinity, in which he was also conversant. Where
in 1 King. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. we meet with that Medicine more plainly, which is
here more obscurely described.

1. Now King David was old, and stricken in years, and they covered him with
Cloths, but he gat no Heat. 2. Wherefore his Servants said unto him, Let there
be sought for my Lord the King a young Virgin, and let her stand before the
King, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy Bosom, that my Lord the
King may get Heat. 3. So they sought for a fair Damsel thorowout all the Coasts
of Israel, and found Abishag a Shunamite, and brought her to the King. 4. And
the Damsel was very fair, and cherished the King, and ministered to him: but the
King knew her not.
The Jews say, that when Saul was easing himself, David cut off the Skirt of
his Robe; for which David's Heart smote him, and the Qualm came so cold over
his Heart, that he could never after recover it. Others say, He quaked so
^erribly at the sight of the Angels drawn Sword, which destroyed his People,
that the Cold Fit held him to his dying-day. But King David was old and
stricken in Years, and they covered him with Cloths, but he gat no Heat.
Wherefore his Servants advise him to this Remedy.

b Our Author has given Abishag the very fair Damsel's Adumbration most
curiously.

c Here are this fair Shunamite's Rose of Sharon and Lily of Damascus, d her
Hair like Purple in curling Locks, e her two young Roes that are Twins feeding
among the Lilies, f her Head filled with the Dew, and her Locks with the Drops
of the Night, g her Countenance fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, h her Fruit
sweet to her Taste, as She sits under the Shadow with great delight, i her
Spikenard and chief Spices, k while the Southwind blows upon her Garden, that
the Spices thereof may flow, l her Well of Living Waters and Streams of
Lebanon, m And here the fairest among Women is wounded by the Watchmen, and
then her Beloved departs.

n Here our Author allows a wholesome Contagion as well as a morbid, and a
Sympathy in Health as well as in Sickness between Creatures of the same Kind,
which argues that this Help meet for an Old Man must be somewhat Humane.

o And let her cherish him.

p And let her lie in thy Bosom, that my Lord the King may get Heat.

q But the King knew her not.

r This danger of Incontinence is another convincing Argument, that our Authors
Cataplasm is a Virgin, the greatest Temptation to that Fault.

Now if the Sin of eating the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, were the
Scriptural Knowledge of a Woman (as is some Learned Men's Opinion) a spotless
Virginity may very likely do some Good in protracting that evil Day of Man,
which Woman's corruption first brought upon him.

Or admit, if our first Parents had not eat the Apple, (as most Divines allow
they really did) Man might have been conceived without Sin or brought forth
without Sorrow, this and all other Acts being naturally performed according to
the Will of his Creator, as the Sun goes round without Sin; but that by the
Fall, Will and Pleasure is become Sinful, and Lust exorbitant, which before was
as pure innocent natural Propensity, as for the Stars to keep their Courses:
Even in Nature this way corrupted, the Remedy is highly Rational. For in this
Case the Virgin Heat irritated and exalted by the Contact of Man thus Old,
exerts it self by its Incubation on her Bedfellow, when she fails of Conception
by him; and so acts that Vigor outwardly in preserving her decaying Species,
which she would otherwise inwardly in Procreation of it anew. And on the other
side this Old Dust and Ashes may by his warm Concubine have some Sparks kindled
in him, so as to keep the Embers alive, that for want of fuel are not able to
break out into a Flame of Lust, however willing, though insufficient to take
green Wood. But if the Old Man's Vital Flame thus trembling and lambent on
himself, should proceed to animate Posterity, he must only expect his own
speedy Extinction.

s This is Old Men's Milk, for there is no fitter Vehicle to accelerate the
heavy Circulation of their Blood, than Generous Wines.

t But what shall we say of Rhenish, White and Claret, which have an innate
watrish Crudity, besides a worse mixture oftentimes at the Vintners?

u These Properties should be well considered in our Beer and Ale, whose Cold
Clime refuses the Grape. And since Fire is to them, what the Sun is to the
Grape, we should take great care they be well boiled, and allow them time
enough to ferment and ripen. But here I must take notice of a modern ill
Custom of drinking Brandy, which may very well serve Medicinally upon
extraordinary Occasion; but the constant Use of it must needs dry exceedingly,
the Blood and Inwards especially, and so turn Men's Bodies to dry old Skeletons,
or by creating Obstructions in the Alimental Passages, cause Dropsies, and
either hasten Old Age, or by Death prevent it.

w How often do Tavern-haunters purchase their Liquor with Rubies in their
Faces, which here and there drop off in a leprous Scurf? A fit Intimation they
should be secluded Man's Society, which they have abused; when their very Looks
do cry them Unclean.

CHAP. XIII. Of things which repair the Faculties and Senses, and restore the
Strength of the Body.
I Have found some Medicines in the Books of the Wise very profitable for
restoring the Senses and Faculties of Humane Nature, and one especially, which
is of the a Serpentine Kind.

But although there be many kinds of Serpents, yet three in especial manner are
agreeable to this Microcosm.

The full Knowledge of one of which has neither come to the Greeks nor to us;
it is perfectly known only to the AEthiopians: And this Serpent is the b Dragon.

But the Knowledge of the Properties of the others has arrived even at us.

Such is the Serpent, which of Avicenna in his fourth and fifth Canon is called
a c Viper, and the other is the d Snake.

Haly and Avicenna write of Vipers, saying, that Vipers are Serpents having
flat Heads and not broad, their Necks are little and slender, their Tail short,
in their going they make a Hissing and a Noise.

A Man must hunt them between the e latter end of Spring and beginning of
Summer. They which are of the better Sort are Yellow, and among the Yellow the
Females. They are distinguished, in that the Males have only one Tooth, the
Females several.

But care must be had lest Asps be chosen, such as are White, living in
Fish Ponds, on banks of Rivers, and watery Places; for such use to do harm, and
cause Thirst.

But let those be taken, which are slow of Motion, living in Places far remote
from Moisture, and if possible to be effected, they should dye as they are
taken, and let four inches be cut off the Head and Tail, let the Guts be taken
out, let them be washed very clean with Water and Salt, and let them be boiled
again and again in Water and Salt, till the Flesh may easily be pulled and
separated from the Bones, then let them be beaten in a Mortar, let the Flesh be
anointed with the Oil of Balm, and dried in the Shade.

And a Man must take heed, that the Sunbeams do not fall upon the Flesh before
it be dried, nor afterward; For the Sun by his Power does spoil the Flesh of
its Virtue, so that it f expells no Poison received either by Bite, or in any
Drink.

Avicenna has reported such things in his fifth Canon. Also in his Chapter Of
the Leprosy he commends Mountain Vipers and white, and orders that the Head
and Tail be cut off both at once.

In like manner Royal Haly in his last Discourse of his Practice advises that
those be had which live in Houses and Salt Waters, and Young ones, in which is
a red Color inclining to Brownness, whose Heads are flat.

Also in his Chapter Of the Leprosy he says, that a certain Quantity of their
Trochisces may be taken with Arrian Wine; And Avicenna says with Red Wine: But
Arrian Wine is Red. As for the Preparation, enough is said already.

The g Property of the Viper, as Haly says in his second discourse of his
Practice, is to purge the inner Parts from superfluities, and to bring out the
venomous Humor to the Skin, and to get it out by Sweat, or Lice, or
Excoriation, to heal the Venomous Bites of Animals: and Galen says in that
Exposition, that there is not a Medicine better than this for strengthening the
inner Parts, and clearing the Body of bad Humors.

But it is also necessary, that some other Medicine be artificially mixed with
it, which may in like manner overcome the Poison, such as Cassia lignea,
Zedoaria, Citron Rind.

After the same manner Avicenna speaks of the Serpent in his second Canon; but
he does not express whether he would be understood of the Viper, Snake, or
Dragon; his Words are to this purpose; The Flesh of the Serpent, when prepared,
forces all the Humors to depart to and penetrate the Skin, and properly when
a Man is purged; it also h prolongs Life, maintains the Faculties of the Body
and preserves the Sense and Youth; it has a great Power of drying, yet but
gently of heating: But it has an admirable Virtue against the i Leprosy: It
hinders the Approach and Increase of the Kings Evil, it cures the Griefs of the
Nerves, it sharpens the sight: for Avicenna testifies this in his fourth Canon
Of the disposition of the Visive Faculty; also the Use of it preserves Health.

But the Latins, as it appears to me, speak of the Snake. For they say, it is
good for the Dropsical and them that are troubled with the Spleen, and them
that have any Defect in their Sight, also that it is useful to recruit all the
Faculties, and that it brings aid and assistance toward the curing and
removing Acute Distempers.

The Son of the Prince Abohaly, in his Canon Of the Leprosy, says, that a Man
ought to cease from the Use of this Flesh, when he is troubled with a Mist
before his Eyes, or an Inflammation of his Belly.

Haly affirms that this Flesh is not to be given, but when Diseases come from
the ill nature of the Humors; and that it is not to be used, except it be mixed
with Styptick Spices, that have a Property against those Diseases, and the
Mixture must be of so long continuance, as till it be fermented, otherwise k it
will be nothing worth.

The Quantity of the Aromatic Spices in my Judgment ought to be such, namely,
One part of the Flesh, and Seven of the Aromatic Spices. This holds true if
the Place be not hot, nor the Complexion high.

But if the Place be cold and the Complexion chill, there ought to be one part
Flesh; and Ten of the Aromatic Spices.

And, as some think, these are the things which ought to be mixed with it,
Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, Citron Rind, Zedoary and a little Musk.

Some have judged this Flesh should not be taken, but when the Sun ascends.
Perchance the thing was made of this Serpent, which was given to a certain Lady
in Germany in our days. For it happened that there were two Sisters, both fair,
one of which moved with Envy gave the other Poison to drink, so that her Hair
and Nails came off, and She endured wonderful Misery: After She had taken this
Medicine, She looked like a Girl of Twenty, although She were much older; her
Hair that before was Black turned Flaxen, and an equal Complexion of White and
Red did succeed.

NOTES on CHAP. XIII.
a As in the former Chapter Woman, who was the Mediatrix of Sin and Death
between the Serpent and Man, was made use of to prevent Death; so here the
Serpent himself, the Arch-plotter of that Death, is taken in his own Snare, the
Decree of the Almighty is executed upon him in the very literal sense, and
though he can hurt Man's Heel, yet he must lose his own Head, and make one of
the greatest Antidotes against his own envenomed Spite and Man's Death, which
he so much designed. Thus to his own cost has the Serpent persuaded us to
taste of that Tree of Knowledge, by whose Experience we have found how to
resist the Evil by the Good that is in himself. And herein our Author makes
good, what in his second Chapter he told us, That in whatsoever thing the Most
High GOD has put an admirable Virtue and Property, there He has also placed
Hurt, as it were the Guard of that very thing.

b The Ethiopian Dragon according to Bellonius is thick about the Belly, has
two Feet, and as many Wings whole like Bats, and the Tail of a Serpent. They
are so big, that without making Use of their Poison, they kill Elephants, and
all other Beasts by mere Force. Whence Lucan lib. 9. sings thus: Rumpitis
ingentes amplexi verbere Tauros,
Nec tutus Spatio est Elephas, datis omnia Letho,
Nec vobis opus est ad noxia fata Veneno.
With mortal Gripe you squeeze out huge Bulls Guts,
To the Elephant's Bulk no Fence is, Death you bring
To all; for Death you have no need of Sting.


c The Viper is a Serpent about an Inch thick, and two Cubits, but generally
less in Length, parti-colored and Yellowish, he bears his Neck upright, and
crawls with the rest of his Body: He leaps when he bites. The Male according to
the Ancients has only two Teeth, and the Female four; therefore Nicander says
in Theriacis, (...)
(...)
With Dog-Teeth two Man's skin Male Vipers gore
Diffusing Poison, Females bite with more.


But Baldus Angelus says, the Male-Viper has four Teeth, only at certain
Times he casts two of them, which made the Ancients think he had but two. But
if a Man will be at the trouble to anatomize Vipers, he shall find they have
twelve Teeth, six on either side in the upper Iaw, and twenty two, eleven on
either side, in the nether Iaw, in all thirty four, which they use in eating;
besides the Dog-teeth before mentioned, with Bladders wherein they contain
their Poison, which once voided gathers again after the manner of
Excrementitious Humors: And with these Teeth only they fight and poison. The
Male has a narrower and sharper Head, thicker Neck and smaller Body than the
Female. His Tail grows smaller by Degrees as in other Serpents: hers is small
at once. He has also rougher Scales at his Tail, which in his Anger he ruffles
as a Cock does his Feathers. It is observable, that the Female-Vipers first
conceive Eggs all of one Color like Fish-Rows, and then bring them forth young
Vipers, whereas other Serpents first lay Eggs, and afterward hatch them. But
the Female's biting off the Male-Viper's Head in Coition, and the Young ones
eating themselves out of the old Viper's Belly, are both mere Fables.

d The Land-Snake is a harmless Creature: For if he bite he inflicts no Venom,
but the bare Wound. But the Bite of a Water-Snake is exceeding dangerous.

e They should not be taken presently, as they come out of their
Winter Quarters; but when they are well fed; yet before they are with Young.

f Hence it is evident of what Moment the true Preparation of Medicine is.

g Treacle, the most serviceable Medicine in common Use, sufficiently shows the
Virtue of the Viper, which is the Basis of that famous Composition. Nay,
Treacle alone or some Mixture with it is the Mountebanks Sheet-Anchor to save
their Wrack in the Stygian Lake: For these Fellows must, to please the People,
either poison their Guts upon the Stage as often as they break their Fasts, or
they must keep two Lents in one Year. I find Treacle in the Description of
Orvietan's Secret, a noted illiterate Mountebank in Rome, who promised others
immunity from Poison by his Electuary, but at last dyed himself of Poison.

These Cheats are well set out by the Father of the Poets. Non enim sunt ii
Scientia aut Art Divini,
Sed superstitiosi Vates, Impudentesque Harioli,
Aut inertes, aut insani, aut quibus egestas imperat:
Qui sibi semitam nonsapiunt, alteri monstrant viam.
For the sake of English Empiricks, thus: In Science or in Art Divines they are
none,
But Superstitious Bards, who Charms do boast,
Lazy, or Mad, or under Want they groan:
They Would be your Guides that never that way crossed.


h The Reason of this may be drawn from that Similitude, our Author mentioned
in his second Chapter, which by Physicians since his Time is called Signature.
For as the Serpent renews his Youth by casting his Skin yearly; so in Medicine
he produces the like Renovation.

i And so from his Spots we may guess him good against the Leprosy.

k Here he illustrates what he said before in Chap. II. That out of the
Serpent, Hellebore and Gold no Man can fetch any noble or sublime Operation,
unless he be Wise, Skilful, and have of a long time experienced them.

CHAP. XIV. Of Things that excite the Animal Faculty, refresh Men's Bodies, and
quicken Motion.
ALL a Wise Men, that have yet treated of the Regiment of Health, constantly
affirm, that the Aged and Men well grown in years, presently after they are
risen from Sleep, should be anointed with Oil; So Royal Haly in his fifth
Treatise Of the Regiment of Old Men.

For such Anointing excites the Animal Faculty, and with it all the Rest; for
all other Faculties depend of and proceed from that, as Avicenna says in his
first Canon Of the Faculties.

But with what things this Anointing should be made, Physicians do very much
vary.

For the Son of the Prince Abohaly in his Chapter Of Oils affirms, that all
kinds of Oil refresh the Body, and help its Motion: But if all do this, it
cannot otherwise choose, but that one sort must be better than another.

Haly in his Treatise Of the Regiment of Old Men, thinks that Old Men should be
anointed with the Oil of Squill, and with the Oil of Violets mixed with the Oil
of Chamomel, and with the Oil of Dill.

But Aristotle affirms in his Books Of the Secrets of Secrets, that Anointing
ought to be made with sweet Smelling Ointments in the Morning at convenient
Seasons, that is, in Autumn, and Winter with Ointments made of Myrrh, and with
the Juice of an Herb which is called a Blite; in Summer and Spring Time cum
Vnguento Caerasino (made with Sanders) Enilegis, and the Juice of Enablaetti:
And he affirms this in his Canon Of Baths.

I shall say nothing of the making of Ointments, but that Sheeps Suet may be
mixed with every Ointment.

Campanus Germanicus, who lived a long time ago, says, the Wise Men of India
after Scarification did lay on this very thing with Oil of Balm.

The Son of the Prince, in his Canon Of Weariness, where he speaks of Balm,
says, it ought to be fortified with Wax or Pitch, that it may long retain its
Virtue and Operation.

And thus we see one Oil operates more strongly in Old Men than another.

NOTE on CHAP. XIV.
a We find in Holy Writ, before Hippocrates lived, Wine was Man's inward, and
Oil his outward Analeptick: And Unction was used by him, and by the Sons of Art
for many Ages after him: Only the Wisdom of our Age knows scarce any Use of it,
except contra Pruritum, and Pruritum Venereum. An erroneous Neglect
undoubtedly. Nothing can be more apt for our Author's Purpose; Since Old Men's
Natural Heat, as a weakened Garrison, slights the Outworks, and fairly retires
to the Fort of the Heart, till Supplies come from without. Now Unction is an
Evacuation to the outer Parts of the Body, because it heats, attenuates and
melts those useless H^mours, that are discharged to and lodged in the Habit of
the Body; and then of themselves they dissipate and evaporate; And so there is
Way made for the vital Flame to play from the Heart. But if the Unction be hot,
it not only softens the out Parts, but its Virtue reaches the very inward
Humors, and so heats, attenuates, and disperses them.

CHAP. XV. Of things that cause Clearness, Cleanness and Ruddiness of Skin, and
that take away Wrinkles.
ALL things that a move the Blood and Spirits to the Skin adorn and cloth the
Skin with Beauty, Cleanness and Ruddiness; and this thing is promoted by
whatsoever does gently cleanse the Skin, rendering in thinner, and making it
clean from those things that stick dead on its Surface.

And in performing this, Care must be had of three things, namely, of Cold, too
much Heat, and the Wind.

Now Blood is moved to the Skin three ways, namely, by breeding of good and
subtle Blood, by its Purity, and by Expansion.

Things that breed good Blood are those of good Juice; amongst which, according
to Pliny, is subtle and sweet smelling Wine; as Isaac speaks of Bread well
baked and leavened, and also all manner of Meats so they be but of good
Digestion. For Digestion is the true Fountain of good Blood and Humor. So does
Avicenna affirm of these things. Those things also breed good Humor, that are
boiled b covered without Water, and dry roasted.

In like manner that Drink is necessary, which moves the Blood from the inner
Parts to the outer, such as c Broth of Pulse, Wine, Milk, Mede, and the like
drunk on a fasting Stomach. And several have had Experience of these things, as
Avicenna says in his fourth Canon.

Haly in the end of his first Discourse of his Practice says, that drinking of
Wine and daily eating of wholesome Flesh makes a good and fair Color.

And things that dry the Blood are these, Trifera Sara^enica made up with
Myrobalans; and the Ancients affirmed that Cassia fistula could do the same

Perl prepared does make the Blood of the Heart clear and fine, as Isaac says
in his Degrees.

Things that disperse and spread abroad the Blood are many; and this is done
two ways;

The first is, either by taking things in at the Mouth, such as are Pepper,
Ginger, Cloves, Saffron properly boiled in Wine, otherwise it tingeth the
Blood; as also if two Drachms of Hyssop and one Dram of Saffron be drunk with
Sugar. And a Man may eat Herbs, such as Radish, Leeks, Onyons, if he eat not
often of them, as also d Garlic well prepared.

Or, if the Soul be e stirred by certain Operations, Actions, and Motions; of
which sort are Wrath, Joy, Mirth, f Anger, and what ever provokes Laughter, as
also Instrumental Music, and Songs, to converse with Company which discourse
facetiously, to look on precious Vessels, the Heavens and Stars, to be clothed
with Variety of Garments, to be delighted with Games, to obtain Victory over
ones Enemies, to argue with ones most dear and beloved Friends, as Aristotle
says in his Epistle to Alexander.

For a cheerful Mind brings Power and Vigor, makes a Man rejoice, stirs up
Nature and helps her in her Actions, as Rasy says to Almansor in his Canon Of
the Cogitations of the Mind.

But secondly, The things which being applied outwardly effect this with
Abstersion and Action, are Lotions and Unctions. And in these things the Way of
their Abstersiveness is unlike; for some things effect this more roughly,
others more finely. There are Ointments which take away and uncover the old
Skin, and cause the Spirits to penetrate as far as the Skin.

Causes that infect the Skin are many.

Either inward, such as are the Humors infecting the Blood, as is manifest in
the Jaundice. For they exert very dangerous operations in the inner Parts. This
Infection may be taken away by those Remedies, which are found among the Wise
in their proper Chapters.

Or outward, as Wind, Heat, Cold. For these things sometime make the Skin
black, foul and wrinkled; but how the Cuticle is defended from these
Inconveniences, and after they are come how they may be removed, the Wise do
teach.

Avicenna of things making the Color beautiful says, The Skin may be well
kept from the Sun, Cold and Wind, if it be smeared with the White of an Egg and
Water of Gum; or if some such thick thing be steeped in Water, and mixed with an
equal quantity of the White of an Egg, and if the Skin be smeared with it,
these Harms are removed, which were impressed from these Causes. So Haly speaks
in his Canon Of Beauty.

Take of the Flower of Beans, Pease, Vetches, Lupines, sweet Almonds blanched,
Dragant, Mastich, grind all these together, sierce them finely, blend them with
Milk, make a sweet Cataplasm of them, let it be on a Day and a Night, wash then
with the Water of boiled Bran, and so use it till the Skin be reduced to its
natural Quality and Disposition.

But if Corrugation happen in the Skin from these Causes, let this Ointment be
made, which Avicenna in his Canon Of O^l appoints, which is very available in
driving away and curing the aforesaid Ails.

Take a little Lily Root prepared, Oil of bitter Almonds, Honey and a little
Propolis, let them be melted together.

And some have said that Oil of Balm with Oil of Bays does most easily take
away and wipe off this Wrinkling of the Skin.

NOTES on CHAP. XV.
a In this Chapter here is a Cosmetica Rationalis, backed with true Philosophic
Reason, not projected upon the Fucus of a barren Notion; where, as in a curious
Picture, we may with Admiration view the Dashes of a Master's Hand, and then
sit down and consider, That only a good Philosopher can make a skilful
Physician.

b This may be done two Ways according to Riverius. The first is this, Take
your Meat, seasoned according to your Mind, and cut into long Slips, put it
into a well glazed Earthen Pot, close covered and luted with Lutum Sapientiae;
set it in an Oven, hot as it is when you draw your Bread, let it stand, and it
will with the Heat dissolve into Liquor. But this some may esteem Baking.

The second Way is this, and it is properly Boiling: Take your Meat prepared as
before, put it in a glazed Pot, in the middle whereof let there stand a wooden
Grate, or one of any other matter; lay your Meat upon it, so that the Bottom of
the Pot may be empty; close the Pot with its Cover, well luted with Paste of
Meal and Water well kneaded. Set it in Balneo Mariae boiling for five Hours.
You will have a limpid Liquor at the Bottom. Two or three Spoonfuls of such a
Preparation taken twice or thrice a Day is reckoned a great Restorative.

c We read in Daniel, how Pulse and Water made the four Children fairer in
Countenance and fatter in Flesh than they that fared on the Royal Provision.
Now Daniel having so good skill in the Learning of the Chaldaeans, as to be set
over all the Wise Men of Babylon, who were a sort of Men that by their Skill in
natural things could do Wonders; I no more question that by the same Skill he
knew, Pulse would nourish well, and give a good Color, than that he understood
by Books the number of the Years of the Captivity of his People. My Reason is,
He that would not eat the Kings Meat, nor drink of his Wine, lest he should be
defiled by offering part thereof on an Altar, if by; or by casting a little
into the Fire, where there was no Altar, which was a Propitiatory Grace to some
Heathen Deity; this Man sure would never have allowed himself the Enquiry into
the Wisdom and Learning of the Chaldees, had such Learning been either sinful
or useless: And it could never be more serviceable than in this Case. Neither
do I think Pease-Pottage a contemptible Dish among the Jews, since it made
their Father Jacob an Elder Brother. Besides, had not Pulse been a Driver out,
that great Physician Avicenna would not have made so much Use thereof in the
Small Pox and Measles.

d By Galen Garlic is called Plow-man's Treacle.

e A merry Heart makes a cheerful Countenance, and the Circulation of the Blood
is so Symmetrous to the Revolution of Man's Thoughts, that Men skilled in
Prudentials have reckoned Vultum esse animi Indicem, and ever took more notice
of an accidental Glance in a Passion, than of the most persuasive composed
Eloquence. Anger glows as a red and lowering Aurora, Joy bespreads the Scene
with a serene Hesperial Crimson. So Cataline for all his fair shows in Words to
the Senate, yet discovered that Treason in his very Face (as Historians
describe him) which his Heart was then contriving.

f Choler is by some reckoned the Salt of the Microcosm, which helps to keep
the Flood of Humors from Putrefaction: And this as well as the Macrocosmick
Ocean, unless sometimes it have its aestus, will be liable to Putrefaction. But
this and all other Passions must be confined within their Banks, lest Men be
transported to their Ruin: For though Grief once turned a Queen to Marble; yet
sudden and excessive Joy has often inscribed an Epitaph upon it; Thus to some
Men has excess of Happiness proved as much of Misery.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Usefulness of this Epistle, Of the Regiment of Old Men, and
of things that help the outward Senses, as also the Imagination, Reason and
Memory, and of the Composition of certain Medicines.
LET us see what the Regiment of this Epistle does add to the Regiment of Old
Men laid down by the Wise, in escaping the Accidents of Old Age, and how much
it helps Men, while it recounts the Meats and Things of good Juice, which are
of Use to Old Men and those that are stricken in Years: Which thing indeed the
Regiments of other Men do not fully perform.

This Epistle therefore shows, by what a Meats the Natural Moisture may be
restored.

Then, how it may be made more b sincere when it is restored.

Thirdly by what Means the c Accidents of Old Age, which come on apace, may
commodiously be hindered.

It also shows how a d foreign Humor and unnatural, that is the Fountain and
Cause of these Evils, may be purged and wasted.

It likewise opens a Way whereby the e Senses of Man by being recreated with
the Virtues of things may be repaired, how the f Natural Heat being spent and
shaken by some outward Causes may be restored, and how g White Hairs shed, and
new ones come in their Room.

Sixthly, it shows Medicines, whereby the h Animal Virtue, as it were dying and
weary, may be excited, Motion deficient may be renewed, the i Skin deformed
with Wrinkles and other ways, may be made fair.

Seventhly, It shows how the three k Instruments of the Senses do operate, and
are governed in every man, lest by reason of them any fault should fall upon
the Soul, and if it should fall, how it may be removed.

And it teaches many other things, which have been treated of in their proper
Chapters.

But the things which are laid down by us in this Epistle, differ very much
from the things laid down by the Ancients.

First, because the Ancients Regiment of living, defends Men's Bodies from
hastening to their End besides the Course of Nature: But our Regiment lays open
by what Way Old Men and the well stricken in Years may easily be freed and
defended from the Accidents of Old Age, which are wont to happen not only to
Old Men, but even to those that are Young.

Again, their Regiment shows how healthy Bodies may be kept so that they may
not be disaffected: But ours teaches to take away those Accidents, which do
come before their Time, and to retard these, which use to come at their proper
Season.

Thirdly, their Regiment is as it were the Beginning: Ours as the End. For the
things which they have taught, are as it were the Means to know and use those
things, which are here expressed.

Therefore let us now discourse of the Regiment of the Old and Aged, that we
may see what is added by us to the Labors and Studies of the Ancients.

The sum of the Universal Regiment is this, as Avicenna says, namely, that
such Men use that which heats and moistens, as also nourishing things, and
quick of Digestion, and Bathes, and much Sleep, and long lying in bed, and
Provocation of Urine, and Expulsion of Phlegm from the Stomach and Guts. To the
end that Kindliness of Nature may endure, chafing with Oil in a moderate
Quantity and Quality is very good for Men of decrepit Age, and for those that
are growing Old. But let them ride and walk moderately, as their Strength will
endure. They ought daily to smell to sweet smelling Spices, especially to the
moderately hot. After Sleep let them anoint themselves with Oil, as is said in
the Chapter Of things that strengthen the Body.

But they must use the six kinds of (nonnatural) things according to the
equable and temperate way of Physicians, as Aristotle says, that a Physician
ought in the Regiment of Old Men to consider the Six kinds of Causes, which are
wont necessarily to alter the Body. But above all he must take into his
consideration Meat and Drink and the Evacuation of what is superfluous, and of
all the four Humors: and secondarily the other kinds of Causes. And this is
what Aristotle says in that Book published at the request of King Alexander
the Great.

And the difference which Rasy puts between the Regiment of the Elderly and the
Aged, is this, namely, that the Bodies of the Elderly are to be considered more
with evacuating Medicines, and to be preserved, that they come not to Evil; and
they must abate of their Labor and Thoughtfulness, that the Strength of their
Body may last a long time. And that they who are arrived at Old Age, avoid
Labor and Thoughtfulness, and Change, unless on great and urgent Necessity:
They must be nourished with Food having a pleasant Taste, and easy to be
digested: They should also often use Bathes, and sleep much: They should affect
the Head and Face with odoriferous things, and use Suffumigations: Let them
also exercise things, which are full of Diversion and Delight. Let them drink
temperate and subtle Wine, and clear, and which has a moderate mixture of
Water. How every one of these things may be done and brought into act, will
hereafter appear.

Royal Haly says, that Old Men ought to use an Air like the Humor of the
Spring, because their Nature is cold and dry: Whence it is necessary that they
use a Custom of heating and moistening, and that they live in warm Places, but
avoid such as are cold and moist, for that they hasten Old Age, as I have said
before, where I treated of Meats, which bring the Accidents of Old Age.

Old Men's Meats ought to be of good Juice, hot and moist, that they may quickly
and easily be digested, and descend from the Stomach; their Bread should be
well l made, and well leavened; their Flesh should be that of m Pullets. n
Kids, o sucking Calves, p young Geese, q Lambs, r Partridge, s Pheasants, small
Birds, except t Sparrows. Let them avoid all gross Meats, difficulty yielding
to Digestion; as is u Beef, w Goat, and such like. For if they accustom
themselves to these Meats, Dropsies will breed in them, Stoppages in the Liver,
and in like manner Obstructions in the Spleen, and Stones in the Kidneys and
Bladder. And if they should happen at any time to eat of these things, let some
Medicine be taken afterward, as Diacyminum well made up, and things of like
nature which help Digestion. Also they must beware of those Birds, which afford
unwholesome Food and bad Juices. Things that are sharp and breeding Choler are
also to be avoided, as Mustard, Garlic and Onyons; and all things that breed
Phlegm, as x Mushromes; and all things that breed Melancholy, as Pulse and
Cheese, and Worts; and what are easily corrupted on the Stomach, as y
Mulberries, z Melons, a a Cucumbers. But of Fruits let them take Figs, Grapes
and Raisins, with Nuts and Almonds. Physicians have not named all Meats and
Drinks, which bring these Accidents of Old Age. But Old Men must be fed twice a
Day, and the weaker by little and little: For the Natural Heat being weak
already cannot bear a great Heap of Meats and too greedy gormandizing. Let
their Dinner be at the third hour of the Day, and let their Meat be of good
Juice and producing good Humors, as all Physicians agree.

Avicenna affirms, that Old Men must eat dry Figs boiled with Honey and Water.

And Galen says, that Figs, if they be dry, are as it were the Fountains of
ill Humors: Which is true of Figs simply; but if they be medically prepared,
it is false.

As to what concerns b b Baths, Old Men are to be bathed in Sweet Water, of a
temperate Heat, as Royal Haly says in his fourth Canon. He likewise says that
Old Men and the Decrepit are often to be washed in Baths: that is, once in a
Week, or in the space of Ten Days. For their Strength will not bear more;
wherefore in some it is sufficient, if this be done once in a Month. When they
go out of the Bath, let them rest quiet for one whole Hour. Then let them take
some Meat hot and moist, easy to be digested, and which quickly passes out of
the Stomach, as is Bread well leavened and made, c c Fish that live in stony
Rivers, Kids Flesh, young Geese, Lamb.

Aristotle in his Book Of the Secrets of Secrets affirms, that they must not
tarry long in the Water, for that they are much overcome by the Cold and
Moisture, lest the Body receive from the Moisture of the Bath.

The Anointing of Old Men ought to be sometime in the Morning when they rise:
And the Oil ought to be Caerasinum mixed with the Oils of Chamaemel, Violet and
Dill.

Then they ought to use moderate Exercise, lest there be any Straitness or
Obstruction of the Pores: Let them avoid too violent Labor and Exercise.

They ought not to admit of Diminution of Blood, unless they be in great and
imminent Danger of Life. Avicenna in his Phlebotomy shows in what Cases and for
what Causes Old Men are to be let Blood, saying: In Old Age let every one as
much as can be abstain from Blood-letting, unless he be compact in Figure and
Solidity of Muscles, and have large Veins, and be indisposed with Redness of
Eyes: This is to be considered in Old Men.

But Johannes Damascenns d d thinks otherwise in his Aphorisms, speaking thus:
Let every Man in his Youth breathe a Vein four times a Year. Thrice when his
Age is forty. When the fiftieth or sixtieth Year of his Age is come, it ought
to be done once. And further it is altogether to be omitted. He also says,
that after the forty fifth Year the Cephalic Vein, after sixty the Median,
after seventy five the Basilick is not to be cut.

Avicenna also says, That they who while they are in their youthful Days, do
often suffer Bloodletting, after seventy Years their Heat is turned into Cold
and Dryness, and that especially, if they were of a Cold Nature.

But now in the Name of the most High and Great GOD let us begin to treat
about, and more diligently and acutely to discourse of those Medicines, which
the e e Wise have kept secret, and which are most profitable for the Old and
Men of ripe Age. For whoever use these things, they a long time restrain the
Infirmities and Accidents of Old Age. The Use of these Medicines is convenient
especially for f f the Rich. For the Charge hinders, that the Poor cannot
easily obtain them.

Now the Use of the first Medicine consumes all Moisture that is foreign, not
natural, bred of ill Concoction, and Indigestion, and bad Meats, wheresoever in
the Body it be, and especially in the Recesses of the Head and Stomach: It
consumes, I say, the Phlegmatic and Melancholic Moisture, sharpens the
Senses, bridles Anger, cherishes and strengthens the principal Members,
recovers the Infirmities and broken Strength of Old Men.

Take g g of the Medicine which grows in the Air four Drachms, of the Medicine
whose Mine is the Plant of India two Drachms, a little Musk and Saffron. In a
Cold Season and Complexion hot Spices may be added, as Cloves and h h Amber.
But in a hot Season and Complexion you may add two Drachms of Violets. Then
make it into an Electuary prepared with Syrup of Violets; or reduce it into
Powder, and the Weight of Sugar equal to all the things aforesaid is to be
added.

This Medicine may he used in Meat or after Meat, as the Old Man pleases. Any
one may use this Powder in Summer and Winter; both in a hot and a cold
Complexion as well as Country, with the Medicine which is i i cast out of the
Sea; without Violets, if it be put in strong Wine, so that its Virtue may be
dissolved, and that being dissolved, it be drunk with a mixture of most pure
Spring Water. For the Water takes away the dryness of the aforesaid things, and
recalls the Virtue of the said Medicine to Heat and Moisture, and makes it
temperate.

But several among the Ancients do not agree in the Composition of this
Medicine: For some put in the Medicine whose Mine is the Plant of India, and
that which is cast out of the Sea, leaving out the Violets and Seeds of Lettuce
and Porcellane.

But others say, You must take of that Medicine which lives in the Air four
Drachms, and of that whose Mine is the Plant of India, two Drachms, and of
Violets one Dram, and a little Saffron and Musk, to these reduced to Powder
they add the weight of Sugar equal to all the rest. And thus ordered this is to
be taken in Wine in a hot Season by Old Men troubled with superfluous Heat. But
they taught that it was to be taken without the Violets in a cold Season and by
a Phlegmatic Old Man.

The second k k Medicine is that which disperseth and purges all the Humors by
an insensible and occult way, namely, Choler by Sweat, Phlegm by Lice,
Melancholy by Excoriation and Scabs, when it is prepared and taken, as we said
before, according to the Directions of Physicians.

Take some Cloves, Nutmeg, Zedoary, Galangale, Citron-Rind, Vipers Flesh, and a
little Musk, mix them with Wine, and make them up into Rolls and Trochises.

If you would strengthen the Senses and all the Parts, add the weight of
Xyloaloes of India equal to all the rest. If you would drive out Phlegm and
Melancholy, add of that Medicine which lives in the Air an equal quantity to
all the rest. If you desire to remove any Disease, add Spices, which are
Enemies to that Disease, and let the Bulk of them be as great as of all the
rest: And you may add other things, which may easily drive away such Diseases;
as Sage is against Softness of the Nerves, Spikenard to provoke Women's Terms,
to help the Obstruction of the Gall and Liver Cinnamon, for the Tympany
Cardamome: for Men troubled with the Epilepsie, Scia^ica, Frenzy, and long
Coughing, Pepper is good: for it drys the Breast and Lungs flowing with gross
Humors: Or

Take of Vipers Flesh, Zedoary, Citron-Rind, Galangale, Cloves and a little
Musk, and mix them with Wine, then make Trochises.

And when there shall be occasion, you that are Old, take hereof one part and
twenty parts of some Spice hot in the first Degree, such as is Spikenard, of
some hot in the second Degree fifteen parts, and one part of Trochises of
Nutmegs. This dissolves the Swelling of the Liver and Spleen, and refreshes
them.

There is another Medicine for Old Men, which hinders Putrefaction, helps the
Natural Moisture, that it does not so easily waste and dissolve, makes the
Blood of the Heart more pure and thin, repells the Leprosy and Trembling of
the Heart, makes men of good Courage, bold and free, purges and casts out that
abundance of Phlegm that oppresses the Native Heat; and it ought to be such:

Take l l of the Medicine which is hid in the Bowels of the Earth artificially
m m prepared, so that it may easily be powdered, four Drachms, of that which
lies hid in the Sea two Drachms, of the Medicine whose Mine is the Heart of the
long-living Animal, one Dram; grind all these very finely together, so that
they may easily be blown away and dispersed with the force of the Wind; then a
little Saffron and Musk must be added. Moreover, those Spices are to be added,
which are Odoriferous and Cordial, that the Medicine may be reduced to a
Temper, respect being had to the Season, Age and Complexion.

Let Old Men take this Medicine greedily; in some such Liquor, as being
digested may easily pass to the very Heart and inner parts, and go through the
Capillary Veins. Several take this Medicine with some savoury Meat, when Hunger
is come upon them: Others drink it in the Morning mixed with Pomegranate-Wine:
Others in an Electuary Fasting: Others take it in a ^ear Egg, when they rise in
the Morning. For you must know, that those Liquors are the best Vehicles for
any Medicine, that are most agreeable to a Man's Nature.

But the Simple n n Medicine, which restores and strengthens the Native Heat,
when wasted and weakened, is that which is likened to the Complexion of a
healthy Young Man.

Whence in Conclusion it is made manifest, that Mirth, Singing, Looking on
Humane Beauty and Comeliness, Spices, Electuaries, warm Water, Bathings, some
things lying in the Bowels of the Earth, others lying hid among the Waves of
the Sea, some living in the Air, others taken from the Noble Animal, well
tempered and prepared, and many more such things are Remedies, whereby the
Accidents of Age i^ Young Men, the Infirmities of Old Age in Old Men, the
Weaknesses and Diseases of Decrepit Age in very Old Age, may be restrained,
retarded and driven away.

NOTES on CHAP. XVI.
a Chap. VII. b Chap. VIII. c Chap. X. d Chap. IX. e Chap. XIII. f Chap. XII. g
Chap. XI. h Chap. XIV. i Chap. XV. k Chap. III, V, VI. and the latter Part of
this Chapter.

l Besides the well Leavening of Bread or Raising it with Yeast, it must be
made of the best Grain, which is Wheat. The Flower should have a little Bran:
for if it be very fine, it breeds a viscid Humor; but the Bran hinders it from
being Obstructive (as in Destilling of Gummous and Resinous Bodies we add Sand
or Pieces of Brick to keep them from clotting.) The Bread must be baked in an
Oven, with a moderate Heat: for what is baked on a Gridiron, or before the
Fire, because of the inequality of Heat, is one part Dough, another part burnt,
and never well soked. It must be knodden with Water, not Milk, as some Bakers
do, to make their Course Bread look White: for Milk makes it exceeding
Obstructive. It must not be stale; the newer the better, so it be cold from the
Oven.

m It is the Opinion of Physicians, that Chickens are a proper Food both for
sick and well People, nor can a more harmless Meat be eaten. They breed Blood
neither too thick nor too thin. They are very good for the Valetudinary, the
Idle, and Persons who use little Exercise.

n Kids should not be very young, for then their Flesh is over moist; nor too
old, for then they savor of the Goat: but about two Months old. Juvenal
describes them well in Satyr. 11.

De Tiburtino veniet pinguissimus agro
Hoedulus, and toto grege mollior, inscius herbae,
Necdum ausus virgas humilis mordere salicti;
Qui plus habet Lactis quam Sanguinis.
A fat little Kid,
The softest of the Herd; near Tibur't was
Bred in rich Grounds, yet neither eat the Grass,
Nor brouz'd upon the Willow's humble Wood,
But more participates of Milk than Blood.
o Veal (if it be very young) is clammy and mucous. Therefore the elder the
Cast is (so it suck) the firmer and sweeter the Veal will be.

p Young Geese, when they have only a downy Coat in Spring Time, are a
wholesome Dish: for then their Flesh is not hard, but something fat and tender,
and seems to melt in ones Mouth.

q Lamb must be elder than Kid, and not killed before they be weaned: for Milk
makes their Flesh more moist and mucous. They must graze on dry Pasture, where
hot Herbs grow, and then they are a wholesome Food.

r Partridge, if it be kept a day or two, is very tender and brittle, affords
good Blood, and is easy of Concoction: The younger the better.

s Pheasant is much of the Hens Nature, but is more grateful to the Palate,
easy of Concoction, and affords good Blood. Great Cooks of old used, for the
greater Delicacy, to boil them in the Steam of hot Water. So says S. Hierome
in Epist. 83. to Oceanus, Non ut Phasidis aves, lentis vaporibus coquat, qui ad
offa perveniant, and superficiem carnis non dissolvant, artifici Temperamento;
Not to boil Pheasants in gentle Steams, which by an artificial Temperament may
reach the Bones, and not break the Surface of the Flesh.

t The Sparrow is a very Salacious Bird; for which reason Sappho the Poetess
feigned Venus (the light Goddess) her Chariot to be drawn by Sparrows. And they
are reckoned by all Physicians, to excite Lust extremely: Wherefore the
Mauritanian Physicians, whom our Author much follows, forbad Sparrows all Men's
Tables, especially then should Old Men abstain from such Incentives.

u Beef powdered, and a Year Old, is good to cleanse the Stomach of Phlegm,
eaten in a small Quantity; it makes a good Salt Bit for great Drinkers,
especially if hanged and dried in the Smoke. But frequent eating of it any way
produces Melancholy.

w The Ancients thought that Goats were always sick of a Fever, because of the
hot and rank smell, which continually exhales from them: Therefore their Flesh
could not be wholesome. But it is very certain, they grow fat upon Hellebore,
Hemlock and such noxious Herbs; so no wonder, if they afford but bad Nutriment.

x Several upon eating of Mushromes have fallen into Colic Pains, Epilepsie
and Apoplexy: For they yield a cold, thick and (as some think) a Poisonous
Juice. They have been very infamous for the Death of Claudius the Emperor: but
most men think the fault lay there in Agrippina's dressing; for Nero in his
merry Humor used to call them (...), Meat for the Gods; amongst whom his
Predecessor was canonized for one. Pliny thinks them dangerous: For if a Nail
or any rusty Iron, or a rotten Rag be near where they grow, the Mushromes turn
all their Juice to Poison; as also they do, if a Serpent have his Hole near
them, or if any venomous Creature breath upon them or touch them. And many have
been strangled by them.

y Mulberries are reckoned among the Fructus (...) or fugaces, which, if they
be eaten on a full or foul Stomach, corrupt presently, and sometimes prove of a
deleterious Quality.

z Melons also are very corruptible, if taken unseasonably, and cause Vomiting
and Looseness. Johannes Cuspinianus in the Life of Frederick the Third writes,
how four Emperors dyed of eating Melons.

a a And Cucumbers are as bad: For it seems the immoderate Use of Cucumbers and
Melons brought so many Patients to a French Physician of Lions, that he built
him a stately House with this Inscription in Letters of Gold.

Les Concombres, and les Melons
M'ont fait bastir cette Maison.
Cucumbers cold did build this Hall,
Musk-Melons crude did furnish all.
b b Here are good Directions for the Use of the Bath and the London Balneo.

c c Fish that lie and feed on a stony Bottom, are of soft and brittle
Substance, and digest well; Whereas they that live in Mud, are fat and slimy,
and hard of Digestion.

d d This man, I think, was too profuse of the Vital Liquor, for the Reason
following assigned by Avicenna; and as superstitious in his choice of the
Veins, since Learned Harvey has found, the Blood circulates.

e e The Learned Bishop Wilkins in his Secret and Swift Messenger tells us, The
Ancients did veil the Secrets of their Religion and Philosophy, counting it a
profane thing to prostitute the hidden Matters of either, unto vulgar
Apprehension. For the Gods and Nature would not themselves have hidden so many
things from us, if they had intended them for common Understandings, or that
others should treat of them, after. an easy and perspicuous Way: Hence was it,
that the Learned Men of former times were so generally inclined, to involve all
their Learning in obscure mysterious Expressions. Thus did the Egyptian
Priests, the Pythagoreans, Platonicks, and almost all other Sects and
Professions. In which Treatise that excellent Person shows the various Means
the Ancients used in their secret expressions. But above all Men, the Chemists
have affected this mystic, Cabalistical Way of unfolding their Arcana, which
puzzles most of their Readers: So that had not Gunpowder shown the effect of
Chemistry more frequently, than matter of fact has confirmed the
Chrysopoietick Art; it would have sounded more incredible, that a Pound or two
of that Chemical Composition should equal, if not surpass, Thunder and
Lightning in Expedition, Noise and Mischief, than that a Grain or two of the
Philosophic Tincture could transmute an Ounce of Lead into an Ounce of purest
Gold. Though it must be acknowledged, these Hermetick Sphynges have baffled a
multitude of Vulgar Capacities to one Oedipus that has as yet unriddled them.
Now our Author being a great Master in Chemistry, uses here a Chemical abstruse
Style; not out of any Envy to Good and Learned Men, but out of Fear lest the
Ignorant and Unworthy should make bad Use of a more free Communication.

f f As they are chargeable Medicines, and therefore only fit for the Rich to
take, so moreover they are very operative, and therefore not to be administered
but with good Advice, lest misapplyed they produce Effects contrary to their
excellent Natures. With this Precaution therefore we withdraw the Veil, and
expose to open View the most curious Workmanship of the greatest Artist, which
perhaps has been before or since Himself.

g g Take of Rosemary four Drachms, of Xyloaloes two Drachms, a little Musk and
Saffron.

h h By Amber here our Author intends Amber Gryse: For he calls it Ambra and
not Succinum (which is solid Amber) Besides, Succinum was never reckoned a
Spice, as Amber is here. And though both Ambra and Succinum be great Restorers
of the Animal Spirits, yet the former is more efficacious.

i i Amber Gryse, a Bituminous Body found floating on the Sea.

k k See Chap. XIII.

l l Take of Gold artificially prepared, so that it may easily be powdered,
four Drachms, of Coral two Drachms, of the Bone of Stag's Heart one Dram.

m m Here is meant Gold calcined or Bezoardicum Solare, many Processes whereof
are in Chemical Authors.

n n See Chap. XII.

FINIS.
ARBOR VITAE; OR, A Physical Account OF THE TREE of LIFE In the Garden of Eden.

BY EDWARD MADEIRA ARRAIS M. D. Physician to JOHN the IV. King of Portugal.

Translated out of the Latin.

A Piece useful for Divines as well as Physicians.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Flesher at the Angel and Crown in St Paul's
Churchyard. M DC LXXXIII.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THE Author of this following Treatise is Edward Madeira Arrais of Lisbon
Doctor in Physic, and Physician to John IV. King of Portugal, that King who
recovered his Crown out of the Hands of Spain, and was Father to her present
Majesty of Great Britain. This his Physician wrote a Book of Occult Qualities,
wherein he has explained their Nature so fully, that he has almost altered it
(for they very far cease to be such) and has taken away from Philosophers the
Reproach of Occult Qualities being their Subterfuge. He writes in a
Philosophical and Scholastic Style. You will find in him more Sense than
Words, more Argument than Rhetoric. Before this his Work he has these Words:
Disputationem construo de Qualitatibus illius Ligni, sive Arboris Vitae
Paradisi Terreni, ad Vitam aeternam aut saltem diuturnissime prorogandam,
quarum Qualitatum nullus Authorum in particulari meminit, aut verbum ullum
protulit: de quibus novam ac nunquam antea auditam Philosophiam proferimus. I
compose a Discourse concerning the Qualities of that Wood or Tree of Life in
the Earthly Paradise, which either prolonged Life to Eternity, or at least a
very long Time; of which Qualities no Author has made mention in particular,
or spoke one Word: About which we produce a Philosophy new and never heard of
before. And he has made good his Promise: For in declaring the Nature of the
Tree of Life, beside many excellent things in Physic, he also shows the Nature
of that Spiritual Body, wherewithal we shall be raised at the last Day; and
makes it appear what we shall be, when we shall eat of the Tree of Life in the
Midst of the Paradise of GOD, by Reason as well as Scripture, in the Course of
Nature without a Miracle. And it is such a Piece of Natural Theology, or
Scriptural Philosophy, that you will be forced to acknowledge, there is a
Religio Medici without either Atheism or Heresy. But to expatiate with me no
further, enter this Learned Paradise, and taste the Tree of Life.

Richard Brown.

The Preface.
. 1. EXpositors of Holy Writ have made the Tree of Life very famous, by which
our first Parents and all their Posterity had been privileged against Death,
and might have spun their Thread of Life to Eternity, had they obeyed the
Divine Precept. Moses mentions this Genesis 2. and 3. And though Divines dispute
many things about it; yet since it is necessary in many things to have Recourse
to the Principles of Physic, and also to our Doctrine of Occult Qualities,
seeing such a Propagation of Life could never be obtained, but by some Occult
Virtues (as shall be made evident in the process of this Treatise) I cannot be
thought to put my Sickle into another Man's Harvest, if concerning the
Qualities of this Wood or Tree I shall at this time discourse what is worthy a
Philosophical Man and his Knowledge: especially since never any Philosopher yet
disputed of it in Particular, nay nor spoke one Word about it.

. 2. Eight Doubts therefore may be moved about this Tree or Wood.

First, Whether it was proper and true Wood, or Metaphorical? Secondly, Whether
the Virtue it had to perpetuate Life, was Natural or Supernatural? Thirdly,
Whether its Virtue were such, as to preserve Life, Time without end? Fourthly,
Whether it sufficed to give Life eternal, if it were but once taken? Fifthly,
Whether this Wood of Life were a Cause adaequate to the escaping all Occasions
of Death? Sixthly, By what Qualities in particular it performed this?
Seventhly, After what manner the Resistance of those Qualities might defend
that Man's Body, who eat of the Tree of Life, from all external Causes that
could hurt it? Eighthly, Whether the Cause of the very long Life of the first
Men were some other Trees of Paradise, or the Tree of Life?
. 3. And although only the Sixth and Seventh (which were never disputed upon,
or so much as hinted at by any one yet) do truly fall under our Cognizance:
Nevertheless that they may the more clearly be decided, it is necessary to
resolve the other according to the probable Opinions of Divines; most of which
notwithstanding the Reader may find adorned and amplified from the Philosophy
of Physicians, especially from this of ours of Occult Qualities.

DOUBT I. Whether the Wood of Life were a proper and true Tree, or only
Metaphorical?
COncerning this first Doubt it is the common Opinion, nay, even Matter of
Faith, as Suarez a asserts, that the Wood of Life was a corporeal and true
Tree, which in Paradise yielded Fruit fit for Food, as other Trees that were
made to grow there. This is manifestly proved from Scripture b: And out of the
ground made the Lord God to grow every Tree that is pleasant to the Sight, and
good for food: the Tree of Life also in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree
of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Where the Word [ made to grow] refers to this
Wood, as well as other Trees, which were truly such. And the contrary Opinion
is ascribed to Origen's Error, who makes the History of Paradise Metaphorical.
And because this Point is sufficiently cleared by Sacred Writers, I need not
stay longer upon it.

a Suar. l. 3. De Opere sex Dierum. c. 15. b Genesis 2. 9.

DOUBT II. Whether the Virtue of the Tree of Life to perpetuate Life, were
Natural or Supernatural?
. 1. AS to this second Doubt it is the more common Opinion that the Virtue of
this Wood to perpetuate Life, was not Supernatural, but Natural. So think
Thomas a, Cajetan b, Gabriel c, Rupertus d, Hugo de Sancto Victore e, Strabus
f, Durandus and Scotus g, and many others.

. 2. Some would prove this Opinion from Holy Writ, h Lest he put forth his hand
and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live for ever: therefore the
Lord God sent him forth from the Garden. Because, if that Virtue (as they say)
were only supernatural, that, namely, they should live that were obedient,
there had been no need to have turned Adam out of Paradise; but as soon as he
had sinned, God was not bound to keep his Covenant, or to make good that Law of
conferring Life and Immortality by eating of this Tree.

. 3. Nevertheless a Man can scarce conclude on this Ground, because two ways
the Fruit of that Tree might have a supernatural Virtue to prolong Life to
Eternity, and yet sin might be no impediment of it. First, If in the aforesaid
Tree there were some Supernatural Quality inherent, made good by God himself,
whereby it should prolong Life to Eternity: In which Case Sin could not hinder
the Activity and Efficacy of that Quality. Secondly, If God had made a Covenant
to give Life Eternal to them that should eat of this Fruit, although they
should sin.

. 4. But upon another Ground it may sufficiently be proved, that the Virtue of
this Tree to give Eternal Life, is Natural: Namely, Because it is not
repugnant, that in Nature such a Virtue should be found; Because the Effect of
this Tree of it self is of a natural Order and finite Perfection: For it should
have preserved Life to Eternity, because it would have strengthened all the
Faculties of Man's Body, restored and preserved its natural Temperament, and
have kept off all Morbifick Causes, as we shall hereafter show. But what may be
done by a Power Natural, that ought not to be referred to one Supernatural:
Therefore not this of the Tree of Life.

a D. Thom. 1 part. qu. 97. art. 4. b ibique Cajetanus. c Gab. in 2 Did. d
Rup. l. 3. in Genesis c. 3. e Hug. de Sanct. Vict. in Annot. Genesis cap. 7. Genesis c.
2. f Strab. in Genesis g Durand. and Scot. in 2 Did. 19. h Genesis 3. 22, 23.

DOUBT III. Whether the Virtue of this Tree were such, as to keep a Man alive,
Time without end?
. 1. THere are two extreme Opinions about this Question. The first is theirs,
who say, That by eating of such a Tree a Man would not have been eternal, but
would only have endured a very long time; and he should therefore have been
eternal in the State of Innocence, because after one or more Eatings, before
the Virtue of the Tree were spent, he should have been translated from the
State of Grace to Glory and Immortality, as Scotus a thinks.

. 2. They prove this Opinion. First, The Virtue of that Tree would have been
finite, in that it was created: Therefore it could not produce an infinite
Effect. Secondly, If that Tree had had a Virtue to preserve Men to Eternity,
that Virtue would have been useless, because no Man in the State of Innocence
should have lived for ever in this World, but after an appointed Time all Men
should have been translated, when, to wit, the Number of the Predestinate was
full (as these Men hold.) For at that Time the just should be translated to
Glory, and the unjust to eternal Punishment. Wherefore when this Time were
finished, the Virtue of the Tree, that preserves Men to Eternity, would have
been superfluous.

. 3. Thirdly, Because the Apple of that Tree taken for Nourishment would have
reacted upon the Body: Therefore it could never restore the Radical Moisture
and the wasted Substance entire, and by consequence could not preserve Life to
Eternity.

. 4. Fourthly, Though the Tree of Life might for the most part take away inward
Morbifick Causes, by restoring entire the natural Heat and Moisture, and the
decayed Substance, so that it should not wax old: Yet it could not take away
external Causes, nor by consequence prevent a Man's being hurt by Wounds, or
perishing by Hunger, or being choked for want of Breath. Therefore from thence
eternal Life could not of necessity follow.

. 5. Fifthly, Because in the State of lapsed Nature at least, Man would have
been much more obnoxious to morbid Causes; whereas in the State of Innocence he
lived more temperately without any Trouble and in all Tranquillity, all which
things after Sin, proved deficient. But the Tree of Life could not avoid so
many Causes of Diseases in the state of lapsed Nature. Therefore it could not
make Man immortal.

. 6. Augustine b seems of this Opinion, Thomas c holds it, Cajetan d, Gabriel
e, Durandus f and others.

. 7. The other Opinion is, That the said Tree had such a Virtue, that being
tasted by Man, it would carry him to perfect Immortality. Of this Opinion is
Augustine g, the Interlineary Gloss h, Rupertus i, Tostatus k, the Author l of
the Questions of the Old and New Testament, which Author is thought to be
Augustine, and is quoted under his Name by Thomas m, Bonaventure n: And the
Ancient Fathers held it before, who affirm that God therefore drove Adam out of
Paradise, lest he should eat of that Tree, and for ever live miserable, rather
pitying than punishing him: For it had been too great a punishment to endure an
interminable Evil.

. 8. So Irenaeus o, Hilarious p, Gregory Nazianzen q, Hierome r, Cyril s,
Chrysostom t, Theodoret u, Eucherius w, Bid x, Strabus y, Damascene z,
Dionysius Carthusianus a^.

. 9. And all these Authors agree in this, That the Tree of Life was able of it
self to give eternal Life, both in the State of Innocence and in the State of
lapsed Nature, if Men had eaten thereof: The difference among them only is,
That some affirm it was necessary to eat often of it; others, that once to have
eaten was sufficient. And then some thought it an adaequate Cause of
Immortality; others thought, it only kept out the internal Causes of Death.
Which Questions we shall discuss hereafter.

10. This said Opinion is sufficiently proved from these Words of Holy Writ;
Lest he put forth his Hand, and take also of the Tree of Life and live for
ever. Therefore for that reason was Adam driven out of Paradise, lest he should
live for ever, as he should have lived in the state of Innocence, had he eaten
of the Tree of Life: Therefore the eating of that Tree must have preserved a
Man for ever, by reason of the Virtue it had to this end, and not only for a
long Time.

. 11. Some make answer to this Argument, that God spoke Ironically. But they
give not Satisfaction. First, because this Solution contradicts the Testimony
of the aforesaid Fathers. Secondly, because Adam's ejection out of Paradise,
and the Angel with the flaming Sword placed to keep the way of the Tree of
Life, sufficiently declare that God spoke not by way of Irony, but properly and
in good earnest.

. 12. Secondly, others answer the foresaid Argument thus, That the Words [ for
ever] ought not to be taken for true Eternity, but for a very long Time. Which
Answer yet does not please. First, because that Word in its proper
Signification denotes Eternity; but the Words of Holy Writ, unless some great
Inconvenience hinder, should ever be taken in their proper and genuine
Signification, otherwise we should have nothing certain. Secondly, because the
Life which was owing to Man in the state of Innocence, was Life Eternal, not
only a very long Life: But the Tree of Life was made by God to make good that
Life, which was owing to Man in the State of Innocence; Therefore not only very
long Life, but simply eternal Life was to be made good by eating of that Tree.

. 13. And this is confirmed, First, because God for that Reason cast Man out of
Paradise, lest he should enjoy that good which was due to him, had he been
obedient, and persisted in the State of Innocence: But that Good due to the
State of Innocence, whereof he was to be deprived, if he were not obedient, (as
God had declared in those words, in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely dye) was Life absolutely Eternal, not only a very long one:
Therefore the same Life eternal must be made good by that Tree. Secondly, it is
confirmed, because the Punishment threatened Man was the loss of Life absolutely
eternal. But God executed this Punishment by the Loss of the Tree of Life.
Therefore this Tree must give Life absolutely eternal, otherwise it had not
been necessary to deprive Man of the eating of this Tree.

. 14. Secondly, The said Opinion is demonstrated, because if that Tree had not
continually kept off Old Age, at least in its Season repeated, it would follow,
that in the state of Innocence something would have been lost of Nature's
Vigor, and Men would have fallen from the Flower of their Age to a worse
condition, which is contrary to the Sacred Text, which says, in the day that
thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, that is, thou shall begin to
decline to Death, or to decay from the Integrity of Nature (as all Authors
expound it) until thou decayest altogether, and do dye. Therefore the Tree of
Life did so make good eternal Life, that it would not suffer Nature to fall a
whit from her Integrity. Therefore it would not only have given a long Life,
but that Apple would not suffer the least Defect in Nature.

. 15. Bellarmine b b judges either of these Opinions probable, and affirms they
may be defended without Heresy. Yet he is for the latter, as I am, to be the
more eligible.

. 16. Therefore a Man may answer the first Argument for the opposite Opinion
thus, That its Cogency is as great in the Beatifick Vision; for that it indures
Time infinite, when nevertheless the immediate Causes of this Duration are the
Intellect and Light of Glory, which are finite Beings. Therefore as it is no
Obstacle in the Production of an Effect which will endure Time infinite, that
these Causes are finite: So also there can be no Repugnance, that the Qualities
of the Tree of Life might produce an Effect durable Time infinite.

. 17. But you will urge. This takes not away the force of the Argument, Because
an infinite Duration is an infinite Effect, therefore it cannot be effected by
a finite Cause. Yet I deny the Consequence, Because it may immediately be
effected by a finite Cause, when in the mean time it depends on a Cause
infinite. For the Qualities of the Tree of Life were to be conserved by God
immediately to all eternity, therefore these very Qualities also would
immediately conserve Life to Eternity: Instances hereof are spiritual
Substances, which are conserved to Eternity by the First Cause immediately, and
they themselves conserve their Effects to Eternity.

. 18. To the Second I answer. From this it would follow, that all other Trees
were superfluous, seeing they would remain after Translation. And yet the
Fruits of other Trees were not supervacaneous in Paradise, although no Man eat
of them.

. 19. To the third it may be answered. That this Apple was not only Meat but
Medicine also, by reason of the Qualities, which shall hereafter be explained,
whereby it either hindered its own Reaction, or made up the Damage of the
Reaction, if there were any, whereby all things respecting the Integrity of
Nature, might be restored, and reduced to the most perfect State. Whence it
might correct by Medicinal Qualities that Damage which it brought by Reaction.

. 20. To the fourth I say. That the Qualities of that Wood, which shall
hereafter be enumerated, would have preserved from all Causes, which might
bring a Preternatural Disposition to the Body, so that it could neither be
offended by Wounds, nor could be sick, or dye of Hunger, or want of Air; which
hereafter we shall show was possible.

. 21. Others, who are unwilling to attribute the perfect Cause of avoiding
Death to the Tree of Life, reply. That those outward Causes must have been
avoided by the extraordinary Providence of God: But we shall dispute this
hereafter. Yet grant it were so, this does not hinder, but that the Tree of
Life might remove the inward Causes of Death for ever.

. 22. To the fifth the same Answer will serve, to wit, That Reparation would
have been made for all offending Causes, though never so violent and numerous,
by the said Qualities of the Tree, as we shall hereafter show.

a Scotus in 2 did. 19. q. unica. b D. Aug. l. 6. in Genes. c. 25. c D. Thom.
1. p. q. 97. a. 4. and 2. 2. q. 164. a. 2. ad 6. d Cajet. 1. p. q. 97. cit.
loc. e Gabriel in 2 did. 19. f Durandus ibid. g Aug. l. 13. de Civit. Dei c.
20. and l. 14. c. 26. and l. 1. de Peccat. mer. c. 3. and l. 8. in Genes. c. 5.
h Glos. interl. in illa verba, Ne forte sumat de Ligno Vitae, etc. i. Rup. l.
3. in Genes. c. 30. k Tostat. super 13. c. Genes. q. 175. l Author quaest, Vet.
and Nov. Testam. quaest. 19. m D. Th. 1. p. q. 97. a. 1. n Bonav. 2 sent. did.
17. De Ligno Vitae. o Iraen. l. 3. advers. Haeres. c. 37. p S. Hill. in comment.
Psalmi 68. in illa verba, Quem tu percussisti, etc. q S. Greg. Naz. Orat. de
Pascha. r S. Hieron. c. 65. Isaiae. s S. Cyrill. l. 3. advers. Julian. circa
med. t S. Joan. Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in Genesis n quem imitatur Theodoretus q. 26.
in Genes. w Eucherius l. 1. in Genes. x Beda supra eadem verba. y Strabus ibid.
z S. Johan. Damascen. l. 2. Orthodoxae Fidei c. 11. aa Dionys. Carthus. in Gen^
c. 2. bb Bellarm. in Disp, Controvers. contra Haeret. l. 1. tom. 4. cap. 8.

DOUBT IV. Whether it were sufficient for Immortality to eat only once of the
Fruit?
. 1. ABout this Doubt also there are two contrary Opinions, one whereof is
Negative, the other Affirmative. St Augustine a is for the Negative part, so
Thomas b, Suarez c, Be^anus d, Benedictus Pereira e, and consequently all those
who affirm, that this Tree could not give Immortality.

. 2. It is proved first, Because that Tree prolonged Life, in as much as it
repaired the Radical Moisture, and Substance of the Body that was wasted, as
perfect as it was; and reduced the Body to the best Temper and Constitution, if
they were lost; and greatly strengthened the Native Heat; whether it did this
materially, being converted into the Substance of the thing nourished, and as
it was Aliment; as also by Qualities manifest or occult, as a Medicine; or by
all these ways. But all these good Properties in Tract of Time would grow
remiss and be extinguished, both by the Reaction of other Meats; and also by
reason of the injuries of external Causes, which in the State of lapsed Nature
would frequently have occurred, as likewise by the Reaction of the Tree it
self, which would necessarily have been, even in the State of Innocence.
Therefore it would have been necessary that at several Intervals the Tree
should have been taken again, that it might repair again the lapsed
Constitution of the Body; and that by this means Old Age and Death might be
kept off, and Life might remain to Eternity.

. 3. Secondly, Because that Tree was corruptible, when it was turned into the
Substance of the thing nourished: Therefore the Substance also that was
generated of it would have been corruptible. Therefore it was necessary that
again and again it should be repaired by taking of that Wood. And it is
confirmed,

. 4. First, Because whatever is generated is corrupted: But a Body is generated
of that Wood; for Nutrition is also a certain Generation in respect of the
Parts lost. Therefore a Body nourished by that Wood would have been corrupted.

. 5. It is confirmed secondly, Because Aristotle f from thence proves against
Hesiod and other Poets and Gentile Divines of his Time, that the Gods cannot be
rendered immortal by taking of Nectar and Ambrosia; Because whatever is
nourished, must of necessity be corruptible and mortal: But the Body would have
been nourished by the Tree of Life: Therefore according to Aristotle's Doctrine
it would have necessarily been and remained corruptible and mortal. Therefore
the Repetition of the eating of the Tree was necessary to prevent Mortality.
Nor does it avail, if you say, the Body was made incorruptible by the Qualities
received from the Tree. I say, it does not avail. Because if these Qualities
could not make the Wood it self incorruptible, how could they make another Body
incorruptible?

. 6. Thirdly, If the Wood once taken had rendered the Body impatible, it would
have followed, that if a Child had taken it, he could not grow further, nor
could Old Men grow young again, nor sick Men grow well, but would have remained
in the same State for ever: But this is false: Therefore the other also. The
Major is proved, because a Body rendered impatible cannot be nourished, nor any
way altered. Therefore the Body would always abide in that state, in which the
Wood once taken rendered it impatible.

. 7. Nevertheless there are firmer grounds for the Affirmative Part, and the
Fathers above cited in the third Doubt for the Opinion which asserts, That this
Tree could give Life eternal, do hold this, such as Irenaeus, Hilary,
Nazianzen, Hierome, and others there cited, of which Opinion the Interlineary
Gloss seems to be, when it affirms that this Wood was not to be taken, but at
that Time when the Just were to pass to the State of the Blessed, which seems
for no other Cause, but that they might be made eternal by the Tree: Whence
that one eating had been sufficicient. Rupertus g expresses this Opinion when
he says, In no wise, as some do suppose, was the Tree necessarily to be
frequented as a Passport of perpetuating Life: But it being once taken, the
Body would have lived for ever. Theodoret h is of the same Opinion.

. 8. This is effectually proved from the very Text of Holy Writ, Lest perhaps
he put forth his hand, and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live for
ever. But if a Man having once taken of the Tree did not remain eternal, it
would have little mattered, that he had taken it once or oftener; and had lived
for many Years; when yet at what time soever he should be cast out and deprived
of the eating of that Tree, he would have been subject to Death, and have
suffered the Punishment of Disobedience. Therefore it is manifest, that once
taken, it would have sufficed for Eternity.

. 9. And it is confirmed by observing with Rupert the [ also] and the [
perhaps]. For these Words suppose, that as Adam took of the Tree of Knowledge,
and as he took of the Fruits of other Trees; so he might also take of the Tree
of Life, not indeed knowingly, but fortuitously; lest therefore he once taking
by chance of this Tree should be made eternal, he was to be cast out before he
touched it. Therefore once tasted it was sufficient for Eternal Life, and not
only for living some long Time. The Argument is corroborated, For why with so
great diligence and speed did God drive Man out of Paradise, and why did the
Angel keep the Way with a Flaming Sword? There seems no other Reason, unless
because perhaps before his Going out, or perhaps Returning after his Exit, if
he had tasted of the Tree, he might have been made eternal; otherwise there had
been no need to use such Care, for though he had eaten sometimes before his
going out, or had after returned to eat, being driven out again he had been
subject to Death.

. 10. It is proved secondly, Because in the state of Innocence, as Thomas i
affirms, there might have been actual Sins: Therefore there would have been
some bad Men, who might have killed others, even the Just, by Wounds, Poison,
or by Hunger and Privation of Air: Therefore unless the Just were altogether
fenced by once eating of the Tree, they might be subject to Death, and there
might be danger lest the Innocent should be deprived of their due Privilege,
which ought by no means to be. For what easier way could there be to kill a
just Man, than to hinder him that he could not come to the eating of the Tree
of Life, or to keep him so long from eating thereof, that he should be consumed
of Old Age?

. 11. It is proved thirdly, Because that Tree, as the Assertors of the contrary
Opinion do confess, was corruptible: Therefore it would sometime fail,
especially when (as seems to be inferred from Holy Writ) there was only one
Tree, nor does it appear whether others could be propagated or planted of its
Seed. Therefore although Men should eat thereof, yet if the Repetition of it
were necessary, they could not live for ever.

. 12. Fourthly, Because, as St Chrysostom k says, It pleased the Lord (these
are his very Words) that Man made by Him and living in Paradise, should have a
certain Meditation of Obedience and Inobedience, and these two were shown by
these two Trees, the one of Life, the other (as I may so say) of Death. Whence
Bellarmine gathers, this was for the Punishment of Inobedience, the other for
the Reward of Obedience: For although Life Eternal (as I apprehend) was owing
to the State of Innocence; yet for a Reward of Obedience Man was not to be
deprived of that Life Eternal. Wherefore as the forbidden Tree once tasted
brought a necessity of Death; so by parity of Justice the Tree of Life once
tasted ought to give Eternity of Life. For which Reasons this Opinion is more
probable to me, as it is more consonant to Sacred Writ and the Holy Fathers.
Wherefore

. 13. It is answered to the Arguments of the contrary Opinion. To the first,
granting the Major the Minor is denied, Because the Qualities of the Tree,
seeing they did not depend of the Tree in their Conservation, and were
incorruptible and altogether eternal, would have defended the Body it self that
it should not fall again from that best Constitution; Wherefore Man would never
have further stood in need of a new Exhibition of the Tree. And although
Reaction were granted, whilst the Apple of this Tree, or any other Food was
concocted in the Stomach, and the other Workhouses, and in the whole Habit of
the Body; yet it would impart such Virtue to the Faculties or Powers of the
Stomach, and of the other Workhouses, and of the whole Body, that it would
correct the Damages of Repassion. As it happens to Fire, which by its Efficacy
fully compensates all Repassion brought from the Wood, so that if Fuel never
fail, it is not diminished or extinguished; nay rather as plenty of
proportionate Fuel increases, it is augmented.

. 14. To the Second, granting the Antecedent, the Consequence is denied,
Because the Substance bred of the Tree would have been defended from Corruption
by Qualities received from the Tree, whereby besides, the Temperament of the
Body would have been rendered so firm, that it could neither further be intended
or remitted from within or from without; but the Faculties of the Bodies would
have performed Actions so perfect, that they would overcome all morbisick
Causes, which hereafter we shall more explain.

. 15. To the first Confirmation, I say, All that is generated is corrupted,
except it be defended by the Qualities of the Tree, or by something else. But
since in this State we want the Tree of Life, that Proposition is true: Yet it
would not have been true in the Time of the State of Innocence, nor also in the
State of lapsed Nature, had it been granted only once to have eaten of the
Tree. But when it is said, If the said Qualities could not defend the Tree from
Corruption, how should they defend Man's Body? I answer, Easily. Because the
Tree had not these Qualities formally or actually, but potentially or
virtually; and it would have produced them in the Body by a Transient Action,
as other Medicaments do, as I think more probably with the most learned
Philosophers, such as are Patres Conimbricenses l, after the manner of Pepper,
as Petrus Garcia m. But after these Qualities existed formally or in act in the
Body, they could make good to it the Effect of preserving it from Corruption:
Wherefore it is no Wonder if these Qualities were able to preserve our Body
from Corruption, yet not the Fruit.

. 16. To the second Confirmation, it is clear already what should be answered,
and shall further appear hereafter. For in this State it is so, but in the
State of Innocence it would not have so been, because by the Qualities of the
Tree of Life a nutrible Body would have been rendered incorruptible.

. 17. But you will urge, The Tree would have produced such Qualities in the
Body either before it was turned into the thing nourished, or after. Not
before, because the Body rendered by them impassible could not turn Food into
the Substance of the thing nourished: Not after, because the Form of the Wood
would be then destroyed, whereby they should be produced, and in the same
Matter of the Wood the Form of Man would be introduced, of which they could not
be produced. Therefore they could no way be produced in a Humane Body.

. 18. Yet I answer, The Wood would have produced such Qualities both before,
and after conversion into another Substance. Before, because to produce them it
would have sufficed, that it should be actuated in the Stomach as other
Medicaments, and the Wood being actuated, presently the Qualities would have
been diffused through the whole Body; nor would the Impassibility of the Body
have hindered the acquiring of Perfection, whilst the Body wanted it, yet it
would have been sufficient that it did not fall from that Perfection, which it
had, as hereafter we shall more explain. After, because the Virtue of the Wood
would have remained in the Humors and the rest of the Juices of the Body, which
Virtue indeed being actuated, although the Substantial Form were not then in
the Wood, might produce actual or formal Qualities, as we have said of the
supra-elementary Qualities of other Medicaments, as of Purgers and Poisons,
which we have proved to remain in the Matter after the Substantial Forms are
corrupted.

. 19. I said [ while the Body wanted it, that is, Per^ection] Because if any
one should have taken the Wood in that State, wherein he had his Substance
perfectly repaired, he would not turn it into the Substance of the nourished,
seeing then such Matter would be Superfluous; but the Medicamentous Qualities
only being received from the Wood, he would have expelled from his Body the
Matter of it as Superfluous, as now the Matter of other Medicines, which are
not also Aliments, is expelled.

. 20. To the third I answer, The Body would not have been rendered altogether
impatible, except after it had arrived to all the Perfection was due unto it:
For if it were below that, by the accession of the Qualities of the Tree, it
could not fall from that it had, although most violent Causes happened to
destroy it, and in this Sense at that very Time it had been impatible: Yet this
did not hinder, that by Means of those Qualities impressed from the Wood, it
should not acquire farther Perfection due unto it. And thence it is manifest
that a Child should come to the Perfection of a Man, an Old Man should be
reduced to Youth, even as a Sick Man to Health. But when a Man were constituted
in all perfection of Health, he would remain for ever impatible in all Senses;
because he could neither decay, nor could he proceed further.

. 21. Which that it may the better be understood, it is to be observed from
Thomas n, that Passion is twofold. First, properly, so called, in which Sense
one is said to suffer, who is removed from his natural Disposition. Secondly,
commonly, according to any Mutation, though it pertain to the perfection of
Nature. And in the first Sense by eating of the Fruit of the Tree the Body
would have been rendered impassible, because it could never be removed from that
Perfection it had. But in the second sense it had not been impassible, as long
as it was not arrived at the top of Perfection, for it would have been
receptive of such a Change.

. 22. But you will question, Whether then Generation and Propagation of
Children could have been? I answer in the Affirmative. And prove it, Because if
such Qualities ought to be no hindrance to a Child that his Body should come to
its Perfection, nor to an Old Man that he should be restored to his, why should
it hinder Generation of Seed in the Vessels, and Propagation of Children? You
will object. Therefore to this end, and to the growth of a Child's Body, and
reduction of an Old Man's, it was necessary to take again of the Fruit of the
Tree, or at least of other Food. I answer, to this Work perhaps so it was
necessary, or may be the Faculties would have been so strong after the first
taking of that Fruit, that from the ambient Air, Water, or from any other
Matter one might have repaired the Substance wanting to the growing of a Child,
or restoring an Old Man, or to breeding Seed for Children. For this would not
then have been impossible to very strong Faculties: Because perhaps the Fruit
it self would have introduced alimentous Qualities into any Matter, although of
its own Nature such Matter had them not.

. 23. But whether Man stated in this Immortality acquired by the Fruit of the
Tree, should have had those Actions and the same Qualities in kind, which we
shall have after the Resurrection? I dispute not this, nor does it belong to
me, but let Divines determine it. Amongst whom the interlineary Gloss o and
Bellarmine p seem to think so.

. 24. But Whether could Children newly born, before they eat the Wood, or also
before their Birth, in the Mothers Womb, be subject to Death? It seems to be
denied, Because the Qualities of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, which was eaten
by the Parents, would have been in their Seed also, and would have defended
their Children from Death both before their Birth and after.

. 25. You will infer, It had sufficed therefore that the Tree of Life had been
once taken by Adam and Eve, for all that should be born of them to have been
made immortal. And this Opinion seems to be confirmed, first, by an Argument
taken from the necessary Efficient Cause; for these Qualities would have been
incorrup^ible, and ever have remained so in the Matter, and with the Seed and
its Virtue would have been propagated into all the Individuals of Humane Kind,
and would have produced other like Qualities in a kind of Cause Univocal:
Therefore there was no necessity for Adam's Successors to taste the Tree of
Life, that they might live for ever.

. 26. Secondly, By an Argument taken from the Final Cause: For if by taking of
the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, which was but once eaten of our First
Parents, the Punishment of Death inevitable was inflicted upon them and their
Descendents; also, that equality of Justice might be observed, by once taking
of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, Life eternal for a Reward of Obedience ought
not only to be given to our Parents themselves, but to Universal Mankind. But
if this does not please any Man, one may say, that some Qualities of the Tree
derived to the Child, would have preserved it from perishing, till the Birth,
and after the Birth also for some Time would have been communicated in the
Mothers Milk; and afterward, had it been necessary, he might also have eaten
of the Fruit of Life it self.

. 27. But whether should they, that had committed actual Sin (according to the
Opinion which admits that) have been subject to Death afterward, although
before they had eaten of the Tree? It seems to be denied. First, Because even
Adam after Sin should have been made free from Death, had he eaten the Fruit of
Life. And seeing the Qualities of the Fruit would have been derived to his
Children, both Just and Unjust would by them have been defended from Death.
Secondly, Because the Punishment of Death was only imposed, if our first
Parents violated that only Precept.

a D. Augustinus l. 3. de Civitat. Dei c. 20. and l. 11. Genes. ad lit. cap. 4.
and l. 1. de peccat. mer. c. 3. b D. Thom. 1. part. q. 97. art. 4. and
colligitur ex 2. 2. quaest. 164. art. 2. ad 6. eamque habent communiter
Scholastici, and sequuntur Suarius. c L. 3. de opere sex dierum. cap. 15. d
Becanus tract. de immortalitate cap. 4. e Benedictus Pereire lib. 3. in Genes.
disp. de arbore Vitae quaest. 3. f Aristoteles lib. 3. metaph. cap. 4. text.
15. g Rupertus lib. 3. in Genes. cap. 30. h Theodoretus quaest. 16. in Genesis i
Thomas 1. part. q. 100. art. 2. k Chrysostomus hom. 18. l Patres Conimbricenses
2. de generat. cap. 3. quaest. 2. articul. 2. assert. 2. and lib. 7. phys. cap.
1. quaest. 1. art. 2. m Petrus Garcia. Fen. 1. 4. tract. 1. cap. 4. disp. 2.
quaest. 5. pagina 269. col. 2. n Thom. 1. p. quaest. 97. art. 2.. Respondeo. o
Gloss. interl. in illa verba Ne forte sumat. p Bellarm. lib. 1. tom. 4. contr.
1. c. 18.

DOUBT V. Whether the Tree of Life were a Cause adequate to the escaping all
Occasions of Death?
. 1. NOW of those Authors who deny to the Tree of Life the Virtue of extending
Life absolutely to Eternity, though it should be eaten at repeated Turns, when
yet they are compelled to affirm, that in the State of Innocence Men would have
been free from Death; Some do assert, following Scotus a, that this Tree by
restoring the Native Heat and Radical Moisture (he spoke according to the Old
and Nugatory Opinion, that admits of a Radical Moisture diverse from the Living
Parts) either as Nourishment or Medicine, or both ways, would have preserved
Life for a very long Time; and they add, that before the Virtue of the Tree
were spent, Men without the intervention of Death should have been translated
to a State of Immortality. Wherefore according to this Opinion the Tree of Life
would not have been an adequate Cause of Immortality. Which Opinion of Scotus
notwithstanding stands refuted from what has been already said.

. 2. But others with Cajetane b admit of a certain Supernatural and Spiritual
Quality in the Soul, whereby the Body could resist the Reaction of the Tree of
Life and of other Meats; and that for this Cause Men in the State of Innocence
would have been eternal; which Quality since in the State of Lapsed Nature it
was wanting, although Man had eaten of the Tree of Life, he would not have been
altogether eternal, but would only have lived for a longer Time. But this
Opinion is confuted first from the Words of Holy Writ c, lest ^e put forth his
hand, and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live for ever. Now
therefore of it self it had a Power to render Man eternal, without any other
Supernatural Virtue. Neither can that Interpretation of a very long time be
allowed, as we have shown.

. 3. Secondly, Because it cannot be, that a Spiritual Quality of the Soul can
naturally defend the Body from contrary Reactions. For it should either do this
by a formal Resistance as a kind of Cause formal, or by an active Resistance as
a kind of Cause efficient. The first it could not be, both because a Spiritual
Quality could not inhere^in a Corporeal Subject, especially since these Authors
say, it was inherent in the Soul, nor by consequence could it inform the Body,
and resist formally: And because the eating of the Tree of Life would have been
superfluous for Reparation of what was lost; for the natural Qualities of the
Body would then have been sufficiently defended by the said Quality of the
Soul, that they could not be lost. Not the second, Because if that Supernatural
Spiritual Quality performed such an Effect as a Cause Efficient, it were able
to produce other Qualities in the Body, which might formally resist; concerning
which the same Doubt would return: Or certainly they would be supervacaneous,
seeing they were sufficiently produced by the Tree of Life, as we shall
hereafter show.

. 4. Others distinguish three Causes of our Destruction. The first is the
different, nay and sometimes contrary Temperament of different Parts, whereby
they mutually act and suffer among themselves, as the Brain moist and cold, the
Heart hot and dry, the Flesh hot and moist, the Veins, Arteries and Bones cold
and dry, and so of the rest. The second is the continual Action of the Native
Heat upon the Moisture, from which two Damages are considerable: One is the
Repassion from Food, from which Food the Radical Moisture and Members of the
Body to be restored do suffer, by means whereof a Substance is not repaired,
which is equal in Perfection to what was wasted: The other is the Remission of
the Native Heat it self, whereby at length it is extinguished. The third Cause
is from things extrinsick, as well altering the Natural Temper, as dividing
Continuity, and finally impeding the Matter whereby the Body should be
refreshed, as Meat, Drink and Air.

. 5. And they add, that the first Cause must have been avoided in the State of
Innocence by a Supernatural Quality of the Soul, which we last confuted. The
second by the Qualities of the Tree of Life, when eaten. The third three ways.
First, By Humane Providence, which in that State would have been most perfect.
Secondly, By Divine Providence, which for that State would have been greater
and extraordinary: Whence it would by extraordinary Concurrence hinder natural
Causes offending; or would deny its general Concurrence, lest they should
offend. Thirdly, By the Protection of Angels.

. 6. Yet this Opinion also is false: And I affirm, that for the first Cause the
Qualities of the Tree of Life had been sufficient, as they were sufficient for
the second. Wherefore that Supernatural Quality was not only unnecessary, but
would have been hurtful also. First, Because as it resisted the Actions of
different Parts, so it would resist those very Qualities, whereof the natural
Temperament of the Body is constituted, seeing they are of the same kind.
Secondly, Because even from that mutual Action and Passion, which is granted
among the Parts of the Body; the total Temperament does result, which is
natural, and necessary for the living Creature to perform its Actions;
wherefore it would be ill impeded by that Supernatural Quality, and
consequently would be hurtful.

. 7. And the Remedy which they bring for the third Cause is contradicted.
First, Because the Fruit of Life was able to make good Qualities very
sufficient to keep off all the Harms of external Causes, therefore the
extraordinary Providence of God, and every other extrinsick Defense had been
superfluous; We shall effectually prove the Antecedent hereafter. Secondly,
Because if the Supernatural Providence of God were necessary, to what purpose
must Man be cast out of Paradise, or be deprived of eating the Tree of Life?
For as that Supernatural Providence had ceased, although Man had abode in
Paradise, and eaten the Fruit of Life, yet he had been forthwith subject to
Death: Which indeed is false: For the Sacred Word affirms, if he had eaten of
the Tree, that he should have lived for ever. Therefore that Tree was an
adequate Cause to secure a Man from Death.

. 8. Some may reply, It is true from the Words of Holy Writ it does follow,
that Man should have lived for ever: But this eternal Life after Sin would have
been contingent from eating the Tree of Life, not necessary: Wherefore lest Man
eating of the Tree of Life should contingently live for ever, he was for that
Reason driven out by the Lord. But that it was possible that Man might thus
contingently live, they prove: For the Wood would prevent the internal
Principles of Death; and Humane Providence, and the ordinary Protection of God
and Angels without the Intervention of another Tutelage, might have sufficed to
avoid the external Causes of Death as Hunger, Suffocation, Poison, Falling,
Beating, Hitting against any thing, and the Treachery and Mischief of unjust
Men. By which means former Men lived near a Thousand Years, and by the same
means by eating of the Tree, might have lived innumerable Thousands, being
preserved by Reason and Humane Providence from the external Causes of Death.

. 9. But this Solution is refuted: Because if in the State of Innocence,
wherein Men's Prudence was most perfect, their Dwelling in a most pleasant
Place, the number of wicked Men much less; and all the said external offending
Causes and Occasions much fewer, the extraordinary Providence of God, and a
greater Guard of Angels, was (as these Men think) necessary, that Life might be
extended to Eternity, or at least to the Time of Translation: How, in the State
of lapsed Nature, with much less Humane Providence, in so many and so great
Concourses of offending Causes, amongst so many worst Dispositions of Men,
could the Life of Man be extended, even contingently, to infinite Ages of Ages,
without the particular and Supernatural Providence of God, unless by some means
else, to wit, by the Qualities of the Wood, Man were secured from Death?

. 10. Father Molina d supposes, that Man's Body would have been defended from
the external Causes of Death by an habitual Supernatural Gift, or an habitual
Quality extended through the Body, which would have defended it from all
Corruption: For he judges Natural Powers can no way be thought of, which were
able to do this. But this Opinion is refuted almost by the same Reasons,
whereby the former was contradicted. First, Because in the said Fruit there
would have been natural Powers sufficient to defend the Body from external
offending Causes, as we shall hereafter show; wherefore it is not necessary to
have recourse to Supernatural Causes. Secondly, Because that Supernatural
Quality would either have resisted all external offending Causes by a Formal
Resistance, or by an Active. Not by a Formal: Both because one and the same
Quality in kind could not formally be opposed to almost infinite, especially
contrary Causes, as to Heat and to Cold: And because it would also resist the
Elemental Qualities of the Body, necessary to its natural Constitution, seeing
they are of the same kind with the Qualities produced of external Causes.

. 11. Not by an Active: Because first, even the Qualities of the Tree could
have done this. Secondly, Because either this Activity would have produced
other Supernatural Qualities, and the same Doubt would have been concerning
them; or Natural, to which either even Natural Causes would have sufficed; or
also they would have been overcome of external Causes, as the Natural Qualities
of the Body. Therefore this Supernatural Quality of Father Molina is not to be
admitted. Thirdly, Because Molina admits, Men may be altered by Rain, Wind,
Heat, and other things, but with Delight. Therefore this Supernatural Quality
would not have rendered Men incapable of receiving Elemental Qualities.
Therefore they might be burnt by the Fire, and consequently dye.

. 12. Perhaps some Man may answer in Defense of Molina, that by this Quality
the Activity of Agents upon the Body would not have been hindered; but only the
Union of Soul and Body would have been maintained. But on the contrary, how can
Heat in the highest Degree with Dryness in the Height be granted, but the Form
of Fire must be introduced in Man's Body, and the Rational be separated without
the greatest Miracle? Which must not be admitted.

. 13. Let therefore the Conclusion be, That the Fruit of the Tree of Life by
its Qualities was an adaequate Cause of Immortality, so that Man by taking of
it would necessarily have lived for ever, both in the State of Innocence and in
the State of lapsed Nature, the Case being granted, that in this State he did
eat of the Tree. St Augustine seems of this Opinion e, where he says, But Men
therefore tasted of the Tree of Life, lest from any hand Death should creep
upon them, or being spent with Old Age, when certain spaces of Time were run
over, they should dye; as if other things were for Aliment, this for a
Sacrament. So that the Tree of Life in the Corporal Paradise may be construed
to be like the Wisdom of God in the Spiritual, that is, in the Intelligible,
whereof it is written in the third of Proverbs, She is a Tree of Life to them
that lay hold upon her.

. 14. Where we must accurately observe that [ from any hand] and that [ or] for
Death might creep on from any hand, unless the Fruit of Life had preserved the
Body from it: And the Particle [ or] denotes a Disjunction, lest, to wit, Man
should perish by Old Age, or by any other Occasion whatever. Wherefore
according to St Augustine's Mind it would have been an adaequate Cause of
Immortality. Which he manifestly confirms by the Example of the Wisdom of God
in the Spiritual Paradise. And is gathered more manifestly from these Words, f
There was Meat that he should not hunger, Drink that he should not thirst, the
Tree of Life lest Old Age should destroy him, no Disease within, no Blow
without was feared. Behold, how according to St Augustine this Tree would have
defended a Man from all internal and external Causes of Death. Therefore
according to his Opinion it was an adaequate Cause of Immortality.

. 15. The Interlineal Gloss on these Words, Lest he take also of the Tree of
Life, etc. insinuates the same Opinion, while it affirms, that when the Number
of the Elect was complete, they should have tasted of the Tree of Life, and so
have passed to the Blessed State. That, namely, by it the Body should have been
rendered immortal, which Immortality would have been attained by rendering the
Body free from all Harms, which could be brought from any Causes internal or
external. And it is plainly gathered from Rupertus g, inasmuch as he affirms,
that it had been sufficient once to have taken of the Tree for Man to have
lived for ever; and from Chrysostom h and Theodoret i, whereas they affirm,
this Tree was created for a Reward of Obedience: But this Reward was, that a
Man should be free from Death, so that he could be killed by no Cause internal
or external: Therefore this Tree ought to defend a Man from all Cause of Death,
otherwise it did not make good the Reward of Obedience, promised by God. It is
gathered also from other Fathers above-quoted, Irenaeus, Gregory Nazianzen,
Eucherius, Cyrill, Hierome, and others, in that they affirm, this Tree could
make Life to be Eternal; for if Man remained subject to Hunger, Sword,
Precipice, Fire, Water and other things, he were not eternal. And so thinks
Bellarmine k.

. 16. Now the same Conclusion is already sufficiently proved by Reason;
especially by this Argument, Because such Natural Qualities are possible, as
might defend a Man from all Causes of Death both internal and external: And we
shall enumerate those Qualities in the following Section, and declare the
manner how they perform it.

. 17. It is further confirmed, that the said Qualities are possible, by diverse
Examples of admirable Virtues, that are in things natural. For if there be
indeed any such Fish as that called Echeneis or Remora, which is able to retard
and hinder the most violent Motion of a Ship by a Natural Quality, which it
impresseth on the Ship: Why might not the Fruit of Life have another Natural
Quality, whereby Man's Body might be defended from the like Impulse and Moon,
and might be rendered free from all Strokes? If a Salamander cast into the Fire
do by Natural Qualities resist the burning Fire for a great space of Time: Why
should another Natural Quality be impossible, which might much more resist the
Action of the Fire? And so resist, that its Resistance might overcome the
Activity of the Fire; for the Activity of the Fire is not intended to Infinity.

. 18. If Fire naturally have a most active Quality, why shall not another
Natural Quality equally or more resistent be possible? Are there not other
Natural Virtues equally admirable? Does not the Ostriche's Stomach digest Iron?
Aqua fortis dissolve Gold, Iron, and other Metals? Vinegar dissolve Stones and
Steel? Does not the Fish called Torpedo render the Fishes that swim over it
immovable, and stupefy the Fishers Arm with its Virtue diffused along his
Spear? Why therefore in like manner might there not be found other Natural
Virtues in the Fruit of Life, resisting the external causes of Death? I pass by
other admirable things which manifestly appear from our Tract and other Men's
Observations.

. 19. Nor can it be said, it is false, and the Echeneis has no such Virtue;
for Experience confirms it, and very grave Authors attest it, as S. Ambrose l,
S. Basil m, AElian n, Plutarch o, Pliny p, Adam Leonicenus q, Vincentius r,
Rondeletius s, Cardanus t, and several others. Nor does it hinder, that Authors
vary in describing the Echeneis, since some affirm that it is a great Fish,
others that it is a little one; some ascribe one Figure to it, others another.
It does not hinder, I say, because there may be diverse kinds of Fishes, which
have this very same Virtue, as also there are diverse sorts of Fishes that bring
Numness, as our Torpedo does, and every Man describes that which he has
experienced to detain the Ship. But after what manner it does it, we will touch
hereafter.

Histories of Wonderful Fishes, for the Confirmation of this Opinion.
. 20. But that it may appear more clearly that what is reported of the Echeneis
is not fabulous, we must not pass in Silence what our Portugueze have observed,
and what the chief Historiographer of his Time our Johannes de Barros has
recorded u, viz. that in the Year of our Lord 1518. when Emanuel the most
Potent King of Portugal set out a Fleet for the East Indies on the twenty
seventh day of March, whose Admiral then was Didacus Lopez de Sequeira: And
when the Ship of Don John de Lima was come up to the Cape of Good Hope, and
then near Mozambique, the whole Ship on a sudden shivered, so that it seemed to
split, or to have struck on a Rock. But when presently she made her Course
again, nor any Leak appeared, as they were afraid, the Portugueze much
astonished set sail, and prosecuted their intended Voyage: Neither was it
possible for them at that present to find out the Cause of that Event, nor yet
to suspect it.

. 21. But when, after they were arrived at Cochim, they fell to refit the Ship,
they found stuck in her Bow the Horn of a Fish two Hand breadths in Length: It
was indeed blackish, and in the shape of a Rhinocerot's Horn; and besides so
hard, that with it Iron might easily be cut as with a File. From whence the
Cause of that sudden Concussion and Retardation of the Ship was discovered,
that namely the violent Blow was struck, not by a Rock, but by the Horn of that
Fish, whereby the Ship was a little detained, and much shaken, especially at
that instant, when the Fish endeavoring in vain to pull out its Horn, rather
broke it than drew it out.

. 22. But the Mariners that argued about the Kind of the Fish, an Opinion
prevailed amongst them, that it was the Acus, in our Language Peixe Agulha. And
that this Opinion was true, Experience afterward confirmed to Johannes de
Barros: For some Years after when they made their Course through the Sea of
Guiny by the Castle of S. George of Mina, having let down Hooks from the Ship,
another Acus was caught, which equalled a Bull in bigness, and being firmly
held with strong Hooks, it shook the Ship after the same manner, and at length
being killed with much ado, and haled up to the Ship by more than twenty Men,
it showed a Horn like the other in shape, having the same Color, Figure, and
Hardness in it; but much less than the other, because the Fish it self was
less. Deservedly therefore this may come to be reckoned among the Kinds of the
Remora, although this does stop and shake a Ship a different Way from what we
shall hereafter speak of.

. 23. And those that travail the Coasts of Brasile make mention of another
Fish, which causes Numness, as our Torpedo does: Whence it becomes
sufficiently manifest, that there are many kinds of Torpedoes to be found. But
this kind lives especially in the River Itapecuro in the Country of Maragnani,
and it is called Perache, or as Gaspar Barlaeus observes, Puraquam, among those
Barbarians. In shape and greatness it resembles a kind of Lamprey (or Muraena:)
they use to kill it by striking it with Staves: But the Arm of him that
strikes, and then his whole Body is stupefied, and shakes presently. Of which
thing Friar Christopher Severinus Bishop Elect of Angola is my ocular Witness,
a very skilful Person, who besides other Works already published, has another
of the Natural and Moral History of Maragnani ready for the Press. It is
evident therefore that there are several kinds of Remoraes and Torpedoes,
dif^using the self same kind of Virtue from them. As it often falls out in many
different kinds of Medicines, as in Rheubarb and Roses, whose Virtue to purge
Choler is of the same kind. Therefore we must not infer, that the Remora is
fabulous, because it is differently described of Authors; seeing there are
several kinds of it, and every one describes that which he knows.

. 24. What wonder therefore, if such a Fruit were possible in Nature, as,
amongst other admirable Qualities, could break the force of things thrown, and
could hinder local Motion, tho the most violent?

a Scotus in 2 did. 19. quaest. unica. b Cajet^n. 1. part. q. 97. c Genesis 3. d
Molina de Opere sex dierum disp. 28. concl. 3. and 4. and disp. 27. concl. 1.
2. and 4. e D. Augustinus l. 13. de Civit. Dei cap. 20. f Aug. l. 14. de Civit.
Dei cap. 26. g Rupertus lib. 3. in Genesis c. 30. h Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 13. i
Theodoret. in Genesis q. 26. k Bellarm. tom. 4. contr. 1. cap. 18. l D. Ambros. l.
5. ex hom. cap. 10. m D. Basil. hom. 7. n AElian. l. 12. cap. 4, 5. o Plutarch.
in probl. symp. decad. 2. probl. 7. p Plin. lib. 32. histor. not. cap. 7. q
Adam. Leonicen. lib. de aquatilibus. r Vincent. in Speculo natural. lib. 17.
cap. 149. s Rondelet. lib. 15. de Piscibus cap. 18. t Cardan. rerum var. lib.
7. c. 37. u Johan. de Barros Decad. 3. lib. 3. c. 1. post princip.

DOUBT VI. What, and how many, were the Qualities of the Tree of Life, whereby
it caused length of Life and Immortality?
. 1. THis Doubt was never put to the Question by any Man, nor perhaps ever
thought of. But because it has much respect to our Treatise of Occult
Qualities, since such Qualities are Alexipharmack, or Curers of manifest
Diseases: therefore I think it worth my Labor to treat of them in this Place.

. 2. That therefore this Doubt may more commodiously be resolved, it is to be
observed first, that the Fruit of this Tree (For although we often name the
Wood, we rather understand the Fruit, though even the very Wood of the Tree
might be of such a Nature, that it might also be eaten) has a double
Consideration, as Aliment, and as Medicament. As Aliment, inasmuch as it might
be turned into the Substance of the thing nourished: As Medicament, inasmuch as
it could produce in the Body several Qualities profitable for it. Wherefore it
might deservedly be called a Medcinal Aliment, or an Alimental Medicine.

. 3. It is to be observed secondly, That the aforesaid Fruit is much more
excellent in the way of Physic than of Food: For though as Food it might make
something toward prolonging of Life, seeing it would nourish better than other
things, and would less alter the Body into a contrary Nature; Yet it would not
on this account avail to extend it much, and less to prolong it to Eternity:
But as Physic it would especially and chiefly conduce to this end. Now by what
Qualities? And by what way? This is the most difficult to resolve.

. 4. It is to be observed thirdly, That those Accidents which preserve our Body
in perfect Health, some of them are manifest, some occult. The manifest are
three, Temperament, Composition, and Unity of Parts: Which because they are
perceived by the Senses, are called manifest. The occult, according to the
common Opinion that admits Powers, are the Faculties of the Body which by
Philosophers are called Powers, that is, the Faculty Vital, Animal, and
Natural. There are also occult Qualities belonging to the Alimentous, which are
introduced into the Aliment by the common Workhouses, and by the Parts to be
nourished (although no Man has yet found them out) and therefore they may on
that account also be called Alimentous: There are besides, Alexipharmack
Qualities also, newly found by us, which in another Treatise we have proved to
be connaturally in the Body of every living Creature, that it may defend it
self from Poison.

. 5. Which things observed, I say first. Diverse Qualities are communicated by
the Tree of Life, whereby all things which concern the Natural Constitution of
the Body, if they be destroyed, may be restored; if perfect, may be preserved,
either to a certain and determinate Time, or to Eternity, according to the
diversity of Opinions about this Matter. This Conclusion is m^nifest, because
unless the Natural Constitution of the Body be preserved, Health and Life
cannot naturally continue: Therefore it is necessary that so many and so great
Virtues must be given from the Wood, as were sufficient to repair and preserve
all things concerning the Natural Constitution.

. 6. I say Secondly, Supra-elementary Qualities must be contributed to the Body
by the Tree of Life, which might produce Elemental ones in that degree only,
which was agreeable to the Natural Temperament; to wit, that these Qualities of
the Tree might concur as a kind of Cause efficient with the Form (or with the
Virtues of the Form, according to the Opinion which grants Virtual Qualities
productive of the Elemental) toward the Production of Elemental Qualities,
just to such a convenient Degree. This Conclusion is proved, because it is
necessary, the Natural Temper should be preserved, that the Body may continue
in Health. But such a Temper will be well preserved, if there be a fixed and
efficacious Cause, which may help the intrinsic Agent in the Production of
those degrees of each Quality, which makes up the Temperament. Therefore it is
necessary that those Virtues be produced in the Body by the said Tree, which
may suffice to concur with the intrinsic Agent productive of such Qualities.
But these Virtues must needs be Qualities of a Superior Order. Therefore such
must be produced in the Body by the Tree of Life.

. 7. I say thirdly, These Qualities must also be of such Efficacy, that they
may preserve that Degree fixed against all the Activity of an external Contrary,
even the most violent, such as are Fire or Snow, according to the Opinion which
affirms the Wood to be an adaequate Cause of Immortality; so that these
Qualities of the Wood of Life being present, Fire cannot act upon the Body, nor
produce further Degrees of Heat beyond those, which are convenient for the
Body: For the contrary Degrees of Cold would be so preserved by the Quality of
the Wood, as a kind of Cause Efficient, that they could not be diminished by
the Fire. And so it may be said of other Elemental Qualities. It is manifestly
proved; Because unless the Qualities of the Wood had so great Efficacy, they
were not able to resist very violent external Agents: But they might resist, if
they produced those fixed Degrees upon the Body, connatural to it, so that it
might persist in Health.

. 8. But to what kind of Quality would these belong? I answer, They would be a
kind of Habit: For according to the Opinion, which affirms that Elemental
Qualities do not flow from the Soul, but are produced of other occult Qualities
superaded of a higher order, which are called Virtual Qualities, they would
belong to Habit: The Reason is, because these Virtual Qualities are Powers,
seeing they are ordained only for Operation: But the Qualities of the Wood do
essentially suppose these Powers, and do help them efficiently in the
production of the Elemental ones. Wherefore they are necessarily Habits, as are
the Habits of Sciences, and some Supernatural Qualities, as the Habit of Faith
and Light of Glory, which Divines commonly affirm do belong to Habit, because
they essentially suppose Power, as Suarez a, Vasquez b, and others commonly
hold. But according to the Opinion that denies Powers to the Soul, they are
also to be accounted Habits, and to concur with the Soul, as Habits of Sciences
and others. And these Qualities will prove a kind of those which cure manifest
Diseases, of which we have spoken in another Book.

. 9. Both Conclusions are confirmed, Because a living Body could no other way
be made durable to Eternity nor for any Time, but its Temperament would decline
something from its Integrity, unless it were preserved the foresaid way.
Therefore, etc. Nor does it appear that the Qualities of the Wood would dispose
the Body as a kind of Cause Formal, whereby it would have been made free from
all natural Causes of Death internal and external; because a help by this kind
of Cause would not have been sufficient, that by its means an intrinsic Agent
could resist the most violent Causes.

. 10. I say fourthly. It is also convenient, according to the same Opinion,
that the Tree of Life should make good other Qualities, even Active ones which
might concur with the Faculties Animal, Vital and Natural, as a kind of Cause
Efficient, that they might perform very strong Actions, when there should be a
necessity. It is proved as to the Animal Faculty, because to avoid some
Diseases of Composition, and Solution of Unity, as Dislocations and Wounds, and
to resist some external Causes, which bring those Diseases, an ordinary
strength of Actions of the Animal Faculty is not sufficient, even where there
is the best Temperament. Therefore it is necessary that this Faculty be helped
by other Qualities, which may concur with it to render the Actions so strong,
that they may be sufficient to avoid all Natural Causes whatever, especially
those which might hurt by Local Motion.

. 11. And as to the Pulsatil Faculty there is the same Reason; for it must
perform a Motion against the Resistance of every external Cause whatever. As to
what concerns the Natural, it is proved: For it is necessary that the
Attractive and Expulsive Faculty perform most perfect Actions, although there
be an impeding Cause. The Digestive also, if it have a help, will operate more
perfectly. And it is confirmed, because these Qualities are not only possible,
but some such like there are indeed, efficiently concurring with the Powers to
the Curing and Preventing manifest Diseases. Therefore it is necessary, that
the Wood of Life should have them most efficacious.

. 12. You will object. Therefore the Qualities productive of Elemental ones
would have been superfluous, which we spoke of in the last Conclusion. The
Sequel is denied; for they also would have been necessary to preserve the
Natural and most perfect Temperament of Body. And although by this means the
Body of Man might resist all morbose Causes acting by Alteration; it might
better and more readily resist together with these Qualities actively helping
the Powers.

. 13. But whether would one only Quality flowing from the Fruit suffice to
concur with all the Faculties? I answer negatively, but every lowest Species
of Faculty ought to have its particular Quality distinct in Specie. It is
manifestly proved, Because every Faculty has its particular and determinate
Effect: Therefore it wants a particular and determinate Concause, which has
Virtue for such an Effect. Secondly, Because Powers are distinguished in Specie
by their Acts and Objects: Therefore those Qualities which participate with the
Powers, are the same was distinguished. Thirdly, because the Habit of one
Power, or an Effect determinate to a certain Species, cannot concur with
another Power, nor to another Species of Act: Nor therefore in like manner can
these Qualities, which are as Habits in respect of the Powers.

. 14. Therefore for the Animal Faculty there would have been given one Quality
for Motion, and diverse other for the Senses; and for every one as well internal
as external (if discerning Powers may seem necessary either to long or eternal
Life) its own Quality would have been allotted. For the Vital Faculty there
would have been given one for the Motion of the Heart and Arteries, another for
Generation of Spirits, whilst there was any necessity for Motion or Generation
of Spirits: For according to this Opinion, which affirms that eternal Life was
given by the Wood, when the Body was reduced to the best Constitution, all
things would have been kept in the same Tenor, so that neither any reparation
of Spirits, nor of Substance, would have been further necessary.

. 15. Wherefore by the Qualities of the Tree of Life the Health of the Body
would have been defended from Hunger, Thirst, and want of Air, lest namely Man
should perish for want of Meat, Drink or Air; which will more appear hereafter.
In like manner there would have been given a particular Quality by the Fruit
for every Species of Natural Faculty, that is, for Attraction, Retention,
Coction, and Expulsion, that, to wit, they might operate most perfectly, while
their operation was necessary. And after the same manner there would have been
another for Generation.

. 16. You will object. The Fruit of this Tree was of one Species only.
Therefore it could not produce so many Species of Qualities. The Consequence is
denied, Because the same Rheubarb performs diverse Actions by Qualities
different in Specie; for it evacuates Choler, strengthens the Liver, opens
Obstructions, binds lax Parts, produces Heat, causes Dryness: And so we
experience diverse Virtues in many other Medicines.

. 17. I say fifthly. Besides the said Qualities (according to the same Opinion)
there was another necessary, which should have been made good by the Tree of
Life: And that is a Resistive Faculty, which might preserve the Union and due
Composition of Parts, namely their Figure, Cavity, Number, and also their
Magnitude. It is evidently proved, Because in defect thereof Man would become
obnoxious to Diseases and Death, which would follow from Division of Continuity
and from vitiated Composition. This Quality indeed would not have been Active,
but relating to Patible Quality, as Hardness in a Stone: For informing the
Parts of the Body, it would have rendered them incapable of any Division or
Compression, which could have been made by an external Cause. Wherefore by
reason of this Quality, Man could not dye by a Precipice or a Blow. And it is
confirmed, for as the Author of the Questions of the Old and New Testament
says c, The Wood of Life was so to Man as an inexpugnable Wall: Therefore it
must necessarily make good this Resistive Quality, as a Wall.

. 18. You will object. If such a Quality were granted, the Limbs could not be
bended. It is denied, Because it was not hardness, but preserving of Union. Or
rather, Whether was there not a Quality actively preserving the Union of Parts?
It might probably be affirmed: And it would have been so strong in Preservation
of the Union of Parts by a certain Action intrinsically terminated upon the
very Union, that the Union could be dissolved by no finite natural Cause. Yet
much more probably, I think, there was no such active Quality, seeing the
Resisting informing one was sufficient, as we said in the last Conclusion.

. 19. I say sixthly, According to this Opinion, the Tree of Life would have
made good all Alexipharmack Qualities of every kind, whereby the Body would
have been made free from all that are Poisonous. This Conclusion also is
manifest. For in defect of these Qualities Man might have perished, seeing
those that are implanted in the Body cannot sufficiently resist strong Poisons.
Nor can it be doubted that this Quality was possible, seeing it is found
naturally in almost innumerable Medicines. Therefore no Wonder, if it were
granted to this Fruit naturally with so great Efficacy, that it overcame all
Poisonous ones.

. 20. You will object against what we have said. Heat would necessarily act
upon Moisture, seeing it is a Natural Cause acting necessarily: Therefore it
would necessarily rarefy it, turn it into Vapors and consume it: Therefore
Reparation and Nutrition was necessary: Therefore Man would necessarily be
obnoxious to Death by Hunger, and it was needful for Man to eat the Wood again
and again. I deny the Antecedent: Because the Moisture would have been
preserved two ways. First by the Occult Quality of the Wood (which we spoke of)
producing Moisture in a proportionate fixed Degree. Secondly by another Occult
Quality of the Wood, producing certain fixed Degrees of Cold, that the Heat
could produce none further.

. 21. You will urge. Therefore the Heat would produce those Qualities at least,
which are produced of it by Resultancy in the Substance wherein it subsists,
that is, Rarity, and Levity (if it be a Second Quality) from which follows
Resolution or Evaporation, and consequently the Consumption of such Substance.
The Sequel is denied, Because that Resultance also of Second Qualities would
have been hindered by their contrary Qualities, which would have been produced
by other First Contraries; for Example, The Resultance of further Rarity would
have been hindered by the Degrees of Cold, for by them its contrary Density
would have been preserved proportional to the Rarity.

. 22. You will object secondly. The Faculty Pulsatil and Generative of Spirits
would have been idle; Because we suppose, the necessary Spirits once generated
would have lasted for ever: And in like manner the Natural Faculties would have
been idle, seeing we suppose, Nutrition would be no further necessary, when the
Body had arrived at full Perfection: Therefore those Qualities would not be
necessary which might concur with such Faculties, according to the Opinion
which affirms, it had been sufficient to have eaten the Fruit only once. I say
they were necessary for the Reduction of a Child's Body and an Old Man's, or
one any other way decayed or imperfect, to the most perfect Constitution, and
therefore they were to be added: But after the Perfection of the Body they were
not necessary; but would have continued, as other things would, which also were
not further necessary, as the common Workhouses of Aliment and Excrements, and
the Faculty expulsive of them, and other things.

. 23. You will object thirdly. To Duration of Life there is no need, that the
Animal Faculty be any stronger, than what suffices to perform Respiration, as
Galen d holds. Therefore to this at least there should no helping Quality be
added, which might concur with it. It is answered, If there were a
preternatural Affection before the eating of the Wood, which ought to be
expelled by the Motion of the Animal Faculty, as by Coughing, or whereto the
Animal Faculty ought to concur with the Natural, as Pissing, Strength must
necessarily be added to the Faculty, that by the said Qualities it might
perform a stronger Motion: And in like manner as before we have already said in
the third Conclusion, Strength of the Animal Faculty was necessary for the
Motive, that it might more readily resist external Causes. But as for the
Discerning Powers, which belong to the Animal Faculty, seeing they conduce
little to Duration, and would sufficiently operate with the best Temperament,
Composition and Unity of Parts; it seems more probable, that other Qualities
are not necessary which should be produced by the Wood.

. 24. You will object fourthly. We said in the fourth Conclusion, that by the
Tree a Virtue was made good, concurring with the Animal Faculty to the avoiding
those Causes, which by local Motion might divide Continuity. Therefore the
resistive Quality is superfluous. The Consequence is denied, because that
Virtue concurring with the Faculties is necessary for their better being, to
the end, namely, that Man might more perfectly be defended from the most
violent Causes.

. 25. In Sum therefore; The Qualities of the Tree of Life might be distributed
into four Classes; for some produced Elemental Qualities, others Alexipharmack
Qualities, others concurred actively with the Faculties of the Body to
Connatural Actions, and others were Resistive. And these last (if a Quality
actively resisting be not admitted) would belong to Patible Quality. The first
would belong to Habit; for if they were Natural Powers they might produce their
Effects, where and when they were not necessary, and not according to the
Exigence of the Body. And those which concur with the Faculties in their
Actions, belong to Habit, the first Species of Quality: Seeing they necessarily
and essentially suppose Powers to their Operation, and are Qualities of
difficult Expulsion, which two things are required to Habit according to common
Opinion. But of the Alexipharmack those which resist Poisons, as a kind of
Cause Formal, belong rather to Patible Quality: What, as a Cause Efficient, if
they concur with the Motive Power or with another, rather belong to Habit, for
the last said Reason: And they will belong to the same Species, whatever should
concur with another Active Power. But we must take notice of the Resistive
Qualities, if any there be actively resisting Division of Parts, that these, if
they concur by themselves only, are Powers; if with the Natural Powers
producing Union, they are Habits.

. 26. But Whether were all the foresaid Qualities, actively concurring with the
Powers, more noble than the Powers themselves? It seems to be more probably
affirmed, that they were more noble, as to the manner of Operation: Because
they elevate the Powers a Supra-ordinary Way (although within the Bounds of
Nature) to more noble Actions, and at least more intense, stronger and quicker,
than is consistent with their Nature, as it operates ordinarily: So that the
said Actions may especially be attributed to the Tree of Life, as to what
concerns this Manner of Operation. You will object. The Habits also of Powers
acquired by Acts do render the Actions more intense, stronger and quicker. And
yet they are not more noble than the Powers: Therefore, etc. The Consequence is
denied, and there is a disparity of Reason; for the Actions of Habits are such,
that they are attributed especially to the Powers: But the Actions of the
Powers, wherewith the Qualities of the Wood of Life concur, are so strong,
intense and quick, and are so efficaciously performed by the Qualities, that
they may rather be attributed to them, than to the Powers; and the Powers are
more the Instruments of these Qualities in respect of their Actions, than the
principal Causes.

. 27. But some one may enquire, Whether all Men would have been of the same
Temperament? I say, according to our Opinion, that affirms, the Wood of Life
would have been sufficient for eternal Life; and that to this there would have
been necessary Supra-elementary Qualities made good by the Wood, which would
have actively produced Elemental ones in a certain fixed Degree; we must
consequently say, That all Men would have been of the same Temperament after
Eating of the Wood. It is effectually proved; for the Cause of the Elemental
Qualities in all Men would have been of the same Reason and Proportion, to wit,
the more noble Qualities productive of the Elemental in the same proportionate
and fixed Degree. Therefore the same Temperament in Specie would have been in
all Men, when they had come to Perfection, and that most perfect. From whence
also it follows, that all Men eating the Fruit, would have had equal Strength,
equal Actions of the Senses, as well internal as external, an equal Strength of
Understanding, with dependency upon Phantasms: For the disposition of the
Phantasy would also have been equal. When nevertheless it is agreed, that some
would have been wiser and iuster than others, as Thomas e observes. Because
they would have acted by Free Will; whence some would have more applied their
Mind to learn this or that: Whereupon it would have followed, that some would
have been better Proficients in Knowledge, others in Justice, etc.

28. But you may deservedly enquire, Why in Reduction of an Old Man to Youth,
or of a Sick Man to Health, or of an intemperate Body to a temperate, there
would not have been Disease or Pain, seeing sudden Mutations, even terminated
to a better State, do cause this? I answer first, That a quick Mutation to a
natural or better state brings not Pain, nay but Pleasure, as Galen testifies
f. Where^ore if sometimes from such Reduction Pain do happen, as when the Hands
chilled with Snow are suddenly exposed to the Fire, this is by Accident,
because, to wit, some Parts are preternaturally altered, whilst the Heat in
others is reduced to its natural Perfection; or because from the Application of
Heat, the Cold in others is suddenly intended by Antiperistasis. I answer
secondly, That Pain is a depraved Action of the Touch: And seeing the Sense it
self (as other Powers) would have been helped to perform perfect Actions; there
could never have been a Depravation of Touch, which Pain is.

. 29. But whether according to the Opinion which denies the Fruit to be an
adequate Cause of Immortality, it had been necessary that Alexipharmack
Qualities should be contributed by the Wood to Man's Body, whereby it might be
preserved from Poisons? It seems to be affirmed, because it cannot be believed,
these Virtues were wanting to the most perfect Medicament, when many other
ordinary Medicaments have efficacious Virtues against Poisons; nay, we must
think, all other Supra-elementary Virtues for curing Diseases must have been
found in it, which are found in other ordinary Medicines: Those notwithstanding
excepted, which used without Art do hurt, such as are Purgative Virtues, which
given unseasonably, and to a Healthy Man, bring no small Harm.

. 30. I say seventhly. According to the same Opinion, which affirms, the Tree
of Life was not an adequate Cause of Immortality, but that the Supra-ordinary
Providence of God was necessary to avoid the Harms of External Causes;
according to this Opinion, I say, it is not necessary to grant a Resistive
Quality in the Tree, nor it may be other Qualities, which might preserve the
Elemental ones of the Body in a necessary fixed Degree, at least not so
efficacious, as wholly to resist all external altering Causes. It is proved,
because the Supra-ordinary Providence of God had been sufficient.

. 31. But since from the Sacred Text it appears, that Women in the State of
Obedience should have been free from the Pains of Birth, it seems worth our
Enquiry, Whether also the Qualities of the Tree of Life would have prevented
the Pains of Birth in Women? It seems to be more probably answered in the
Affirmative. First, Because seeing the Wood would have averted all internal
Causes of Death, or also the external besides, according to different Opinions;
and since it would have cured all preternatural Affections, it must of
necessity have been able to prevent and take away the Pains of Birth; nor is
there need of any greater Reason, why it should take away these than others.

. 32. Secondly, Because there are Medicines found naturally, which by means of
Supra-elementary occult Qualities do wonderfully allay the Pains of several
Parts, and preserve a Man from them, as a Wolf's Liver against the Pain of the
Liver, as Galen g testifies, and that famous Stone, which may deservedly be
called Nephritick, brought from the West Indies, vulgarly called de la hijada,
as Monardes h testifies, which tied to the Arm both takes away Nephritick
Pains, and preserves a Man from them, as also does a certain Wood of the same
Name (which I have sometime seen) described by the same Author. Therefore it is
credible, that in this Wood, which had admirable Virtues for all Preternatural
Affections, these also were not wanting, which might preserve from Pains of
Birth; especially seeing it makes for the Conservation of Life, as a Reward of
Obedience, to which purpose in the primary intention it was created.

. 33. But what way did it perform this Work? It may be doubted: For the Cause
of the Pains of Birth is the breaking of those Bonds, that tie the Child to the
Womb; which being a violent and sudden Solution of Continuity, it necessarily
causes Pain. Wherefore that the Tree of Life may prevent these Pains, it is
necessary, that it either stupefy the Sense in those Parts, as Narcotick
Medicines do; or so mollify and dispose the Ligaments, whereby the Child is
knit to the Womb, as Anodyne Medicines do, that without violence they might be
separated from the Parts of the Womb; or that it regulate the Faculties of the
Womb after such a manner, that they work that Separation by little and little
without Trouble: For only a violent Passion, which is preternatural, when it is
done much together and speedily, causes Pain; but what is done by little and
little escapes Sense, as Galen i expresses it. Another Way may also concur,
viz. Because in that State the Wood of Life would join with and assist the
Powers, that they might perform most perfect Actions. Therefore it would concur
with the Touch, that it might feel most perfectly; wherefore a depraved
Sensation could not be, in which Pain might formally consist, although the
Object or Cause of Pain were present.

. 34. But you will object. Either this Wood would have taken away the Pains of
Birth in the State of Innocence, or in the State of Lapsed Nature. Not in the
first, because it appears from the Sacred Text, that in it Woman would have had
no Pains in Birth: Not in the Second, because from the Sacred Text also it
appears, that they must necessarily suffer Pains for a Punishment of Sin.
Therefore it would take away Pains in no State. I answer, that both in the
State of Innocence and in the State of Lapsed Nature this Wood would have been
good against the Pains of Birth, if it had been eaten. In the State of
Innocence, because by it Women would have been preserved from Pains, and by
means of it would have obtained, what was owing to that State. And in the State
of Lapsed Nature, because therefore God cast Woman with Adam out of Paradise,
lest she should enjoy the Good due to Innocence, and the Reward promised for
Obedience, and by consequence Eternal Life; and lest she should obtain Immunity
from the Pains of Birth by Eating of this Wood.

a Suar. in Met. disp. 42. sect. 4. n. 8. b Vasq. tom. 1, 2. ad q. 21. disp.
78. c. 3. n. 21. c Auth. quaest. vet. and. nov. Testam. q. 19. d Gal. 7. meth.
cap. 13. lit. C. e D. Thom. 1. p. q. 96. art. 3. f Gal. lib. 1. de causis
sympt. cap. 6. g 8. local. cap. 8. F. h Monardes 1. p. c. propr. i Gal. 1. de
causis sympt. cap. 6.

DOUBT VII. After what manner would the Resistance of Qualities defend that
Man's Body, who eat of the Tree of Life, from all External Causes that could
hurt it.
. 1. ALthough the present Doubt be already resolved together with the
foregoing: Yet since all these things are new, which we have alleged for the
Preservation of Man from Death by the Qualities of the Wood of Life; and that
those are more hard to be known, which should naturally defend him from the
extrinsick Causes of Death, and seeing they are not sufficiently declared, as
the Difficulty of the thing requires, I accounted it very necessary more amply
to explain them, to the end, the strength of those things, which may be
objected to the Contrary, may more easily be broken, and the Truth may be more
open and clear.

. 2. External Causes therefore, that bring Diseases and Death, which must have
been resisted by the Qualities of this Fruit, are of two kinds: For some are
altering, others are locally moving, or impressing an Impulse. It is proved,
for among Philosophers Accidental Mutation is only twofold, that is, one to
Quality, another to Place. I pass by Mutation as to Quantity, because since
Quantity is never produced de novo (as the more probable Opinion says) this is
not a true Mutation.

. 3. And of the Altering Causes, some move to the Manifest Elemental Qualities,
and others to the Occult. The first are all those things which can produce
Elemental Qualities, first or second, and by this means vitiate and overthrow
the Temper of the Body, from whence various Diseases and Death do follow. The
second are especially all Poisons, which introducing Occult Poisonous Qualities
into the Body, waste Men's Strength, and take away Life.

. 4. And the Causes moving locally are also of a twofold Difference: For either
they move the Humors of the Body, as Medicines Purging, provoking Urine, Sweat
and Women's Courses, which by reason of their unseasonable, or superfluous, or
other preternatural Motions, can also cause Diseases and Death: Or they impress
such an impulse upon the Members of the Body, that they dissolve natural
Continuity, or change the Situation of the Parts; whereon do follow Diseases in
Conformation, viz. in Magnitude, Figure and Site; and consequently Death it
self, which the Fruit of Life was obliged to avoid, averting all these Causes.

. 5. But beside these Causes which produce positive Effects, others also may be
considered, which produce other (if I may so call them) privative Effects, and
consequently bring Death: For seeing the Body of a Living Creature, that it may
live, does stand in need of certain Matters, whereby the lost Substance may be
repaired, such as are Meat, Drink and Air; what things soever can deprive it of
these Matters, without doubt will cause Death, that is, things causing Hunger,
Thirst, Want of Air, or Suffocation.

. 6. These Causes being declared, which coming from without can bring Diseases
and Death, now it follows that we explain, according to the Opinion that
affirms the Wood of Life was an adequate Cause of Immortality, what way it
could hinder them: Which thing indeed since it seems altogether difficult, or
rather impossible; this Opinion is exploded by many, who have recourse to the
Supra-ordinary Providence of God. But for its Defense.

. 7. It is to be observed first. That the Virtues of the Tree of Life would not
so keep off external offending Causes, that most of them could not approach the
Body, nor that the Body should abide beyond the Sphere of their Activity: for
Example, They would not hinder the Fire to approach Man's Body, nor a Mad Dog to
touch it, nor any other Poison to be swallowed down: As neither would they
hinder the Defect of Meat, Drink or Air: For it is manifest, it was not in the
Power of the Wood to do this. Yet the Virtues of the Wood would hinder, that
the aforesaid Causes could not produce their positive Effects upon the Body: to
wit, that the Sun or Fire should not heat the Body; or the Sword or a Stone
should not dissolve Continuity by their Blow, or otherwise move the Parts of
the Body contrary to their Nature; and so of other things: And in like manner
the said Virtues would preserve a Man, that he should not perish by Privation
of Meat, Drink or Air. I said [that most of them should not approach the Body]
for we shall afterward prove, that it was possible for Virtue to be extended
from the said Wood to a certain Space without the Body of Man, in which it
might hinder those things which moved to Hurt, from moving farther, or reaching
to the Body.

. 8. It is to be observed secondly. The Wood of Life would defend Man's Body
from external Causes, producing Elemental first or second Qualities, by those
occult Qualities, which would produce other Elemental ones proportionate and
natural to the Body, in a certain Degree so fixed, that they could be remitted
by no other, even the most violent external or internal Cause, as we said
before in the last Doubt: And as by these the Body would have been preserved
from the mutual immoderate Reaction of the Parts among themselves, and from the
Reaction of the Aliment; so also the Body ought to be defended from the Action
of external Causes. It is effectually proved, Because these would have sufficed
to resist all Alterative Agents both internal and external.

. 9. But you will object. Two Degrees of Cold, for Example, which are necessary
and proportionate to the Health of the Body of Man, cannot naturally resist
eight Degrees of Heat of Fire applied next to it, seeing the Action would
necessarily follow the stronger Side. Therefore it is impossible, according to
Nature, that the Temper of the Body should endure in these two fixed Degrees
after the application of the Fire, but that it should be removed from them, and
part be burned. And it is confirmed, Because between equal contrary Agents, nay
between unequal ones, there is mutual Repassion, as Experience shows, and it is
the common Doctrine of Philosophers: Therefore the inferior Agent ought to
re-suffer from the stronger, that which resists with only two Degrees of Cold,
from the Action of the Superior, acting at the Rate of eight Degrees of Heat.

. 10. I answer, By distinguishing the Antecedent. Two Degrees of Cold
considered in themselves, according to their formal Resistance and Activity,
are not able to resist eight Degrees of Heat, so I grant the Antecedent: But
considered according to the Activity of their Cause producing them, I deny it:
For their Efficient Cause, that is, the Quality of the Wood produces them with
that Efficacy, and has such Influence on their Production, that they cannot be
remitted by any other the most violent Agent. Which Answer is according to the
Doctrine of Suarez a, as afterward we shall declare. For this Resistance is
not considered as Active, on the part of the Activity of the Degrees of Cold
themselves, or as Passive, on the part of their Formality, so much, as for the
Efficacy and Activity wherewith they are produced by their Cause. And for this
Reason the Rest of the Qualities of the Temperament do resist, being preserved
by the Qualities of this Wood, that they can never be remitted by their
Contraries. Which I prove effectually. If God by himself alone, that is, by his
actual Concurrence, will produce these two Degrees of Cold, and preserve them;
although eight Degrees of Fire were applied, yet they could not be remitted, if
God did not desist from his Concurrence; for the reason why they are corrupted
when a hot Agent comes, is because God in presence of it desists from his
conserving Concurrence: Therefore in like manner they will not be remitted, if
they be conserved by the same Efficacy of any other second Cause, not desisting
from its Influence. And for this Cause we said these Degrees were fixed.

. 11. Perhaps some will reply to this Argument, That it implies a
Contradiction, if God will conserve these two Degrees of Cold by his alone
Concurrence in the presence of eight Degrees of Heat, unless He should produce
more Degrees of Cold: And therefore it would be necessary to produce some
Supernatural Quality, which might resist eight Degrees of Heat. But on the
contrary, first, it does not appear wherein the Contradiction consists: For an
Agent with eight Degrees of Heat, could never introduce into the Subject,
having these two Degrees of Cold, but six Degrees of Heat, whereby the whole
Latitude of eight Degrees would be filled: For those two of Cold would be
conserved by God: Which I prove, for the Concurrence of God produces any thing
necessarily: Therefore it would produce necessarily those two Degrees of Cold,
while God continued his Concurrence. But Whether were it necessary that God
should increase his Concurrence? I answer negatively: For if he should increase
it, its Term also would be increased, and more Degrees of Cold produced.
Secondly, the foresaid Answer is refuted, Because either that Supernatural
Quality would resist, as a kind of Cause Formal, or Efficient: Not the first,
Because Cold would resist more, as being contrary; wherefore a Supernatural
Quality would be superfluous, as less resisting: Not the second, because this
would be by producing Cold, which also the Concurrence of God would do.
Therefore such a Quality would no way resist, or be necessary.

. 12. But you will urge against the foresaid Solution of the principal
Argument. No Cause has continual Influence, but upon an Effect depending on it
in Conservation: But Cold, and also other Elementary Qualities do not depend in
their Conservation upon their Efficient Causes: Therefore the Qualities of the
Wood of Life could not have continual Influence upon them: Therefore they could
not actively be preserved by them in a fixed Degree. I answer first, That
although the same Degree in Number be not preserved; yet the same in Specie is:
-- namque uno amisso, non deficit alter.
For when one's lost, another does not fail.
Which is sufficient for Incorruption of Temperament, and to preserve Health. I
answer secondly, That although some Quality of its own nature be not dependent
in Conservation; nor stands in need of the continual Influx of its Cause, for
its Conservation; yet there is no Inconvenience, that sometime it receive
continual Influx from its Agent, as that which is dependent in its
Conservation; after which manner actual Heat, existing in the very Fire, seems
to receive it: Which Influx, though it be not necessary to its Being; yet it is
necessary to its much better Being.

. 13. It is to be observed thirdly. That by the same Qualities of the Wood of
Life, which would have kept the Natural Temper of the Body in a fixed Degree,
the Harm also, which follows the Want of Meat, Drink and Air, would have been
prevented. Wherefore that Man, who had tasted the Fruit of Life, would never
have perished by Hunger, Thirst, or prohibited Respiration. It is proved,
Because in this Case the Heat would not act upon the Radical Moisture, (whether
that Moisture be Something diverse from the Living Parts, as the Old Opinion
held; or not, as now we more commonly think) nor would the Parts of the Body
mutually act and suffer among themselves beyond the Degrees convenient for
them, since every of the Natural Elemental Qualities would have been conserved
in its proportionate fixed Degree. Wherefore there would not be the Dissolution
of any Substance necessary for the Body; nor therefore would any Reparation on
by Meat, Drink or Air, have been necessary; nor consequently would the Defect
of these external Matters do Hurt.

. 14. But you will object first. Therefore the Introduction of these Matters at
least would do Hurt, seeing the Actions are no less Hurt by Addition than by
Defect. The Sequel is denied: For the most efficacious expulsive Virtue helped
by other Qualities of the Wood, concurring with it self, acting most
vehemently, would either not admit what was Superfluous, or would presently
expel it. This Harm might also be avoided by the Natural Providence of Man, who
would not take Meat, Drink and Air Superfluous.

. 15. You will object secondly. Men in the State of Innocence did eat, and
ought to have eaten, if they had remained in the same State: For the Lord said
unto them, that they might eat of every Tree of Paradise, except the forbidden
one. Therefore the Tree of Life did not excuse Men from Meat: therefore they
might dye for want of it. I answer with a Distinction, That before Eating of
the Wood of Life Men stood in need of Meat, I grant: After Eating of that Wood
of Life, I again distinguish, If they were constituted in Perfection of Health,
and in the best Constitution of Body due to perfect Age, I deny that they would
have wanted Meat, Drink or Air: But if they were not constituted in the highest
Perfection, as Children, Old Men and Sick Persons (if they had eaten the Wood
in the State of Lapsed Nature; for in this State the Wood being denied, they
might grow sick and old, and dye) that they would have stood in need of Meat
and Drink, and Breath, I grant.

. 16. You will infer. Therefore at least Children, Old Men and Sick Persons,
seeing they suffered a Defect of Substance, might, though they had eaten of the
Tree of Life before, notwithstanding perish by Hunger, Thirst, and Want of Air.
The Sequel is denied: For they would have only wanted Meat and Drink, that they
might come to the best Constitution of Body, but not that they might be
preserved in the same imperfect State: Because since we have it proved, that
the Qualities of the Tree of Life kept the Temper in the same fixed Tenor, and
hindered the contrary Qualities of the Body from acting mutually among
themselves beyond measure; the pre-existing Substance could not be further
wasted, nor consequently Children or Old Men for Want of new Food be consumed.

. 17. You will urge. The Qualities of the Wood were necessary Causes productive
of Elemental Qualities: Therefore they would necessarily introduce those
Degrees, which they were able, both in a Child and an Old Man: Therefore they
would necessarily produce in them a Temper agreeable to perfect and flourishing
Age: Therefore they should be Children and Old Men for their Temper, and they
should not, because they would want due Magnitude, through Defect of Aliment,
if they were deprived of it. I answer, In such a Case some might have been
Children, other Old Men, as to the Magnitude of Body; yet not as to their
Temper: Which implies no Contradiction.

. 18. And perhaps it might be answered, That the Virtues from the Qualities of
the Tree were so strong, that they could dispose any Matter, although it were
not Alimentous, and breed Blood of it, and Substance for the thing nourished.
Wherefore of Earth, Water and the Ambient Air, or of any other circumadjacent
thing, whatever it were, they were able to make Nourishment.

. 19. Which may be effectually proved by the Example of that Maid of twelve
years old, lying sick of a Diabetes, who turned the Ambient Air drawn in by
Respiration and by the Pores, into Water or Serum, as was the certain Opinion
of the Physicians then present: For she made thirty six pounds of Water every
day, but did not take above seven pounds in Meat and Drink; and seeing this
lasted threescore days, it appears that in that Time she made one thousand
seven hundred and forty Pounds of Water above the Weight of her Meat and Drink,
which was much more than the Weight of the Maid, if she had even been all
dissolved into Urine, as Cardan b affirms: For the Maid weighed not above one
hundred and fifty Pounds. Wherefore of necessity the inspired or circumfused
Air must have been turned into Urine. What wonder therefore, if the strong
Faculties of the Wood helping and elevating the Natural Powers of the Body,
were able sufficiently to dispose any indisposed Matter, and to turn it into
the Substance of the thing nourished?

. 20. And it is confirmed, Because for any Matter to be fit to nourish, it
suffices that Alimental Qualities be found therein, and that it want those
which may hurt: But the Virtues of the Wood, which we suppose most efficacious
and most agreeable to Nature, were able to introduce these Qualities into any
Matter that occurred: Therefore the Body of Man armed with the Qualities of the
Wood might be nourished by any occuring Matter whatever.

. 21. You will object thirdly. If Men in Innocence or after the Fall had eaten
the Fruit of Life, yet they would have generated by Abscision of Seed: But
Matter is necessary for generation of the Seed to be abscinded, and
consequently Meat, Drink and Air: Therefore if they had used Venery, and
notwithstanding had eaten nothing, without doubt they had dyed. I grant the
Major and the Minor, I deny the Consequence. Because for them who gave
themselves to Generation and used Venery, even for those that were of the best
Constitution of Body, the use of Food was necessary toward the Generation of
Seed: But though they used Venery, they would not be sick for want of Food,
because the strong Retentive Faculty of the Body would not suffer the Seed
necessary for the Body to be expelled; nor therefore would Nature at that Time
send Blood or other necessary Matter to the Seminary Vessels. Wherefore through
want of Food, and consequently of Seed, they might be rendered Barren; but dye
they could not.

. 22. You will object fourthly. Therefore at least through defect or immoderate
Use of the other non-natural things which are necessary for the preservation of
Life, Diseases would happen, nor could Man be defended by the Qualities of the
Wood of Life. And these things are, Sleep and Waking, Motion and Rest, and the
Accidents of the Mind, as Anger, Sorrow, Joy, and the like. I deny the Sequel,
Because these non-natural things do so far preserve or destroy Health, as they
preserve or change Natural things; for it is by Accident that they alter the
Temper of the Body, or change its Composition. But since we suppose the
Qualities of the Wood of Life do keep the Temper of the Body in a fixed
Proportion, it cannot be preternaturally changed by these Causes. Whereas also
we suppose, the Faculties of the Body would be helped by the Qualities of the
Wood after such a manner as we have said, they would most easily prevent the
Harms of the Excesses or Defects of the said non-natural things; as will easily
appear to him that thoroughly considers the Use of each non-natural thing.

. 23. It is to be observed fourthly. The Wood of Life defends the Body from
Plague, Malignant Fevers, and contagious occult Diseases by those Alexipharmack
Qualities, whereof we have treated before: For the Body is hurt by the
Poisonous Qualities of these things: Therefore it is well defended by other
contrary Alexipharmack Qualities afforded by the Tree of Life.

. 24. It is to be observed fifthly. A Natural Quality, which we called
Resistive, was possible, which was able to defend the Body, that it could not
be broken or divided by any Impulse or Blow, even the most violent. It is
proved effectually first, Because as the Hardness of a Stone resists Division,
so also there might be a Quality imparted by the Wood, which was able to resist
Division. It is proved secondly. For in things Natural, there be Qualities,
which indispose a Moveable Body, that it cannot be moved by a Cause able to
produce Motion. For it is evident from Experience, that Iron is so indisposed
by some Qualities, that it cannot be moved by Virtue of the Magnet. That Fishes
swimming over the Torpedo, enclosed in the Mud or Sand for the purpose, when
they come to the place whereto the Virtue of the Torpedo is extended, can stir
no farther, by which Art She catches and eats them, as Aristotle relates c. In
like manner the Fishers Arm is deprived of Motion, when the Quality of the
Torpedo reaches it. The Quality of Opium and other Stupefying Medicines does so
dispose the Humors, that they cannot move further, during the Quality of the
Opium; Wherefore Opium given stops violent Fluxes of Blood and other Humors.
The Quality of the Boodstone does also stop the Motion of the Blood.

. 25. And what is more wonderful, a Remora coming near stops the swiftest
Motion of a Ship under full Sail, as is the common Tradition of the fore-quoted
Authors, and of many others: Which although it may happen, because the Remora
draws the Ship a contrary way, as it fell out in that Fish, whereof we made
mention before, because it had fixed its Horn most firmly in the Ship: Yet the
Remora may do it a more easy way, namely, by impressing such a Quality on the
Ship, that, it being present, the Force of the Wind bearing upon the Ship,
cannot produce Motion, by reason there is an Indisposition, which is as an
Agent, that it cannot act. Wherefore a Power drawing the contrary way, or
otherwise resisting, is not necessary for hindering the Ship to be moved; but
this Quality may most easily hinder its Motion.

. 26. It is proved from the like. For if Amber be dulled by Moisture, its
Virtue cannot produce Motion in Straws. If the Virtue of the Torpedo reach the
Fishes swimming over her, or the Fishers Arm, their Motive Power cannot produce
Motion. If the Virtue of Opium come to the Humors, they cannot be expelled or
any way moved by the Faculties. Therefore so it will happen in like manner in
the Virtue of the Remora impressed on the Ship, that, it being present, the
force of the Wind cannot produce Motion on the Ship. Therefore after the same
manner may a Quality be afforded by the Wood of Life, which being present, no
external Motive Cause is able to effect Motion on the said Body. Nay, perhaps
that Quality might be diffused for some Space without the Body of Man, who eat
the Wood, by virtue whereof Darts cast, or Bullets shot from Guns, coming to
the Sphere of that Quality, would presently lose Motion, and not come at the
Body: Because the Motive Force, impressed on the Dart or Bullet, could not
effect Motion, because of the indisposing Quality diffused without the Body by
the Virtue of the Wood.

. 27. It is proved thirdly. Because (as before we have already said) all
Natural Agents, although they have most violent Powers, are yet of a finite
Virtue: Therefore there is no Inconvenience, that a Resistance may be, which
surpasses their Power. Seeing therefore such a Resistance is possible, whereby
the Wood of Life might defend Man's Body from Death, and that the Sacred Text
does clearly intimate, that it was an adequate Cause of Immortality, unless
some Supernatural Help should intervene, why shall we dare to deny it? Why
shall we seek other Interpretations for the Sacred Text? Medium's therefore
should rather be enquired, whereby the Wood of Life might be an adequate Cause
of Immortality: Which if they be found, as now by us, through God's Blessing,
they are found, it will be superfluous to have recourse to Miracles.

. 28. You will object. If such a Quality were, which indisposed any thing to
Motion; if such a thing could not be moved by one Cause, neither also could it
be moved by another Cause of equal Strength, since all Local Motion is of the
same kind: Therefore there can be no Quality indisposing to Local Motion. I
answer, The said Qualities are not Indispositions on the part of the Patient to
receive Motion; for if it were so, that thing which could not be moved by one
Agent, could be moved by none, for its Incapacity of Motion: But they are
Indispositions only on the part of the Agent, namely, of the Motive Quality,
that it cannot produce Motion. And for this Cause the Virtue of the Magnet can
produce Motion in Iron, not in other Bodies, because it finds in it
Dispositions necessary on the part of the Agent, which being present, it can
operate; not in other things. And for the same Reason Amber moves Straws, not
Iron, nor Stones: Agarick purges Phlegm, and not other Humors; and so we may
say of the rest.

. 29. It is to be observed sixthly, to give better Satisfaction to the Point,
That Philosophers reckon of a double positive Resistance (beside another
Negative) one Active, another Formal. Negative Resistance is the utter
Incapacity of the Subject to receive any Form, such as is in the Heavens,
supposing them incorruptible, as to receiving Qualities, altering to
Corruption. Active Resistance is the very Action of the Agent, as by it a Term
is produced, which formally resists, or by it the Force of another Agent is
broken, which is resisted; and it is called by d Suarez Radical Resistance,
because by it another Agent is prevented, that it does not act, and that its
Virtue is diminished: And seeing it is not immediately diminished, but by the
Form produced of such an Action, therefore it is called Radical Resistance; and
as it proceeds from an Agent, it is Active; but as it produces an Effect
immmediately resisting, it is Active Resistance.

. 30. Passive Resistance, or actual, is an Accidental Form, whereby the Subject
is rendered incapable of receiving another, which is resisted, or whereby the
Subject is indisposed to another; and this Resistance consists (says the same
Author e) in a certain formal Incompossibility, or Repugnance, from whence it
comes, that the Action of a contrary or any way repugnant Agent, is either
altogether hindered, or retarded, or remitted. And Active Qualities, as Heat and
Cold, may as well have this Resistance; as the not Active, as White and Black.
From whence it follows, that one Quality can violently resist actively, but not
at all formally, as Heat: or on the contrary, that another may violently resist
formally, not at all actively, as Dryness.

. 31. But seeing Formal Resistance consists in a Formal Incompossibility or
Repugnance; and two contrary Qualities in the same intense Degree, for example,
Heat and Cold in the eighth Degree are equally incompossible in the same
Subject, it is hard to assign a Cause, whence it comes that one can more resist
than another. Yet Suarez f brings three Causes, for which it may happen. The
first, is a greater and firmer Union to the Subject, as it happens in things
artificial, that some are more hardly parted asunder, because other things
cleave to them in form of a stronger Glue. The second is a greater Inequality
in some Condition requisite to do or suffer, as Density in the Patient, by
Reason whereof more Parts are united to resist the Action of the Agent. The
third is a greater, or the greatest Activity, whereby the quality flows from,
or is otherwise produced of its Cause; which way, for example, it may be said,
that the Moisture of Water resists more than that of Air, because it is
produced or flows more efficaciously from the Form of Water than from that of
Air. Also two or three of these Causes may be conjoined, by reason whereof the
Resistance may be greater; and besides the Active and Formal Resistance may be
joined, and therefore the Resistance may yet be more vehement.

. 32. From whence it is easily gathered, that the Elemental Qualities, produced
in Man's Body by the Supra-elemental, would both actively and formally resist
other Contraries, which are produced by ordinary intrinsic or extrinsick
Agents, Fire, for example, or Snow: And it is evident, that this Formal
Resistance would have been much greater than the Formal Resistance of
extrinsick active Qualities for the third Cause alleged by Suarez, namely for
the exceeding Efficacy, whereby they are produced of the Qualities of the Wood
of Life. Which in the same manner may be said of the Alexipharmack Qualities,
which resist Poisonous ones.

. 33. Therefore the Supra-elemental Qualities, as they most efficaciously
produce the Elemental, they resist actively, radically and mediately: But the
Elemental now produced resist formally and immediately other their Elemental
Contraries, and can by no means be overcome of them: Because they are either
perpetually produced in Specie by the Qualities of the Wood, which among all
Natural Agents are the most efficacious in acting: Or because by their
continual and most efficacious Influx they persist in the same, as we said
before. But whether their Union or their Inherence to their Subject be greater,
it does not appear: because it appears not whence it should proceed.

. 34. It is gathered from this Doctrine besides, that the Quality which resists
dividing things, imparted to the Body by the Wood of Life, does sufficiently
resist them passively or formally only: First, because as Hardness resists
Division, or Opacity the Light, so this Quality would resist dividing things.
Secondly, because it would resist the dividing Impulse and other Motive
Virtues, in the Nature of an indisposition on the part of the Agent, so that
they could not produce Motion, as we have proved by Example of other Qualities
hindering Production of Local Motion, that should be produced by some Motive
Qualities.

. 35. Moreover it is proved before, that those who eat of the Wood of Life,
were able to resist actively also, beyond this abovesaid Manner, any extrinsick
Causes making an Impulse, by Qualities actively concurring with the Animal
Motive Power; by reason whereof they were able to produce stronger, nay, the
strongest Motions, according to what we have said before.

a Suar. 2. Tom. Metaph. disp. 43. sect. 1. number. 14. b Cardan. de variet. lib.
8. cap. 44. c Aristot. 6. de hist. animal. cap. 10. and 9. de hist. cap. 37. d
Suar. tom. 2. metaph. disp. 43. sect. 1. nu. 8. e Suar. number. 10. f Suar. number.
12. and sequentibus.

DOUBT VIII. Whether the Cause of the very long Life of the first Men were some
other Trees of Paradise or the Tree of Life?
. 1. PAssing by various Opinions about the long Life of the first Men, I
declare I am of Opinion, that the Cause of the very long Life which these first
Men enjoyed, should be ascribed to the Qualities of other wholesome Trees
growing in Paradise, which were either in Fruits to be eaten, or transfused to
the ambient Air (whether it were done by Vapors, which exhaled from the said
Trees, or by continual Alteration, or both ways) and then they were
communicated by Food and Air to the Bodies of our first Parents, and from them
again in Seed and Blood to their Children. All which things I endeavor to
prove.

. 2. And in the first place, that there are in Nature Trees and other Plants
very Salutiferous, and which by occult Qualities both cure and prevent many as
well manifest as occult Diseases, is a thing most certain.

. 3. But that such Trees and Plants ought not to be wanting in Paradise, seems
a thing most manifest: For since the Sacred Text declares, there was every
Tree that is pleasant to the Sight and good for Food; the Consequent seems
infallible, that the most wholesome was there also; especially seeing those
very Trees which are good for Food, and pleasant to the Sight, are likewise
most wholesome. And we must consequently suppose, that the wholesome Qualities
of these Trees excelled all other in the whole World be^ides; even as in
Sweetness of Taste, Smell and Sight, and in goodness of Nourishment it was
convenient they should surpass all other Trees.

. 4. It follows therefore, that the Fruits, which our first Parents eat, were
endued with such like Qualities: And that the Air, which they inspired, was
likewise replenished with wholesome Qualities: And that the very same Qualities
remained in the Body of our Parents themselves: for the Medicamentous Qualities
of things that are eaten, remain in the Bodies of Animals, as the Virtue of
Hellebore in the Body of a Quail.

. 5. Seeing therefore such Fruits, and the inspired Air were efficacious in
producing those Virtues; it is consequent, that the Virtues themselves must
needs be produced in the Bodies of our first Parents, and must from thence be
communicated in Seed to their Children and Children's Children. Wherefore of
necessity they must strengthen the Faculties of the living Body, and concur
with them to perform most perfect Actions, as Alexipharmacks and Amulets.
Whence long lasting Health and Life must necessarily follow.

. 6. All these things are confirmed from the like: For we daily experience,
that grievous Diseases are contracted from bad Food, and from bad Air, infected
with the rank Vapors of unwholesome Plants, or of neighboring Lakes, or of
nasty Places: We experience Diseases hereditary from Fathers to Children and
Children's Children, which is frequently observed in the French Disease, Gout
and Falling Sickness, and in many others. What wonder therefore on the
contrary, if from wholesome Food, and from very wholesome Air most wholesome
Qualities be contracted; which propagated to Children and Children's Children,
may become Causes of most perfect Health and Long Life?

. 7. Besides, the Vicinity of the Place to Paradise might contribute to
Diuturnity of Life: For their Habitation, when driven out, would not be far
distant. Wherefore as the Winds blowing from a wholesome or unwholesome Place
render an Habitation wholesome or unwholesome; So those blowing from Paradise,
must necessarily with the same Qualities make the neighboring Country's
exceeding wholesome.

. 8. For Corroboration whereof there comes very opportunely the History of that
Indian, most famous among our Portugueze, who lived above three hundred and
thirty five years, as do testify Patres Conimbricenses a, our Johannes de
Barros, who may rather be styled the Lusitanian Livie b, and our Didacus de
Couto a famous Portugal Historian c. Several of our Portugueze at their Return
from the East Indies assured me they saw him alive. Nunius a Cunna, when he
governed India, found him there, and afterward when Don John de Castro
presided Viceroy Anno Domini 1547. he was then alive. And all the Kings of
those Parts, before they were subject to the Kingdom of Portugal, and our
Governors and Viceroys afterward, appointed an Allowance for the Maintenance
of this wonderful Man.

. 9. His Teeth fell several times, others e're long coming in their room; His
Beard, when it was grown all white, as his Age reflourished, grew black again.
Some ascribe the Cause of this to certain Fruits, which he found in Ganges, and
eat: For at certain Times after Inundations, rowing up and down Ganges in a
Boat, he sought these Fruits, which, as they affirm, are brought with the
Waters from Earthly Paradise, from whence this River (as is believed) derives
its Original.

. 10. But Whether did these Fruits fall from the Tree of Life? It must without
doubt be denied. For if God cast out Adam, lest he should eat thereof, and
commanded the Angel to keep the Way with great Vigilance, how would he suffer
them to glide down the Flood, that others might eat them? Again, according to
the Opinion which affirms, that once eating of such Fruit would have been
sufficient for eternal Life; it becomes most certain that these Fruits were not
of the Tree of Life, since at length he is dead, who eat of them. Wherefore we
must rather affirm, they were very wholesome Fruits of some other Trees, whose
occult and wonderful Virtues concurring with the Powers of the Animal, kept off
mortiferous Causes, and especially Diseases themselves, the same way that
Alexipharmacks and Amulets, and other Medicines cure manifest Diseases by
occult Virtues; only these Fruits had much more efficacious Virtues, by means
whereof the Body of Animals persevered a very long time free from Diseases.

. 11. But against the abovesaid things some might say, That those most
Salutiferous Virtues beforementioned were diffused through the Air from the
Tree of Life, which did render not only Paradise, but all the Neighboring
Country most wholesome: And there is no need to have Recourse to the Virtues of
other Fruits or Plants. I answer, That probably this might be said; nor would
it therefore follow, that the Air was sufficient to impart eternity of Life;
because such Virtues diffused in the Air would either be of a different kind
from those which rendered Life eternal; or if they were of the same kind, they
had not Intenseness sufficient, as those had which the Fruit eaten afforded.

. 12. Nevertheless I think it more probable, they were the Fruits of other
Trees. First, Because if the Tree of Life had those Virtues that were
sufficient for Eternal Life; it were superfluous to have others, that made for
the Prolongation of Life. And then if we suppose they were the same, that were
able to render Life Eternal, but more remiss; it seems, that in any Degree
whatever they would have made it so: For they were of such a Nature and
Efficacy, that in any Degree whatever they could easily overcome all other
natural Agents, even the most violent: And thence it was, we judged before,
that one Eating of our first Parents was sufficient, that these Qualities might
be diffused with the Seminal Virtue to their Children, their Children's
Children, and at length to Universal Mankind. But of these Opinions every Man
may follow that which pleases him best.

a Conimb. lib. 2. de Genesis cap. 10. quaest. 1. art. 3. ad fin. b Johan. de
Barros Decad. 4. lib. 8. c. 9. ad initium. c Didac. de Couto lib. 1. Decade 5.
c. 12.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
OF the Qualities of the Tree of Life. page 1 Eight Doubts concerning the
Qualities of this Tree. ibid. That the Wood of Life was a true Tree and not
Metaphorical. 3 Whether the Virtue of the Tree of Life, to perpetuate Life,
were Natural? 4 The Affirmative part is approved. 5 Whether the Virtue of this
Tree were such as to keep a Man alive, Time without end? 6 The Affirmitive part
is approved 8 Whether it were sufficient for Immortality to eat only once of
the Fruit? 16 The Qualities of the Fruit of Life would compensate all
Repassion. 23 When the Fruit would have produced Qualities to cause Eternity?
26 The Fruit of Life would not always have been turned into the Substance of
the Person nourished. 27 When it would have rendered the Body altogether
impatible? 27, 28 Whether after eating of the Wood there could have been
Generation and Propagation of Children? 28 Whether by eating of this Fruit a
Man would have had the same Qualities in kind, which we shall have after the
Resurrection? 29 What way the Qualities of the Fruit did defend the Child from
Death before and after its Birth? 30 It had been sufficient, that Adam and Eve
had once eaten, to have made all their Posterity immortal. 30. Even those that
had committed actual Sin. 31 Whether the Tree of Life were a Cause adequate to
the escaping all occasions of Death. 33 The Affirmative Part is approved. 42
The Remora or Echeneis stops a Ship. 45 Echeneides are of diverse kinds. 46, 50
A wonderful History of a Remora's shaking and stopping a Portugueze Ship. 47 An
easy way is shown how a Remora may without any trouble stop a Ship. 94 What,
and how many, were the Qualities of the Tree of Life, whereby it caused length
of Life and Immortality? 51 The Tree of Life was Food and Physic. 52 It might
be called a Medicinal Aliment or an Alimental Medicine. ibid. It would give to
the Body so many and so efficacious Qualities, as were sufficient to preserve
and repair the Natural Constitution. p. 53 This Fruit would give to the Body
supra-elementary Qualities, which were able to produce Elemental ones, only in
such a Degree, as was agreeable to the Natural Temperament. 54 These Qualities
were of so great Efficacy, that they would preserve that D^gr^e ^ixt against
the Activity of any external Agent. 55 These Qualities productive of the
Elemental ones were a kind of Habit. 56 They are also a kind of those which
cure manifest Diseases. ibid. It was not sufficient that these Qualities should
dispose as a kind of Cause Formal. 57 The Tree of Life would also give
Qualities, which would concur with the Faculties as a kind of Cause Efficient
to perform most perfect Actions. ibid. Whether one only Quality flowing from
the Fruit would suffice to concur with all the Faculties? 59 There would have
been a particular Quality for each Faculty. ibid. The Fruit would defend the
Body by these Qualities from Hunger, Thirst, and want of Air. 60 How this might
be done? p. 61 A Resistive Quality would have been given by this Fruit to
prevent all Diseases in Union and Composition. ibid. This Resistive Quality
would not have been Active, but relating to Patible Quality. ibid. Whether this
Quality belonged to Power or Habit. 67 This Fruit would have communicated
Alexipharmack Qualities. 62 It is probable, that the Wood of Life communicated
no Qualities to help the Discerning Powers. 66 How the Moisture would have been
defended by the Qualities of the Tree of Life, that it could not be wasted by
the Heat? 63 The Qualities of the Tree are distributed into four Ranks. 66
Whether the Qualities of this Tree concurring with the Powers, were nobler than
the Powers themselves? 68 All Men that eat the Fruit would have had the same
Temperament, 69. Yet some would have been Wiser and Iuster than others. 70 Why
there should have been no Pain, when in the Reduction there would a sudden
change have been made by the Qualities of the Tree of Life? ibid. Whether the
Wood of Life had Alexipharmack Qualities? 71 It had all Virtues, which other
Medicines have in healing, except those, which used without Art do Harm. ibid.
According to the Opinion, which requires the Extraordinary Providence of God to
the avoiding external Causes of Death, the Tree had not given a Resistive
Quality^ 72 Whether the Qualities of this Tree would have preserved Women from
Pains in Travel? ibid. What way they would have preserved Women from Pain? 73
After what manner would the Resistance of Qualities defend that Man's Body, who
eat of the Tree of Life, from all external Causes that could hurt it? 76
External Causes of Death would not have been hindered by the Qualities of the
Wood of Life from approaching the Body. 79 Yet they would have been hindered
from acting upon the Body. ibid. How the Qualities of the Wood defended the
Body from Agents producing Elemental Qualities? 80 How these Degrees would be
preserved fixed by the Qualities of the Wood? 81 It is proved that they might be
preserved naturally by the Qualities of the Wood p. 82 In what Sta^e would Men
have stood in need of M^at, Drink snd Respiration, after eating of this Fruit?
87 The Qualities of the Wood were able to convert any Matter into the Substance
of the thing nourished, 88. And this is proved, 89 Why they that generated,
would not have died for want of Food? 90 How the Harm of the six Non-natural
things would have been prevented by the Fruit of Life? 91 It is proved that
such a Resistive Quality was possible to be made good by the Tree, as would
have been able to have kept the Body from being broken by the most violent
Motion. 92 How the Elemental Qualities produced by the Wood of Life would have
resisted. 99 The Res^^tent Quality made good by the Wood suffici^ntly resisted
passively or formally. 100 How i^ did this? ibid. Wh^^h^r the Qualities of the
Tree of Life diffused ^^rough the Air, gave length of Life to the first Men in
the Neighboring Regi^^? 107 (...) the Earth^^ Paradise excelled all others the
whole World over, in Wholesomeness, Sweetness of Taste and Smell, and in
Pleasantness to the Eye. p. 103 The Qualities of these Trees were the Cause of
the very long Life of the first Men. 102
The End.
Books Printed and sold by Thomas Flesher, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Anatomy of Humane Bodies Epitomized. Wherein all the Parts of Man's Body,
with their Actions and Uses, are succinctly described, according ^o the newest
Doctrine of the most accurate and learned Modern Anatomists. By a Fellow of the
College of Physicians, London. With the Approbation of the President and
Censors of the said College.

The Anatomy of an Horse, Containing an exact and full Description of the
frame, situation and connection of all his Parts, (with their Actions and Uses)
expressed in forty nine Copper Plates. To which is added an Appendix, Containing
two Discourses; the one of the Generation of Animals, and the other of the
Motion of the Chyle, and the Circulation of the Blood. By Andrew Snape Junior,
Farier to his Majesty.

The Non-conformists Champion his Challenge accepted; or, an Answer to Mr.
Baxter's Petition for Peace, written long since, but now first published, upon
his repeated Provocations and importune Clamours, that it was never answered.
Whereunto is prefixed an Epistle to Mr. Baxter; with some Remarks upon his Holy
Commonwealth, upon his Sermon to the House of Commons, upon his Non-conformists
Plea for Peace; and upon his Answer to Doctor Stillingfleet. By Ri. Hook, D. D.
Vicar of Halyfax.

The Loyalty of Popish Principles examined, in Answer to a late Book Entitled
Stafford's Memoires, with some Considerations in this present Juncture, offered
to Protestant Dissenters. By Rob. Hancock, Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambrige,
and Rector of Northill in Bedford-shire.

A Sermon Preached at Guild Hall, before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
by Richard Hancock.

A Sermon Preached in the Cathedral Church at the Triennial Visitation of the
Lord Bishop of Sarum. By Samuel Fyler A. M. Rector of Stockton in the County of
Wilts.

There is now in the Press a Book Entitled, A Guide to the Practical
Physician, showing from the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern, the
truest and safest way of curing all Diseases, internal and external, whether by
Medicine, Surgery or Diet; lately published in Latin by Theophil. Bonetus M. D.
And now rendered into English, with the substraction of some things of less
Moment, a more exact Relation of several others, and an Addition of many
considerable Cases, Rules and means of Cure, that were omitted by the aforesaid
Author; a work very necessary and useful for all Practitioners in Physic: To
which is added an Appendix concerning the Office of a Physician, by the same
Author.

An exact Description of all the Birds hitherto known; the Descriptions
illustrated by most elegant Figures, nearly resembling the Live Birds, engraven
on 78 Copper Plates, with three considerable Discourses, viz. 1. Of the Art of
Fowling, 2. The ordering of Singing Birds, and, 3. Of Falconry. By Francis
Willoug^by, Esquire. For.

Glossographia, or, A dictionary interpreting the hard Words of whatsoever
Language, now used in our refined English Tongue; with Etymologies,
Definitions, and Historical Observations on the same: Also the Terms of
Divinity, Law, Physic, Music, Mathematics, War, Heraldry, and other Arts and
Sciences explicated. The Fifth Edition with many Additions. By T. Blount of the
Inner Temple, Esquire

The Policy of Rome, or, the true Sentiments of the Court and Cardinals there
concerning Religion and the Gospel, as they are delivered by Cardinal
Palavicini, in his History of the Council of Tr^nt; Englished out of French.
With a Preface. By Gil. B^rnet, D. D.

Vade Mecum, or, A Companion for a Surgeon: fitted for Sea or Land, Peace or
War: showing the Use of his Instruments, and Virtues of M^dicin^s simple and
compound most in use, and how to make them up after the best Method: with the
manner of making R^ports to a Magistrate, or Coroner's Inquest. A Treatise of
Bleeding at the Nose: with Directions for Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, etc. By
Tho. Brugis, Doctor in Physic. The seventh Edition, amended and augmented.
With an Institution of Physic, and Seven new Trea^ises, viz. Of Tumors,
Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, Dislocations, Lues Venerea, Anatomy. By Ellis Prat,
M. L.


