Friar BACON HIS DISCOVERY OF THE MIRACLES Of ART, NATVRE, And MAGIC.

Faithfully translated out of Dr Dees own Copy, by T. M. and never before in
English.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
A Prejudicate eye much lessens the nobleness of the Subject. Bacons name may
bring at the first an inconvenience to the Book, but Bacons ingenuity will
recompense it ere he be solidly read. This as an Apology is the usher to his
other Works, which may happily breath a more free Air hereafter, when once the
World sees how clear he was, from loving Negromancy. 'Twas the Popes smoke
which made the eyes of that Age so sore, as they could not discern any open
hearted and clear headed soul from an heretical Phantasme. The silly Friars
envying his too prying head, by their craft had almost got it off his
shoulders. It Is dangerous to be wiser than the multitude, for that unruly Beast
will have every over-topping head to be lopped shorter, lest it plot, ruin, or
stop the light; or shadow its extravagancies. How famous this Friar is in the
judgment of both godly and wise men, I refer you to the Probatums of such
men, whose single Authorities were of sufficiency to equallize a Jury of
others; and as for the Book, I refer it to thy reading. As for my self, I refer
me to him, whom I serve, and hope thou will adore.

THE JUDGMENT OF Diverse Learned Men CONCERNING Friar BACON.
IO. Seldom de Diis Syris Sintag. 1. r.2. -- 7.25.

That singular Mathematician, learned beyond what the Age he lived in did
ordinarily bring forth, Roger Bacon an Oxford man, and a Friar minorite.

The Testimony of Gabriel Powel in his Book of Antichrist in Preface, p. 14.

Roger Bacon an Englishman, a founded Scholar of Merton-Colledg in Oxford, a
very quick Philosopher, and withal a very famous Divine, he had an incredible
knowledge in the Mathematics, but without Necromancy (as John Balleus does
report) although he be defamed for it by many: Now this man after he had
sharply reproved the times wherein he lived; these Errors, says he, speak
Antichrist present. Nicholas tbe Fourth Pope of Rome did condemn his Doctrine
in many things, and he was by him kept in prison for many years together; as
Antonine has it in his Chronicle. He flourished in the year of our Lord, 1270.

John Gerhard Vossius in his Book of the four Popular Arts, printed at
Amsterdam, 1650. is every where full of the praises of Bacon, as in the year
1252. About these men's time Roger Bacon also flourished, an Englishman, and a
Monk of the Order of St. Francis; who as he had dived into all Arts and
Sciences: so also he writ many things of them, he was a man both learned and
subtle unto a Miracle, and did such wonderful things by the help of
Mathematics, that by such as were envious and ignorant, he was accused of
Diabolical Magic, before Pope Clement the 4th, and for that cause was detained
in prison by him for some time. Jo. Pecus Earl of Mirandula, the Phoenix of all
the wits of his Age, calls him likewise, very ingenious. Moranlicus also
commends highly his Optics. He was buried at Oxford in the Monastery of the
Monks of his own Order, anno 1284. So Chap. 35.. 32. anno 1255. So Chap. 60..
13. Of Music, anno 1270. So Chap. 70.. 7. 1270. Roger Bacon flourisht in
England, a man wonderfully learned. And Chap. 71.. 8. anno 1270. Roger Bacon a
Franciscan Monk, and a Divine of Oxford, was famous amongst the English in all
sort of Sciences; a man of so vast learning, that neither England, no nor the
world beside, had almost any thing like or equal to him. and either by envy or
ignorance of the Age, wherein he lived, was accused of Magic. He in the mean
time did write and recommend to the Memory of Posterity, a Book of Weights, of
the Centers of heavy things, of the Practicks of Natural Magic, etc. For he
was a man well versed in all sorts of study, very learned in the Latin, Greek
and Hebrew Tongues, a Mathematician every way accomplished, and very skillful
both in Philosophy, Physic, Law and Divinity.

THE CONTENTS Of the Several Chapters.
Chap. 1. Of and against fictitious Apparences and Invocation of Spirits. 1.
Chap. 2. Of Charms, Figures, and their Use. 4 Chap. 3. Of the force of Speech,
and a Check to Magic. 10 Chap. 4. Of admirable Artificial Instruments. 17
Chap. 5. Of Perspective Artificial Experience. 9 Chap. 6. Concerning strange
Experiments. 23 Chap. 7. Of Retarding the Accidents of Old Age, and
Prolongation of Life. 28 Chap. 8. Of obscuring the Mysteries of Art and Nature.
35 Chap. 9. Of the manner to make the Philosophers Egg. 41 Chap. 10. Of the
same Subject another way. 46 Chap. 11. Of the same Subject another way. 49
BE pleased to take notice, that there is now in the Press 18 Books of the
Secrets of Art and Nature, Collected out of the choicest Authors, both Ancient
and Modern; first designed by John VVecker Dr of Physic, and now much enlarged
by Dr R. Read. The like never before in the English Tongue. To be sold at the
Star in St Paul's Churchyard.

A LETTER SENT BY Friar ROGER BACON TO William of Paris, Concerning both The
Secret Operation OF NATURE and ART, As also The Nullity of Magic.
CHAP. I. Of and against fictitious Apparences and Invocation of Spirits.
THat I may carefully render you an answer to your desire, understand, Nature
is potent and admirable in her working, yet Art using the advantage of nature
as an ^n^trument (experience tells us) is of greater efficacy than any natural
activity.

Whatsoever Acts otherwise than by natural or artificial means, is not humane
but merely fictitious and deceitful.

We have many men that by the nimblenesse and activity of body, diversification
of sounds, exactness of instruments, darkness, or consent, make things seem to
be present, which never were really ex^stent in the course of Nature. T^^
world, as any judicious eye may see, groans under such bastard burdens. Jugle^
by an handsome sleight of hand, will put a complete lie upon the very sigh^^.
The Pythonissae sometimes speaking from their bellies, otherwhile from the
throat, than by the mouth, do create what voices they please, either speaking
at hand, or far off, in such a manner, as if a Spirit discoursed with a man,
and sometimes as though Beasts bellowed, which is all easily discovered by
private laying hollow Canes in the grass, or secre^ places, for so the voices
of men will be known from other creatures.

When inanimate things are violently moved, either in the Morning or Evening
twilight, expect no truth therein, but downright cheating and cousenage.

As for consent, men by it may undertake any thing they please, if so be they
`have a mutual disposition.

These I mention, as practices wherein neither philosophical Reasons, Art, or
power of Nature is prevalent. Beyond these there is a more damnable practice,
^^en men despising the Rules of Philosophy, irrationally call up wicked
Spirits, supposing them of Energy to satisfy their desires. In which there is
a very vast error, because such persons imagine they have some authority over
Spirits, and that Spirits may be compelled by humane authority, which is
altogether impossible, since humane Energy or Authority is inferior by much to
that of Spirits. Besides, they admit a more vast mistake, supposing such
natural instruments, as they use, to be able either to call up, or drive away
any wicked Spirit. And they continue their mistake in endeavoring by
Invocations, Deprecations or Sacrifices to please Spirits, making them
propitious to their design. Without all question, the way is incomparably more
easy to obtain any thing, that is truly good for men, of God, or good Angels,
then of wicked Spirits. As for things which are incommodious for men, wicked
Spirits can no further yield assistance, then they have permission, for the
sins of the sons of men, from that God, who governs and directs all humane
affairs. Hence therefore I shall conclude (these things being beyond, or rather
against the Rules of Wisdom) No true Philosopher did ever regard to work by
any of these six ways.

CHAP. II. Of Charms, Figures, and their Use.
WHat men ought to believe touching Figures, Charms, and such stuff, I shall
deliver my opinion. Without doubt there is nothing in these days of this kind,
but what is either deceitful, dubious, or irrational, which Philosophers
formerly invented to hide their secret operations of Nature and Art from the
eyes of an unworthy generation. For instance, if the virtue of the Lodestone,
whereby it draws iron to it were not discovered, some one or other who has a
mind hereby to cosen the people, so goes about his business, as lest any
by-stander should discover the work of attraction to be natural, he casts
Figures, and mutters forth some Charms. Thus many things lie dark in
Philosophical writings; in which the wiser sort of Readers will express so
much discretion, as reject the Figures and Charms, eying the works of Nature
and Art, that so they may see the mutual concurrence of animate and inanimate
creatures, occasioned by Natures conformity, not any efficacy of Figures or
Charms. This is the cause why the unlearned crew have judged such natural or
artificial operations to be merely Magical. And some fond Magicians believe,
That their casting of Figures and Charms was the sole cause of such
operations; hereupon leaving their natural and artificial operations have stuck
close to their erroneous casting of Figures and Charms. And thus they both have
by their own folly deprived themselves of the benefit of the others wisdom. In
times past, godly and religious men, N^mb. 6.27.
or rather God himself, or his good Angels composed several Prayers, which yet
may retain their primitive virtue. As to this day, in several Countries,
certain prayers are made over hot irons, and water in the River, etc. By which
the innocent are ci^ared, and guilty condemned; yet all this is done by the
Authority of the Church, and her Prelates. Our Priests exercise their holy
water, as formerly the Jews did in the Old Testament, Numb. 5.
in making the water of Trial, whereby the wife was tried, whether she were an
adultresse, or honest. Not to instance in others of the like nature. Concerning
those Secrets, which are revealed in Magicians writings, although they may
contain some truth, yet in regard those very truths are enveloped with such a
number of deceits, as it is not very easy to judge betwixt the truth and
falsehood, they ought all worthily to be rejected. Neither must men be believed,
who would assure us, That Solomon, or some other of our sage Progenitors were
Authors of such Books, because those Books are not received either by the
Churches Authority, or by any prudent men, but only by a few cheating
Companions to be the works of such men. Mine own experience assures me they
compose and set forth new works and inventions of their own, in lofty high
flown expressions, the more colourably to make their lies pass under the
shelter of the Text; prefixing some specious titles, the better to set them
off, impudently ascribe such bastard births to famous Authors.

Figures are either composed of words involved in the forms of letters,
invented to contain the sense of some Oraionis.
speech or prayer; or they are made according to the face of the Heavens in
proper and select seasons. The Figures of the former sort must have the same
sentence that I gave of prayers formerly; as for Figures and Sigillis.
Impressions of the other kind, unless they be made in their peculiar seasons,
they are not of any efficacy. And hence it is that all wise men think they
effect nothing, who only go according to their prescribed Characters, not at
all regarding more than the bare external form. The more knowing sons of
Art, dispose all their works of Nature and Art according to the power of the
Heavens, casting their work under a right Constellation, no less than the
casting it in a right Figure. Now in regard there is much difficulty to discern
the motion of Celestial Bodies, many are cousened, and very few know, how to
begin their work either profitably or truly. Hence it comes to pass, that the
crowd of judicious Mathematicians and Star gazers effect little, and that
unprofitable, while the more expert Professors, who sufficiently understand
their own Art, attain many conveniences both by their Operations and Judgments
in select and proper opportunities: And yet let us take notice, how the
Physician, or he that would re-erect a drooping soul, effects his design by
the use of Figures or Charms, which in themselves are merely fictitious (as
Constantine the Physician is of opinion.) Physicians use Figures or Charms,
Th^s some think the Kings evil is cured, by creating a belief the touch of the
King can cure.
not for any prevalency in them, but that the raising of the soul is of great
efficacy in the curing of the body, and raising it from infirmity to health, by
oy and confidence is done by Charms; for they make the Patient receive the
Medicine with greater confidence and desire, exciting courage, more liberal
belief, hope and pleasure. The Physician then who would magnify his cure, may
work some way of exciting hope and confidence in his Patient; not that hereby
he should cheat, but stir up the sick to believe he shall recover, which if
we pin our faith on Co^stantines sleeve, This may be done lawfully, if the
part^ that is the principal agent does nothing by way of compact with any
Spirit, o^ sinistrously.
is very tolerable. Upon this account he defends the hanging Charms or Figures
about the Neck. The soul no question is of much prevalenc^ by reason of its
strong affections over its proper body, as Avicen says in lib. de anima, and
8. and animal. to which all wise men accord. Hereupon it was, that they
concluded sick persons should be delighted by the company of children to play
before them, and other pleasing objects. Yea they frequently consent to such
things as please the appetite, though they be obnoxious to their disease;
because affection, desire and hope of the soul conquers many diseases.

CHAP. III. SERMONIS. Of the force of Speech, and a Check to Magic.
IN regard truth must not receive the least injury, we should take more exact
notice how every agent communicates the Virtue and Species which is in it to
other extrinsecal objects; I mean not only the substantial Virtue, but even
Act^ve Accidents, such as are in tertia specie Qualitatis.

As for the Virtues which flows from the Creature, some of them are sensible,
some insensible. Man which is both the most noble corporeity, and dignified
rational soul, has no less than other things heat and spirits exhaling from
him, and so may no less than other things emit and dispose of his Virtues and
Species to external Objects.

Some creatures we know have power to metamorphose and alter their objects. As
the Basilisk, Plin. Not. Hist. li^. 39. c. ^.
who kills by ^ight alone. The Wolf, if she first see a man before the man see
him, makes the man hoarse. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 22.

Solin. Poly. cap 8.

Plin. lib. 8. cap. 30.

Solin. c 30.


The Hyaena suffers not the dog which comes within his shadow to bark (as
Solinus de mirabili bus mundi, and others) And Aristotle lib. 2. de Vegetab.
says, That Female Palm Trees bring forth fruit to maturity by the smell of
their Males. And Mares in some Kingdoms impregnate by the smell of Horses (as
Solinus affirms. Cap. 30. ex C. Plin. lib. 4. c. 32. and lib. 8. c. 42.
) Aristotle in his Secrets assures us of several other contingencies which
issue from the Species and Virtues of Plants and Animals. Hence I argue, If
Plants and Animals, which are inferior in dignity to our humane Nature, can
emit, then surely may man more abundantly emit Species, Virtues and Colors to
the alteration of external Bodies. To this purpose is that, which Aristotle
tells us ( Lib. de s^mno and Vigilia) a menstruous woman looking in a glass,
does infect it with spots, Cap. 6. vid. and C. Plin. l. 7. c. 2.
like clouds of blood. Solinus further writes, That in Scythia there are women
which have two sights in one eye. (Hence Ovid, Nocet pupilla duplex.) and that
these women by their glances kill men. And we our selves know, In the Norhe^n
Country some are said to have an evil eye, and to do harm by their looks, yea
though they do it not voluntarily.
That men of an evil complexion, full of contagious infirmities, as Leprosy,
the Falling Sickness, spotted Fever, bleer-eyed, or the like, infects those
men in their company: While on the other side, men of a sound and wholesome
complexion, especially young men, do by their very presence exhilerate and
comfort others; which no question, He holds sight by emission.
as Galen in his Techne, proceeds from their pure spirits wholesome and
delightsome vapors, their sweet natural color, and from such Species and
Vir^ues as they emit.

The soul sinful or not, works mor^lly, not physically to the hurt of others,
but the man who has a body may do (...) Medi^ant^ co^p^re.
That man whose soul is defiled with many heinous sins, his Body infirm, his
Complexion evil, and has a vehement fancy and desire to hurt his neighbor,
may bring more inconveniences, then another man. The Reason may be, the Nature
of Complexion and infirmity yields obedience to the thoughts of the Heart, and
is more augmented by the intervention of our desires. Hence it is that a
leprous person, who is solicitous, desirous and fancying to infect some one or
other in the room, may more easily and forceably effect it, than he which has
no such intention, fancy or desire. For (as Avicen observes in the fore^cited
place) the nature of the body is obedient to the thoughts, and more intent
fancies of the soul. And (as Avicen in the 3d Metaph. affirms) the thought is
the first mover, after that the desire is made conformable to the thought, then
after that the natural virtue, which is in the members, obeys the desire and
thought; and thus it is both in good and bad effects. Hence it is that a young
man of a good Complexion, healthful, fair, well featured Body, having his soul
not debauched with sin, but of a strong fancy and vehement desire to compass
the effecting of some magnificent design, withal adding the power of his
Virtues, Species and natural heat; He may by the force of these Al. Species.
Spirits, Vapors and influences work both more powerfully and vehemently, than
if he should want any of these foregoing qualifications, especially strong
affections and forceable imaginations. Hence I conclude, Men by the concurrence
of the foresaid Causes, Words and Works being the Instruments, bring great
undertakings to perfection.

As for words, they are hatched within, by the thoughts and desires of the
mind, sent abroad by heat, Vocale arteries, and motion of the Spirits. The
places of their generation are in open passages, by which there is a great
efflux of such spirits, heat, vapors, virtues, and Species, as are made by the
soul and heart. And therefore words may so far cause alterations by these
parts or passages, as their Nature will extend. For it is evident, That
breathings, yawnings, several resolutions of Spirits and heat come through these
open passages from the heart and inward parts: Now if these words come from an
infirm and evil complexionated body, they are constantly obnoxious. But if from
a pure sound and wholesome constitution, they are very beneficial and
comfortable. It Is clear then, That the bare generation and prolation of words
joined with desire and intention are considerable in natural operations.
Hereupon we do justly say, Vox viva magnam habet virtutem; Living words are of
great Virtue. Not that they have any such Virtue of doing or undoing, as
Magicians speak of, but only they have the Virtue of Nature, which makes me put
in this Caution of being extreme cautelous herein. For a man may, as many have
already done, err on both hands: Some wholly denying any operation of words:
Others superfluously decline to a Magical use thereof. Our duties should be to
have a care of such Books, as are fraught with Charms, Figures, Orizons,
Conjurations, Sacrifices, or the like, because they are purely Magical. For
instance, the Book De Officiis Spirituum, liber de morte animae, liber de art^
notaria, with infinite others, containing neither precepts of Nature or Art,
having nothing save Magical Fopperies. Yet herewithall we must remember, there
are many Books commonly reputed to be Magical, but have no other fault then
discovering the dignity of wisdom. What Books are suspicious, and what not;
Every discreet Readers experience will show him. The Book which discovers
natural or artificial operations embrace; that which is void of either or leave
both, as suspicious and unworthy the consideration of any wise man. It Is usual
with Magicians, to treat of both unnecessary and superfluous subjects. 'Twas
excellently said of Isaac ( in lib. de Febribus,) The rational soul is not
impeded in its operations, unless by the Manicles of ignorance. And Aristotle
is of opinion, ( in lib. secret.) That a clear and strong intellect, being
impregnated by the influences of divine Virtue, may attain to any thing which
is necessary. And in 3d Meteor, he says, There is no influence or power, but
from God. In the Conclusion of his Ethics, There is no Virtue, whether Moral
or Natural without divine influence. Hence it is, that when we discourse of
particular agents, we exclude not the Regiment of the universal Agent, and
first Cause of all things. For every first Cause has more influence on the
Effect, than any second Cause, as he speaks in the first proposition of Causes.

CHAP. IV. Of admirable Artificial Instruments.
THat I may the better demonstrate the inferiority and indignity of Magical
power to that of Nature or Art, I shall a while discourse on such admirable
operations of Art and Nature, as have not the least Magic in them, afterward
assign them their Causes and Frames. And first of such Engines, as are purely
artificial.

It Is possible to make Engines to sail withal, as that either fresh or salt
water vessels may be guided by the help of one man, and made sail with a
greater swiftness, than others will which are full of men to help them.

It Is possible to make a Chariot move with an inestimable swiftness (such as
the Currus falcati were, wherein our fore fathers of old fought,) and this
motion to be without the help of any living creature.

It Is possible to make Engines for flying, a man sitting in the midst whereof,
by turning only about an Instrument, which moves artificial Wings made to
beat the Air, much after the fashion of a Birds flight.

It Is possible to invent an Engine of a little bulk, yet of great efficacy,
either to the depressing or elevation of the very greatest weight, which would
be of much consequence in several Accidents: For hereby a man may either ascend
or descend any walls, delivering himself or comrads from prison; and this
Engine is only three fingers high, and four broad.

A man may easily make an Instrument, whereby one man may in despite of all
opposition, draw a thousand men to himself, or any other thing, which is
tractable.

A man may make an Engine, whereby without any corporal danger, he may walk in
the bottom of the Sea, or other water. These Alexander (as the Heathen
Astronomer assures us) used to see the secrets of the deeps.

Such Engines as these were of old, and are made even in our days. These all
of them (excepting only that instrument of flying, which I never saw or know
any, who has seen it, though I am exceedingly acquainted with a very prudent
man, who has invented the whole Artifice) with infinite such like inventions,
Engines and devices are feasible, as making of Bridges over Rivers without
pillars or supporters.

CHAP. V. Of Perspective Artificial Experiences.
THe physical figuration of rays are found out to be very admirable. Glasses
and Perspectives may be framed, to make one thing appear many, one man an Army,
the Sun and Moon to be as many as we please. As Pliny in the 2d Book, Not.
Hist. chap. 30 says, That Nature so disposes of vapors, as two Suns, and
two Moons; yea sometimes three Suns shine together in the Air. And by the
same Reason one thing may in appearance be multiplied to an infinity, in regard
that after any creature has exceeded his own virtue (as Aristotle cap. de
vacuo.) no certain bounds is to be assigned it.

This design may seem advantageous to strike terrors into an Enemies Camp or
Garrison, there being a multiplication of appearances of Srarres, or men
assembled purposely to destroy them: Especially if the following design be
conjoined to the former ( viz.) Glasses so cast, that things at hand may appear
at distance, and things at distance, as hard at hand: yea so far may the
design be driven, as the least letters may be read, and things reckoned at an
incredible distance, yea stars shine in what place you please. A way, as is
verily believed, Julius Caesar took by grear Glasses from the Coasts of France,
to view the site and disposition of stoth the Castles and Sea-Towns in great
Britain. By the framing of Glasses, bodies of the largest bulk, may in
appearance be contracted to a minute volumne, things little in themselves show
great, while others tall and lofty appear low and creeping, things creeping and
low, high and mighty, things private and hidden to be clear and manifest. For
as Socrates did discover a Dragon, whose pestiferous breathings and influences
corrupted both City and Country thereabouts, to have his residence in the
Caverns of the Mountains. So may any other thing done in an Enemies Camp or
Garrison, be discovered. Glasses may be framed to send forth Species, and
poisonous infectious influences, whither a man pleases. And this invention
Aristotle showed Alexander, by which he erecting the poison of a Basilisk upon
the Wall of a City, which held out against his Army, conveyed the very poison
into the City it self. Glasses may be so framed and placed, as that any man
coming into a room, shall undoubtedly imagine he sees heaps of gold, silver,
prceious stones, or what you please, though upon his approach to the place he
shall perceive his mistake.

It Is then folly to seek the effecting that by Magical Illusions, which the
power of Philosophy can demonstrate.

To speak of the more sublimate powers of Figurations, leading and congregating
rays by several Fractions and reflections to what distance we please, so as any
object may prove combustible. It Is evident by Perspectives they burn backward
and forward, which Authors have treated on in their Books. That which is the
most strange of Figurations and Mouldings, is the description of Celestial
Bodies, both according to their Longitude and Latitude, in such Corporeal
Figures, as they naturally move by their diurnal motion. An Invention of more
satisfaction to a discreet head, than a Kings Crown.

But this will suffice as to Figurations, though we might produce infinite
prodigies of the like Nature.

CHAP. VI. Concerning strange Experiments.
TO our former discourse we may adjoyn such works as are effected without
Figurations. We may have an artificial composition of Saltpeter, and other
ingredients; Oleum rubrum Petroleum.
or of the oil of Red Petrolei, and other things, or with Maltha, Naphtha, with
such like, which will burn at what distance we please, with which Pliny
reports, Lib. 2. Chap. 104. that he kept a City against the whole Roman Army:
For by casting down Maltha he could burn a Soldier, though he had on his
Armor. In the next place, to these we may place the Grecian fire, Ignis
Graecus.
and other combustibles. To proceed, Lamps may be made to burn, and waters to
keep hot perpetually. For I know many things which are not consumed in the
fire, as the Salamanders skin Talk, with others, which by some adjunct both are
inflamed and shine, yet are not consumed, but rather purified. Besides these,
we may speak of diverse admirable pieces of Art it should be, as I suppose.
Nature. As the making Thunder and Lightning in the Air; yea with a greater
advantage of horror, then those which are only produced by Nature. For a very
competent quantity of matter rightly prepared (the bigness of ones thumb) will
make a most hideous noise and corruscation, this may be done several ways; by
which a City or Army may be overcome, much after the fashion as Gideon overcame
that vast Army of the Midianites with three hundred men, by the breaking of
their Pitchers, and shining of their Lamps, together with the sudden leaping
forth of the fire, and inestimable cracklings. These would appear strange, if
they were designed to their just height both of proportion and matter. I might
produce many strange works of another kind, which though they bring no sensible
profit, yet contain an ineffible spectacle of wit, and may be applied to the
probation of all such secrets, as the ignorant crew will not embrace. Such
might I name the attraction of Iron to the Loadstone, a thing so incredulous,
as none save an eyewitness would believe. And in this attraction of Iron,
experience will show a diligent searcher, more wonders than any vulgar capacity
can entertain.

But to proceed to greater, and more than these. There is an attraction of
gold, silver, and all other metals, Silver and all other metals. Plin. Hist. l.
36. cap. 20.

Aliter Vinegar.


by a certain stone, much after the same manner. Besides one stone will run
to the heap. Plants may have their mutual concurrence, and the parts of
sensible creatures locally divided, will naturally move to a mutual
imbracement. The consideration whereof makes me think, that there is not any
thing, whether in divine or outward matters too difficult for my faith. To
proceed higher. The whole power of the Mathematics may compose a spherical
Engine, according to P^olomies frame in eight Almagest; which sincerely
describes both longitude and latitude of all Celestial Bodies; but to give them
a natural diurnal motion is not in the power of the Mathematics. However a
discreet headpiece would do well to try the making hereof of such materials
and artifice, as it might have a natural diurnal motion. Which seems to me
possible; and because many things are moved with the motion of the Heavens, as
Comets, the Sea tides, with several other things, which are turned about either
in the whole or in part. Such a work might be thought more miraculous, and of a
vaster benefit than any thing hitherto mentioned. For the perfecting of this
would frustrate all other, whether the more curious, or the more vulgar
Astronomical Instruments, which surely would be more valuable than a Kings
Coffers; and yet there may matters be brought to pass, which though they will
not reach so near a miracle, yet of far greater public and private profit.
As the producing so much gold or silver, as we please, not by the work of
Nature yet accomplishment of Art: Quid sint december and septem modi auri, octo
scilicet ex admixtione argenti cum auro, and primus mod^s sit.
seeing there may be ten and seven ways of gold, ^^ght by the mixture of
silver with gold; and the first way is made by sixteen parts of gold with some
parts of silver, which will attain the four and twentieth degree of gold,
always augmenting one degree of gold with one of silver, and so for the
mixture of brass with gold. So the last way is Ex from.
by the four and twenty degrees of pure gold without mixture of other metal.
And beyond this, Nature knows no further progress, as experience tells us.
Though Art may augment gold in the degrees of purity, even to infiniteness,
and complete silver, without the least cheat: And yet that which seems more
rare than all this is, That though the rational soul (has so far its
free will, as) it cannot be compelled, yet may effectually be excited, induced
and disposed freely to alter its affections, desires and behaviors to the
dictates of another man. And this may not only be practiced upon one particular
person, but upon a whole Army, City, or Body of a Nation living under one
Region, if we believe experience. And this experience, Aristotle discloseth in
his Book of Secrets, both of an Army, Region and single person. And thus I have
well nigh finished my thoughts of Nature and Art.

CHAP. VII. Of Retarding the Accidents of Old age, and Prolongation of Life.
THe furthest attainment, which the complement of Art, joined with the whole
Energy of Nature can reach unto, is the Prolongation of Life to a very old
date. How far this is attainable, manifold experience has showed us. Pliny
reports, That Pollio, a man of a strong body and mind, Lib. 22. cap. 24.
lived much longer then men usually now: of whom Octavius Augustus enquiring,
What course he took to live so long? was answered aenigmatically, he used Oil
without, and Mulsum within (now according to the opinion of some, it is eight
parts of water, and nine of honey) I might produce many examples of the same
quality: as that which fell out in the days of King William; A Countreyman
plowing in the field, found a golden vessel, containing a certain liquor, which
he supposing to be the Dew of Heaven, washed his face withal, and drunk of it,
whereby he became renewed in spirit, body and excellency, De bubulio factus est
Bajulus Regis Siciliae, from a Plowman he was made Porter to the King of
Sicily. And the Popes Letters assures us, That Almannus, held Prisoner by the
Sar^cens, through the use of a Medicine lived five hundred years. For the King,
whose Captive he was, having received this Medicine from the Ambassadors of
the great King, and being suspicious of them, made trial hereof upon this
Captive, which was brought him for that purpose. And the Lady of the Woods in
great Britanny searching for a white Hind, found an Ointment, wherewith the
Keeper of the Woods anointed his whole body, except the soals of his feet, and
he lived three hundred years without any corruption, save in the soals of his
feet, which had some passions. We our selves know it frequent in these days,
That plain Country men, without the advantage so much as of a Physicians
advice, live very healthfully an hundred years, or little less. And these are
the rather confirmed by the operations of Animals, as Hearts, Eagles, Serpents,
and many others, who by the efficacy of heart or stones, have renewed their
youth: And wise men seeing, that even bruits could reach so far to their
Prolongation, adjudging it no less feasible by reasonable men, set themselves
on the Spur to find out this secret. Hereupon Artefius from his own
ingenuity, having found the Secrets, of Stones, Herbs, Sensibles, etc. both for
the knowledge of Nature, and especially the Prolongation of Life, did Al. Glory.
rejoice, that he had lived 1025. years. Further, to confirm this Assertion
of the Prolongation of Life, it is considerable, That man naturally is immortal,
that is to say, Potens non mori, has a possibility of not dying. Yea, even
after his fall, he might live a thousand years, though by degrees the length of
life was abbreviated. Hence it follows, That this abbreviation is Accidental,
and consequentially may be repaired in whole or in part; and upon search we
shall find the accidental cause of this corruption, is not from the Heavens, or
any other than the defect of true Government of our health. In that our Fathers
are corrupt and imbecil, they beget sons of a corrupt complexion and
composition, and their children upon the same score are corrupted. Thus the
Pedig^ee of corruption is deprived from Fathers to sons, until we settle
upon our heirs an assured abbreviation of our days. Yet this does not
conclude, That to perpetuity there shall succeed an abbreviation of our life,
since there is a positive period set to our life, men may live till they be
eighty years, Psalm 90.
though then their days be but labor and sorrow.

Now if every man would from the br^st exercise a complete Regiment of health
(which consists in such things as have relation to Meat, Drink, Sleep, Waking,
Motion, Rest, Evacuation, Retention, Air, and the Passions of the mind.) He
might find a remedy resisting his proper malady. For upon the prosecution of
such a Regiment, one might arrive at the uttermost limit of that Nature he had
from his Parents will permit, Deest parenthesis in alio exemplo.
and be led to the very last period of Nature (I mean Nature fallen from its
original uprightness) beyond which there is no further progress; because it
does little or nothing avail against the corruption of our Ancestors: and yet
the great impossibility of any man's so ordering himself in a mean, in all the
forementioned things, as the Regiment of health exacts, wherefore abbreviation
of our days does not only from our Progenitors, but has its advantages from
the want of Regiment. However the Art of Physic sufficiently determines this.
Although nor rich, or poor, wise or ignorant, no nor the most accurate
Physicians themselves, do accomplish this Regiment in themselves or others, as
every eye can discern. Yet Nature is not deficient in Necessaries, or Art any
ways incomplete, but rather is advantageous to make insurrections and
irruptions against, and so far into these accidental passions, as they are
either whol^^ or in part rooted out. At first, and in the beginning of our ages
declining, the remedy was easy: But since we have five thousand years or more
disadvantage, the Cure is more craggy.

But waving the Inconveniences wise men moved by the considerations
forementioned, have endeavored to find out the means and ways, which not only
are forceable against the defects of every man's proper Regiment, but also
against the corruptions of our Parents: Not that hereby they can attain to the
years of Adam or Arte^ius, by reason of the growing corruption, but that our
days may be augmented an hundred years, or more, above the ordinary age of
most men in these days. And though it be impossible absolutely to retard the
accidents of old age, yet hereby they may mitigate them, so as life will
happily be prorogued beyond the common account, yet always within the ultimate
circuit of Nature. There is a bounder of Nature, set in men since their Fall.
There is a bounder of every particular man arising from the proper corruption
of his Parents. Beyond both these bounders it is impossible to pass; yet
happily one may arrive beyond the latter: nor yet so far to go beyond it, as
that the wisest of men can ever reach the former. Although there be a
possibility and aptitude of Nature to proceed to that boundary our first
Parents set them Let no man think this strange, since this ap^itude extends it
self to immortality, as app^a^s both before the fall, and shall be evident
after the Resurrection.

Perhaps you may obj^ct, That neither Aristotle, Plato, Hippocr^^es, or Galen
ever attained that pr^longation. I shall answer, They have not attained the
knowledge of many ordinary truths, which other ingenious heads have found out;
and if so, they may easily miscarry in a business of such weighty consequence,
though they made it their study: especially, if we consider, how they were
^u^dened with other imperti^en^^es, and so were sooner brought to their g^^y
hairs, spending the inch of their Candles in more debased and vulgar subjects,
than in finding out the ways to ^o great Secrets. We are not ignorant
Aristotle says in his Predicaments, That the Qu^^^ature of a Circle is
possible, yet not then known. Yea he conf^sse^^, himself and all his
Predecessors were ignorant hereof, yet we in our times know it. Now if
Aristotle did come short in such a trivial, much more might he in the deep
mysteries of Nature. Even in these days wise men are ignorant of many things,
which the most ordinary capacity shall understand ere long. Thus the Objection
is of little force.

CHAP. VIII. Of obscuring the Mysteries of Art and Nature.
AFter an enumeration of some few examples concerning the pr^valency of Nature
and Art (that by these few we may gather many,) by these parts the whole; and
so from particulars, ^n^vers^ls, which will d^m^nstrate the u^^^^^ssary
^spiring to Magic, since both Nature and Art afford such suffic^^nci^s. I
shall now endeavor a method^^al procedure in singulars, la^ing open b^^h the
cau^es and waves in particular: and yet I ^ill call to mind how a^ ^ecrets (of
^e^st in ali^.
Nature) are not committed to Goats-skins and Sheeps-pelts, that every clown
may understand them, if we follow Socrates or Aristotle. For the latter in his
Secreta Se^retarum affirms, He break^th the heavenly Seal, who communicates
the Secrets of Nature and Art; the disclosing of Secrets and Mysteries,
producing many inconveniences. In this case Aulus Gellius in Noct. A^tic. de
Collatione Sapie^tum, says, It Is but folly to profer Le^tices to an Ass,
since he is content with his Thistles. Et in lib. lapidum, The divulging of
Mysteries is the diminution of their Majesty, nor indeed continues that to be a
Secret, of which the whole fry of men is conscious.

For that which all men, which wise, and the more noted men affirm is truth.
That therefore which is held by the multitude, as a multitude, must be false; I
mean of that multitude, which is distinct from knowing men. The multitude, it is
true, agree with wise men in the more vulgar conceptions of their mind; but
when they ascend to the proper principles and conclusions of Sciences and Arts,
they much dissent (striving to get only the appearances in Sophismes and
subtilties which wise men altogether reject) Al. Vacans sophismatibus and
inutilibus.
) And this their ignorance of the proprieties and Secrets, makes the division
from knowing men. Though the common conception of the mind, have all one Rule
and Agreement with knowing men. Yet as for common things, they are of small
value, nor enquirable for themselves, but rather for particular and proper ends.

The Reason then, why wise men have obscured their Mysteries from the multitue,
was, because of their deriding and slighting wise men's Secrets of wisdom,
being also ignorant to make a right use of such excellent matters. For if an
accident help them to the knowledge of a worthy Mystery, they wrest and abuse
it to the manifold inconvenience of persons and communities. He Is then not
discreet, who writes any Secret, unless he conceal it from the vulgar, and
make the more intelligent pay some labor and sweat before they understand it.
In this stream the whole fleet of wise men have sailed from the beginning of
all, obscuring many ways the abstruser parts of wisdom from the capacity of
the generality. Some by Characters and Verses have delivered many Secrets.
Others by aenigmatical and figurative words, as Aristotle says, ( in lib.
Secret, O Alexander, I shall ais-close to you the greatest of Secrets, which it
becomes you by divine Assistance to keep secret, and perfect the thing
pr^posed. Take then then the Stone, which is no Stone, which is in every man,
and in every place, and in all times; and it shall be called the Philosophers
Egg, and the Terminus Ovi. And thus we find multitudes of things obscured in
the Writings and Sciences of men, which no man without his Teacher can u^vail.

Thirdly, They have obscured their Secrets by their manner of Writing, ^s by
Consonants without Vowels, none knowing how to read them, unless he know the
signification of those words. Significata.
Thus the Hebrews, Caldees, Arabians, nay the major part of men do most an end
write their Secrets, which cause^h a great obscurity amongst them, especially
amongst the Hebrews. For, as Aristotle says in his fore recited Book, God
gave them all manner of wisdom long before they were Philosophers: And all
Nations had their Originals of Philosophy from the Hebrews, as Albumazar in
lib. Introductorii Majoris; and other Philosophers, with Josephus lib 1. and
lib. 8. Antiquit. makes it evident.

Fourthly, This obscuring is occasioned by the mixture of several sorts of
Letter^, Ethi^us Astronomus fortasse N. deest ergo Anglice dedi Ethnic.
for so the Eth^ick Astronomer hid his knowledge, writing it in H^b^ew, Greek
and Latin Le^ters altogether.

Fif^hly, This obscuring was by their inventing other letters, th^n those which
were in use in their own, or any other Nation, being framed merely by the
pattern of th^^r own (...), which surely is the grea^e^t imp^d^men^; yet this
was the pr^ctice of Artefiu^ in lib. de Secretis Naturae.

Sixthly, They used not the Characters of Letters, but other Geometrical
Characters, which have the power of Letters according to the several Position
of Points, and Marks. And these he likewise made use of.

Seventhly, There is a greater Art of obscuring, which is called Ars Notoria,
which is the Art of Noting and Writing, with what brevity, and in what manner
we desire. This way the Latins have delivered many things. I held it necessary
to touch at these obscurings, because it may fall out, I shall through the
magnitude of our Secrets discourse this way, that so I may help you so far as
I may.

CHAP. IX. In aliis Adverg. Of the Manner to make the Philosophers Egg.
NOw I shall methodically handle those things I promised above, These are
aenigmatical.
the dissolving the Philosophers Egg, and finding out the parts thereof; a
work which will give beginning to other enterprises. Make a diligent
purification of the Calx with the waters of Alkali, and other acute waters,
grind it by several contrition with the salts, and Al. Contermina.
burn it with many assations, that the earth may be perfectly separated from
other elements, which I hold worthy the Al. Melan^bolia staturae.
longitude of my stature. Understand it if you can. For without doubt there
will be a composition of Elements, and so it will be part of that Stone which
is no Stone, which is in every man, and in every p^^ce of man; and you may find
this in all the seasons of the year in its place. Then take oil after the form
of a Saffron-cheese, Al. Insensibile.
and so viscouous first (as not to be smitten asunder by a stroke) divide the
whole fi^ry virtue, and separate it by dissolution, and let it be dissolved in
acu^e water, of a temperate acuteness, with a slight fire, and let it be
boiled till his Al. T^rrestreitas.
fatness, as the fatness of flesh be separated by distillation, that nothing
of the unctiousnesse may issue forth; and let this fiery virtue be distilled in
the water of Urine. Afterward boil it in Vinegar, until the least part, which
is the cause of adustion be dried up, and the fiery virtue may be had; but if
theere be no regard of it, Al. Tum fac.
again let it be made. Mind and search what I say: for the speech is d^fficult.
The Oil is dissolved in acute waters, or in common Oil which works more
ex^resly, Al. Vt.
or in acute Oil of Almonds upon the fire; so as the Oil be separated, and the
spirit remain occult, in ^he p^rts of living creatures, Sulphur and Ar^^ick.
For the stones, in which the Oil of humidity overflows, have their terminus in
the union of its parts: for there is no vehement union, but one may be
dissolved from another by the nature of water, which is the subject of
liquefaction in the spirit, which is the Medium betwixt the dry parts and the
Oil. The dissolution being made there will remain in the spirit, a pure
humidity, vehemently mixed with dry parts, which are moved in it, when the fire
resolves it, which is sometimes called of the Philosophers, Sulphur fusibile,
sometimes Oil, other while an ^ery humor, sometime a conju^ctive substance,
which the fire separates not, sometimes Camphore: and if you please, this is
the Philosophers Egg, or rath^r the Terminus and end of the Egg; and it came
^o us from these Oils, and may be esteemed amongst the subtilties, when it is
purged and separated from the water and oil in which it is. Further, the Oil is
corrupted by grinding it with desicea^ing things, as with salt or Atrimentum,
and by a^^ation, because there is a passion arising from the contrary; and
afterward it is to be sublimated, until it be deprived of Al. Olio suo.
its o^eagmeity, and because its a^ Sulphur or Arsnick amongst Minerals, it may
be prepared, even as it. Yet it is better to boil it in waters, that are
temperate in acuity, until it be purged and whitened. Which wholesome exaltation
is made either in hot or moist fire: The distillation must be re-iterated, that
it may sufficientl^ receive it^ goodness, until it be rectified, the signs of
its last rectification are candor and crystalline se^enity: And when other
things grow black by fire, this grows white, is cleansed, shines with
clearn^sse and admirable splendor. From this water and its earth comes
Argentum vivum in Minerals, and Al. Quand^que in salem Armoniacum.
when the matter has waxed white, this way it is congealed; the Stone of
Aristotle, which is no Stone, it is set in a Pyramid a hot place, or (if you
please) in the belly of an Horse or Ox, and it imitateth an acute Feavor. For
from seven to fourteen, and from that it sometimes proceeds to one and twenty,
that the Fecis of the Elements may be dissolved in its water, before it be
separate: The dissolution and distillation is to be iterated, until it be
rectified. And here is the end of this intention. Yet know that when you have
consummated your work, you are then to begin.

Another Secret I shall show you, you must prepare Argentum vivum by mortifying
it with the vapor of ^in for Pearls, and with the vapor of Lead for the ^^one
Iberus; then let it be ground with desiccating things, and At^ramentis, and the
like, as is said, and let there be an as^ation: Then let there be a sublimation
Al. Sept^es.
if for Pearls twelve times; if for redness one and twenty times, until the
humidity within it be totally corrupted. Nor is it possible, that its humidity
be separated by vapor, as the foresaid oil; because its vehemently mixed with
its ^ry parts; nor does it constitute, as in the fore^said metals. In this
Chapter you may be deceived, unless you distinguish of the sign^^ication of
the words. It Is now high time I involve the third Chapter: that you acquire the
Calx, the Al. Cla^em ope^is.
Calx of the body, which you intend, the body is calcined, when it is
appodiated, i. e. that the humor in it may be corrupted by salt, and with salt
Armoniack and vinegar, and sometimes with burning things, and with Sulphur and
Arsnick: and sometimes bodies are fed with Argentum vivum, and sublimated from
them, until they remain Remaneant putris, ni sallor male imprimitur aut debet
esse pura aut putres.
putred. The Claves of the Art are congelation, resolution, inceration,
proportion; and another way purification, distillation, separation, calcination
and fixation, and then you may acquiesce.

CHAP. X. FORTE. 620. Of the same Subject another way.
IN the 602. Arabian year you entreated me for some Secrets. Take then the
Stone, and calcine it with a light assation and strong contrition, or with
acute things. But in the end mingle it a little with sweet water, and compound
a Laxative Medicine of seven things (if you will) or of six, or of five, or as
many as you please; but my mind rests in two things, whose proportion is better
than the other sixth proportion, or thereabouts, as experience will teach you.
Al. Mollius calescant.
Resolve notwithstanding the gold at the fire, and tried it better; but if you
will credit me, take one thing that is the Secret of Secrets of Nature, able to
do Miracles. Let it be mixed from two or more, or a Phoenix, which is a
singular creature Al. Adjunge.
at the fire, and incorporate by a strong motion: to which if hot liquor four
or five times be applied, you have the composition. Yet afterward the
celestial nature is debilitated, if you i^^use hot water three or four times.
Divide therefore the weak from the strong in several vessels, if you believe
me: Let that which is good be evacuated. Again, use the powder, and the water
which remains, carefully express: For of a certain, it will produce the parts
of the powder, not incorporated; therefore take the water by it self; because
the powder exiccated from it has power to be incorporated into the Laxative
Medicine. Work therefore as formerly, until you distinguish the strong from
the weak, and apply the powder three, four, five times or oftener, and work
always the way: And if you cannot work with hot waters, do it with water of
Alkali, and by such acute things you make the violence of the Medicine^ But if
by reason of the acu^ty and softness of the Medicine it be bro^^^, the powder,
being applied, apply v^^y car^fully more of the hard and soft. But if it be by
reason of the abundance of the powder apply more of the Medicine; if it be by
reason of the strength of the water, water it with pistils; Pistillo.
and congregate the matter, as you can, and separate the water by little and
little, and it will return to its ^^ate, which water you must exiccate: for it
contains both powder and water of the Medicine, which are to be incorporated,
as the principle powder. Here you may not sleep, because here is contained a
very great and profitable Secret. If you rightly order in a right series of
things, the parts of the Shrub or Willow, they will keep natural union: and do
not deliver this to oblivion, for it is profitable for many things. Vi^^ne
facta.
You must mingle Pearls with the made union: as I think there will arise
something like the Stone Iberus: and without doubt it mortifies that which is
to be mortified by the vapor of Lead. You shall find Lead, if you express the
living from the dead; and the dead you must bury in Olibanum and Sarcocolla.
Keep this Secret, for it is of some profit, and so must you do with the vapor
of Pearls, and the Stone Tagus, and you must (as I have said) bury the dead.

CHAP. XI. FORTE. 603. Of the same Subject another way.
TO your desire in the Arabian year 630. I return this Answer. You must have
the Medicine which may be dissolved in the thing liquified and steeped in it,
and penetrate its interior parts, and may be mingled with it; and it may not be
a fugitive servant, but transmute it. Let it be mingled by reason of the
spirit, and let it be fixed by the Calx of the metal: it is to be thought that
fixion is prepared, when the body and spirit are set in its place, and the
spirit is made a body. Take then of the bones of Adam, and of the Calx the same
weight; let there be six to the Stone Tagi, and five to the stone of Pearl; let
them be ground with Aqua vitae, whose property ^t is to dissolve all other
things, so as in it they are dissolved and assated, until it be incerated, i.
e. let the parts be united, as the parts in wax. The sign of inceration is,
that the Medicine liquifies upon iron very hot. Then let it be put in the same
water in some hot and moist place, or let it hang in the vapor of waters made
very hot: after that dissolve and congeal them against the Sun. Afterward
take Saltpeter, and argentum vivum shall be converted into lead: And again,
wash the lead with it, and mundifie it, that it may be the next to silver, and
then work as a pious man, and also the whole weight must be 30. But yet of
Saltpeter LVRVVOPO Vir Can Vtriet Sulphuris: and so you may make Thunder and
Lightning, if you understand the Artifice: but you must observe, whether I
speak aenigmatically, or according to the truth. Some men have supposed
otherwise: For it is told me, that you must resolve all into its first matter,
of which you have Aristotl^ speaking in vulgar and known places, which makes me
silent herein. When yo^ have this, you have pure, simple and equal Elements.
And this you may do by contrary thing and various operations, which formerly I
have called the Claves of the Art. And Aristotle says, That the equality of
potencies excludes action, and passion, and corruption. And these things
Aver^ho's ^ffirms, reproving Galen. And this Medicine is esteemed the more pure
and simple which may be found, which is prevalent against Fevers, passions of
the mind and body. Farewe^l. Whoever unlocks these, has a key which opens and
no man shuts: and when he has shut no man opens.

In this Translation, I followed Dr Deos Edition, Printed at Hamburg, 1618.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following, are printed for Simon Miller, and
Sold by him at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
DOctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament, which will shortly be
reprinted with large Additio^s.

The civil Wars o^ Spain in the Reign of Charles ^he fifth, Emp^rour of
Germany, and King of ^ha^ Nation, wherein our l^^e ^^happy di^fe^ences are
paralleled in many particu^lars.

A g^neral History of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James,
containing the principal Revolutions and Transactions of Church and State, with
Political Observations, and reflections upon the same: by David Hume of
Godscroft.

The History of thi^ Iron Age.

Mr Paul Baine on the Ephesians.

The Queen of Arragon, a Play: In fol.

In Qua^to large.
Io. Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command.

Quarto Small.
An Eperimental Trea^tise of Surgery, by Felix Wortz.

Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true Faith of Gods Elect By John Nicholson Minister
of the Gospel^

The Anatomy of Mortality: By George Stroad.

Three Treatises: 1^ The Conv^rsion of Nineveh, touching ^raye^ and F^sting^ 2.
Gods Trumpet sounding to Repentance^ 3. ^overeigne preserva^^ves against
distrustful Thoughts and Cares: By Will At^ersoll Minister of Gods Word at
Isfield in Sussex.

Aynswor^h on the Canticles.

Paul Baine^ his Diocesans Trial

Gr^lle against Appo^onius.

A Treatise of Civil policy, being a clear Decision of 43^ Queries concerning
prerogative, right and privilege, in reference^ to the supreme Prince and
people: By Samuel Ru^herford Professor of Divinity of St Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military Obse^va^ions of Civil and Military Government,
containing the Birth, Increase, Decay of M^narchies, the carriage of Princes
and M^gistrates.

Mr Pinchin his Meritorious price of man's Redemption, cleared.

Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets h^ve over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

Wells his Souls Progress.

Christ tempted, the Devils Conquered; Being a plain Exposition on the fourth
Chapter of St Mathews Gospel: By John Gumbledon, Mini^ter of the Gospel.

The Saints Society.

Dr Stoughtons thirteen choice Sermons, with his B^dy of Divinity.

The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren concerning the Presbyterian Government,
together wi^h the answer of the Assembly of Divin^s.

Camd^ns Remains.

The Harmonious Consent and Confession of Faith, o^ all the Protestant Reformed
Churches in Ch^istendome.

The description of the Universa^l Quadrant, by which is performed with great
Expedition, the w^ole Doctrine of Triangles, both plain and Sphericall: Also
the Resolu^ion of such Prop^sitions as are most useful in Astronomy,
Navigation, and Dialling: By which is performed the proportioning of Lines for
measuring of all manner of Land, Board, Glass, ^imber, S^one, etc. by Tho.
Stirrup Mathemat.

Large Octavo.
Florus Anglicus, with the lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens since
the Conquest, cut in Brass.

The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two thousand seeming Contradictions
are ^ully and plainly Reconciled.

Evidences for Heaven, containing infallible Signs and real Demonst^ations for
assurance of Salvation: published by Edm. Calamy Minister of Aldermanbury, Land.

The Life and Reign of King ^harles from his Birth ^o his Death, By Lambert
Wood.

The Night-Search, the second part: By H Mill.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies.

Useful Instructions for these Evil times; held forth in 22. Sermons, by
Nicholas Locky^r, Provost of Eaton College

The Nullity of Church Censures, or Excommunication, not of Divine Institution,
but a mere humane Invention: Written by the famous Tho Erastus, and never
before Englished.

Small Octavo.
Ed. Waterhouse Esquire His Discourse of Pi^^y and Charity.

Pana^^a, or the Univer^al Medicine; being a Di^cou^se of the Admirable Nature
an^ Virtues of Tobacco: By Dr. Everard, and Others.

A view and Defenc^ of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful
in these times.

Daphnis and Chloe, A mo^^ sweet and pastoral Romance for young Ladies, by
Geo. Thornhill, Gent.

M^^ ^^t. du Moulin^, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the Delusions of the Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy
amongst us

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Medi^a^ions and
p^ayer^ usef^ll upon all occasions.

Ovid de Ponto, in Engli^h^

The spiritual Seaman, or the Marrin^rs Companion, being a Compendium of the
Principles of Religion, b^ I ^^rant, formerly in the N^vy, now at Chri^t-Church
Cant.

The Lov^s of ^livio and Lozi^^ Romance.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudime^^ o^ the H^brew Tongue.

A Book of Scheams or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of
times, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of William the
Conqueror to the death of the Late King.

Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue, and five Senses for Superiority: a
serious Comedy.

Venus Cabinet unlockt, and her S^cre^s laid open.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discove^y how a man may cer^^inly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not.

The poor man^ Physician and Chyrurgion.

Physical Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts in P^ysick and
Chyrurgery, for the cure of a^l Diseases Incident to man's body: By R. W^lliams.
To which is added the physical Mathema^icks: By Hermes Tris-M^gistus.

The Idol of Clowns, or the Relation of Wat ^iler's Rebellion.

Historical Collections or Ecclesiastic affairs in Scotland, including the
murth^r of the Cardinal of St. ^ndrews, and the b^heading of their Queen Mary
in England, by R. W^^son

The Christian Moderator, in 3 par^s.

The Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of the clothing of England.

Dr. Sibbs his Divina Medi^ations.

Vig^rius Precepts of Idiotismes.

Grotij Po^mata.

Three Books of Mr. Mathews Minister at Swansey in Southwales.

1 The Messiah Magnified by the mouths of Babes in America; or Gaius and
Gamaliel, a help^ull Father, and his hopeful Son, discou^sing of the three
most c^nsiderable points: 1 The great want of Christ. 2. The great worth that
is in Christ. 3. The good way that is chalkt out by Christ^ 2. The New
Congregationall Church, proved to be the old Christian Church, by Scripture,
Reason, and History. 3 The Rending Church-membe^ Regu^arly ca^l'd back to
Christ and hi^ Church.
A physical Dictionary, or an Interpretation of all the terms of Art, and
marks used in Physic, Anatomy, Surgery, and Chemistry.

Duo^ecim.
A Collection of Proverbs, English, French, Dutch, Italian, and Spa^nish, all
Englished and Alphabetically Digested, by N. R. Gent.

F^ier Bacon his Discovery of the Miracles of A^^ Nature and Magic. Transla^ed
by T. M.

Doctor Smith's practice of physic.

The G^ammar War. Posseli^^ Apo^hegmes. Fasciculus Florum. Crashaw'^, Visions.
The Juniper Lecture. Helvicus Colloquies.
The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the three arch-enemies of mankind,
the world, the flesh, and the devil.

Heinsius d^ Crepu^diis.

The History of Russia, or the Government of the E^perour of Muscovi^, with the
manner and fashions of the people of that Country.

Drexeliu's school of Pa^ience.

Drex^lius his right Intention of every ones Action.

Viginti Quat.
The New Testament.

The third part of the Bib^e.

Sir Ri^hard Baker's Med. and Prayers for every day of the Week.

Plays.
The Ball. Chawbut. Conspiracy. Obstinate Lady.
The London Chan^iclers; a Comedy fu^l of va^ious and delightful Mi^th, never
before published.


