25. November. 1646.
Lieutenant Colonel JOHN BOOKER being sent out of the Province of Munster by
the Right Honorable the Lord of Inchiquine Lord President, and the Council of
War there, and having delivered Letters from his Lordship to the Honorable
the Speaker of the House of Commons, to the Right Honorable the Committee of
Lords and Commons for the Irish affairs, and also to the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, earnestly
desiring to promote the good of that Province and Kingdom, so that his
endeavors here might not be fruitless, nor the expectations of the Army there
frustrate, in this their great necessity, does humbly present the state and
condition of the Army in that province.

THat at his arrival there in September last, he found them in great wants
both of clothes and money, being then lately returned from the taking of
Piltown Castle; and presently after the Lord President called a Council of
War advising with them to march forth upon another Design, and how to
procure money, that the Soldiers and Officers might be enabled in some measure
for that expedition; and finding no way but by making use of friends to borrow,
did then take up some money, (which yet remains unsatisfied) Whereupon his
Lordship drew forth all the forces of horse and foot (leaving sufficient
guards to secure our Garrisons) into the County of Lymbricke, which is above
forty miles from our Winter quarters, and a rich country, where we intended
to have lain some time, the better to relieve our men, and to annoy the enemy,
which during our stay there, we did, by driving away their cattle, and fireing
all the Corn which we could not secure to our Garrisons; but the violence of
rain and storms were such, the waters increasing, and our men by continuing
in the field, where they had little or no shelter, many of them also wanting
Clothes, and being bare footed, and most of them wanting shirts, fell
dangerously sick of the Flux, and ammunition waxing scarce, and that we had,
having taken wett, we were enforced (for those reasons) to march back to
Mallowe, where we stayed to refresh our men whilst we sent to Cork for a
supply of Ammunition, determining to march into the County of Kerry, but the
weather continuing with such violent storms, thunder, lightning and rain,
(such as I have not seen the like before) we were enforced into our garrisons
not without the great hazard of our Army, being constrained to wade to the
Arme-pitts, the rivers being so difficult to pa^e, (the enemy having destroyed
all the Bridges) and so being returned, we still expected a fair opportunity
to draw forth our men, the better to preserve our stores, yet the rain still
continuing the Army could not be drawn forth again at my coming away, when
there was not 14. days provision left at a small allowance, that the wants of
that Army were very great, insomuch as the Officers had not received one penny
pay for many weeks together, before my coming from thence; and that many of
them were forced to pawn their clothes to buy them bread, and that many of
the Officers at this day go upon ticket for what they have: That the country
within our reach is generally wasted, and yields neither free quarter, nor
other accommodations, but the Soldiers are forced to content themselves with
what they carry on their backs.

That wants in the Army were such, that the common soldiers were for some
weeks before I came away stinted to 6. pence a week in money, and a loaf of 6.
pence a piece, which was so small an allowance as that the soldiers,
(especially those that were sent hence from better means) could hardly be
contained, and many of them grew much discontented thereat, which they
professed by often saying, that they would rather go to the Rebels, where
they should be provided for, then stay and starve with us: of all which, I was
an Eyewitness.

That the horse there are generally very much impaired by a strange mortality,
and scarcely the one half of the former number are left, and those much
weakened by their late ill marches and constant duty, and that no horse have
arrived there, since Collonell Iepsons, who were designed in September 1645.
and landed the beginning of the next Summer.

That if the horse upon the place were recruited, and the 500. horse designed
for the service of that Province at the Lord Presidents being here were sent
over, and the Regiment of foot already sent thither made full, horses and
carriages with a sufficient train of Artillery, and all things thereunto
belonging sent, the want whereof is none of the least defects, there is no
doubt but by the blessing of God we should soon be Masters of that Province.

That the Country is generally wett in winter, full of Rivers and Passages,
and void of housing for horse or men upon their marches, so as it is not to be
expected that they should keep the Army abroad for any long time in the winter
without too great prejudice to the Soldiers in their health, Clothes and
Arms, and therefore it is humbly offered as more expedient for the service:
That money and provisions were sent to them that are there upon the place, to
enable them to subsist until a convenient season of doing service, then that
more men should be sent over to increase the charge, as of late has bin,
without means to defray the same: but if any forces be thither designed, it is
humbly desired, that they may be hastened over to make our incursions more
frequent and effectual, yet so as they bring some fit means of subsistence
with them whereby the Rebels will be the more disabled to raise an Army to
withstand us this next Spring.

That whatsoever means is intended by the Piety and Wisdom of the Parliament,
to be sent over, is of double advantage to the Army and to the service, to be
sent in money, English or Spanish, rather then in Corn, or victuals, except
Corn, Biskets, and some Cheese, to continue as a store in case of scarcity, the
Corn sent hence standing there in 50 s. per Quarter, or thereabouts; whereas it
may be bought there for half the price, and so will be had as long as the
Markets may be kept open.

That the Charge of that Army amounts to 1210 l. per week, or thereabouts,
allowing each Common Soldier 2 s. each Trooper 5 s. a Colonel of Foot 4 l. a
Lieutenant Colonel 3 l. and a Major 2 l. 10 s. a Captain 1 l. 7 s. a
Lieutenant 12 s. an Ensign 9 s. a Colonel of Horse 5 l. a Major 3 l. a Captain
of Horse 2 l. a Lieutenant 1 l. 4 s. a Corner 16 s. with a proportionable
allowance to inferior Officers, Officers of the Staff, Gunners, and such as
must necessarily be maintained about the Train of Artillery, which is not half
pay for the Common Soldiers, nor a third of the pay for the Officers; and that
upon the place there cannot be raised above 120 l. per Week, which also is
anticipated for some Months to come, to satisfy those whose goods they have
contracted for their necessary relief in their extremity, upon that Account:
and that it is to be remembered, that the greatest part of the means hitherto
designed for that Province has been expended in raising of Forces, in Arms,
Ammunition, and other necessary things.

That the Cities, walled Towns, and Harbors in the Parliaments power of that
Province, are of mighty importance for the Parliaments service, in relation to
the Religion, to the Safety and Welfare of this Kingdom, and generally of
Trade and Traffic, insomuch that it has been certified by those trusted in
the Navy, that the Harbors of Cork and Kinsale only are of as much
consequence to this Kingdom as Plimmouth.

That the said Lord President of Munster is one well known to be most real in
the Cause, of much gallantry and resolution, of much industry and action, who
most seasonably secured those Parts for the Parliament against the common
Enemy. That he does with extraordinary fidelity, constancy, care and diligence,
in his own person, see that the Officers and Soldiers do their duties, in
the service of God and the Parliament.

That the Officers and Soldiers there are not only good guides in the
Country, but are generally experienced Soldiers, and valiant men, that have
endured much hardship, faithfully, freely, and cheerfully served, to the
hazard of their lives in the Parliaments service, and desirous still to
continue the same.

That but a bare subsistence is desired for the present.

That if a settlement and supply be not speedy, the ruin, the loss of those
important places to the Irish, or some foreign State or Potentate, and
consequently the loss of the Parliaments interest there must be; and that it
will be no great charge or difficulty for the Parliament, by the blessing of
God, speedily to become Masters of that Province.

It is therefore humbly desired, That some effectual course be speedily taken
for the subsistence of the Army, by the recruiting the old Regiments of Horse
and Foot, and supplying them with money to be paid in a settled way, and a
sufficient Train of Artillery, with Carriages, Wagons, Pickaxes, Spades,
Engines, Mortar-peeces, Grenades, and other necessaries thereunto belonging,
for the carrying on the War there, and I doubt not but by the blessing and
assistance of God they will render your Honors a good account of this (...).


