No Mercurius Aquaticus, BUT A CABLE-ROPE, Double twisted for JOHN TAILOR, The
Water-Poet; who escaping drowning in a Paper-Wherry-Voyage, is reserved for
another day, as follows. Viz.

This Emblem here, expresses to the full
What shall betide our City Water-gull;
Who (leaving Poesy, Pamphlets, Wine, and Whores)
Must be trussed Laureate on his proper Oars,
With his own Tackling; Therefore it is meet,
The Sail stand by, to be his Winding Sheet;
I Am sure, he must pass thus over Charons Ferry,
Unless some Boyst'rous Wind o're-turn the Wherry.
By John Booker.

Printed according to Order for G. B. July 19. 1644.

No Mercurius Aquaticus, BUT A Cable-Rope double-twisted for JOHN TAILOR the
Water-Poet.
I Should be loath to foul my fingers with any base Pamphlet that comes from
Oxford, if the venom of their malicious spleenes were darted only against my
particular self: But when through my sides they wound the honor of the
Parliament, and our Armies abroad, I cannot but set Pen to Paper, and pay them
back again in their own kind. And who do you think I should meet abroad for a
Rogue in Print, but one of our City Water-rats, the doughty John Tailor, who
according to the knavish Custom, changes his name upon every new
paper-designe? Sometimes he calls himself Thorny Ailo, Mercurius Aquaticus, and
now he entitles himself, NO MERCURIVS AULICUS, I thought I had lately sent rope
enough for all the Parrets in Oxford: But I perceive they will be prattling
still; and therefore I must unmaske the Mysterious Masters of the Science of
railing. There are three grand paper-Conspirators well known by the Name of
Mercurius Aulicus, George Naworth, and reverend Master John Tailor the
Water-tankerd, by whose sprinklings in this great dearth of Wit and Honesty,
the University is cherished and kept in credit: These three are they which
pumpe and Pimpe about with their prostitute Noddles in the behalf of Popery.
Murder and Rebellion against the State; they are Liars in all Elements. Aulicus
for Land-l^es, Tailor for Water, and hungry George Naworth, for all between
Heaven and earth, where I doubt not but to see them all meet together, to take
their farewell of the World, where the Parrets will find Ropes made of
stronger Lines then mine, and such as will nonplus the very primest Wits in
the University.

And now thou Thames Otter, thou Malignant Dive-dapper, thou Jack Tailor, thou
Motley, Seagreen, Ditch-water villain, that have more Malignant flowings and
ebbings in thy Waterish Brains, then the Thames has Tides; which makes thee as
subject to Moon fits and Lunacy, as the besotted University itself, or as
George Digby, when his plots fail, or as Rupert under the Influence of a
plundering, or wenching Constellation; whose p^ricranium is fit for nothing but
to make an Appendix to the sign of the Mare-maide Tav^rne at Carfoix: that
very Tavern which for want of Wine, and money in the Courtiers pockets, which
used to damn and swe^re the Drawers out of the Reckonings, is now very
seasonably turned into a fluent Magazine of Nectar, which according to the old
Translation, is y-cleped an Alehouse, which is the highest Title of honor
that the best Rend^z-vouz of good fellowship can now attain to in Oxford. In
this place I understand that thou thy most Aquaticall self, and George of
No-worth, alias Naworth, with whose dangerous Coxcombrian conceits (to speak
Anagrammatically) I am in NO WRATH; and the prevaricating, calumniating
Mercurius Aulicus, do meet together weekly to make Ducks and Drakes with your
Sottish brains over Barley-broath; and muster up whole Regiments of Lies,
Slanders, and ridiculous Quibbles against the Parliament and City, and such as
my self, who are sworn friends to their King and Country: And in stead of
answering my Rope for a Parrot, thou and George Naworth have out of your
drunken Aleh^use humors, both combined together to be Fools in Print; but I
perceive that your language is as foggy and fulsome as your Ale, your conceits
smell too much of the Malignant Onions and Garlic of Egypt, you have so much
Irish and Spanish, that I cannot understand you with my Wits; for should they
go a rambling after your far-fetched conceits, perhaps I should never recover,
or call them back again.

Thou railest against Master Pym, and rakest in the ashes of the dead, most
sacrilegiously rifling his grave of the honor due unto it: But I know that
Malice and Envy survive the Funerals of worthy men, as well as their virtues;
and whereas thou talkest of receiving wages with Achitophell, and Machiavell, I
tell thee that the day of Account and Receipt is not come as yet, though the
declination of your Culminating signs and Ensigns at York, is a shrewd
Prognostic that the time cannot be far off. If thou will not believe this
Prognostic of mine, what think thou of your Idolized and Idolizing
Marquess of the North? He foresees this without Astronomy, and knows not
whether he had best arrive in Holland or Ireland: What thinks Count ( Saladine
the Sarasen, cry you mercy, I mean) Palatine Rupert, the young man that
speaks nothing but Daggers and Carbines, and commits nothing but out-ragious
Cruelties against the best Subjects? What think ye of the Achitophells, the
Machiavells, and Sanballats at Court, the Turks of Ireland, and Infidells of
Wales? They shall receive their wages, I warrant you, though none of their Pay.

Thou talkest of a Long-lie, a Short-lie, a Broad-lie, and a Round-lie, and of
Cuckolds, and Coxcombes: But this variety of lying is proper to none but
Courtiers: Thus Rupert has made many Coxcombes, that have no more of Gentility
or Nobility, but the bare outside, to be Cuckolds, nay, and some of them
contented ones too, very well contented to be dubbed and Palatin'd, and this is
his usual kind of lying: you have another kind of lying, which is as common
as lying a-bed, the Art of lying, and be-lying our Armies, the proper gift of
your rebellious Faction. This is a special quality of yours too, Reverend
Master (Prick-louse, cry you mercy, I forgot) Tailor; you are skilled (you say)
in the Syriack and Arabian Tongues, yea, the very Air of Oxford Colleges, and
Schools, the Authors you have read, the Books you have perused, and the
Dictionaries you have poa^'d upon, have much illustrated, elevated, and
illuminated your Intellect. But you are a Pagan villain, to run so far as
the reign of S^nacherib for an Author (or rather a fiction) to confirm your
Roguery, a little too far for me to step, that have other business, than to
give every knave an answer, and therefore I shall go no farther than Mahomet
and his Alcoran, and there I find the word, Thorny Ailo, the wise Anagram of
thy Name, to be thus Anatomized and Skellumatized. Thorny in the Arabicke,
signifies a villain, and Ailo in the Syriack a Rook, otherwise called in the
Greek Abaddon, which being Englished, is a destructive Villain; or an
Antichristian Prick louse, which tacks together all sorts of Fustian, as
im^udent lies, Sl^nders, and far-fetched Bumbast; in the behalf of Popery:
Thou art a most expert Tailor in this kind, and can easily take measure of
the University Intellects, and fit their Fantasies with a paper-worke
presently: But I will spoil your trading Sir, by being silent at any more
fopperies which shall be sent abroad by thee, or thy companion Naworth; for to
write against you, is to relieve you, by giving you occasion to raise a fortune
with scribbling Pamphlets: But for this I Will take a course to starve you by my
silence; I will not be so charitable, as to bestow another Rope upon such
Parrets, nor spend my labor in vain upon Rebels that are past cure.

But Pretheo Master Thorny Ailo Abaddon, or Abaddon Thorny Ailo, (take which
end thou will foremost, and still thou art A Bad One) thy mistakes are as
gross as thy conceits: Sure you and Naworth had been liquoring your brains
with Ale of the infusion of Opium, or for want of victuals, eaten a Sallet of
Nightshade, Hemlock, and Poppy, with Unguentum Populeon, and Oil of Alabaster
in stead of Butter, some such sleepy, drowzie repast or other, that you could
not open your eyes to read right, what I said concerning the conjunction of the
31 of May, but that you must mistake Jupiter for Mars, you print it to be the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, but I said of Saturn and Mars, and my
Prediction thereupon you call a Bug bear fear*fool Prediction, and a lying
Prognostication; But I leave the World to judge that: Have not the Authors of
distraction and murder, been sufficiently punished from that time hitherto?
Were they not then driven out of Oxford, and ever since up and down the
Kingdom? And have the Northern Incendiaries fared ever a whit better; their
god-lesse Regiments being all dispersed, and the principal Abettors forced to
seek their fortunes in foreign Parts. They had raised the flame to such a
height, that the Kingdom began to be a little too hot for them.

But to say no more of this, seeing it is apparent, I will cut thee for the
Simples thoroughly before I have done: Thou say that Saul was sent to seek
two Asses, and (not finding them) he found a Kingdom. But how did Saul play
the Ass, and lose his Kingdom? Was it not for saving Agag the King of the
Amalekites alive, whom he should have destroyed as an utter enemy to Israel?
What shall we think then will become of that King, or those Counselors, which
have made Peace, and spoke friendly to those which have cut the throats of
200000. Israelites, I mean Protestants in Ireland? If I should Prognosticate on
such a business a^ this, what would become of them: and if Justice should
suffer thee to live to see the event, thou would then confess that there
were some more realities in my Predictions, than in the Books of Fortune, the
Shepherds Calendar, Erra Pater, Mother Shiptons Prophesies, or the long-ear'd
Outacousticou of Albumazar.

I could willingly Prognosticate somewhat concerning thy villainous Self; and now
I think on it, it is very neatly couched in the Anagram of thy name, and it is
the very thing which the men of thy Element do foretell of thee, and to this
they say, there needs no Art, for they can do it without the help either of
Necromancy, or Hydromancie, having had experience too often of your Bank side,
and Beare-Gardes rogueries; and they all agree with one consent, that to --
John Tailor, -- Join Halter is a most complete Anagram, than which none could
ever have framed a better to speak thy deservings: But thou will except against
this Anagram, as irregular, because that I place an E, where thou put an O,
in spelling thy Surname; I will then deal critically with thee, and prove that
thou are guilty of an Innovation or Corruption in thy Name; for all our Trades,
Professions, Callings and Offices in England, do for the general, end in or,
as Habberdasher, Ironmonger, Draper, Sculler, etc. and none of them in or; look
in Holinshend his description of England, and he tells us, that this Custom
was derived from the Saxon language, which Nation had once possession of this
Island: And therefore thy Name being the name of a Trade, ought sure rather to
follow the general, in being spelled Tailor, and not Tailor.

What is the reason Sir, that you spell false? Is it because your Skellumship
would not have the world to think, that your Pedigree was derived from such a
Lowsy, Snip snap Original, as to have thy Ancestors thought to be Taylers.
Such an extract were too good for thee: No, thou art Tailor from the Tail of
the Dragon, which thou ran'st to Oxford, to lay hold on as the surest stay: And
now that the Beast begins to be faint and weary, and is unable to support
Popery any longer in England, you are even at your wits end: thou look
toward London with a heavy heart, not for the offenses and vilanies which thou
have committed here, and since thy departure, against this famous City; but
because thou dare not come hither again to commit more, and play more pranks
than thou have done formerly. So that I suppose, thou art even ready to Join
Halter indeed for want of necessary maintenance; And therefore I Will express
some Charity toward thee, though an enemy, and put thee into employment: And
because thou s^yest, that the seven Planets, and the twelve Celestial Signs
are all offended with me, I do constitute George Naworth Joynt-Commissioner
with thee, to carry them, such News, which I know will be welcome to them, and
be a means to procure thee a reward.

I prithee, in the first place, tell Jupiter, that he spends his thunder in
vain, and that Vulcan knows not how to procure him any more Thunderbolts,
unless he return to his Ancient Throne, in a lawful Assembly of the Gods:
And that whilst he was abroad managing those tempests, which the anger of Juno
had raised, she stupefied him by Circean enchantments, borrowed of the great
Red Dragon, and mingled by the grand whorish Cassiopaea in the Cup of
Abominations. Tell Ursa Major, and Ursa Minor, that when Endimyon Porter has
recovered of his madness, I have appointed him to be their chief Beare-Ward,
and thou thy self to be Sub-Bear-ward, that Mercury the Irishman may pass
freely to Jupiters Court, without fear of being, Bugg^ Bear'd by the way, and
that he may have safe Conduct in Charles his Waine, through the Milky way, or
the Purple way, no matter which, so he make haste. Petition Mars, that he
would favor Jupiters Cause so far, as that the Protestant Religion may be
maintained, according to the desire of Juno, and no otherwise, in despite of
inferior Mortals. Desire Venus that she would recall her severe messenger,
Morbus Gallicus from the Royal Army and Court, who is like to prove the ruin
of the Camp and Cabinet-Councell: Especially remember to beg of Luna to
withold her self in mists and thick Clouds, for since the Cavallers were
soundly banged near York by Moonshine, they will henceforth be ready to
swoone at the sight of her, or grow Lunaticke, as men of no hope in this world,
and of less in that which is to come. VVithall when thou have dispatched this
business, and art returned to thy friends at Oxford, carry them this News:
That in my late return from my Astronomicall Journey, as I passed by the Twelve
Signs, I perceived very few of them to be Malignant; but all sworn enemies to
the desperate Cavalrie; Aries and Tayrus have so rammed up the way to heaven,
and so guarded it, that they will gore any Cavalier that shall offer to pass:
Gemini indeed would willingly entertain them, because they are of kin, being
double every way, double-tongued, double-hearted, double-Religion'd, half one
thing, half another, half Protestant, half Papist, or whole Athiest: But
neighboring Cancer will pinch and gripe them for their cruelties, and cast
them into the den of Leo, where they shall be Plundered and tolmented, and
never be suffered to Quarter in Virgo, (tell Rupert so, for that is his Heaven,
his Turkish Paradise, and the only hope of his Religion.) And then Libra will
weigh them all, the weight of whose Plundering cannot but b^eak the Scales; And
then they shall be bitten by Scorpio, shot though with darts and Arrows by
Sagittarius, hamme-string'd by Capricorn, sowsed, duck't and pumped by thy
kinsman Aquarius, and then their blasphemous Tongues, and bloodguilty feet be
bitten off, and devoured by Pisces, and so at length they may chance to be
cook't in the Devils Drying Pan.

And thus thou learned Metropolitan of villainy, I have anatomized, and
Skellumatized your ridiculous, roguing, and lying Pamphlet, which for this
once, I have taken the pains to answer in thy own strain, being resolved to
be troubled no more by thee; for I have of late found out a Medicine which will
cure thee and all thy Malignant Companions, of their railing and malignant
fits. It is very good for purging away humors in the head, and will cure the
Vertigo or Staggers in Religion, and clear the eyesight of the University,
and cure them of the Surfiet, which they have taken of Protestantisme, and
quench the Praeter-naturall thirst after Popery and Slavery, and take away the
obstructions of Reformation. Pray send the Bill to Her Majesty's own
Apothecary, who will very carefully compound it.

Rs. One dram of King James his Cordial, that was made by Buckingham.
Of His Majesty's Protestations. Of the Cabinet-Councells Honesty. Of Harry
Iermyns Honor. Of Ruperts Religion. Of Digby's English heart, ana. 2. grains.
Of Tompkins his Halter, Quantum suffocat. One of Her Majesty's good Intentions
to the Kingdom. Two Arguments at Law, of Justice Heath's own making. Two
Ounces of the Irish Commission, and an ounce and an half of the Wax that
seared it, and three Pen-fulls of the Ink that wrote it. I. Case of Conscience
of Doctor Fern, in the behalf of Tyrani^. I. Head-full of Mischiefs of
Bristoll and Cottington. I. Heart-full of fears of the Iunto, and one pound of
their slavery. Half a dram of University Divinity, and one scruple of
Chop't-Logick, and Hebrew Roots, ana: 5. Gallons of Holy Water, of the
Vice-Chancellors own Consecrating.
Boil all these the length of a Masque at White Hall, or rather of
Cart-Wrights Prophetical Play, called the Royal Slave: Then stop it close
with Surplesses, Copes and Hoods: So let it simper, like a Madam in her
Nightcloathes, in the ashes of the next Town, which shall be fired for the
Liberty of the Subject: then strain it, and in stead of Syrup, sweeten it
with a Bucket or two of Irish Protestant Blood, that it may please the Palate,
Drink three ounces of this Cursing and Swearing, and if it help not thee and
thy friends to breathe out all your Malignant Humors, which have so
intoxicated your Noddles with vile Conundrums: I must sit still admiring, and
leave you to the Gallows, the proper cure for such Rebels as thy self, that
are past Cure.

FINIS.

