THE BOOK OF Common Prayer, now used in the Church of ENGLAND, Vindicated from
the aspertion of all Schismatickes, Anabaptists, Brownists, and Seperatists.

Proving and maintaining, that the English Common Prayer as now it is, was made
and compyled by many most Reverend Divines of our Church in the Reign of that
ever-famous and first confirmer of the Protestant Religion in England, King
Edward the sixth.

With a true Catalogue of their names and dignities, collected from the records
of Parliament Rolls in the Tower.

Together with a discovery of a sort of people called Rebaptists, lately found
out in Hackney Marsh near LONDON.

London, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.

The book of common prayer now used in the Church of England, vindicated from
schism and errors.
IT is very well known, to most professors of the protestant Religion in the
Kingdom of England, that the reformation (fully to be effected) began in the
Reign of that ever-famous Prince King Edward the sixth, whose pious and godly
care was such, that with the advice of his most reverend and worthy Divines, an
uniforme Book of common prayers, and forth with complied, and by act of
Parliament, then fully confirmed, furthered the subsequent years, of his ever
dear sister, Queen Elizabeth of everlasting renown: it was more amply
manifested by acts of Parliament and Proclamation to her Eternal praise, and
Gods glory, and the joy of all Protestant professors throughout the Christian
world, all whose times it so continued with general applause.

And since, has been upholden by two most renowned and religious Princes,
King James of blessed memory deceased, and King Charles our dread Sovereign
now reigning over us, whom God long preserve, till of late schism and faction
arising in the Malignant spirits of some Brownists, Seperatists, Anabaptists,
who like the Egiptian locusts swarm in every corner of the City and Kingdom,
and having of late got a head, began to oppose and spurn at that ancient
monument, defiling of it, with their opprobrious tongues, and as much, as in
them lies, seeking utterly to tread it under foot, and quite abolish the same,
by calling it popish, and superstitious, others by taxing of it, viz. The
Lettany, to be in part conjuration, and such like charms or witchcrafts, to the
great hearts grief of good Protestants, and true professors of the Gospel of
Christ, now has it been, depraved and reviled by those Ignorant,
haire-brained, and Illitterate fellows, who do all things, by the motions of
their unguided, unlearned, unadvised, and foolish rash spirits, as they boldly
in great multitudes from time, to time, most impudently seek to maintain.

Proofs of the holy Scripture alleged in Iustisication of the Book of
Common Prayer, now used in the Church of England.

First, THat Go himself appointed in the Law, a set form of Benediction,
Numb; 6.23.24, 25.26.

Secondly, that David himself, set Psalms to be sung upon special occasions,
as the title of them shows,

Thirdly; That the Prophet Ioell, appointed a set form of Prayer, to be used
by the Priests at solemn fast; Ioell 2.7.

Fourthly that Christ not only commandes us to pray, after such manner, Mat.
6.9. But to use a set form of words, Luke 11.2. when ye pray, say our Father.

Fifthly. The spirit of God is no more restrained by using a set form of
Prayer, then by singing set hymns, or Psalms in meeter, which yet the
adversaries of our Common Prayer, practice in their assemblies.

Sixthly, Of all prayers, premeditated are the best, Eccle. 5, 2.

Seventhly, And of premeditated prayers, those which are allowed by public
Authority, are to be preferred above those, which are utterly by any private
spirit.

Eighthly, All the Churches in the Christian world, in the first and best times,
had their best forms of Liturgies, whereof most are extent in the writings of
the Fathers unto this day.

Ninethly, Let our service book be compared with the French, Dutch, or any
other Litturgy prefered in any of the reformed Churches, and it will appear to
any indifferent Reader, that it is more exact, and complete then any of them.

Tenthly, Our Service book was penned and allowed of, not only by many learned
Doctors' but glorious Martyrs, who sealed the truth of the reformed Religion
with their blood, now what those most reverend Compylers of the book of Common
Prayer as it now is, this ensuing Table will truly and really dilineate.

The compylers of the English Common Prayer as it now is.
Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. Doctor Goodricke Bishop of Ely,
Doctor Skipp Bishop of Hereford Doctor Thirlby Bishop of Winchester Doctor Day
Bishop of Chichesler Doctor Holheck Bishop of Lincoln Doctor Ridley Bishop of
Rochesler Doctor Gox King Edwards Almoner. Master Tailor Deane of Lincoln
Master Heynes Deane of Exeter Master Redman Deane of Westminster Master
Robinson Archdeacon of Leicester

Mense Maii. 1541.
What grounds then have these Factions, and schisinaticall people, seeing it is
demonstrated unto us, to be both lawful and necessary in the Church, both by
the word of God, and the learned Fathers in those times, but what can we
expect from a Mechanicke and Illiterate people, whose unseemely G^stures, are
daily apparent to the eye of the world, witness their Riotous, and uncivil
disorders in the streets, on the Sabbath day, at the Church door, until
divine service be read, talking all the while of profane and Idle matters, a
rude and Ignorant fellow of that sect, violently tore a great part of a
Communion book in a Church in London lately, And being brought before authority
for the same, answered nothing for himself, but that he could not abide in it,
however he was not suffered to pass so impudently without punishment, for he
was committed and suffered accordingly, many other in diverse places of this
Kingdom, have committed many such like outrages, insolences, against Church
Government, and if there be, not some course taken for the suppression of such
outrages, a great confusion is feared thereby to fall upon our Church; and for
those, that have boldly taken upon them in private holes and corners, to blast
the worthy antiquity thereof, by their violent pens, but thanks be given to
God, Revend Divines have vindicated the cause thereof, by the holy Scriptures,
both in print and Pulpit to the shame of all opposers whatsoever.

The discovery of a base sect of people called Rebaptists, lately found out in
Hackney Mash near London.
ABout a Fortnight since a great multitude of people were met going toward the
river in Hackney Marsh, and were followed to the water side, where they all
were Baptized again, themselves doing it one to another, some of which
persons, were so feeble and aged, that they were feign to Ride on Horseback
thithere this was well observed by many of the Inhabitants living there abouts,
and afterward one of them Christened his own Child, and another took upon
him to Church his own wife, an Abominable Act, and full of gross Impiety.

FINIS.

