A BOOK OF THE Continuation of Foreign Passages.

That is, Of the Peace made between this Commonwealth, and that of the united
Provinces of the Netherlands, with all the Articles of that Peace. Apr. 5. 1654.

And the Articles of Peace, Friendship and Intercourse agreed between England
and Sweden, in a Treaty at Vpsall. May 9. 1654.

As also The substance of the Articles of the Treaty of Peace betwixt England
and France. Given at White Hall the 20 of November: 1655.

From General Blakes Fleet, The Turks in Argier do consent to deliver up all
the English slaves, and desire a firm Peace for ever: And in Tunnis Road we
battered their Castle of Porta-ferina, and set on fire their fleet in the
Harbor. Apr. 9. 1655.

MOREOVER, An attempt on the Island of Jamaica, and taking the Town of St. Jago
de la viga, beating the Enemy from their Forts and Ordnance, being a body of
3000 men, and so took possession of the Island, May 10 1655. With a full
Description thereof.

With a true Narrative of the late Success which it has pleased God to give
to some part of the Fleet of this Commonwealth, the Speaker, the Bridg-water,
the Plymouth Frigots, against the King of Spains West India Fleet: the value of
what is taken and posessed by the calculation of the Spaniards about nine
millions of pieces of eight, and 350 prisoners, and all this without the loss
of one vessel of the English, 1656.

He has showed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the
heritage of the Heathen,

Psalm. 111.6. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner at the South entrance
of the Royal Exchange. 1657.

two armies facing each other, with figures on horses bearing flags between
them; in foreground, three figures on horses facing the viewer
A PROCLAMATION of the Peace made between this Commonwealth, and that of the
United Provinces of the Netherlands.
HIS Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, considering how necessary it is not only to preserve Peace and
Quiet at home, but as far as in him lies, to live in Amity and Friendship with
his Neighbors, has by the blessing of God, with the advice of his Council
made and concluded a Peace, Union, and Confederation to continue for ever,
between this Commonwealth of the one part, and that of the United Provinces of
the Low Countries of the other part; their Lands, Countries, Cities, Towns,
Dominions, Territories, Places and People, by Sea, Land, Fresh waters, and
elsewhere; by the which Peace it is agreed, That all Enmity, Hostility, Discord
and War between the said Commonwealths, their People and Subjects shall cease,
and all injuries and wrongs whatsoever done since the 18 of May, 1652. shall
cease and be forgotten, except such depredations as shall be committed by
either side in these Seas after 12 days, from the date of these presents, and
in all other places on this side the Cape of St. Vincent, after six weeks; and
from thence, within the Mediteranean Sea, and to the Aequinoctial Line, after
ten weeks; and beyond the Aequinoctiall Line, after the space of 8 Months, or
immediately after sufficient notice of the said Peace given in those places.
And that the people and Inhabitants of each party respectively, of what
condition or quality soever they be, shall treat each other with love and
friendship, and may freely and securely come into, and pass through each
others Countries, Towns, Villages and Precincts, and there stay and abide, and
from thence depart again at their pleasure, without any hinderance and
molestation, and likewise trade and have eommerce, and generally do use, and
exercise all other things (observing the Laws and Customs of each place
respectively) as freely, fully and securely as they might have done in time of
Peace: Whereof all persons whatsoever in these Nations of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, are to take notice, and conform themselves accordingly.

Given at White Hall this 26 of April, 1654. O. P.

Articles of Peace, abreviated, April 5. 1654.
I. IT is agreed, concluded, and accorded, that from this day forward there
shall be a true, firm and inviolable Peace, betwixt the Commonwealth of
England, and the States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands,
and the respective Lands, Countries, and Cities, without distinction of places,
under their obedience.

II. That from henceforth all enmity, hostility, discord and War betwixt the
said two Commonwealths, their People and Subjects, shall cease, by Sea, Land,
and fresh-waters.

III. All offenses, injuries, charges, and damages, which either party has
sustained by the other, since the 18 ( alias 28) of May, 1652. shall be taken
away and forgotten. And all actions for the same shall be held and reputed void
and null.

IV. All Prisoners of both sides, of what condition, or in whatsoever places
they be, shall be set at liberty.

V. The two Commonwealths shall remain confederate friends, joined, and allied
together for the defense and preservation of the Liberties and Freedom of each
against all whomsoever, or be declared Enemies to the Freedom and Liberty of
the people living under either of the said Governments.

VI. Neither of the Commonwealths shall make, do, act, treat of, or attempt
any thing against the other, or the people of either, in any place either at
Land or Sea, upon any occasion whatsoever. Nor that either of them, or the
people of either, give, yield, or afford any aid, counsel, favor, or assent
that any thing shall be done, treated of, or attempted by any other whomsoever,
to the injury and wrong of the other, but shall expressly contradict, gainsay,
oppose, and really hinder all whomsoever, that act, do, treat of, or attempt
any thing against either of the Commonwealths.

VII. Neither of the Commonwealths, or the people abiding, inhabiting, or
dwelling within either of them respectively, shall yield, give, or afford any
aid counsel or favor to the Enemies or Rebels of either, but shall expressly,
really, and with effect hinder either of them from giving any aid or
assistance, by Men Shipping, Arms, Ammunition, Money, Victuals, or otherwise
by Sea or Land, and all such Ships or persons whatsoever, that shall be made
use of, contrary to the intent of this Article, shall be forfeited to the
respective Commonwealths, and the persons employed therein, declared Enemies to
both Commonwealths, and suffer the penalties of Treason where the offense was
committed. And to the end there may be a specification made of what Goods shall
be deemed prohibit, or contraband, Commissioners may in convenient time be
appointed to determine herein. Provided that this extend not to the impeachment
of any thing contained in the present Article.

VIII. The two Commonwealths shall truly and sincerely assist each other as
need shall require, against the Rebels of either, at Sea and Land, at the costs
and expenses of the party requiring the same, upon such conditions as the two
States shall agree.

IX. That neither of the Commonwealths shall receive any person or persons,
that are Enemies to the other, nor afford any aid, counsel, lodging, etc. but
shall expressly and effectually, oppose and hinder the same.

X. That if either Commonwealth shall by their public Letters signify to the
other, any persons to be, and have been their Enemies, that they reside, be
hid, or shelter themselves in their Jurisdictions, that Commonwealth receiving
such Letters, shall within 28 dayer charge such Enemy to depart their
Jurisdidictions, and if they shall not depart within 15 days, to be punished
with death, and loss of lands and goods.

XI. No Rebel of the Commonwealth of England, shall by any be received into any
place of the United Provinces: And if any person under their power, (...) the
contrary, such person shall forfeit and loose their Castles, Towns, which they
shall at such time have or pretend to have. And no declared Enemy of the United
Provinces shall be received into any places holden or possessed in England, but
they shall hinder the same, and in case of contempt, forfeit the same.

XII. Both Common wealths shall treat on both sides with all love and
friendship, and come by water or land to each Havens, with freedom, and
continue there as long as they please, and trade in any goods, paying Customs,
saving always all and singular the Laws and Ordinances of either Commonwealth
respectively.

XIII. The Ships and Vessels of the United Provinces, meeting any the Ships of
War of this Commonwealth in the British Seas, shall strike their Flag and
lower their Top-saile.

XIV. Neither of the said Commonwealths shall receive into any of their
Havens, or give affistance or relief unto any Pirates or Sea-Rovers, but shall
cause them to be apprehended, all ships taken, shall be restored to the right
owners, or made good to them.

XV. That if either Commonwealth, shall hereafter make any Treaty with any
other Nation, the one shall give notice to, and comprehend the other, if they
desire it.

XVI. If during the Amity, any thing shall be acted against this Treaty, it
shall not be hereby interrupted, or broken off, only those particular persons
who have offended, shall be punished, and satisfaction made to all persons
concerned, after 12 month demanding thereof, in any part of Europe, within the
Straights of Gilbralter, in America, upon the Coasts of Africa, or on this side
the Cape of Good Hope, and beyond the said Cape within 18 months, and in case
the offenders shall not submit themselves to Justice, they shall be declared
Enemies to both Commonwealths, their Estates confiscate, and persons liable to
such further punishments, as their offense shall deserve.

XVII. The people of the Commonwealth of England, may freely, unmolested, and
securely travel in and through the Countries of the United Provinces in
Europe, in them, or beyond them, to follow their Traffic in all places there;
as also their Factors or Servants, armed or unarmed; but if armed, not above 40
men in company. And the people the United Provinces of the Netherlands may
enjoy the same liberty in the Commonwealth of England in Europe, they
conforming to the Laws thereof.

XVIII. If the Merchant Ships of one or the other side, shall through Tempest,
Pirates, or any other necessity, be driven into the Ports of either, it shall be
free for them to depart without payment of any Customs, or other duties;
provided they break not bulk, or expose any thing to sale.

XIX. The Merchants, Masters, Pilots, or Mariners, of either Commonwealth,
their Ships or Merchandises shall not be seized or arrested in the Lands, or
Rivers of the other, for any warlike or other service, except upon inevitable
necessity, and just satisfaction for the same; provided that hereby shall not
be excluded the Arrests and Seizures in the ordinary way of Law of each
Commonwealth.

XX. The Merchants on both sides, and the Shipmasters, may by Sea and Land,
carry all sorts of Arms for defense and offense; but being come to their Inns,
shall lay down their Arms, and so leave them till they return on board again.

XXI. The Men of War of either Commonwealth, meeting or overtaking any
Merchants Ship belonging to the other, or holding both one course, shall take
them under their protection, and defend them against all attempts.

XXII. If a Ship of either Commonwealth, or a Newrer, shall be taken in the
Havens of either by any third party; they, in or from whose Haven the said
Ships shall be taken, shall endeavor the re-taking of the said Ship, at the
charge of the proprietors.

XXIII. That Searchers on both parts, shall regulate themselves according to
the Laws of each Com: and not levy or take more they are allowed.

XXIV. In case wrong be done, against any the Articles of this Treaty, no
Letters of Reprizall, Mark or Countermark shall be granted, till first Justice
be sought, and in case Justice be refused or delayed, and no satisfaction made
within 3 months, then Letters of Reprizall, etc. may be granted.

XXV. All persons going to Sea, having particular Commissions, shall put in
security to do no wrong to either side.

XXVI. Free access shall be granted to each others Ports, with Merchants
Ships, and Men of war, so they exceed not the number of 8 Ships of War, nor
stay longer then for the reparation of their Ships; and if any greater number,
then it is not lawful to make entrance without first obtaining leave from the
Governor, and make no longer stay then he shall permit, and during their stay
shall commit no hostile act, or do any thing to the prejudice of the said Ports.

XXVII. The Lords of the United Provinces shall take care that Justice be done
on the Authors of the Murder of the English in Amboyna.

XXVIII. Whereas certain English Ships and Goods have been seized and detained
within the Dominions of the King of Denmark, since May 18. 1652. the States
General have oblidged themselves, That restitution shall be made of all the
English Ships and Goods detained yet in specie; together with the true and just
price of such as are sold, imbezled, or otherwise disposed of, within 14 days
after the arrival of the Merchants for the receiving of them. And also that
Damages be given for the losses sustained by the English, by reason of the said
detention, according to what shall be arbitrated by Edw: Winslow, James Russel,
John Beex, Will: Vander Cruyssen, on the part of the Lord Protector, and the
States General, to examine the demands of the Merchants; and to meet at
Goldsmiths Hall, London, June 27. and make Oath before the Judges of the High
Court of Admiralty, that they will proceed without respect to any particular
interest whatsoever. And the 1 of Aug: next, unless they agree upon Sentence
sooner, be shut up in a Chamber by themselves without fire, candle, meat,
drink, etc. till such time as they come to an agreement, and the award shall be
Obligatory to both parties. And the States General do firmly Oblige themselves
to perform the same, to pay such sum of money here at London, as the said
Arbitrators shall a judge to be paid for the use of the said Owners, as the L:
Protector shall nominate within 25 days after the adjudication made, and the
States Gen: shall pay at London the sum of 5000 l. ster. toward the Charges of
the Merchants, Masters, or their Assigns, for their Journey to Denmark, and the
sum of 20000 Rix Dollars, to such persons as his Highness shall appoint,
within 6 days after their arrival there. Which said sums shall be accounted in
part of payment of such sum, as shall be so awarded. And that security shall be
given by sufficient men living in London, binding themselves in 140000 l.
sterling. that restitution shall be made according to the premises: and that the
20000 Rix Dollars shall on their part be duly performed. And if all the
Conditions be not really performed, then the said sum of 140000 l. sterling. shall
be paid to such persons as his Highness shall nominate, that the Merchants
losses may be satisfied.

XXIX. The States Gen: have undertaken the restitution of the Ships and Goods,
and the same being performed, all questions, strifes, and wrongs between the
said Commonwealth and King shall cease and be for ever forgotten, and shall be
as a friend comprehended and included in this Treaty and Confederation.

XXX. That at the time of the delivery of the Instruments of Ratification, four
Commissioners shall be nominated on both sides to meet here at London, May 18.
to examine and determine all the losses and injuries which either side alleges
to have sustained from the other since the year 1611. unto May 18. 1652. as
well in the East Indies, as in Greenland, Muscovy, Brasil, or any other place.
And if the said Commissioners shall not within 3 months come to an agreement,
the differences shall be submmitted to the judgment and arbitration of the
Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, who by an Instrument for this purpose, shall
be desired-to take upon them that Arbitration, and appoint like Commissioners
empowered and instructed to give final judgment thereupon within 6 months
after the expiration of the 3 months; and whatsoever the major part of them
shall award, shall oblige both parties, and be performed accordingly.

XXXI. It is agreed, That both parties shall well and truly perform, and cause
to be performed, this present Treaty.

XXXII. The States General do by these presents, firmly oblige themselves, that
all and sigular whom, shall at any time elect, constitute, or appoint, Capt.
Genesis Stadtholder, Commander of their Army, or Admiral of any of their Fleets,
shall confirm by Oath this Treaty, all the things therein contained, and shall
promise to perform and keep the same.

XXXIII. Lastly, it is agreed that the present Treaty shall within 15 days
next, be confirmed and ratified in due and authentic form, by the said L:
Protector, and the said States Gen: of the United Provinces, by their Letters,
Patents under their Great Seals, and that Instruments of Ratification shall be
delivered interchangeably, within the time aforesaid. And furthermore that this
Treaty and Consederation shall immediately after delivery of the Instruments,
be pubished, according to the usual solemnity, and in the places accustomed;
and that all Acts of Hostility shall cease on both sides from that time.

Articles of Peace, Friendship and Intercourse concluded and agreed between
England and Sweden. May 9. 1654.
I. THat from henceforth there be and remain a good, firm, sincere and
perpetual Peace, Amity, Alliance and correspondence between the Protector and
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, portrait of man with mustache,
short curly hair, no beard, high neck ruff, and armor (?) and the Queen and
Kingdom of Sweden, and all and singular their Dominions, Kingdoms, Countries,
Provinces, Islands, Plantations, Lands, Cities, Towns, People, Citizens, and
generally all their Subjects and Inhabitants, so that each part treat and use
the other with all real friendship and affection.

II. The said Confederates their People, Subjects and Inhabitants shall, as
opportunity is offered, take care of, and promote the welfare each of other.
And shall advertise each other, upon knowledge thereof, of all imminent
dangers, plots, and conspiracies of Enemies against the other; and, as much as
in them lies, oppose, and hinder the same. Neither shall the one Confederate,
either by himself, or any else, treat of, act, or attempt any thing to the
prejudice and disadvantage of the other, his Lands or Dominions, in whatsoever
place, whether at Sea or Land; nor shall any way assist the Rebels or Enemies
of the other, to the damage of the Confederate, nor receive, or entertain
within his Dominions, any Rebel or Traitor, who shall attempt any thing
against the others State, much less afford them any Council, help or favor,
or permit it to be done by any of his Subjects, People and Inhabitants.

III. The said Protector and Commonwealth, and the said Queen and Kingdom
shall take diligent care, That, as much as in them lies, all impediments and
obstacles be removed, which have hitherto interrupted the freedom of
Navigation and Commerce, as well between both Nations, as with other People and
Countries within the Dominions, Lands, Seas and Rivers of either. And shall
sincerely endeavor to assert maintain, defend and promote the aforesaid Liberty
of Navigation and Commerce against all the Disturbers thereof, by such ways and
means, as either in this present Treaty, or hereafter shall be agreed upon.
Neither shall they suffer, that either by themselves, their Subjects and
People, or through their default, any thing be done or committed contrary
hereunto.

IV. That either of the aforesaid Confederates their People and Subjects, may
without any safe conduct, license, general or special freely and securely go
and enter by Land or Sea, in and to the Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces, Lands,
Islands, Cities, Villages, Towns, whether walled or unwalled, fortified, or
otherwise, Havens and whatsoever Dominions of the other, and there stay and
from thence return or pass through; and in the same places, upon just prices
to procure, and have provision of Victuals, for their use and sustenance and to
be used with all friendly Offices. And that either Confederate, their People
and subjects may trade and have commerce in all places where commerce has
hitherto been exercised, in what Goods and Merchandises they please, and may
freely import and export the same, paying the Customs which are due, and
conforming themselves to the Laws and Ordinances of the said Commonwealth and
Kingdom, whether the same respect Trade or any other right; which presupposed,
the People, subjects and inhabitants of both Confederates, shall have and enjoy
in each others Kingdoms, Countries, Lands and Dominions, as large and ample
privileges, Relaxations, Liberties and immunities, as any other Foreiner at
present does, or hereafter shall enjoy there.

V. No Merchants, Captains, and Masters of Ships, Mariners, nor any other
Persons, Ships, Goods, or Merchandise belonging to either Confederate shall
upon any public, or private account, by virtue of any Edict General or
special, within any the Lands, Havens, Sea roads, Coasts, or Dominions of the
other, for any public service, or expedition of war, or any other cause, much
less for any private use, be seized, embargued, arrested, forced by violence,
or be any way molested or injured, provided only such arrests as are
conformable to justice and equity be not hereby prohibited, so be it they are
made according to the ordinary course of Law, and not granted upon private
affection, or partiality, but are requisite for the administration of right and
justice.

VI. In case any of the Ships of either Confederate, whether of War or
Merchants, belonging to the subjects and People of either, be by occasion of
Tempests, pursuit of Pirates and Enemies, or any other urgent necessity
constrained to put into each others Havens, Roads or shores, they shall be
received there with all kindness and humanity, and enjoy all friendly
protection, and be permitted to refresh themselves and procure at a reasonable
price, all things needful for their sustenance, reparation, or use. Neither
shall they be hindered from going out of the said Ports or Roads, at their
pleasure, without paying any customs or duties. Provided they do nothing
contrary to the Laws Ordinances and Customs of the place, which the said Ships
shall enter into or abide in.

VII. In like manner, if any Ship or Ships whether public or private,
belonging to either Confederate, their People and Subjects, shall within any
the Coasts or Dominions of the other, stick upon the sands, or be forced to
lighten their burden, or be wracked, or suffer any damage, all friendly help
and relief shall be given them upon a competent reward. And whatever shall be
remaining of the goods thrown overboard or after shipwreck, or any other damage
sustained, shall be kept in safe custody, and restored to the Owner, or whom
the said Owner shall appoint.

VIII. In case the People and Subjects on either part, whether they be
Merchants, Factors, or Servants, Masters of Ships, Mariners, or such others,
who travel and inhabit within the Dominions of the other, or those who act on
their behalf before any Court of Judicature, for recovery of their Debts, or
for other lawful occasions, shall stand in need of the Magistrates help, the
same shall be readily, and according to the equity of their Cause, in friendly
manner granted them, and Justice shall be administered to them without long and
unnecessary Delays. Neither shall they be any way molested upon any pretense in
the Dispatch of their Affairs, in their Journeying, Bargaining, and Receiving
the Price of their Commodities, but that all Love and Friendship be extended
toward them. And it shall be free for them on both sides, in their passage to
and again, in each others Coasts, Ships, Havens, and Public Places, to wear
about them Arms for their proper defense, so be it they give no just suspicion
to the Governor or Magistrate of the place, of any design against the public
or private peace. But he especially who behaves and demeans himself soberly
and inoffensively, shall be protected from all injury, violence and molestation.

IX. The said Confederates, and all and singular their People and Subjects, may
buy and export out of all the Countries, Dominions and Kingdoms of the other,
all kind of Armor and Provision of War, and may safely and freely put in with
their Ships, and arrive at each others Ports, Havens and Shores, and there
stay, and thence depart, they carrying themselves peaceably, and conformably to
the Laws and Customs of the respective places, and not disturbing the freedom
of commerce therein. In like manner the Ships of War shall have free access to
the Ports of either, there to stay, and come to anchor, but not in such numbers
as shall occasion manifest suspicion, without the leave and consent of that
Confederate first obtained, to whom the Port belongs, unless compelled thereto
by tempest, force, or danger of the Sea, in which case they shall signify to
the Governor, or chief Magistrate of the Place, the cause of their Arrival,
and shall continue there no longer then the said Governor shall permit.
Observing always the Laws aforesaid, and such as shall hereafter be agreed upon.

X. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Queen and Kingdom of Sweden, may
safely and freely travel in England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereof, and pass through the same by Sea or Land, to any other Nations freely
to traffic and have commerce with them in all sorts of merchandise, and to
import and export the same. And the People of the said Commonwealth shall enjoy
the same freedom in the Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories, of the Queen and
Kingdom of Sweden. Provided, the Laws, Ordinances, and particular rights of
each Nation, concerning Trade and Commerce be observed, on both sides.

XI. Although in the preceding Articles of this present Treaty, it be forbid
to either Confederate to yield any aid or assistance to the Enemies of the
other; yet it is not to be so understood, as if either Confederate having no
War with the Enemies of the other, might not sail to, or traffic with the
said Enemies, notwithstanding the other Confederate be in actual war with
them; But it is only provided, That till a more particular agreement be made
concerning this matter, no goods called goods of Contrabanda, a Catalogue and
Specification of which shall be made within 4 months after the date hereof,
shall be carried to the Enemies of each other without peril in case they be
taken, of being adjudged lawful prize without hope of Restitution.

XII. But lest such Navigation and Intercourse of the one Confederate, his
People and Subjects by Land or Sea, with other Nations, during the War of the
other Confederate, should redound to the prejudice of the other Confed: And
lest goods of Enemies, should pass concealed under the name of Friends; for
the removal of all suspicion and prevention of fraud herein, it is agreed,
That all Ships, Wagons, Wares and men, belonging to either Confederate, shall
in their passage, have Letters of safe conduct, commonly called Passe-ports,
and Certificates signed by the Governor, or chief Magistrate of the Province
or City, from whence they come; Of which Letters and Certificates such forms
shall be observed as shall be mutually concluded upon, within the space of 4
months, next after the date hereof. And wheresoever any the Merchandise, goods,
vessels, or men belonging to either, their People and Subjects, shall be met
with either in open Sea, or in any Channel, Haven, Road, Land, or any other
place by the Ships of War, public or private, or by any the People, Subjects
and Inhabitants of the other, or shall happen to be in one place with them,
they producing their Letters of safe Conduct and Certificates aforesad, shall
have nothing further exacted of them, no search made, either of Goods, Vessels
or Men, much less shall they receive any damage, injury or molestation; but
shall be suffered to pass on with freedom to pursue their occasions. And if
any People and Subjects of either shall do, or commit any thing contrary to the
proper sense of this present Article, either Confederate shall take care that
severe punishment be inflicted on the Offenders, and cause full and speedy
satisfaction to be made to the parties wronged, for all Costs and Damages.

XIII. In case it shall hereafter happen, that during this Amity and
Confederation, any of the People or subjects of either, shall act or attempt
any thing against the same or any part thereof, either by Land, Sea, or other
waters, this Amity, Confederation and Alliance, shall not be thereupon
interrupted or broken of, but shall remain and continue still in full force and
virtue. Only in such case the particular persons which have offended, shall be
punished, and no others; And that Justice shall be done and satisfaction made
to all persons injured, within 12 months after Demand thereof. And in case the
Persons so offending as aforesaid shall not appear and submit themselves to
Justice, and make satisfaction within the said Term, the said Persons shall be
declared enemies to both States, and their estates, goods and effects
whatsoever, shall be confiscated and employed to a due and full satisfaction
for the wrong by them done. And their persons shall be liable to further
punishment when they shall come within the power of either State, as the
quality of their offense shall deserve. And that speedy restitution and
satisfaction be made for the loss and damage which either part has sustained
from the other, during the War betwixt England and the United Provinces.

XIV. This present Treaty and Confederation shall in nothing derogate from any
preeminence, right or Dominion of either Confederate within any his own Seas,
Channels or Waters, but that they have and retain the same, in as full and
ample manner as they have had, or as of right belongs to them.

XV. It being the primary intent of this League and Amity, that each
Confederate their People and Subjects might enjoy such Navigation and Commerce,
as is described in the foregoing Articles, within the Balticke, Sound,
Northern, Western, and British Seas, Mediterranean and Channel, and other the
Seas in Europe; Therefore all sincere endeavor shall be used on both sides by
common advise, aid and assistance, that the aforesaid mutual Liberty of
Navigation and commerce, be established, promoted, and as occasion is, defended
against all the Disturbers thereof, who shall go about to interrupt, prohibit,
hinder or restrain and limit the same to their own will and pleasure, in
prejudice of the said Confederates. And either part shall with all willingness
or readiness, promote the good and prevent the hurt each of other; Saving the
Treaties which either Nation has made with other Kingdoms, Commonwealths and
Nations. And neither Confederate shall hereafter make any League or Agreement
in prejudice of this present, with any other People or Nation without the
privity and consent of the other, or if any such Agreement be hereafter made,
the same shall be reputed null and void, and give place to this present Treaty.
But as for the manner of giving aid and assistance each to other for the
defense of this League and of the Liberty of Commerce and Navigation, a more
particular agreement, as need shall require, shall be made thereupon
accommodated to the Circumstances of time and other affairs.

XVI. For what concerns other Commodities, which Ships of War may enjoy, and
the Laws by which they shall regulate themselves when they arrive in each
others Ports and Harbors: and for what concerns commerce to be exercised in
America; as also the advantages of the Herring, and other Fisheries, the
erecting Staples for Trade, and other Things and Conditions which shall be
found requisite for the better clearing of the foregoing Articles, Resolution
shall be had therein according to what shall be agreed upon in a distinct and
peculiar Treaty or Contract.

XVII. Whatever is agreed on in the foregoing Articles shall be in force and
virtue from this present time, and be truly observed on both sides by all such
as are within each others Allegiance. And for the further Confirmation thereof,
shall be subscribed, signed and ratified by the Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, in the
name of his Highness and the said Commonwealth, and by her Majesty of Sweden,
under the handwriting and Seals of their said Highness and Majesty, within
four months next ensuing the Date of these Presents.

A PROCLAMATION of the Peace made between this Commonwealth, and France.
OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland,
etc.

Whereas by the blessing of God, we have, with the advice of our Council, made
and concluded a Treaty of Peace, friendship, and amity between this
Commonwealth on the one part, and France on the other, their Lands, Cities,
Towns, Dominions, Territories, Places, and People, by Sea, Land, fresh-waters,
and else where; and whereas by the said Treaty of Peace all Acts of Hostility
are to cease on both sides immediately after publication thereof, as well upon
the Sea, as at Land, Rivers, and fresh-waters, and whatever shall be taken by
the one from the other after the said Publication, shall well and truly be
restored, and all Letters of Marque and Reprisall to be recalled and made void,
We have thought fit to make Publication, as we do by these presents, of the
aforesaid Treaty and Agreement; and do hereby strictly charge and require all
person and persons, of what degree, quality and condition they, or any of them
be, belonging to this Commonwealth, to take notice thereof, and conform
themselves accordingly, portrait enclosed in an oval inscribed in Latin: Louis
XIV, by the grace of God most Christian king of Gaul and Navarre; below the
oval and its rectangular frame, a tree bearing arrows and other weapons
(center) bordered by a Latin motto and flanked by more weapons to the left and
right LODOVICVS XIIII.D G. GALLIA ET NAVARRAE REX CHRISTIANISS.
VIRTVTI DAMNOSA QVIES And in further performance of the said Treaty on our
part, we do by these presents require and enjoin all Ships of ^^a^, and others
belonging to the State, or particular persons set forth upon private
Commissions, or otherwise, to observe the said Agreement. And to the end none
may pretend ignorance thereof, the Commissioners of the Admiralty are hereby
required to give effectual notice of the premises to all the Ships of War of
this Commonwealth, either at Sea or in Port. And the Judges of the High Court
of Admiralty are also by virtue of these presents forthwith to call in, upon
their several Securities given in that Court, all such Ships as have been set
forth upon private Commissiions against any of the People or Subjects of
France.

Given at White hall this 20. day of November, 1655.
Here follows the substance of the Articles of the Treaty of Peace betwixt
England and France. Nov: 20. 1655.
I. THat henceforth there be a firm Peace, Amity, and League betwixt the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Kingdom of France, and
betwixt all the Countries, Dominions, Cities, and Places, within the Dominion
of either, and that the People and Subjects of both Nations may freely have
recourse unto all Ports and Havens, without prejudice.

II. That neither part shall hereafter directly or indirectly assist such as
are already declared Rebels or their Adherents; and in case either part do
make a Peace with such as are already their declared Enemies, that part which
shall so make Peace shall not give any aid or assistance to the said Enemies
against the other part.

III. That all Hostility shall cease henceforth both by Sea and Land, and all
Commissions and Letters of Marque or Reprisall, issued out on both sides
against the People and Subjects of either, be recalled. And whatsoever shall be
taken on either side, after the publication of the present Treaty, it shall be
restored. And if any injury be done by the People of the one State to the
People of the other, no Letters of Marque or Reprisall, shall be issued out,
till justice be first demanded; and in case Justice cannot be had after the due
ways of demand made, then Letters of Marque or Reprizall may be granted, etc.

IV. That freedom of Trade be maintained in all places, etc. betwixt the
People on both sides; Provided that the usual Customs be paid, and the Laws
and Statutes of each State be observed.

V. That the People of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc.
shall have liberty to vend all Manufactures of Wool and Silk made within the
said Commonwealth in any place of the Dominion of France, notwithstanding any
Law, Edict, etc. to the contrary. Provided, that the 13 Article of the Treaty
made between England and France, Anno 1606. concerning Clothes ill made, be
kept and observed; And that the Subjects of France may have free leave to vend
all Wines of the growth of France, in all ports and places of the said
Commonwealth, notwithstanding any Law or Statute, etc. to the contrary.

VI. That the Rates of Customs, which are to be paid by the Merchants on both
sides, shall be hung up in a Table in the public places at London and Roven,
and in other Cities of England and France, as need shall require.

VII. That whereas some payments and privileges are claimed by some Cities and
places, as due unto them, in the Dominions on either side, the Magistrates and
Officers in all Cities shall take care that no more be exacted than what is due.

VIII. That the payment called in English Headmony, in French Du Chief, exacted
hitherto by custom without Law in some Ports of England and France, shall no
more be paid by the People of either State, at their entrance or departure.

IX. The French Merchants trading in England shall not be compelled to put in
any other caution for the vending of their Commodities, etc. besides their
caution upon Oath, etc.

X. That French Ships may have safe recourse to the Key of London, and all
other Ports of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. there to take in their
lading without molestation, and they shall not be compelled to unlade into
other Vessels. And the Ships of England shall enjoy the like liberty in all
the Ports of France.

XI. That the Merchants Ships of England, trading to Bourdeaux, shall not in
their passage up the River of Garunne, be compelled to unlade their Guns, etc.
at the Castle of Blaye.

XII. That the Merchants and any other People of the aforesaid Commonwealth of
England, may by Will and Testament dispose of their Commodities, money,
housholdstuffe, Debts, etc. within all parts of the Dominion of France,
according to their pleasure. And whether they die testate or intestate, their
heirs or executors shall enjoy, etc. according to the Laws of England, in what
part of France soever they shall happen to die; and this notwithstanding the
Law commonly called Droict d'Aubeyne. The like liberty and privilege is to be
enjoyed by the Subjects of France in England.

XIII. That the Inhabitants of the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey shall enjoy the
same privileges and immunities in France as the French do in those Islands, the
usual Tributes and Customs being paid on both sides.

XIV. That for the more easy prevention of Piracies, and injuries to Ships by
Rovers at Sea, all Captains and Masters in any Men of War, or Ships belonging
to the People of either State, shall before they set out of any Port within the
Dominion of either put in security for their good behavior at Sea, and that
they will not take or seize, nor otherwise hinder or injure the people and
goods of either. And if those who are appointed to take the Security, shall
neglect it, or not take good security, they themselves shall make recompense
for such damages as shall be done.

XV. That for the space of 4 years succeeding the Ratification of the present
Treaty, all Ships belonging to the Subjects and People of either State trading
in the Mediterranean, and in the Eastern Sea or Ocean, shall be free and have
their lading free, although they carry goods in them, yea Grain or Pulse, which
belong to Enemies; except nevertheless all prohibited and Contraband goods,
that is to say Gunpowder, Guns, Pistols, and all sorts of Arms, Munition,
Horses and Warlike Provision, nor shall they transport men for the service of
the Enemies of either State, in case the Ships, Provision and Goods shall
become Prize; which shall be severely put in execution also against such as
shall carry Corn or Victuals for relief of places besieged by either State.

XVI. That both Parties shall expressly charge their Sea Commanders, etc. That
they do not any way prejudice or hinder the People of either State in their
Ships, Vessels, Goods or Merchandise, but diligently observe this Treaty; And
that those who violate it, shall beside the undergoing of Corporal punishment,
repair the Damages, etc. And that such men of War, as being designed Convoy to
Merchant men, shall meet with Vessels belonging to either State, be obliged to
defend them against any that shall offer violence, so long as they hold the
same course together.

XVII. The seventeenth Article enjoyneth the copying out and securing of Books
of Accounts, Papers, Bills of lading, etc. That shall be found in any Ships,
belonging to the People of either State, that may happen to be made Prize by
any of the Sea Commanders of either Party, etc.

XVIII. The eighteenth concerns such Commanders, Masters, Mariners and Seamen,
taken in Vessels that shall be made Prize as aforesaid.

XIX. That neither of the Confederates shall harbor or permit their People to
harbor any Pirates or Robbers, nor to assist or supply them, but rather
endeavor to apprehend and bring them to their deserved punishment, etc.

XX That neither of the said Parties do permit that the Ships or Goods
belonging to either people, which shall at any time be taken by the Rebels of
either, upon pretense, or by virtue of any Commission whatsoever, and be
brought into the Ports or Places of either Dominion, be alienated from the
right Owners, but they shall be detained and laid up safe, that no part of them
perish or be imbelished, etc.

XXI. That if the People of either part shall be driven by Tempest, fear of
Enemies, or any other danger, into the Ports of either Nation, they shall
depart free without paying any Custom or Tribute, provided they neither buy
nor sell there, and do at their first coming give an Account of their Arrival
to the Magistrate of the Place.

XXII. That the People of the said Commonwealth may freely Trade in all
Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories, that are in Amity or Neutrality with the
said Commonwealth, and not be hindered or injured by the subjects of the said
King, although there should be an enmity and Hostility betwixt the said King,
and those Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories, or any of them. The same is to
be observed in like manner, on the said Commonwealths part toward the subjects
of France. Provided that neither of them do Trade to any port or Town besieged
by either party, nor carry any prohibited Goods unto such places as are in
hostility with either, etc.

XXIII. That inpartial Justice be done to the people of either, according as by
the rule of Law and Equity in all Causes depending on eithers Dominion, and
that all Sentences, and former Bargains and agreements, made by the people of
either, for their own advantage, do stand good, etc.

XXIV. And forasmuch as since the year 1640 many prizes have been taken, and
many damages done by the people of each nation to one another, it is agreed,
That there Commissioners be nominated immediately after the Ratification of the
present Treaty, with power to examine, estimate, and clear such Prizes and
Laws, and determine the compensation and satisfaction for them, according to
the demands, which shall be produced and exhibited before them, by their people
on either part, within three months time, to be accounted after the publication
of this Treaty; For which purpose the said Commissioners are to meet within six
weeks after publication, in the City of London, and to determine the said
Controversies within five months next following. And if within six months they
shall not agree, then the said controversies shall be referred to the
arbitration of the republic of Hamburgh, to be determited within four months
time next after, who are desired to appoint Commissioners to give Judgment upon
the premises, and whatsoever they shall determine shall be binding to both
Parties, and shall be performed within 6 months next following. And if these
shall not determine the said Controversy, then no man shall be molested
thereupon, etc.

XXV. That the Controversy betwixt both parties touching the Forts of
Pemtacoet, St. John, and Port Royal, lately taken in America, and the goods
found in them, be referred to the aforesaid Commissioners and Arbitrators
mentioned in the foregoing Article.

XXVI. That if there should happen to be a war betwixt the said Commonwealth
and Kingdom, the Merchants living in Towns and Cities shall have six months
time after the declaring of the War to sell and transport their Goods and
Commodities, and if any damage or injury be done them by the people of either
part, they shall have recompense and satisfaction given them.

XXVII. If it so fall out, that during this League and Amity any thing shall
be done by any of the people on either side, contrary thereto, this League and
Amity shall notwithstanding remain entire, and retain its full force, but the
persons so offending shall be punished and satisfaction given to all parties
concerned, etc.

XXVIII. That this Treaty shall within 15 days next following be confirmed and
ratified under the great Seal of both Nations, and the instruments be delivered
on both sides, and afterward this present Treaty shall be published in the
accustomed place and manner.

A Relation of Gen: Blakes engagement with the Turks in Tunnis: And of their
submission in Argier.
two sailing ships in battle, with a smaller boat in the foreground
Tunnis Road, April 9. 1655.
AFter the Turks in Tunnis had given us an unsatisfied answer, we sailed to
them again, and arrived at Porta Ferina the 3 of April; when we came there the
Officers met, and we sought to the Lord by Prayer, after which the Officers met
in Counsel, and that day it was unanimously resolved by the Generals and
Captains, to set upon the Turks Ships there the next day, and to burn them. On
the 4 of April we caused the Turks to fly before us, their Castle of Porta
Ferina we battered, their strong Town and houses of stone we did beat about
their ears: By break of day the whole fleet weighed anchor; The Newcastle
Frigot went first in, after her the Kent, the Taunton, the Forefight, the
Amity, Princesse-Maria, Pearl, Mearmaid, and Merlin followed, and came to
anchor near the Turks 9 Ships who lay close to the Castle and Forts by it: Then
came in the Andrew our Vice Admiral, and the Plymouth, after them the George,
Worcester, Unicorn, Bridgwater, and Success, these all anchored just against
the Body of the Castle within musket shot, and began to play our broad sides of
Guns at the Castle, which we plied very thick for 4 or 5 hours; In the mean
while our other Frigots sent their boats aboard the Ships to endeavor the
firing of them, which by the blessing of God was done by 11 a clock; we had hot
work of it, for their Ships lay within Pistol shot of the shore, and all the
Coast was lined with Musketeirs, and about 60 pieces of Ordnance mounted upon
the Castle. The most men slain were in the Boats going aboard their Ships,
which was by small shot, 30 is the most to be slain in the whole Fleet, and
about 80 wounded; which considering the strength of the Place, and the many
advantages the Turks had upon us, was but a small number. We are now in Tunnis
Road, and General Blake has sent once more a shore, but what will be done we
know not.

April 10. 1655. The Turks in Argier do consent to deliver up all the English
that they have slaves, to General Blake, and declare that they desire a
Confirmation of the Peace with England, and that the Lord Protector will send a
Council to them, to make a firm Peace with them for ever. And it is believed
that Tripilo will do the like.

portrait of Pope Alexander VII (?)
To our Venerable Brethren, The Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Clergi-men,
Religious, and all the Faithful ones of Christ belonging to the Catholic
Church.
ALEXANDER VII. POPE.
VEnerable Brethern, beloved Sons, greeting, and Apostolical Benediction.
While from the height of our Apostolic Dignity we look round about us, and
sollicitously survey the State of Things throughout the World, as subjected to
our Care and Charge, the Affairs of Christendom appear to be in a very sad and
lamentable condition; for strangers make spoil of the Portion of the Lord, and
his heritage, casting out those that are indeed his Children. Those Nations,
which out of our Fatherly love and tenderness, we had a desire to take into
our bosom, that is to say, into the bosom of true Religion, and most
affectionately to embrace them, even they endeavor to rend and tear this very
bosom in pieces; and making their way from the remotest parts of sea and land,
have invaded the Flock of Christ. Yea and Catholic Princes disagreeing bend
their Forces against themselves, and (which is a Judgment that God threatened
heretofore against our Enemies, and them that rise up against us) they devour
one another, and are made drunk with their own Blood, as it were with new wine.
Whilst in time past, we were silently bewayling these things with our self, it
seemed good to him, who works things great and incomprehensible without number,
to call us, unwilling and trembling, to the Government of the Church; and to lay
this immense burden upon us, enough to make the strongest shoulders to shrink.
What our sorrow has been, we have testified by those public prayers, which we
enjoined in all parts, as soon as we were advanced to the Supremacy; as also
by those Letters which we sent to our most dear Sons, not only to the
Illustrious Ferdinand of Hungary and Bohemia King, and Roman Emperor Elect, but
also to the 2 Kings, and which with grief of heart we wrote a second time,
when we perceived our most deadly Enemy designing ruin and destruction to all
Europe, by distressing the most renowned Republic, to the end that we might
turn them from mutual discords, against so dangerous an Adversary; and now
also we send again, admonishing them, that whilst their Armies are at a stand,
during this winter season, they would use their utmost endeavor to settle
Peace. Let all these things bear witness for us, that seeing there remains no
hope to mittigate so great and sore evils, save only in common concord, it is
the main care that takes up our Mind night and day, to insinuate it into the
hearts and affections of all men. But because this is not to be effected by
humane strength and earthly wisdom, but ought to be expected from him as his
gift, upon whom rests the discipline of our Peace, who takes away the Spirit of
Princes, and rebukes the Sea, and it is Still; therefore do you (Venerable
Brethren, and Beloved Sons) strive as much as in you lies, not only by your
endeavor, study, Counsel, duties, and Authority, but also rent your hearts in
prayer, in tears, in fastings, and Alms deeds, take ye the Censor of Incense,
that is, the prayer of the Saints; and stand ye in the gap betwixt the Fire,
and the people that are ready to be consumed. You who are set to be watchmen
upon the walls of Jerusalem, cry aloud night and day, and be ye the Appeasers
of divine wrath and vengeance. Empty out the Cup of Fury and destruction, the
Cup of anguish and of tribulation without mixture, with which we have been
drunken. We for our part, to whom Christ thought not his sheep safely
committed, till we were again and the third time admonished in Peter touching
the greatness of his Love, to whom alone it is given to enter the Sanctuary,
and to present the prayers of the people to God before the Altar, conceive it
our duty with all diligence to labor, that the Lord may not be angry, and say,
I sought a man to make up the Breach, and to plead with me for the earth, that
I might not destroy it, and I found him not, therefore have I powered out mine
indignation upon them. For this is the property of divine vengeance, that he
who is the most high, is then most easy to be entreated, and returns to
gentleness and mercy, that is, to his own nature, when he draws the sword
with his mighty Arm and strong hand, to the end that he may strike. Let your
Feet be the Feet of those that bring the glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace,
that the Bows and Arrows may be broken in pieces, and that God may command the
winds, and cause Peace and Tranquillity; which by your assistance especially we
desire to obtain, and do most affectionately confer upon you our Apostolical
Benediction.

Given at Rome, in St. Mary the Greater, under the seal-ring of the Fisher, the
20 of September, 1655. In the first year of our Popedom. NATALIS RONDININVS.

A Letter concerning the manner of the Queen of Swedens renouncing her
Religion, and embracing the Popish, written by an eyewitness,
at Inspruck in Tiroll, October 26. 1655.
I Shall acquaint you with the manner of the entrance of the Queen of Sweden
into this City. The Archduke of Tirol having many months since been advertised
of the Queens intention, to pass through this City, resolved to give her an
extraordinary noble entertainment. To this end he sent Letters to all the
Gentry and Nobility in this Country, and to his Friends in the parts adjacent,
to wait upon him in their bravery at his Court on Saturday last. In the evening
the Archduke having intelligence that the Queen would lodge within 9 mile of
this City, took Post with his brother the Archbishop, and a dozen Gentlemen,
and only kissed her hands, bidding her welcome into his Dominions, and returned
back hither the same night. The next day, being Sunday, about 4 in the
afternoon, 12 of the Archdukes Trumpetters, and most of the aforesaid Nobility
and Gentry rode before him, the Archdutchess, which is the Duke of Florence his
Sister, being carried after him in a rich Sedan, the rest of the Gentry about
and behind her; then followed his Guard on Horsback, being 50 Firelocks, his
ordirnary Guard with Halberts standing on each side of the way: and in this
equipage he met the Queen about a mile from the City; about 20 yeards before he
came at her he light off his horse, and she out of her Sedan, and saluted one
another; and so in the former manner, with Trumpets, Drums, and other loud
Music very fine, she entered the City.

The next day I saw her at dinner only with the Archduke, his Lady, and
Brother, which was very magnificent: I made account to have seen her at supper,
but she supped privately; yet being at the Court, I was told, That the Queen
the next day would make open profession of the Catholic Faith in the
Franciscans or Archdukes Chapel, which not only I, but all her Protestant
Servants much admired at, and would not believe; but it proved true: For on the
Wednesday between a 11 and 12 of clock, she was led to the aforesaid Church by
the Archduke, attended by the company aforesaid, and seated upon a Canopy on
the left hand before the High Alter; below her, a little toward her right hand,
was the Archduke, and his Lady, and Brother; and over against them the Spanish
Ambassador in a Chair by himself; all the Quire being hung with Crimson
Velvet, and the ground covered with red Serge: Then Mr. Holstenius, who was
sent as the Popes Nuntio, stood at the right side of the Altar, and said, That
Pope Alexander the VII, having understood that Christina Queen of Sweden, being
enlightened by the Holy Ghost, had intent to put her self into the bosom of the
Church, had sent his Letters to testify his Approbation of her desires, and to
receive her with his Apostolical Benediction, therefore he was there to know,
whether it were true or not; upon which she made answer, that it was so. Then
he gave the Popes Letter to a Priest that stood by, who red it aloud to the
effect abovesaid; the Letter being read, Mr. Holstenius desired that in
Testimony of the truth, she would make Profession of the said Catholic
Apostolic, and Roman Faith, and swear to keep it upon the Holy Evangelists,
before the Archduke and the Spanish Ambassodor, which she did, and kissed the
Book. Then was a Chair for Holstenius to sit in, and a Cushion laid at his
Feet, upon which the Queen kneeled, and he making the sign of the Cross over
her head, and embracing her shoulders, said, That he did receive her into the
Catholic Church, and by virtue of Order from the Holy Father, Pope Alexander
the VII, and from power given by Christ, whose Vicar he was, he did absolve her
from all her sins that she had committed, In the Name of the Father, etc. Then
were certain short Prayers said (or rather sung) in Latin for her; after
which, High Mass was sung, and then a Priest made a Sermon in Dutch, his Text
was out of the Psalms. Hear O my Daughter, incline also thine ear, forget also
thy people and thy Fathers house; so shall the King have pleasure in thy
Beauty. Then was Te Deum sung with most excellene Voices; and fifty pieces of
Ordnance discharged, and so she returned home as she came.

portrait of Christina, Queen of Sweden (?)
The Profession of Faith of Christina Queen of Swedland, as it was publicly
Sworn unto at Inspruck.
Sect. 1. I Do firmly admit and embrace Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
Traditions, and the other Observances and Constitutions of the Church. Also I
admit the holy Scriptures according to that sense which our holy Mother the
Church, to whom it belongs to judge of the true sense and interpretation of
holy Scriptures, has held, and does hold: neither will I ever take and
interpret it but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

Sect. 2. I do profess also that there be truly and properly seven Sacraments
of the new Law instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary to the
salvation of mankind, though all be not necessary for every man; that is to
say, Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme unction, Order, and
Matrimony; and that they confer grace: and of these Baptism, Confirmation and
Order cannot be reiterated without Sacrilege: Also the received and approved
Rites of the Catholic Church used in the solemn administration of all the
aforesaid Sacraments, I receive and admit.

Sect. 3. All and every the things which are defined and declared in the holy
Council of Trent concerning Original sin and Justification I embrace.

Sect. 4. I profess also that in the Mass there is offered unto God a true,
proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead: and that in the most
holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is truly, really, and substantially, the
Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and there is made a conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the
Body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the Blood, which conversion
the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation: I confess also that under
either sole species, all and whole Christ, and a true Sacrament is received.

Sect. 5. I do hold there is a Purgatory, and that Souls therein detained, are
helped by the suffrages of the faithful. Also, that the Saints reigning with
Christ, are to be worshipped and prayed unto, and that they offer prayers to
God for us, and that their Relics are to be worshipped: I most firmly avouch
that the Images of Christ, and of the mother of God, always a Virgin, and of
other Saints also, are to be had and retained, and that due honor and
veneration is to be given them. Also I affirm that the power of Indulgences was
left by Christ in the Church, and that the use of them is most wholesome to
Christian people.

Sect. 6. I acknowledge the holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church Mother
and Mistress of all Churches, and I promise and swear true obedience to the
Bishop of Rome, successor to St. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ: I do likewise undoubtedly receive and profess all other things
delivered, defined, and declared by the sacred Canons and Councills
oecumenicall and particularly by the holy Council of Trent; and withal I do
condemn, reject, and anathematize all things that are contrary thereunto, and
all Heresies whatsoever the Church has condemned, rejected, and anathematized.
And I do promise, vow and swear, that I will be careful to hold and confess
constantly (with Gods help) this true Catholic Faith, out of which no man can
be saved, which at this present I do willingly profess and truly holds; and
also as far as I am able, that by those who are under me, or over whom by
reason of my charge, I shall have care it be held taught and professed.

CHRISTINA R.

A brief Description of the Island of Jamaica, and a Relation of possessing the
Town of St. Jago de la Viga, with the Routing the Enemies from their Forts and
Ordnance, and taking the said Island, May 10. 1655.
COncerning Jamica or Jamaica, we find these following passages heretofore. In
the Navigation of Christopher Columbus, cap. 98. Tandem Admirans devenit ad
Insulam, quam Insulam Jamicam, etc. The Admiral at length came to an Island
which the Inhabitants call Jamica: This Island is as fruitful as any place
near the Sea coasts or within the Land.

In Peter Martyr, dec. 3. l. 9. Est his Australior Jamaica, etc. Jamaica is a
little more Southerly then Cuba and Hispaniola; it is a pleasant and fruitful
Island, most happy in the fertility of soil, and it has but one Mountain, and
is most fit for sowing.

And Dec. 1. l. 3. Hanc insulam Siciliam longiorem latioremque praedicat: It is
said that this Island is greater then Sicily.

Bartholomeo de las Casas, who was a Bishop in those parts, in his Book of the
Cruelties of the Spaniards in the Indies, writes thus: The Spaniards went over
the Isle of St. John and to the end of Jamaica, which were like Gardens for
Bees, 1509. setting before them the same end which they had in Hispaniola, and
committing the like robberies and crimes, adjoining thereunto many great and
notable cruelties, killing, map of the Caribbean, including Cuba, Jamaica,
Hispaniola, and many smaller islands, and some of the surrounding coastlines
(tip of Florida, north coast of South America, and a bit of the east coast of
southernmost North America) burning, rosting, and casting them to the dogs;
furthermore, afterward oppressing and vexing them in their Mineralls and
travel, unto the rooting out of those poor innocents, which were in these two
Isles by supputation 600000 souls, yea I believe they were then a million.

And Dr. Heylin in his Description of the American Islands, says of Jamaica,
It is in length from East to West about 50 leagues, and in breadth 20, the
whole compass estimated at 150. The middle of it under the 18 Degree of
Northern latitude: of a rich Soil, abundantly provided of all things necessary,
well stocked with cattle, and no less plentifully stored with most sorts of
fruits, which either industry or nature have supplied it with; great store of
Cottonwool, and such a bundance of Jaccu (a Root whereof the Savages once made
their bread) that it was deemed the Granary of the neighboring Islands.

The Island Jamaica belongs properly to the Duke of Veragus, who is lineally
descended from Christopher Columbus, the Discoverer of the Indies, and not to
the Duke of Medina, as was by some conceived.

The chief Ports of this Island are (1) Caguaya which serves to the Town of St.
Jago de la Vega, or St. James of the Plains, from whence it is about two
leagues distant.

The second Port of any note on that Southside, is Esquyvel, which is about
three leagues distant from the former toward the West, which though the
Channel be, as of the former, difficult to find, is within a commodious Haven;
and in respect of an Arm of the Sea which affords the Commodity of building of
Shipping; within it is of singular commodity to the Island. This Arm of the Sea
extends it self a full league within the Land, where it admits into it a small
fresh Brook, called Ell Rio de la Puente, which arising within two leagues of
the Town of St. Jago, and passing pleasantly through the Savanas, is received
by the Arm before described, which is called Guavayera. The Land between the
Town of St. Jago and this place, is for the most part open, and Savana land,
well stored with cattle and horses. From thence to Maccario, which is about
six leagues distant the Coast, is good and fit for Anchoring; but affords no
Port or Harbor nearer then Panda Botellio, which is a round Mountain, about a
league to the West of which, a River called Mantinesse discharges it self into
the Sea: This River arises about a league, or a league and half with the land,
and abounds in fish, and is well stored with cattle, upon the neighboring
Hatos, and Savanas of Tama and Guatibacoa. Thence passing along this Coast, the
next place of goodness of Land, or convenience of Anchoring. And about eight
leagues distant from Peccaria, is Punta de la Gostus, which is in the Hato of
Perada, which is one of the best and largest pieces of Savana of the whole
Island, it being four leagues in length and more.

From Pereda to Elconde, another little Port is five leagues, between which two
places falls into the Sea the great River Caphana, which arising in the
Mountains, passes through Savanas of the same name, well stored with cattle;
and leaving the open land about a league from the Sea, runs through woody and
manguey, or mountainous grounds, and is from the very Savana, of depth
sufficient for most ordinary Ships, but narrow, as being over grown by the
Mangroves, for want of use or clearing; yet contains in the narrowest about
sixty or seventy foot of breadth. At the mouth this River receives into it
certain large Brooks of fresh water; but of no other consideration then for
fishing only, whereof it affords a plentiful commodity. The mouth of this
River, by reason of the smalnesse of its fall, is barred with the sands, so
that unless at some times of considerable floods, it has not depth above four
foot upon the Bar, but without is Anchoring good enough in the open Road, but
harbor none at all.

Next about two leagues distant, is El Eaido, which is a Hata, having some
small Savanas, but very great plenty of cattle abiding in the Woods, which the
Spaniards call Ganadus Siniarones, or wild cattle, as being not marked, nor
belonging to any certain proprietor, other then the chief Lord and owner of
the Hato. In this Hato is a small Port called Puto del Conde, of no great value
or consideration.

Thence to Punto Negrillio, is no other Port or Harbor whatsoever; but passing
by land, is a Hato called Cabnico, large and well stored with cattle, both
wild and tame.

Thence next is called the Savana of the Sea, which reaches to the Cape
Negrillio. From the Puerto de Cuguaya toward the East, is the Hato de Loguany,
which is at the East side of the Port it self, and presents to the Harbor a
large and well stored Savana, with an Arm of the Port extending to it,
commodious for the building of Shipping, there being store both of Cedars and
other sort of Timber convenient for that purpose.

Next Eastward Land to this of Lyguany, is Lezania, a narrow tract of plantable
land between the sea and the mountain, containing some small Savanas, but no
habitation, nor any Cattle but wild, and is about two leagues in length.

Then is the Hato Ayala full of tame cattle, and has much commodity of
planting, or erecting of Sugar Engenios of water, by reason of two convenient
Rivers which it has running through, is fit for that purpose; but is
dangerously open to the incursion of Pirates, who there have too much commodity
of landing in two small Cores or Bighs of Land, the one of which is called los
Anaones, toward the West of this Hato, and to the East la Cruz del Padre.

Several sorts of Wood in this Country.
1. Grandillio, of a reddish black color, and heavy as Ebony, used much in
these parts for bedsteads. 2. Cedar, the best in all the Indies, useful for
all purposes, as Oak in England. 3. Cawobena, a Tree of six fathom about, a
fine red, excellent good for beds, tables, or buildings. 4. Cittano, of a
yellow color, a fathom about, excellent for dying, called in English, yellow
Fustick. 5. Brasil, and Brasiletto, excellent for dying, sold in these parts at
one pound seventeen shillings and six pence per hundred. 6. Guaicum, good for
bedsteads, bowls and chairs, and Physicians uses, three foot over, sold at
Carthagena for two shillings per pound.
The Country affords several Fruits.
1. Pepper smelling like Cloves, the North side of the Island is full of it,
wild, good for Chocolatto, sold here at six pence per pound. The Leaf
distilled, makes excellent good water, much esteemed by the Spaniards at
Carthagena. 2. Pyne, the best that ever was eat, in season almost all the year
long, sold at six pence per piece. 3. Nispero, esteemed the best fruit in the
Indies by the Spaniards, in season in July and August. 4. Mamesappole, tastes
like Marmalet, in season part of June, July, and August. 5. Avocatas, a
wholesome pleasant fruit; in season in August, sold for eight pence per piece.
6. Cocao, in great plenty, of which they make Chocolatto, sold ordinarily for
three shillings per bushel. 7. Catrao, a very sweet luscious fruit, green of
color, and much like a Mulberry in shape and bigness. 8. Limes, Limons,
Oranges, Guavers, Bonana's, Plantan's, Papaas, Melons of all sorts, and very
good Cucumbers, Gourds, etc. and the largest Potatoes ever eye beheld. 9.
Tobacco, which at Carthagena bears the best Rate there. 10. Indico.
The substance of diverse Letters from the Generals and Commissioners in the
West Indies to his Highness, to the effect following.
Aug: 8. 1655.
WE left Barbados the last of March, and came to St. Christophers, where we
found a Regiment formed, which we received into our company, not staying to
anchor. Thence passing forward, we came in sight of Sancta Luz, Porto Rico, and
some other Islands, and on there 3 of April arived before Sancto Domingo, part of
our forces landing within six miles of the Town, without any opposition, but
the main of the Army landed near 40 miles beyond it, contrary to what was
intended; which fell out in respect of the absence of the Pilot, who being sent
out to discover, returned not in time. This occasioned a very long march for
the Army through Woods and narrow Lanes, and all without any guide; which with
the heat of the weather, and want of water, put the Army into some weakness
and distemper, and made them very unfit for service. The Soldiers likewise
stragled from their Colors to gather Oranges, Lemmons, Pines, etc. the
extraordinary eating whereof put many of them into the Flux, and Fevers. In
this condition we advanced near the Town, where our forelorn, being surprised
by an Ambush, and their Leader Adjurant General Jackson running away, were put
to a retreat by 300 men; and there Major General Heans keeping his ground, was
slain. This Ambuscado was afterward routed by some of the Seamen, who came up
to relieve the Forlorn. Iackson was cashiered for cowardice, and had his sword
broken over his head.

After this, the Army retreating for some refreshment, it was thought most
convenient by the Officers, and most for the service, to leave that Island (the
Army being weakened by their aforesaid long march) and to attempt the Island of
Iamaica: And having shipped the Army, we arived there upon the 10 of May, and
took the Town of St. Iago de la Vega, having beat the Enemy from their Forts
and Ordnance, who were got together in a body, consisting of about 3000 men.
And from this place nothing did divert our first atrempt, but that it had not a
name in the world; for we find the Country equal, if not superior to
Hispaniola, and in four miles march here, we saw more Cattle and Plantations
then in forty in Hispaniola, and a better air; and the situation thereof
much more advantageous to all purposes. We are now getting horses, whereof
there are great abundance in the Island to make Troopers and Dragoons, to
pursue the Enemy, who are fled unto the Woods, and endeavor to get away into
the Island of Cuba, twenty leagues from this; for prevention whereof we have
laid some Frigots in the way. The Fleet got safe into the Harbor, which is
indeed a very safe and gallant one for riding in all winds. We find here Ebony
in great plenty, store of large Cattle, and Timber in abundance for shipping,
and some ships on the stocks in building; the Ground very Fertile, and full of
brave Plains and Rivers. There is likewise great store of Saltpeter, which
some men among us, who are Powder men of London, do affirm, may be had as
good and as plentifully, as in any place in the world, and in three years time
they will undertake to serve England with it, woods and Rivers for carriage
being easy here, with choice places to erect Mills. We want only workme, some
of our men are already beginning to Plant.

We lost in Hispaniola between two and three hundred men by sickness and
Skirmishes with the enemy, and killed in the Woods by the Cow-killers, as they
were straggling to gather fruit. The Town where our Army is, is a well built
Town of Stone and Brick, above two miles about, and is able to Quarter 20000
men.

September: 23. 1655.
Came the following Intelligence touching Gen: Pen, Gen: Venables, and our
affairs in the West Indies.
General Pen arrived at the Spit-head near Portsmouth from Jamaica, with part
of the Fleet, the 31 of the last month, having left a very good Squadron behind
him in those Seas, and being come as far as the Havana in the Island of Cuba,
the Ship Paragon fell on fire by negligence, and so perished in the Sea,
blowing up many of the men that were in her. The said Gen: Pen is not yet come
to London, but has sent hither Letters which he brought from Gen: Venables.
There are 20 sail returned, and 13 left behind: And that notwithstanding some
discouragements at first in that part of the world, yet now our men are well
accommodated, and doubt not but to bring good advantage to the Commonwealth by
their Expedition.

The Letter from Gen: Venables to a person of Honor.
Honorable Sir,
SInce my last of the sixth of this instant, we have taken some prisoners of
the enemy; the rest continue in the Mountains, wanting houses, bread, etc.
willing to submit, if not overawed by a few amongst them, yet we hope to make
them good Subjects, most of them being Portugais, and shall endeavor to gain
them by our civility. That which we most want for the present, is bread and
Bandry, there being not much Casava in the Country, and of that the enemies
steal a share, but we shall be planting more of that, and hope our Friends will
give us a supply as soon as may be. There be some considerations and expedients
which will be sent into England, not yet fully resolved upon; and I am not able
now to enlarge, having quite spent my spirits; but this Island Jamaica, for
Commodities, Air, etc. and in situation for other purposes, exceeds
Hispaniola, in the judgment of,

Sir, your very obliged Servant, ROB: VENABLES.

Here follows another Letter from the Fleet in Jamaica Harbor, concerning
our Affairs in the West Indies.
June 25. 1656.
IN the last to you dated the 12 of March, by the conveyance of the Grantham,
we intimated the departure of some Frigates for the Maine, which since returned
with Intelligence only of 7 ships in the Harbor of Carthagene. A few days
after, A Council of War was called, and it was thought expedient to move upon
some design for the advantage of the Commonwealth rather than lie still in
Harbor. In order to which, eleven of the best sailing Frigates in the Fleet
were chosen out for the effecting of our purpose (the Admiral himself to
command in chief.) The Port we were bound for, proved to be Rio de la Hache, a
Town about 30 Leagues to the Eastward of Sancta Martha. We landed 500 Seamen a
mile Westward of the Town, where they saluted us from the Fort standing to the
Eastward with three great shot, but did no execution; whereupon we marched
boldly forward, and by the advantage of some houses near adjoining, we got
thither, and played our small shot into the Fort so fast, that they soon
deserted their great Gunns, and begged for Quarter, which was presently
granted; the Fort was 19 foot high, with a Brest-work on the top, and 4 brass
Guns mounted: The Inhabitants had sent away all their Goods by their Negroes
upon their first espiall of us, which was 5 hours before we landed. We stayed
there 3 or 4 days, and sent several Parties up into the Country in quest of
the Enemy, but took none save one Friar, and some Spanish women and Negroes. In
the mean time, several came down with Flags of Truce, and gave us notice, that
the Governor of the place would come and compound for them* but they failed at
the prefixed time; wherefore Orders were given for carrying aboard the Spanish
prisoners (women excepted) and the Town to be immediately fired, and our Forces
drawn off.

After all matters were dispatched here, we set sail to Sancta Martha to review
our former spoils. We drew out the same party, and went on shore, no Enemy
opposing, most persons of Quality being fled to Carthagene for security. We
soon left the place after we had watered; and espying a Sail at Sea, in few
hours we came up with her, and found her to be a Spanish Prize laden with Oil,
Olives, Wine, Stuffs, to a good value.

Then we moved toward Carthagene to show our selves; we lay there one day, and
then 8 of the Fleet departed for Jamaica, leaving three of us behind in our
former station, 6 leagues Eastward of Carthagene. In their way they chased
another Ship laden with Cocoes, and took her, and have sent the Fruit to the
Lord Protector: it is good to make Chocolette, which is a great Drink in these
Countries.

We that were behind after the rest of the Fleet, two Evenings together near
Sunset, made another Sail; but night approaching, we lost sight of her, and
the next day saw her at Anchor under Carthagene wall. We attempted to bring our
Ships near her; but they discovering our intents, haled her ashore, cutting
their Cables; so that we being Ships of great burden, had not depth of Water,
besides the danger of the Forts. We gave the Town a strong Alarm, coming within
shot, but they fired no Guns. So we left our chase, and with the advantage of a
Westerly wind (which is not usual here) we got up as high as Sancta Martha,
and so stood over for Jamaica, leaving the other two Ships behind, where they
chased another Vessel into the shore, which suffered shipwreck there, laden
with Tobacco, Hides, and Cocoes.

Several Gentlemen from the Governor of Mevis have been here to view this
Island of Jamaica, in order to their Transplanting, who approve of the Ground
very well, and are upon their Return with three of the States ships, to fetch
the Governor, and their Families, and Estates.

A true Narrative of the late Success which it has pleased God to give to
some part of the Fleet of this Commonwealth, upon the Spanish Coast, against
the King of Spains West India Fleet, in its return to Cadiz; being the
substance of several Letters writ and sent by the Generals of the Fleet.
October: 4. 1656.
battle between sailing ships
The Letter of Capt: Stayner, Commander of the Speaker Frigate, to Genesis Blake,
and Genesis Montagu.
Right Honorable,
AFter my service presented to your Honors, these are to acquaint you, that
upon the 8 instant at night it blew hard Westerly, by means whereof we with our
Squadrons (only the Providence was gone to water) weighed out of the Bay of
Cadiz and plied to Sea; in the evening we espied eight Sail some five or six
leagues to the Westwards of Cadiz, we using the best means we could to meet
with them the next day, which we did. It being little wind at N.E it was nine
of the clock before we came up with them, but having a fresh gale in the night,
all but we and the Bridgwater were to the Leeward, and could not come to us.
But when we came to the Fleet, it proved to be the Spanish Fleet come from the
West Indies, which were four of the King of Spains, three Merchantmen, and one
Prize which they had taken by way of the Western Islands being a Portugal,
which were eight in all: We engaged the Fleet, but being within four leagues of
Cadiz, could not stay for our ships, but we, the Bridgwater, and Plymouth,
engaged them, and had a sharp dispute some of us; but the Admiral being the
smallest ship, we slighted her, for we conceived there was some Policy used
in the Flag, by which means their Admiral and the Portugal Prize got into
Cadiz; the Vice Admiral and one more we sunk, and burnt two: We took one, the
Captain of her, which we have on board, says she has in her two Millions of
silver; the Vice Admiral had as much, I do believe. The Plymouth chased
another, who ran ashore between S. Peter's and Cape Degar, but it seems by the
prisoners information she had no silver in her; the ship we took was as good as
all the Fleet besides: the other that Captain Harman has taken is very rich,
but little silver in her. Both the Prize and our ship are sorely wounded both
in Mast and Hull. The Commanders advise me not to take the silver out of her, I
do intend to take further advice about it; there is no News, only the Fleet I
believe will follow us. The Galleys came out because of the riches and
disability of our ships: we will come toward you except your Honors send
further orders, for we are in no capacity to stay here. I shall leave two or
three of the best sailing ships off the Cape, and I and the rest will come to
Lisbone, where I hope to find your Honors. There is the Nova Spaniola Fleet at
the Havana, but when they will come home is not known. This is all, only there
is loss of men in some ships, the number I know not. I am,

Your Honors most humble Servant, Ric: Stayner.
From on board the Speaker, in haste, Sept. 9. 1656.
The Letter of Genesis Blake, and Genesis Montagu to his Highness the Lord Protector.
May it please your Highness.
BEing out of water, and our Victuals almost spent, and having not heard from
your Highness, since the receipt of your commands by the Griffin, we found it
requisite to sail for this place, with the greatest part of the Fleet, as well
to recruite our wants, as to be in a way of further order. Accordingly we
arrived here on the 11 instant, and the 17 following in the night received the
enclosed Account from the Commander of the Squadron left before Cadiz, which we
humbly present to your Highness; hoping we shall be shortly able to inform
your Highness more particularly thereof, having sent out what Frigots we
could, as well to reinforce the Guard before Cadiz, as to secure the Prizes
hither to us. In the mean time, the Providence that have come to our knowledge
concurring to bring these ships into our hands, do very much convince us it is
of God in more than an ordinary manner; and we trust it will by the same good
hand be sanctified unto us. We humbly take leave and remain,

Your Highness very faithful and obedient Servants, Robert Blake. E: Mountagu.
From on board the Naseby in the Bay of Wyers, Sept. 19. 1656.
An Account touching the great Destruction befallen the Spaniards in the
West Indies.
THE eldest son of the Marquess of Badex (who was taken prisoner by our Fleet
in the Spanish Vice Admiral, as they came with their Silver from the
West Indies) being examined, says upon his Examination: That above five months
since, presently after his Father and Family departed out of Lima in Peru,
there happened a fearful Earthquake and most miraculous Rain of fire from
heaven in Peru, insomnch that the whole City of Lima is swallowed up and
destroyed, and also the City of Calao; in which places there perished above
twelve thousand Spaniards, and (to see the great distinguishing hand of God)
not above one hundred Indians with them. In that City also, viz. Lima, the King
of Spain has lost by the Earthquake, one hundred Millions of Silver ready
wrought up. Moreover, the famous Mines and Mountains of Potosi (out of which
they dug their Silver) are destroyed in a wonderful manner, so that there
is no more of Hills to be seen, but all plain, nor is there any further
possibility of having Gold or Silver in Peru. Some of the Spanish themselves
do acknowledge, that this desolation and destruction has befaln the Spaniards
for the Cruelties by them acted upon the poor Indians, they not sparing even
those Indians among them who professed the Roman Catholic Religion, insomuch
that the miserable Creatures being beyond measure oppressed, and grieved with
their sufferings, cried to Heaven for vengeance against them. Never was there a
more terible visible hand of God in judgment upon any people since the time of
Sodom and Gomorrah. Great is the Lord, mavelous are his doings, and to be
had in reverence of all the Nations round about.

Here follows the Narrative of the great Success given by God to a few of
our Ships against the King of Spains West India Fleet.
SEven Ships in the service of the King of Spain (being four of the Kings own
Fleet, and three Merchants) coming from the West Indies, most of them richly
laden with Gold Silver, Pearl, and other Commodities, viz. The Admiral, Don
Marquess Del porto General; The vice Admiral a Gallion, Don Francisco De
Esquevel Commander; The Rere Admiral a Gallion, Don Francisco Del Hayo
Commander, a ship commanded by Captain John Rhodrignes Caldron, a ship
Commanded by Capt. John De la Tour, another small man of war, and a Vessel of
Advice from the Vice Roy of Mexico to Spain: They did in fifty eight days
proceed so far as within a few leagues of Cadiz, without making Land or
touching at any place during the voyage, having in their way betwixt the
Western Islands and Massagam in Afric, seized upon a small Portugal as
Prize, by whom receiving a false information, that the Spaniards had beaten the
English Fleet from off their Coast, a month before; they sailed with much
confidence toward Cadiz as not expecting opposition.

The greatest part of the English Fleet, were at this time gone to the Bay of
Wyers in Portugal (where they arrived the eleventh of September last) to
recruit their wants, and to be in a way of further Orders, the Generals
leaving behind them a Squadron of six or seven Ships (to have an eye upon
Cadiz) under the command of Captain Stayner, Captain of the Speaker Frigot:
which Squadron on the eight of September last, plying to Sea, being forced
thither by a strong Westerly wind, did at the evening of the day Discover the
said Spanish Fleet, five or six Leagues to the Westward of Cadiz; And the
approach of the night denying opportunity of present action, they endeavored
to fall in with them the next day, which accordingly they did about nine of the
clock in the morning (they seeming to the Spaniards to be Fisher-boats) But
there being a fresh Gale that night, all but three of the Squadron were to the
Leeward, and could not presently come in, and finding it to be the Spanish
Fleet come from the Indies, the Speaker, the Bridgwater, and the Plymouth
Frigots (not thinking it advisable to stay for the rest of the squadron, they
being within 4 leagues of Cadiz) engaged with the Fleet, and a sharp dispute
there was betwixt them: The Admiral being a small ship, and it being conceived
that the placing of the Flag upon her, might be in policy to divert them from
attending the Ships of better value, they slighted her, and suffered her (with
the Portugal Prize) to go into Cadiz Bay, where (its said) she was run on
shore and sunk, being reported to have in her Six hundred thousand pieces of
Eight: The Vice Admiral (being reported to have Six hundred thousand pieces of
Eight; besides in Jewels and Plate, upon the account of the Marquess of
Badex, to the value of five hundred thousand pieces of Eight) having fought six
hours, was taken by our Ships, and after set on fire by the Spaniards
themselves, and so burnt down, and snnk, in her were destroyed one hundred and
ten men, the principallest of whom was the Marquess of Badex, who with his
wife and eldest daughter were burnt: The Rear Admiral was taken and remains in
our possession: The ship under the command of Captain John Rodrignes Caldron,
which was said to have in her Sugar, Tobacco and Plate, to the value of Six
hundred thousand pieces of Eight, was taken, and in the bringing off was by an
accidental fire burnt and sunk: The ship under the command of De La Tour,
twelve thousand West India Hides, and some quantities of Sugar, is taken and in
our possession: The small Man of War (having in her the like lading with the
last mentioned) and the Advice Vessel being of no force or lading, are said to
escape into Gibralter.

The value of what is taken and possessed, is not justly known; but by the
Calculation of the Spaniards there are taken and lost about Nine Millions of
pieces of Eight: besides the said Ships and their Lading, there are many
prisoners taken, three hundred and fifty being found in the Rear Admiral, and
about Ninety saved out of the Vice Admiral, amongst whom there are the Eldest
Son, a younger son, and two daughters of the said Marquess of Badex, as also
Don Diego De Villa Alva, the Governor of the Havana, and several others of
quality, and Merchants.

And all this was done without the loss of one Vessel of the English, so it
pleased the wisdom of God, to choose to effect so great a work, by a little
force: As also by suffering the Enemy to be foolishly ensnared into a
presumptious confidence, by an Enemies information, on which they so relied,
that they neglected the haling of a Vessel which came from St. Lucaz, and
might have informed them of the truth.

By this Narrative we see that the Lord whose right hand has been heret ofore
so glorious in power, for the help of his poor people in these Nations, in the
time of their saddest dangers, when their Enemies at home expected to have
satisfied their Lusts in their ruin, has again appeared on their behalf in
this day of their need by blowing with his winds, and causing the Sea to cover
their Enemies abroad, so that they have sunk as Lead into the mighty waters,
which gives abundant cause to say, who is like unto the Lord, for he has
triumphed Gloriously; and as the Eminency of this Mercy, in weakening the common
Enemy of Religion (the King of Spain, with whom this Commonwealth is engaged in
a just and necessary war) and in encouraging and strengthening the hands of his
Servants, in a vigorous prosecution of that engagement, is much heightened by
the freenes of (...)


