AN ANSWER TO Doctor Good (So called) His DIALOGVE against those called QUAKERS
Wherein he has Forged the QUAKER, AND Confuted HIMSELF. Which Dialogue of Tho.
Good's is in his Book, Entitled Firmianus and Dubitantius, or certain
Dialogues concerning Atheism, Infidelity, Popery, and other Heresies and
Schisms, which trouble the Peace of the Church, etc.

By Edward Bourn.

The Bows of the Mighty Men are broken, and they that stumbled are girt with
Strength,

1 Samuel 2. 4. Printed in the Year 1675.

AN ANSWER TO Doctor Good (So called) etc.
Tho. Good,
FRiend, Thou have dialogued against the Quakers, to render them odious to the
World; but our Innocence who are called Quakers, will clear us of the Reproach
thou castest upon us, who would insinuate, that to become a Quaker is the
ready Way to become a Papist: For first, say thou in the Beginning of thy
Dialogue against the Quakers with Firmianus, say thou, You have informed me
in our last Discourse, page 90. of thy Book.
that being sometime a Quaker, you had a ready Way open to become a Papist.

Answ. What Ground or Reason gives Firmianus to say so? We find no Reason
Firmianus gives for so saying; a poor and silly Business may we say it is, to
say, To be a Quaker is a ready Way to become a Papist, and to show no better
Reason for thy so saying, then thou have done in thy Dialogue; surely the
Papists and thee are very wide in your Opinions herein; surely, we believe, if
it should come to the Trial between thee and us, it will be found that thou art
more one with the Papists in thy Practice, then the Quakers; and therefore it
will appear, that the Way thou art in is a more ready Way to become a Papist,
then to be in the Way those called Quakers are in.

Further, in thy Dubitantius, where thou answerest thy Firmianus, thou have
many scornful and disdainful Expressions, not becoming a grave Man, or a Man of
Gravity, which some have taken thee to be; and so show thy self to be
sitting in the Seat of the Scorner; But blessed is the Man that walks not in
the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stands in the Way of Sinners, nor sits in
the Seat of the Scornful, etc. See Psalm. 1. 1. etc. And if thou would be
blessed, thou must come forth out of the Seat of the Scorner, and fear the Lord
God, and not be as such who open their Mouths in Blasphemy against Heaven, and
them that dwell therein; I judge I need not mention thy scornful Expressions,
nor say more in Answer to them in this Place, because I know, that People who
fear God, and are acquainted with our Principles, and know our Conversations,
will judge that thou have Dialogued thus against us without a just Cause, for
which I say, the Lord rebuke thee.

Further, says Firmianus, How could you be deceived by such painted
Sepulchers? What could you see more in them, then what was conspicuous in the
Scribes and Pharisees of old? Take it for and Infallible Rule, that whosoever
hold or practice any Thing which is contrary to the Law of Nature, good
Manners, express Scriptures, the Vsages of all sober and civil People in the
World, are so far from being True Christians, that they are not worthy the Name
of Men.

Answ. Here is a high Charge against us, which if Firmianus or Tho. Good could
prove, according to what he has charged upon us, then should we be much to
blame: But what if his Charge in every Particular be false herein? surely, then
it will follow, that Tho. Good does much deserve to be blamed for using his Pen
thus against the Innocent; and indeed I must tell Tho. Good, that he has
falsely accused us herein, for comparing us with such whom Christ compared unto
painted Sepulchers, he cannot make good his Charge against us therein, but
ought to take it home to himself, he being more like these, and more one with
them then we, whom Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, cried Woe against; for
whereas he charge us for holding and practicing Things contrary to the Law of
Nature, good Manners, express Scripture, the Usages of all sober and civil
People in the World, I say, these are false Accusations, and he himself by the
Scriptures may be proved guilty of all those Accusations he falsely charge
upon us; and therefore let T. G. in Time to come have a Care, and be wiser,
then to go about such a bad Work as this is, wherein he has grossly slandered,
and falsely accused the Innocent, and be humbled before the Lord, and repent of
the Evil he has committed herein; and for the Satisfaction of such as are
sober-minded, let them read Mat. 23. and see who it is that is contrary to
Christ Jesus, and Breakers of the Law of God, our Accuser or us, and who is
contrary to the Scriptures, and read John 5. 41, 42, 43, 44. etc. And let the
Witness of God in People, unto which we do commend our selves, judge between
our Accuser and us, for that will judge righteously, and not according to that
which is right in Appearance, but is indeed contrary to what it does appear to
be: And whereas thou speak of perusing Priest Danson's Book, Danson's Book
is answered, and all his Lies thrown back upon his Head, as thou may see in
the Answer, and thy Dialogue is rather a Forgery, which thou and it are stuffed
with Lies, which come from the Father of them, and not from God.

Thou say, That they affirm that there are not three Persons in the Trinity.

Answ. We desire thee to show us Chapter and Verse for these Words, and let us
see whether thou walk according to Scripture in these Words, and in these
Terms; and see whether thou have not presumed above what was written.

There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, and the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, these three are one; and this we own in Scripture Language,
according to John' s Doctrine, etc.

Thou say that we say, That Christ did not make Satisfaction for the Sins of
Men.

Answ. This is another lying Forgery; for by one Offering he has perfected
forever them that are sanctified; and we are not redeemed with corruptible
Things, but with the Blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb without Spot; and we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
Reconciliation for our Sins, and not for our Sins only, but for the Sins of the
whole World.

And thou say that we say, That Justification is not by Imputed
Righteousness, and good Works are the Cause of our Justification.

Answ. Here are more Lies again, and thou abusest Peoples Minds, and the Press
with them; for Christ Jesus is our Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption; God has made him so, and we are justified freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus; and therefore By the Works of
the Law there is no Flesh justified, Romans 3. 23. We are justified by Faith in
Christ Jesus, which the Work of Faith, which works by Love, is not denied by
the Apostle nor us, if thou denyest that, thy Faith is dead.

Further, thou say that we say, That a State of Perfection and Freedom from
Sin is attainable in this Life.

Answ. Do we err in holding that a State of Perfection and Freedom from Sin is
attainable in this Life? Did not God say to Abraham, I am Almighty God, walk
before me, and be thou perfect? Genesis 17. 1. And did not Christ say in his
Sermon in the Mount, Be you therefore Perfect as your Father which is in Heaven
is perfect? And art thou of that Faith and Belief, that God and Christ does
command us to do that which we cannot by his Help and Assistance do? It Is true,
we cannot keep the Commands of Christ of our selves, but by his Assistance we
are able to do the same, else why did the Apostle say, I can do all Things
through Christ that strengthens me? And did not the Saints know a Freedom from
Sin in this Life? Friend, I tell thee, if thou say, a Freedom from Sin is
not attainable in this Life, thou must deny the Scriptures of Truth, and give
the Apostle the Lie; for does not the Apostle say to the Romans, But now being
made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto
Holiness, and the End Everlasting Life, Romans 6. 22. And does not the Apostle
say concerning himself, For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has
made me free from the Law of Sin and Death? Therefore stop thy Mouth for Shame
from speaking of those Things which thou ought not, and thy Pen from so
writing concerning us; certainly, God will judge thee for thy Lies and Slanders
against us: Thou say, That our Positions are contrary to the sacred
Scriptures; but by this thy Evil Work it appears, that thou art contrary to
the Scriptures, and not we, who have manifested thy Ignorance of what the
Scriptures say, and have appeared contrary to what thy self have learned in thy
young Days, and since (for ought that I know to the contrary) have caused
others to learn, viz. That when thou came to Age, thou would, according to
what was promised and vowed in thy stead by thy Godfathers and Godmothers in
thy Baptism (so called) forsake the Devil and all his Works: And if thou have
not learned thus, not caused any thus to learn, I am sure that I, and many
more, were caused thus to learn in our youthful Days: I believe however, thou
ownest thy self a Member of that Church that teaches thus to say, though not
to do; and so thou may be a Sayer of the Word, but not a Doer of it; but now
thou art neither Sayer nor Doer, and so in that Estate can not be justified
of God; for as thou have doubtless read in the Scriptures, It is not the Sayers
of the Word that are justified, but the Doers of it: Now he that forsakes the
Devil and all his Works, he must cease from all Sin, and abstain from every
Appearance of Evil; for all Sin is of the Devil.

Again we say, say thou, That there is a Light in every Man sufficient to
guide him to Salvation.

Answ. Is it an Errorth us to hold, seeing John says (speaking of Christ) That
is the true Light which lights every Man that comes into the World? And has
not God given his Son, Christ Jesus for a Light to the Gentiles, that he might
be his Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth? And does not the Apostle say, For
God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ; and see John 14. 26. and 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Consider of
these Scriptures, and then tell us whether it be any Error to hold that there
is a Light in every Man sufficient to guide him unto Salvation, or to hold the
contrary, and so whether it is not thou that errst from Scripture, and the true
and right Way of the Lord, and not we.

Again say thou, We hold that the Scripture is not the Word of God, or a
standing Rule of Faith and Manners.

Answ. We own the Scriptures to be what they speak of themselves, according to
Luke's Preface, where he writes of the Gospel, etc. But the Word is God, if
John wrote the Truth, which we believe he did, as thou may see, John. 1. 1.
And I hope thou will not presume to say to the contrary; but we own the
Scriptures, that which Holy Men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, to
be the Words of God, and that which was the Saints Rule we own to be our Rule,
as the Scriptures testify thereof; see John 16. 13. etc. and Tit. 2. 11, 12.
But thou manifests thy self to be contrary to the Rule both of Scripture and
Spirit, that does by thy Neighbors and Countrymen, as thou would not be
done by.

Again thou say, That we hold that there is no Resurrection of the Dead.

Answ. We do own the Resurrection of the Dead according to the Scriptures, as
thou may see, 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
etc. And further see Ver. 29. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. etc. So I
say, we own the Resurrection of the Dead, according to the Scriptures; and if
thou hold'st it otherwise, it is thou that errest therein, and not we.

Again thou say, We hold there is no need of Ordinances, as Baptism and the
Lord's Supper.

Answ. We own that Baptism that is according to the Scriptures, but not that
which is contrary to them, which is according to the Traditions and Inventions
of Men; and the Supper of the Lord we own, according to the Scriptures, though
not such a Supper which some take before Dinner, and call it the Lord's Supper:
So be humbled before the Lord, and repent of the Wrong thou have done us herein.

Again, we hold, say thou, That it is Unlawful to take an Oath before a
Magistrate upon any Account whatsoever.

Answ. Is it an Error in us to keep the Commandment of Christ herein, who
says, Swear not at all; and the Commandment of the Apostle, who says, But
above all Things my Brethren swear not? see Mat. 5. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. and
Jam. 5. 12. Friend, was it not commanded by Christ and his Apostle, that we
should not swear at all, no, not by any Oath? And what must we err for doing
according to Christ's Commands herein? Oh sad! that one who takes upon him to
be a Minister of Christ should hold to the contrary, and teach others so:
Friend, repent of those Things, and do so no more, that these Words of Christ
may not come to pass concerning thee, viz. Whosoever therefore shall break one
of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so to do, he shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

And whereas thou say in thy Dubitantius, I know these and many more to be
the Positions of the Quakers, and that they are directly contrary to the sacred
Scriptures.

Answ. Whereas thou say, Thou know these P^sitions, and many more of
ours, are directly contrary to the sacred Scriptures, I say, thou have belyed
us herein; for the Scriptures make for us in these Positions which we own to be
ours, as I have showed thee before; and wherein thou have said we hold that we
do not hold, thy Lies are thrown back upon thy self, and I doubt not but God
will rebuke thy lying Tongue, for thy slandering of us, and turn the Mischief
thou would bring upon us thereby upon thy own Pate.

And whereas thou say in thy Firmianus, These Things are so clearly confuted
by the Word of God (by which I suppose thou meanest the Scriptures) and
Tradition of the Catholic Church, etc.

Answ. Thou have said so, but thou have not brought one Scripture to confute us
in those Positions we own to be ours, and so have accused us without a Proof,
which will not serve thy Turn, for the carrying on of thy envious Work against
us, with People of Understanding, but the rather thy Folly, and Ignorance and
Madness is the more made manifest to such as are honestly minded, and are
willing to try, and to prove all Things, and to hold fast that which is good:
And therefore cease from thy Work in this, and in Things of this Nature; for by
thy Strength thou must not, nor shall not be able to prevail against us,
because the Truth is for us, which is stronger, and of more Might then any
Thing beside it, and takes our Parts against thee herein.

And whereas thou say, Our Practices are extremely opposite to all good
Manners, and the Civilities of all Nations, which are not grossly barbarous, as
well as the Holy Scriptures; and whereas you have observed their Carriages to
be very demure, austere, and that they are of a sad Countenance; it is no more
then our Blessed Savior reproved in the Scribes and Pharisees long since, etc.

Answ. Wherein are our Practices so extremely opposite to all good Manners, and
the Civilities of all Nations that are not grossly barbarous, as well as the
Holy Scriptures? Friend, let us know if thou art able to do it, wherein our
Practices are contrary to the blessed Truth; and if our Practices are not
contrary to the Truth, but agreeable therewith, as surely I may safely say they
are; then wherein can they be said to be opposite to all good Manners, and the
Civilities of all Nations? Friend, I can say, and the Witness of God in my
Conscience justifies me herein, thou art one of those that calls Good Evil, and
Evil Good, and so art not led by that good Spirit that the Holy Apostle and
Servant of Christ was led by, who said, As Obedient Children, not fashioning
your selves according to the former Lusts in your Ignorance, 1 Pet. 1. 14. So
thou who ar^ ignorant of the Light of Christ, and of the right Way of the Lord,
may call that good Manners and Civility, which is according to the Fashions
^f this World, which pass away; but that which the good Spirit of God does lead
into, is contrary to that which thou may account good Manners and Civility;
But thou and such as thee art, are nearer in Nature to the grossly barbarous
then we are, as this thy Work manifests; for I am of the Mind, thou art not
of so meek a Spirit as to bear with any Man or Woman that cannot put off their
Hats and bow to thee for Conscience sake, though what they do herein does
accord and agree with the Scriptures; and so we are not contrary to the
Scriptures, but according to them; for Mordecai who was a good Man, could not
bow to Haman, as thou may see Ester 3. 1, 2. For which Cause Haman was full
of Wrath, as see Ester 3. 3, 5. So thou who art angry with any that cannot for
Conscience sake put off their Hats, and bow to thee (I speak not of such as
thus do in Contempt to any Man's Person, but for Conscience Sake toward God)
art like Haman herein, and not like Mordecai, whom God was with, etc.

Further say thou of us, That we are very demure, austere, and of a sad
Countenance; whereas a sad sour Face, a hanging down Look too much resemble
Cain's Mark, and is a very probable Sign of a disquieted, discontented, guilty,
troubled, if not a malicious Mind.

Answ. Thou judge of us according to thy own Thoughts: But Friend, tho^
should not judge of us according to the outward Appearance in thy prejudiced
Mind; but judge Righteously of us, and if thou would so judge, then thou must
judge nothing before the Time: It Is probable that thou may judge us to be of
a malicious Mind, because we cannot appear as one with People in their Folly,
in being jolly and merry with them, out of the Fear of the Lord, which is
because we know such Things are contrary to Godliness, and that whereby his
good Spirit is grieved, and by which he is provoaked to Anger daily; the
Consideration of those Things makes us sad many Times, and we cannot avoid it
well many Times) but must by our Words and Carriages show our Disl^ke thereof,
because we well know that People by such Things do provoak the Holy God against
their own Souls, who has long born with their Evil Manners herein, and striven
with them by his good Spirit, to reclaim them therefrom; but his long Suffering
will soon come to an End with such, and his good Spirit will cease to strive
with them; therefore let such repent and amend their Waves and their Doings
before it be too late; but thou show thy self to be one with them, which
thought it strange of the Saints formerly, because they could not run with them
into the same Excess of Riot which they run into, as see 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4. And
though thou say of us, that in this or in such Things beforementioned of
us, it too much resembles Cain's Mark; I say, Cain's Mark may easier be seen in
thee, who have wrote so maliciously against us, as thou have; let the VVitness
of God in thy Conscience testify whether thou have not wrote thus against us
out of Malice, and whether thou have not done it out of the Enmity in thee unto
that which is good.

Again says Firmianus, This Practice of theirs is against the very Light of
Nature, as well as plain Scripture, a mere levelling Device of their Seducers
(the Popish Priests and Jesuits) to make a Confusion amongst us, to destroy all
Government, to take away all Honor and Respect which is due to our Superiors;
for what Honor or Reverence has that Man in his Heart toward them, who will
express none in his Words or Gestures, according to the ^^udable Custom of the
Country where he dwells?

Answ. What is that Practice of ours that is against the very Light of Nature,
as well as plain Scripture, which thou call a mere levelling Device of our
Seducers (the Popish Priests and Jesuits?) etc. Is it in not respecting Persons
in that Way which the World does, with Cap and Knee? Is this the Respect thou
look for from us? Have thou learned Christ no better then so? Did not Christ
reprove such as loved Greetings in the Markets, and to be called of Men Rabby,
Rabby? And did not Christ say to the Jews, I receive not Honor from Men; and
how can ye believe which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor
which comes from God only? See Mat. 23. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and John 5. 41.
and 44. Is this contrary to the very Light of Nature? then may thou say,
Christ's Doings were contrary to the very Light of Nature; thou may with
Shame enough give over thus abusing the Scriptures and us, who do not know
that which thou call the very Light of Nature, nor the Scriptures to guide
thee, nor to say as thou do herein, but the contrary: So it is thee that art
contrary to the very Light of Nature and the Scriptures, and not we: Therefore
thou false Accuser, Repent of thy false Accusations against us herein. And as
for the Popish Priests and Jesuits, whom thou falsely say, have seduced us
herein; I say, thou belyest them in these Things, who are one with thee in
those Things thou practisest, more then one with us in what we practice; and so
it is more probable that thee, and such as thou art are seduced by them, because
your Practices do better acccord and agree with the Practice of the Popish
Priests and Jesuits then ours do, and so both denied by us. And what is the
Honor thou would be honored withal, viz. with putting off the Hat, and
bowing the Knee to thee? Can Honor and Reverence be shown no other Way, but
by this Way? Certainly, one Man may have a good Esteem of another in his
Heart, and yet not show it by such Gestures as these, else why does the Apostle
say, Honor all Men in the Lord? So People may have a good Esteem of each other
in their Hearts, without showing it by such Gestures, as thou would have
them to show it by: It Is possible one Man may bow to another, and say to him,
Your humble Servant Sir, as if he were ready and willing to do him Good, and
yet for all that would, if he had an Opportunity for it, do him an Injury; what,
are these the laudable Customs thou would have us do and practice? Friend,
what by the Light of the Lord we are led unto in these Things, we can do; but
that which is contrary to his Holy Light we may not do, lest we make our selves
Transgressors against him thereby.

Again, Thou say in thy Dubitantius, Truly I have often admired at the
Uncivil Behavior of the Quakers, in saying [THOV and THEE] to their Betters,
in not Bowing, the Knee or putting off the Hat to their Superiors.

Answ. Is not Thou and Thee most proper to speak to One Person, seeing You
signifies more then One? And if I say You when I speak but to One, I speak
Contrary to the Truth, seeing You signifies more then One, or Many, is it not
according to the Scriptures to say Thou to One, when one speaks but to One? Was
it not the Language of Almighty God to Adam in Paradise? And did not Adam say
Thou to God again? see Genesis 3. 9. 12. And frequently in the Scriptures Thee and
Thou we find was used to One; and what! is it Uncivil in us to speak as we find
it is recorded in the Scriptures of Truth herein? Oh! blush for Shame, for so
saying: And now tell us, who is contrary to the Sccriptures, Thee or Us? speak
the Truth herein. And wherein may one Man be said to be Better then another,
except it be in his being more Honest and Just then another, and so in being
more in the Truth then another is? It Is not because one man is better by Blood
then another, seeing God made of one Blood all Nations: One man may be better
in his Estate then another; but how that man can be a better man then another,
I know not, except in his Estate, seeing God made all Nations of one Blood. But
thou, who art for Respecting of Persons, committest Sin; who art contrary to
Christ, and contrary to his Apostle, and the Scriptures, and so art judged by
the Scriprures, and by the Spirit of Truth, from which they were given forth;
for, our Civil Behavior to any, does not lie in putting off our Hats.

Again, Thou say in thy Firmianus, But, pray you, what think you of their
pitching a certain Price upon their Commodities, of which they will not bate
one Farthing, etc?

Answ. Would thou make it a Crime in us to keep to what we say? If we say, in
case we are selling a Commodity to any Person, We will not sell it under such a
Rate or Price; is not thus to do, to keep Christ Jesus, our Lord's Command
herein, who says, Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; for, whatsoever is
more then these comes of Evil? And can we do that which is Honest and Right in
the Sight of God herein. and do otherwise? For shame give over Writing and
Speaking against those things which in themselves are good, and ought by every
true Christian to be observed.

Again, Thomas Good says in his Dubitantius concerning us, I believe, That
these men, most of them, are as great Cheats as ny in the World.

Answ. But what is thy Reason for thy thus saying? If thou believe, that the
most of us are as great Cheats as any in the World, thou should show, why
thou so believe. Thomas Good, this will not serve for thy Purpose herein:
What! Must People believe thus of us because thou do? People that be wise
will not believe what thou say of us herein, except thou can show a better
Reason for thy so believing of us then thou have; Indeed thou give no Reason
at all; but it is only thy so saying, without giving or showing any Reason for
it. But, it may be, thou think, If thou say, thou believe it, it is
sufficient for others to believe so too: But I tell thee, Nay; that will not
serve for thy Purpose herein; for, they that be Wise, will require some further
Testimony for thy so saying then thy bare Words, in saying, Thou believe so
of us: And so thou have manifested thy own Folly and Envy in this Matter.

Again, Thou say in thy Dubitantius, I did once believe them to be great
Contemners of the World, Meek, Humble, Lowly, etc. but it is evident they are
quite contrary to what they seem to be; for (say thou) I know, that most of
them are Extremely Covetous, and Narrow-breasted, without all Bowels of Pity
or Mercy toward those that want, unless they be of that Phanatick Party; which
is mere Faction, and no Christian Charity at all.

Answ. It seems, by thy words, thou once did believe better of us then now
thou do; it may be that was when in thy Mind thou wast more one with the
Truth then now thou art; but now thou art of a Prejudiced Spirit, and
Evil-minded against us, or else thou might believe as well of us now as
formerly, for any Alteration that is in us from those Good Things we formerly
were adicted unto, according to that thy former Belief of us. And whereas thou
say, That most of us are extremely Covetous, and Narrow-breasted, without
all Bowels of Pity or Mercy toward those that want, etc. I require thee to
prove what thou have said of us herein, or otherwise to acknowledge thy self to
be a False Accuser, and a Slanderer of us; I doubt not but many who are not of
us, can witness thee to be a Liar herein. And for Phanatick Party, which thou
reckonest us of; that thou may take home to thy self; for thee, and such as
thou art may more truly be called Phanaticks then We.

Again, Whereas thou say, That whereas many of them have been known to have
been Persons of mean Fortunes at first, are now Rich and Wealthy; and none of
them (though very Poor before they turned Quakers) now in a necessatous
Condition, being maintained, as it is very probable, by their New Masters, the
Jesuits, a very Rich and Opulent Society, who make more Proselytes by the
Length of their Purse-Strings, then by the Strength of Argument, or personated
mimical Gestures.

Answ. It may be it troubles thee, that such of us who were formerly of mean
Fortunes, are now Rich and Wealthy; and that none of us now are in a
Necessatous Condition: If God Almighty has added to our Outward Substance, so
that many of us, who before we owned that Holy and Blessed Truth, possessed by
those called Quakers, which thee and many more do not, though you profess the
same Truth, have more of Outward substance then before, why should thou be
troubled at that, so as to judge, it is obtained by us by Extreme Covetousness?
The Proverb is, Ill Will will not speak well: So thou being ill-minded toward
us, take things the wrong way, and would insinuate thy evil suggestions
into others, that they might be like-minded with thee therein. And if Care be
taken by us, that none that are truly of us, are in a Necessatous Condition,
do thou judge amiss of us therefore? If thy Religion teaches otherwise, I
desire not to be of it, because it cannot be a good Religion; so not according
to the Apostle's Religion, who said, Do Good unto all, but especially unto the
Household of Faith: And whereas thou say, Being maintained, as it is very
probable, being maintained by their new Masters, the Jesuits, etc. I say, if
there be such a Society, they may tell thee, as well as we, thou had not just
Cause to say that that was every probable, they being unknown to us, and we to
them: And art not thee a Possessor of their Tithes and Peter's Pence? Does not
that come in thy Purse that formerly came into the Jesuits? And as for thy
Words, they converting us with their Purse, we deny ^^em, and abhor their
Practices; for, is not that thine and the Jesuits Practice, who practice (that
which you call) Converting for the Purse? But have not you Priests Imprisoned
and Plundered Us sufficiently to make us poor?

Again, Whereas thou say, As for their Humility and Lowliness, it is evident
they show no such Virtues in their Carriage toward their betters; their
Contempt of Gold Rings, Silver Lace and Rich Attire, is no Infallible Proof of
their Humility; Diogenes may be as Proud in his Tub, as Alexander in his
Palace; he may trample upon Plato's Pride with greater Pride; as Haughty a
Spirit may be hid under a Plain Country Russet, as under the Richest Sables.

Answ. What are those Carriages of ours toward any that do not show Humility
and Lowliness? Surely those, who are not one with us in Judgment, yet being of
a Moderate Unprejudiced Spirit, perceiving that we are Conscientious in what we
do, though we cannot carry our selves toward them as they do one toward
another in many things, have a better Opinion of us then thou have; and God,
unto whom our Souls are subject, knows, that it is otherwise with us then thou
judge of us; who will plead our Cause with thee, who smitest at us without a
Just Cause. And I say, Who cannot for Conscience sake wear Gold Rings, and
Silver Lace, and Rich Attire, as formerly they could have done, do show more of
being guided by the Holy Infalliable Spirit of the Lord then such as practice
those things, and are better Followers of the Apostle, who would have others to
follow him as he followed Christ, then such as do contrary herein; which holy
Apostle says, Let your Moderation be known unto all men, for the Lord is at
hand: And the Truth, if it be minded, will lead to Moderation in these things.
And the Apostle Peter says, where he speaks of Women's Adorning themselves,
Whose Adorning let it not be the Outward Adorning of Plaiting the Hair, and of
Wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel; but let it be the Hidden Man of
the Heart, in that which is not Corruptible, even the Ornament of a Meek and
Quiet Spirit. which is in the Sight of God of great Price; see ^ Pet. 3. 3, 4,
etc. Now, Friend, consider what Spirit thou art of, who smitest at us for doing
according to the Apostle's Exhortation herein: And who walks most according
to the Truth, We, who are Conformable to God herein, or Thou, who seek
Occasion against us therefore? What any People may do as to things which are
good in themselves, and ought to be done, they doing them in Imitation only,
that they may be reckoned Humble and Lowly-minded, and not in Obedience to God
is one thing; but what is done for the Lord's sake, in true Obedience to him,
is another thing: so there ought to be a Distinction made between such, in
things which the Blessed and Holy Truth leads them to do, where it is kept
to; and such as do like things, yet not so led thereunto: And though things may
be done by some by Imitation only, which are good in themselves, yet ought and
may the same things be done by others by the Leadings of the Spirit of Truth;
and where it is so, such things are rightly accounted the Fruits of the Spirit;
and such are reckoned by Christ as the Good Tree, which brings forth Good
Fruit: so, by what the Tree brings forth, it may be known, whether the Tree be
good or evil: so, who do things by the Leadings of God's Spirit, those things
are the Fruits of that Good Spirit, and are so owned by this Holy Spirit,
though not owned by it where the like things are done In Imitation only, that
they may seem to men that which in the Sight of the Holy God they are not.
Therefore, Friend, have a care of Smiting against such as are Conscientious to
God in what they do, lest thou condemnest the Righteous with the Wicked and
Hypocrites, which certainly is an Abomination to the Lord. So, to say that
Diogenes may be as proud in his Tub, as Alexander in his Palace; and may
trample upon Plato' s Pride with Greater Pride, will not hold parallel in this
Case, no more then what some do by Imitation only, that they may seem to be
that which they are not, will hold parallel with what some do in Reality, and
only for Conscience sake: And though as Haughty a Spirit may be hid under a
Plain Country Russet, as under the Richest Sables; such a Comparison will not
nor cannot hold in the Case before mentioned. And why art thou Angry with us?
Is it because we reprove thee, who art in the Steps of the Proud Pharisees?

Again say thou in thy Firmianus, But what do you think of their Meekness
and Mildness? they rather suffer an hundred Injuries then revenge one, that
they will not take up Arms to offend the Enemy, or defend themselves or their
Country; are not these rare Signs of their Christian Meekness?

Answ. What, is it a Crime for any to be guided by that Spirit, which leads to
suffer an hundred Injuries, rather then to revenge one? Thou Scoffer, do thou
take upon thee to be his Minister or Servant, who says, But I say unto you,
resist not Evil, he that shall smite thee on the one Cheek, turn to him the
other also; and would make Jests and Mocks, and scoffest at those Things
which are consistant with Godliness, and would persuade People, that those
that are real herein, are not so, but would appear otherwise, if Occasion
should serve; for so thy Words do import; thou Smiter against the Innocent,
they that take thee to be a Minister of Christ, are much mistaken in thee, who
mockest and scoffest at those who do according to his Command and Requirings
herein, and would make them Dissemblers therein; but we can and do appeal to
God, who will judge Righteously between thee and us, who says, Vengeance is
his, and he will repay it.

Again thou say in thy Dubit^ntius, You know the Time when they did take up
Arms in a Hostile Manner against the King and his Loyal Subjects, and if they
had a fair Opportunity, they would do the like again, etc.

Again says Firmianus, I confess that many of them were in Arms under Cromwell
against the King's Royal Party; that Light within them did then warrant them to
rebel against their Lawful Sovereign; but now the Light within them shows, that
it is not lawful to resist Magistrates by Carnal Weapons.

Again says Dubitantius, You are pleased to make your self merry with these
Men's barefaced Hypocrisy; what a Juggle is this Light within them? more
unconstant then that of the Moon; a mere Fantasy, a Diobolical S^ggestion;
the Devil suits his Temptations, when there is good Probability of prevailing
by Rebellion and Treason, then the Light, or rather Darkness within them, does
suggest unto them, it is lawful to take up Arms, to plunder and murder their
Fellow Subjects, yea, the King himself; but when there is no Probability to
prosper by such villainous Enterprises, then the Light within them persuades
them to be quiet as Lambs, etc.

Answ. Many of those called Ministers, that were as Leaders of the People, in
their Preaching did use what Arguments they could, to stir up and encourage
their Followers in the Beginning of the late Wars, to engage them therein; and
doubtless there were many that did hold themselves obliged to observe what
those Men did so earnestly press upon them, and were thereby animated to take
up Arms accordingly.

And I further answer, That I do acknowledge that several of the People now
called Quakers, before that Name was cast upon them, and before turned to that
Light, which we now bear witness unto (which is the Light of Christ, which
lights every Man that comes into the World) were in the late Wars engaged in
Arms, some in the King's Party, and some in the Parliament Party, according as
those called Ministers beforementioned, did animate and encourage; but since
being turned to that Light, and believing in it, we have denied all such
Ministers, and their Doctrine also, which led so contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ, who came not destroy Men's Lives, but to save them: And the Parliament
Army being not disbanded before this Light broke forth so fully amongst us; and
some of us being then Members of the Army, as we were turned to that Light, and
our Hearts given up to follow its Leadings, we cast off our Carnal Weapons of
War, with a Resolution never to return to them again, but many of them we brake
in Pieces, and converted them to better Uses, giving up our selves to be
Followers of him, who said, Love your Enemies, and do Good to them that hate
you, etc. And our peaceable Deportment in our Conversations to this Time, have
given a Faithful Testimony to the Reality of such our Resolution, and as
Occasion has required, have testified against such who has professed to be of
us, and yet through Provocation, or otherwise, have acted contrary to this our
peaceable Principle: And so still both in our Doctrine and Practice, we bear
Witness to that Excellency and Unchangeableness of that Holy Light, which we
have believed in, which is by thee and thy Generation thus vilified and
reproached, which shall dash you to Pieces, be you never so proud and losty, if
ye repent not: And touching our owning Magistracy, and the King as Supreme (as
the Lord has set him) we have several Times by Writing, Declaration and
Conversation, testified our Innocence and Fidelity herein, always being ready
passively to suffer, where we cannot for Conscience sake actually obey: And if
we may judge of Persons and Principles by Practice, then let such whose
Understanding* are not blinded with Malice and Envy, judge who are farthest
from Plunder and Murder, the Priests or we, let the Fruits of either testify,
and that God who searches the Heart, and tryes the Reins, to whom we commit
our Cause, and appeal for Judgment, knows our Innocence, Fidelity and Integrity
to the King and all People whatsoever; and that those Things which thou have
thus wickedly suggested and charged against us, are false Accusations of thy
own forming, and Lies of thy own Inventing, for which thou have brought no
Evidence, but thy own envious false Affirmations: But what other or better
Usage can we expect from the Hands of such an one as thou art, who have not
only thus wickedly belyed, falsely accused and slandered such an Innocent People
as we are, but have taken upon thee most impudently, impiously and
blasphemously to vilify and trample on that holy Light which we make a
Profession of, which w^ have always declared to be that true Light which John
bore Test^^ony of, Joh 1. 9. caling it a Juggle, more Unconstant then that of
the Moon, a mere Fantasy, a Diabolical Suggestion, Darkness within them, the
very Blackness of Darkness within them; thou wicked Blasphemer of God, and
false Accuser of his People, do thou think thy Greatness shall secure thee
from the Just Hand of God, when he shall render a Reward to all Men according
to their Deeds.

And now by the Blasphemy, wicked Insinuations, horrible Lies, and abominable
Slanders, how have thou manifested thy self guilty of that which thou have
charged falsely upon us (viz.) one that practices that which is contrary to the
Law of Nature, good Manners, express Scripture, the Usages of all sober and
civil People in the World, and therefore (by thy own Judgment) art so far from
being a True Christian, that thou art not worthy the Name of a sober Man; How
is the Wicked snared in the Work of his own Hands, and fallen into the Pit he
has dug for others? and the very Blackness of Darkness is thy Portion,
except thou repent speedily.

And T. G. has other slighting and profane Expressions of that blessed Light,
which we own and profess, as groundless Fancy, an Unconstant and Uncertain
Guide, etc. By all which T. G. manifests himself one of those Builders who have
set at naught the Cornerstone, and also his Ignorance of the Scriptures of
Truth, which testify of the Light, to be the Way to the Father, that which
gives the Knowledge of God, that in which the Nations of them that are saved
must walk; and that People should believe in the Light, that they may be
Children of the Light, and that they which follow it shall not abide in
Darkness, with much more touching the Excellency, Certainty and Sufficiency of
it; what Cause have we to bless the Lord, who has delivered us from such blind
Guides, who thus err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God?

Further, Thou sa'yst in thy Firmianus, You need not wonder, if you shall
seriously consider that they Flatter themselves, that they are in a State of
Perfection, that they cannot sin, are above Ordinances, that cast off Fear, and
Restrain Prayer, Job. 15. 4. should fall into the Snare of the Devil, etc.

Answ. Here are many more Lies, which thou castest on us, which thou must bear
the Weight of thy self, which thou have learned of the Father of Lies, and not
of God, nor of Christ; for, no Lie is of the Truth, as says Christ, the Truth.
And as for our Flattering of our selves, that we are in a State of Perfection;
that is false: For we do not Flatter our selves herein; thou do us great
Wrong herein, and thy self greater; for, in the End the Harm will be to thy
self, when thou must bear thy own Burden for the Wrong thou have done us
herein; yet the Doctrine of Perfection we own, and must not deny it; for it was
the Doctrine of Almighty God to Abraham, and also Christ's Doctrine in his
Sermon in the Mount, as I said before; and the Church of England, which thou
take on thee to be a Member of, teaches not contrary hereunto in Words,
which teaches Godfathers and Godmothers (so called) to promise for Children
in their Baptism, That when they come to Age, they shall forsake the Devil, and
all his Works: But who art thou, that (doubtless) do sometimes preach against
Sin, and yet cryest against such as own the Doctrine of Perfection, which, as I
said before, was the Doctrine of Almighty God, and of Christ? Consider with thy
self, whose Servant thou art, and whom thou followest herein.

Again, Thou have belyed us in saying, we say, we cannot sin; for which of us
did thou ever hear say so? Yet I say as the Apostle says, speaking of
Christ, he that abides in him, sins not. Further, whereas thou say of
us, We cast off all Fear, and, restrain Prayer; that is false also; for we are
of the same Mind with the Holy Apostle, which said, Let us therefore fear, lest
a Promise being left us, etc. any of you come short, etc. as they did, even
such who fell short of the Rest that was promised them, because of their
Unbelief, Hebr. 4. 1, etc. And whereas thou say, We Restrain Prayer: How
can thou make this to appear? Our Practice in Praying often, and in making
Supplication to God often, proves thee to be a Liar, and a false Accuser of us
herein; and the Scripture thou bring against us (Job. 15. 4,) to prove us
such, serves not for thy Purpose against us herein: I believe, I know wherein
it may be justly charged upon thy self, but now I have omitted it; but do say
to thee, Repent of the great Sin and Wickedness that thou have committed and
done against the Truth, and the true Followers thereof, and do so no more, that
the Lord may blot out thy Transgression.

And as for John Toldervee's Recantation of. Quakerism, p ^8. it was long since
Confuted, and afterward Recanted of by Himself.

And whereas thou mentionest two Franciscans, who did tell one Cowlishaw an
Ironmonger in Bristol (whose Oath, thou say, is to be seen upon the
Register) That within Eighteen Days Quakerism should be set up in Bristol,
etc. That has long since been Answered. And as for William Prinn's Quakerism
Unmasked, it was long since Answered, and his Falsehood Unmasked by John
Audland; and also by George Whitehead, in his short Treatise, entitled, Truth
Trumphing in a Suffering Time.

And whereas thou say in thy Dubitantius, in the close of thy Dialogue
against us; I am fully satisfied concerning the Folly and Madness of this
Phanaticism, and from whence it sprang, etc.

Answ. I desire, that when thou have read this Answer to thy Dialogue against
us, thou may see thy Own Folly and Madness in doing what thou did therein,
and be humbled before the Lord for thy great Sin against Him therein, and
Repent thereof, resolving never to do the like again: This I desire thou may
do for thy Own Good, and not abuse what is writ in answer to thee herein;
however, if thou do, I know with whom my Reward will be, and that is my
Comfort, even with him who is the Rewarder of all the Faithful.

From a Lover of Immortal Souls, and of the whole Creation of God, Edward
Bourne.
Worcester, the 21th of the 4th Month, 1675.
THE END.

