No Home but Heaven. A SERMON, PREACHED At the FUNERALS of the Right Worshipful
the Lady Sybilla Anderson, in the Church of Broughton, in the County of
LINCOLN. October. 30. 1661.

By EDWARD BOTELER, Sometimes Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College in
Cambridge, and now Rector of Wintringham, in the County of Lincoln, and
Chaplain to His Majesty.

Job 30.23. Scio quia morti trades me, ubi constituta est domus omni viventi.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedib. Lamb. Nov. 9. 1663. Geo. Stradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D.
Gi^b. Archicp. Cant. a Sac. Domestic.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedel, and T. Collins, at their Shop next to the
Middle Temple Gate, MDCLXIV.

To The Right Worshipful, Sir Philip Egerton, Of Oulton, in the County of
Chester, Knight.
SIR,
THat these Leaves have loitered so long, is not their fault, but their fate:
comeing through the fire to you, where they had like to have met with their
Vrn, while they were preparing this account of your Sister's Funerals. The best
on it is her fame might have spared them, being as little increased by them, as
Infinity is capable of addition. Had they been all lost, it could have been no
detriment to that Name, which rescues it self, carries its Balm with it, and
is its own preservative.

And now, SIR, these Escapes of Ruin apply to you, to secure them a life
against all future hazards, and contingencies. It is their glory they may
entitle themselves to a Patron, who had the courage to undertake the Patronage
of his Country, his Orphan Country, and that in the most desperate days of
thriving Rebellion. They have forgot themselves, that remember not with passion
that Loyal attempt of yours, with that excellent person, the now Lord
De-la-Meere, for our redemption and disinslavement; to whom the whole Kingdom
still owe their acknowledgement, as possibly they might have done their
recovery, had not God reserved our Deliverance to be the work of his own
immediate hand, in that meek and peaceful method, which ravisheth our thoughts
to this very day. It was you, whom Honor commanded as far then, as the Oath
did the Roman Soldiers of old, -- Pugnabo pro sacris and cum aliis, and solus.
Judge. 5.18.
You then (as sometimes Zebulon and Nephtali) jeoparded your lives unto death
in the high places of the Field. I should not be just to your merit, if I
should speak of you at a lower rate, than that triumphant Prophetess, v. 9.
My heart is to the Princes of Israel, that offered themselves freely. My
heart, and many hearts more, were then, and are still toward you, and toward
God for you, in Prayers then, now in Praises. And I may say, (but let me first
beg leave of your modesty to say so) That as Saint Augustine seemed to be
borne an Antidote to his poisonous Contemporary Pelagius: So were you, to your
pestilent Countreyman Bradshaw.
-- whom no Pen can write without blotting, no tongue mention without spitting;
The Margin take his Name, and the mischief his Memory; whilst your Name is
written in Heaven, and still repeats the flourishing Ages it has past on Earth
in an interminate succession, till the last Flames shall reduce the World. And
may the Amen himself make good the Votes of,

SIR, Your humbly Devoted Servant, Edward Boteler.

In obitum praenobilis pariter atque ornatissimae Heroinae Dominae SYBILLAE
ANDERSON, Domini EDMUNDI ANDERSON, de Broughton, in Comitatu Lincoln Baronetti,
haud ita pridem Defuncti, Conjugis pientissimae.
EXtremum, Heroina, tibi hunc impendo laborem,
Carminibusque lito, Pieridasque voco:
Carminibus lito, nam fuerant tibi carmina curae;
Hasque voco, solitus nempe favere tibi.
Harum tu cultrix; Hae te coluere, colentque,
Musisque accedas ut decumana petent.
Barbiton, ecce, Thaleia ultro tibi cedit, and omnis
Nympha suas defert officiosa fides.
Tu dic, quae Musa esse velis; jamque annue Justis
Diva vocata tuis; carminibusque fave.
Tam propere sequeris praeeuntem? Nempe sine illo
Tent asti infelix vivere, nec poteras.
Hoccine obire, an abire? Petit Rhodopeius Orco
Orpheus Euridicen; Orphea tuque tuum.
Thrax olim Elysias fidicen descendit ad umbras,
Obtestans quicquid Numinis Orcus habet,
Ut charam Euridicen sibiredderet; annuit Orcus;
Nec redit illa tamen; sed redit ille tamen.
Tu non sola redire voles: Te detinet umbra
Grata, and dilecti Conjugis ora tui.
Tu superas, quicquid delirat Graecia mendax,
Musaque Graiorum quicquid ineptit anus.
Quid prima infelix referam, summarc querela?
Virtutum strages, heu, mihi quanta subit!
Effusum est in te, quicquid reliquum extitit olim,
Virtutis Gregae, Cordis Egertonii.
Nunc subeunt nivei mores, and vita Sabina;
Et mox Divino pectus amore calens.
Heupietas! heu priscafides! Non Martius horror,
Non populi levitas, non novitatis amor,
Hnic mentem morere loco: Regemque Deumque;
Immoto coluit pectore, mente, fide.
Quis Veneres oris duet, Charitasque loquelae?
Quis totis haustam Pallada pectoribus?
Quid referam Proavos, cumulataque stemmata longo
Ordine majorum, Greya and Egertonia?
Quid decus ascitum Thalamis, clarosque Hymenaeos,
Tedam Andersoniam, Bellotiasque faces?
Quis reliquas panget lauds? Quis pyxida franget?
Quis Nardum and latices ad pia justa dabit?
A SERMON, Preached at the FUNERALS of the Lady Sybilla Anderson, Oct. 30. 1661.
IT is an excellent piece, that Draught of the good Woman we meet with Prove.
31. where, after the delineations of particular beauties, upon view taken of
the symmetrical elegancy, and perfection of the whole by a judicious eye, this
Sentence is given, v. 29. Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou
excellest them all.

If you ask whose picture it is, I will not say it was made for this
accomplished Lady, whose Ruins are yet before us, (for Expositors look on it
as a vagous kind of Encomiastick, designing none, but intending any, that could
bid fairest, and come nearest up to it) But I may say, and I am persuaded there
are many more of my mind, there have scarce been any more like it, since it was
drawn; Sic occulos, sic illa manus, sic ora ferebat.

From hence it was, that when I was first summoned to surrender up my self to
this service, I looked on it as a betraying of my self, and stood it out with
as much resolution as might consist with that piety I owe to her Remains, and
that duty I profess to her Relations. For, to speak truly, such a body of
Rarities, would be dealt with as bodies under a learned dissection; Every part,
every particle, would have a day, and it would be too little too, for the
Anatomist to read upon, and his skill had need be more than mine, or else the
odds will be too great against him still, let him do what he can. But that is in
vain to hope for; My time is set, and so scant it is, that to waste any of it
in Apology, or Preface, were to discover a greater want than I am begging
pardon for. I shall cast my self therefore upon your charity, and fall next way
upon my Text; A Text, one part whereof I have discoursed to this now happy
Lady's ear, and the other I come here to dedicate to her Exequies.

It is written
Hebr. 13.14. But we seek one to come.
CRazy, and sickly times, are as a great warning Piece, discharged from Heaven,
to startle the secure world, whose souls for the most part lie open to a
surprizal, like that people in the Prophet, Jer. 49.31.
having neither Gates nor Bars, and dwelling without care. When diseases
grassat, and grow epidemical, they come upon more than an ordinary errand: and
it will not be enough that we take up that common discourse of being minded of
our mortality, unless we consult our immortality too.

This verse furnishes us with an Admonition of both.

Of our Mortality; We have here no continuing City.

Of our Immortality; We seek one to come; Or if you please, the deceased Lady,
and I, will divide the verse betwixt us.

She is a legible Sermon upon the former part, showing you we have here no
continuing City.

Let me give you an Audible one upon the latter part, persuading you to seek
one to come.

There Is a word in our way would not be passed by, or leaped over, we must do
it the right to speak to it. But. But we seek one to come.

It is a particle of Discretion, Gramarians tell us: and so it is here, in the
best sense, speaks the greatest Discretion in the world, when the transiency of
our present condition makes us drive on immortal designs; and the reflecting
upon that pitiful minute share we have in this inch of time, influenceth so
effectually upon us, as to put us upon all possible provisions for eternity.
And that is the force and purport of the particle that brings in the Text, to
make us, being discharged our houses of flesh, and like to turn out e're long,
provide our selves of a Mansion, an abiding place, a seat of some certainty,
where we may fix, dwell, and take our rest; We have here no continuing City,
but we seek one to come.

Come we to the words; and observing St. Paul's Rule, to preach absque
eminentia sermonis, 1 Cor. 2.1.
without flash or flourish, I shall spend my discourse upon these three plain
parts.

1. A Description of a Christian's Inheritance. It is a City,

2. His Estate in it; it is a Reversion only. It is to come.

3. His Demeanor toward it, till it comes to his hands; he seeks it. We seek
one to come.

For the title first; A City. Sometimes it is called An House; but of admirable
work, a rare Structure, the true Architecture; 2 Cor. 5.1.
we have an House (...), not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Sometimes it goes under the name of a Country. Via and Patria distinguist the
Worlds, This life is our way, that other our Country. Cicero.
Patria est ubicunque est been, and that is no where on this side Heaven. Heb.
11.13, 14.
They confessed (says our Apostle) that they were strangers and pilgrims on
the Earth; and declared plainly that they seek a Countrcy.

Sometimes no less than a Kingdom will serve to express it; Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Thus Heaven, like the Bread of Heaven, will fit every
palate, gratify the relish of every soul, (as Saint Origin conceives of the
Manna) Here Is House, and Kingdom, and Country, and City; it is any, it is all
these; Seek it and you will find it so. We seek one to come.

But we'll keep to the Metaphor of the Text, A City. Heaven is the City of the
Saints. So it is called often, and borrows the name of Jerusalem, the
Metropolis of Judea, Thren. 1.1.
The City that was great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces.
Psa 48.1, 2.
The City of God, the Mountain of holiness, Beautiful for situation, the joy
of the whole Earth. Rev. 21.10.
He showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of Heaven
from God. Hence they have (...), ortus civicum, Philip. 3.20.
as that word which our rendering gives Conversation does rightly signify. And
they are (...), or Cives conscripti, Fellow Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
and of the household of God.

Please to see this City a while, and I hope it will raise you higher than
Jerusalem did the Kings of the Earth, of whom it is said, They saw it, Psalm 48
5.
and so they marvelled.

1. A City: there is multitudo. It is a place of great receipt, and
entertainment. It is next to incredible, the number that were found in
Jerusalem without wedging, when the seditious within, and the Leaguer of Titus
from without, had so thin'd them in the day of their desolation. Such the City
in the Text: Joh. 14.2.
In my Fathers house are many Mansions, says our Lord; as if Heaven was
parcell'd, and made all out into dwellings for the everlasting reception of the
Saints. God says to St. Paul of Corinth, Act 18.10.
I have much people in this City: but what myriads of millions has he here?
Nations are little enough to express them: Rev. 21.24.
The Nations of them that are saved, he calls them, that best knows their
number. When the Angel had sealed the thousands of Israel, after this, (says
St. Rev. 7.9.
John) I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all
Nations, and Kindreds, and People, and Tongues stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands. Though
Gods Flock be little in comparison of that great Hord, and those Droves of the
damned, yet shall they be numerous, when he shall send his Angels with a great
sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather his Elect together from the four
winds, from one end of heaven to the other. A City, there is multitudo; That Is a
first.

2. A City: there is Fortitudo. Cities are places of strength. Genesis 4.17.
Willet. Hexapl. in Genesis
Cain thought the first builder of a City, did it for his defense, in his fear,
when he thought every bush a man, and every man a slayer. Thus, we read of
Cities of Refuge, of walled Cities, great, and fenced up to Heaven. Psalm. 48.12.
Walk about Zion, and go round about her; tell the Towers thereof. Much more
may it be said of Zion in the Antitype, the City in the Text, v. 3.
God is known in her Palaces for a Refuge. Job 3.17.
Here the wicked cease from troubling; here the weary are at rest. Psa. 91.1.
He that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. Psalm. 89.22.
The Enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the Son of wickedness afflict him.
Psa. 91.4.
He shall cover him with his feathers, and under his wings shall he trust; his
truth shall be his shield and buckler. When the Saints shall take possession of
this City, it shall be with ovation and triumph. Isa. 26.1.
In that day shall this song be sung, we have a strong City, Salvation will God
appoint for walls and bulwarks. Salvation must needs make strong walls, and
that City cannot but be inexpugnable, where God undertakes the fortification. A
City: there is Fortitudo; that is a second.

3. A City: there is Plenitudo. Cities are places of opulency and fullness.
Locuples copiis civitas. Cic.
Neighboring Towns and Villages, pour in their store to increase, and furnish
them. Such this City, and in such an allusion does the Holy Ghost speak; Rev.
21.24. v. 26.
The Kings of the Earth do bring in their glory and honor into it. They shall
bring the glory and honor of the Nations into it. Look how the lesser Towns
and Vicinages do bring in their wealth and provision, and contribute to the
plenty and abundance of the Cities; so shall the uncessant confluence of all
that is rich and glorious, advance the flourishing estate of the new
Jerusalem. The Author of this Epistle tells us, Chro. 11.16.
God has prepared for them a City: Guess, if you can, what plenty there is
like to be, where God himself makes preparation. There you shall find what the
Apostle calls (...), Ephesians. 3.8.
the unsearchable, the impervestigable riches of Christ. There we shall see
with enlightened understandings, what are the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints; Annot. in Ephesians 1.18. Mat. 6 20.
or, in the holy places, as the Italian Diodati gives it us out of his own
language. There are those Treasures, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt,
nor Thieves break through and steal. Luke 12.33.
There are those Bags which wax not old, whose sums would pose all telling,
could we cast accounts with the Stars. Psalm. 50.2.
In the perfection of beauty there God shines. Psalm. 84.1.2.
How amiable are those thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea,
even fainteh for the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for
the living God. How have all the servants in our fathers house bread enough,
and to spare, Luke 15.17.
and we stay here and perish for hunger? A City: there is Plenitudo; that is a
third.

4. A City: there is Unitas. It is a Town incorporate, an union of several
members in one body. Such our City here: what was said of the old, may much
rather be said of the new Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.3.
It is builded as a City that is at unity in it self. There is

1. Unitas oris, an accord of voices. All tongues are tuned to praise. They do
all (...), in St. Paul's phrase, 1 Col. 1.10.
speak the same thing. And St. John tells us what it is, Blessing, honor, Rev.
5.13.
glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. The whole Chorus of Heaven and Earth join in this Song.

2. Unitas Cordis, an oneness of heart and affection. They shall be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, 1 Col. 1.10.
and like those believers in the Acts of the Apostles, of one heart, Chapter 4.3^.
and of one soul. Here our affections straggle, and run out diverse ways; there
they shall all come in, concenter, and take up in God. Here we differ in
Diameter, contest sharply, and like Paul and Barnabas, dispute our selves
asunder; there we shall consent, and be all composure, and harmony, and love,
Ep. 5. ad Marcel.
and joy, and peace: For this is a City, where Rex est veritas, Lex est
charitas, modus aeternitas, in Saint Augustines language. A City: there is
Unitas; that is a fourth.

5. A City: there is Immunitas, Cities are infranchised and privileged places;
they have many freedoms above other Towns, and so, in the Apostle's words,
Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4 26.
is free, which is the mother of us all.

The privileges of a City, among many others, are these two: The Seat. The
Safety.

1. The Seat. It is a prime privilege to be the Royal Seat; the Chamber of
Kings; the Residence of Majesty. It is much for the honor of Jerusalem,
Psalm. 122.5.
that there are set Thrones of Judgment: the Thrones of the house of David.
And it is the glory of Heaven, Heb. 12.22.
to be the Seat of the Eternal Majesty; The City of the Living God; The
Residence Royal of the great King. The Lord has chosen Zion; Psalm. 132.13, 14.
he has desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever: here will I
dwell, for I have desired it. This City shall have a name above every name,
and overtop the world with this Title, Ezekiel. 48.35.
Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there. That Is the first privilege, the Seat.

2. The Safety. The security it affords its Denizons and Inhabitants; which in
this City are great and matchless: for here is freedom.

From the Impositions of Sin, the Oppositions of Satan, the Assaults of Time
and Violence.

1. The Impositions of Sin: For this City makes every inhabitant Sinfree. It
will disinslave him from the arbitrary power of commanding corruption, and
those lawless lusts which were wont to impose upon him, are for ever kept out
there: the City gates are shut upon them, Rev. 21.27.
and there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles.

2. The Oppositions of Satan; a privilege that never City yet had. We of this
Kingdom have cause to count this a privilege indeed: for we can remember how
busy Satan was in our Cities, at the beginning of the late Commotions; what
storms be raised among giddie and tempestuous people. His manner was to
transform into an Angel of light, get into a City, set up some Simon or other,
whom the bewitched people of that City cried up as the great Power of God: Acts
8.9, 10.
And the plot took so effectually, that we groan under the sad success of it
to this day. But this City of the Text is fortified against Satan, as
Jerusalem sometime was against Senacherib, with a Dicit Dominus, 2 Kings
19.32. Rev. 12.7, 8, 9.
Thus says the Lord, He shall not come into this City. The Dragon fought, and
his Angels, and prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in
Heaven. He was cast out, and he comes no more there: The caelestial Paradise
will admit no Serpent.

3. The Assaults of Time and Violence: Heb. 11.10.
and therefore it is called a City having foundations: as if other Cities had
no foundations: at least they are next to none, such as Job speaks of, whose
foundation is in the dust; light, Job 4.19.
volatile, unstable dust, as the word is there observed to signify.
Foundations that cannot stand the shock of an Earthquake; which force may
undermine and blow up: or, if they escape these, time will assuredly bury in
their own Ruins. Not a City besides this of the Text, but we may say of it as
our Antiquary does of Rheban, Camd. Brit. Ireland. p. 86.
it is (...), a Citilesse City.

We read in the Ecclesiastical History, of Simeon the Anchorite, who lived in
the time of Domnus Bishop of Antio^ch, that before that terrible Earthquake,
which shook in pieces Phoenicia, he whipped the pillars which stood in the
Marketplace, crying, Evagr. Schol. l. 4. ca 33.
(...), stand fast, ye are like to dance shortly. Upon such Pillars stand all
sublunary buildings; their foundred footing shakes their lofty tops. It stains
their glory, and takes down their height, to think that sad fate in the Prophet
attends them; Thorns shall come up in their Palaces, Isa. 34.11, 13.
Nettles and Brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation
of Dragons, and a Court for Owls: And he shall stretch out upon it the line of
confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

Babylon is now the glory of Kingdoms, Isa. 13 19.
the beauty of the Caldees excellency: but presently shall be as when God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. Nineveh the ranting Metropolis of Ashur, the City
of three days journey, Jon. 3.3.
who multiplied her Merchants above the stars of heaven: Nah. 3 16. Cap. 2.10.
she is now empty, and void, and waste, and the heart melts, and the knees
knock together.

Tire, the joyous City, whose antiquity is of ancient days: the crowning City,
whose Merchants are Princes, whose Traffiquers are the honorable of the Earth:
Isa. 23.7, 8.
She must not, cannot stand, for her own feet shall carry her afar off to
sojourn.

Zion only cannot be moved, but stands fast for ever. Her foundation is in
the holy mountain. Psalm. 87.1.3, 5.
Glorious things are spoken of thee O City of God. The Highest himself shall
establish her. Urbs aeterna, a title once given to Rome, is the due of this
City in the Text, of none but this, the Eternal City. Here are those Gates
that lift up their heads above all, and here are those everlasting doors for
the King of Glory, and his Saints to enter in. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, Rev. 22.14.
that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the
Gates into the City: For as we have heard, so shall we one day see in the City
of the Lord of Hosts, in the City of our God, Psa. 48.8.
God will establish it for ever.

And be that enough to have spoken to the first part of the Text, the title of
a Christians Inheritance: It is a City.

Proceed we to the second.

The Estate a Christian has in that City: it is a Reversion. It is to come.
We seek one to come.

Not as if the Saints were quite out of possession here: (for till they can
come to their estate, it is often coming to them in the glimpses and foretastes
of it. Heb. 6.4, 5.
They taste the heavenly gift, and the powers of the world to come. They have
an Heaven upon Earth by communion with God; 1 John 1.3.
by fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.) But it is to
come, because the sweet, and sweight of it lies in the promises: what they have
now, is very little compared with that full, free, and un-interrupted
possession a soul shall be put into, when he enters the everlasting gates of
the City of the great King. You are come to the City of the Living God, says
the Apostle. What? come to it already, and yet to come? Yes, (says St
Augustine) Credendo venisti, sed nondum per venisti. You are in the Suburbs,
but not yet in the City: for that is to come. We seek one to come.

Our happiness consists not in what we have, but what we hope for, (...), (as
St. Basil speaks) blessings reposited, and stored in Promises. And therefore
the Holy Ghost in the Scriptural Deeds, and Conveyances of a Believers estate,
makes so frequently use of phrases of futurition. Psalm. 97.11.
Light is sown for the righteous. Sown, it is but growing and coming on. Adhuc
mea messis in herba. Psa. 31.19.
O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?
It is great goodness, but it is laid up. Ephesians. 1.14.
The Apostle calls what we have now, Pignus, only the Pledge and Earnest: that
Redemptio acquisitionis is yet behind, possession is in reserve, and but
coming. We seek one to come.

Nor have we any cause to suspect the hand of Providence as over-close, or
reproach our Father with unkindness, for keeping our estate so long from us:
there is a threefold good intended us by this deteinure, the thoughts of which
may be useful, 'twill keep a good understanding betwixt us and Heaven; for
thereby our Graces are rendered active, our Affections ardent, our Possession
welcome.

1. It will keep Grace in action. Many Graces are now set on work, and employed
by this respite of happiness, that would be idle, that would not be at all,
were we in possession of it.

There are three notable Graces, that live best, that only live upon reversion
and futuritie.

1. Faith; precious Faith. That argumentum non apparentium, Heb. 11.1.
the evidence of things not seen; so it is called by that Apostle, who came
nearest this City of any that retreated into pilgrimage. The promises are
Pabulum Fidei; Faith lives wholly and solely upon hereafter; She sees best when
the object is furthest off; Videbo cum, sed non modo: I shall see him, but not
now: Number. 24.17.
I shall behold him, but not nigh. Had God given Abraham Canaan in present,
where had been work for that vigorous faith of his, whose quick eye saw through
the thick distance of four hundred years; Genesis 15.13.
and whose long arms reached a promise over the heads of so many intervening
Generations? Give in hand, and take away Faith. For Fides est credere quod non
vides, cujus merces est videre quod credidisti; so St. Augustine.

2. Hope, which is inconsistent with possession. To. 8.24.
For hope that is seen, is not hope. As Faith advances to sight, so Hope shall
commence fruition. Heb. 6 19
Hope is the Anchor of the soul; It is serviceable whilst abroad in the storm,
the Harbor will not need it. Enjoyment supersedes hope: it is one great
purpose of God, in keeping his people, and their possessions asunder, that they
may learn to live in hopes of them; 1 Pet. 1.13.
hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought to them at the revelation
of Jesus Christ.

3. Patience, which can have no trial after this life. It is a Grace which
lives only in ill times. Plin.
It is the Bird that hatcheth in thunder. When it comes to killing with the
Sword, Rev. 13.10. Romans 5 ^.
here is the patience of the Saints. Tribulation works patience: and when
tribulation works not, patience is idle, is not. We cannot be patient in the
day, when we shall be impassible. Be patient Brethren, Jam. 5.7
unto the coming of the Lord; till then, longer you need not, you cannot be.
When he comes, he calls from work, Rev. 22.12.
and brings his reward with him. When he comes, he will cease both sin and
suffering, wipe away tears, and bring in the times of refreshing from the
presence of the Lord. Acts 3.19.
Patience is in season whilst we can be in suffering, we shall be past both
together. It is good company whilst we are in our way, in our Country there is
neither room nor reason for it. Heb. 12.1, 2.
Let us run with patience the race that is set before us; when that is done, we
have no further use of it; with the author and finisher of our faith, we shall
sit down on the Throne of God. Patience is the contemporary of our pilgrimage;
we part when we enter upon our eternity.

And they are the three Graces which this reversion of our estate renders
active: which is the first particular.

2. It makes affection ardent. Suspense sets an edge on the soul, as fasting
begets appetite. It makes a thirst after the waters of life, an hungring after
the hidden Manna, a very greediness of glory, to Tantalize (as it were) over
immortal joys, to have happiness in view, and yet be held off from it: this
wings desire, and sets the soul on longing. Let David be a while excluded from
earthly Zion, (guess then what the heavenly Zion will do) and how earnestly
does he breath, how passionately express his longings after it. Psalm. 42.1, 2.
As the Heart hunted (say some) or (as one worth all the rest, Annot. in Ps.
the invaluable Doctor Hammond) feeding in a dry and parched wilderness,
finding no water, going about, and making a mournful noise for it: as this Heart
pants after the water Brooks, so pants my soul after thee O God. My soul
thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God?
It makes Affection ardent. That Is a second.

3. It renders Possession welcome. The forty years traverse in the wilderness,
sweetens the peace and plenty of Canaan: and when we have staid a while in the
Tents of Kedar, we admire the more the Curtains of Solomon. As it is with an
Heir apparent to some fair Estate, whereof the greatest part has been in the
hands of Longaevous Parents, and some other parcels possibly have strayed out
into tough and durable Joyntures; he huggs and applauds himself, that at length
the mouth of his expectation is made up, and the desired All is come into his
hands; with such, with more than such, with infinite more than such delight, do
poor pilgrim Saints enter upon the Inheritance in light, Col. 1.12.
and the respited glory of the other world. And this is by some Divines
conceived one thing wherein the bliss of men may be called more than that of
Angels; because Angels shall be where they were, and their estate not improved,
(except any will say, that Christ was this of advantage to the Angels, that he
did confirm them when he redeemed us, in which I determine nothing) but men
shall have the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness: after a wet seeds
time, Psa. 126.5.
(They that sow in tears,) comes a fair Harvest, Phil. 3.21.
(shall reap in joy.) There shall be a change of their vile bodies, that they
may be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body. 1 Cor. 15.53.
Their corruptible shall put on incorruption, and mortality shall be swallowed
up of life. And this is that will make heaven more heaven; Heb. 11.9.
because they sojourned as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles, with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, the heirs with them of the same Promise. This is
that will make the Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts more amiable; because the
soul has been kept at a distance, and looked after them with longing. This
City will be more welcome when it comes, because it is to come; the last Reason
of the deteinure of our estates, We seek one to come.

Give me leave now but to show you a piece of spiritual good husbandry, to tell
you how you may improve this Estate in Reversion, and I shall pass from this
particular.

Thank God for it. Value your selves by it. Live sutably to it.

1. Be thankful for this estate. It is a rich one. The reserves of heavenly
glory, are infinitely more than all the enjoyments of the treasures of the
earth. Psa 31.19.
The goodness laid up for one Saint, is much more than the goodness laid out
upon all the world. Isa. 17 14.
God might have given you a portion with the men of the (age, or) world, in
this life, (...). as the Seventy two render it, in this life of theirs: and
possibly you had better have been without it, it will be more easy for you in
the day of your accounts. A confluence of outward things is not always a
kindness. Woe unto you that are rich, Luke 6.2^.
for you have received your consolation. What a sad Recordare does Abraham set
upon the rich man's Recepisti in the Gospel. Son, Luke 16.25.
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. It is the very
Emphasis of evil, to have received all our good. If in this life only we have
hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19.
we are of all men most miserable. But God has provided some better thing for
us, (says the Apostle) sure, something extraordinary it is, that is of Gods
providing. It is the invaluable advantage of a Believer, that he has his
portion to receive, when all the treasures of the Earth shall be exhausted;
that he shall enter upon his estate, when all the inhabitants of the world
shall turn out, and be eternally dispossessed; that he shall be on the taking
hand, when they have nothing to look for but those damnable debenturs of wrath,
and vengeance; when all is past and gone with others, and they have not one
atome of hopes left, then is his all to come. We seek one to come. Be thankful
for this estate; that is the first improvement.

2. Value your selves by this estate. Account not what you are, but what you
shall be. If you look as a Believer now, Psa. 68.13. Sionit. aupud D. Hammond.
Ann. in loc.
you will find him it may be, lying among the pots, (inter scobes, as some give
it from the Syriack, among the broken pieces of Brick, used to set the Pots on,
the receptacle of the Soot and Ashes, and so betokening a low and abject
condition) and this will mis-represent him: if you will see him in his proper
colors and complexion, look at what follows, Yet shall ye be as the wings of a
Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with the yellowness of pure Gold. It
is utterly the fault of Christians, to measure themselves by the standard of
the world, and value their estate by the rate-book of creatures: for so whilst
they inventory what Goods they have, they are always poor; whereas, would they
look only at what they hope for, they could see no end of their riches. If you
would take a right survey of your estats, look at them in promises. A Believers
life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses, but in
the assurance of the things which he expects. Expectation is the great riches
of a Believer. My soul, Psa. 62.5.
wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him. The mercies we have
in expectation, are transcendently beyond whatever the hand of Heaven will
give, or the arms and bosom of the Earth can possibly receive in present.

It was high, that of Alexander, who being asked, when he was dealing whole
Lands and Lordships among his Commanders, if he meant to give all away,
replied, It is nothing I give away, for I keep Hope to my self. It is a
gracious gallantry, and becoming a Christian, when he sees the Earth cut out
among the great possessors of it, to raise his spirit high as his expectation.
Alas! Col. 1.5.
these are nothing, I have hope laid up in Heaven for me: These estates are all
going, mine is coming. We seek one to come. Value your selves by this estate;
that is the second improvement.

3. Live sutably to this estate. And one thing is, you cannot live above it,
the ordinary mischief of estates here below: (for the more you live upon it,
the faster it comes in, the more you have of it. It is not so like the Widow of
Zarepta's Barrel of Meal that wasted not, 1 Kin. 17.16. Met. 15.37.
as the miraculous Loaves in the Gospel, that multiplied by being fed upon.)
all the danger is of living under it, the too familiar practice of those that
pretend (at least) a title to it, and to look for it. How do men live, as if
there were no life but this: pursue estates in this world, as if they had
neither hopes nor desires of another: Exodus 16.3.
preferring Fleshpots and Onyons, before Quails and Manna: the very
Brick-Kilns of Egypt, before the glorious stones of the new Jerusalem:
Possessions in houses of clay, before the reversions of the City of God. If thy
treasure be in Heaven, why is not thy heart there also? If thy hopes be laid
up, then what do thou poring here below? -- Heu regni, rerumque oblite
tuarum? Consult the credit of thine estate and hopes: do nothing unworthy such
pregnant expectation: let thy designs be taller than subcoelestial: evidence
thy aims to be above the world: proceed in mortification and self-denial:
Confess thy self a stranger and pilgrim on the earth; Heb. 11.14.
they that do so declare plainly that they seek a Country: that they have here
no continuing City, but seek one to come.

Which is the third way of improvement of this estate in reversion; Live
sutably to it. And that for the second part of the Text; the estate which a
Believer has in the heavenly City, it is a Reversion only, a City it is, but
that City is to come. We seek one to come.

The third now only remains; The demeanor of a Christian toward that
Reversion, till his estate comes into his hands, he seeks it, We seek one to
come.

I shall contract, and so speak of seeking, that we lose no time. It is
observed the simple word imports, Ardorem and studium, a more than ordinary
earnestness in seeking: (...). Mat. 7.7
and is therefore joined with words, and actions of importunity; so that in
composition (as it is here used) the force being augmented, it denotes the
highest and most eager aspirations of the soul; (...), Expetimus (as some have
rendered it) we seek effectually, and come up to the object in pursuit: we seek
with invincible purposes, not to come short, or be taken off, not to be baffled
with any difficulties, but to seek till we find, thus We seek one to come.

Briefly, Seeking speaks;

Quaerendi sedulitatem.

Inveniendi difficultatem.

Diligence in seeking, and difficulty in finding; them two.

1. Novarin. in Matthew.
Diligence in seeking. Ingentem voluntatis propensionem notat: it shows heart,
and good will: the engaging and setting on all the powers of the soul. It
expresses a painful endeavor, and excepteth against a cool and faint
velleity. Lud. de vita Chri. p. 1. c. 40.
Non enim potest fieri sine conatu magno, quod homo terrenus fiat Civis in
coelo. A right of Citizen is not so easily obtained in the new Jerusalem, none
that is there division'd but upon the chief Captains terms; with a great sum
(not of silver and gold, Act. 22.28.
but with the precious blood of Christ) obtained I this freedom; and 't will
cost him pains besides, ere he find it. It Is no seeking as the woman sought in
the Poet, -- tanquam quae vincere nollet; but as the woman sought in the
Parable, She lights a Candle, Luke 15.8
sweeps the house, (...), and seeks exactly, acurately, solicitously, Luke
16.3.
diligently, till she find it. The Steward in the Gospel, that was to seek for
a place, could not dig, and to beg he was ashamed: but he that seeks the City
in the Text, must do it in Wisdome's mode and method, who dispenses with
neither; A man must both beg and dig for her, and well he can compass her so
too; He must beg; If thou cryest after knowledge, Prove. 2.3.
and liftest up thy voice for understanding. v. 4
And he must dig too; if thou seek her as silver, Et sicut the sauros
effoderis illam; and diggest for her as for hid treasures. It must be a labor
like that of men in a Mine, where desire sets industry on work, and makes
Diligence indefatigable.

Diligence in seeking; that is the first impost. 2. Difficulty in finding. If it
were easily come to, what need endeavors? if obvious, why such seeking? Saint
Augustine tells us of a threefold book for the guidance of Travelers to this
City; Naturae, Scripturae, Creaturae, and yet all will not do, a number miss
the way for all these Directors.

There are four things make this difficulty.

1. Via Arcta. 2. Civitas ignota. 3. Impugnantium vis. 4. Ducentium varietas.

1. Via arcta. The way is norrow: it is not easy to find; and so no wonder the
Prophet tells us of a Nescierunt, Isa. 59.8
They have not known the way of peace; and the Psalmist complains with an Omnes
declinaverunt, Psa. 14.3.
They are all turned aside, and gone out of the way. The Passengers are so few,
the way is not beaten. Judge. 5.6.
It is like those highways in the days of Shamgar, the son of Anath, that
were unoccupied, whilst the Travelers went per calls devios, through
by-waies. Or like those ways of Sion, Thren. 1.4.
that mourned when none came to her solemn Feasts, The ports and passages to
Life, are very strait, the way lies all per angusta; it is but a Lane that
leads to the large and delightful Fields of Elysium. The way to Hell is broad
enough, it is a Road, that to this City is but a Path; Thou will show me the
path of life: Psa. 16.11.
in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore.

2. Civitas ignota. The City is little known, and so as little regarded. Many
talk of it, few understand it. It is a gift not given to all; Matthew. 13.11.
It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, (says
our Savior) but to them it is not given. It is a parable to the most. Men are
well versed in the Regions of the lower world, but their thoughts seldom travel
so far as Heaven. They gaze at the stars, and contemplate the beauty of the
Suburbs: but they are strangers to the Crystal River, Rev. 22.1.
and the Tree of Life, in the midst of the street of the City.

3. Impugnantium vis. The power and strength of enemies, which waylay all that
travel to this City. No coming hither unassaulted. Israel mystical must, as the
literal did, encounter Giants, fight the Anakims, and force a passage into
Canaan. Transivimus per ignem and aquam: Ps. 66.12.
and eduxisti nos in refregerium; It is a transit of fire and water that brings
to the wealthy place. The combinations of hell and darkness are up to attack
us: we must expect to wrestle against Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6.12.
and the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses
in high places. Nor is all peace at home, Hannibal ad portas is not all, our
intestine stirs give us no little trouble: (...), says the Apostle of our
lusts, they are an Army disciplined and drawn up, 1 Pet. 2.11. Chapter 7.1.
They war against the soul. Nay, Militia est vita hominis super terram, (as the
vulgar Latin reads that of Job) the life of man is a warfare upon earth. The
Church now writes militant, engaged on all hands: we are in Joab's case, 2 Sa.
10.9.
The front of the battle is against us, before and behind, and therefore had
best follow his counsel, v. 12.
Be of courage, and let us play the men for the City of our God.

4. Ducentium varietas. Difference among guides, and a strange kind of variety
of them that attempt to lead. Hence it is, that the greatest part of followers
are misled, Viam per avia quaerentes, and so mistaking their City, 2 Kings 6.19.
are in a case like that of the silly Syrians; who blind, thought they were for
Dothan, but seeing, found themselves at Samaria. The world is full of
misguides. To say nothing of the more brutish part of men, that lie so deep
buried in the ruins of the fall, they know no guide but that of sense; there
is a wiser sort, who have somewhat emerged those desolations, and recovered
some steps of degraded nature, following Rationem suscitatam (as the Schools
speak) Reason set up by the advantages of moral acquirings: that yet are not
secure against deflections, and in danger, at least, to come short of this
City. Erasmus indeed seems to justify the sufficiency of this conduct, unless
he play the wanton with us in a piece of Letany; Vix possum me continere quid
dicam, Sancte Socrates Ora pro nobis. But there is no great heed to be had to
Erasmus's opinion in point of Guides, who followed such an one himself as could
not lead him through to this City, Jud. v. 13.
or else they do him wrong that picture him in the midway betwixt Heaven and
Hell. But of all, commend me to the men of wild fire, those (...). (in the
Apostles terms) that with their Erratick lights, will needs show us a new way
to this City, neither Patriarch, nor Prophet, nor Apostle, nor any of the
Saints of former ages, were acquainted with. And which is the mischief on it,
some believe them too; they want not followers, Isa. 9.16.
such as they are. For the Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they
that are led of them, are destroyed. The vulgar Latin in that place is very
expressive; Et erunt qui beatificant populum istum seducentes, and qui
beatificantur, praecipitati: Their seducers shall bless them, or those that
bless them, shall seduce them. Just our case for all the world: whilst those
that head, and lead them, bless them, call them the blessed ones, the honest
men, the people of God, even then are they seducing them, and precipitating
them into ruin. Psalm. 49.13.
Of these we may say as the Psalmist, This their way is their glory. Never were
men so out of the way, as in these distracting days, wherein so many pretend
to conduct. Mat. 24.23.
Lo here is Christ, and lo there! Lo he is in this form, in that Sect,
flying up and down, and crying him (as Lapwings do their young) to be every
where but where he is. Such a stir once made Theudas, Act. 5.36, 37.
and Judas of Galilee, who would needs be some body in their times, and drew
away much people after them, who were scattered and brought to naught. And such
a bustle made Primianus, and Maximianus, in Saint Augustine's days, thought
worthy of their names by a giddy faction, whom they headed; whilst
Postremianus, and Minimianus, were titles more becoming their merits, and
manners, in the judgment of that learned Father. This was our case, and well
it is that we can say it was so. Blessed be God for better Guides, that though
the Lord gave us the bread of adversity, Isa. 30.20.
and the water of affliction, yet our Teachers are not still in a Corner, but
our eyes may see our Teachers.

The finding this City must needs be difficult, where the way is so narrow. The
City so little known. The Opposition so great, and false Guides so many

Difficulty of finding, that is the second import of seeking. We seek one to
come.

For a close of all then; Let this difficulty in finding, put you upon resolves
of seeking this City. Dicit Piger: it is the sluggard that says, There is a
Lion without, Prove. 22.13.
I shall be slain in the streets. A generous spirit is so far from desponding,
that he heightens his courage in the face of danger. Consider that (...), Heb.
2.10.
the Captain of our salvation, and those triumphant Troops, that are now
wearing the Laurel of immortality, how they were all made perfect through
sufferings. For, tell us you noble Army of Martyrs, you invincible Confessors,
who now are clothed in white Robes, Rev. 7.9. Chapter 14.4.
and have Palms in your hands, and follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: how
got you into possession of your City? How came you to enter those Gates of
Pearl, Ch 21 21.
and to tread those Streets paved with pure Gold? Did you not strive to enter?
Did you not seek it, seek it in good earnest, before you found it? Are not you
they who through faith subdued Kingdoms, Heb. 11.33, 34.
wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of Lions,
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the
aliens? Here was Par animis periculum, Danger great as the souls of them that
encountered it. Men and Brethren, you see what seeking is: what mountains of
Opposition you must top, and overpasse: what an Ocean of troubles you must cut
through: what an Armado of difficulties you must charge: all which lie betwixt
you and this City. Let me therefore bespeak you in that Apostolical
Exhortation, 1 Cor. 16.13.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. As for some
of those difficulties, which have distracted so many, and put them to a loss
in the late unhappy days, through mercy you need not fear them: the false
lights are almost out: the Batts and Owls that pestered us in the dark, are
gone to their holes, and dis-appear now the Sun is up; Genesis 45.21.
I shall therefore Give you some provision for the way, (as Joseph did his
Brethren) only direct you to seek in a couple of particulars, and I ha'done.
Orderly, Opportunely, them two.

1. Seek this City Orderly: and that both as to means and end.

1. Jer. 6.18.
As to the means. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask
for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find
rest for your souls. Take heed of new, and untrodden paths, how fair and green
soever they look. It is the same City, and the same way leads to it,
Mortification, Self-denial, Faith, Repentance, Obedience, the use of Prayer,
the Word, and Sacrament, -- En qua via ducit in urbem. Beware of letting down
Boats from the Ship, Act. 27.30, 31.
(as Saint Paul's Ship-men would have done) of gathering Churches out of the
Church, except ye abide in the Ship ye cannot be saved.

2. As to the End. That Is primum in intention, the first thing in a wise man's
thoughts, though last in his atchievings. Mat 6.33.
Our Saviors Quaerite primum, directs us to this method, tells us quaerite
will not do without primum: First seek the Kingdom of God. Let this City be
uppermost in your minds, and go along with your leading thoughts. Be sure the
Dew of Heaven go before the Fatness of the Earth. Set it at your right hand
now, and it will give you that place at the last day. To seek any thing before
it, is to be to seek for every thing, and sit down with loss. It is an
inversion of order, to seek it any where but first. Seek it Orderly, that is
first.

2. Seek it Opportunely. To every thing there is a season, Eccle. 3.1.
and a time to every purpose under Heaven; and then surely to seeking Heaven
above all. Hic est vitae finis, pervenire ad vitam cujus non est finis. This
life is our season for making sure of another. Every thing is beautiful in his
time, says the Princely Preacher. v. 11.
The beauty of a flower is in it is season, of fruit in it is season; and a soul
seeking Heaven in season, is the greatest beauty on this side the Sun.
Opportunity is that price in the hand, Prove. 17.16.
if there be but a heart to it, that is all, and Fool is his name that has not.
Opportunity seems to say to us (as our Savior to the Pharisees) Yet a little
while am I with you, Joh. 7.33, 34.
and then I go to him that sent me: Ye shall seek me, Isa. 55.6.
and shall not find me. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found. There is a time
while God may, and when he will not be found. The everlasting arms will not
always be open for reception. The healing wings will not always be expanded
and stretched out for gathering. The Spirit will not always strive with Flesh.
Patience will not always bear, nor Long-suffering wait for ever. Mat. 25.11,
12.
The foolish Virgins sought to enter, but 'twas too late, an intempestive
seeking, and so went without, Nescio vos, was their doom: Verily I say unto
you, I know you not. Esau, with his after-wit, Heb. 12.17.
would have inherited the blessing, but was rejected: for he found no place of
repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. Luk 16.24, 26.
The rich man in torments would have had but a drop of water, and 't would not,
could not be, for (...), The Gulf is fixed; Mercy can have no pass; all
intercourse is cut off, and hopeless. 2 Co. 6.2.
Now is the accepted time, with an Ecce before it, that you may take special
notice of it; behold now is the day of salvation. Now is, and but now is, not
is now, and ever shall be. The Morning comes, and also the night. Our days
wheel away in their vicissitudes, and we purpose to enquire and seek, but when
begin we? Si quaeritis, quaerite, if you will enquire, enquire ye: return,
come. The City to come, will not be come to without seeking. But we seek one to
come.

I pass now from the Text, to the occasion of our meeting; or rather from one
Text to another. And a large one it is, that I am now to speak on: no less
than the Memorials of that Elect Lady, the Lady Sybilla Anderson, that miracle
of her sex and time. A Text, not for an hour, but an age: not for a Sermon, but
a Volumn. Her very name is a Sermon to them that knew her. And if any in the
Congregation was so unhappy as to be a stranger to her, I shall give them a
guess at her, scarce so much, I dare venture at no more.

A woman that fears the Lord, Prove. 31.30.
she shall be praised, says Solomon; or rather (if I mistake not) says Queen
Bathsheba, in her instructions to King Lemuel, alias, Solomon her Son. Do you
ask who shall praise her? God shall praise her in the Judgment, Then shall
every man and woman have praise of God. 1 Cor. 4.5. Prove. 31.31.
Let her own works praise her in the Gates. But works are not loud enough to
praise her to the deaf world: Ibidem. Diodat. in Loc.
may she not then have some other help? Yes. Give her of the fruit of her
hands. Let every one give her that praise, honor, and blessing, which she
deserves by reason of her virtues. Minister and People, every one owes their
contribution; here is a warrant for any, for all to praise her. So that I care
not much, if there chance to be here any of that sower and sullen generation,
that are against all order, and decency, both to the living and to the dead.

And now methinks I am muchwhat in the case of Elihu; En venture meus quasi
mustum absque spiraculo! Job 32.18, 19.
As Wine which has no vent. For I am full of matter, and the spirit within me
constrains me. And I will follow his course; I will speak that I may breath.

We Will begin (if you please) at her beginning, her extraction, and original.
She and it were mutually credits to one another. She was none of those Ladies
of the late edition; those false printed pieces, for whom the just God has now
provided a Deleatur, Psalm. 109.13.
In the generation following, let their name be blotted out. She was descended
(says our Antiquary and Oracle) from the Barons of Malpas, Camd. Brit. in
Cheshire.
and that is as high and far, as we can with any certainty trace the footsteps
of honor; which I would not name, if her personal worth had not been
answerable; her graces were the more resplendent for it; as a Jewel set in Gold
is more rich and orient, than when it is unpolished, and in its native dirt.

-- Nec census in illa
Nobilitate sua major: Ovid. Met. l. 9.
sed vita fidesque
Inculpata fuit --
If we look at her personal excellencies, they were many and rare, I shall
speak of them first, and then of her relative merits.

Her outside presents it self first to view, and that was ever decent, and
suiting her degree; not light and vain, the too familiar folly of that sex, who
by their garb might go for Adventures in some such Ship as that of Solomon's, 1
K. 10.22.
that brought Apes and Peacocks. She was none of those Ladies the Father
chides, Bern.
Quae fulgent monilibus, sordent moribus, whose Jewels were rich, and Manners
rusty. Pet. 3.3.
Her adorning was after Saint Peter's dress, not that (...), That outward, of
plating the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: but the
hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, the ornament of a
meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.

Her countenance was grave and sober, and serene too. Ovid.
She was Pollens Matrona, in the Poets phrase, a Lady of an authoritative
aspect; a Correctoress of sin in her very looks: insomuch that those whom
neither Law nor Conscience could oblige to a regular composure elsewhere,
studied a deportment, and durst not trust their demeanor without a watch and
guard in her presence.

Her carriage affable, free, courteous: and yet so exact, she left no place to
fasten an accusation upon her, even by the most critical Animadvertors upon
lives and actions.

Her wit quick and sharp, but such an allay of humility withal, that it never
made any sallies to the prejudice of her judgment and prudence.

Her discourse pregnant, proper, significative, unaffected. The tongue, that
(...), as St. James calls it, Jam. 3.8.
so unruly in others, was by her well commanded. Like that good woman in the
Proverbs, Chapter 31.26.
She opened her mouth in wisdom, and in her tongue was the Law of kindness. She
opened it in wisdom; she did not open it at random, and continually, but duly
shut it, and discreetly opened it. Her speech passed David's Watch, Psa. 141 3.
which stood at the door of her lips: and showed Saint Paul's seasoning, Col 4.6.
had abundance of salt, salt of wit, and salt of grace. This captived her
Auditors whilst they were with her, and seldom sent them from her without
wonder, -- Nec vox hominem sonat, O Dea certe. --

She was another Abigail for her wisdom, another Sybil indeed, for she did Rem
nominis implere, so make good her name, that (for ought I know) she may make
good her place too among those celebrated Prophetesses, whose fame has filled
the world.

Her knowledge, so general, so divine, that she might seem born to justify the
probability of that strange Convention, Anno 694. Sr. H. Spelm. Counc. p. 190.
under Withred King of Kent, and Bertuald Archbishop of Britain, (or
Canterbury) where Women sat in Council, and subscribed transactions
Ecclesiastical.

This, all this, more than this, she was in her self. Let us now view her in
her References.

1. To God, before whom she walked, and with whom she now is in glory. Him she
loved, feared, served; which is more for her honor, comfort, and advantage,
than all those accomplishments of flesh and blood, which might gain her a name
on earth, but never provide her a place in heaven. And to this I shall bring in
two sufficient witnesses.

1. Her private Devotions, which were due and constant: thinking no day well
spent, wherein she did not send to Heaven, and exchange prayers for mercies
with him whom her soul loved. And for her furtherance and advantage in this
duty, she was wont to cut her self out work, by keeping Catalogues of her sins,
that none might escape her confession, when she came to prostrate her soul
before the all-seeing Eye. I have seen (but very lately, I wish I had seen them
sooner, you might have had a better account of them) some papers under her own
hand, wherein she had written what sins she desired might be blotted out: what
mercies were seasonable to beg, for her self, her Relations, the Church, the
Kingdom. And herein she dealt faithfully, would not wink at small faults in
her self; Book'd her very failings, and Item'd the least infirmity, which
doubtless will make the way easy, and happy for passing her last accounts,
Apocal. 20.12.
and clearing her in that day, when the Books shall be opened.

And for these prayers of hers, many fared better, and may do now she is gone:
her self, her family, her friends, may I not say the whole Kingdom? Have we
not cause to think, that the contributions of her prayers, among many others,
helped not a little to bring His most Excellent Majesty in, upon those just and
honorable grounds, which we look at, not without joy and astonishment this
day? Exodus 17.11.
The hands of Moses lifted up on the Mount, gave Amalek the rout, when the Arms
of all Israel in the valley, were of no force.

2. Her zeal to the House of Prayer; which, like that of David, Psa 69.9.
had eaten her up, whilst the zeal of others, had almost eaten up those houses.
She had a large share in that promise, Isa. 56.7.
I will make them joyful in my House of Prayer. She did not forsake the
assembly, as the manner of some is: (and it is to be hoped those manners will
be mended shortly) nor was she like him in the Poet, Hor. Car. li. 1. Od. 34.
-- Parcus Deorum cultor and infrequens -- One that came seldom, when list and
leisure would give her leave: but disposed like those in the Psalmist, Psa.
122.2.
Our feet shall stand, shall stand often, within thy gates O Jerusalem: of
David's temper just, Psa. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell
in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

She was swift to hear, Ja. 1.19.
and yet not so swift to swallow down all for sound Doctrine, which she heard.
She had a careful and commendable jealousy over the plausible Doctrines of the
late days of defection; and could spy Rebellion, when it preached in the Cloak
of Religion. As the noble Bereans, Act. 17.11.
she received the Word with all readiness of mind: but withal, searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. She took not truths upon trust,
and the bare credit of Authors, no, not of those, whose names were most tossed,
and sounded no less than Oracular in the world; Ad legem magis, she kept to
that, To the Law, and to the Testimony. Isa. 8.20.
She knew there was much Copper Divinity become current, and therefore brought
it to the Touch, being cautioned by the Apostle, 1 These. 5.21.
to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. So that look at her in
this first reference, and she has good right in that title of Piissima,
sometimes given by eminency to St. Hellen, the Mother of Constantine; or she
may put in her claim to Hierophile, Sybilla Cu^ana dict. ^ierophile ^ud Suid.
given as an Agnomen once to one of her name-sakes. That for her reference to
God.

2. To Gods Lieutenant, her, and our Sovereign, she was invincibly faithful,
following him through the vicissitudes of his fortunes, with constancy and
resolution. No assaults could batter, no siege force a surrender of her
loyalty; she had trial of both. She knew how to suffer, better than the Kings
Enemies to oppress, and they were pretty good at it. Such a composition of
Piety and Loyalty, one should rarely meet withal. Her practice was an
irrefragable confutation to that black-mouthed slander, (of those who called
themselves only honest that least deserved it) that a Royalist could not be
Religious.

I should not have mentioned this of her, but in opposition to the Bodkins and
Thimbles, the Sword and Gantlet of that sex, which were made use of, to promote
the beginnings of the late Rebellion. She was a person of undaunted, untainted
loyalty, and yet her confidence rarely tempered with an holy fear, still
showing courage in the worst, fear in the best of times.

Sperat infestis, Hor. Carm. l. 2. O. 10.
metuit secundis
Alteram sortem, been praeparatum
Pectus --
And that was her second public reference.

3. To Gods Church she was rarely devoted: praying often and earnestly for the
peace of Jerusalem, Psa. 1.22.6.
and she prospered for loving of it. Her love to this Church, will need no
further evidence, when I have told you, it was her constant practice, during
our late confusions in Worship, to repair to places, where Common Prayer, and
Administration of Sacraments might be had according to the use of the Church of
England. Which is so much the more for her honor, as feminine weakness
exposes sooner to the attempts of seducers. The Apostle tells us who are the
spoils of those Worthies, 2 Timothy 3.6.
They creep into houses, and lead captive silly women. It is notoriously known,
that these swelled their Bills of Proselites, and gratified the triumphs of
those popular Rabbi's, who were wont to Poll for applause, and glory more in
the noise and number, than in the worth and wisdom of their Disciples; but
being like bodies Electrical, whose alliciency goes no further than straw or
chafe; she was too weighty for such attractions.

If you now look a while at her private references, 1. She was as good a Wife
as a woman. She had the way to make gains of an Husband (as St. (...). 1 ^et.
3.1.
Peter's word signifies, and a good way too, such a way as Livia had to win
hers, which Dio says, was Multa modestia.

We had too sad a testimony of her affection, in those impressions which his
death made upon her; indeed we may date her death from his: for we can scarce
say she lived since, unless to bewail her life; Heu mihi, Psa. 120 5.
quia incolatus meus prolongatus est! As if she had taken up Ruths resolution,
Ruth 1.17.
Where thou dyest, will I dye, and there will I be buried And we may
commemorate them in David's Funeral expressions, 2 Sa. 1.23.
They were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not
divided.

-- Ille dies utramque Hor. Carm. li. 2. Od. 17.

Ducet ruinam --
2. Though she had not the breasts, yet she had the bowels of a Mother. And
even in that relation she was so tender, and affectionate, and deserved so
well, that her Children will rise up and call her blessed, (that is) both bless
her, and bless God for her, as some gloss upon that place.

3. And a Mater-familias she was too, a Mother as well as a Mistress to her
Family. With the virtuous woman (in that so often named Chapter of the
Proverbs) She looked well to the ways of her Household. Speculatur itinera
domus suae: she watches as from a Tower, for the security of her family, that
they may go out and come in, in peace. It was her care, even now in her
sickness, that prayers among them might not be laid aside with her; and in her
health, not over-imploying them, she would often say, it was her desire, her
servants might have leisure to serve God as well as her self.

These were her Relations within doors; nor was her goodness circumscribed with
the walls of her house; but if you follow her from home, you may trace her by
the footsteps of her friendship and charity, so careful she was (...), and
(...), 1 Timothy 6.18.
both to do good, and be rich in good works, away to grow rich that few use,
the world will not believe it.

I need not speak here of her compassions toward those in misery, her care and
constancy, in visiting the sick, relieving the poor, supporting the weak, and
supplying those in want: there are enough can show those Garments which Dorcas
made when she was yet alive. Act. 9.39.


Thus lived this excellent Lady, Act. 23.1.
in all good conscience before God, all her days. And suitable to her life, was
her death, mark the perfect, Psa. 37.37.
and behold the upright: for the end of that man, and woman, is peace.

When the days drew near that she must dye, Genesis 47.29.
she fell sick by proxy, of the Small Pox, Madam K. Egerton.
in a young Lady of her Relation, such was her tenderness of her. And knowing
how fatal that disease had been to many of her flesh and blood, she entertains
it, as coming on the same errand with Hezekiahs messenger; 2 K. 20.1.
Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye, and not live. A little warning
serves a Tenant that is provided for a remove. She Is now all upon flitting,
breaths after her change; Psa. 55.6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be at rest!
Hereupon she makes her Will, disposes of her Estate, that she might have no
weights upon her soul, ready to take its flight; nothing to incumber her
thoughts, or stand betwixt her, and her desired happiness; but wholly and
freely intend her expedition for another world. Which done, her hand will tell
you where her heart was: for thus she subscribes that Testament of hers, Psa.
116.7.
And now return to thy rest O my soul.

God finding her thus prepared for himself, sends another messenger for her,
(not the Pox, which she loved not, and upon some account feared, but) a
Quartane Ague, a messenger not so ugly, but as sharp as the other. This, after
several assaults, began to prevail upon her, and insult over her, insomuch that
she saw (with Peter) I must shortly put off my Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.14.
and said (with Hezekiah) In the cutting off of my days, Isa. 38.10.
I shall go to the gates of the grave. I am deprived of the residue of my
years. Being now to go through the valley of the shadow of death, she sought a
staff of comfort to support her in the way; and some few days before received
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that with so much fervency, and holy
appetite, so eating the flesh of the Son of man, and so drinking his blood, as
gave good evidence she has eternal life, Joh. 6.54.
and that he will raise her up at the last day. And one thing I may not omit
without injury to her, that notwithstanding her weakness, she would not receive
it any ways but kneeling, in detestation of that slovenly, Elephant Devotion
of our days, and in obedience to the Orders of the Church, and chiefly, in
testimony of that great humility of soul, with which she desired to worship,
and fall down before the Lord her Maker. And this was the last Manna she ate on
this side Jordan.

The day before she dyed, I came to visit her, and found the time of her
departure was at hand. She then desired me to pray with her, and to absolve
her, according to the use of the Church of England; which accordingly I did,
and however some living Sectaries set light by it, yet I am sure, she, and
other dying Saints, have found no little comfort in it, in the hour of their
extremity. This I am sure was the practice of the Church, long enough before
Presbytery (as we now use the word) was either made or thought on. And Fanatic
is no new word; it was used as a term fitting men of contrary opinions, many
years since, Apud Marlor. p. 602. c. 2.
by Musculus; Fanaticos autem homines sciamus, dum hanc legationem spernunt,
Calv. Instit. l. 4. Cap. 4. Sect. 12.
Christi sanguinem pedibus calcare. And if Mr. Calvin be not worn out of credit
with these men, they may see him very earnest in asserting the expediency of
this delegation, to the Ministers of the Gospel. Job. 20.23.
And undoubtedly that Commission, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them, being the first words that our Savior spoke to the Disciples all
together, after his resurrection, and upon the very day of it, coming from his
breath as soon as it was immortal (as the Fathers observe) carries some notable
import of power along with it, was not to dye with the Apostles, and terminate
in their persons; but derives this power of the Keys to infinite succession,
and is to be a standing Ordinance in the Church of God to the end of the world.
I beg pardon for this digression, the petulancy of these times has forced it
from me.

Give me leave now to tell you of one passage very remarkable in her, (I have
already spoke of it, little thinking it would fall to my lot to tell it here)
when I had read the Versicle, appointed in the visitation of the sick, O Lord,
save thy Servant, and some rehearsed the (...), Which puts her trust in
thee: She started up with much earnestness, hands, and eyes, and heart, and
all, lift up, and added, I, and my whole confidence Lord: as if she apprehended
Trust too low, to speak the height of her soul now sublimated, and ready to go
to the God of the spirits of all flesh.

In this height of well-grounded confidence, I left her, full of the comforts
of God, fit for the Convoy of Angels, in the Confines of that glory she had so
long breathed after; in in the Suburbs of that City she had so earnestly
sought, and immediately entered, Rev. 21.23.
which the glory of God lightens, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

God had given her her hearts desire, to see what she had often begged to see,
though with a nunc dimittis in her mouth: our rejected, almost abjured King,
recalled with honor, and without blood, coming home in triumph upon the wings
of his peoples prayers and votes; our divided, almost devoured Church, restored
to some hopeful degrees of peace, and soundness; our broken, almost ruined
Nation, put into somerepairs, and well on the way toward tranquillity, and
plenty; Psa 128.6.
she saw (his) childrens children, (whom love made her own) and peace upon
Israel: and there being nothing on Earth to be seen after these, she is gone to
Heaven, to see the complement of all sights, the blessed face of God, and take
possession of that City, we are still seeking after.

We seek one to come.
FINIS.

