THE CHASTE and LOST LOVERS: Lively shadowed in the persons of Arcadius and
Sepha, and illustrated with the several stories of Haemon and Antigone, Eramio
and Amissa, Phaon and Sappho, Delithason and Verista.

Being a description of several LOVERS smiling with delight, and with hopes
fresh as their youth, and fair as their beauties in the beginning of their
Affections, and covered with Blood and Horror in the conclusion.

To this is added the Contestation betwixt Bacchus and Diana, and certain
Sonnets of the Author to AURORA.

Digested into three Poems, by Will. Bosworth, Gent.

-- Me quoque
Impune volare, and sereno
Calliope dedit ire coelo.
London, Prnted for William Shears, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bible
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

To the true Lover of all good Learning, the Honorable Iobn Finch, Esquire
SIR,
IF Poetry be truly conceived to carry some Divinity with it; and Poets, on
what Subjects soever their Fancies have discoursed, have bin intitaled Divine,
as the Divine Mr. Spencer, the Divine Ronsard, the Divine Ariosto; how much
more properly may they be esteemed to be Divine, who have made chaste Love their
Argument, which is a fire descended from Heaven, and (habitual in its Action)
is always ascending and aspiring to it: This is that Love which Xenophon does
distinguish from the sensual, and does call it The heavenly Venus, and with
this our Poet being powerfully inspired has breathed forth these happy
raptures, to declare, That Love and the Muses are so near of kin, that the
greatest Poets are the greatest Lovers.

And Sir, although there is no man a more absolute master of his passions than
your self, and therefore you cannot be said to be subjected unto Love, yet it
shall be no dishonor to you to acknowledge your self to be a lover of the
Muses. In this confidence I have made bold to tender unto you these Poems, the
work of a young Gentleman of 19 years of Age, who had he lived, might have been
as well the Wonder as the Delight of the Arts, and been advanced by them
amongst the highest in the Temple of Fame. The Myrtle and the Cypress Groves,
which he made more innocent by his Love, shall remember, and the music of the
Birds shall teach every tree to repeat to one another his chaste complaint, and
the flourish of the trees shall endeavor to raise unto Heaven his name, which
they shall wear ingraved on their leaves. These are only his first flights,
his first fruits, the early flowers of his youth; flowers they are, but so
sweetly violent, that as their Beauties do arrest our eyes, so (I hope) their
perfume will continue through many Ages to testify the Influence of your
protection, and the most graceful resentments of him who is

Sir, Your most humble and devoted servant, R. C.


To the Reader.
THis Book has the fate which the modesty of Antiquity did assign to their
Books, which is, not to be extant till the Death of the Auth^r, declining
thereby the p^esumption of an assumed and a saucy Immortality, and owing this
new life, which by their remaining labors they received, to the Benefit and
Commendation of Posterity. These Poems are secure in themselves, and neither
fear the tongue of the Detractor, nor desire the praise of the Encomiastick,
their one worth can best speak their own merit, but this it shall be lawful
for me to insert, that in one Book and of so small a bulk you shall seldom
see more cont^ined, -- He does swell
Not with th'how much he writes, but th'how well.
You shall find in this System the Idea of Poetry at large, and in one garland
all the flowers on the Hill of Parnasus, or on the banks of Helicon.

The high, the fluent, and the pathetick discourses of his lovers, and the
transformation of them after their death into precious stones, into Birds, into
Flowers, or into Monuments of Marble, you shall find has allusion to Ovids
Metamorphosis, which in Ovids own judgment was the best piece that ever he
composed, and for which with most confidence, he does seem to challenge to
himself the deserved honor of a perpetual Fame.

The strength of his fancy, and the shadowing of it in words he takes from Mr.
Marlow in his Hero and Leander, whose mighty lines Mr. Benjamin Johnson (a man
sensible enough of his own abilities) was often heard to say, that they were
Examples fitter for admiration than for parallel, you shall find our Author
every where in this imitation. This the one. Some say fair Cupid unto her
inclined,
Mourned as he went, and thinking on her pined.
And in another place, And as she went, casting her eyes aside,
Many admiring at her beauty died.
This the other, And mighty Princes of her love denied,
Pined as they went, and thinking on her died.
You shall find also how studious he is to follow him in those many quick and
short sentences at the close of his fanc^, with which he every where does adorn
his writings.

The weaving of one story into another and the significant flourish that does
attend it is the peculiar Grace of Sir Philip Sidney, whom our Author does so
happily imitate, as if he were one of the same Inteligences that moved in that
incomparable Compass.

His making the end of one Verse to be the frequent beginning of the other
(besides the Art of the Trope) was the labor and delight of Mr. Edmund Specer,
whom Sir Walt Raleigh and S. Ke^e^^ Digby were used to call the English
Virgill, and indeed Virgill himself did often use it, and in my opinion with a
greater grace, making the last word only of his Verso to be the beginning of
the Verse following, as -- Sequitur pulcherrimus Astur
Astur equo sidens, and ve^si^oloribus armis.
Virgill has nothing more usual than this graceful way of repetition, as
those who are most conversant with him, can readily witness with me. Our
Authors making use of one and the same Verse in several places is also taken
from Virgill, as you shall often find in his Georgicks, which he would never
have let pass (being full twelve years in the completing of that work) if he
had conceived it would have bin looked upon as an imperfection either of two
much Haste or Sloth, and this also is often to be found in Homer.

You behold now how many, and what great Examples our Author has propounded to
himself to imitate, if it be objected, that it is a disparagement to imitate
any, be they never so excelent (according to that of Horace) O imitatorum
stultum pecus; It is no absurdity to make answer, that Horace wrote that in a
critical hour, when he abounded with a hypercrytical sense for if you please
to look upon the Fragments of those Greek Poets, which in many books are
inserted at the end of Pindar, you shall undoubtedly find that Horace has
translated as much of them as are now extant word for word, and put them into
the first book of his Odes, which is very easy in this place to be
represented, but that it is much beyond our room, and a little besides our
subject.

But more fully to satisfy the objection, it may be answered, that in this
Horace had no relation at all to the words or fancy of the Imitator, but to
these new numbers, and measures, which he first taught the Roman Muse to tread,
and this makes him so much to magnify himself.

Libera per vacuum posui vestigia princeps. The works of Virgill are nothing
else but mere Imitations^ in his Eclogues he follows Theocritus, in his
Aeaeids, Homer, in his Georgicks he imitateth Hesiod, which he conceives to be
so far from his prejudice, that he esteems it his glory. Ascraeumque Virg.
Georg. lib. 3.
cano Romana per oppida carmen. And yet because the same subject was not
treated on before by any Latin Poet, you may observe how confident he is of
himself: -- Iuvat ire viam qua nulla priorum
Castaliam molli deducitur orbita clivo. Lib. Georg 2.

These praelibations may serve not only to discharge our Author, but to raise
him above those accusations which peradventure some distempered Critics might
have charged him with. The other part of his invention is entirely his own,
smooth yet smart, and as clear as it is active! Now when all this shall be done
at nineteen years of age, and out of a desire only to please you, what
entertainment should you give unto it? with what flowers should you crown his
memory, who brought so many flowers to crown your delight? Take them, and
peruse them, his leaves invite every hand to turn them over; The young men may
read them for their Information, and with some sympathy of affection; The old
men for their Recreation, The Ladies may learn them by heart, and repeat them
to one another, for this the Muses, upon their credit, have given me in charge
to impart unto them, That whatsoever they shall lay forth on his praises (the
Book readover) they will find it paid back to them in the reckoning.

R. C.
On the Amorous and pathetick story of Arcadius and Sepha, etc.
LO here the Muse which to our eye discovers
The bleeding Fate of many haples Lovers^
What though his warbling lyre not gravely rings
With such deep notes as lofty CLIO sings,
His Muse is soft, as sweet, and though not strong,
Pathetick, lively, all on fire, and young,
Flowing with tears and smiles, and full of sport,
As fits the subject of fair VENUS Court,
And this may Court you to peruse his Book;
So often in the streets with prompter eyes we look
On lovely Girls who but their shooe-strings tie,
Than Wives, their Garters making fast more high.
L. B.
On the exact and elabourate story of Arcadius and Sepha, and the rest of the
Beavy of the Lovers:
WHat brave young Man is this, whose lute does lead
The dancing Rocks, and teach the Woods to tread?
Is Thracian Orpheus revived, whose lay
Has now charmed Hell, to get himself away?
(Son of the Arts and Heaven) our hearts we fill,
With joy and zeal to gratulate thy skill;
What fitting tributes shall we bring thee now,
To crown thy merits, and adorn thy brow;
For since thy harp to follow Trees are graced,
Bays of themselves unto thy Brows maks haste
F. L.
An Epitaph on the deceased Author, in allusion to his Sonnets on Aurora.
SAd Lover, thou who to thy cruel Saint,
Did teach thy Muse to breath thy last complaint,
Whilst thou the Ends that Sex aimed at made known,
Me thought I heard thee thus to speak thy own;
Lo here the Glory of all Women's pride,
The matchless Trophy of their Beauties might,
To kill by Treason, and hid fires provide
Those to devour whom they do most invite;
Poor injured ashes! you too late have tried,
How ill they do the gentlest hearts requite;
O that in Beauties should those flames be known,
Which burn our breasts, yet never warm their own!
E. G.
On the deathlesse Poems of the deceased Author.
HAppy young Man, who though laid under ground,
Thy name to Honor a sure way has found;
Thy chaste Arcadius shall with Sepha live,
Whiles the kind Sun warmth to the Earth shall give,
And every Age shall take delight to see
Fair Haemon met with fair Antigone;
Whiles thankful Rivers to the Seas make have
Eramioes and Amissaes love shall last;
No more shall Phaon by contempt be led,
But foot to foot shall now with Sappho tread,
And Delithasons youth, and chaste desires
Shall keep more warm his fair Veristaes fires;
Thus whilst that thou with thy immortal lays,
Beauty, and Love, and Innocence do praise,
That praise which thou to others worths do lend,
Does make thy own high as the Stars ascend.
S. P.
On these labored Poems of the deceased Author, Mr. WILLIAM BOSWORTH.
THese bleeding, Lovers, and unstaind desires,
Their undry'd tears, and their religious fires,
And their Stars sullen malice, which did bend
Their lives and loves to an untimely end,
May bring the pious Reader with perfumes
Of flowr's and sighs to worship at their tombs
And their high flames admire; But o forbear
That hasty zeal, and do not tread too near,
For know the flames so ardent were that burned
Their suffering hearts, and them to ashes turned,
That by your sighs they may too soon be blown
Into new life, and fet on fire your own.
L. C.
The BOOK to the READER.
Reader,
MY Author vowed to prattle forth his Loves,
And fill the azure skies with watery clouds:
My Author vowed to dwell in shady groves,
And paint his Fortune in Diana's shrouds.
For the best Artist that the world admires,
Was but the Artist of his own Desires.
You must not then expect a curious strain,
That best befits the queintness of his story,
No, that is a shadow for a riper brain,
Let them report it, that have had the glory,
The gilded tresses of the clearest shining,
Have neither force in rising nor declining.
Then take the branches of his tender vine,
Which here you have presented, though he fears,
You Will draw his meaning by too strict a line,
For yet he never attained to thrice seven years.
Yet let me pass, and e're his day see's night,
His Hawk may please you with a fairer slight.
Arcadius and Sepha.
(1)
NEar to the Caspian streights, where Dolphins sing,
Hippobatos, a verdant Meadow lay,
Along which Meadow ran a silver Spring,
Winding her streams as careless of her way,
Here would she stay, and seem returning home,
Till with her self, her self was overcome.
(2)
Down by which brook there sat a little Ladd,
A little Ladd named A Poet of Creet.
Epimenides,
Close to his foot a little Dog he had,
Whose Masters face Charactered his disease,
Sighing he said, and to the Powers above,
Make me (o Gods) immortal for my love.
(3)
Snatch hence my soul, the better part I have,
And him of his detested life deprive,
Who vows to live obscurely in a Cave,
Shall Sepha die, and I remain alive?
Satyrs go weep, and when ye hear her name,
Blow forth my Loves inevitable fame.
(4)
Let swiftest thoughts possess my Sepha's name,
And sound her praise as swift as Eagles fly,
Let Marble be proud to preserve the same,
Left rotten time out-slip her memory,
Lest Trumpets cease to sound, and so forbear it.
Let Ecchoe's learn to dictate when they hear it.
(5)
Ye sliding streams, that pass so gently by,
Winding your waves, and do not faster flee,
Joy you to hear my Sepha's Elegy?
Or do you linger to condole with me?
It Is to condole, since such is my estate,
Your bubling streams do murmur at my fate.
(6)
Ye little Birds that used to sit and sing,
While Driades with Musicks nimble touch,
(When woods and valleys did of Sepha ring)
Present harmonious tunes, to make her couch,
A nest of Heavenly raptures, sweeter far,
With purer notes, than earthly noises are.
(7)
Why do you now my Sepha's tunes forbear?
Why do you cease to tune my Sepha's lays?
Why do'n't you now to wonted trees repair?
Why do'n't you sit and sing my Sepha's praise?
Ye warbling Chanters that such Music bred,
Are ye grown weary, or is Sepha dead?
(8)
Or Sepha dead? is, Heavenly Sepha dead?
No more shall earth be happy with her sweet,
No more shall eyes be with her beauty fed,
No more shall slowers be proud to kiss her feet,
No more shall Phoebus court her in a shower,
No more shall Bee's mistake her for a flower.
(9)
In blessed times when virtuous Sepha lived,
The happy earth was with her beauty dressed,
Each greedy eye, that saw not Sepha, grieved,
Each flower was proud, to be by Sepha pressed,
Love-showring P^oebus spared no amorous time,
And Bees on her did think to gather Thyme.
(10)
Blessed be the season, and the hour blessed,
When first my eyes in Sepha's eyes were seen,
When first my hopes began to build their nest,
When first I saw her walking on yo^ Green,
When first my lips s^ipt Nectar from her breast,
Blessed be the season, and the hour blessed.
(11)
Ye stately Pines that dwell on lofty Hills,
Stoop down your heads with a dejected fall,
Let Boreas go sport with whom he wills,
And though you knew her not, nor never shall,
Sob forth her plaints with a bewailing eye,
And say 'twas Sepha's death that made you dye.
(12)
Smilax, and Crocus, little blushing flowers,
Hence cease your red, and let your pale begin,
And, say you want those sweet distilling showers,
That P^oebus used to Court fair Sepha in,
Lillies forbear to stoop your drooping heads;
For now your shame, the fairest Lillie's dead.
(13)
That Lillie's dead in whom all graces been,
That Lillie's dead, the fairest of the Nine;
That Lillie's dead, where Natures art was seen,
That Lillie's dead, whose odours were divine.
That Lower, than whom more fairer there was none;
Is plucked away, the fairest Lillie's gone.
(14)
She was the fairest, and the sweetest creature,
That ever yet was subject to the Gods,
For they resolved she was the only feature,
In whom they joy'd, the Powers delight in odds,
To deck their tents, Fair Sepha 'twas that moved
My soul to bless, thee Sepha whom I loved.
(15)
Some Poets feign there is a Heaven on Earth,
Earth has its joys to make a happy time,
Admired odors giving a new birth,
And sweetning joys, with M^lli-^lor^'s thyme;
It Is not a feigned, but Heaven rightly famed,
For I enjoyed the Heaven the Poets named.
(16)
Jove was propitious when ^ first begun
To Court fair Sepha, Eccho's nimble charm:
Rose-cheek't Adonis, fairer than the Sun,
Had not a sweeter choice, nor kinder harm;
Rough-footed Satyrs, Satyrs, Nymphs and Fauns,
Scattered her praise througho^t Diana's lawns.
(17)
If I but walked in T^mpe, or the Groves,
To meditate my melancholy lays,
I was saluted with the murmuring loves
Of shady Pines, repining at her praise,
Grieved at her praise, when they her name did hear,
They sigh for want of her sweet presence there.
(18)
Or if, (weary of sighs) I left the bowers,
To recreate me in the whispring Air.
I was saluted with distilling showers,
That brought me tidings of my sweetest fair.
Coming from Heaven they told me news of this,
Jove had prepared already for her bliss.
(19)
If to the Mountains I a voyage took,
Mountains with Roses, and with Pinks adorned,
There lay Adonis by his silver hook,
Courted by Venus, Venus by him scorned,
Venus with tears presents young Cupid's letter,
He hates her vows, and loves fair Sepha better.
(20)
If to the Garden Flora me invited,
Where all the dainty flowers are said to lie,
Those dainty ^lowers, that so much on^e delighted,
Are now abasht, and in their beauty dye,
Lillies and Roses startle at her name,
One pale for fear, the other red for shame.
(21)
If to the Woods persuaded by my Muse,
Even there were Echoes of ^air Sepha's glory,
The warbling Chanters made a fine excu^e,
For her delay; and chanted forth the story
Of her best praise; by which I understood,
They strived with tunes to tell her to the wood.
(22)
If I but chanced to walk unto the springs,
There sat the Muses warbling forth her story,
Wanton Thalia with sweet raptures sings,
Folding her name in Heavens immortal glory.
With Hymns, and lays, they prattle forth delight,
And count her name the pen with which they write.
(23)
Yet sad Melpomine rejoices not,
Nor ought but imprecations 'stows upon her,
She says her beauty is to her a blot,
Whose so much goodness robs them of their honor,
Help then Melpomine with thy sad ver^e,
To tell her fate, and houl upon her Hearse.
(24)
These were the plaints the (...) Lad bestowed
The funerals of his fair Sepha's death,
Behold said he, the service that I owed,
And vowed to pay ( Sepha) shall be my breath,
When heard by Ladies of renowned glory.
They urged him to relate his Sepha's story.
(25)
Ladies (said he) if your unhappy ears,
Admit such sad disas^ers to have room,
I by your looks your inward thoughts appears,
You Will Elegize this story that shall come.
You Will sigh to hear my Se^ha's hap, while I,
Bend all my power to tell her fate, and dye.
THE HISTORY OF ARCADIUS and SEPHA.
Liber Primus.
AMidst Campania Fields, near Sabine Bowers,
Plain to each view there stood two stately Towers,
Mounting aloft the skies their cloudy heads,
As proud as high, disdaining their first Beds;
So curious was their building, and their stone,
That both alike, they both were took for one,
Showing by'th' type of their conjoyning arts,
The true conjunction of each others hearts.
Two stately Towers for their buildings famed,
One Arathea, the other Talmos named;
In Talmos, Sepha dwelt, whose heavenly face,
Gave to each quill a line, each line a grace,
In whispring forth her praise, whose radiant eyes,
Like starry lamps that emulate the skies,
In height and beauty with their gl^ttering light,
Shone like the clearest stars in the darkest night.
Upon her head she wore a Laurel Crown
Knit up with sundry flowers, on which Renown,
As chiefest Empress of her fate and beauty,
Did sympathize with a religious duty:
Hesperides, in whose calm heart did rest
No sullen strains, but Lyrick, and a nest
Of Heavenly raptures, perfumed odours sweet,
Which Nectar and Nepenthe breathings, meet
For Heavens great Queen, such was her virtue given,
That where she was, there was a second Heaven.
Her face so sweet as Nature can devise,
Was dressed with sparkling Diamonds of her eyes,
The sweet composure of whose beauty yields
A Medall of the true Elisian fields;
Her forehead, fittest place to go before,
(Since who so speaks of beauty treads it over)
Was justly called a path, whereon did pass,
A way that leads you where all beauty was.
Close by that path, two radiant lamps did rise,
Which some abruptly did entitle eyes;
Too mean a name for two such Heavenly lights,
As far beyond all eyes, as days from nights:
To whom was added that Celestial grace
Of perfect pureness to adorn the face,
That whensoe're these seeing lamps did move,
They Would light spectators on their way to love.
Between which eyes (if eyes they may be named)
A pillar, (as of purest marble framed)
Then called her nose, did lead you to two plains,
Pure white and red, like milk which clarret stains.
Two flowery fields where Flora seemed to dwell,
Where white and red were striving to excel,
Whose raptures seemed like a Celestial nest,
Whereon distressed lovers seemed to rest,
Which Paradise if any lover seeks,
It was presented in fair Sepha's cheeks.
Two pearls of that inestimable price,
So far beyond the perfection of her eyes,
Impall'd with that excessive form of bliss,
Smiling, you would think the invited you to kiss.
What name or title fits fair Sepha's lips?
Shall some Ambrosian cup, where great Jove sips
Nectar from Ganamed? too mean it is,
To bear their form, it is too mean by this,
Jove out of them Nepenthe used to sip,
But that Nepenthe grew on Sepha's lip.
Then began her teeth in a most perfect line,
Placed each by other through her lips to shine,
More white, more true, than Nature could prefer
To any other was it not to her.
Those that never saw, might judge what they had been,
Like picture pearl, through crimson shadows seen;
So was her chin like Crystal over red,
So was her hair in decent manner spread;
Which she all careless down her back did wear,
As a fit object for the wanton Air,
Careless to sport with, next to them was praised
Her neck, as of a Marble pillar raised,
Proud to support the weight of such a f^ce,
In whom three Graces seemed to be one grace.
Then might you see her Amber breasts, more white
Than Scithian snow, and yielding more delight
Than silly quill is able to report,
They were the hills where Cupid used to sport.
Between which hills there lay a pleasant Alley,
Whose milky paths did lead into the Valley.
This was that Sepha who unhappy died,
This was that Sepha for whose hap I cried;
This was that Sepha, whom the Valleys miss,
And this was her whose Tragic stories this.
Sepha, the glory of the scorned earth,
In Talmos dwelt, sometimes a place of mirth,
The ground whereon it stood was decked with flowers,
Here lay a Meadow, there were Sabine bowers.
The house was with a Grove of trees enclosed,
Proud of the beauty that therein reposed:
Only a glead there lay, the trees between,
Where Arathea was of Talmos seen.
In Arathea young Arcadius dwelt,
A man where Nature had so freely dealt
Her chiefest art, and artificial skill,
Pleasing each eye, but most to Sephas will.
Often by her window did Arcadius ride,
Sometimes to hunt, and sometimes to divide
The Air with riding swift Italian horses,
Here making stops, there running at full courses,
When she (unknown to him) with watchful eye,
Often saw his going, and his coming by,
So that of fire which Lovers sometimes find,
A spark began to kindle in her mind.
Once did she blame unkindly Cupid much;
Darling said she, and is thy power such?
Unkindly thus pure streams to overcome,
And force a heart to love she knows not whom?
Is he too good that thus thou do deny
Me to receive one courting from his eye?
Cupid, scorn'st thou my prayers? or do thou shame?
Is he so mean to let me know his name?
Yet let me live, let me his feature se^,
If he is but virtuous, it is enough for me.
This said, her eyes drawn by a heavy sound,
Saw young Arcadius, grovelling on the ground,
Whose too too nimble horse, in striving most
To please his master, his blessed burden lost.
Once did she speak, once did she move her tongue,
What sad mishap said she, did thee that wrong?
How did thou of thy wonted favors miss?
Was the ground greedy thy fair limbs to kiss?
At whose Celestial voice, like a sweet charm,
He started up, and said, I had no harm;
Thanks for your love, and with a decent grace,
Stoops down his hat, by which she saw his face.
Sepha (said she) be glad, for thou have found,
And seen the Arrow that thy heart did wound.
Well, young Arcadius gets him to his steed,
Who guilty of the last unhappy deed,
With nimble strokes his master to delight,
Slips over the plain from fairest Sepha's sight.
Go then, said she, the height of beauties pride,
And worlds chief mirror; if thy heart is tied
To any Lady whom thou call'st thy own,
As sure it is, or else thou would have shown
Some more respects to me, but if thou art,
If to another thou have linkt thy heart,
Twice happy thou, thrice she, that shall embrace
Thy slender body, and enjoy thy face.
This said, she to a silent chamber goes,
Weary of love, but more of mind, and throws,
Sometimes her restless body on a bed,
Where love is with imaginations ^ed,
Then to the window would she take her way,
And view the place where young Arcadius lay,
Thence would she to her closet, where alone,
Alone she sat her sorrows to bemone;
If such was Isis love to Lignus son,
Then ignorant why he her love had won,
And Iphis had in his Ianthe got,
Not yet a man, yet more than one man's lot?
If such was Philoclea's a^dent love,
From her own sex, such free desires to move?
When Zelmenes eyes such direful vapors threw,
And to her own, prodigious accents drew?
If Isis was of Iphis change most glad?
And Philoclea her own wishes had?
Why may not Sepha be possessed of hers,
Not half so far impossible as theirs?
But Heaven conspird with an impatient eye,
And all the powers to act her Tragedy.
Not that Injustice with the Gods did dwell,
For how could they against that sweet face rebel,
Nor enmity against such beauty bred,
Whose double portion with amazement led
Each greedy eye into a field of Roses
And Lillies which a ^hea^re incloses.
But Love whose passions with impartial flames,
Now whispered amongst the Gods, aloud proclaims,
By ^ove^ consent to dispossess us here
Of our fair Heaven, for they did want her there:
Conspicuous fate, her heart already feels
Cupids dire bolt, and at first Arrow yields;
No Warrier she, nor strived with struggling hand
The dart to break, nor would she it withstand,
But gently stepping toward his Bow did hie,
And Phoenix-like into the flames did fly;
So Pilomel does willingly depose,
Her tender breast against the Thorn, so those
Who (Bleeding easly) meet death void of pain,
Pha^iphae so in Ida woods did reign,
Twice did the honor of Latona move
A scornd defiance to Arcadius Love,
But twice by Ericyna it was defaced,
And twice more Love into her heart was placed,
Wherefore unwilling to omit the art,
The Salve she thought would molli^ie her smart,
Half doubting Cupid who such change had wrought,
Gave speech the leave, to ease her of her thought.
Love, who the greatest Potentates can tame,
(Ruin of zeal) at whose majestic name,
(Blind wicked boy) disguised with all untruth,
The Gods have yielded honor to his youth,
Sprung first from Venus Goddess of his art,
If blind as some suppose how can he dart
Showrs of such wrongs on silly Woman's heart?
Thou Goddess of the Valleys and the Plains,
See how the wagg thy sacred rites disdains,
Thou thou Latona's Daughter, whose delights
I vow to perfect, and maintain thy rites,
In spite of Cupid, see how he deposes
Thy Holy Laws, see how he plucks thy Roses,
And crops the fairest Lillies of thy Closes.
Into my heart some heavy thought is straid,
But there it shall not, nor long has it staid,
Some muddy cloud has overwhelmed my face,
And left behind it shadows of disgrace:
Thus when the Heavens thy mighty Father lowrs,
His anger is some bitter tasted showrs,
To perish quite the odours of thy flowers.
Thus has he given power to the Boy,
Who strives thy Virgin odours to destroy.
Urged by the daughter of Oceanu^
His Frothy Mother, enemy to us.
And she does practice his deceitful smiles,
The fittest motions with which he beguiles,
And with a touch thy Vestall lamps defiles.
Up (thou Alphea) show thy power and skill,
Reserve thy virgins wholly to thee still,
Lend us the swiftest ^rethusa's feet,
To fly Alpheus, make our prayers fleet:
And that we may do honor to thy name,
Do thou in Ephesus thy will proclaim,
That we with nettles may defy his flame.
Thus did she feed her thoughts on weak despair,
Sighing her sorrows to the empty air,
Repining only that her heavy fate
Pressed down so hard to make her derogate.
Might I (said she) Idali^'s garments wear,
I would be glad, would she but hear my prayer,
Or Dian thou to whom I am devoted,
Admit not my true zeal to be remoted
From service thine, if still thy power thou have;
If Citherea has it not defaced,
Say whether yet he any has embraced.
Say whether yet he any has embraced,
If yet to thee his service be allied,
Let not his cheeks of any sorrows taste,
It Is pity such pure streams with worse be died;
But howsoever if happy him be tied,
And Hymen link him to some other Bride,
Let not his name, nor kindred be denied.
And thus she discontinuing Dian's fires,
Vexed with excess of heat and love, retires
Into the garden, where she takes free scope
To vent her plaints, but all deny her hope.
Each flowr she sees gives a fresh appetite
To that sweet flowr she wants; there is no delight,
But dreams and visions haunt her in her sleep;
The birds that used to sing, now seemed to weep,
And all with heavy voice did seem to move
Complaints, and wail for her unhappy love.
Nor could she say 'twas love did her oppress,
Since she was ignorant of what fair guess
She was enamored, she saw his face,
And knew he was a man, but of what race
And name she knew not, nor knew where he dwelt;
(Often so for unknown cause, strange pains are felt)
Often from the garden would she send her eyes,
Loves faint Ambassadors, into the skies,
For help, and often with shrill complaining sounds,
Would weep forth prayers, with which the air abounds.
Thence would she unto Venus Altar have,
Where when the myrrh and odors she had placed,
And mixing plaints with the perfuming flame,
Grant me great Queen of Love to know his name.
Thence would she unto Dian's Altar hie.
And do the like, and thence to Cupid fly,
But still returned enraged, amazed, unblest,
Till fairest Hecate heard her request.
Not far from Talmos there a City was,
C^speria named D^lia's denoted place,
Where she a temple had sacred to her,
Where of^ unmarried people did prefer
Their prayers, remoted only for the same,
No ^ymi neall servants thither came
Now was the time, when clothed in Scythian whites
Her Priests were ready to perform her rites;
Her Cups were with ^asta^ion liquors filled,
Her Altar with pale Sacrifices hill'd,
That all her virgins came to wait upon her
Bearing their ^estall lamps Diana^s honor.
When Sepha toward her temple did repair,
Clothed all in yellow, whose dishevelled hair,
Stirred with the wind, gave a reflective shine,
As Jove had towed her in a golden shrine.
Down to Gargaphia, did she take her way,
Fear lending wings, since Love had caused her stay
Too long, and as she tript over those fair Lawns,
Roughfooted Satyrs, Satyrs, Nymphs and Fawns,
With various colored flowers which they had set,
Made for her feet a pleasant Carquenett.
Her eyes when first they glanc't toward the place,
Whither she would, O more than human race,
Said she, be thou propitious to me still;
Impute not this delay, want of good will
Toward thy holy Laws, and as she prayed,
The more she run, the more she thought she staid;
Chiefly for this, when first her tender feet,
With gentle motions brought her to those sweet,
Those diapred, those rape enamored dales,
First mother to those cool perfumed gales,
Which Zephyrus from flowery Meadows sends,
To court Aurora, whose beauty extends
(Like blushing sighs with which women beguile)
Back to the same to grace them with a smile.
She heard shrill voices, shrill complaining cries,
The hasty messengers of some dull eyes,
Call her to witness with lamenting verse,
Like those that use to houl over the hearse
Of their dead friends, to which as women use,
^he gives a skreek, women can seldom choose;
Which skreek, whether it were for strangeness rather;
That all the Silvan dwellers 'bout her gather,
Or whether 'twas the rareness of her voice,
As sure it was, for that O Heavenly noise,
Has power to lead the wildest rudest ear,
Which once those Heavenly raptures does but hear,
From uncivility, to deep amaze;
But be it what it will, they all did gaze
And flock about her, silent, pale, and wan,
Till one (it seems the chiefest of them all) began,
Hence ugly grief, to which they all agree,
Though our King's gone, we will make our Queen of thee,
Then began they leap and dance, with such delight,
Which put fair Sepha into such a fright,
That from her eyes she let fall such a frown,
That seen of them, they all fell trembling down.
Yet such was Sepha's virtue and good nature,
That she would not permit the smallest creature,
Through her to perish, if from her there came
Ought did extingish the desired flame
Of life, the same to her own heart returned;
^or with the like desire of Love she burned:
^he would have gone and left them, but compassion
Of their then grief, caused a deliberation,
Half gone she turned again, and with her hand
Helping them up, says let me understand,
The cause you weep, if it require my art,
With you to grieve, with you I'^ bear a part.
When one awakened with excess of bliss,
^ose up, and began to kiss her ^ars with this.
Nisean Silenus Silenus herein is used for Bacchus.
born of Indian race, The Tale of Bacchus and Diana.

Once kept yon hill, you Gaurus was his place,
His palace was with palest marble raised,
Embraced with blushing grapes, and often praised
By those, which never yet the reason knew,
For those sweet smelling flowers about it grew.
The way that leads you to this more than blessed
Elysium, was bordred with a nest
Of Hyacinths, which now begin to spread
Their Amiclean flowers into a bed;
Like that of Lillies, which our Poets say,
Leads now to him, instil'd the Milkie way;
There was no path went creeping through the same,
Which might delude the most opprobrious name,
With, Fallicies, for so they might suppose,
The way that leads to honor does enclose
A world of bliss, when each eye has his charm,
The way to honor has a world of harm.
I speak not this to disallow the rites
Honoria claims, the self-same way invites
As well to honor, as well not to honor,
For she has equal balance cast upon her;
But to uphold the blessed Silenian way,
Whose smooth egressions will admit no stay,
To those who toward Brisean Altars hie,
Till they enjoy the Nisean Canopy:
A vale there is, which from a low descent
Of a late Hill, did somewhat represent
Phlegrean plains, nursed by Meanders waves,
Which cut their bedds, and furrow their own graves.
This was Nemea called, a fertile plain,
Bedewed with blood of Mifian cattle, slain
For sacrifice, brought by the Ismenides,
The wrath of just Silenus to appease.
Whose angry frowns fright you from that blessed vale;
But till you to a far more pleasant dale,
Which mounted by two stepps does yield a sight
More smooth than glass, more glorious than del^ght.
A heap of Pines there are, which equal range
On either side, a pleasant sight but strange,
To those never saw't, through which there lye^a glede,
Smooth bladed grass, which shows you the ab^de
Of Bacchus guide, then come you to a Court,
Where all the crew of Satyrs do resort;
And with shrill cries do make his pallace-ring,
And Io, Io, Bacchanalia sing.
No wall there is that does enclose the same,
It Is hemmed with laurel trees of the bigst frame,
And under them there is a bushy hedge
Of Rosemary, which cut even make a ledge,
For various colored flowers his Clients bring,
They are the courteous offerings of the spring.
In midst of which fair Court there is a Fo^t,
Of Crystal streams, where often a Goddess wont,
With diverse Damsels, Goddesses I think,
Because their beauty has such power to link
Men to their love, for sure such Heavenly faces
Never sprung from mortal; never from humane races^
But be they as they are, in that same Well
They used to bath, the Statues there can tell,
Chlamidias shrines the are called, and strong de^ence
That were erected at her going thence.
Which story if you will please but to admit
And bless the ground so much, as here to sit
(Fair Lady) it is not tedious, we will relate
The Tragic ends, and tell the heavy fate
There lies entombed, we will in every thing
Present to you the figure of the spring.
Time slips too fast (said Sepha) and my way
Is long, I cannot well admit the stay
To hear it told, but since you say it is short,
I Will linger time to hear out your report.
Then thus: Our God hearing what Heavenly shapes
Haunted those groves, and with what store of grapes
It did ^abound; said rise and lets go see,
Perhaps it is a dwelling fit for me.
Whither being come, and having took a view
Of each delight, what pleasure might accrue
By dwelling there, said lets begin to build;
The ground is fragrant, it is a pleasant field
With odours dressed, Marble shall be our stone,
Cedar our Timber, the Foundation
On yonder hill, yon hill that will be proud,
To be instil'd the powrfull Bacchus shroud.
At this the Goddess laughed, and in a scorn,
More shamed and ruddy than the blushing Morn
Escaped from Tytans arms, does nimbly rise,
While pale revenge sits trembling in her eyes,
Ready to ruin those that dare presume
To view, much less to touch her hallowed room;
She girts her armor on, and to her side
Her quiver, full of bloody arrows tied,
In her left hand her bow, and with the other
Tearing the grapes from their beloved Mother;
Tramples them on the ground, and in a rage,
(For so it seems no treaties could assuage
Her furious wrath) Bacchus said she, thou Clown
So shall I trample thy Imperial Crown.
How durst thou (vilain) dare to touch this Isle?
And with thy nasty carcass to defile
My holy place? (Egregious drunkard) how
Durst thou presume to offend my Virgin brow?
What recompense art able to bestow?
Or how will thou my powrfull wrath o're-goe?
How will thou my destroying anger miss?
Or what requital shall I have for this?
Thy death I will not work lest it be known,
I so much goodness to thee should have shown
In slaying thee, it would be as bad disgrace,
Should it be known that thou have seen my face.
Thou happy of this favor may rejoice,
My damsels scorn that thou should hear my voice,
What a vile stain, what laughing there would be,
Should the world know I daign to speak to thee.
How shall I Combat then? or thee expel
From the society of this blessed Well?
See how these Roses at thy boldness blush,
Those flowers dye which thy proud feet do crush.
See how the trembling Lillies stoop a low,
Grow pale and droop, for fear thou will not go.
The Birds no more will sing while thou art here,
These silver streams do murmur plaints for fear
Thou will their drops defile, the very skies
Since thou came hither have withdrawn their eyes.
And since thou have this flowery place defaced,
No more we shall of their sweet favor taste
To cherish us, here is a spacious way,
Be packing then or at thy peril stay.
Vile words against a God, who smiling said;
Here will I live, ^and thou shall be my maid:
Thy maid said she, to do thee service then,
With this weak arm, and these shall be thy men,
Sending him showrs of arrows, which invade
His Nurses hearts, and there a Tavern made.
Bacchus at this grew wroth, his rudy face
Where the best beauty used to have a place,
Grew pale, and pale: Bellona now said he,
Be thou propitious to my Sov'raignty.
What spiteful God has sent these mortal shapes?
Wicked devourers of my sacred grapes;
Nor enmity alone against the fruit,
Will them suffice, who seek to spoil the root.
Fair Girl he said; think thou I dread thy power,
Dare mickle Fortune on my pleasure lower?
My Father guides the motion of the year,
His dwelling is beyond the middle Sphere.
Heaven is his palace, where his power's known;
Power waits on him, Elisium is his own;
My mother's of no base nor mean descent
With whom all Graces had their Complement.
And though she is mortal, yet her pedigree,
Portrays in brazen lines her memory;
From worthy Cadmus, whose descent does spring
From old Agenor the Phoenician King.
How dare thou then revile my holy fire?
I am a God, and can withstand thine ire?
Can these thy threatenings then make me the worse?
Or do thou think thy arrows can have force
To pierce my powrfull skin^ Fond foe forbear,
They Are fit'st for Cupids use, by Styx I swear
A secret influence has my honor saved,
I have in L^the lake my body lav'd.
This said, his leavy javelin up he takes,
At sight of which the fearful Goddess quakes,
He turns him back to his devoted train
In whose each hand a Thirsis did remain,
Whose fiery valor never was withstood,
Good was their courage, and their valor good.
Forbear said he, let not your anger light
On these, so far unworthy for your fight,
What stain shall we endure? when it be said,
So many Hecatompil^ns have made
War with a silly maid? what though she strive
Through haughty pride our honor to survive?
Urge not her fight who cannot manage it.
Fie, are these subjects for your valor fit?
Forbear I say, and let your wrath be kept,
For those who have our ancient honors swept
Into a dirty lake; let it suffice
This moutain shall our Orgies memorize.
With that another shower of darts she sends
From nimble arms, whose multitude extends
All over the Army which our God had there,
Enough to move a valiant God with fear;
So thick they came, that like the Evening cloud,
Or like an Arbor, or a Leavy shroud
Remaining long, they might have caused a dearth,
They kept the courteous Sun from the dark earth.
Go too said Bacchus, let all pity fade,
And fight on now, we now shall fight in the shade;
Then began a desperate war, but being divine,
No harm was done, the greatest harm was mine,
Till fair Antigone, alas too rare,
Too young alas, alas too Heavenly fair
To leave this haven, exchanged her mortal hue
And leapt to Heaven, I saw her as she slew.
A wound she had, nor was there any place
But that alone, but that which could deface
Her rudy cheeks, her lips that often did shove
Life to the hearts of those that saw them move,
And thus it chanced, The sto^^ Haemon Antigone.
Haemon the fairest boy
Of Thebes City, would go sport and toy
With Cupids darts, and Cupid being blind,
(And Love you know when vexed is often unkind)
Pulled them away, Haemon would him withstand,
And as he held, he chanced to race his hand.
This being slighted began to fester in,
And having got a newly welcomed skin,
Began to fester more; it being small,
And of small pain was pitti'd not at all,
By him I mean, who as it seems delighted
In this new pain; and that is the cause 'twas slighted^
Now was it grown unto a doubled height
His breast within, and with a nimble slight
Began his heart to bore, when he o'recharg'd,
Could not suppress that fire which now enlarged
It self with larger flames; it kissed his heart,
And he kissed it, like one loath to impart
Some serious thought, from his o'reburthened breast,
And yet detaining it can find no rest.
Have you not seen the H^liconian spring,
Send her beloved streams a wandering
The vale below, who ready to fulfill
(Though murmuring for grief) their mothers will,
Glide on apace, yet often with watery eyes,
Look toward the place where their blessed mother lies;
While she with crooked bublings does complain,
Now calls them in, then thrusts them forth again.
So was it with Haemon loath to lose the bliss,
The pleasing joys he hoped to reap from this
His new intended life, also unwilling
To dispossess himself of those distilling
And grateful honors, from Diana came,
Due only to the lovers of her name.
In both perplexed alike he sits amazed;
( Symptoms of Love) and over the vaileys gazed,
Starts up, sits down, admires with foolish joy
The fruits thereof, detests as much th'annoy
The same ingenders, having before his eyes,
The sad examples of the miseries
It has produced; Leanders heavy fate,
Makes him eschew it now as much with hate,
As e're before he to it zealous was,
Whose Tragedyes are unto him a glass.
In this extreme, what will not Venus do?
He studies how, and can already woe.
Admit said he, the winged boy would send
Into this place the picture of that friend,
I best could honor, should I be approved
Or no? for yet he knew not whom he loved;
Or should I chance of that fair chance to chance:
Could I in lovers phrase my love advance?
Say Cupid, or if yet thou think I cannot,
Make trial, and if too much she disdain not,
Thy book I Will quickly learn, before the morn
Descry our blots, there is none a workman born;
And at our next encounter I Will so gain
Thy approbation, there shall not a stain,
Deface my quill to make my study faulter,
Whole showrs of Myrrh I Will pour upon thy Altar.
Thy Altar shall with saffron streams appear,
And I with yellow garments will be there;
There will I be to see thy service don,
The Oaths betrothed by thy beloved son,
On high Hymerus hill, and ere the same
Had flown from Haemons sacred breath, there came
A Lady by, nor only one there was,
Yet had there been no more, she did su^pass
All beauties could have come, Antigone
Whose face from sable night did snatch the day,
And made it day, what need I show the same?
I know'ts enough, if you but know her name.
Antigone came thither, thither came
Blind Cupids Love, and there the good^y frame
Of Natures pride, whose beauty can procure
Each wink to make, each love spectators sure.
Three sisters they, but one of all the rest
More fair and lovely was, and far more blessed
With Natures gifts, and that was only she
Whom men alone did call Antigone.
Her cheeks bedeckt with lines of Crystal veins,
Were like that rudy blush Au^o^a gains
From Tellus breath; whose odors do incroach
Over flowery fields to welcome her approach.
She came with such a Majesty and Grace,
As if the Gods in her all-conquering face,
Had kept their Parliament, the Milky way,
Running Meander-like with crooked stray
From her white chin, lead to that hill which yields
A prospect over the fair Elisian fields.
Her upper garments were of milky hue,
And under them a coat of azure blue;
Some stars of Gold there were, and those but small,
Were like the shour Phoebus let on her fall.
The blew seen through the white, with that fair shower
Seemed like a cloud that did inshrine a power.
Her hair not loose as some do use to wear,
Ribonds of Gold were proud to tie her hair,
And so delighting held it up so hard,
Lovers from favors of it were debarred.
Each step she took, was like a virtuous way,
Or path where her distressed Lovers lay:
For as she went casting her eyes aside,
Many admiring at her beauty did,
Of all the gestures that her body had,
With one especial gesture she was clad;
And that was this, often as thou used to walk
Into the groves to hear the small birds talk,
Antigone thy praise, thou often was used,
(I think by some diviner power infused)
To ravish men, often was thou indu'd
With that sweet grace which each spectator ru'd,
A careless winding of thy body 'twas
Reeling, and nodding as thou by did pass,
Like frisking Kidds upon the Mountains seen,
Or wanton Lambs that play upon the Green.
Then would thou leap from bank to bank, and rise
The Iocastaean body into the skies.
While Zephyrus better to help the flee,
Would fly beneath, but 'twas thy Heaven to see.
Then would thou swing abroad thy tender hands^,
At whose pure shine, each eye amazed stands,
And with thy finger beck, which gave excuse
To lovers, saying thou call'dst, but it was thy use,
This Haemon saw, even as the smiling ground,
With various-colour'd flowers her temples crowned;
She crops a rose, and why so did she seek,
There was a purer Rosy in her cheek;
But (Lord to see) putting it to her nose,
What purer beauty could there be then those?
Like Coral held in her most most pure hands,
Or blood and sickly milk that mingled stands.
The pale-faced Lilly from the stalk she tears,
Even as the Lilly, so Narcissus fares,
Sweet Crocus from his weeping root she twinds
And him with his beloved Smilax binds.
Nor Hyacinthus must this favors ^lie,
Who with the Cyprian Anenomy.
After she had retired into a shade,
Of these disc^lour'd flowers a posie made^
Then lying down^ (for sleep began to play
The wanton with her eyelids as she lay)
She slept; not seeing Haemon who still kept
Out of her sight, or else she had not slept.
Then began the Silvan warblers to renew
Their pleasant notes, with all the merry crew
Kind Spring affords, each striving best to keep,
Their untaught quaver, lull^ng her asleep.
Her Posie to her left hand she conveyed,
And on that hand her weary head she laid;
Her right hand had the office to employ
A safeguard to her breast, where Haemons eye
Stood ready fixed, softly he would have stole
The Posie thence, but each wink did control
His bold attempt, at last with ravished joy,
That Fortune op't to him so fair a way
To so divine a mark, he gently laid
His trembling lips to hers, and softly said,
Ye Powrs be thank't, and if such power ye have,
As there is no power but what is yours, o save
Your servant, o permit not her disdain,
T'acquaint my heart with just cause to complain^
Still let her sleep, rob me not of this bliss,
Still let her sleep, e're I this favor miss,
Camelion-like I Will live upon her breath,
It Nectar is, and will preserve from death.
With that she waked, and seeing there so nie,
An unknown guest, she rose and began to fly
Abashed she would have spoke, but too much fear
Caused it so softly that one could not hear
Whether she chid or no, Great Queen said she,
Who art rewarder of Integrity,
Let me not be defiled; this Haemon heard,
And would have answered, but he was debarred.
By her ensuing voice which might inflame
Cold Neptunes bosom, if but heard the same.
She views him well surveys with curious eye
His face, Alterna faci^s sibi dat resp^nsa rubore, and tener affectum prodit
^trique pudor.
who with like language does reply,
A face she saw, the face she sure had known
But that she did compar't with was her own,
Of beauty pure, too pure she thought it was,
To be the picture of a humane face,
Those speaking looks, that Grace and Majesty,
Far better would befit a Deity.
To whom she said, but what I must omit,
Since I am ignorant, nor is it fit,
To let my thoughts into those secrets pry, which they deny,
For had she not been curious of her will,
She n'ere had whispered, n'ere had been so still.
But Haemon thus,
Lady your looks a Tragic tale unfold,
I fear the end before I hear it told,
Why should you tremble so? or be afraid
Of him in whom your power is displayed?
Remit this boldness that I did intrude
Into your sacred Grove, o fair exclude
Not my complaints from your still honored praise,
Lest sable night give period to my days.
Peace said Antigone, shall every grove,
Where babbling Echoes dwell witness your love?
So much I heard, and saw her pretty look
Show him her face in which there lay a book
By Cupids finger wrote, while he over joy'd,
Kissed as she spoke, and with her ribonds toy'd:
He took her by the hand and softly crushed
Sweet balm from thence, at sight of which she blu^
He would have saved the same, but of it mist,
She would have spoke, but as she spoke he kissed.
Then met his hands about her tender wast,
So Jupiter when Danae he embraced,
And such like toys they used as lovers use
While a pure kiss (as if they would infuse
Into each others breast their souls) was given,
For Haemon vowed by all the Powers of Heaven,
No impious thought that honor should molest,
Which was engraven in his loyal breast.
And that he was from all deceit as free,
As he desired to find Antigone.
Go then said she, it is but one lingering night,
Our bodies part, but ah, they parted quite.
For she toward Diana took her way;
Where then in Camp Dianas virgins lay,
Ready to give our God their strong assault,
Where she was slain, Oh, 'twas her Haemons fault,
For he belike that Cupid had implored
Which some call God, that favor to afford,
Through his beloveds breast with his keen dart,
To make an easy passage to her heart.
Which Cupid to fulfill did open lay
A hole through which a Iavelin took his way.
At this she starts, revenge my death she cried,
Haemon my love, Haemon farewell and died.
At this disaster Dian did repine,
Hold, hold said she ( Bacchus) the battle's thine.
The hill I Will leave, yet e're I take my way,
Permit that I by yonder spring do lay
My Virgin dead, which yielded, there she laid
Her corpse, and over them a Statue made;
It stood upright, and looking toward the East,
The blood ran trickling down her wounded breast,
And on each side her sisters statue stood,
With weeping clothes wiping away the blood.
This being done Diana left the place,
Fears making furrows in her virgin face,
Her Sisters left to let her body lie,
But since their Statues did accompany
Her tomb, they took their way, having don this,
To yon Casperia where her Temple is.
Now Tytan weary of that sable bed
Night did him lend, toward Aurora ^led,
When Haemon weary of slow-footed hours,
Often wished the morning, which come, each cloud lowrs^
The winds spoke loud, and little birds were mute,
For Sol had clothed him in a mourning suit,
The morning wept, but what it might foreshow
Haemo suspected not, sweet Winds did blow
No more, the Powers themselves with heavy eyes
Gave a consent to weep her Tragedies.
Straight to the place appointed there to meet,
He hi'd, time lending wings unto his feet,
He calls his love, Antigone he cries,
Why art so slow to meet him who relies
Upon thy faith, more than upon his own?
Then speaks unto the Trees, have you not known
Which way she went? or has she not bin here?
Is she too slow? she is too slow I fear,
Himself replies, and like a Tiger flees,
With raving eyes, enquires of all he sees.
The fairest Rosy that the garden bred,
Says he, has now forgot the Mother bed
Of its first birth^ I fear it has been pulld
By some unluckie hand, whose drops have lulld
It in a bath of Mildew, or has been,
Cause of mishap, cause of some deadly sin,
Else why should Phoebus shame to show his face?
And creep behind a cloud, lest some disgrace
Should taint him of conspiracy; or why
Should Coelum's vesture yield a Sympathy
Of grief? or why should shrill complaining cries
Of Echoes strive to pierce the Azure Skies?
Wherefore do little Birds forbear to sing
To Amphiluche, and her praises ring
Along the valleys? Why do Lillies fade?
Or why do Roses yield a ruddy shade
For their late sickly leaves? there is some mishap,
Has sure enforced the Fatal Nymphs to crap
Their still still brittle threads, the virgin sign
No more I see's beloved, but does repine,
The custody thereof for thrice five years,
And that is the Infants time; the Cypress fears
To bud, lest in pale hours it should be torn,
And cropped lamented Herses to adorn.
What this Eclipse, what this cloud might presage,
This blushing Earth presenting now a stage,
I cannot conjecture, unless it should be
A Theater to act a tragedy.
With these, and such like words, he vents his Soul,
Of those over burth'ning maladies, and foul
Conjectures, which such torments did in^lict
Upon his heart, enough even to convict
Him of a sincere love, which like a wind,
Hurries him to the Spring, there there to find
His Mistress statue, O unhappy eyes
Of mine, said he, that view the obsequies
Of my dear love; what did not Haemon say?
He beats his breast, endeavors to allay
His scorned life, and from his head he tears
Whole handfulls of his hairs.
(Ye sullen Gods.) what moved you to divide
Her Soul from hence; distracted Haemon cryde?
Seek'd yea for some revenge? it is true alas,
Because her virtues did your virtues pass.
Ye Fatal Nymphs that hurry on the threads
Of our weak lives, and cut it in the midds
Of our best time, what moved you to be
So envious against Antigone?
But since your Powrs have made me so accursed
By her sad death, ye Powrs now do your worst;
Yet help me first to weep before I die,
For my Antigone an Elegy.
With that he took his pen, and having wrote
Her heavy dirge with a lamenting note,
He laid him down upon her Tomb, and praid,
Then with a Sphere a speedy passage made
Toward his love, even to whose throne he cried,
Make room for me my love, so sighed and did.
At this mischance the Fatalls did repine,
And turned his blood into a Columbine,
Which still retains his nature, in three days,
It gains its prime, and in its prime decays.
His body then reposing on her urne,
The Gods did to a Marble statue turn,
Whole head upon his weary hand does rest,
And looking steadfast on her wounded breast,
Surveys the blood, that blood with watery eye
Which leaves her breast to turn t'a Tulippie.
So Haemon toward Elisium did fly.
But e're he went he left this Elegy
Under her feet engraven, on which be
The lively praise of dead Antigone.
Ravished with Necta breathing from those dales,
Where Zephirus in all his worth remains,
I past the Arabian deserts, and the vales,
And thence I jorney'd over the Scythian plains,
I jorney'd thence, and in Diana's bowers,
My eyes bedewed me with distilling showers.
I sat me down to think upon my loves,
The thought of which proceedings made me weep,
Until the warbling chanters of the groves
Lulled me into a sweet and pleasant sleep.
Me thought I sported on the Are^dian mountains,
And then I sat me by Minerva's Fountains.
Sitting and musing by those silver streams,
Where babbling Echoes whispered forth my moan,
As if awakened from some glorious dream,
The Muses showed me on a marble stone,
Charactered lines of gold, whose triple lays
I coppi'd out to prattle forth their praise.
Aspire to honor her whose glories such,
Nature has given that artificial face,
No Muse nor Goddess can delight so much,
Excepting her who is her chiefest grace;
Often so the Dove a whiter Turtle brings,
And from the self same root, a fairer flower springs.
Some say the fairest Cupid being moved,
Mourned as he went, and thinking on her ^pin'd,
Entirely seeking, seeking her he loved,
Till too much gazing on her made him blind,
He called her Vesta, and to prove the same,
Erected up a Trophee to her name.
Durst I but tell the world how much I love her,
Omitting nothing that I could express,
Rapt in those Heavenly joys that seemed to hover,
Only to crown her with their sacred bliss;
Too long I should upon her praises dwell,
Hymns are unworthy of her worth to tell.
Symethis shows how far her voice exceeds
Musical charms, whose sacred breath does sink
Enchanted hearts, and where it stays it breeds
The sweet Nepenthe which the Gods do drink.
Having their love, they make her what they can,
Equal to them, too Heavenly for a man.
Many that view her sweet Elisian face
Admiring stand, as if some silver hook
Ran from her eyes to tie them to the place,
Tempting the Gods to read the amorous book
Her cheeks enclose, while every wanton air,
As proud to kiss her, sporteth with her hair.
Sestos enjoyed so beautiful a Lass,
Me thought her equal could not easily be,
If yet with Hero she compared was,
'Twas not fair Hero that is so fair as she,
Her face bedeckt with beauties sweet adorning^
Exceeds far the blushing of the morning.
Yet see how Fate has stole her Soul away,
And wrapped it in the fair Elisian rest,
Slow time, admit me here no longer stay,
Till blessed with her, I never can be blessed;
Receive dear Love into those Azure skies,
This soul who whilome to thy bosom flies.
So much for this now for the cause we weep,
(Fair Lady) know Bacchus is fallen asleep.
The nature of the Spring we have declared,
So have you of Dianas battle heard;
At this she sighed, and as she gently praid
For some revenge, the Satyrs grew afraid:
The winds spoke loud, Dian in choler burned,
And each of them cleaving to trees, she turned
To Ivy, whence it still is twinding found,
And Bacchus nurses are with Ivy crowned.
Thus Fortune, (whose continual wheely force,
Keeps constant course, still keeps unconstant course)
Bequeathed her harm; and Se^ha with amaze,
Tript over the plains toward that sacred place,
Casperia named, and as she thus did hie,
Trust me Arcadius came riding by,
He looked on Sepha, oh what good it wrought
To her, who with her earnest eyes besought,
One ravished word to open those lips, but they
Lurk^ still in glorie^ garden as they lay.
At this she sighed, o how she sighed at this,
Farewell said she, and if I needs must miss
Of these fair hopes, yet shall my tender mind
Accuse thee not, thy horse did prove unkind,
To carry thee so fast; thu^ with this thought,
And such like meditations, she was brought
Unto the Temple now with Roses strewn,
Then to the altar with sweet balm bedew'd^
Where when the Rites and Ceremonies done,
She read this superscription was thereon.
Those that Idalia's wanton garments wear,
No Sacrifices for me must prepare;
To me no quav'ring string they move
Nor yet Alphaean music love,
There Is no perfume
Delights the room,
From sacred hands,
My Altar stands
Void and defaced,
While I disgraced,
With angry eyes
Revenge the cries
Of you who to my Altar have,
And in my laws take your repast;
Pursue it still, the chief of my pretense
And happiness, shall be your innocence.
After sh'had read what vile reproach and stain
Her Queen endured, what just cause to complain
Hung on her breast, by an aspersion thrown
Upon her Damsells glories, and her own,
She sighs, and through enough and too much sorrow,
Disdaines to live, for true love hates to borrow
Art to bewail mishap, and as she fainted,
Alas too much unfit, and unacquainted
With grief, she sighing said with swelling eye,
The root deprived of heat, the branches dye.
Then began her sense to play the Tragic part
Of Fate, and Atropos joy'd in her art.
Each thing she saw (as all were proud to advance
Themselves to her fair eyes) now seemed to dance,
And turning round, the Temple where she stood,
To her wet eyes presented a pale flood.
While she with scrambling hands seeking to take
Hold lest she fell, fell down into that Lake.
Where struggling still, with many pretty dint
Her curious hand did give the earth a print,
For Sepha's sake, which print the earth still keeps,
Of which we will speak a while, while Sepha sleeps.
A foolish Prince (not wise because he vowed The story of Eramio and Amissa.

Virginity to dwell within a cloud)
And so much honor to her did ascribe,
Many had thought he had received a Bribe
To vaunt her praise, and Laurellize her name,
His mouth and he were Trumpets to her fame.
I say a Maiden Prince was lately there,
Whose custom was twice five times every year,
Clothed all in white, and stained with spots of black,
A yellow ribond tied along his back,
To offer Turtle doves with silver plumes,
And strew the place with Aroma^tick fumes.
He was a Prince, born of a royal blood,
And being nobly born, was nobly good;
Nor only good he was, but stout and wise,
(Save that this fond opinion veiled his eyes,)
Else he in every action was upright,
And free from vice, as sorrow from delight.
Of Courage good, for valor often had bound
His Temples up, and them with Laurel crowned.
Beauty lay lurking in his Magic face,
Worthy of praise since it chose such a place;
Those ruddy lips, those cheeks so heavenly fair,
Where Love did play the wantou with his hair,
Did witness it, and witness this his line,
I found engraven ore his golden shrine,
By some beloved hand, whose pen does speak,
(Though willingly his praise alas to weak.
^o here he lies, inshrind with his own s^^e,
Whose virtu^'s gone abroad to tell his name.
This Prince returning home by those dim lights,
After he had performed the sacred rites
Of his pure zeal, for night came peeping on,
Whose sable face had thru^ the weary Sun
Beyond the Northern Pole, whether it was
To hide her fault, and bring his end to pass;
Or whether it was to view his sacrifice,
She stealing came, or to keep him from the eyes
Of those destroyers tha^ about did gather
To steal his life, or have destruction rather,
To me it is not revealed, but sure it is,
To sure alas, Conspicuous fate was his.
Could Heaven permit the deed? or give consent,
(Who should be just) to the accomplishment
Of this nefarious act? could Phoebus eye
Be dazzled so, or yield a sympathy
To this rebellious inhumanity?
Better had he renounced the vows he made,
And spent his days under some gloomy shade;
Better had he in flowery fields abide,
And lead his flock by purling Rivers side;
Better had he bestrid the fomy waves,
Where Pactolus his weary body laves;
Yea better far he nere had been allide
To Dian's Laws far better had he died.
And die he did, did death commit a sin?
No, yet when first his arrows do begin
Untimely death to force, it is often said,
His sulphur breath has the sweet spring decaid.
He was but young, the girdle of the year,
By which our humane actions do appear,
And so we live and dye, had nere embraced
Thrice three times twice his young and tender wast,
Scarce could he stand upon the joyful ground,
And crop those blushing cherries which he found
Upon their infant trees, yet envious eye,
Conspired to end his perpetuity.
And thus it was, as young Eramio came
From Dians temple (for so was his name)
Amissa, who had often desired to free
Her breast of that hell-knawing jealousy
By her conceived, for this Amissa had
Bin with the beauty of Eramio clad,
In a supreme desire toward his love,
Often with her letters did she strive to move,
With Cupids laws him to retain alliance,
Till he, who scorned obedience gave de^iance.
This could not cool that hea^ which had inspired
A longing hopes to that which he desired,
She sighs, and weeps; she sighs and laughs, she cries,
And in a rage does heave toward the skies
Her feeble hands, she studies how to tempt
Him to her lure, (lovers are often exempt
Of modesty) and in a rage does go
Toward her ink, (as lovers use to do)
And frames this letter, which I chanced to meet,
Ah me, it was young Eramio's winding sheet.
Amissa to Eramio.
I Heard how elder times enjoyed the bliss
Of uncouth love, Fame the Historian is,
Men whose heroic spirits scorn to bend
Their gallant necks to any servile hand,
Whose beauty could command as noble eyes,
I, and as many as these Azure skies
E're showed thy face, to view with a desire
Their glorious parts, and viewing to admire;
Yet these in whom each God have plac^d an eye,
To make a shrill and pleasant harmony
Of all their glories in one sound alone,
Yet these so far have their affection shown,
With sword and lance to make their faith approved,
Though as thy self not half so well beloved.
How can thou then disdain this humble ^ute
Of a pure love? how can thy pen be mute?
Many detesting love^ and scorn his name,
Yet with their pens will certify the same
By answer, that they may that harm prevent
Of future hopes, for Silence gives Consent.
Shall still unkindness overflow the brim?
Leander did to fairest Hero swim,
But I must come my self, and void of good
To strengthen me, must make my tears the blood,
And when I come, thy Tower so fast is barred,
Thy supp^^^ts weak complaint will not be heard;
What is the cause thou do affection scorn?
Shall base contempt those lovely brows adorn?
Am I too mean? look what I want of i^,
So much my loyal love shall make me fit.
Let not thy thoughts accuse me cause I sue,
For true love clad with virtue needs must woo;
Nor let thy Answer show I am refused,
But use me now even as thou would be used.
Amissa.
This moved Eramio much, who (worthy Knight,)
As ignorant as free from Loves delight,
Like purling Quails, who even now are secure,
With pleasant tunes are trained unto the lure
Of the deceitful fowler, so was he
As this his Answer will a witness be.
Eramio to Amissa.
(Fair Queen) that favor which you pleas to give
To my unworthiness, shall make me live
Renoun'd, when so much love you do bequeath,
Blown by the bellows of your flowery breath,
Shall fold me in your arms, do not conceave
It Was scorn, or want of love that made me leave
My Answer until now, Amissa no,
And amongst your other virtues please to know,
It Was that excessive humble love I had,
That would not link your honor to so bad,
As your Eramio.
This fair Amissa saw, what sweet content
To her it brought, let those whose time is spent
On Cupids Study know, the same I leave
To them alone, let them alone conceave.
It was not long (though lovers think it long)
E're young Eramio went, (new love is strong)
To see Amissa, where ('it is open said)
There was a private contract 'twixt them made;
This being noised, (as Fame will quickly spread)
Amongst his friends, how fondly he was led
By loves Alarms, with letters they did strive
Dianas holy fires to revive
Within his breast, and that to love alone,
From Venus free, whereof this letter's one.
Fluentus to Eramio.
BE not so serious, striving to commend
The blaze of Beauty, sometimes let a friend
Partake of your well tuned notes of worth
Which solely to your self you warble forth,
In some retired shade, do not adore
A boy for God, let others harms before,
By his deceit, make you at last be wise,
It was for something Cupid lost his eyes.
Love is a thing deceitful, and will charm,
The wounded heart unto a further harm,
Such are th'allurements of the boy, to stain
The virtuous mind and make destruction plain.
What desperate ends to many do ensue,
And in their blood their guilty hands imbrew,
To thee it is known, let them a warning move,
If thou desir'st continuance of our love.
Fluentus.
Even this Eramio read, and being moved,
In that his friends despise him cause he loved,
In loves excuse whose arrows he did kiss,
He sat a while, and then returned this,
Eramio to Fluentus^
RApt with Ambrosian favors of her love
I well may serious strive, when Tempe grove
Delights so much to whisper forth the praise,
Of my sweet love, with Heliconian lays.
How can my Muse be dumb? or cease to sing
Of fair Amissa? when each silver spring
And cooling arbor to report her fame,
Dictates my Muse in ecchoing back her name;
If she but daigns to beautify the air
With her sweet breath, her golden knotted hair
Receives a thousand complements of love,
From wanton Zephirus, enough to move
Conceived delights, so joys he when he finds
How much her Nectar-breath perfumes the winds.
If she but coverts in Pathimne bours,
To hide her from those sweet distilling showrs
That come to kiss her from their cloudy throne
Of vapour'd mists, those Pearls finding her gone
Lament and die, when they have lost the sweet
They mist, yet some will stay to kiss her feet.
Why will you then dissuade me from that chase
I have begun, when every private place
Records her praise? nor think I am so stupid
In stead of higher powers to honor Cupid;
In all things there is a mean, I will be warnd
By others harms, for since I have been scorned
By some, the next shall teach me to be wise,
And shame mishap; poor Cupid lost his eyes,
By gazing so much on the love I honor,
That all the eyes he had he spent upon her.
Glad is Amissa when my Muse repeats
^er friendly looks, and then again her threats,
Against those that bid me cease to tell her blisses,
Sweeter than life, and half so sweet as kisses.
^f therefore serious friendship may advise you,
On still, for if you cease, your love denies you;
And if another chance to see her face,
Take heed, twill draw him on to win the race.
Eramio.
Which when Fluentus read, and fully found
The depth of his affection, and his wound,
This he returned,
Fluentus to Eramio.
REceive with this my thanks, and prosperous fa^e
To your proceedings, love instead of hate,
Kindness for coyness, Venus sweet embrace,
And Juno's kiss, with all the pomp and grace
That Hymen can afford, then joyful I,
Will come and sing your Epithalamy.
Thus far my wishes, but if counsel may
Be took as kindly, boldly then I say,
Trust not the winds, they are as false as fleet;
As fleet as amorous, kissing all they meet,
Without exception: Be not credulous,
What Groves do whisper is suspicious;
Ask but Narcissus, and he will declare,
Eccho's a wanton, only empty air,
That does but mock, the mists you say that meet
To court your love, do but bemire her feet,
And not adorn them, Temp, and the groves
Are now forsook of shady leaves, and loves;
Flora for shame resideth in the earth,
Until the Spring do give her a new birth.
In speculation of your Mistress eyes,
If Cupid lost his sight in any wise,
Beware of yours, for so it well befits,
Lest with your eyes you also lose your wits.
Cupid they says a God, and dares commence
A suit with Jove, Apollo had no fence
Against his weapon; Thus conclude I then,
If Gods do fail, there are no hopes in men.
Reflect on this, you say you have bin scorned
By some, therefore take heed you be not horned
By others, for this Proverb is both known
And true, an evil seldom comes alone.
Run not too fast, although you see her face,
(Love will beguile, Jove did a cloud embrace,)
Lest when with pain you traverst have the ground,
You win a prize is better lost than found.
Fluentus.
Eramio stood amazed, so quick a change
Should hurl about occasions to so strange
An intercepted plot: O Heavens said he,
Can this delusion spring from Amity?
From enmity it comes, Fluentus knows
A true affected heart admits no shows
Of wavering thoughts, to cloak a real sign
Of occult things, of harmonies divine:
The world I know, even as the dwellers use it,
Is pregnant full of sinners that abuse it.
But let them live, while I in faith involved,
Fluentus, do by this make thee resolved.
Eramio to Fluentus.
REports of Gratulations to retain
Me for your vowed servant are but vain,
For prosperous gales may drive me more your debtor
Through Neptunes fomie floods, to love you better
For this pretext, Epithalamium like,
The mirror of which influence does strike,
That Epithesis to my humid sense,
That young Leander like, I banish hence
Foolish despair, when such an easy price,
Favored by love, may win a merchandise,
Richer than Cholchos pride, such power and force,
Have your Platonic lines, to make a course,
That once seemed tedious, when it was begun,
Pleasant and short to those that needs must run.
Thus far my thanks, your counsel being had
Kindly, and seriously, of one as glad
As may be, when he finds a friend will say,
And botch his lines, to make an hour a day;
Trust me the winds are not so false as fleet,
Nor amorous, nor kiss they all they meet
Without exception, those be foolish winds,
Which Bore^s like blusters on all it finds.
There is indeed a breath that takes delight.
With his obdurate busses to affright
Chaldei met, come from Lavinium dales
In love's disgrace, but these are not the gales
My Muse reports of, it is a pleasing air,
Which only sits, and nestles in the hair
Of my dear love, which like a feth'red rain,
Circuits the Globe and thither comes again,
Witness the heads of those Aeolin streams,
Whose bubling currents murmur forth the dreams
Of Nymphs, and Satyrs, which acount the groves
The ardent Salopia for their loves.
Ardent Narcissus mist the love he sought,
Yet, foolish boy, what ere he wished he caught,
He loved himself, and when himself he misses,
The eccho's mock him for his foolish wishes,
(Amidst such Hero and such ^hisban choices)
Thrusting him farther with their wanton voices,
To deeper griefs, mounted on the highest tops
Despair could grant; those clear and silver drops,
Which only lingered time to kiss she sweet,
The innocent, the pur^, and heavenly feet
Of my fair love, amazed him to behold,
For what they touched they straitway turned to gold;
For shame Queen Flora daigns not to appear,
Abash't to se^ a fairer Flora here;
Nor Cynthia did more chastity embrace
Than she, nor Venus a more lovely face,
Whose radient eyes that kindle Cupids fire,
Are Cos amoris, whetstones of desire.
Then strive not this entire knot to undo,
For I can love thee and Amissa too.
Eramio.
This by the one wrote, by the other read,
Stopped Letters mouths, and sudden Parley bred,
In which dispute Eramio did haste
To publish proofs, but in his proofs was cast.
O dear Fluentus, said Eramio,
In whom my soul revives, by this I know
Thou art upright; so will I be upright,
No more the wicked boy shall taint my sight
With his deluding parables, I hate
His idle laws, and at as high a rate
Esteem Diana's worship, as before
I ever did, and her alone adore;
And will you then neglect that lovely chase,
( Fluentus said) you so much did embrace?
I will said he, and if Eramio live,
No more I will my youth and honor give
To foolish love; Idalia's son I bid
Thy laws adue; and so indeed he did.
Which when his love, the fair Amissa knew,
How all her wished joys abortive grew,
She watch't a time, even as Eramio came
From sweet Casperia, Dian's sacred flame,
And there by force, love conquering did move her,
By force to make Eramio her lover.
Eramio starts, mistrusting even as reason
Her self would do some new intended treason.
What cause said he has urged you to this plot,
Against my life, (ye men) I know ye not?
About to strike, the fair Amissa cries,
O ^old thy blow, for if thou strik'st she dies
Whose death thou seek'st. And came the cause from thee
Eramio said? let this thy glory be
Thou worst of Women, that thou have received
Thy death from him, whose hand has thee bereav'^
Of a polluted soul; when thou shall come,
Before Rh^damanth there to receive thy doom
For this last act, lament thy self, and houl,
In that thou have been tainted with so foul
An ignominious stain; could thy base hear^
Permit fruition to this dev'^ish art
Of base conspiracy? O hel-bred evil!
Hatched by infernal potions of that Devil
Father to thee, and thine; had I supposed,
So fair a frame as thine could have inclo'd
Such hateful guess within, or had I thought
Thy often flattering messages had wrought
By that black art, from which this harm proceeds,
Or such fair beauty could have masked such deeds,
Long since thy soul to that black Cave had fled
Of envious night, and I snatched from thy head
Those glorious Anadems thou used to wear,
Chaplets of curious flowers I did prepare
For thy bewitching brows, O how I hate
My wicked star, my too too envious fate;
I hate the time that did induce desire
Of love, I hate the fuel caused the fire,
I hate my eyes too credulous and kind,
To thy false heart, that strikes thy beauty blind.
And which more honor from thy breast discovers,
To give example to young foolish lovers;
I vow by heaven, and all the powers there be
Therein, I hate my self for loving thee.
His words half spoke Cyandus daughter cries,
Is this the meed of zealous love? and dies.
For young Eramio in this plot deceav'd,
Up from the ground the massy stone had heaved,
Borne by the fury of a Tyrannous spite,
And as his present anger did invite,
Hurled it amongst them, heard you not the sounds,
Of struggling vialls pouring from their wounds
Consumed oil? Amissa's feeble heart
Paying untimely death for his wished dart
Its purest streams, but lo a sudden change,
Wrought by inspired miracles does range
There deep amassed ears, amidst the throngs
Of their shrill cries were heard Elisian songs,
Like those when Jove his Ganimed had stol^,
Gr^nting a pleasant convoy to her soul.
Her soul and body gone those Heavens to grace,
As too too worthy for this sordid place;
Her heart to manifest the clear complexion
Of her upright, of her unstained affection,
Was metamorphos'd to a Diamont,
Which so the afflicted lover did affront
With visions, dreams, and such like signs, to move
A good conceit of her unspotted love.
Hold, hold, said he, let my revenge alone,
The Gods have ways enowe, if once but shown,
The time will come, when V^^us will inspire
Into each scornful breast tormenting fire,
By naught to be extinguished, for I know,
If Poets can divine, it must be so;
It must be so, and those who now deride
Her holy laws, and have too much reli'd
Upon the foolish worships of the Queen
Of Chastity, whose power is still unseen,
Even as I am, so will I always pray,
Shall be perplexed a thousand times a day;
This hand, (cursed be this hand, and every hand
That rescued me, and helped me to withstand
That glorious yoke my neck should daily move
Under Amissa's too respective love.)
This hand no more shall sprinkle the persume
Of Frankincense, in Dian's hallowed room,
But if it ever an oblation make,
To any Altar, or do e're partake
In any solemn sacrificers vow,
More zeal and honor shall appear in mine,
Amissa, it shall be upon thy shrine.
These words were stopped, by Menothantes Father,
Who to revenge his Sisters death, but rather
To quit his stock of an abusive crime
Was laid upon the Worthies of the time,
Supposed, though false by him, (whereof you have
In this portraite a Copy, which I leave
To your chaste eyes, in hope you will permit
A charitable censure over it,
For sweet Eramio's sake) old Pae^^s son,
Striving to perfect what he had begun,
(To which his bloody heart had bin inured)
With his envenomed dart a death procured
To young Eramio, who sighing said,
See, see, unhappy fate has me betrayed.
But while speaks, he to Amissa goes,
Invokes the powers to pardon him, and throws
His body on the blood-besprinkled ground,
Where, when distilling tears had washed her wounds,
Ay me, said he, that this does us betide,
So kissed into her lips his soul, and died.
So much the Cretan lad, with weeping voice
Had told, and was about to tell the rest;
But lest said he (Ladies) the heavy noise
Of her mishap, should your chaste ears molest,
A while give respite to my tongue, that I
May gather strength to end her Tragedy.
Finis Libri Primi.
SO far my Childish Muse the wanton played,
To crop those sweets the flowery Meadons bore,
Pleasing her self in valleys as she straid,
Unable yet those lofty hills to soar;
But now her wings by stronger winds aspire,
In deeper songs to tune her warbling lyre.
For what before her infant brain declared,
Was but a key to tune her quav'ring strings,
Allwaies to have her Instruments prepared
To sing more sweet, when she of Sepha sings,
Who from above, even for her virtues sake,
Will shrill my sound, and better Music make.
Now let me tell how EPIMINIDES,
With weeping voice, and penetrating eyes,
Revived the Ladies, who themselves did please^
By purling streams to wail his miseries,
Who, while the Meads with his complainings rang,
Wiping his eyes, these sad Encomions sang.
THE HISTORY OF ARCADIUS and SEPHA.
Liber Secundus.
I Told you (Ladies) if your tender hearts
Admit attention, while my tongue imparts
Such heavy news, how young Eramio came
With yearly incense, to the hallowed fame
Of the Alphaean worship, and how fate
Abridg'd his life with nights eternal date.
I told you also (leaving her asleep)
How Sepha's eyes ore-charg'd with tears did weep,
And as she swounded how her curious hands
Did give the earth a print, which print still stands,
To keep her fame alive, but what it was,
Through too much grief my tongue did overpass,
As fit'st, it seems, to be inserted here,
That as my heavy story does draw near
Toward her end, so her immortal praise,
Raped in her sweet Encomions may raise
Conjugall tears from each distilling eye,
Whose praise and fame shall them accompany
With her harmonious voice, I mean the love
Her soul will power upon them from above.
And that her eyes may make all sighs the fairer,
Her soul will smile to see the love they bare her.
The spices which Eramio had strewn
About the altar, her wet eyes bedewed
With sorrowing tears, which daily they did cast
Upon the same, and made thereof a paste;
Like those congealed clouds which some have given
A glorious title, called the walls of Heaven.
So Sepha falling, fell upon the same,
From whose fair hand that fair impression came,
By some swift Savo called, for many say
From thence Campanian A River in Campania.
Savo took her way,
And there it is where each Campanian maid,
For yearly offerings her vow has paid
With the Medean draughts, to revive the fame
Of Sepha dead; Savo from Sepha came:
But that is not all, the print whereof I spoke,
Though some affirm it is, yet it is not a Lake.
For if the spices which Eramio cast,
Dried up her tears, and thereof made a paste,
How can a Lake ensue? but this is sure,
There was a corner of the altar pure
From any blot, on this Eramio laid
His Aromatic spices as he praid.
This being turned into a past by those
Distilling eyes (which dying seldom close,)
The palm of her fair hand did gently press
The yielding paste, and as she up it reard,
Like a triangled heart the print appeard,
The fingers standing just upon the heart,
Presented Cupids shafts, which he does dart
On simple souls, from whence ensues the blood,
The blood being gone, came that ^am^anian flood;
Thus palm and fingers having shown the love
By ^upids net entangled, strait did move
T'another form no figure there was seen,
While yet they gaze upon it, the place grows green;
At this they stare, at this a flower up-starts,
Which still presents the form of wounded hearts.
This being seen by Nymphs that haunt the Springs,
Each took a slip, it to their Mansion brings,
Where being set, it is now in every grove,
A pretty flower, and called the L^dy-glove.
Now let me tell of Sepha, and her hap
That did ensue, while she in Fortunes lap
Lies lulled asleep, (sleep had her sense bereaved)
(And chie^ly for the love she had conceived
Of her Arcadius) bethinking hard,
Either he is of charity debarred,
Or linkt to another virtue, and surmising
He Is not to be imbrac'd^ waking and rising,
She found her self by him to be embraced,
Who, being present at her fall, did haste
To hale her breath again; those eyes that wrought
Confusion first, now more confusion brought;
Having Arcadus kissed, she thinks some dream
Deludes her wandering sense, in which extreme
Rapt with conceit of this her present good,
Her greedy eyes with ardent wishes wooed,
That Heaven, in which her present hopes remained
A worlds continuance, and she had obtained
What she desired, had not the winged boy
Unbent his bow, with period of their joy.
Yet something to her hopes he did admit,
To whet the heavy sacrificers wit;
While young Arcadius with trembling hand,
Felt how the pulse, as if at Deaths command,
Sounded a loud Alarm; fair Heaven said he,
In whom all grace and virtues planted be,
Why will you suffer that grief^
infernal hound?
To dare to come, to give this heart this wound?
Use that celestial power, the powerful Gods
Have given, that grief and you may live at odds.
I know those eyes, one wink from those fair eyes
Have power to banish hence all miseries
Are incident to man so rare a gift
Did nature find, when only but this shift
TO amaze spectators she for you had left,
For know when Nature framed you she befreft
The world of all perfections, to make
You of divine, and Heavenly good partake,
As well as humane, that there might agree
In you, of every grace a sympathy.
So said, the blushing damsel with delight
Of this new friend, did with her eyes requite
His too soon ended speech, O Heavens she said,
That have respect to me unworthy maid,
And daigne this good to me so often desired,
Direct me so, that e're I have expired
This perfect bliss, and am deprived the same,
I may enjoy the knowledge of his name.
Grant this (ye Gods) to me, impatient, till
I know his naame, his Country, and his will.
Then did she pull her scarf from off her face,
And putting by her hair with that sweet grace,
That Venus used, when to Adonis eyes
She did expose her love, Sepha did rise
With such sweet looks as cannot be expressed,
And said, these favors Sir, and sighed the rest.
Well, thought Arcadius, something there remains,
And it is some weighty cause that it detains,
(Grant Heaven) that as I hope, so it may prove,
By her unpollisht sentence to be love.
For he in dreams and visions often had seen
A Lady, who for him alone had been
Tortured a thousand ways, with blubbred cheeks,
She often had said, receive her love, who seeks
No other life, than for thy own deserts
TO enjoy thy presence, and admire thy parts.
She being now recovered sat her down
To view Arcadius, whom the Priest did crown
With wreaths of Laurel, which he always wore
For the upright affection that he bore.
Then to the Altar went he, where he praid,
While Sepha overcome with passion, said,
So loud that he might hear, were I the Saint
To whom he prays, sure I would hear his plaint.
At this Arcadius looked upon her lips,
And blessed them that they let that message slip;
Then with his pure devotion onward goes,
and on the Altar throws
A winged heart, which lately he had got
For sacrifice, about the heart was wrote
These next ensuing lines.
The purest piece of Man's delight,
In whom his life, and Love consists,
Whose softness keeps from gloomy night,
Which naught can pierce, but Amatysts^
Is here presented on thy Throne,
Bedewed with tears of faithful vows,
Presenting thee what is thy own,
The best to please thy virgin brows,
To fan thy face with her cool wings,
And fly the faster as she sings.
Which I by chance,
The better hi^ sad story to advance,
Have Copi'd forth; about the wings there was
Some other Lines, which I will not let 'pass,
That (Gentle Ladies) ye may not have cause,
Of his devotion to detract the applause.
Fly swift my thoughts, and through this sacred fire,
That by those sweet distilling drops above,
So may I live, and escape the Dart,
And flourish like those Flowers it fills
First let V^luptas weep,
C^st^lio^ liquor's free,
^'re I forsake
Or yet deny
Mount up to her, ^et her to me retire,
She may infuse to me religious love,
While her sweet breath saivs up my heart,
With Nectar sweet, which one frown kills,
And Gloria fall asleep,
Medea bitter be,
Thy praise to make,
Thy ^i^tie.
These and the like Arcadius presents,
Mingled with deep, and choice perfuming sents
Of many bitter sighs, he turned him round,
Salutes the Priest, the Altar, and the ground
Whereon it stood. then to fair Sepha turns,
Who while her heart with strange affection burns,
Meets him with nimble eyes, he gently bends
A Trembling Cringe to Sepha, who attends
With her impatient ears that happy hour,
When the wished Sun shall show that gracious flower
She loves unknown, till a sigh does bewray,
As if the prologue for a following play,
These next ensuing words, and such they were,
They did requite the time she stayed to hear.
Harpoc a^es may clame a vow I made, The Go^ of Silence

(Fair Lady) under his beloved shade;
When my insipient years too too blame,
With rash attempts to Lauralize the fame
Of ^upids power, invested that disgrace,
Which still should be a shadow to my face.
Then, cause one way did lead to both their Towers,
He took her Magic hand, and with whole showers
Of tears first washed them, then with a faint kiss,
Dried them, and walking homeward told her this.
The story of PHAON and SAPPHO.
In Lesbos famous for the comic lays,
That used to spring from her o'reflowing praise,
Twice famous Sappho dwelt the fairest maid
Mit^lin had, of whom it once was said
Amongst the Gods, a sudden question was,
If Sappho, or Thalia did surpass
In Lyribliring tunes, it long remaind,
Till Mn^mosyne the Mother was constrained,
To say they both from her begetting sprang,
And each of the others warbling Lyra a sang.
There was a Town in Lesbos^ now defaced,
An^issa named, by Neptunes arms embraced;
There Sappho had a Tower, in it a grove
Bedecked with pearls, and strewn about with love;
^^u^othean ^branches overspred the same,
And from the shadows perfect odors came.
To dress it most there was a purple bed,
All wrought in works, with azure mantles spread,
The tables did unspotted carpets hold
Of ^yrian dies, the edges fringed with gold.
Along this grove there stealing ran a Spring,
Where Sappho tuned her Muse, for she could sing
In golden verse, and teach the best a vain
Beyond the music of their sweetest strain.
Here while she sang, a ruddy youth appeared,
Drawn by the sweetness of the voice he heard,
Sing on said he (fair Lady) let not me,
Too bold, give period to your melody.
Nor blame me for my over bold attempt,
(Although I yield of modesty exempt
^n doing this) and yet not over bold,
For who so hears the voice, and does behold
The lips from whence it comes, would be as sad
As I, and trust me Lady if I had
But skill to tempt you with so sweet a touch,
Assure you, you your self would do as much.
She answers not, for why the little God
Had touched her heart before, and made a rod
For one contempt was past, she viewed him hard,
Whose serious looks made Phaon half affeard
She was displeased, about to go she cries,
Stay gentle Knight, and take with thee the prize,
To thee alone assured; the boy looked pale,
But strait a ruddy blush did make a veil
T'obscure the same; while thus he panting stood,
A thousand times he wished him in the Wood
From whence he came, and speaking not a word,
Let fall his hat, his javelin and his sword.
She being young, and glad of an occasion,
Stoopt down to take them up; he with persuasion
Of an half showing love, detains her hand
From it, and with his fingers made the band
To chain them fast, (now Love had laid his scean)
And draw'd the tragic plot, whereon must lean
The ground of all his Acts; (great Deity)
When thy foreseeing nove-sight can descry
Things which will hap, why do thou train their love^
With pleasant music to deceitful groves?
See how the love of some with equal weight,
By virtue poised, live free from all deceit,
To whom thou help'st with thy beloved darts,
And link'st their true inviolable hearts,
Why deal'st not so withal? are some too hard?
Or has enchanted spells their heart^ debarred
From thy keen shafts? you Powers should be upright
Not harm^ull Gods^ yet thou still take delight
In bloody ends, why did not wink at these?
And send thy shafts a thousand other ways
That more deserved thy anger? or if needs
Thou would be doing, while thy power proceeds
In lofty flames one flame requires another.
Why did thou wound the one, and not the other?
For (Lady) so it past between the lovers,
That after little pause Sappho discovers
Those kindled flames which never can expire,
But his contempt adds fuel to her fire.
Immodest Girl he said, why art so rude
To woo? when virtuous women should be wooed,
And scarce obtained by wooing, O forbear,
Sweet Sappho cried, if I do not prepare
A just excuse by none to be denied,
Never let me -- so sat her down and cried.
He moved for pity more to see her tears,
Than touched with any loyal love he bears,
Sat down by her, while she dispairing, laid
Her eyes on his, her hands on his, and said,
Ay me, that Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbls^
herbs for love no cure afford,
Whose too too jealous actions will accord
To naught but semblable desire, that lost,
What pain more vile than lovers that are crossed
With hopeles hopes? they say'ts a Credo ali quis Demon, etc.
God that work^
The same, but sure some Devil it is that lurks
His opportunity how to destroy,
And tear the Soul from her aspiring joy.
Now to prevent occasions that may fall,
Is serious love, which will all harms appall,
Neglect whereof by many is deplored,
Ay me! that herbs for love no cure afford^
Now for the fault whereof I am accused,
O blame me not, for it is no fault I used;
For if affection spurs a man to love,
^Tis that affection needs must make him move
His suit to us, and we, when we affect,
And see the like from them, seem to neglect
Their scorned suit, but so our frowns appear,
Mixed with a faint desire, and careful fear
It should displease them, that we may unite,
A careless love, with an entire delight.
Again, when men do see a curious stone,
The only hopes of their foundation,
How often do they slight with scornful eye,
Neglect, disgrace, dispraise, and spurn it by?
The more to move and stir up an excess
Of disrespect, and make the value less.
Even so we handle men, who still endure
A thousands deaths, to train us to their lure,
And were we sure they could not us forsake,
We Would dally more, even more delight to make.
Even so as men are caught, even so are we,
When we affect those that our service flee;
What kind salutes, embraces and constraints
Ought we to use? lest our untuned complaints
Unpitied die, and we with sorrows scope,
As free from pleasure die, as free from hope.
Thou art a stranger Pha^n to this place,
But I have known thy name, and know thy race,
An Italian who wrote the private sedition of Illyricum.
Eumenion stories do thy honor tell,
Istria Eumenion knew thy Parents well,
Whose Fathers head upheld the weighty Crown
Of Illyris, which none could trample down,
Though many envied, free from harm he laid
His bones to rest, with whom the Crown decayed.
Now fate to show a model of her power,
On thy Illyricum began to lower;
Thy These sprung first from the Sons of Lara, by the Painims called Household
Gods, of whom Ovid: Ponitur ad Patrios barbara praeda d^os.



Household Gods, acquainted with the cries
Of thy decaying subjects, cast their eyes
This way, and that, it was yours O Gods to bid
Denial to sedition that was hid
In Catelinian breasts, and to surcease
The period of your domestic ease.
In this uprore (what fruits seditions bring
May well be guest, for every one was King)
The better sort prepared for thee and thine
A waftage over the beloved Rhyne
To Lesbos this; thou had not long bin here,
But private envy did thy walls uprear,
And did beguile to all posterity
Thee of thy glory, and the Crown of thee.
These things thy household Gods (to Lesbos brought)
Foreseeing good, have for thy own good wrought,
That thou may gain a greater Crown than that
Illyrius had, and be more honored at
Those Festivalls, when yearly thou partak'st
Of Triumphs, which to Chimney Gods thou make.
This was a work divine, and happy too,
(If any happiness from grief ensue)
That thou wast here concealed, for many vowed,
And thundered forth the fame thereof aloud,
Of thy ensuing death, while thou wast still
In pupil age, and knew'st, nor did no ill,
But 'twas the Providence of you that dwell
In lofty Heavens (ye Powers) and to expel
All harm from him who must your Laws maintain,
That when his perfect strength he does obtain,
He may reward their deeds that envy bred,
And maugre those that to rebellion led.
Here wast thou brought, here have thou daily staid,
And (while thy better subjects sought thee) played
Beguiling time away; perhaps you would know,
What moved the powers to permit thee so
Untimely ruin, know they did anoint
Thee King of famous Lesbos, and appoint
This means alone to make their power approved,
And bring thee here of me to be belovd.
To this faint speech he intermission made
With heavy sighs, and then (fair Lady) said,
The Heavens have robbed me of succeeding bliss,
And hid me from those means to grant you this
I most desire, behold my love I dye,
My trouled soul methinks does seem to fly
Through silent Caves and Fields, two pleasant gates
Open wide to take me in, wherein there waits
A Crown of gold, neither by arm or hand
Supported, but of its free power does stand,
Now sits upon my head, these things I see,
And yet I live, can this a vision be?
About to stir, O stir me not he cries,
My feet stick fast, Sappho farewell, and dies.
While yet he speaks, my Parents wayward fate,
Must be accompanied with the date
Of my despised life, a fearful rind
Of Citron trembling redd, does creeping bind
His not half closed speech, his curled hair,
Which gallants of his time did use to wear
Of an indifferent length, now upward heaves,
Toward the skies their gold re^ulgent leaves.
Sappho at this exclaims, laments, invokes
No Power nor God, but seeks by hasty strokes,
As a fit sacrifice unto her friend,
From her beloved breast her soul to send.
A while she silent stood, belike to think,
Which was the safest way for her to drink
Of the same cup her Phaon did, at last
(As evil thoughts will quickly to one haste)
She saw the Spring that ran along the Grove,
It Is you fair streams must send me to my Love.
Behold, dear Love, with what impatient heat,
My soul aspires to mount to that blessed seat,
Where thou blessed sit'st, stretch out thy sacred hand,
And with safe conduct draw me to that land,
That we may taste the joys the vallie yields;
And hand in hand may walk the Elis^an fields.
This said, she turns her face unto the Tree,
And kissing it^ said, if thou still can see,
Behold how irksome I enjoy that breath,
Which still detains my meeting thee in death:
With that she saw his sword, which she did take,
And having kissed it for the owners sake;
Salutes her breast with many weeping wounds,
Then casts her self into the Spring, and drown'ds.
There is a Hill in Paphlagonia, named
Cytorus, whither this mischance was famed;
My self was present there when many rude,
And base untutur'd peasants did intrude
Into our Plays called Actis, used every fifth year in honor of Apollo.
games, they were, as since I heard
Those base insulting Traitors, that debarred
Wendenlands Crown from righteous Phaon's browe,
These (cause the Gods had quit them of the vows
They made to work his death) with open cries,
Proclaimed their thanks, and sent them to the skies.
But Venus, who in constant love delights,
And every perfect amity requites,
Exiled their joy, each one perceives their arms
To branches grow, each one partakes the harms
Of their deserts, The ^^x tree.
a tree there is which bears
His summer hue, and it in winter wears,
To this she turns them, that continual green
Might manifest their never pard'ned sin.
This done I saw a Knight of courage bold,
Clothed all in argent armor, stripped with gold,
Who vowed, the death of one of us should pay
For her mishap, to crown the heavy day
With Anadems from his victorious hand,
I too too over forward, did demand
What was the cause; discourteous Knight he said,
Do not repent thee that thou have betrayed
That honored Lady? while I ignorant
Of what he meant, he said it is not the want
Of Lance, shall keep thee safe, till I have shown
Thy just revenge; so threw away his own.
But with his sword he taught me what to do,
And I my self had sword and armor too
Ready to answer him; the fight was long,
And had been longer too, till I too strong,
With an unlucky blow, o were ungiven,
Betrayed his life, and sent his soul to Heaven:
It Was ^lphitheon, who of long had loved
Sappho, now dead, whose suit I often had moved
In his behalf, now hearing of her fate,
Either increast in him suspicious hate
Toward me, or furious else did frantic strike,
Amazed, unkind to every one alike;
Dying he knew me, and bewaild his loss,
My friend Arcadius said he, the cross
Of this my present state, ought not to be
A blot to stain our former amity
I die, let my remembrance have a place
In thy just heart, it shall be no disgrace.
Though envy stole my sense, o it is no blot,
No fault at all was mine; I knew thee not
When here I met thee first; My dearest friend,
I die, love the remembrance of my end.
So said, he went away, while I distraught
For grief of this inhumane wicked fault,
Vowed never more to move a Ladies heart
Nor for my self, nor for another part.
Arca^ius ceast, and Se^ha's turn was now.
Who said (beloved and worthy Knight) that vow
You easily may infringe, and yet be blessed.
A rash conceit was never held the best.
You say it may be, and it shall be so.
Arcadius said, chiefly for that I know
When virtue, beauty, and entire delight,
Our nere dissolved affection do unite
The fault appears the less the glorious eyes
Of the All-seeing power do despise
Continual grief, Semel in anno ridet Apollo.
and love himself erst while
Carousing bouls of wine is seen to smile.
Fair Lady know, as yet to me unknown,
Your beauty and your virtues have oreslown
My willing yielding sense, a secret fire,
Continually increasing through desire
To honor your admired parts, does move,
By naught to be extinguished but your love.
Res est solliciti plena cimoris amor.
Love is a thing full of suspicious care,
By every churlish wind blown to despair.
Silent Canius died for love, not known
To her, who did his pure affection own.
I therefore open my heart before your eyes,
Not doubting but you are kind as well as wise;
Not doubting but you are wise as well as kind.
Fair Sepha said, your worth I know may find
Far better Ladies, that may more content
Your love than I, and then you will repent
You of your deed, which still will you mole^t,
A rash conceit was never held the best.
Though all the beauties in the world were one,
Said he, and I by right might seize upon
The same, yet would I for thy virtues sake,
Aspire no better fortune, than to make
Thee my beloved wife, Tibullus Lib. 4 Illam qui^quid agit, quoquo vestigia
vertit,
Composuit furtim, subsequ^turque decor,
Seu solvit crines susis decet esse capillis,
Seu compsit, comp^is est reveren^a comis.



where ere thou art,
What ere thou do, the Graces grace impart
To thy sweet self; this hair, this lovely hair,
If loose, as thou do often use to wear,
Ostends thy freer beauty, or if knit,
It shows rare wisdom is enclosed in it.
In fine they are the chains that link desire
In every breast, and kindle Cupids fire,
For which soever way thou do them wear,
They fetch thee honor, and thy honor bear.
To me she said you please to speak the best,
O thought you of me so I should be blessed,
Not that my fond conceit desires to be
Linkt with each pleasing object that I see,
But of a long retained affection, I
Desire the bonds of perfect amity;
And since you please to honor me so well
With common friendship, that in all should dwell,
Tell me the name of that thrice blessed place
Injoyes your presence, and from what blessed race
You draw your line; me Arathea claims
Said he, my much unhappy Parents names,
Were Capaneus, and Evadne, they
Of good report and noble progeny,
My Father, led by just revenge, was chief
Of those that wrought distressed Thebes grief,
Who having wed my Mother then but young
And of a pleasant face, whose Parents sprung
From Juno's breasts, unto those wars was called;
Where after many skirmishes befall'd
To him this sad mishap, when various fights
Had closed up many with eternal nights,
He furious, and impatient of delay,
Resolved a quick dispatch, and with that day
To end the wars, a Ladder he devises,
Of cords composed, by which he enterprises
Apparent means to scale the walls, but lo,
About to clime, some wicked hand does throw
A stone upon him; yet i will clime he said;
But while his soldiers c^^e unto his aid,
For all their hopes upon his worth reli'd,
He gave directions for the wars and died.
My Mother too too heavy for his harm,
Did help his wounded body to unarm,
When all his friends to honor him the more,
Were present, and his ruin did deplore.
An ancient use to burn the bodies of the dead, and put the Ashes into Vessels
which they called ^^nes; whereof Ovid Met: Lib. 4. Quodque rogis superest, una
requiescit in urna.



But while the fire consumes with greedy flame
His ^lesh, my Mother runs into the same;
To show when virtue shrines an upr^ght heart,
Death never can united honor part.
In this Campania where my Castle stands,
I was instructed by the careful hands
Of Callias, till understanding bad
Revenge be done for wrongs my Parents had.
I moved the wars afresh, what means I made,
With all-perswading reasons to persuade
The soldiers aid, is this
O You, said I, beloved for upright ways,
And feared of all for valor that obeys
Your conquering arms! I purpose not to add
Words to your virtues, nor my speech to cladd
With flattring robes, my just revenge shall cause
A triumph for that never scorned applause
Of your victorious fame, which daily moved
Toward your names, O you so well beloved!
Your noble friend my Father, to whose shrine
You pay your yearly tears, is now divine,
He sorry for that harm which would betide
Your never conquered arms i^ that he died,
Died loath to leave you, now there is a time,
To heap revenge against them for that crime
Those Coward traitors acted, when they slew
Your noble friend my Father; let us view
The cause that moves us to display our war,
O is it not meritorious, and far
Beyond the price of their despised blood?
Your wisdom knows your loss, our cause is good;
Too good alas for them, I know your love
Still, still, remains alive, which makes me move
Those val^ant hearts which always you enjoyed,
To seek revenge against those that have destroyed
Your noble friend my Father: This, o this
Makes me require your help, nor greater bliss
Can to your dying tombs more honor gather,
Than to revenge your noble friend my Father.
O you so well beloved, I need not show
The sloth^ull Thebans fearfulness, you know
The manner, and the matter of their war,
How through disorder, and discord they jar
Amongst themselves, your swords their Towers shake
At the remembrance of your names they quake.
When in the skirmage you your valor send,
To court their necks, and show their lives their end,
Bethink you for whose sake you fight, and let
His wonted valor and remembrance whet
Your all-commanding swords, what greater gain
Than their subjection can you obtain?
Honor from thence will spring, their wealth and glorie^
By you enjoyed, will fill your famous stories
With never-dying fame, and for your merit,
Your Sons shall everlasting praise inherit.
We for revenge, renown, and amity,
Our wars display, they but for liberty;
When we have girt their City with the choice
Of Martial men, then shall we hear their voice
Come creeping to us, but our ears are stopped
From Traitors mouths, till we have overtopt
(For justice sake, on which we have reli'd)
Their weighty sins, and high aspiring pride.
O you beloved of all, it is not a cause
Of little worth, nor only for applause
I move you to this War, survey your hearts,
There see his tomb, his wounds, and his deserts
Ever to be admired, your noble friend
My Father, whose too too unhappy end
Requires their blood^ desires no greater bliss,
Than to present his joyful soul with this.
These and such words I used, with me they swore
To fetch the glory which the Thebans wore,
And placed upon my Fathers tomb, to crown
Him with Heroic conquests, and renown.
With me they went, with me they overcame
The Thebans pride, and brought with them their fame.
Detained at wars, I saw you not, till late
Returning home, my ever happy fate
Blessed me to hear your voice; My nimble Steed
To gratulate my labor with the deed,
So well beloved (as if he knew my mind)
Lost me, that you fair Lady might me find.
At this she smiles, while his loved tale goes on;
Now since it is your chance to light upon
What was ordained your own, debar me not
That service from, which is my own by lot.
While I infolded in your love declare
Those sweet contents in Venus pleasures are.
Catullu^. Quis me uno vivit felicior? aut magis hac est optand^^ vita dicere
quis poterit.
For who with more delight can live? What are
Those joys that may with these delights compare?
She blushed and said, for e're she spoke she blushed,
Then from her sweet, but angry lips there rusht
This angry speech, (beloved Sir) I owe
More inward zeal than yet I will bestow
On your lascivious love, and being near
Her Talmos, flung away, and would not hear
His quick-prepar'd excuse, who over-waid
With death-tormenting grief, looked up and said,
Shall these contempts ore-rule thy virtuous will?
O Sepha, know thou whom thy scorns do kill?
Well she goes on, nor looks behind to see
The fruits of her disdain, his Amity,
But hasted home, by fond suspicion led;
(So Arethusa from Alphaeus fled)
Till to her chamber come, she unawares,
(Beginning now to be perplexed with cares)
Looked from a window, from a window spied
Her fair Arcadius dead, even then she cried.
Her nimble feet had not such power to bear
Her half so fast away^ as now her fear
Returns her to him, ready to complain
Upon her fate, her tender eyes do strain
Balm to bedew his cheeks, till a sweet kiss,
(It seems beloved better than that bliss
The Heavens bestowed) recalled his sleepy eyes,
Who opening first, straight shut again and lies
Closed in her arms, as if naught more could grace him,
With greater joys, than when her arms embrace him:
At length remembrance (usherd by a groan)
Proclaimed his life; and am I left alone?
He said, then op't his eyes, whose fixed sight
Not yet from deaths imbracings free, did light
Upon her face, about his voice to raise,
Soft kisses stop his speech, those past he says,
Ye Gods, whose too too hasty shafts have struck
Beguiling joys into my eyes, and took
My heavy soul from that thrice blessed place
Where Sepha dwells, who must Elisium grace,
What yields this Heaven? O would I still might live,
Her presence yields more joys than Heaven can give;
Invest me with all pleasures that you please
In Heaven to have, with Canticles of ease
That follow pious souls, they naught will yield
To me but grief; while over the Elisian field,
And gloomy shades, continual steps I take
For her safe wastage over the Stygian lake.
These words he spoke, taking her face for Heaven,
(In whom the Powers, all powerful grace had given)
Where still he thought he was, while Sepha grieved,
With cordial water from her eyes, revived
His not yet living sense, with greedy eyes
He views her face, who with this speech replies.
To me it is strange, that you (within whose breast
Such rare undaunted strength and wit does rest)
Through foolish grief should yield your sacred soul
To Charons boat, who shall your death condole
So slightly caused? shall I? believe me no,
I Will rather seek some noble means to show
How much you strive with faint tormenting mind
To raise that heart wherein you lie inshrind.
Should men despair for once or twice refusal,
Few men would speed, for to our Sex it is usual;
And often, words outstep the careless lip,
Which past, repent that e're they let them slip.
Now let this message in thy bosom light
Arcadius, thou art the sole delight
Of this my wretched life, for thee I live,
To live with thee, to thee my love I give.
Preserve it then so worthy to be loved,
That of thee always I may be beloved:
Let no lascivious thought pollute the same,
Which may increase a scandal to my name,
But with unstained desires let me be led
By Hymen's rites unspotted to thy bed.
Have you not heard young lambs with wailing cries
Lament their dams departure? who still lies
Under the sheerers hands? with discontent
Thinking them dead, their sudden death lament?
While they to hinder the bemoning notes
Get up, and pay their ransom with their coats.
Even so Arcadius with attentive^ care,
Observed each word her heavenly lips did spare,
Still fearing lest some various conclusion,
Should draw his life to sable nights confusion.
But when he heard the full, Ladies I know
You can conceive what streams of joy did slow
In his still honored breast, he nimbly rose,
Conjured the Air to keep her message close
From babbling Echoes, to her self he vows
An amrous kiss, and she his kiss allows.
He craved remission for his faulty words,
Now asked, and straight remission she affords,
And binds him to the limits of unstained
Desire, and with her golden tresses chained
His heart from all deceit, with such pure grace,
As ought in every lover to have place;
To Talmos she (proud of her prize) him ledd,
(For know fair Sepha's parents both were dead)
Where entertained with many royal sips
He drunk full boules of Nectar from her lips.
Time hasty to produce the marriage day
Of these impatient lovers, hy'd his way;
And Sepha after many sweet embraces,
Fraught with conceit, and stuffed with interlaces
Of their ensuing pleasure, did permit
Arcadius departure, who unfit
For any service, but the winged God,
To Arathea went, and as he rode,
Often blamed orehasty time their joy t'undo,
But praised him for the sports that should ensue.
Now was it when the fraction of the day
From sable night had made Aurora way,
When Epimenides.
I, ambiguous of succeding fate,
Forsook my native country for the hate
Against me conceived, me Creet.
Minos Country bred
Whose hundred Cities with amazement led
Each eye to view their pride; My Father old,
And I a pretty stripling, did uphold
The staff of his declining age, with care
I cherisht him, and did the burden bear
Of his domestic ployments, now it was,
(When all his business through my hands did pass)
That once he sent me to attend the sheep,
Where Woods sweet chanters summoned me to sleep:
Within a Cave of Par^an stone composed,
I laid me down, I laid me down, and closed
My duskish eyes, sure some enchantments kept
The same with Magic spells, for there I slept
Whole seventeen years away; awaked at last,
I got me up, and to my home did haste,
Not knowing so much time away was sled,
I called my friends, but ^o, my friends were dead.
This known I left Creet.
Minoia, and spent
My days in Rome, not caring where I went,
Nor what I did; nor there I long remaind,
Cause more mishap was to my life ordained:
A gate in Rome.
Mugiona stands pointing to a way
Called A high way from Rome to Campania.
Appia, through which my journey lay;
Nor many days were spent before I came
Unto that Town which A town in Campania.
Sora has to name;
And there a while I staid, a while I strove
To kill those griefs, which never ceased to move
A desperate end, for that unwisht mischance
Still gnawing on my soul, about to advance
My sword toward my end, o stay a while
A voice bespake, let not thy wrath beguile
Thee of succeding joys; amazed I stood,
Not knowing why to save, or spill my blood.
My eyes could show me nothing, but my ears
Granted a convoy for the sob'd-forth tears
Of a distressed Lady, what mishap
Has Fortune more, said she, than to entrap
Our joys, and cut them off? the voice did guide
Me to a little grove, wherein I spied
A wretched Lady with torn hair discover,
(Over the dead corpse of her beloved lover)
Th'irreparable loss, and hateful breath,
She did sustain through his untimely death.
Aghast she trembled, and with liquid eyes,
Sent with her lovers soul into the skies,
Prays that her end may with his end appear,
Or here to have him, or to have him there.
A while I stood, either with fear o'regon,
Or else with grief not able to go on,
Till she with sword tug'd from his wounded breast,
Made passage for her souls eternal rest.
I hi'd me to her, but my steps were lost,
The wound was given; says she, since we are crost^
Of Terrene pleasures, and those joys do miss,
Our souls shall wed in Heavens eternal bliss.
I strived to stop her blood, but she denied
That any favor should to her betide,
Since she was crossed in all designs, and said,
If the entreaties of a dying maid,
Sir Knight may move you, grant this last request,
With your own sword give period to the rest
Of him who did my Delithason slay,
Over yon ambitious hill he took his way.
I vowed their deaths revenge, withal desired,
Since she would die, before her life expired
Its glorious date, t'acquaint my pitying ears
With her sad story, while whole shours of tears
Imbalm the body dead; alas said she,
You cause me to renew the grief must be
My pasport to his foul, then faintly raised
Her weary head: For ever be ye praised
(Ye Powrs) that grant me liberty t'unfold
Our Tragic ends, and then this story told.
The Story of Delithason and Verista.
Not far remote there are four little lands,
Ruled by that Neptune.
God, who girts them with his hands;
Islands about Campania.
Statinae called, in these my Father dwelt,
Whose always scraping, but nere filled hand felt
A mean of Fortunes good, (whether by Fate,
Or foreordained to expire the date
Of my distressed life) to me^t's unknown,
But wealth (with which those Isles have ever flown)
Heaped to his hands a still increasing crowd
Of gilded pills, those riches made him proud.
Amongst the other fortunes that he had,
(O whether shall I term it good or bad)
The Heavens assigned him me, Verista named,
Who yet but young, a false report had famed
Rare beauty of me; this, o this declared,
Draw'd many Princes that the same had heard,
To try the judgment of their eyes, which fame
By some confirmed, this Delithason came,
(Not like a Prince, as like a Prince he might,
Because he was a Prince) but like a Knight
With Sword and Lance, but first I Would have you know
My Father amongst many had a foe
Of Giants race, whose heart enured to wrong,
To rapes, and base oppressions had long
Applied his strength, and now to torture more
My Fathers breast that life might give him over,
This quarrel picked, he came and did demand
Me for his wife, and cause we did withstand
His wish, with kindled rage from Pluto's Cell,
He shakes his dangling locks, and down to Hell
A journey takes, A Fury of Hell.
Erinnis he implored,
And all the Furies which he there adored,
T'assist his new found plot, nor yet in vain
They add their help, with fire they rent in twain
A Town my Father owned, the dwellers there
Afraid of death, t'abolish quite their fear,
Plastred the walls with brains, their limbs bestrew'd
The blushing streets with streams of blood bedewed.
To this he adds a mischief worse, and throws
Blasphemous oaths, on which he did repose,
Up to Jupiter of Saturn and (...)
Saturnus son, The Altars.
the sacred stones,
On which the people laid oblations,
He hurls about the Temple, from the posts
The gold he tears, and in his mischief boasts.
By this my brother, guided by the cries
Of conquered sounds, came staring in, and spies
The honors of Celestial Gods defaced,
A sling he had, and from that sling did cast
The over hasty stone, and though he well
Could use his sling, yet did his art excel
In managing his sword, now heaved aloft,
Threatening the Giants death, said he, how often
Shall I be vexed with too too partial eye
Of thy outrage? perish with this and dye.
His speech scarce closed, the Giant.
Marfilos smeared with blood,
A colebrand snatched which. by the altar stood,
And sends it to my brother, 'twas espied
By Delithason this, about to slide
Along the Air, with Lance he stopped his hand,
And sent his soul to that infernal land,
Where ghosts with hideous cries endure the right
Of their deserts, clothed in Eternal night.
Thus Delithason by the clamors called,
And by the Giants death the same appalled;
Restored to every man his own, the rather
To get (the seldom got) love of my Father;
Who nothing thankful for so great a favor,
Gave thanks indeed; but with so rude behavior,
That naught was heard but sighs and pittious moan,
How to regain the harm to him was done.
I must said said he, omit the charge I used
In keeping house, by which I have abused
My quite-consumed stock; I must omit
The courteous entertainment that is fit
For worthy guess, and so to end the strife
Of sleeping age, with a retired life;
To this the Prince, (whose ever piety
Still lent discourteous acts a noble eye)
Says, aged Father your declining head
Should scorn to be to base Rebellion led
Against the Laws of Hospitality;
Decrepit age should on the good rely
Which she has done, not on her present wealth,
The souls decay, opposer to her health.
O whither shall I turn? assist me now
Ye ever helping Powers, let not a vow
So firmly made before your holy fires,
So easily be infringed; but who aspires
To mount the chariot where the glorious Sun
The orb surveys, with pride shall be undon.
And shall I silent dye? Shall this exile
From hopes, the pure bond of my love defile?
Shall my desired desires with horrid sound
Of a faint heart increase m'increasing wound?
No, Love must fear no harm, he is not fit
To Enjoy Loves fruits, that has not firmly knit
A resolution to his hopes, and tied
Himself, though often, yet never to be denied.
Father, the wings of ever warbling fame
Exempt alone, chatter'd the glorious name
Of your Verista's beauty, 'twas my chance,
When every Echo did the same advance
In lofty tunes, to hap into your fight,
And being greedy of so great a sight,
Gave period to all hopes of other beauty,
And did besiege her heart, it is now her duty
My pleasure to obey, for Hymen's lights
Have linkt our hearts, with honor of those rites
To Lovers due, be willing then to it
Since Fate has stopped all means the bond t'unknit.
But if you will not, if you will persever
In hatred to those Princes, that endeavor
To bless their happy lives in blessing her;
I say again, if still you will prefer
Your will before all reason without reason,
As hitherto you have don, there is a Season
Called quivering winter, with his milky bride,
Will freez your honor, and abate your pride.
Imperial I, in fair Zephire sit,
Whom wealthy Caria bounds, and brags of it,
There slowes that paltry gold so much I hate,
I think the more t'impare my quiet state.
Luxurious brat, and enemy to wealth,
My Father said, thou have got the Crown by stealth,
With it Verista's love, and do thou think
My Daughter shall of that stolen honor drink?
First let my hands imbrew their wrinkled skin
In her false breast, first let the spoil begin
Upon my offspring, can thy boasts assure her?
Or the bare title of a Crown procure her
Contented wealth? Say, can so great a name,
As Queen of Caria wipe away the blame
Of disobedience? or release the oath
Of duty? or of zealous care? or both?
Which she (when subject to my tender rodds,)
Made in the presence of the better Gods?
Here Delithason staid his speech, too late,
He said, you vent your nere consumed hate.
The Gods observe your deeds, and though a while
They slack their vengance, it is but to beguile
The Offenders with false hopes; so said, he turned
His head about, and on the Altar burned
Prepared Incense, strait the Altar brake
In twain, and after a fierce Thunderclap,
Sweet Music breathed, in which a Chanter cried,
Thy time's expired, and thou art deifi'd.
Amazed the people stand, nor yet to whom,
They can conceive this prophecy should come;
No^ I alas, no, nor my feeble heart,
Forethought of this, of this untimely dart,
For so it hapt, The Giant.
Marfilos had a son,
(From a corrupted spring ill waters run)
Who (wicked) at his fathers death repining,
Just as the Sun was to his bed declining,
Observed when I and Delithason hy'd
Toward his Zephire, (for being denide
My Fathers Blessing, privily we got
Away, when careless he observed not)
And passing through this wood, this Bloody wood
(A closet for those that delight in Blood)
The Giants son a twinded Iavelin cast,
And made this wound you see, that don, in haste
Knowing his dart this spotless heart had sped,
Unto his home, his fathers den he sled:
About to tell the rest she stopped, and died,
When I by virtue of my promise tied,
After I had reposed them in one Vrne,
Toward Statinae did my voyage turn,
And (lest too long I should delay the joy,
Hasty Arcadius wishes to enjoy)
Stuffed up with Ire, I did not long pursue
His steps, before at him I had a view.
Ho! villain stay, I cried, receive the meed,
The Gods alot thee for thy wicked deed,
Stay Murderer, thy haste shall not prefer,
Injustice before right, stay Murderer,
While yet I spoke, my Lance his shoulders caught,
My Sword beguild him of his head, and taught
This lesson to the world, th'allseeing Eye,
Lets not apparent wrongs unpunished dye.
My vow dissolved, I bent my course again
Toward A Town in Campania.
^b^lla, whose high walls disdain
A rival in their pride, there is a way
That leads thereto, by which a meadow lay,
In it I saw a Knight of Silver hew,
With sword, hold a stout Combat against two
Of fiery looks, I hy'd me to the sight,
Either by force or Treaty to unite
Their various minds, but what can words prevail,
Where bloody resolutions do assail
A spotless mind? no time they would admit,
Through hasty fight, t'inquire the cause of it.
A while I viewed the Combat, till the Knight
In silver armor on the neck did light
Of one of the adverse side, who unacquainted
With such rough complements, fell down and fainted.
So done, he said, by all the Powers that dwell
In lofty thrones, thy valor does excel
Thy neighboring Princes, but thy unjust cause,
Repugne against the splendour, and the laws
Of Martial discipline, content thee then
With this, thou art the happiest of men
In that the have escaped revenge to traitors due,
Do other matters cause thee to pursue
This spite, besides thy false suspect? or can
Thy ever-stain'd affection (which began
And ends with lust, not love) enchant thy sense
So far with stupid blindness to commence
Hatred for this? withdraw thy self and yield
To me thy life, thy weapon, and the field.
So shall my arms with amity embrace
Thy neck; where else 'twill show thee thy disgrace.
No sooner said, but we might hear the sound
Of trampling horses beat the tender ground
For swifter speed now to us seen, and now
Dismount their Steeds, and to the adverse bow,
Pardon said they (great Prince) that our neglect
Infringed the Laws of our indeer'd respect.
But when they saw his armor stained, and viewed,
His dead companion with blood imbrued,
They re-amount the nimble Steeds they rid,
(For Marble looked not paler than they did)
And to the silver Knight their anger bent,
Who with excess of bleeding almost spent,
Held up his hand to me, to me he said,
(For they were three) see how I am betrayed
With these unequal odds, no more you need
To move me up I said, fear not, proceed
With your own hands to lacerate in twain
Their conscious hearts, to me your prayers are vain.
I am too weak to shelter you from harms,
Though armed, yet I Am unskilled to use my arms,
But what I am I Am yours, with that our swords
We drew, and blows supplied the want of words.
While he (most noble and most valiant Knight)
Each blow he took, each blow he did requite
With treble use, awhile they hold us play,
Till overcome, their lives did end our fray.
This done, and all things hist, I thought it good
To stop the conduits of his flowing blood,
When mounted on our Steeds, with gentle gate
Riding toward his home, he did relate
The tragic story thus; I am said he
Arcadius, and yonder Towr you see^
Is mine, this Prince whom now we slew,
Hearing what pure unstained affection grew
'Tween me, and one named Sepha in her heart,
He came, and did prescribe a double part:
On this our quarrel grew, and what success
In it he had, your valor will express.
Not I, said I, 'twas you your conquering hand,
Your cause, your sword, your strength that did withstand
Their greedy hopes, the Gods do close their eyes
From impious vassals, and exclude their cries.
And since you please t'intitle me your friend,
O let my willing service you attend,
And what you think will magnify your name,
Withal conceive me ready for the same.
'Twas Summer then, and having cured his wounds
Called out by the noise of his pursuing hounds,
We gallopp'd over the plains, now by a Wood
Our way we took, where purple statues stood,
O bless me here he cried, and softly said,
Inshrind in these four pleasant Nymphs are laid.
Then by a Tower, in this said he remains
The fairest flower, the pride of all the plains,
It Is Sepha's house, the Goddess of my heart,
In whose fair cheeks, Love with his golden dart
Sits sporting, dashed with a Vermilion dye,
They Are like the blush came from Endymions eye,
When twin-born Cynthia to suffice her will,
Had courted him on sleepy La^mos hill.
No sooner said, but Sepha said it is true,
If liked of you, for Sepha lives by you,
And spying me she blushed, lovers do so,
For conscious minds appear by the outward show;
All salutations past, she led us in,
Where first our root of ruin did begin:
For such firm bonds of constant amity,
Had linked Arcadius loyal heart to me,
(Which by our outward actions was not hid,
For never two loved better than we did)
That she perceiving how he stood inclined,
The more to please and gratulate his mind,
Used me with courteous terms, he discontent,
(Suspicion is a trial eminent
Of true affection) thought some newborn love
'Twards me increast, her tender heart did move
As Helen did to Paris, took occasion,
TO assist her loyal love with this persuasion;
For sitting in a pleasant bower which hung
With various flowers he took a Lute and sung.
See not my love with what a grace?
The Spring resembles thy sweet face?
Here let us sit, and in these bowers,
Receive the odors of the flowers,
For Flora by thy beauty wood,
conspires thy good.
See how she sends her fragrant sweet,
And does this homage to thy feet,
Bending so low her stooping head,
To kiss the ground where thou do tread,
And all her flowers proudly meet,
to kiss thy feet.
Then let us walk my dearest love,
And on this carpet strictly prove
Each others vow, from thy request
No other love invades my breast.
For how can I contemn that fire
which Gods admire?
To crop that Rose why do thou seek,
When there is a purer in thy cheek?
Like Coral held in thy fair hands,
Or blood and milk that mingled stands;
To whom the Powers all grace have given.
a type of Heaven.
Yon Lilly stooping 'twards this place,
Is a pale shadow for thy face,
Under which veil does seem to rush;
Modest Endymions ruddy blush.
A blush indeed, more pure and fair
than Lillies are.
Glance on those flowers thy radiant eyes,
Through which clear beams they will sympathize
Reflective love, to make them far
More glorious than the Hesperian star,
For every swain amazed lies,
and gazing dies.
See how these ^illy flowers twine,
With s^eet imbracings, and combine,
Striving with curious looms to set
Their pale and red into a net,
To show how pure desire does rest
for ever blessed.
Why will thou then unconstant be?
T'infringe the laws of amity?
And so much dis-respect my heart?
To derogate from what thou art?
When in harmonious love there is
Elisian bliss.
Sepha at this was pleased, displeased was he
To see her smile; leave off thy jealousy
^rcadius she said, I am possessed
With that firm love, which nere shall leave my breast.
First shall the Sun forget his course to fly,
And Pindus hills shall soar about the sky.
First shall the Roman Eagles lose their wings,
And music murmur music without strings.
First shall the Sea-born Goddess leave the fan
Of ardent love, and turn precisian:
And fearful Hares pursue the thundering cry
Of Cretan Hounds, and Ovids memory die,
Er'e I, who to thee do my soul betroth,
Forsake my word, or falsify my oath.
So said, she hangs her lip, and lours her head,
(Lovers are often ashamed of what they sed)^
While he with hymns of joy the debt did pay
Of upright love, and named the wedding day.
Which come, and all things ready, Sepha dressed
Her hair, her coats were blew, upon her breast
She wore a Stone of curious art composed,
Wherein two naked lovers were enclosed;
Both striving, till the maid who did resist,
Grew weak, and then he used her as he list.
Now Ladies, know; a Prince there was whom fame
Had taken captive with fair Sepha's name,
Who hearing of the wedding day, wherein
Their hands should be linkt, as their hearts had bin;
And hearing of the weakness of the guard,
That should conduct them to the Church, prepared
To rob us of her; as you pass the plain,
There is a pretty hillock that would fain
Be called a hill, behind this hill they hide
Themselves, their weapons, and do there reside.
Now we in whom no thought of treachery
Had told us of mishap, with jollity
Hy'd to the temple, there, o there the chance
Of base conspiring mischief did advance
It self, dejected us, a horrid voice
Of threatening people sent a hideous noise
Unto our ears, now to our eyes their arms
With glittring shields foretell our following harms.
Vnweapon'd we, for battles are refused
On wedding days, and other weapons used,
So that the easier they our necks did bend
Unto their yoke, now had they took my friend
The young Arcadius and his lovely bride,
The only prize they waited for, and hy'd
Them on their way, born by the heat of love
'Twards the one, 'twards the other hate their speed did move,
When I (o never till then unfortunate)
Saw Tyranny and malice at debate,
Who first should steal away the spotless life
Of my Arcadius, at last a knife,
His unstained bosom pierced, who dying cried,
Let Sepha live, and I am satisfied.
You ravishers said I of others blood,
By this discern if Traitors ends are good,
And with a sword snatched from another arm,
Cleft one, and said be sharer in his harm;
With that a second, and a third I slew,
And so a fourth, till such a tumult grew,
That after diverse blows away they fled,
And left me, as they well might think, for dead.
Mean while Campanian Sepha took her flight
Into a Wood, born there by horrid fright.
Where long she could not stay, by careful heed
Drawn forth, to know how her known love did speed,
And now she finds, what nere she wished to find,
With his dear blood the blushing flowers lined;
She says not much, lest helpless words should stay
Her soul too long, but kneeling down does pray,
Then took the knife by his own blood made foul,
And falling down upon it advanced her soul.
Awaked from out my sound, I saw how Fate
Had played the wanton, and expired their date:
I took their bodies and them both did burn,
I put them both together in one Vrn;
Strait both their ashes, Male and Female grew,
And from the same admired Phaenix flew;
From whence I Prophecy it shall revive
By death, for it is their fame shall keep't alive,
Which growing old toward the Sun shall fly,
And till the Heavens dissolve shall never dye.
Here Epimenides his story ceast,
And bending down his panting bosom dies:
Whose death the Ladies former griefs increast,
They sent his Soul to Elysium with their cries,
Upon whose shrine they wrote his death, to show
From Heaven he came, to Heaven he needs must go.
FINIS.
Hinc Lachrimae, OR THE AVTHOR TO AVRORA:
1
WHy should my pen aspire so high a strain,
A verse to guide, to guide a verse unfit?
Are they the fittest voices to complain?
Admit they be, they are for a riper wit;
Yet you who these unpolisht lines shall read,
Deride them not, they from distraction came,
Let that suffice, my love alone shall plead
For their defect, and shall excuse the same,
Excuse the same, for what from love does spring,
To lovers only resolution bring.
2
Caelums fair daughter has bereft my heart
Of those sweet hopes to lovers only due,
Unwilling she those pleasures to impart,
Lest too much joy should make me cease to rue,
Lest her fair eyes should work that gracious hap,
Which she would not permit I should enjoy,
While I lie lulled in Fates unconstant lap,
With grief converse, and still with sorrow toy:
For such a gentle pain she does me send,
As if she would not wish my life, nor end.
3
Yet such it is that I will not exchange
My life with those whom Fortune kind entreats,
And since it is her arrow that does range
My tender heart, I kiss the rod that beats.
I laugh at Cupid, who is overjoyed
With fond conceit, that he has wrought this fire,
But let him be with self-conceit destroyed,
'Twas not his power, it was my own desire,
Though Venus hood-winked son does bear the name,
Azile's virtue 'twas did me inflame.
4
'Twas thee Azile, of whose loves I sang,
'Tween thee and me among the gentle Goths,
Something it was when all the valleys rang
Too true, the breach of thy beplighted oaths.
I little thought my willing warbling quill,
With her shrill notes did miss to sing the truth,
But now I find through too dear gotten skill,
Thou art despiser of my blooming youth,
What there I said, how much thy soul relied
Upon thy faith, these Poems say I ly'd.
5
Else why should I complain of this mischance,
Had it not been contrary to thy vows?
With tears thou made them, and what furtherance,
Of si^^^es were more, Heaven's ruler only knows.
Heaven knows my faith, how I have loyal been,
And have not broke the smallest string of love.
To see my constance will augment thy sin,
How loyal I, how wavering thou do prove,
But it was thy will, that I thy favor mist,
I Am thine, and thou may use me as thou list.
6
Even as thou list Azile, I Will rejoice,
And tremble at thy eyes when e're they move;
Command thy will, I will obey thy voice,
Unless thou bidst me cease to owe thee love.
There pardon me dear love, for such a root
It has obtained in my triangle heart,
That since thou first did thereon place thy foot,
The pain increased, and still I feel the smart;
No pain at all, since it from thee ensues,
And Love, thou may command them as thy dues^
7
Even as thy dues, and what I can procure,
More from my heart, to thee shall be presented,
Yet had thou but the tenth part I endure,
I Am sure thy last neglect should be repented;
Thou would be sorry that I have misspent
My time in sighs, for prayers only free,
But prayers are killd through too much discontent,
For he that loves can never zealous be.
It Is thee alone must be my gracious Saint,
Against thee, and to thee onely's my complaint.
8
How often have I been subject of thy scorn?
How often killed by thy impetuous eyes?
How often have I the warlike Ensign born
Of thy fierce heart, enured to cruelty?
So often have thou, after the tide was past,
Of disrespect, my heavy soul reprieved
From that dejected state, so often thou have,
Witnest with vows, if vows may be believed,
O that I could thy former love descry,
To reassume thy late humanity.
9
Would thou but think with what entire de light
My soul was carried to those joys, and whither,
Would thou but think how strong we did unite
Into one bond our mutual loves together,
Would thou but reconcile thy wandering sense,
And cease t'afflict with thy impartial eyes;
Would thou but hear the prayer which I commence,
One shour might cherish yet the root which dies.
But thou art wise, and can thy worth refine,
Yet use me gently, 'cause thou know I Am thine.
10
What though thy birth require a higher place,
Than my low heart is able to bestow?
Admit it do, yet count it no disgrace,
It Is my humility that makes me low,
And since I have aspired so high a favor,
Which once I had, but now I cannot obtain,
I Will spend my days, even with as sad behavior,
And study most, how most I may complain.
O that my plaints would mollify thy heart,
And once thou would give period to my smart.
11
What though thy riches ask as high a fortune?
And with thy birth does bear an equal sway?
O were that all, I know I might importune
A little help, for riches will decay.
Even as thy wealth, so will thy beauty fade,
And then thou will repent thee of my wrong,
A secret sorrow shall thy breast invade,
Thy heart shall be as faulty as thy tongue,
They both shall vex, and this shall be the trial,
One gave consent, the other gave denial.
12
When tho^ shall be of all thy youth deprived,
And shall with ages wrinkled rows be clad;
When thou shall sit and think how much I strived
Thy love to gain, and what reward I had;
When thy deceitful promises shall call
Thee to the bar, and there arraign thy thoughts,
When thou with heavy eyes shall summon all
The harms which thy unkindness in me wrought,
When thou shall hear of my distracted mind,
Thou will repent thee that thou wast unkind.
13
And that thou may remember thy disdain,
Even these I wrote, that thou may read the same,
And there shall find what just cause to complain
From thee I had, by thy unkindness came;
That so thou may be sorry for my harm,
And wet thy eyes; for once I know you loved me;
O let that love be to thy heart a charm,
But since nor prayers, nor vows, nor tears have moved thee,
Even these I wrote to show to future years,
How much Azile thou have scorned my tears.
14
How much Azile thou have scorned my tears,
And have detained that which thou know is mine,
Thy heart is his, even to whose heart he fears
No hopes will come, and therefore does repine
Even to his death, for which way can he choose
When the remembrance of thy faith shall creep
Before his eyes, and therein shall infuse
A thousand tears, how can he choose but weep?
O happy yet, would thou this discontent
But call to mind, and in that mind repent.
15
The time will come, when thy beloved face
Shall lose the spring, with which it now is clad,
When thou art old, thou in some secret place^
Wilt sit, and think of all the wrongs I had,
Then will thou read these my unpolished plaints,
The Chronicles of my unpittied cries,
When thou art old, perhaps thy heart shall faint
For shame, and let one tear forsake thy eyes;
I know thou will, and e're thy Sun expire
His glorious date, thou will recall thy ire.
16
Though now thy eyes are carried from the wounds
Thy eyes did give, when first my eyes beheld them,
Though now thy ears deny to hear the sounds
O^ my just plaints, and therefore have expelled them,
Yet once before thy Soul shall take her way
Toward those fields, the fair Elisian rest,
Thou will be greedy of an hours stay,
To tell the world, how thou have me oppressed.
I know thou will, and though a while the shade
Obscure the Sun, at last the cloud will fade.
17
Tell me how often thou have with serious voice,
Vowed for thy love no harm I should endure?
Tell me if erst thou did not like thy choice,
And with thy vows did crown our nuptials sure?
Tell me if once upon those blessed Stairs,
T^^ Stairs my thought that guided unto Heaven,
When I surprised by thee unawares,
Had there thy loves assurance fully given,
Or if thou will not tell, yet say in this,
If I have spoken or wrote a word amiss.
18
Mistake me not, my pen was nere defiled,
With any stain, that may thy honor stain,
From all lascivious thoughts I am exiled,
So shall my pen immodest sense refrain;
Thou art as free, as pure from any blot,
And therefore shall with Lotus crown thy brows,
If ever thou did sin, I knew it not,
Excepting this the fraction of thy vows,
I vow by Heaven and all the powers therein,
Excepting this, I never knew thee sin.
19
Ye slowry Meads where I do use to sing,
And with complaining notes do often fill ye,
Ye purling streams, where I with quav'ring string,
Make Music, tell the praise of my Azile,
Ye shady Groves and melancholy places,
Where often I do retire to sigh my wrongs,
Ye lofty hills that often hear my disgraces,
To whom I chatter forth my heavy songs,
Let these persuasions now your voices move,
Say if I ever spoke against my love.
20
When I with Lillies do adorn my head.
And dress my face by pleasant silver brook,
When I my snowy flock do gently lead,
And guide their steps with willing Shepherds hook,
When I with Daffadill's do garlands make,
And therewith have my back and arms inshrin'd,
When I to oaten pipe do me betake,
To tell of my Azile, and her mind,
When I so often with flowers my hands have dressed,
What was it but to please Azile best?
21
The firstlings of my flock to her I gave,
Twice happy flock to send your presents thither,
Thrice happy flock, for she the last shall have,
The last was hers, I sent them both together.
She took them both, and with a gentle eye,
(Where courtesy, and grace together lay,
As loath to rob, yet lother to deny)
She'wd on the hills her willingness to stay,
Blessed be the time when first her love I moved,
Too silly Shepherd so to be beloved.
22
Too silly Shepherd, and unworthy too,
That durst presume that fair fruit to attempt,
But since entire affection made me woo,
O judge me not of modesty exempt,
For though I did aspire so high a task,
Yet best it is, and best to be commended,
I easily can maintaint't, no help I ask,
Let love and honor join, dispute is ended;
I Will mount the highest steps that honor calls,
He falls no lower than the ground that falls.
Qui jacet i^ ^err^m, non habet unde cad^t:
23
And that the easier I may climb the same,
I Will build a ladder of heroic wood,
Each step imbellisht in the purest frame,
Of Coral born in the Tyrraean flood,
That when my wishes have attained their will,
And all my thoughts have perfected my art,
That when my cares have rested on a hill,
The only rock of my repining heart,
None may condemn me, for I did aspire
To virtue clad in constant loves atire.
Sidne^.
24
Yet many will conjecture much amiss,
Because my love so slowly is requited,
Each spiteful Satyr will surmise by this,
Thou hat'st me cause my pains have thee delighted;
But let them please themselves with thought thereof,
And with their wits ascribe their own applause,
I free from anger at their harms will laugh,
For some vex most when none will give them cause,
That when thou see how loyal I am thine,
Thou may conceive the greatest harm is mine.
25
The Morning blush is like Azile made,
Azile's cheeks are like the morning blush,
If fair Aurora please to be the shade,
Why should Az^le scorn to be the bush?
Thou art that bush Azile under whom,
My buskin Muse sings free from contrie strife,
Thou art that Lotus to whose shade I come,
To sup my milk, and sport away my life,
That when thou ^eest my harmless sports excel,
Thou may remember once thou knew'st me well.
26
Thou may remember once thou knew'st me well,
And did not shame t'account me as thy own,
Then loyal love within thy breast did dwell,
And faith, but now no faith in thee is known.
When we in Evenings have the valleys traced,
And sipt fresh air to cloze the hasty day,
When with thy steps thou have the mountains graced,
To see how Hes^er hy'd him on his way,
Why wast not careful then to keep thy vow,
For there thou made me promises enough.
27
And then the Spring of my unstaind affection,
With Roses dressed, and Lillies sweetly grew,
Whose ruddie look, gave it a fair complexion,
Till frowning Winter gave't another hue,
But stay thou know already why I sing,
And with my heavy verse so gently move thee,
For that alone I did these sonnets bring,
That by these plaints thou may perceive I love thee,
For out of nothing, nothing can be brought,
And that which is, can nere be turned to naught.
28
How can I smother then my long pent love,
Almost unknown to thee so long conceald?
O you that can assist me from above,
For by your means ^twas first of all reveald,
Since when my heart in such sure hope remains,
That I will not exchange my part in her,
Not for the purest face the world contains,
For before all her love I will prefer;
And know in their fruition I shall want
Those sweet contents which these complainings grant.
29
Twice has the Sun drencht in Iberian Seas,
Twice fifty times renewed his fiery Car,
Since with thy sight thou did impart some ease,
And since I spoke to thee ran twice so far,
But yet thou see thy still dejected friend,
Admits no period to the love he owes,
And though thy absence gives all pleasures end,
Yet know thy presence far more grief bestows,
For this will vex, when one their own shall see,
And yet not dare thereof the owner be.
30
Ay me, when I alone sit and bemone me,
Of thy hard heart, and my unjust correction,
When by my self I sit, and think upon thee,
With what sure bonds I Am brought into subjection,
Then, then my heart, grieving to be restraind;
Beats up a loud alarm, to come to thee,
If when I think of thee I am so pained,
What do I then when I thy face do see?
Such is my pain, if pains may be believed,
Grieved at thy sight, and at thy absence grieved.
31
What though I have transgrest against thy will?
And run as idle ways as many other?
I am not minded to pursue them still,
If thou no more wilt thy affections smother,
And know Azile that the chiefest cause
Of all mishaps, sprung first from thy unkindness,
It is a statute made in Cupids laws,
Neglected Lovers spend their days in blindness,
And so it is, when once deprived the bliss
Of constant love, we other blessings miss.
32
And so run headlong careless of our good,
Into all danger that the world has sent,
But Heaven be praised, that I have this withstood,
I never knew what carnal action meant;
For other sins, I know I have a share,
As deep as any that committed sin,
And more must have, I yet cannot forbear,
Such is the state my restless soul lives in,
Such is my state, unless thou do relent
My daily wrong, and then I shall repent.
33
If thou misdoubt, as thou may well misdoubt,
Because I Am now so wild, and vain withal,
That should I speed, my love would quickly out,
And I unto my old rebates would fall,
O let the thought thereof no place obtain,
But banish it, as enemy to good;
Try me a while before I reap the gain,
Which so long wished, has so long been withstood,
Try me I say, and thou shall me restore,
For verjuyce sweetened once, will sour no more.
34
Alas my love, what love appears in this?
To omit the cure, which only may procure
Thy Clyents ease? guide not thy love amiss,
Lest thy neglect make thy destruction sure,
And then my blood (...) ^prinkled on thy Coat,
Will bring a horrid (...) unto thy Soul,
I vow by Heaven that all (...) world shall know it;
There Is nothing can (...) resolve control,
By Heaven I vow, and this the truth relates,
Deny again, I Will dye before thy gates.
35
But stay complaints, return unto your owner,
And blame her not, she is free from any blame,
There can no spotted scandal rest upon her,
It Is your presumption, and it is your shame.
But say again, although you are unfit
To kiss her ears, yet you will take no denial,
And that you' l not her plighted troth remit,
But will remit it to a further trial,
Even to his doom, who will all things destroy,
And there reward her inhumanity.
36
And there reward thy inhumanity
Unkind Azile, rapt in liquid charms,
Thou can not with an unstaind Conscience dye,
Unless thou do give period to my harms.
Is it thy wealth that makes thee thus refrain me?
As it is thine, so shall it still be thine.
Is it thy birth that makes thee thus disdain me?
O scorn me not, I come of Noble Line,
For by the Norman Duke our brows were crowned,
With Laurel branches, and our names renowned.
37
Cease then t'afflict, and show that heart some ease,
Which in offenses never gave thee none,
Unless it was in striving best to please,
Therein indeed it has been very prone,
And that thou know, there is none does know so well,
How my poor love did run in full carier,
My daily presence did my passions tell,
My daily passions in thy presence were.
O happy time when thy sweet presence gave it,
But now I have most need I cannot have it.
38
Believe Azile, when of thee I think,
As such sweet thoughts are in me very rife,
I Am ready of prepared bane to drink,
Or any poison that will end my Life;
And still because, my still consuming heart,
Injoyes no rest, wished rest I never have,
But of turmoyls and troubles I have part,
But it is not trouble that a Soul must save,
A sweet content does lead the way from wrath,
He safest lives that quiet conscience has.
39
But I have none, nor never must have any,
Unless thy eyes do shine upon my face,
Amongst thy noble virtues which are many,
O let this favor thy poor Servant grace;
Since thou disdainest to bestow thy heart
On me so far dejected, so unworthy,
Tell me what cause it is, and twill impart,
Ease to those daily pains I suffer for thee;
So shall my soul be quiet, so my pain
Releast, and I shall hear thee speak again.
40
And that's a favor far beyond desert,
But not beyond desire I have to love thee.
Do thou desire? I Will rip my wounded heart,
And show thee that which there perhaps may move thee;
O let me find access unto thy breast,
And there receive my almost wearied Soul,
Her wings are weary, and implore some rest,
Her wearied wings their slippery fate condole;
And scorn me not that I so much have sought thee,
For know Azile I have dearly bought thee.
41
For know Azile I have dearly paid
For thee, if of thee I am e're possessed,
Possess me then with thy prevailing aid,
And aid to that shore that must make me blessed,
There shall I sing Encomions to thy praise,
And praise the luster of thy noble Spirit,
When ravished by those Epithalm^an lays
Of Nymphs, thou shall their Nymph-like grace inherit,
And Hyme^ in a saffron veil shall come,
Over a fair field bestrew'd with Margerum.
42
There shall the scores of either love be read,
And there my pains in which thou have delighted,
There shall my love for her offenses plead,
There shall my vows be paid, my pains requited,
And those that do except against my age,
Harpocrates to silence shall conjure,
A Vultur shall his starved desire assuage,
Upon their hearts, cause they my pains procure,
What though! scarce have twice ten winters told,
As much as is in man, in me behold.
43
As much as is in man in me should be,
But that thou have bereft me of my heart,
I want those glozing words of flattery,
By which some men gain more than by desert,
I want that wit which ought to parallel
Thy virtues, and procure deserving bliss,
I want that strength and vigor to repel,
Dejected grief, which guides loves wheel amiss,
I want those means which should all good supplant
Within my breast, and chiefly thee I want.
44
Loves coach they say is made of Ebony,
And drawn by Turtle Doves of Silver hue,
To show the brightness of pure amity,
With Turtles yoak't, than Turtles what more true?
Along whose sides the purple silk does twind
The silver Ouches to the golden wheels,
So outward beauty should a lover bind,
For who the outward love the inward feels,
Eye sight confirms, but virtues motives be,
It Is not alone thy face I love but thee.
45
Thee for thy virtues I alone admire,
Azile mine, but mine no more thou art,
Yet can thou not those raging flames expire
Of Love, unless thou have a double heart,
O double not my pains (my dearest love)
Nor let the Torments of my Soul increase,
For private envy will all truth reprove,
That Kingdom safest lives that lives in peace,
How can we then a true concordance find,
When we two, one, have both a different mind?
46
A Poet said, if Cupid be a power,
Let him possess me now with his desire,
When suddenly his eyes began to loure,
And he expired his life in helpless fire,
And so must I perish within that flame,
If these will not thy heart to pity bend,
If still thy slinty heart remains the same,
I wish that with this line, my life might end;
And this cmplaint about the earth be hurled,
Alive to death, but dead unto the world.
47
And hear I stay, expecting now the doom,
And sentence of eternal joy, or grief,
Which from thy sweet, or fatal lipsmust come,
For while I live thou of my heart art chief;
Then show thy self as thou desir'st to be,
Unstained in all thy ways, in all upright,
That following days with pure integrity,
May sweet my sorrows past with some delight;
And here I rest expecting the regard,
Of faithful love, and his deserved reward.
Peliander.
FINIS.
To the immortal memory of the fairest and most virtuous Lady, the Lady
HEr tongue has ceast to speak, which might make dumb
All tongues, might stay all Pens, al hands benum;
Yet must I write, O that it might have been
While she had lived, and had my verses seen,
Before sad cries deaf'd my untuned ears,
When verses flowed more easily than tears.
Ah why neglected I to write her praise,
And paint her Virtues in those happy days!
Then my now trembling hand and dazzled eye,
Had seldom failed, having the pattern by;
Or had it erred, or made some strokes amiss,
(For who can portray Virtue as it is?)
Art might with Nature have maintained her strife,
By curious lines to imitate true life.
But now those Pictures want their lively grace,
As after death none well can draw the face:
We let our friends pass idly like our time,
Till they be gone, and then we see our crime,
And think what worth in them might have been known,
What duties done, and what affection shown:
Untimely knowledge, which so dear does cost,
And then begins when the thing known is lost;
Yet this cold love, this envy, this neglect,
Proclaims us modest, while our due respect
To goodness is restrained by servile fear,
Lest to the world, it flattery should appear^
As if the present hours deserved no praise:
But age is past, whose knowledge only stays
On that weak prop which memory sustains,
Should be the proper subject of our strains:
Or as if foolish men ashamed to sing
Of Violets, and Roses in the Spring,
Should tarry till the flowers were blown away,
And till the Muses life and heat decay;
Then is the fury slack'd, the vigor ^led,
As here in mine, since it with her was dead:
Which still may sparkle, but shall flame no more,
Because no time shall her to us restore:
Yet may these Sparks, thus kindled with her fame,
Shine brighter, and live longer than some flame.
Here expectation urges me to tell
Her high perfections, which the world knew well.
But they are far beyond my skill t'unfold,
They were poor virtues if they might be told.
But thou, who fain would take a general view
Of timely fruits which in this garden grew,
On all the virtues in men's actions look,
Or read their names writ in some moral book;
And sum the number which thou there shall find:
So many lived, and triumphed in her mind.
Nor dwelt these Graces in a house obscure,
But in a Palace fair, which might allure
The wretch, who no respect to virtue bore,
To love It, for the garments which it wore.
So that in her the body and the soul
Contended, which should most adorn the whole.
O happy soul for such a body meet,
How are the firm chains of that union sweet,
Dissever'd in the twinkling of an eye?
And we amazed dare ask no reason why,
But silent think, that God is pleased to show,
That he has works, whose ends we cannot know:
Let us then cease to make a vain request,
To learn why die the fairest, why the best;
For all these things, which mortals hold most dear,
Most slippery are, and yield less joy than fear;
And being lifted high by men's desire,
Are more propitious marks for heavenly fire;
And are laid prostrate with the first assault,
Because, our love makes their desert their fault.
Then justice, us to some amends should move
For this our fruitless, nay our hurtful love;
We in their Honor, piles of stone erect
With their dear Names, and worthy praises decked:
But since those fail, their glories we rehearse,
In better Marble, everlasting verse,
By which we gather from consuming hours,
Some parts of them, though time the rest devours;
Then if the Muses can forbid to die,
As we their Priests suppose, why may not I?
Although the least and hoarsest in the quire,
Clear beams of blessed immortality inspire
To keep thy blessed remembrance ever young,
Still to be freshly in all ages sung:
Or if my work in this unable be,
Yet shall it ever live, upheld by thee:
For thou shall live, though Poems should decay,
Since Parents teach their Sons, thy praise to say;
And to Posterity, from hand to hand
Convey it with their blessing and their land.
Thy quiet rest from death, this good derives,
Instead of one, it gives thee many lives:
While these lines last, thy shadow dwells here,
Thy fame, it self extends every where;
In Heaven our hopes have placed thy better part:
Thine Image lives, in thy sad Husbands heart:
Who as when he enjoyed thee, he was chief
In love and comfort, so is he now in grief.
To his dear Friend Mr. John Emely upon his Travells.
HAve other Nations got that tempting art?
Or Seas? (O thou the second of my heart)
To steal thee from us? shall thy presence plant
Those goods elsewhere, which Country thine does want?
And chiefly me, who every wind abjure
That loudly roars, to make thy passage sure,
As much I blame the calms, for secret fear,
Though without cause, in all things will appear.
And now my thinks the Cantabrician blood,
With open jaws grows thirsty for thy blood,
Which if great ^aelums offspring does appall
The calm I ^ear sits smiling at thy fall.
Or if Sicilian Seas thou surrowest over,
Thy danger by Charibdis I deplore,
And Scilla's rock, whose bloody mouth does lie
For thee, if more toward the North you fly.
If to Eoum, or to Indus arm,
Paropanisian rocks will do thee harm.
If on Propontis, or Tanais blood,
Tanai's and Hellespont are stained with blood.
What pleasure then allures thee to their coast?
In safest beds pleasure resideth most.
Nor Country can, nor other Nations give
More sweet content, than where thy Parents live.
What will it boot to view the snowy hills
Of Al^ine high? whose fleecy moisture fills
The humble dales? or what will it prevail,
To hear the exub'rance of a foreign tale?
What joy can it produce to hear the swains,
Leading their flocks along the Scythian plains,
T'accord their voices to the slender reeds
Of Amarillis praise? or what exceeds
With sweeter pleasure, and more bright does shine
In other Countries, than it does in thine?
Now to Olimpian hills thou take thy way,
Far happier would thou in our valleys stay,
And see thy Country Hero's sports prepare,
More pleasant than Olimpian pleasures are.
No service we to Nereus Altar vow,
Nor dread we Neptune, nor to Neptune bow,
But free from fear, in blushing mornings walk,
Through shady groves, to hear woods chanters talk
Ruddy A^roras praise, and with free moan,
To Eccho's only sigh our loves alone.
In Summer time we walk the flowery meads,
Where Flora over her spotted Carpet leads
Our eyes, and gluts us with discolored shows
Of Flowers, which on her amorous bosom grows.
Then Zephirus with fair Nepenthe sents,
Comes stealing over the flowers, and present^
Sweets odors to us, while by silver brook,
We sit, and cheat the Fishes with a hook.
And when the Meadows are disburthened
Of grass, and with their withred Cocks are spread,
Then with our Nymphs and Ladies we resort,
Unto those Cocks, and on, and over them sport.
So Frisking Kidds their pleasures will display,
And with their loves in smiling Evenings play.
When going forwards with sweet tunes received
Our fingers in each others interweav'd,
We chat of love, and all the way we walk,
We make the boy the subject of our talk;
So sport we over the Meads, till Hesper come,
Allured by our delights to light us home.
The night we pass in contemplations sweet,
(Contented thoughts makes sable night more fleet)
And in the morning (morning beautified
With glorious Sol, who decks it with his pride)
We ride about the fields to recreate
Our o're-joy'd minds, minds never staind with hate.
Where fearful hares before our Greyhounds fly,
A while they run, and run awhile they die.
Then cast we off our nimble winged hawk,
Whose speedy flight all baser preys does bawk,
And up, his envying strength does manage well,
Against him, who from Minervas turrets fell.
Now to her Altar we, whose golden hairs
Presents our corn, whole handfulls of our ears
Do bear, who smiling on her Altar, takes
Our Offerings, and next fruitful harvest makes.
When you Carpathean, and Aegaean Seas
With odors stain, their flatt'red God to please.
If palsy Hy^ms with his frozen head
Does hide fair C^r^s in his Icy bed,
With gins we snatch the silly birds; and snare
With our deceitful royls, the fearful Hare.
And now Sydonian Bores with angry pace,
Through thick S^ymphal^an Woods our Hounds do chase;
Who over our steepy hills their way do fly,
Where Country swains their speedy flight descry:
And with a hollow of rejoicing sounds,
Blown up, encourage our pursuing Hounds.
Retiting home, we praise, or discommend
Their long-maintained race, or hasty end.
When loggs of wood in spacious Chimneys laid
Of a consuming fire, a fire are made,
And we with our beloved wives declare,
Those sweet contents in Country pleasures are.
O might I taste those Marriage joys, and tell
What pure delight in upright Love does dwell.
And now to feast loved Christmas with delight,
Our neighbors to our suppers we invite;
Which past, and stools before the fire set,
All former wrath and wranglings we forget,
And while the Apples in the fires roast,
Of kindness we, and Country friendship boast,
Till with a Wassell, which our wives impart
With sugared hands, we close the night, and part.
These things thy nation yields us, and would prove
More blessed, would thou adorn her with thy love.
For if thou still depriv'st us of that light
Thy presence gives, and that entire delight,
By which thy Country smiles, she will decay
In fame, and her renown will fade away.
And I pursue thee over Bononian Rhyne,
And to thee my dejected life confine.
Will: Bosworth.
FINIS

