THE PROPOSITIONS Of their Excellencies THE AMBASSADOVRS OF The High and Mighty
States General of the united Provinces, in the NETHERLANDS.

Delivered by them, by word of mouth, in both Houses of the Parliament of
England, the 22/12. of July, 1644

The Translation in English, delivered to both Houses, was subscribed.

W. Borell. John Reed de Renswoude. Alb. Ioachimi.

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, 1644.

RIGHT HONORABLE LORDS, AND COMMONS.
FRom the very beginning of the restoration of the Liberty of the Republique
of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, The High and Mighty Lords, our
Lords, the States General, their chiefest wishes and desires have ever been
to see, that the Kings of great Britain, and these Kingdoms might be
perpetually maintained, and preserved in a good concord, Peace and Union, by
which nothing could befall them but all safety, and advantage, and that for
three principal reasons.

First, that these Kingdoms, being the greatest and the strongest Body, which
having received and maintained the Profession of the true Christian Protestant
Religion, and concerving it self so well, it might also contribute much, yea
by Fame and reputation it self, to the conservation of States, Confederates
and Friends, and of all the other Protestant Churches, established and spread
through whole Europe.

Secondly, that these Kingdoms, by their situation, commodities, traffic,
and Navigation, and their Republique, being so nearely combined by their common
Interest of State, and Religion, our Lords might rest assured, that the
Interest of the King, and these Kingdoms, being so mightily advanced, and
conserved by the same means, those of the Netherlands could not be but well
conserved.

And thirdly, that this intestiue Peace, Union and Concord, (which Prosperity
and Weal ordinarily accompanies) continuing here, that not only the Kings
and Kingdoms should be able to maintain, and preserve themselves; but that
the States Confederate, and Friends, or the good Cause of the Protestant
Religion, in other parts unjustly suffering; (as formerly it has been, and
yet this day is too much perceived) they might ever find their refuge and
azile, their Succors and their aid against all those, who on the contrary part
of other States and Churches, should undertake to undermine the true Foundation
of the happiness of these flourishing Kingdoms.

For your situation being well considered, you are in your selves as a World a
part, separated from many inconveniences of the other.

You have your Commodities at home, not only which are necessary, and for your
pleasure and delight, but also in such plenty that you are able to communicate
them to other Nations your Neighbors.

The Sea does serve you for a ditch and Bulwark, and your Power by Sea is able
to maintain you in your filicity, and to exempt and free you from all
foreign injuries.

So that the good of your own conservation, and the cause of your evil and
ruin, could not be suscitated, nor found elsewhere but at home, and within
your selves.

And certainly the Kings and Queens formerly have done notable asistances for
the maintenance and conservation of the true Religion, and of many States which
had need thereof, amongst which Our LORDS do profess themselves as much
obliged and bound, as any other.

And the King and these Kingdoms shall yet in time be able to do the like
assistance, as well for the present, (now there is so great a necessity) as for
the future, provided you conserve your selves in that Concord and Union, which
heretofore has made, and shall ever make you mighty and redoubted.

From hence it is, that the common Enemies of the Peace of Christendom, and
their Agents, who (long since) have framed and forged the Design of an
universal Monarchy of whole Europe, yea of the whole World, seeing and
perceiving with an envious and malicious eye your former happiness, your
flourishing State, and your power, and that there was nothing so contrary and
dreadful to their vast conceptions, as your oppositions.

To hurt and weaken, yea to ruin you, if they had been able, they have
heretofore used all violence, and the strength of great Fleets and Armies, but
in vain and without success.

They have at last not been able to act a better play, then that which is most
familiar to them, and which often has helped them, to the ruin of many great
States, which have not bin so circumspect and prudent as you are:

Right Honorable,

It is so, that quitting violence in a profound peace, which they have with
you, and during the time of the same, they have sown amongst you the seeds
and weeds of Discord and dissension, as well in politic as Church
businesses, and shall ever foment them: whence they could assure themselves of
a certain profit, what end soever the said dissentions might take.

And by these means and their accustomed craft, they have proposed to obtain by
intestine troubles, you should weaken your selves, and making you less mighty,
and less dreadful, and no ways considerable, you might serve at last, (which
God avert) to the inglutting of their insatiable ambition, to the destruction
of the true Religion, and of all that which may be dear and recommendable to
you.

As We see already brought to pass in Ireland where the cruelties, murders,
horrible and unheard of slaughters have been perpetrated, with effusion of so
much innocent blood, to the total destruction of the true Protestant religion
there, and to the great danger of the State it self.

Our Lords seeing these mis-understandings, troubles, and miseries here already
grown to so great an extremity: and being so highly interessed in your well
being, have esteemed fit and timely to send Us their Ambassadors to this
Kingdom, to offer to the King and to his Parliament Our Service and mediation.

To help (if acceptale) to remove and take away the jealousies which are and
might be, and to compose the dissentions by the mild ways for an amiable
Conference.

And our said Lords declare, that they have not been moved hereunto by any
presumption, or to intrude themselves in the business of a great King, and of
these mighty Kingdoms: But only to acquit themselves of the Office and Duty
of a good friend, and also to acknowledge in this occasion the great obligation
which the King, and these Kingdoms have upon our Republique.

Our Lords further do persuade themselves that no other State in the world,
but theirs shall be found more fit and acceptable, (in then opinion) to
interpose it self in the meditation of an accommodation, and reunion between
his Majesty and his Parliament, and to whose interposition more credit might
be given without all susption: For the honor, greatness and prosperity of
the King and these Kingdoms, is by reflection the same for our Republique; and
on the contrary your evil is to Us a very great affliction, and a most
sensible evil.

From thence may be taken this firm assurance, that the aim of our mediation
shall not be to recommend an accommodation, and reconciliation feigned and
painted without, not prejudicial, and not assured within. But to procure a
true reunion, sincere and perfect, founded upon the Basis of the true Religion
and Justice, which shall re-establish respectively the good correspondence,
confidence, love, and the respects between the King and his Parliament, and
between all the good subjects of these great Kingdoms.

The King has so much approved of the reasons and proffers of our said Lords,
that his Majesty has accepted on his part Our Interposition, and has
consented to a Conference between Commissioners to be sent from both parties,
(if you find it good) and that you shall choose the place, the time, and the
number of the persons who shall be employed in this action.

Right Honorable,

Now We come unto you by command of Our Superiors to make the same proffer of
mediation, and to understand whether also it may be agreeable and acceptable
unto you.

We have always observed that your good inclinations have been carried to
peace, if you receive satisfaction to your just and reasonable demands.

Your wisdoms also may well judge, that the ways of Arms are no always the
surest, their successes being very uncertain, and which changes face in a
moment.

The good Cause which is proposed, does not always promise an assured and
certain success, for we are all men, and God sometimes permits the good Cause
to suffer for our sins.

All war is an affliction and punishment of God, in which we are not to take
del^ght, when we can be freed of it, upon honest and sure terms and
conditions, that the wrath of God be not longer provoked against us.

It is to be considered also, if no reasonable accommodation be found that the
decision of your differences by Arms is not to be expected so soon; but rather
on the contrary, that it shall be the cause of perpetuating the wars in
these Kingdoms, because the King shall ever live in his Royal Posterity, and
the Parliament never dies to suscitate always the former evil successes by new
wars, which at length shall cause the total ruin and destruction of State
and Religion, only to the great advantage of the common enemy of our Faith.

Right Honorable,

If it please you to make use of our intercession, unto which the King
consented at our first Proposition and offer, We promise you to proceed and
labor in it with all sincerity and fidelity, as Ambassadors sent by your best
friends and allies, making profession of one and the same Religion.

And we shall spare no endeavor, travail, nor pain (by the good will which
his Majesty has declared to us, and by your good intention) to make the
affections of our Lords succeed to such perfection, that the King and his
Parliament, and all good and loyal Subjects of the King, and lovers of their
Country, shall find their desired contentment and tranquillity with all
assurance.

Right Honorable,

We must yet add these few words, that your troubles and wars, trouble and
endanger us also: for many Merchants and Masters of Ships daily present
themselves to Our Lords the States Genenerall, and to us here, with their
complaints, that your men and ships of war trouble their course of trading and
traffic, and take their ships and goods without any just cause, and without
reason, and any right at all, as may be seen by a Memorandum hereunto anneed,
which you are desired to take notice of, and to give order for restitution and
reparation of the damages sustained for the present, and to take such course
that in the future the like excesses may be prevented.

And if any doubts be found in the said Memorandum, that it may please you to
appoint us some Commissioners to settle the points of which we are
complaining, as shall be found to agree with reason.

FINIS.

