A TREATISE Concerning the HEAT OF THE BLOOD: And also of the USE OF THE LUNGS.

By RICHARD BOULTON of Brazen-Nose College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row, School.

IMPRIMATUR.

JO. MEARE Vice-Can. Oxon.
Jan. 24. 1697.
HUNC Librum (cui Titulus, A Treatise of the Heat of the Blood, etc.) dignum
Censemus; qui Imprimatur.

Thomas Millington, PRAESES.
Samuel Collins, Edward Hulse, Richard Morton, Charles Goodall,
CENSORS.
Martij 5. 1697/8.
TO THE Reverend Dr. JO. MEARE PRINCIPAL OF Brazen-Nose College, AND
VICE CHANCELLOR OF THE University of Oxford.
SIR,
IT is not any great Opinion I have of my present Performance, (though there
are some who would persuade me, that it is not altogether despicable) that
makes me presume to prefix your Name before it.

Indeed, amongst Men of Sense and Learning, Truth for the most Part brings it is
own Recommendation along with it, and finds that Candid and ready Reception
which it deserves. But the Generality of Mankind will not relish any thing,
that bears not in the Front some great and eminent Name.

And for this Reason it is, that I have made bold to make this Dedication.

Your real Worth which has deservedly placed you in two Eminent Stations, to
both which you do more Honor than you receive from them: And the Encouragement
and Favor you show to all Persons of Industry, Virtue and good Learning under
your Government, soon determined me in the Choice of such a Patron; though my
small Share of each of the latter, could merit neither of the former.

And here, according to the usual Mode of Dedications, I might easily enlarge
upon so fair a Character; But as it is your peculiar Delight to oblige and do
good with all the ease and sweetness imaginable, so with as little Noise and
Ostentation possible: And I should sooner hope for your Pardon for this
Presumption and the Faults of my Book, than for such an Attempt upon your
Modesty.

I shall therefore only add, that you would be pleased to accept this as a
Testimony of my Duty and Gratitude, and that I shall always remain,

Reverend SIR, Your Ever Obedient and Obliged Servant R. BOULTON.

To the very LEARNED AND JUDICIOUS Dr. R. ANGEL, Resident in the CITY of
CHESTER.
Learned Sir,
SIXTEEN Years Education in a University, and a great many more improved in
succesful and judicious Practice, has sufficiently qualified You for a Judge
and Patron, when I consider the former and withal my own Weakness, I confess I
have less Reason to desire the latter: But sinoe it usually happens that those
that are least subject to Faults are commonly candid Critics, and most ready
to forgive others: I am bolder to beg your Patronage; yet not for it is Faults,
since that is below your Judgment, but whatever Truth is contained in it, which
will scarce be denied by One that is so much an Encourager of Learning.

But perhaps I ought to make an Apology to You as well as the World, for
deviating from the Opinions of some Learned Men; especiatly of that never too
much Honored Dr. Willis, who was One of the Greatest Physicians of his and
preceding Ages. And truly all that I can say for my self, is, That as it would
be below the Character of so Great a Man, to write any Thing upon any other
Consideration, than an Improvement of Knowledge and Truth; so, undoubtedly, he
would not desire any Thing he writ should be believed except it seemed so.

That then which I hope, will be an Apology for such an Attempt, is, That I
have considered his Opinion, with no other Design than an Endeavor after
Truth, and have offered nothing against his Opinion, but plain and unprejudiced
Reasons; and though I have given Reason enough to prove he was mistaken in this
Point, yet I must ever have the greatest Veneration and Esteem for all such Men
of unparallelled Worth and Learning, and so heartily Ingenuous.

But whether this little BOOK may pretend to any Reason for what it offers or
not, I am more encouraged to ask Your Patronage, it being approved by Men of
noted Learning and eminently Judicious, the President and Censors of the
College of Physicians, of which Number that your Self is not a Member, no other
Reason can be given, but that Your own Choice of a more retired Life has fixed
you in that CITY, where you are now resident, to the Satisfaction and Good of
those that commit themselves to your Care.

But, Learned Sir, That I may not press too much upon your Patience, That
Patronage which you were pleased to Give my Last, when I was a Stranger to You,
both encourages me to hope for it, now You have been pleased to take me into
Your Favor; and also, that You Will Pardon me for taking this Liberty, since it
is only designed to testify my Gratitude for those Favors You have already
been pleased to Confer on

Your very Humble and Obliged Servant R. BOULTON.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page, 1 Our Knowledge is very short. ibid. -- And Imperfect.
p. 3 The Pursuit of Knowledge very desirable. p. 4 Where most easily attained.
p. 5 The Heat of the Blood not obscure in respect of it is Cause. p. 6 The
Opinion of the Ancients very Superficial. p. 9 Dr. Willis's Opinion answered.
p. 11 But one Way by which Bodies grow hot. p. 13 Fire is rarefied Matter in
Motion. p. 16 Heat not actually in the Body that causes it. p. 19 Heat only a
Sensation. p. 20 Heat only produced one Way proved further in Answer to Dr.
Willis. p. 23 An Objection answered. p. 27 His comparison of the Blood's
Accension with Flame answered. p. 28 Several Degrees of Heat without Flame. p.
29 Nitre makes no Part of the Flame. p. 32 How Nitre promotes Flame. p. 33 Why
a Candle in a Glass-Globe is extinguished by extracting Air. p. 36 Whether
Nitre promotes the Heat of the Blood. p. 39 Liquids fetter up Heat without
Nitre. p. 41 Blood may grow hot without a Sulphurous Pabulum. p. 42 His
Comparison of the Recrements of Flame and Blood answered. p. 43 A Digression
why Flame* usually ascends. p. 50 Why it sometimes descends. p. 60
Diemerbroek's Opinion answered. p. 62 Dr. Henshaw's Opinion answered. p. 65 Of
the true Reason of the Heat of the Blood. p. 67 Animal Spirits Demonstrated. p.
80 That they are in Motion through the Nerves. p. 89 The Nature of them. p. 91
The Reason of the Heat of the Blood explained. p. 94 That Reason of it is Heat
proved. p. 100 -- By Attrition. p. 103 How the Animal Spirits rarify the Blood.
p. 111 Why the Heat varies. p. 112 How Sp. of C. C. raises the Pulse. p. 116
The Reason of flushing Heats. p. 120 How far the Blood and Spirits are Active
and Passive p. 131 How the Heat of the Blood is continued. p. 132 Some
Objections answered. p. 134 Why it is Heat declines. p. 139 Of the Use of the
Lungs. p. 159 -- In Respect of the Soul. p. 162 Why they ought to be in Motion.
p. 164 The Use of the Lungs in respect of the Body. p. 169 To dilate the
Ventricles of the Heart. p. 174 How obstructing Respiration kills an Animal. p.
178 Whether Air be mixed with the Mass of Blood. p. 191 Whether Nitre be. p.
192 -- And how. p. 193 What Effects it has upon the* Mass of Humors in the
Lungs. p. 196 How Nitre depresses the Heat of the Blood. p. 198
Page L. Read, 41. 5. Occasion for Accension, 53. 18. Motion for Notion, 60. 2.
Exploded, 84. 8. Blood for Body.

OF THE HEAT OF THE BLOOD.
EVEN Philosophy in General is so Our Knowledge in Philosophy is limited to a
small Part of the Creation.
Mysterious, and so infinitely out of the reach of our short and weak
Capacities; that the best of Philosophers may truly be said to have, but a
slight and superficial Knowledge of it: For if that small Part we know, be
compared with what we know not; all our Knowledge is but as an invisible Speck;
those things to which it extends, being inconsiderable, if compared with that
vast and endless Mass of the Universe.

But although that Part of the Universe, which in some Measure Which is
furnished with Objects too copious for our Senses
lies within the Cope of our Senses, be small and inconsiderable, when compared
with the vast Extent of the whole Creation; yet when we reflect on the vast
Variety of Objects, contained within those narrow Dimensions; we find, and must
needs acknowledge it very considerable; and superabundantly furnished with
Matter for our Senses to work upon.

For, the Extension of our Knowledge, as to those Of which at the best we have
but an imperfect Knowledge.
Objects, is bounded by Limits not very spacious; and notwithstanding the
Diligence and Industry of Learned Men, and the great Improvements, made in most
Parts of Knowledge: The wisest Men, and the most profound Philosophers must of
necessity own, that of those Things they know most, their Knowledge is very
imperfect. We know but in Part, and indeed so small a Part, that it chiefly
seems to inform us, more sensibly of our Ignorance.

But so pleasant and desirable is Knowledge; and we find so much The Pursuit of
Knowledge very desirable.
uneasiness in Ignorance, when once we have tasted of it; that it is impossible
to abstain from a further Pursuit after it at least, notwithstanding the vast
disproportion betwixt our Knowledge and Ignorance, which continually lies in our
way to discourage us.

And as we thirst after Knowledge, with a desire to attain to Especially of that
which is most Advantageous.
a more adequate and complete Apprehension of it; so we most eagerly pursue
those Parts of it, which we hope to understand most clearly, and which we
expect to make a Progress in, with the most considerable Advantage.

Since then the Microcosm, which is, as if it There is more Reason to expect
Truth and Certainty in the Microcosm than the Macrocosm.
were a Type and Epitomy of the Macrocosm, lies much more within the narrow
Cope of our Senses; since we can dive and search into all, and the inmost
Recesses of it; and come nearer to those Springs and Fountains, upon which all
the Effects, we perceive in it, depend; we have much more solid and firm
Foundations to proceed upon, than in any other Parts of Philosophy whatsoever;
and may much more reasonably hope for Certainty and Truth; besides the Pursuit
of it, must needs be not only more Pleasant, but Advantageous.

And although in a Man's Body, some Things Where it is easily attained.
are much more apparent and clear than others; yet the most obscure, may easily
be so far explained, and understood; as is necessary and subservient to show
the Use of them, and to what Ends they were designed.

Amongst those that are accounted most obscure, the Heat The Heat of the Blood
not obscure in respect of it is Cause.
of the Blood is unfortunately one; but the Reason why it is so, is not that it
is less apparent in it self, but rather the Inadvertency of those that searched
into it: If possible such great Men, as have writ concerning it, may be guilty
of so great a Fault, which (although otherwise no small one) is much more
excusable in those, whose more weighty Concerns take 'em of a deeper Enquiry.

Since then, so many learned Men, and those to whom Physic is not least
obliged, for considerable Improvements, have writ on this Subject; I think it
not only Justice, but also Reasonable, I should show upon what Grounds, and for
what Reasons I have rejected their Opinions, before I take leave to propose my
own.

It would be Both Ancients and Moderns have differed as to the Cause of it.
needless to spend time in Informing my Reader, that both Ancient and Modern
Writers have endeavored to account for it; and it would be Information to but
a few; since none that have made any considerable Progress in Physic, can be
ignorant of it. I shall only as briefly as I can, mention the Opinions of the
Ancients, that it may better appear to the more unlearned, wherein they are
deficient; and then, I shall consider the most remarkable Opinions of the
Moderns, that less competent Judges, and young Students in Physic, may spend
less time in convincing themselves, how far they come short of explaining, the
Reason of the Heat of the Blood.

Amongst the The Opinions of the Ancients very Superficial and Insatisfactory.
Ancients, who wanted those Improvements in Anatomy, that have been made of
late, to direct them in their Judgments; some fancied that it proceeded from a
Calidum innatum, or innate Heat; which was fixed and rooted in all the Parts of
a Man's Body, before his Birth; and that This continued Heat, by communicating
it self successively to the Nourishment of the Parts, as soon as it was
received by them: Which indeed was so weak and superficial an Account of it,
that it rather served to please the Unlearned, then to satisfy the Curious,
and more Inquisitive. Others thought, that there was a sort of Flame lodged in
the Heart, which kindled the Blood as it passed through it. But Moderns having
learnt by a further and a deeper Insight into Men's Bodies; that the former of
those was rather the Effect; than the Cause; and by frequent Dissections, that
the Heart was altogether incapable of containing such a Flame, and also that
that which they supposed to be the Pabulum of it, to be clotted Blood; they
have, with sufficient Reason, rejected them both. Wherefore passing by these, I
shall proceed to consider those Modern Opinions, which are thought most worthy
our Consideration.

The first that Dr. Willis' s Opinion considered.
I shall take Notice of, is, the Opinion of the most Ingenious Dr. Willis; who
although in some things he has had the Fortune to be mistaken, with other
Learned Men (the best being not exempt) yet for the most part, has made the
greatest Improvements of any of his Predecessors in Theory.

This Learned Who asserts that there are three ways by which Liquids grow hot.
Author, in the eight Paragraph or thereabouts, of his Exercitation concerning
the Heat of the Blood, takes Notice; that there are three Modes or Sorts of
Causes, by which Liquids grow Hot.

First, a culido ad moto, or by applying them to something that is Hot; as when
Water boyls over the Fire. Secondly, when Saline Corrosives mutually act upon
one another, or on sulphurous Bodies mixed with them, by an intense and
powerful Agitation. Thirdly, when a Liquor abounding with much Spirit or
Sulphur, takes Flame from some other Body. And in the next Paragraph, he says,
that there are other ways of Calefaction; as Fermentation, Putrefaction, and
Attrition; but the sear only observable in solid Bodies.

The Design And that the Blood grows Hot by Accension.
of which, is, to prove, that since the Blood has not any other Body applied,
to communicate Heat to it; and since it is not impregnated with Saline
Corrosives; but is sufficiently stocked with Sulphurous Particles; and since
Fermentation, Putrefaction, and Attrition are only the Causes of Heat in solid
Bodies: It must needs be preserved in a continual Heat, by Accension of it is
Sulphurous Pabulum.

But if we do To which it is answered that there is but one way in Philosophy
by which all things grow hot.
but duly consider how Heat is promoted in all these several sorts of
Substances; it will presently appear, that in Philosophy, there is but one way,
by which all, whether Liquid or Solid grow Hot; and if so, then it will follow,
that whether we say the Blood grows Hot, by applying of a hot Thing to it, or
Saline Corrosives; whether by Fermentation, Accension, or Attrition, it will be
equivalently the same.

To make it evident Several degrees of Heat differ only in Degrees of a
peculiar Power to cause Heat.
then, that there is but one way, by which all Bodies grow Hot; and that to
say, that the Heat of it proceeds from the Application of other hot Bodies,
Saline Corrosives, Accension, Fermentation, or Attrition, is but to express the
same thing several ways; since they are all equivalently performed the same
way; we are to consider, what is the Nature of hot Bodies, and wherein their
Power consists; either to cause Heat themselves, or to communicate that Power
to others: And because several remiss Degrees of Heat, differ only in
Proportion from Fire, which is the most intense; and because, That is free from
those Masks and Clouds, which intervene it and our Senses, when it is in more
remiss Degrees; the best way to understand the Reasons of Heat, will be to
consider, wherein the essential Nature of Fire consists.

Amongst Philosophers, And Fire, which is the highest, is rarefied Matter in a
swift Motion which Masked in different Subjects affects not our Sight.
although it is very dubious, what it is, that causes Fire to differ so much
from all other Substances; yet it is by the Consent of most Moderns, and
evident from Flame it self, and the manner that it destroys other Bodies by,
that it is made up of rarefied Matter, whose Particles are in a swift and
powerful intestine Agitation, and of a peculiar Figure and Size: And if Fire be
nothing else, but Matter rarefied and in a swift Motion; and from that swift
and intense Motion of Matter, affecting our Organs of Sense, we perceive Heat;
we must needs conclude, that whatever rarifies Matter, and puts it is Parts into
a brisk Motion, is the cause of Heat. And although according to the Diversity
of Subjects, that Heat is dispersed through, it has different Appearances to
our Senses, and in most, it is Light; which, when it exists seperately, is
always joined with it, it is obscured by the Interposition and Mixture of other
Matter; yet if Heat depends Essentially upon the Effects, that rarefied Matter
in Motion has upon our Senses; it is undeniably true, that Heat is caused only
one way, Remotely and Proximately, with respect to Matter in Motion, and the
Effect it then has upon us, viz. By putting the Parts of Matter into a brisk
Motion, to affect our Senses with Violence enough to cause such a Sensation.

But, before I proceed to a further Proof of what I have asserted, viz. That
there is but one Way in Philosophy, by which all Things grow hot; it being a
Controversy, whether Heat be actually in the Body that causes it; or whether
Matter in Motion only produces such an Effect as the Sense of Heat, upon our
Sensory; although it is not requisite, I should here Publish my Opinion of it,
yet it is necessary I should explain what I mean, when I say, that Heat is only
produced one Way; or that Heat is caused, by putting the Parts of Matter into a
swift Motion; or that Heat depends on the Effects, which rarefied Matter has
upon our Senses, when it is in Motion.

But if I were here to declare my Opinion of Heat is not actually in the Body
that causes it, but potentially, because that Body has a power to cause such a
Sensation.
this Point which is so differently held by various Philosophers; I should say,
that as far as I can conceive of it, Heat is not actually in the Body that
causes it to be perceived, by our Senses, but potentially; in as much as that
Body has a Power to cause such a Sensation.

And although a great many may wonder; that Fire, which causes Heat, should not
be hot it self; yet there is as much Reason to believe, that it is not; as that
a Sword which will cause Pain, is not Pain it self: For those who think that
Fire which causes Heat, is Heat it self; take the Cause for the Effect, and
affirm it to be so.

Besides, Heat being only a Sensation; and it Heat is only a Sensation which is
actually where there is Sense to perceive it.
being impossible there should be a Sensation, where there is no Sense; it is
impossible there should be Heat, where there is only Fire, and no Sense for it
to work upon: For Heat is not a Mode of Matter rarefied and in Motion; but an
Effect of Matter so modified. But, say they, it is impossible for us to think
so; truly, if we are not directed in our Thoughts by Reason we may irrationally
think, that Matter in Motion, which only causes Heat, is Heat; but if our
Reason proceeds upon those Mediums which our Senses furnish us with, and
certainly we can on no other, we shall easily be induced to believe, that the
Cause is not the Effect; there being a great deal of Reason for us to believe
so; though, none to the contrary.

When then I say, that Heat is only produced one Way; I mean that there is but
one Way to modify Bodies, so, as to make them capable of causing Heat; when
they affect our Sensory: And when I say, that Heat is caused by putting the
Parts of Matter into Motion, I mean, that a Power of producing Heat is caused
so: And when I say, that Heat depends on the Effect, that rarefied Matter has
upon our Senses, I mean, it is caused by those affecting our Senses.

And because, always when I have occasion to mention the Cause of Heat, it
would be too much Circumlocution to say, the Power of causing Heat is produced
so, or otherwise; I shall use the Word Heat, sometimes to signify that Motion
of rarefied Matter, which is sufficient to cause Heat; and shall call that
Motion, Heat in respect of the Effects which it causes.

But, to proceed to a further and more evident Proof; That Heat, That Heat is
only produced one way further proved.
or a Power to produce it, is only caused one Way; we are to consider, how the
Motion of Particles is carried on in all those, which Dr. Willis calls,
different Ways of causing Heat, viz. per admotum Calidi, Saline Corrosives,
Accension, and even Fermentation and Putrefaction.

And first, when Water is put over the Fire, and heated per admotum Calidi, the
fine Particles of Fire penetrating the Vessel, are imbibed into the Water, and
being fettered up, and kept from flying away, by the Parts of the Liquor, put
them also into a quick Motion* from whence proceeds a sensible Heat. In the
same Manner, when Saline Corrosives are mixed together, the subtle Effluvia,
of each, first begin powerfully to oppose one another; and being by that means
reverberated and struck back upon the Particles of those Bodies, of which they
are the Effluvia, put them into Motion; and as the Motion so begun, grows
stronger and more violent, so the Degrees of Heat become more intense And when
a Flame is applied to any Sulphurous Body, the Particles of that Flame, being
forcibly agitated against the Sulphur, put the Particles of it into a brisk and
swift Motion; and they being by that means rarefied and expanded, are turned
into Flame. Lastly, it cannot be denied, but that when any thing grows hot by
Putrefaction, that heat either proceeds from elastick and fermentative
Particles within, working upon one another, or from something from without.

Now in all these ways, as he is pleased to call them, since Heat is produced
by the same Method in Philosophy; so it is reasonable to affirm, that there is
but one Way, by which all Things become hot, viz. By Attrition.

For Water grows hot, because the Particles of Fire are mixed Viz. by putting
the Parts of Matter into Motion
with it, and put it is Parts into a swift Motion: And the Effluviums of
Corrosives, being very volatile and in a strong and powerful Motion, by an
Attrition, and grinding upon one another cause Heat. So also the Particles of
Flame, by Attrition turn Sulphur into Flame: And by Motion, only not so
intense, a less violent degree of Heat is produced in Putrefaction; so that in
all these ways, Heat only proceeds from rarefied Matter, put into a violent
Motion by Attrition; and the consequence of that Attrition, is Fermentation.

After the same manner, Heat is produced in solid Bodies: For when Flint and
Steel are violently struck together, the Sulphurous Particles being scattered
and dissolved by that Force, are put into a brisk and swift Motion.

But, although from hence it appears, that all Bodies whatsoever, A seeming
Objection answered.
grow hot by being put into Motion, by an intestin Collision and Attrition of
Particles; and consequently but one way: yet some will be apt to think, that
since there is so much difference betwixt Water, Corrosive Salts, and
Sulphurous Bodies; that there must needs be some difference in their way of
working upon one another.

To which, all that I need to say more, is, That though different Bodies are
differently applied together; yet it is evident, that they only operate by
those Particles that are in Motion, and which communicate Motion to each other;
and one may as well say, that Sulphur kindled by a Flame, is made hot per
admotum Calidi, as that Water is: For as Flame is applied to one, so the
dispersed Particles of Fire are communicated to the other.

This Learned Author, having laid these Premises to establish His Comparison of
the Bloods Accension, with Flame considered.
a Rational Hypothesis upon; and concluding that the Blood of a Man's Body,
could not become hot any other way, but by Accension, goes on to compare the
Accension of the Blood, with the burning of the Flame; and because, as he
thinks, the same things are requisite, to continue both, viz. First, a free and
continual Access of Air. Secondly, a fresh supply of a constant Sulphurous
Pabulum. Thirdly, a perpetual Avolition of fuliginous Recrements; he concludes
that it must needs be kept hot by a continual Sort of Flame.

But, he might as well say, that Water over a Fire, could not There are several
degrees of Heat produced without visible Flame.
become hot, except it was put into a Flame, as that the Mass of Blood, cannot
grow hot without Accension; but since every Body knows that hot Water is not
Flame; there is no doubt, but that Blood may be hot without Accension too.

That to produce Heat, there is no need of a Flame to be always accended, is
evident; since there are several degrees of hot Bodies, in which no Flame at
all is apparent; and even Blood it self, immediately as soon as it is
extravasated, seems so unlikely Pabulum, for a Flame; that Water will not
sooner extinguish it, but to produce several degrees of Heat in Liquids, it is
sufficient the Particles of those Bodies that so affect our Senses, be put into
a swift Motion; although not into so high a degree as to make a Flame. So by
rubbing of two Flint-stones together moderately, is produced an evident Heat:
and when they are moved against one another more violently, the Heat is
stronger; and by a Collision yet more violent, those Sulphurous Particles,
that before caused a gentle Heat, constitute a Flame

He says, that a Flame may be continued, it should always have a free Access of
Air; for all sublunary Fire, and especially Flame is composed of Sulphurous
Particles, breaking out of the combustible Matter; and of Nitrous Particles
which always abound in the Air, and these Nitrous Particles, he says, are so
necessary to the production of Flame, that in the Summer, if the Sun does but
shine upon the Fire, by driving it back and dissipating the Nitre, it
extinguishes it: Whereas, on the contrary if it be supplied with a sufficient
Quantity, it burns more clear and brisk.

Indeed, it is so manifestly certain, that Fire burns brisker and Nitre makes
up no part of the Flame.
fiercer, when it has a sufficient quantity of Nitre about it, than when it
has not; that to contradict it would be to deny what is sensibly apparent; but
yet it does not therefore follow, that Nitre makes up part of the Flame: For
Sulphur and Oil will flame as violently in the Summer as in the Winter, though
Wood and Coal, and other combustible Matter will not.

Besides, if Nitre made any Part of the Flame, though it might readily mix with
the outward side of it, I would willingly understand, how when a Flame is two
or three yards Diameter, it is possible for it to be mixed with the middle of
the Flame; which we perceive is more violent than the Borders of it, where
Nitre abounds.

But, the Reason why Flame will not burn without some degree The Nitrous parts
of the Air promote Flame by keeping i'ts Matter from dispersing too soon.
of Nitre, is not that it makes up any Part of it, but because the Particles of
Fire are in so very swift and violent a Motion, that they would immediately be
dispersed and fly away; if the Nitrous Particles of the Air did not prevent
them, by closing round about them, and keeping them up to a Center; by which
means Flame is not only made of a longer continuance, but it is Power of heating
us is more violent; those moving Particles being reverberated, and working
mutually on one another, so as to increase their Motion, and consequently their
Effects.

And as the Rays of the Sun, collected into a Point by a Burning-Glass, makes
'em more violent, so do the Nitrous Particles enerease the Vigor of the Flame:
And again, as Banks cast up about a Spring prevent the Water from streaming
away till a greater Quantity is gathered together, and it breaks out violently;
so are the Particles of the Fire heaped up, and kept in till their Motion
overpowers the Pressure of the Nitre.

But Nitre does not only by reverberating the Rays, collect a great Number
together, and by that means increase their Vigor; but also by inverting their
Motion, turns them back again upon, and causes them by striking against, the
combustible Matter to dissolve, and put the Particles of it into Motion sooner,
wherefore it burns more briskly, and is consumed in less time.

And this is the Reason that Fire burns better in the Winter, Wherefore Fire
burns better in the Winter than in the Summer.
than the Summer: For in the Summer for want of a close condensed Nitrous Air,
to bind up and collect the Particles of Fire, they are dissipated and scattered
immediately; but in the Winter, being as if it were yoked and locked up
together, they affect our Senses more vigorously.

To prove, That Nitre is Part of the Pabulum of Flame, Why a Candle in a Glass.
Globe is extinguished by extracting the Air.
he instances an Experiment, from the Famous Mr. Robert Boil, viz. That a
lighted Candle being put into a large Glass-Globe, and the Globe being stoped,
as soon as the Air is sucked out, the Flame expires. But this is so far from
proving, that the Air is part of the Pabulum of Fire, that it is the strongest
Proof of what I just now said: for as long as the Particles of the Air closing
about the Candle, keep all the Rays together; and by inverting their Motion,
cause them to turn upon the Fat, that they may, by dissolving of it, and
putting it is Parts into Motion, turn it into Flame, so long it burns; but as
soon as the Nitre is exhausted, the Rays being immediately dispersed, and
scattered by their own agility; fly away from, and cease to convert the
remaining Part of the Fat into Flame; and that which makes more for what I have
said, is, that as the Air is gradually drawn out, so the Flame is gradually
diminished: For when there is less Nitre to oppose the Motion of the Rays, they
are sooner dispersed; and the Nitre by giving them that liberty, leaves less
flame about the Candle.

He says further, as Flame is extingushed by taking away the His Comparison of
extinguished Flame, compared with the Death of an Animal considered.
Nitrous Pabulum of it; so when the Breath of an Animal is stopped, it dies not
so much because it is choked by a Retention of fuliginous Recrements, as by
robbing the Blood of the Nitrous Pabulum.

How an Animal comes to die by stoping Respiration, I shall hereafter give an
Account, when I speak concerning the Use of the Lungs; in the mean time, I
shall here make it evident, that the Nitre of the Air, is so far from promoting
the Heat of the Blood; that the less Nitrous the Air is the hotter it grows.

This is sufficiently manifest, Nitre does not promote the Heat of the Blood
but rather depresses.
if we do but take our Breath through a warm Woollen Cloth, which imbibes, as
if it were, the Nitre; for we shall be so far from being cooler for it, that in
warm Weather, when our Bodies are a little predisposed, it causes us to sweat,
whereas if Nitre promoted the Heat of the Blood, we should rather be cold, the
Flame of the Blood according to him being extinguished for want of a Supply of
Nitrous Pabulum.

But, although this would not be a sufficient Argument to convince us; yet a
cold Winter and a hot Summer would be Arguments strong enough; for we always
find, that in the Winter, when the Air is full of Nitre, we are much more cold,
then in the Summer when in the Heat of the Sun, we want that Supply of Nitre:
From whence it sufficiently appears, that Nitre does not contribute to the Heat
of the Blood, but rather depresses it.

Neither, in Liquids is there For in Liquids the volatile Parts are
sufficiently opposed by the Parts of the Blood and kept from flying away.
any accension as there is in Flame, for Nitre to lock up and keep the Heat
from dispersing; for Water will be Hot, though it be placed in the Middle of a
Fire, where no Nitre can come near it; the Particles which make up that Liquid
Substance, being sufficient to reserve those Particles of Matter, which cause
Heat upon our Sensory, from flying away so soon, by intangling and fettering
them up.

The second Blood may grow hot without a Sulphurous Pabulum.
Thing, that he says, is requisite to preserve Heat, is a continual supply of
Sulphur. That Flame cannot be continued without a Supply of combustible Matter,
I do not deny, yet we are certain, that Blood may grow Hot, without such
Pabulum; for the Blood of Horses, and other Beasts, is so far from being
supplied with a Sulphurous Pabulum, that nothing is less combustible then
Grass and Water, which are their constant Food; and which have different
Effects upon our Senses from Sulphur; and the daily Food we eat, is so far from
kindling a Flame, that it would presently extinguish it.

The Third and His Comparison of the Recrements of Flame and of Blood
considered.
last Thing, he supposes, requisite to continue a Flame is that the Fuliginous
Recrements be carried of; and as Flame requires a continual Avolition of it is
Recrements; so does the Blood, by the Branches of the Trachea and the Pores of
the Body.

That Smoke Which appears widely inconsistent.
and Flame are, as if it were, inseperably joined together; and that a subacid
Balsamic Juice continually sweats through the inward Coats of the Trachea, and
a saltish Serum through the Pores of the Skin is most certain; but in the
carrying on of each of these Phenomenon, there is a very wide difference; for
in an First, because that Juice that sweats through the Coats of the Trachea
and the Skin is not Recrementitious.
Animal that Subacid Balsamic Juice, which sweats through the inward Coats of
the Trachea, is designed to moisten the Cavities of it, to prevent them from
drying and becoming useless, and partly to preserve them from the sharpness of
the Nitrous Particles of the Air: and in like manner, the Skin is continually
watered with that Serum, to preserve it from withering and becoming too dry; and
though these Humors are not sucked up again into the Blood, yet that is not
because they are Fuliginous Recrements, and Useless Parts of the Serum of the
Blood; but because, since those Parts must needs be kept from drying; it would
be impossible for Vessels to be so framed as to receive and return them to the
Mass of Blood again: For the outward side of those Vessels would still be dry
and want Effluviums, to moisten them ad And the Fuliginous Effluviums of Fire
are Recrements.
infinitum. But the Fuliginous Effluviums of Fire are altogether Recrements and
Useless in respect of Fire.

Besides, the Effluviums of the Mass of Blood, Secondly, because the former if
not carried of increase it.
if stopped, are so far from depressing and diminishing the Heat of the Blood;
that they increase it so much; that they presently put those that have
predisposed Blood into violent Fevers: But if the Smoke But Smoke extinguishes
Fire.
of a Fire, or of a Candle, be reflected upon the Flame, it is presently
extinguished.

But it is a Question, whether Smoke be Smoke is not altogether an Effluvium of
Flame.
altogether an Effluvium of Fire? whereas, no Body doubts, but that the
Moisture, which supplies the Lungs and insensible Transpiration is separated
from the Serum of the Blood: For Smoke, as I conceive, is made up of the Nitre
of the Air, fixing the Particles of the Flame, together with the Ashes of the
Fuel, that are raised and forced up by the quick and violent Motion of the
Fire; which I believe is carried on after this Manner,

The Particles of the Fire, being in a very Smoke thus compounded.
brisk and violent Motion, endeavor to expand, and powerfully to fly away,
from the Fuel that supplies them; but the Nitre of the Air, strongly opposing
them, partly presses them back, till their Motion being increased and more
intense, they violently scatter themselves in the ambient Air, both amongst the
Dust and Ashes of the Fuel, hurried along with them by their Motion and the
Particles of Nitre: By which means, they loose most of their Vigor, and are
more easily overpowered by the Nitre; and being fixed and joined with those
Ashes, makes up that which we call Soot; which the longer it lies together,
grows more Bitter, the Sulphurous Particles of the fixed Flame, being by an
Intestine Sort of Motion, exalted, and overpowering the more dull and effete
Parts of Matter.

From whence it appears, that Soot is not altogether a Recrement of Fire; but
is made up of effete Ashes, Fire and Nitre.

But though Soot were wholly a Recrement of Fire, yet it does not follow, that
that Moisture, which supplies the Lungs, is a Recrement of the Blood, though it
were to be called a Recrement: For it is separated, as a Part of the Serum and
Lympha, and not of the Blood.

FRom what I have said, I think, it plainly appears, that neither the Simile he
uses, is in any considerable Circumstances agreeable; nor can he from thence
deduce the Reason of the Heat of the Blood; and being led as if it were by a
Necessity, in Answer to his Opinion, to consider the Nature of Flame, and the
manner of it is Production, more then I otherwise should have done; I shall beg
leave A Digression in which is given the Reason why Flame Ascends rather then
Descends.
to make a small Digression here, which though it may seem foreign to a
Discourse of the Heat of the Blood; yet it may not be improper, after what I
have already said of Fire, to endeavor to give a Reason, why Flame, when it is
left to it is own Liberty, always ascends.

To understand then the Reason, why Flame always ascends, we must again
remember, that Fire is, for as much as appears to our Senses or Reason, a light
rarefied Body, whose minute and subtle Particles, are in a swift Motion, and
in some measure pinned in, by the ambient Air.

Now though the ambient Air thus press Which is because it has less Opposition
in it is Motion that way.
upon it on every side; yet the Particles of Flame, being in too strong a
Motion, and also too subtle to be totally resisted, and altogether confined;
must needs break out that way, which it forces most easily, and where it is
least powerfully resisted.

That Flame is only a rarefied Body in swift Motion, I take for granted; and
that it is pressed upon on every side by Air, none sure will deny; and it must
needs be most reasonable for us to believe, that it will be subject to spread
and expand it self that way it finds the least resistance: Therefore all that I
need to prove, is, that Flame exposed to the open Air, finds less resistance in
Ascending then Descending.

That Flame finds less resistance in Ascending then Descending, will easily be
proved, if we will but allow, what is beyond Contradiction, viz. That the more
solid and compressed any Body is, the more Powerfully it repels those Bodies
that move against it; which plainly appears, if we strike two pieces of Mettle
together, viz. Lead and Iron, for at the same time, that Lead easily yields to
the Impression of the Iron, it as powerfully resists the former.

If then, the Air, the nearer it is to the Center, Because the Air the nearer
to the Center makes stronger Opposition than that above.
be more Solid and Firm, consequently it will resist the motion of Bodies that
strike against it, with greater Vigor; and when the Particles of Flame are
forcibly driven against it, they, being more strongly resisted, by that Air,
which is below, than the Air above, with less difficulty make way for
themselves upward, and so ascend.

That the Air, the nearer it is to the Center, is thicker and more compact,
consequently will be abler to resist the Notion of the Flame; we have a great
deal of Reason to believe* if we consider, what a vast and unaccountable Weight
of incumbent Air, presses upon it; for, as in a Pillar of Stone, the nearer to
the Foundation, the harder it is to force a Stone out of it, because it is held
faster by the weight of those that lie upon it; so we must needs conceive, that
those Particles of Air next the Center, will be made more compact and able to
resist the Flame by the weight of those that lie upon them.

But to prove it more evidently, Which is proved by these Experiments.
viz. That the Air next to the Center, makes a stronger Resistance; I shall
produce a common, yet very remarkable, Experiment, which is this. If a Bladder
be blown full of Air, at the bottom of the Mountain Teneriff, and be carried up
to the Top of that Hill, it will presently burst: The Reason of which is
plainly this, a great quantity of Air at the bottom of the Hill, being pressed
and squezed close together, by the weight of all that condensed Air, that lies
upon it, the Springs of it being by that means, as if it were wound up, and
made more compact, as soon as that weight is wanting to keep them close
together, at the Top, they fly open and expand themselves, to a more lax and
open Constitution of Parts; which Reason is confirmed by another Experiment,
viz. By blowing a Bladder full of Air at the Top of the same Mountain; for as
it is brought down to the bottom of the Hill, it gradually subsides; and though
it was as full as it could be blown at the Top of the Hill; yet at the bottom,
it will seem not near fully distended, the Spring of the Air that was above
expanded, being now pressed together by the weight of the Air above it.

Another Observation, which I shall bring, for It is also proved by the
Expansion of Gunpowder.
a Confirmation of it, is, That a Musket shot off at the Top of that Hill,
makes no considerable Noise, compared with the Sound it causes at the bottom.
The Reason of which difference can be no other, but this, that the Air being
more compact and solid below, causes the Collision of the small Particles of
Matter, to be more violent, by a stronger Opposition; and consequently the
Sound is by that means louder.

Besides, the Particles of expanded Gunpower fly away and dissipate themselves,
a great deal more easily above then below; which confirms what I have said
before, of the Reason, why Nitre is beneficial to the maintanance of Flame; for
if the Air, when it is more condensed, binds up and causes the Particles of
Fire, to work more powerfully upon one another; and by that means a stronger
Collision of Particles; and if when it is less condensed, it more easily yields
to them, and gives them Liberty to fly away with less Resistance; it must needs
be granted, that the Office it performs here below, in respect of Flame, is, to
keep it is Parts from flying away too easily.

But for a further Proof and Confirmation of the Reason I have given, why Flame
flies upwards, viz. Because the Air yields more readily to it is Motion upwards,
being less compact above then below; I shall produce two or three Instances,
which prove, that if it had but less Liberty to ascend, by the Opposition of
some other Body then to descend it would as naturally fly downwards as it does
now upwards, when it is otherwise; and I shall also prove, that if it had but
an equal Resistance on each side, it would expand orbicularly.

And First, that if Flame had but an equal Resistance from ambient Bodies on
each side, it would expand Orbicularly, will be proved by this Experiment, viz.
fill a hollow Globe with Gunpowder, one side of which is a little thinner than
the other; and whatever way that thin side is turned, whether down, upwards, or
horizon-ward, the Gunpowder will expand, and break out that way.

Secondly, to prove that if there were but more liberty for the descent than
ascent of it, Flame would naturally fly downwards, we need but shoot a Gun off
with the Mouth downwards; for the explauded Gunpowder finding an open and easy
Passage downwards, and being resisted upwards, and on each side, it naturally
descends.

But some perhaps that do not thoroughly understand, why a Thing is said
naturally to ascend or descend, may be unwilling to believe, that when a Gun is
shot downwards, the Motion of the Flame is a natural Motion, but may rather
think it Preternatural.

But that it may appear, that it is as truly a naral Motion in The Motion of
Flame downwards is a natural Motion in Philosophy.
Philosophy, as the ascending Motion of it, I shall consider, why Flame may be
said naturally to ascend.

Flame then is said naturally to ascend, because it is the Nature of it, for
the most Part to do so, which is as much as to say, the Nature of Flame
inclines it to ascend; how the Nature of it inclines it to ascend, I have
already shown, and that there are the same Reasons, why the descending Motion,
should be termed Natural, will easily be proved; for as it is natural for it to
ascend, as long as it has only the Air to oppose it is Motion, so it is it is
Nature to descend, when the Order of Opposition is changed; and the latter is
as much a natural Motion, as the former; all that diversifies the tendency of
Flame, being those accidental Circumstances which are about it; and as a Ball,
cast against the bottom of a Room, rebounds upwards; and when it is thrown
against the top of it, as naturally flies down; so Flame, being in a brisk
Motion, naturally flies up or down, as the Parts of Matter it striks against
resist it, and cause it to fly back from them.

HAving made this short Digression, I shall proceed next to Diemerbroek's
Opinion examined.
examine Diemerbroek's Opinion; who thinks that the vital Spirit, by reason of
it is Volatility, always endeavoring to fly away, does continually agitate
those grosser Particles of the Blood; with which it is entangled and detained
from flight; and is diversely vibrated and beat back, and so the whole Mass
being kept in a continual fermentative Motion; there is a Heat produced in it,
which in a greater Agitation, is greater, etc. And so differs, according to the
different Degrees of Agitation.

All that I shall, or need to take Notice of here, is, that that Agitation of
Particles, which he says, causes the Heat of the Blood, rather produces a
Sensation of Heat, by affecting our Senses, in their Motion, than produce that,
which we call Heat in the Blood. But to know the true Reason of the Heat of the
Blood, we must understand how those Particles are put into Motion; which by
affecting our Sensory, cause such a Sensation. So that he seems to me to say no
more, then that that which has a Power to cause Heat, is the Cause of that
Power, when he ought in order to explain the Heat of the Blood, to have shown
from whence that Power proceeds, the Reason of which, I should have taken in
some measure, for the Reason of the Heat, potentially in the Mass of Blood; but
from what he has said, it appears, that he has not explained the true Reason
of the Heat of the Blood so plainly, that I need say no more against it.

Dr. Henshaw thinks, that the Dissimilitude betwixt the Chyle Dr. Henshaw' s
Opinion considered.
and Blood is so great, that it becomes immediately the Cause of an
extraordinary Ebullition, upon their mixture together, which is very much
increased by the reciprocal Motion of the Lungs; whereby the Blood is wrought
into a froth, by that time it gets into the left Ventricle of the Heart. Which
sudden Excess of Heat, he thinks, not unlike what happens upon the mixing of
several Chemical Liquors together; for the Heat often becomes so great, that
they often endanger the Vessels that contain them.

But he might as well have said, that there is so great a Dissimilitude betwixt
hot Blood and cold Milk, that as soon as the Milk is mixed with it, it will
cause an extraordiary Ebullition; and that by exposing them to the Air, and
running them through Pipes, the Heat would increase; but this is so plainly
false, that it needs no other Arguments, but Reflection to convince the weakest
Reason.

And he might equally as well conclude, that Water would kindle a Fire, and
increase the Flame of it, because Oil will, as that Chyle will put the Blood
into a Heat, because Oil of Turpentine and Spirit of Wine will grow hot when
mixed together, but the Conclusion being manifestly absurd, I shall in the next
Place, endeavor to show the Reason of the Heat of the Blood as evidently as
possibly I can.

FROM what I have already said, in Answer to Dr. Willis's Opinion, it
sufficiently appears; that, whether we say, the Blood grows hot per admotum
Calidi, Accension, or any other way, it is no more then to express the same
Thing several ways; or to make Words different in Sound, to express one and the
same thing.

But as all that have writ on this Subject, have made choice of a Ancient and
Modern Writers have rather disputed about the Use of Words, than much
difference observable in their Opinions.
different Name to signify the Heat of the Blood by; whilst some would have it
done by Accension, others by Attrition, etc. so they have by that means, rather
disputed about Names and Words, than any real and fundamental Difference in
their Opinions. I shall not here enter into a dispute, whether the Blood when
it becomes hot, may most properly be said to grow hot, or it is Heat expressed
by any one of those Titles, they have been pleased to signify it by; for as in
discoursing about the constituent Parts of a Man, it is not necessary to fix
any Name upon that Man; but whether it be Thomas, Robert or William, the
constituent Parts of him, if he be a perfect Man, will still be the same; so in
discoursing concerning the Heat of the Blood, and considering the principal
Cause or Agent, and the more remote and accessory Causes; it is no matter at
all, whether the Consequence of these Causes be signified by the word
Accension, Attrition or Fermentation; because the Difference of the Title, does
not at all diversify the Action.

But if any one would rather signify the Heat of the Blood, by any of these
different Words, I shall be equally pleased with them, or any of them; provided
they all meet, in the Matter signified by them, and do not deny that which
seems to be true: That the Heat proceeds from a swift intestin Motion of it is
Particles. Which Motion is the Reason why it affects our Sensory, so as to
cause a Sensation of Heat.

But as the Reason, why it affects our Sensory so, is not The Reason why Heat
affects our Sensory does not show how it comes by that Power.
sufficiently satisfactory to explain what is the Cause, and how it comes by
that Power of causing such a Sensation. In making an Enquiry into the Cause of
that, I shall beg leave to make Use of that Word, which I think to be most
expressive, viz. Fermentation.

For since in every mechanical Action, there is an Agent and a The Blood grows
hot by Attrition the Consequence of which is Fermentation.
Patient; and the Agent operates upon the Patient, by moving powerfully against
the Parts of it: And in that Motion, the Parts of the one strike against, and
rub upon, the other; so far it may be called Attrition: And if by the force of
the Agent, the Motion, and consequently Attrition, be more violent; and the
consequence of that Attrition, be a Production of a Power to cause a Sensation
of Heat; so far it may be called Fermentation: If then* in causing the Heat of
the Blood, there be such a Motion and Attrition, and the consequence of it be
Heat; we may properly say, the Blood grows hot by Attrition and Fermentation.

But because, to signify the Heat of the Blood, by Attrition Attrition and the
consequence of it both to be signified by the Word Fermentation.
and Fermentation, would be needless; I would signify all that Action by
Fermentation: And when I say, the Blood grows hot by Fermentation, I would be
understood to mean and signify both that Attrition of Parts, which is the Cause
of Fermentation; and also Fermentation, which is the consequence of Attrition,
yet if any one would rather say, it grows hot by Accension; they have my
assent, provided they mean thereby, not so high a degree of Heat, as is usually
signified by that Word; but since it sounds rather too harsh, and implies too
high a degree of Attrition and Fermentation than that, which is commonly in the
Blood* I more willingly make choice of the former, viz. Fermentation.

And since I have said thus much of the Use of Words, applied How far the Heat
of the Blood proceeds from Pressure and Mixture.
to signify the Heat of the Blood; I shall here take Notice, of what was by way
of Discourse told me, by one, to whom I communicated, in some Measure, my
Notion concerning the Heat of the Blood; which was this. He said he thought he
could prove that it was done by Mixture and Pressure; and that he could explain
the Heat of the Blood, by that Notion.

I shall here conceal the Authors Name, because he has not made it public upon
this account, though upon some others to very little purpose; and because he
told me, he intended to publish it, I shall for his satisfaction, and also the
satisfaction of those, to whom he has communicated it, say; that as I have
shown, that in mechanical Actions there is a Motion, and by that Motion there
must be employed a Mixture, to any one that does but understand the Circulation
of the Humors in a Man's Body; and it will consequently follow, that where
there is a Mixture, and a Motion of Humors, there must needs be also an
Attrition of Parts, so moved; which Attrition implies a Pressure: For there can
be no Attrition, without a Pressure; though Pressure does not imply Attrition.
This is all he told me, and consequently all that I can Answer; but, for as
much as I could gather, from the remaining Part of his Discourse, the most
Essential Part of his Notion; but from what he said, it appearing not what
Pressure he meant, that is, a Pressure of what, whether of the Particles of
Blood with one another or not; and it being plain, that he did not believe,
that Animal Spirits circulated through the Nerves; I not only concluded that
his Pressure was only of the Particles of Blood; because there are none other
except Serum to mix with it; but also, that what he had to say for it was
rather about the Use of Words then any thing else; and therefore, I have showed
him how far his Words are significant in my Hypothesis.

But Words, whereby we signify the Heat of To dispute about Words is not
material in an Enquity after the causes of Things.
the Blood, being nothing at all to the Cause of it; and to dispute, whether it
may be called Accension or Fermentation not at all informing, what are the
Principal or Accessory Causes of it; I shall proceed to show, how it is begun
and carried on; and by what: That is, what Humors are Active, and what Passive,
in producing Heat, or a Power to Heat; and how they are so, and after what
manner; as also where they chiefly operate.

And that it may appear, we are to consider; The whole Body is made up of
Vessels and Humors contained in them.
that the material and corruptible Part of a Man, in which, the immaterial and
immortal is lodged, is made up of Solid and Liquid Parts; the Solid Parts are
all those Vessels, that make the Body a curious contrived Vascular Engine; which
are filled with, and actuated by, Liquids, and in which, they all circulate:
And as those Vessels carry different sorts of Liquids; so they are called by
different Names; Veins, Arteries, Nerves, etc. Through the Arteries and Veins,
the Mass of Blood continually circulates, and Animal Spirits through the Nerves.

The Veins and Arteries, being, as if it were, By what means the Spirits and
Blood are mixed in order ^o a Fermentation.
both rooted and springing from the Heart, are branched up and down the Body;
both through the External as well as Internal Parts, except those, that the
Vena Porta supplies; and the Nerves, taking their Original from the Brain and
spinal Marrow, are dispersed through the whole; and meeting with the capillary
Terminations of the Veins and Arteries, they being interwoven one with another,
terminate all together; and, as I Metaphorically expressed it, in my Treatise
of Muscular Motion, all terminate in small Glands; in the Cavities of which
both through the substance of the Muscles, as well as the Internal Parts, the
Arteries lay down Blood, and the Nerves either mediately, or immediately Animal
Spirits; and having there also proved, that a subtle Liquor, made and prepared
in these Glands by Formentation, was according to the different degrees of
Spirits, sent there by our Appetite, not only subtilized but thrust out by a
succession of Matter into the Fibers, and circulating through them, distends
'em, and by that means contracts the Muscles; and there also having shown, that
the Fermentation was caused, by a mutual Conflict of the Blood and Spirits; I
shall now in this Treatise endeavor to explain from that mutual Conflict, the
Heat of the Blood.

And because some, as yet doubt, whether Animal Animal Spirits demonstrated.
Spirits circulate through the Nerves, or not; and others, though they are
willing, and find it necessary to grant; that Spirits do really run through
them; yet profess that they cannot be demonstrated. I shall before I proceed to
show how the Heat of the Blood is caused, endeavor to demonstrate those
Spirits; and prove, that they circulate through the Nerves, as plainly as we
can by the help of our Reason, and the Testimony of our Senses, demonstrate
any, and the most apparent Things whatsoever.

For any one, that does but look into the Substance In the substance of the
Brain.
of the Brain, I think, needs neither doubt, nor be ignorant what the Animal
Spirits are, nor of their Nature, which appear as manifestly as the Humors of a
Man's Body.

But, perhaps it will be a hard Task to Viz. that Mucilaginous oily Moisture
which we call Brains.
persuade some, that that oily and clammy Moisture in the Brain, is Animal
Spirits; since it seems, as some say, to be as gross a Substance, as any Liquid
in the Body.

To this I answer, that if we take Animal Spirits, An Objection Answered.
or that Moisture in the Brain, and compare it with coagulated Blood, it is
much more fine and pure, and not half so tough and clammy; whereas, if it were
a more gross and sluggish Body, it would be a great deal more Viscid and
Phlegmatic.

But if we further compare the Taste of the That it is the most spirituous Part
of the Blood and consequently Animal Spirits proved.
Brain, with the Taste of the Blood, it will be evident; that that sweet
Substance is the Spirit of the Blood; and consequently that it is Animal
Spirit; For as the Blood is a sweet Mass, inpregnated with diverse sorts of
Salts, and Phlegmatic crude Serum; so the substance of the Brain is moistened
with an oily sweet Salino-Sulphureous Mass* free from those indigested Dregs,
that swim along with the Blood* being separated from those Impurities in the
cortical Part of the Brain, now if a Spirit partakes of the Nature of that
Body, it is separated or drawn from, this is an Argument strong enough to
convince any Rational Man, that that Moisture is the Spirit of the Body* since
we learn by our Taste, that it is the purest and most refined Part of the
Blood; as a Spirit ought to be.

But some think it too gross a Humor, to That oily Substance is capable of
performing all those Actions which we can suppose the Animal Spirits do.
perform all those Actions, which they think, the Animal Spirits do; yet if
they grant that the Mass of Blood is the Pabulum of the Animal Spirits, as I
think none can deny; since any considerable Evacuation of it, presently sinks
and diminishes them, then it will be very manifest, that those Spirits are
able to perform all those Actions, that we can truly suppose Animal Spirits to
do; for if by withdrawing that sweet Viscid Pabulum, that sweet oily
Mucilaginous Moisture in the Brain, be diminished, and upon that Diminution the
Animal Spirits are presently less vigorous; and on the contrary; if by
enriching the Blood, and consequently increasing the stock of Animal Spirits,
the Actions of the Body as well as of the Mind be stronger, we must
consequently believe, that they are moderately performed by them; when that
oily Substance, neither too plentifully abounds, nor is too much spent and
consumed.

But some People will not believe, That to Another Objection answered.
be Animal Spirit; because they say, they cannot get so much as one drop of it
out of the Vessels.

To which I answer, that if they deny it to be Animal Spirits, because they
cannot gather it in drops; by the same Reason they may deny Blood to be Blood,
because in small capillary Veins, when it is coagulated, it cannot be dropped
out: For not only the capillary sanguiferous Vessels are so small, that they
cannot be seen by good Microscopes, but also the Nervous Fibers are so
extremely diminutive and fine, that they have been computed to be fourscore
times as Fine as a Hair, and consequently the Liquor contained in each must be
so little, that five or six Hundred Vessels must be joined* together, to make
one Drop; so that, being separated and divided into very small Portions, by the
Intermixture of the Vessels, it is no sooner exposed to the Air, but is
immediately chilled and coagulated.

Which we may more easily believe, when we take Notice, how thin and fluid the
Mass of Blood is, as long as it is in a swift and constant Circulation, that if
a capillary Vessel be but pricked with a small Pin, Blood immediately spurts
out; yet how soon when exposed to the Air, does it thicken and coagulate,
though it be exposed in great Quantities* so that one would scarce think it fit
to move through Veins so small, that they cannot be discerned by the best
Microscopes; much rather then may the Animal Spirits, whose Portions are so
incomparably diminutive, be forthwith chilled and thickened, when they
immediately, as soon as they are exposed to the Air, are almost equalled with
Particles of Nitre.

But be it never so evident, that these are That these Spirits are in a
constant Motion proved.
the Animal Spirit's that are in the Brain; yet most deny them a constant and
free Circulation. But since we see, that Blood, which is much more gross and
thick, than Animal Spirits, when coagulated, as long as it is in a quick and
brisk Motion, can move through the smallest Capillaries, we have great Reason
to believe that the Animal Spirits would move much more swift, when separated
and preserved from the Nitre of the Air; and although they immediately thicken,
when exposed to the Air; yet are they much more thin and liquid, when in
Circulation.

But it is not only evident, that these Spirits are in a continual Motion, but
also highly necessary: For either they must be in Motion, or stagnate; and if
they should stagnate; they would in a short time corrupt and putrify. Besides,
since there is a continual and constant Supply, separated in the Cortical Parts
of the Brain, there must be a continual Decrease, or otherwise, there would be
no room to receive them, which Evacuation we can rationally imagine to be no
other way, but through the Branches of the Nerves; and also, because we
perceive the Effects of them in the Musculous Parts.

From hence it appearing that that oily Substance in the Brain is separated
from the Mass of Blood; being the sweetest and most spirituous Part of it; and
that it must needs circulate continually* through the Nerves; I shall now
consider the Nature of it, that we thence may gather more clearly the Manner of
it is Operation.

Which presently appears, if we do but consult The Nature of the Animal Spirits
considered.
our Taste, the Taste of it being oily, sweet and mucilaginous, that Substance
being made up of the most volatile sulphurous and salt Particles of the Mass
of Blood, which are incorporated, in some of the most digested and ripened
Serum of the Blood, and by that means appear in the Form of a Mucilage.

That these Spirits are made up of the finest Sulphurous Particles and the
most volatile Salts of the Blood, is apparently proved by our constant Diet;
for we always perceive our selves most full of Spirit after Meat that abounds
with Sulphur, volatile Salts and Oils; whereas all Acids, Austeres, etc. which
thicken Oil, and take of the Force of volatile Salt and Sulphur, depress our
Spirits and keep them too low.

That these Spirits are full of sulphurous oily Matter, is farther manifest,
by exposing the Brains of any Animal to the Air; because they presently grow
rancid and fetid.

It appearing then, that the Animal Spirits are an oily mucilaginous Substance,
abounding with the most volatile Salts and Sulphurs of the Blood; and that they
are in a continual Circulation from the Brain and spinal Marrow through the
Branches of the Nerves; and that being forcibly laid down in the Glands, there
meet with the Arterial Blood* I shall next endeavor to show, how the Heat of
the Blood is carried on and continued; which, I conceive, to be after this
Manner.

These oily Salino-Sulphureous Spirits, being violently driven The Reason of
the Heat of the Blood explained.
through the Nerves, meet with the Arterial Blood in the Glandules; and these
two Liquors being forcibly driven one against another, the Particles of them
are intimately mixed together; by which means the Animal Spirits are, as if it
were, ground and rubbed betwixt the fixed and more solid Particles of the
Blood; whereby they are minutely dissolved, and being put into a swift intestin
Motion, they endavour powerfully to expand themselves, and to fly away; but
being held in, and reverberated, by those grosser Particles; their Motion is by
that means inverted, and that Force, which, if they had but Liberty, would be
lost in a further Expansion, being inverted and driven forcibly upon the other
Particles, they mutually increase and promote one another Motion; by which
Motion the Blood, when it affects our Sensory, causes us to perceive Heat.

In carrying on of which, it is to be observed, that the Animal How it is Heat
is promoted.
Spirits being thus accidentally expanded, and put into Motion, by the grosser
Parts of the Blood, and being thus held in, and struck back, by them; does not
only by that Means fly back and increase each others Motion* but also hurry the
grosser Particles of the Blood along with them, and so increase their Motion,
and by striking against them, and knoking them together, break them, as if it
were into smaller Parts, and consequently ratify and expand Them also.

It is further to be observed, that as these Spirits The Heat of the Blood
varies according to the different Quantities of them.
are more or less in quantity, so (the gross Parts of the Blood, grinding them
together and putting them in Motion,) they more powerfully, or less vigorously
expand, and moving accordingly, digest and rarify the Mass of Blood to a higher
or lower Degree; and consequently, put the Parts of it into a stronger or
weaker Motion.

We may further take Notice also, that the sharper the Particles It varies also
according to the sharpness of those Humors that put the Animal Spirits into
Motion.
of the Blood are, so they corrode and grind the Spirits into Parts, with
greater Violence, and consequently sharpen their Motion.

Again, when the Mass of Blood is very full of, and plentifully The volatile
Salts and Sulphurs in the Mass of Blood make it more apt to be fermented.
abounds with, volatile Salts and Sulphur, the Particles of it, are with less
difficulty put into Motion by the Spirits; and joining with them, increase
their Motion; and, on the contrary, when the Mass of Blood is more dull and
phlegmatic, it neither so powerfully grinds the Animal Spirits, nor is so
easily put into Motion it self.

Furthermore, The Animal Spirits do not only according to Which is more or less
promoted according to the different Degrees of the Activity of the Spirits.
their different Quantities, differently exagitate the Mass of Blood; but also,
according to their different Degrees of Activity; whence the more volatile and
stronger the Spirits are, the more conspicuous are their Effects.

Lastly, we may take Notice, that neither the Animal Spirits, Neither the
Animal Spirits nor Arterial Blood are wholly Active or Passive.
nor the Mass of Blood, are altogether Active or Passive, in producing these
Effects; but mutually both of them, and by Turns.

Having premised this short Account of the Heat of the Blood, without any
manner of Proof, to the end, that we might have a more clear and entire View
how it was caused; without the Interruptions it would have made, to prove every
Paragraph as I proposed it; I shall now proceed to a Proof of what I have
proposed collectively, for the Material, Formal and Efficient Causes of it.

And First, That the Animal Spirits and Arterial Blood are both forcibly laid
down in the Glandules; I have given sufficient Reasons to evince, in my
Treatise of Muscular Motion, and have given further Proof of it here.

To prove then, that the Heat of the Blood does proceed That the Heat of the
Blood proceeds from Fermentation proved.
from that Fermentation, it being necessary to explain the mechanical Motion of
the Parts of those Liquors, that work mutually one upon another; I shall in the
next Place show, that the Heat of the Blood is caused by such a mechanical
Motion of Parts, as I have before mentioned.

That the Animal Spirits then are forcibly driven against the Arterial Blood,
is so self evident, that it needs no Proof; and if so, it must needs follow
that the Particles of the one will be intimately mixed with the other; and it
is undeniably True, that the Animal Spirits will by that means, be ground and
rubbed betwixt the Particles of the Blood, which are in Motion, and amongst
which, they are mixed; and the Animal Spirits, being of an oily
Salino-Sulphureous Nature will consequently be expanded and rarefied, and put
by that means into a swifter degree of Motion, is evident; whether we consider
the Effects, that solid or liquid Substances have on one another, when in
Motion; for Amber, by a violent Attrition of it is Parts against a woollen
Cloth, feels hot; the Sulphurous fat Effluviums being by that Attrition
increased, and caused to fly out in greater Quantities. It is evident also, by
striking of a piece of Flint against Steel, that the sulphurous Particles of
the Flint, being, as if it were disyok'd from the Embraces of the more firm and
solid Particles of the Stone, and being rubbed and ground betwixt them are put
into a violent Motion; which causes them so much to rarify and expand, that
whenever they affect our Sensory, they cause that Sensation we call Heat; which
is accordingly violent, as their degrees of Motion are more or less intense;
and so Amber, by a mild Attrition is moderately warm, and by a violenter, more
sensible.

Again, It is observable in the turning of any large and That Heat proceeds
from Attrition further proved.
weighty Wheel, where the extraordinary Weight makes such a forcible Pressure
of those Parts that lie about the Axle-tree, that by strong and frequent
Attritions of the Parts together, the crude Sulphur, which is fettered up in
the Substance of the Wood, is by degrees loosned and dissolved, and being put
into Motion is rarefied and expanded; which being still ground betwixt the
solider Parts of the Wood, it is Parts are yet put into so strong a Motion, that
they break and dissolve that solid Substance, and by creating a Flame consume
and burn it.

In like manner, the Particles of Fire being applied to Gunpowder, by
dissolving and grinding of it is Parts in Pieces, and putting them into a
violent Motion, cause them to expand and explode.

But not only solid Bodies cause Heat, by Not only solid Bodies but also
Liquids grow hot by an Attrition of their Particles.
grinding of volatile sulphurous Particles betwixt them, and so by putting
them into Motion; but also the Patticles of Liquids, by grinding one upon
another, put themselves into so violent a Motion, as not only to cause Heat;
but sometimes so high a degree of it, as actual Flame; as, when Spirit of Wine
and Oil of Turpentine are mixed together: And that Heat proceeds from an
Attrition of sulphurous Particles, and their violent Motion; I have not only
brought Instances enough to make it appear, but have sufficiently proved it
before in my Answer to Dr. Willis's Opinion.

And now, since not only Solid, but also Liquid, Bodies grow hot, by an
Attrition of their more volatile and sulphurous Particles, betwixt the more
gross ones, and since there appears from what I have before said, but one way,
by which all Bodies grow hot; we must needs conclude, that the volatile
salino-sulphureous Particles of the Spirits grow hot, by being ground betwixt
the grosser Particles of Arterial Blood; and that those, by putting the whole
Mass into a more violent Agitation, cause the Heat of the Blood.

But some will perhaps say, that in all those Phenomenon, I have mentioned,
these grosser Parts of Matter, which grind upon the sulphurous Particles, are
put into Motion by something else: But they do not perceive, how the grosser
Parts of the Blood are put into Motion first.

To which I answer, that the Particles of the The Particles of (...) of these
Humors are first put into Motion by Circulation.
Mass of Blood, are put into Motion by that force, which is always inseparably
joined with Circulation; so that in a Man's Body, as there is a continual
Circulation of Humors; so there is of Causes; for the Fermentation, in the
musculous Glands, is raised by the Mass of Blood, grinding the Animal Spirits
betwixt the Parts of it; in which Fermentation a subtle Liquor is prepared,
which being forced into the Fibers of the Heart, cause it to contract; which
Contraction forces the Blood, and consequently the Nervous Juice, through their
distinct Vessels; and so causes them again to meet, and ferment a second time,
in the Glandules; and as Circulation is preserved and carried on by the subtle
Liquor, which is continually prepared in this Fermentation, so the Particles of
the Blood are mixed with the Spirits, and preserved in Motion by Circulation.

Having thus showed, that the Heat of the Blood may as probably proceed from
Attrition, as Heat in any other Bodies; since Heat is nothing else, in respect
of that which causes the Sensation, than a quick intestin Motion of Parts, and
since those can be put into Motion no other way but by Attrition; I should in
the next Place prove, that the Particles of refined and rarefied Matter always
expand and endeavor That the Particles of refined and rarefied Matter, are by
an Inversion of their Motion put into a higher degree of it proved.
to fly away but, being reverberated by the Opposition of those gross ones,
with which they swim, their Motion is inverted, and by that means much
increased. But it is so evidently True, that it needs not; for we always
observe, that where any two Bodies meet together, and strike against one
another, that which is less yields to that which is most solid, and makes the
strongest Opposition; this is manifest in Flame it self, as also in the
Expansion of Gunpowder; for if a Gun be shot against a Wall, the Flame of the
expanded Gunpowder striking against it, presently flies back again, and, by
mixing with that, which immediately follows it, increases the force of it; and
for this Reason, a Gun which is charged with a greater weight of Shot, more
forcibly recoils; the Powder not finding free Liberty to expand, but flying
backward with a greater Force: It is also further evident, from the Reason
which I have given, why Nitre is beneficial-in continuing Flame, and making it
more vigorous.

The gross Parts of the Blood, having thus put How the Animal Spirits rarifie
the Blood.
the Animal Spirits into a swift Motion, and by inverting them in their Motion,
having caused them to increase one another Motion; the Spirits at last, set
upon the Mass of Blood, and by breaking and dissolving the Particles of it,
rarifie them and cause them to expand also; so the Rays of the Sun, being in a
swift Motion, and gathered into a Point by a burning Glass, grow more vigorous,
so as to dissolve and burn even solid Bodies; and after the like manner Flame,
by the force of it, subtilizeth and attenuates the Sulphurous Parts of it is
Fuel, neither does it only rarifie and expand the Sulphurous Matter of it is
Fuel, but also carries violently the Ashes of the calcined Matter along with
it, where it may be observed, that as the Particles of Animal Spirits are not
in so strong a Motion, as those of Fire, so the Particles of the Blood are
moved with a more easy force, then Ashes which are far more Solid.

But for a further Proof, that the Mass of Blood grows hot, in a That the
Animal Spirits according to their different quantities differently exagitate
the Mass of Blood proved.
Natural state, by the Methods and Ways, which I have endeavored to explain; I
shall in the next place prove, that the Animal Spirits, being put into Motion,
according to their different Quantities, differently expand themselves, and
exagitate the Mass of Blood, and put it is Parts in a more violent or weaker
Motion, and consequently increase or diminish the Heat of it.

And this is easily manifest, if we do but observe, that young By the
observation of People of different Ages.
and healthful People, whose Nerves as well as the Fountains from whence they
spring, are full of, and abound with, Spirits, are always of a more brisk and
vigorous Heat then People of a declining Age, whose Nerves are less plentifully
stocked with them.

But it is not only observable in People of different As also by different
Constitutions.
Ages, but also in different Constitutions, that as the Pabulum of the Animal
Spirits is more plentiful and yields a more constant and large Supply; so the
Heat of the Blood is more powerful and intense; as in cold and Phlegmatic
Constitutions, where the Mass of Blood abounds, with dull Phlegmatic Humors,
or Acid and Austere Juices, of too close and compact Texture, and a large
Supply of Spirits is denied; the Blood is not of so hot a Temper, as in
Choleric Constitutions; whence it evidently appears, that the Heat of the
Blood depends on the Vigor of the Animal Spirits; for if when the Vessels are
filled with Spirits and plentifully supply the Glands, that Fermentation is
raised higher, and by that means the Heat of the Blood is accordingly
increased, it is a most certain Conclusion, that the Heat of the Blood depends
upon the Effects, that the Animal Spirits have in that Fermentation.

Which is further confirmed, by the common And the Practical Part of Physic.
and constant Practice of all Physicians; for when the Natural Heat, as some
call it, is languid and weak, and almost extinguished; they give such
Medicines, as increase the Heat of the Blood, by renewing the Vigor of the
Spirits; whence to People that are almost a dying, their Spirits being dulled
or exhausted, nothing is more usual then to give them Spirits of Hartshorn How
Spirit of Hartshorn raises the Pulse.
or of Armonick-salt, or some other Saline or Sulphurous Spirits, which
presently joining with those in the Nerves, increase the Fermentation in the
Glands, and by that means put the Mass of Blood into a more swift Exagitation;
and by raising the Fermentation, not only renew Circulation, but the Heat of
the Blood.

On the contrary, when the Animal Spirits are too high and That the Spirits
according to their different Degrees of Activity variously exagitate the Mass
of Blood.
volatile, or too much in Quantity, they raise this Fermentation so high, that
the Blood is presently put into a Preter-natural Heat; from whence proceeds
that Preter-natural Heat in Fevers: And the way, that Physicians either do, or
can take, in such Cases is, either to take down the Animal Spirits, by
withdrawing Part of their Pabulum, and by Acids given internally, to harden the
Texture of the Blood, and make it less subject to grow too Hot by Fermentation;
or otherwise by cooling and fixing those predominant Spirits, and evacuating
other accessory Causes, by proper Excretories and Emuctories of the Body.

Lastly, That the more any rarefied Sulphurous Body is expanded betwixt the
more gross and solid Parts of Matter, those gross ones are put into a stronger
Motion, is evident from a Musket charged with Shot, which, with a small
quantity of expanded Matter, will scarce be moved; but by a greater quantity of
exploded Matter, are put into so swift a Motion, that they fly forcibly a
considerable way.

Having thus far proved, what I proposed, to be reasonable The sharper the
Particles of Blood are the more they corrode the Spirits and put them into
Motion.
and likely, and nothing but what is consonant to the Practice of most Rational
Physicians; I proceed to show, that the sharper the Particles of the Blood are,
they corrode and grind the Spirits into small and minute Particles with a great
deal more Violence, and by that means cause them to expand more vigorously, and
by putting them into a strong Motion, cause a higher Degree of Heat.

This is sufficiently proved by the Preter-natural Effects, that The Keason of
flushing heats, in the Scurvy.
Scorbutic Salts cause in some People; for when the Mass of Blood is
impregnated with Acid Acrid Humors, these, meeting with the Spirits, cause
Preter natural flushing Heats; which appear in several Parts of the Body, and
sometimes in the whole; which are so violent, that those, that are affected
with them, complain; that they feel themselves as Hot, as if they were in a
Stew or a Bagnio.

That this Preter-natural Heat proceeds from Corrosive Salt Humors, fermenting
with the Spirits, is very manifest; since these Symptoms are only curred, by
such Medicines as correct the Acidity and Acrimony of the Blood, viz. When it
most partakes of Acrimony by sweet diaphoretick Decoctions, or some sort of
Acids, which dull and take off their corroding Edges, or when they are more
Acid, by volatile Salts that carry them off by Sweat or Urine; or by Acid
Absorbers, which by correcting the Acidities of the Pancreatick Juice, leave
the Ferment of the Liver more predominant; and the bitter Choler, being by that
means bred a great deal more plentifully, digests and carries off those crude
Humors, which by the aforesaid means being made thin enough, to go off by Urin
and insensible Transpiration, are dispersed and carried off those ways; and the
Mass of Blood, being cleansed of those sharp Humors, is reduced to a healthful
State.

If then by considering the Nature of those Medicines, that Proved by comparing
the Nature of the Medicines that oppose it and correct it.
correct vicious Humors, we may learn to know what is the Nature of those
Humors; we must conclude, that whatever is corrected by Medicines directly
contrary to Acrimony, the nature of that Humor is Acrid; and when, by the Use
of volatile Salts, the distempered Humors of our Bodies, are attenuated, and
disposed to Evacuation, and at the same time we know, that volatile Salts by
volatizing and preparing the superfluous fixed Acid Acrid Humors of the Mass of
Blood, dispose them to be carried off, we have all the Reason imaginable to
conclude, that when we find those Medicines carry off such Symptoms, that they
are caused by such Humors,

And that these flushing Heats in the Scurvey, proceed from Acrid Acid Humors
is plain, because all Salt Meat, that abounds with Acids; and all sharp Acrid
Bear, that has an Acrid Fluid Salt predominant in it, as also Vinegar and such
like, make those Symptoms more violent.

If then, both from the Method of Cure, and the Cause it self augmented by such
Sorts of Juices, we gather they proceed from sharp Acrid Acid Humors, we may be
certain, that those Symptoms are caused by such Humors grinding and corroding
the Animal Spirits, and that by putting them into a Preter-natural Motion, they
are the Causes of such Sensations.

And that those Sensations only proceed from thence, we may easily conceive;
for since, as long as those Humors circulate with the Mass of Blood, and
forcibly meet with the Animal Spirits, they can only affect them, by moving
amongst them; they must needs put them into a more swift Motion, and an unusual
Expansion, by corroding and grinding them more powerfully, betwixt their
Particles, which is evident from the cause of those flushing Heats I just now
mentioned, and from the Reason I have before given of Heat.

But that the sharper the Mass of Blood is, the more the Animal Spirits are
ground and expanded betwixt the Particles of it, is evident from Reason it
self; for it being proved before, that the Heat of the Blood proceeds from a
swift intestin Motion of the Particles of the Blood and Spirits, caused by
Attrition; nothing is more Reasonable than that the more solid the Mass of
Blood is, the stronger the Attrition is, and consequently the Motion of
Particles, which upon our sensory cause heat, must be more violent; and as in
striking of a Flint with a piece of Steel, the more firm and hard the Steel is,
the more powerfully it loosneth the Texture of the Flint, and strongly
expanding it is Sulphurous Particles, puts them into that Motion, which
constitutes Flame; so by Parity of Reason, we may expect, that the Particles of
Blood will cause the Sulphurous volatile Parts of the Spirits, to expand more
powerfully, the more solid and compact they are.

And that the Texture and Constitution of Saline Humors, is more Solid, and
their Parts more Corroding, than of a sweet Balsamic Liquor, I think, none can
deny, who compares Vinegar and Spirit of Vitriol with Tincture of Sulphur, and
although in Fevers, where the Blood abounds with too much exalted Sulphur,
Spirit of Vitriol and other Acids, cool the Blood, by fixing the Spirits, and
Coagulating the Sulphur; yet when the Blood is impregnated with Scorbutic
Salts, Acidity joining with Acrimony, causes Heat, by corroding the Spirits,
when they want a Mixture of crude Sulphur, to dull their Edges, of which it
would be no difficulty to convince, those that are considerably troubled with
scorbutic Symptoms.

But furthermore, I shall prove that the Mass of Blood, the more That as the
Blood as more or less Volatile, it is Parts are put more or less easily into
Motion proved.
it abounds with volatile Salts and Sulphurs, is more easily put into a violent
Heat; and that it is Particles being more easily put into Motion, readily join
with the Animal Spirits, and increase theirs; and that on the contrary, the
more dull and phlegmatic any Body is, the less apt are it is Particles to be put
in Motion.

And as it is commonly taken notice of, in all Bodies, so it is not less
observable in the Mass of Blood; for we always find, that the least quantity of
any volatile Liquor inflames the Blood of those, that are of a tender and open
Constitution, much sooner then phlegmatic and melancholy Peoples, and as the
former is evident in those that are subject to Fevers; so the latter is not
less remarkable in those of cold Constitutions; for to increase the natural
Heat of their Blood, when it is too much depressed, it is not only necessary to
take away some of those crude Humors, which stuff up the Vessels, and too much
depress the Spirits; but also, by volatile and spirituous Medicines, to increase
the Spirits; and at the same time, to exalt and spiritualize the Blood, by
absorbing Acids, and exalting the volitile and subtle Parts, to render them
predominant.

Moreover, that the Animal Spirits do not only according And that it is
differently promoted according to teir different Degrees of Activity of the
Spirits.
to their different Quantities, and the different State of the Blood, variously
exagitate and increase the Heat of it; but also, according to their different
Degrees of Activity and Strength is put beyond Dispute by the different Effects
that Spirit of Wine, or Aquamirabilis, has upon us from Sack which any one
that does but taste must soon acknowledge.

It remains in the next Place, that I should How far the Blood and Spirits are
Active or Passive.
show, how far the Animal Spirits are Active, and how far Passive, in causing
these Effects, as well as the Blood, which evidently appears from what I have
already said: For when the Spirits and Blood are forcibly driven together, then
they seem to be mutually Active and Passive, the Spirits being forced betwixt
the Particles of the Blood, and vice versa; but the Animal Spirits being ground
and rarefied betwixt the Particles of the Blood, are so far Passive; but being
by that means expanded, by a powerful expansive and elastic Motion exagitate
the Mass of Blood, and by that means are active; so that throughout the whole
Process it appears, that neither of them singly are altogether Active or
Passive, but both, mutually and by turns.

From what I have said it appearing, how the How the Heat of the Blood is
continued.
Heat of the Blood is caused; I shall in the next Place proceed to show, how it
is continued; which will be sufficiently evident, if we do but consider, that
the Animal Humors are in a constant and continual Circulation; for since all
the Blood in a Man's Body, is allowed to circulate through the Heart, several
times in an hour; and that the Blood from thence is continually forced and
dispersed through the Parts of the Body, and so great a Quantity of Blood is at
one Pulsation, laid down in the whole Habit of the Body, and ferments at the
same time, with the Animal Spirits; there must needs be raised in the Blood, a
considerable Heat, or in other Words, the Parts of the Blood and Spirits must
of necessity be put into, so swift and intense a Degree of Motion, as to enable
them to produce an extraordinary Heat, when they strike upon our Sensory. The
whole Mass then circulating thus, through the Extremities of the Vessels, there
is not only a great deal of Blood fermented, every Pulsation; but also by a
continual Succession of Pulsations, the Blood, being forced into a
Fermentation, by the expansive Motion of the Spirits, is by that Means
preserved in a constant and continual Heat.

But I know, here will some Difficulties offer themselves, and Some Objections
considered and answered.
perhaps some may doubt, whether the Blood only ferments in the Extremities of
the Vessels, and not in the Vessels themselves; and since it is hot in the
Arteries, before it be laid down in the Glands, as well as in the Veins after
Fermentation; they may think it reasonable to conclude, that wherever it
ferments, there it is Fermentation is caused; and because there is a great deal
of Blood betwixt their Extremities, and the larger Vessels; they may think,
that the Fermentation in the Extremities, cannot be the Cause of the Heat of
the Blood in the larger Vessels; it being an old Maxim, that, toll Causam
tollitur Effectus; which is as much as to say, the Cause immediateley goes
before the Effect.

Another Doubt which perhaps may arise will be, that since I affirm, that there
is such a mutual Action and Passion in the Attrition of these Humors, in order
to a Fermentation; whether Fermentation can be carried on, in such a manner, in
so short a Time, as the quick Circulation, and consequently Protrusion of the
Blood from the Extremities of the Vessels admits?

As to the First, To wit, whether the Fermentation of the The first Objection
answered, viz. whether the Heat of the Blood be chiefly caused in the
Extremities of the Vessels.
Blood be caused in the Extremities of the Vessels, or the large ones; I
affirm, that it is chiefly and originally caused in the Extremities of the
Vessels, just where the Nerves and Arteries meet, and where their contents are
first mixed together; and that the Fermentation in the larger Vessels is but a
Continuation of the Effects of the same Original Cause; and as when Water is
heated over a Fire, that Part of the Water, which is at the top of the Vessel
that contains it, is as truly said to receive it is Heat from the Fire, as that
in the Bottom, so that Blood which is in the Body of the Vena Cava is as really
put into a Fermentation, by a Mixture of Spirits, as that in the Extremities;
for the Animal Spirits, being mixed with the Arterial Blood in the Glands, and
ground betwixt their Particles, and being by that means put into an elastick
and expansive Motion, they powerfully ferment and exagitate the whole Mass.
This Blood then, so fermented, is thrust out of the Glands, by a Succession of
Matter forced in the next Pulsation, and so forwards, by the next,
successively, till it be driven into the Vena Cava.

Now as soon as it is thrust out of the Glands, those Spirits which did so
powerfully expand before, and the remaining Part of them, which are not mixed
with that subtle Liquor, that circulates through the Fibers; being yet further
corroded and exagitated by Pulsation, still continue to expand themselves, and
by that means, keep the Blood in a continual Heat.

And the Animal Spirits being yet more expanded, do not only continue, but in a
great Measure increase the Heat of it.

But these Spirits, being frequently opposed The Reason why the Heat of the
Blood in time decays.
in their Expansion, by striking against the Blood, loose in a short time a
great deal of their Vigor, the Particles that before grund the Animal Spirits
betwixt them, obstructing their Motion; and the Animal Spirits, not being able
any longer to keep them in a just Motion, sufficient to continue the Heat,
which is Natural to human Blood; they are, as if it were, linked and fettered
up, betwixt those grosser Parts, and are incorporated into one Substance with
them, which is the Reason, that the Blood by frequent Circulations, is ripened
and digested; and for this Reason the flesh of a Hare grows tenderer, by being
coursed along time.

The Blood, being thus impregnated with Animal Spirits, and by that means
wanting Spirits in a free and strong Motion, would by degrees grow cold; but
the Intervals of time, while the Blood moves from the Extremities of the
Vessels to the Heart, and from the Heart to the Extremities of the Vessels
again, being very short; before there can be any sensible or considerable Decay
of it, the Blood is anew fermented in the Glands; and so by a continual
Circulation, the Heat of the Blood is preserved; and because by this time the
Animal Spirits mixed in the first Fermentation with the Blood, are almost
spent, being incorporated with it; and because Part of it is continually
separated in the Brain, it meets a second time with new Supplies, and also by
repeated Fermentations is more impregnated with Spirits as well as digested and
ripened to a higher Degree of Maturity.

Thus I have given an Account, how the Heat of the Blood is carried on in the
Vessels, that it might more clearly appear, how the Original Cause of Heat is
principally in the Glands.

That the Animal Spirits are put into an elastick And that Reason proved.
Motion in the Glands, I have before proved, by the grosser Particles of the
Blood; and that the Blood, so fermented, is successively cast out into the
Veins, is plain enough, to any one that does but understand Circulation; to
prove then, that the Blood, being thrust out of the Glands, does by a further
Expansion of those Spirits, for a while increase the Fermentation; and that,
when the Vigor of the Spirits is spent, it will gradually decay; we need but
take Notice, how Fermentation is begun and carried on in other Liquors; for
when oil of Vitriol and Spirit of Ammoniac Salt are mixed together, the Parts
of each being in some measure mixed, and put into Motion, by dropping the one
into the other, they presently begin to ferment; which fermentation is
gradually exalted, till by a frequent Collision and Attrition, the most
Fermentative Parts fly away, or their Vigor is lost; and then Fermentation
gradually decreaseth; and in like manner, all other Liquors, that for a time
ferment with a sensible Heat.

But if possible, it will further appear, that the Original and Principal Cause
of Fermentation is in the Glands, if we do but consider, how Fermentation is
carried on in a dying Body.

For in a Body that is about to die, the Vigor as well as How Fermentation is
carried on in a dying Body, and the Reason why it cease when it is quite dead.
Quantity of Animal Spirits, being diminished, and those too, being less
vigorously grund, betwixt the Parts of the Arterial Blood, expand so weakly,
that they scarce agitate the Mass of Blood, sufficiently to preserve it is Heat,
but as soon as the Blood and Spirits cease to circulate, the Heat of the Blood
presently grows milder, till at last it is quite extinguished.

Now, if when the Fermentation is weak, the Heat of the Blood is more remiss
and depressed; and when Circulation is stoped, it consequently cease; it must
needs follow, that the Animal Spirits are the Cause of that Fermentation; and
that it is promoted by driving those two Liquors forcibly together; and that
the Fermentation is chiefly caused in the Glands, is plain, because when the
Spirits and Blood cease to be driven together, and there fermented, the Heat of
the Blood decreaseth; and that it is not in the Vessels is evident, because
after Circulation is stoped, it presently declines, whereas if it were caused
in the Vessels, it would continue after Death as well as before; since, it then
has the same Matter, though it wants Circulation and a forcible Mixture; and
what I have showed to be the Consequences of it.

I shall only bring one Argument more to prove, that the Another Argument to
prove, that the Heat of the Blood depends on, and is caused by, Attrition.
Heat of the Blood depends upon the Attrition and Fermentation in the
Glandules; which may be inferred from this common Observation, that the Heat of
the Blood is increased by all violent Motion: For upon all violent Motion, a
larger Quantity of Animal Spirits, being sent to the Parts to be moved, in
order to prepare a greater Quantity of subtle Liquor, to distend and dilate
the Fibers; the Fermentation is not only raised higher in the Glandules, but
the Motion of the Heart, being thus accidentally increased, quickens the
Circulation of the Blood so much, that before the vigorous Motion of it is
Parts, which was raised in the precedent Fermentation is spent; it is again
renewed.

But the Circulation of the Blood is not only quickened by the Contractions of
the Heart; but also by the frequently repeated Contractions of the Muscles: For
the Heart contracting sends it out into the musculous Parts; and again, those
Muscles drive it sooner and more forcibly back upon the Heart; from whence it
appears, that both the Heat of the Blood is increased, by being often fermented
in those Glandules, and consequently, that it depends on the Mixture and
Fermentation of the Animal Spirits, and Arterial Blood.

From hence it is manifest, how far Circulation is beneficial, Fermentation and
Circulation mutually depend on one another.
in carrying on the Heat of the Blood; and if we consider the Reason, which I
have given of Muscular Motion; we shall see, that as Fermentation depends on
Muscular Motion, so Muscular Motion depends on Fermentation; so that, as I said
before, there is a continual Chain and Circulation of Causes as well as Humors
in a Man's Body.

To proceed therefore to the second Objection, I supposed some The second
Objection answered, viz. That Fermentation may be performed in so short a time
as the Circulation of the Blood admits.
might raise, viz. Whether this Fermentation can be carried on, in so short a
time as a continual and quick Circulation will admit: This does not only appear
Possible from evident Matter of Fact; but also if we consider, that in much
less Time than what is allowed for Fermentation in the Glandules, if a Spark of
Fire be put to Gunpowder, it immediately puts it is Parts into an Explosion;
and that the Blood not only ferments in so short a time, but that it may
prepare that subtle Matter, which circulates through the Muscular Fibers, we
may, with a great deal of Reason believe, if we do but take notice; that warm
Milk, if it be but forcibly milked into Vinegar, it presently is separated into
two Parts* viz. Curd and Whey. If then by mixing these two Liquors, they cause
so great a Change on one another; I cannot conceive any Reason, why Part of the
Animal Spirits, fermenting with the Blood, may not as soon be mixed with some
Part of the rarefied Succus Nutritious, and forced forward into the Fibers.

But from what I have said, it appearing, that The Blood is more powerfully
fermented in the substance of the Heart than in any proportionable Part of the
Body besides.
the Heat of the Blood Is caused in the Glandules by Fermentation; and how it
is continued in the Musculous Parts; I shall in the next Place consider, in
what Parts it is most vigorously fermented; which will appear only by
considering where the Spirits are most plentifully laid down; for if
Fermentation depends on, and is chiefly caused by, the Animal Spirits, as I
have shown; then it must needs follow, that the Heat of the Blood is most
promoted in those Parts, where Animal Spirits are most predominant. And having
proved that in order to prepare that subtle Liquor, which causes Contractions
of the Muscles, a greater Quantity of Animal Spirits is sent there, it will
follow* that the Blood grows hotest, being most vigorously fermented in those
Parts that are in Motion; and then it will follow, that the Heart being a Part*
in constant Motion, and that Motion proceeding from a successive Supply of
Spirits, the Blood must needs acquire the most considerable Degree of Heat, in
the Substance of it.

But although I say that the Blood, for these Reasons, acquires a greater Heat
in the Heart, then in any other Part; I would not be thought to mean, that it
grows hot so in the Ventricles of the Heart: For the Use of the Heart, being
only to force the Blood out of it, and by dilating to receive it in again, for
another Expulsion, and so to keep it in Circulation, it can get no great Heat
there; since it wants Spirits to ferment with it; but I only mean, that
considering the Substance and Dimensions of the Muscular Part of the Heart, and
that small Portion of Blood contained in the Arteries dispersed through it,
that that Blood acquires a greater Heat than that Quantity of Blood does in
another Part, that is not in Motion.

But there being, besides Muscular Parts, many Fermentation is not only
promoted in the Muscular Parts, but also in the internal Bowels.
considerable Internal Parts, in a Man's Body, in which a great Number of Blood
Vessels are distributed, it perhaps will be asked, whether Fermentation be
carried on in these too? To which I answer, that Animal Spirits and Arterial
Blood, being either mediately or immediately, laid down in them all, there must
needs be a Fermentation; which being proved, upon such Premises, by what I have
already said, there is no need I should repeat it again.

But since Anatomists have not as yet discovered Nerves to be distributed
through the Liver, although Blood be communicated to it, by the Vena Porta,
which supplies the Office of an Artery to the Liver, it perhaps may be doubted,
whether Fermentation is carried on after the same Manner there; and
consequently, whether the Office of the Liver be performed by Fermentation* or
not; that it is, I shall show hereafter, and also how the Glands in that Part,
are supplied with Spirits.

From what I have hitherto said, it appears, what are necessary to continue the
Heat of the Blood; and also, what is the Cause of it.

For First, It is necessary* that the Animal Spirits and Blood Three things
requisite to continue the Heat of the Blood.
should be in a continual Circulation, that being forcibly driven together*
their Particles might be intimarely mixed one with another. And*

Secondly, That the Animal Spirits should be grund betwixt the Parts of the
Mass of Blood, that they may be thereby rarefied and expanded, and their
Particles put into a swift Motion. And,

Thirdly, It is requisite, that the Animal Spirits, should be of an oily
Sulphurous volatile Temper; that being more easily rarefied and expanded, they
may be presently put into Motion, and cause the whole Mass to ferment.

Having then explained the Heat of the Blood, and proved it agreeable to these
Circumstances; I am for the Reasons, before mentioned, persuaded to believe,
that the Heat of the Blood thus proceeds from Fermentation.

OF THE USE OF THE LUNGS.
FOR as much as appears from the Books of several Learned Men; the Use of the
Lungs has not been hitherto indisputable, no more than the Use of other Parts:
For as there are several Opinions concerning others, so there are no less
Disputes about this; whilst some would have it to be, only a sort of Fan to
cool and air the Blood: And others, that it was designed to kindle and put the
Blood into a Flame, by continually supplying it with Nitre.

Whether of these is most probable, may easily be gathered, by considering the
Effects that Air has upon us: For since the Air is continually drawn in, and
thrust out again, in Respiration, any one that does but know, what Effects it
has upon himself, cannot be ignorant of the Use of the Lungs, in respect of
the Heat of the Blood, evidently finding himself cooled by it; and if any one,
that, by daily Experience, finds that it cools him, can conclude thence, that
it kindles and promotes the Heat of the Blood, he may be pleased with his
Notion, but no Body else will with such as contradict self-evident Truth.

But that it may appear, how far the Lungs may be said to be a Fan or
Ventilabrum to the Blood; and whether the Air promotes the Heat of it or not; I
shall take this Method; First, consider the Use of the Lungs with respect to
the Rational Soul; and Secondly, with respect to the Body.

The Use of the Lungs, with a more immediate Respect to The Use of the Lungs in
Respect of the Soul.
the Soul, appears to be nothing else, but as a large capacious Vessel, endued
with a Cavity, to contain a great Quantity of Air: so that it performs the same
Office in the Body, as a Pair of Bellows to Organs: For as in Organs, the
Bellows supply Pipes of different sizes with Air, and that being driven through
them, produces different Sounds; so the Lungs dilated and extended by the
Motion of the Thorax, and being full of Air, contract; and accordingly as the
Pharinx and it is Parts are differently modulated; so the Air forcibly driven
through them, causes different Voices.

In which Action, the Lungs seem chiefly to be an Organ Is to express all it is
Conceptions and Reasoning.
made, on purpose, to be serviceable to the rational Soul, to express all it is
Conceptions and Reasons; and to form Voices or Articulate Sounds, to signify
those Notions contained in, and apprehended by, it; that those Things, which
must otherwise remain in silence, might be communicated, to promote a mutual
Commerce and Conversation amongst Men.

But here some may ask, if it be chiefly designed to form articulate Sounds, as
it really seems to be, why do we take our Breath continually? Or why are our
Spirits constantly consumed, by keeping the Part in a perpetual Motion? Since
sometimes we use it very little for a long time, to express any Thing by; one
half of our Lives, and the larger too, being passed away in Silence.

To which it may be answered, that it is necessary, the Lungs Why the Lungs
ought to be in a continual Motion is because.
should be in a constant, and continual Motion, that they might be kept in
readiness, to express what and whenever, we have a Mind.

Another Reason is, that since the Cavities of the Lungs, are It carries off
that Superfluous Moisture that supplies them.
constantly supplied, with a serous Lympha, to moisten their Coats, and to
moderate the Acrimony of the Air, it is necessary there should be a constant
and continual Respiration, to carry that serous Lympha off; which would
otherwise stuff up the Bladders of the Lungs, that they would be incapable of
receiving Air; but every Inspiration, that superfluous Moisture being mixed and
incorporated with the Air, is by every Expiration carried off; which prevents
those ill Consequences, which would otherwise follow.

Another Reason why the Lungs ought to be always in And that their voluntary
Motion might less Preternaturally affect our Bodies.
Motion, is, least they should Preter-naturally affect and disturb the
Constitution of our Bodies, when put in Motion, as we have a mind to express
our selves; for if the Lungs were at other times quiet and still, our Bodies
would be put into such Disorder, by violent and sudden Motions, that we should
be as unfit to discourse of any thing, as one that is in a Fit of the Epilepsie;
but our Bodies being accustomed to it, and it being made agreeable and
consistent with Circulation of the Blood; becomes less troublesome, when we
have occasion for Extraordinary Respirations.

For these Reasons it is plain, why the Lungs ought to be in a continual
Reciprocal Motion, the first of which is self-evident and needs no further
Proof; and the second is sufficiently evinced by the Consequences, that follow,
when this Lympha is not evacuated.

When it is too thick, or too much in Quantity; or on the other What Effects it
causes when too thick, and also why thick foggy Air is troublesome to some
People.
side, the Air, which we breath is too thick and moist; and it is not duly
carried off; there follow Obstructions of the Ducts of the Trachea from whence
proceed Symptoms of an Asthma, Orthopnaea and Duspnaea, some sorts of
Phthisicks, and a great many more dangerous Symptoms.

For when it is too thick, it sticks fast to the Coats of the Lungs, and not
being easily enough mixed and incorporated with the Air, the Quantity of it
increases; till it stuffs up the Cavity of the Lungs; and when it is too much
in Quantity, though it be thin enough; yet the Air being not able to carry it
off fast enough, it runs down the sides of those tender Vessels, and by a
gentle Irritation, raises a tickling Cough: Lastly, when the Humor, that
moistens the Lungs, is almost Natural as to Quality and Quantity; yet if the
Air be thick and moist, it, being so much impregnated with it is own Moisture,
is incapable of carrying off the Moisture, supplied by the Serum of the Blood;
whence People that are inclined to Obstructions of their Lungs, in foggy and
moist Air, find them more oppressed; that Moisture which ought to be carried
off, being left behind.

But if we consider further the Use of the Lungs, with respect to The Use of
the Lungs in respect of the Body.
the Body; we shall find other Reasons, not only why it should be in a constant
Motion; but also, we may understand, why we cannot live without a continual and
free Circulation.

For in respect of the Body, the Lungs seem in some Measure Seems to be to
perform the Office of another Heart.
to perform the Office of another Heart; and as the left Ventricle of the Heart
contracting, sends out the Blood into all the Parts of the Body, by the
Ramifications of the Sanguiferous Vessels, so the Lungs contracting, force the
Blood, contained in the Sanguiferous Vessels, which are distributed through
their Lobes, into the left Ventricle of the Heart; and the left Ventricle being
by that means more vigorously dilated, and more plentifully filled with Blood:
a larger Quantity of it is forced out into the Aorta; and consequently the
Blood in the Branches of the Aorta is more copiously pressed by subsequent
Matter into the Roots of the Vena Cava, and so forwards, into the right
Ventricle of the Heart; so that by the help of the Lungs, the Dilation of the
left Ventricle of the Heart is immediately, and the Dilation of the right
mediately promoted.

That the Lungs thus promote the Dilation of the Ventricles of the Heart, it is
very reasonable to believe, not only because it is self-evident, but because,
otherwise it will be very hard to conceive, since the Motion of the Heart is
only Contraction, and the Dilation of it is Ventricles only a Cessation from
that Motion, how the Blood is forced into them with Vigor enough to distend
their Cavities.

For there is so little Reason to expect, that they should dilate of their own
Accord; that we should rather believe, they would be continually contracted,
since all the Weight of Blood contained in the whole Sanguiferous Vessels of
the Lungs, could not possibly dilate them without some other force to help it,
for the Substance of the Heart being contracted, and the Cavity of the left
Ventricle so considerably diminished, so small a Portion of blood as has
Liberty to press against it is Orifice would make but a weak Pressure and much
too small to dilate the Ventricle in so little time as intervenes the
successive Contraction, besides the Heart having no Tendency at all to dilate
it self, since that would make it unapt to yield to Contractions, we must
suppose, that a Part of such Substance cannot easily be dilated but would
require some Force greater then can be supplied by an inconsiderable Pressure
of Blood faintly intruded by almost nothing at all.

But the Lungs being almost in a continual Contraction, in respect of the
Sanguiferous Vessels, and consequently squeezing out the Blood contained in
them, help to dilate and extend the Left Cavity of the Heart, and consequently
the Right.

That the Dilation of the Ventricles of the Heart is only a By helping the
Blood to force violently enough into the Cavities to distend them against the
next Contraction.
Resolution or Cessation from Contraction, is allowed and agreed upon; to prove
then, that the Venal Blood cannot return with Force sufficient to dilate the
Right Ventricle of the Heart; nor is sufficiently able duly to extend the Left,
in order to the next Contraction, by that force it received from, and was put
into, by the former Contraction, but is assisted by the Lungs, we may easily
perceive: For not only the Blood in it is Vessels, but even any Liquor, being
forced through Pipes, whose Cavities increase the further they run from their
narrow and small Original, always moves with less force the farther it goes: So
that although in every Systole, the Blood should be forced forwards from the
left Ventricle, by a successive Pressure of subsequent Matter; and the Motion
should be strong enough to make it circulate briskly through the narrow and
capillary Twigs of the Arteries; yet when it came into the Veins, it would move
much more slow, and by that time it came to the Heart again, would want Force
sufficient to dilate the right Ventricle, and the right Ventricle being not
duly dilated, so little Blood would be squeezed into the Lungs, that the Left
would want a Supply of Blood to dilate it, and consequently the Pressure of
Blood through the Aorta and Vena Cava would be so weak, that the next Dilation
of the Right Ventricle would be weaker than the former, and so Circulation
would gradually decrease.

But that weak Motion of the Blood into the Right Ventricle, being increased by
the Force of subsequent Matter from the Left, the Motion of the Blood into the
Lungs is consequently more plentiful, and as it passes through them is
violently forced into the Left and so on; and by that means, as I said before,
the Lungs distend the Left immediately and consequently the Right mediately.

That the Motion of the Blood is thus weakened by so long a Course in the Veins
is further evinced; if a Vein and Artery be opened at once; for the Blood runs
out of the Artery much more forcibly; and indeed, it would be reasonable to
think it so, though it were not manifest by so plain an Experiment; for if
Water in a Cistern be put into a violent Motion at one end, the further it runs
along, the less violent is the Force of it.

And it is further evident, that the Motion of the Lungs does How stopping the
Breath of an Animal kills it.
assist the Dilation of the Heart; as I have showed by stopping the Breath of
any Animal, which for want of free Circulation presently dies, and not because
the Flame of the Blood is by that means extinguished; for as long as the Lungs
duly perform Respiration, and the Heart violently contracts, and drives the
Blood contained in it is Ventricles forcibly out, that Motion of the Blood being
by a continued waving Pressure decreased, is enabled by the Assistance of the
Motion of the Lungs, to dilate the Ventricles of the Heart, with a sufficient
Quantity of Blood, to be forced out the next Contraction; but as soon as the
Lungs cease to assist the languid Motion of the Blood in dilating the
Ventricles, it is not only less plentifully forced successively thus into the
Ventricles of the Heart, but by a weaker Pressure of the Contents of them
thrust out, each succeeding Pulsation; the Arterial Blood is less plentifully
driven forwards; so that the whole Mass circulates flower by degrees, and also
the Animal Spirits, being driven less violently into the Muscles (that Supply
of Spirits separated in the cortical Part of the Brain, being not so powerfully
thurst after by an equal Succession of Matter) the Fermentation in the Glands
is weaker, and consequently the following Contractions gradually decline both
in Number and Vigor, till at the last they Why by permitting it to breath
again the Circulation of the Blood is renewed.
cease. But if before the Circulation of the Blood be quite stopped, that
Animal be again permitted to breath; the contractive Force of the Lungs drive
Blood more forcibly into the left Cavity of the Heart; so that the next
Pulsation a greater Quantity of Blood is forced into the Arteries, which makes
a more considerable Protrusion of Blood into the Muscular Glands, and also of
Spirits through the Nerves; by which means, the Thorax contracting more
violently, forces the Blood in greater Quantities into the left Ventricle of
the Heart; and the Motion of the Heart at the same time increasing, raises
Circulation to it is natural Force, by squeezing Blood forwards into the Right
and so successively.

From hence it appears, that the Blood is forced into the Ventricles of the
Heart by the help of the Lungs; for if, when the Motion of the Lungs is
obstructed, the Systole and Diastole of the Heart cease in a short time; it
must needs follow, that it is in some measure preserved in that Motion by them,
and it is further proved, because the Motion of the Heart, does not only sooner
stop, when Respiration ceases; but also, because it is increased by a renewed
Respiration; and any one that would be further satisfied of the Truth of it,
let him hold his Breath a considerable time, and he will find his Pulse
gradually decay, which is again renewed by reiterated Breathing.

But though from hence it may appear, that How the Motion of the Heart is
promoted in an Infant unborn.
the Motion of the Heart is promoted by the Assistance of the Lungs; yet it
perhaps may be a Question, how this Defect is supplied in unborn Infants; and
how their Blood circulates* since then their Lungs do not perform the Office of
Respiration.

To which I answer, that in an Infant before Birth, the Placenta supplys that
Defect; for that additional Force which the Infants Blood receives, from the
Motion of Nourishment, violently forced into the Umbilical Vessels, by the
Pulsation of those Arteries, that separate it from the Mother's Blood in the
Womb, do prove equivalent, and supply the Office of the other; but as soon as
the Circulation of the Blood ceases to be promoted by a Sepaparation and
Protrusion of that Juice, it immediately, if unborn, dies; and after it is born
has a continual Necessity of Breathing, as long as it lives.

Where it is to be noted, that as in one that breaths, the Lungs more
immediately assist the left Ventricle, so in one unborn, the Placenta more
immediately promotes the Dilation of the right.

Now although it from hence appears, that the Motion of the Heart is promoted,
by the reciprocal Motion of the Lungs, yet it does not wholly depend upon it,
for if it did, the Motion of the Heart would as suddenly stop, as that of the
Lungs; but since it does but partly depend upon it, Circulation declines by
degrees upon the stopping of it.

But that it may be better understood, how the Lungs, promote Circulation, I
shall next show, that the sanguiferous Vessels in the Lungs, are not only
contracted by the Contraction of the Thorax; but also in every Inspiration.

And since it is known, that the Bladders of the Lungs are encompassed about
with the small Twigs and minute Ramifications of sanguiferous Vessels; every
Systole of the right Ventricle of the Heart, these must needs be filled and
distended with Blood; and if so, consequently that Blood must needs be forced
by the Contraction of the Thorax, through the Vena Arteriosa with a
considerable Force; and so be driven into the left Ventricle of the Heart with
more case, where we may by the way take Notice, that the Blood in the Arteria
Venosa from the Orifice of the right Ventricle, is not only by that means
thrust into the minute Vessels of the Lungs more easily, but also the Blood,
that is to be forced forwards by the next Pulsation is more readily received by
the Vena Arteriosa, and the Ventricle more easily contracting (when the Vessels
of the Lungs are thus emptied by a Contraction of the Thorax than if they were
distended) that subsequent Matter in the depending Parts is received and driven
after it with less difficulty, the resistance that distended Vessels would make
to the Egress of it, being thus prevented by the help of the Lungs.

That the Blood is thus forced out of the Lungs into the Ventricle of the
Heart, is not only evident from Reason, but also Experience; for in violent
Coughing, where the Lungs are almost in a continual Contraction, the Blood is
more violently driven into the Habit of the Body; that it is forced into the
Face visibly appears; and that it also flows into the Habit of the Body is
evident, in People that are let Blood, which by coughing much, is plentifully
forced out of the Orifice; and that the Contraction of the Lungs in coughing
can no otherwise force the Blood into the Habit of the Body, but through the
left Ventricle is very plain, and Lastly, that not only the left Ventricle is
by that means further dilated, but consequently the right, by the Assistance of
the Lungs is manifest, because Circulation is presently quickened by coughing;
so that this one Phenomenon proves all that I have asserted concerning the Use
of the Lungs with respect to the Heart.

But it may here also be questioned; how the Lungs supply the Heart in
Inspiration, when the Cavities of the Lungs are dilated?

To which I answer, that though the Cavities of the Lungs are dilated in
Inspiration; yet the Bladders which are swelled and dilated with Air, even
then, make a moderate Pressure upon, and consequently a Contraction of, the
Blood Vessels, that are about them.

But though there were no such Contraction upon Inspiration, yet the Dilation
of the Thorax is not so long continued; but that the Lungs renew the vigorous
Contractions of the Heart, before they are sensibly decreased; as I have before
explained it.

From what I have said, of the Use of the The Office of the Lungs is partly
voluntary, partly involuntary.
Lungs with respect to the Rational Soul, as well as the Motion of the Heart,
it appears, that the Lungs perform a Sort of a mixed Action; partly voluntary
and partly involuntary; with respect to the Body, it is involuntary, being
carried on whether we will or not, and when we are able to take no notice of
it; and with respect to the Soul, voluntary, it being in our Power to quicken
or remit the Motion of them, differently to modulate our Voices, as occasion
and necessity require, or our own Will inclines us.

But besides these extraordinary Offices it performs in promoting both a
Circulation of Humors and of Discourse; since there is such a great Quantity of
Air drawn in by every Inspiration, it must needs produce some Effects in the
Mass of Blood; and those Humors that circulate along with it; and since it is
so minutely mixed with it, by the small and circular Windings of the Blood
Vessels about the Bladders of the Trachea; the Blood must needs be sufficiently
impregnated with Nitrous Particles.

But it being a Question, how the Nitre of the Air comes to be mixed with the
Blood, and whether the Air it self be mixed with it also, before I proceed to
show how the Mass of Blood is affected by it, I shall endeavor to solve these
two Questions. And,

First, That the Air it self is no otherwise mixed with the Mass of Blood, but
as I have showed, viz. by the Mediation of the distinct Vessels in which each
run is plain, because we don't perceive the Effects of it in that Mass, and
also we may probably guess so, because Air would hinder Circulation and much
disturb it: Air being always unapt to mix with Liquids and to fly from their
Embraces, there being therefore these Reasons, why it ought not to be mixed
with the Blood, and none that it should, nor any Sign of it being so, we have
Reason to conclude that it is not. But,

Secondly, That those Nitrous Particles which swim in the Air, are mixed with
it, we see manifestly by the Effects, which are caused by them, there being the
same Alterations in some Measure made in the Blood as it passes through th
Lungs, as when exposed to the open Air.

But, the Question then will be, how the Nitre of the Air is mixed with the
Mass of Blood, and by what means. To which it may be answered, that if we
consider what fine and subtle Bodies, those Particles of Nitre are, which we
draw in by Inspiration; and through what minute and small Pores, they are
capable of passing, so that they penetrate the most solid Bodies in Nature;
well may we suppose that they can find Pores fine enough to pass through the
Coats of the Vessels.

That they pass through the most compact and solid Bodies; Bodies that are much
more close and less Porous, than the Vessels of the Lungs are, is certain; for
otherwise, hot Water contained in a brazen Vessel would never grow cold, and
that the substance of Brass is less porous than the Substance of the Lungs, no
thing is less dubious.

Moreover, since that the Nitrous Particles of the Air are conveyed into the
Blood, is so plain from the Effects that are there caused by them, they must
needs be conveyed through those Pores, there being no other ways at all for
them to pass by. But,

Another Question which may perhaps be asked, will be, how the Nitrous
Particles of the Air are forced through those Pores; which will be easily
understood, by taking notice, that when the Thorax is violently contracted, the
Air contained in the Bronchia, being violently pressed together, in order to an
Expulsion of it, a considerable Number of those Particles of Nitre must needs
be pressed through those Pores, that are wide enough to receive them, and that
there are Pores wide enough, is visible from what I have said.

It appearing hence, how the Nitre of the Air is mixed with the Blood, I shall
next consider how it affects it, and what Effects it produces in respect of
Heat.

To understand then the Effects that it has upon all that Mass of Humors, that
circulates through the Veins and Arteries, to wit, Blood and serous Lympha, we
are to consider them both together, and apart; together, that it may appear how
they influence each other; and a part, that we may know, for what end each is
impregnated with those Nitrous Particles; and because when we are acquainted
how it alters each singly, it will better appear how they influence each other;
I shall first consider them apart.

The Effects then, which we perceive the Nitre What Effects the Air has upon
the Mass of Blood.
of the Air has upon our Blood, and the Alterations we are sensible it
produces, are either in respect of it is Color or Heat.

That the Air alters the Color of the Blood, In respect of it is Color.
and makes it more florid, is very plain in extravasated Blood, and is so
commonly known, that I need not take any further Notice of it, but shall show
what other Effects it causes in the Blood, and how.

Having therefore explained the Heat of the Blood, in the foregoing Treatise,
and it appearing that it is caused by a swift and violent Agitation of the
Particles of the Spirits and Mass of Blood; the way to understand, how Nitre
affects the Heat of the Blood is to consider how it promotes, or hinders, the
Motion of those Parts of Matter, which cause Heat, which, as I conceive, and as
Reason seems to evince, is performed after this Manner.

The Nitre of the Air consisting of Particles, Nitre depresses the Heat of the
Blood.
not at all inclined to Motion; but on the contrary, disposing those Bodies
they are mixed with to rest, except by accident, when they are too powerfully
resisted and opposed; These, I say, being mixed with the Mass of Blood,
inviscate and fetter up the most subtle Spirituous Parts, and hinder them from
Motion; by which means, the more gross ones are moved more slow, and the Heat
of the Blood consequently abated; but when the Mass of Blood is so Elastick,
and the Parts of it move so strong, that the Nitre cannot depress them
sufficiently, and check them, the Heat of the Blood is increased; the Motion of
those Parts being inverted.

That the Nitre of the Air inclines those Bodies to rest, with which it is
mixed, and consequently the Blood, is not evident only by exposing hot Water,
to a cold freezing Air, but even Blood; and nothing is less dubious than that
excessive Cold extinguishes a moderate Heat.

But that Nitre, when it is not powerful enough to check and extinguish the
Heat of the Blood, does increase it, I have before explained, and the manner
how it does it; and also, that it has never those Accidental Effects upon
Liquids, except by hindering the fierce volatile Parts which ought to be
dissipated, from flying away through the Pores of the Skin, which being
increased thereby to too great a Quantity, exagitate the Mass of Blood too much,

From hence it briefly, yet plainly, appears, that the Nitre of the Air alters
the Color of the Blood; and also serves to temper the Heat of it.

I shall now consider, what Effects it has upon the serous What effects Nitre
has upon the Serum of the Blood.
Lympha; and if we may but compare it to Milk which differs only from Chyle, by
being less impregnated with Oil, it will be manifest, that it precipitates the
Watery Parts of the Serum; which joining with the fixed Salts of the Blood,
dispose them to be separated, and carried off by the Urinary Passages.

This is so strongly proved, both by Non-Naturals and Medicine, that to deny it
would be to contradict Reason, and plead Ignorance of those Things it is almost
impossible for us not to take notice of; for if we sit by a Fire in a close
warm Room, and drink a good Quantity of Beer, which is not very strong; it
presently, if we go into the cold Air runs off by Urin, besides nothing in
Medicine, is a more known and common Diuretic, than Sal. Prunel. which is
purified Nitre concentered and condensed; and it is no less observable in an
Experimental Observation of the Famous Dr. Lower's who in his Book de Cord,
takes notice, that as much Serum is precipitated in a short time after we rise
from Bed, as in the whole night, when we are less affected with the ambient Air.

How Beneficial Nitre is in Precipitating the Serum of the Blood, and what
Advantages the Animal Economy receives thereby, I shall not now enquire, yet
how inconsiderable a Part of it is Office soever it may seem, yet if it be duly
weighed, it will appear very useful.

From what I have said concerning the Alterations made on the Blood and it is
Serum; I should now proceed to consider, how they influence each other; but
since as much as is sufficient for our present Purpose, may be gathered from
what has gone before, it being plain that the cool Serum will help to temper
the Heat of the Blood, and vice versa; I shall wave a further Notice of it
here, and should rather show; That,

The Lungs perform many more and considerable Offices in respect of each Part;
But to explain them would not only be to treat of the Lungs, but the whole
Body, and the Use of all the Parts; which being not my present Design, I shall
omit giving an imperfect Account of them, because they are so interwoven
mutually with one another, that they cannot truly be understood, without an
Account of the whole.

FINIS.

