A MIRROVR OF Mercy and Judgment.

OR, An Exact true Narrative of the Life and Death of Freeman Sonds Esquier,
Son to Sir George Sonds of Lees Court in Shelwich in Kent.

Who being about the age of 19. for Murdering his Elder Brother on Tuesday the
7th of August, was arraigned and condemned at Maidstone, Executed there on
Tuesday the 21. of the same Month 1655.

Deus vindictae gladium Misericordiae oleo perungit. James chap. 2. verse 13.
For he shall have Judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy, and Mercy
rejoices over Judgment.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at his shop at the Sign
of the George in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords-Inne 1655.

TO THE DISCONSOLATE Sr. GEORGE SONDS, etc.
Sad Sir,
BEing a stranger to your person, I shall be secured (I presume) from
prejudice, and freed from the worlds censure, whilst it cannot be imagined, or
said without an high guilt of malice, that, in compiling this work (which I did
too at others requests) I aimed at any other interest, or had any design, but
only the glory of God in the manifestation of his mercy and justice.

I confess, Sir, I had a little acquaintance with your mourning pen in a
most Christian and Fatherlike letter to your sorrowing condemned Son, Dated
Aug. 20. wherein you acted the part of a tender Father, and more, of a Divine,
as appears by your large and pious exhortations, advising him not to despair of
mercy and forgiveness; For that man's sin cannot be so great but God's mercy
is greater, and that Hell is only full of impenitent souls, pressing him to
beware of self-deceiving, to deal plainly and clearly with his God by judging
and condemning himself for his matchless sin, and not to doubt, but upon his
humble and hearty sorrow for it, he should find that made good to his soul
which the Thief upon the Cross heard from the sweet lips of our Lord Jesus,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Besides this to him, I had the
sight of two Letters more, by you written to the honored, Sir Humphrey Tufton,
Knight and Baronet, Sheriff, etc. one dated August 15. the other 16. "Wherein
you did most humbly beg and entreat, (it is your own phrase) that he would be
pleased to respite the execution for a short time, upon this ground, (which was
the chiefest cause of your earnest request) that it might conduce much to the
good of your Son's poor soul: And of this you were assured by a few lines from
me, the night before he should have suffered, and so fallen into the bosom of
Aeternity, which that it might be of joy and everlasting happiness, was the
subject of your prayers and pen, which joined issue with our Ministerial
actings and assistances, of which he had (by Gods blessing) a plentiful
measure.

You said well in your Letter to him, that it was not all the prayers, and
tears, and cries of all the godly Ministers about him, nor the earnest beggings
of your self his Father, nor the Churches public intercessions, which could
work his conversion, and obtain a pardon for him, unless his heart went along
with ours, and combined with our holy endeavors; unless he begged it of God
himself with earnest supplications, you said truly, that all would be in
vain. The hottest Sun cannot make a dead Tree live; nor the strongest blowing
kindle fire in a dead cole: if there be no sap in the root, the Sun does but
dry, and not enliven the Tree; and if no heat of fire lies under the Ashes, all
the blowings will never make it to burn. (These are your own words.) Then
bespeaking your Son, you add this; I hope thou have some sparks of grace in
Thee, though deeply buried under a world of rubbish: and I hope all those gody
bellows (you mean the breath of the Ministers) will blow that away, and make
thy fire of true repentance, and godly sorrow burn clear, and make thee able
truly to say with the prodigal, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and
against Thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son: Then he will embrace
thee in the arms of his mercy, he will feast thee in his heavenly mansions,
and say unto thee, Thou were lost but now art found, thou wast dead to sin, but
now thou art alive in Christ, etc. Oh happy sadness, if it produce this joy!
Oh happy death if it procure thee this blessed life! Happy change, to leave a
sinful world, and a sea of misery, to go to an haven of bliss, etc. These are
the breathings of your Soul; and as you presaged and wished; there we hope your
converted Son is now beholding the glorious face of his Lord Jesus. Now Sir,
Who but the malicious (who look with a squint eye upon all good intents and
actions) will not say, that you had in you toward your provoking son, the same
bowels that David had in him toward his Absalom? Who can imagine that he can
be guilty of discouraging severity to his child, to whom he used too much
cockering indulgence in his life, and of whom he was so charitably careful and
forgiving before his death. I confess that the sweetest Wines turn to the
sharpest vinegar, and the best love, abused into hatred, and the worst
displeasure. An act of disobedience, and contempt of command, from one whom we
have admitted into a deep affection, is ever entertained with greater dislike,
repaid with frowns, neglect, and slighting. Thus a command from you his
Father, in reference to his elder Brother, being not obeyed, forced you to a
paternall severitie, to threats, etc. which were not a sufficient ground to
provoke him to that bloody act, unless a melancholy passion (h being deeply in
love with a fair Gentlewrman) together with a Diabolical suggestion, had (Gods
grace for a time deserting him) possessed his heart, and carried on his hand to
attempt and act so horrid a sin.

Sir, You do like a Christian in the close of your Letter to him, in charging
your self with a fault, for which it may be, God brought on you this heavy
judgment: It was old Elie's sin, your too much softness and gentleness: Do so
no more my Son, was Eli's, 1 Samuel 2.14. the same your often, and soft expression
(as you attest) to him: You say, You ought to have gone higher, and I believe
you did when you went to your heavenly Father by prayer, for amending what was
amiss in him; but to go higher in passion, might have made you fallen lower in
his, and your friends este^m: And it is a piece of your Sons glory, that in
all his sufferings, restraints, and high provocations from one of your unworthy
servants, he never discovered any passion or impatience, but meekly, with a
composed countenance, used to pray for him, and the rest of his barbarous
revilers, and say, God forgive them.

A moderate correction and reproof, carried on with moderation, becomes the
persons of Masters to their Servants, Tutors to their Pupills, and Parents to
their children. Too much severity, and too much remissness from them, has
destroyed many: Some hearts like clay, are hardened by the Sunshine of favors
and gentleness: To say with that old Eli, Why do ye so? to say this (and no
more) with a gentle voice, when the sin deserves the thunder of a bold and
Majestic reprehension, or more; such an easy reproof does encourage
wickedness, and makes it measure it self by that slight censure, and thinks
it self light, because it finds no greater weight from its reprover. As it is
with ill humors, that a weak Dose does but stir and anger them, and not bring
them off: so it fares with sins acted by inferiors, some whereof being of a
greater magnitude, and deeper stain, get growth and increase by remissness.
To trouble you no more with a farther gloss upon your confession, I shall only
add this as a caution to all parents: They that are indulgent, are cruel to
themselves and their posterity: Had you been more severe, you might have had
two Sons living to be the prop of your family, and less sorrow, which is
augmented, by your reflecting on your indulgency and loving care of them, which
by them was (as it seems) abused, and not improved to that height of piety,
as was by you, their Father, intended. I hope this complicate sin in you and
them has met with a gracious pardon from the God of mercy, your Father, which
is in heaven, who will in his good time dry up the stream of your sorrow,
which now runs full, so that I conceive it vain to oppose counsel, or to go
about to stop that torrent, which will run over the banks of nature, and
never cease, till it be bounded with grace and comfort from the God of
patience. I confess such losses (the loss of Children) when they come single
afflict us, but when double, astonish and overwhelm our Spirits even to
impatience. A Wife is a man's self divided, Children himself multiplied, and at
one blow to loose all, is enough to batter the greatest courage, and it is a
mercy if that man be not with immoderate grief distracted.

But good sir remember that saying of that brave Spartane Lady, who hearing of
the death of her two Sons in one day, only replied thus with an undaunted
courage (though in another language) peperimortales; What news is it for those
that carry death in their names and natures to die? no more has it befallen
them then was expected: But so was not your Sons death, it was sudden and
unexpected, and as providence or foresight abates grief, and discountenances a
cross, so now that you could not foresee this bloody storm, by so much must
your grief be augmented: I profess I mourn with you in secret, and at this
hour tears are ready to mingle with mine Ink, and could I mitigate your sorrow
by bearing a part with you, I wish my burden might be your ease; but let me
tell you, that now is the trial of your spirit and Christianity, you are now in
the lists, set upon by a Lion and a Bear, two of Gods fierce afflictions, one
Son murdered, another executed, notwithstanding this, show your fortitude
and patience; and hereby approve to us in this great difficulty and heavy
strait, that you have all this while been a Christian in earnest. Resign up
your self and all that you have to God, to be disposed by him the doner
according to his good will and pleasure, say with those humble ones to Saint
Paul, the will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.14. And be ready to suffer
patiently more for him, who has done and suffered so much for your salvation:
Our Lord Christ for the glory that was set before him, endured the Cross, and
despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. This text your Son had in his mouth a little
before his death, and what I then said to him, I repeat to you, so long as
glory may redound to God by his shameful death upon a Gibbet, do you take
comfort and glory in it. Resolve hence-forward to act what the noble Matron in
St. Hierom once said, and did, when she had at one time the corpse of her dead
husband, and the bodies of her two only Sons slain in the field exposed to her
view, only replied thus with weeping eyes, by this I shall learn to take off
my heart from the world, and serve my God with more attention and greater
devotion, being more frequent n prayer and reading of his holy word. Thus did
she, and thus if you do, putting into practice that counsel which Daniel gave
to the King of Babylon, Dan. 4.24. Then will God when he sees it fit (and the
times being in his hands, his seasons are best) Then will God turn the
darkness of your sorrow into brightness of joy, your sadness into comfort,
he will do by you as he did by Job, He will bless your latter end more then
your beginning, and in the end of your days you shall close up your eyes with
full assurance of enjoying the soul-ravishing presence, and beholding the
saving countenance of Christ in Heaven. Where when you shall see your Son (with
greater sinners then he that repented) crowned with immortality and advanced to
glory, you shall have a just cause to say and sing with them in the Revelation,
Chap. 15.3. Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and
true are thy ways thou King of Saints. Chap. 7.12. Blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power and might be unto our God for
ever and ever. Amen. To this God Almighty the God of Consolation, who is able
to comfort and to keep you from falling, and present you faultlesse before the
presence of his glory with exceeding joy, I commend your sad soul, and rest

Your loving though unknown friend to serve you in the Lord Jesus, R. BOREMAN.
From my Brothers house in Teston, 24. Aug. 1655.
(...) THE LIFE AND DEATH OF FREEMAN SONDS, Esquire etc.
Christians,
WHen you hear or read his name, you will look for a Monster in Nature, or, (as
the Pharisee once said) one not like other men, Luk 10.11. So horrid, so
unheard of, so unnatural was the fact, that I confess, when I first made my
addresses to him at Mr. Fosters house in Maidstone: I plainly told him, that I
expected to see the head of a Monster, ( a Bear or a Tigre) see upon the
shoulders of a man; So amazed (even to misbeliefe) was I at the first report of
the murder.

For who would think that Brethren, and they but two, nursed up in the lap of
Religion, and bosoms of the Church, should not love each other? dispersed
love, that is cut into many streams grow's weak, but fewness of Objects uses
to unite affections. And if two Brothers be left alive of many, we think that
the love of all the rest should center and survive in them, and that the beams
of their affection should be so much the better, because they reflect mutually
in a right line upon each other. But the Devil, that set enmity between Man
and God sets enmity between Man and Man. Thus by the malice of this foul Spirit
in the beginning of the world, the Elder Cain proved the Butcher of the younger
Abel, but now, when the world is drawing to its last period, the younger kills
the Elder, and murdered himself too in his Brother. But what was the occasion
of both murders? It was Envy The Father of murder, as Basil of Seleucia
calls it, (...), the Corrasive of all ill minds, and the root of all desperate
actions. Abel's sacrifice is accepted, and Cain's rejected; was Abel to be
blamed for this? It should have been Cain's joy to see his Brother Abel
prosper, and to behold his field flourish and grow fairer, as it should have
been his sorrow to see that himself had deserved a rejection from his Hevenly
Father: His Brother's example should have directed him to labor for acceptance
and Grace with God, his Creator: was Cain ever the farther from obtaining a
blessing, because his brother found mercy and acceptance? How proud, and
sottish even to folly and madness is envy and malice? It makes a man hate
that goodness in another, which he neglects in himself; and whosoever hates
his Brother is a Murderer. 1 John 3.15. Blood and cruelty are the Attendants
of Envy; it was ever bloody; for if it feeds not on another's heart, it will
eat its own; and unless it be restrained by the bridle of Grace, it will not
rest till it be fed with another's ruin. If there be an evil heart, there
will be an evil eye, and if both these combine, the hand at last will be
guilty. This Envy is a wasp of Satan, (...), so Gregory terms it, it is a
plant of the Devils setting in the heart of man, and grows only when it is
watered with showers of blood, I mean other men's losses and afflicting griefs.
It choaks the seed of all good Education; for if this could have prevailed over
an envious disposition, Cain had not been a murderer, neither had the young
Sonds killed his brother.

Doubtless Adam though in Paradise not innocent, yet was a good man out of it;
his sin and fall now made him religiously circumspect, so that he labored by
all holy endeavors to repair that image in his two sons, which he had lost by
his trespass in eating the forbidden fruit: Notwithstanding this his care, he
could not prevent that murder. Good breeding cannot alter Destiny: A man's vast
reading and knowledge on Earth, cannot alter what is written in heaven.

May we not believe the charge of a Father to a dying Son? are not these Sir
George Sonds his very words to him in his last letter, (which he received the
day before he suffered) O Freeman, rouse up thy self like a man, stir up the
graces that I hope are in thee -- Thou have been instructed in the ways of
Godliness, from a child thou had Masters, and Tutors when thou wast abroad
to keep thee in them ( He was for a short time educated in Sidney College in
Cambridge, about six years since, under one Master Mathews, a religious, godly,
and learned man) and at home thou have had thy Fathers counsel and example (we
must give leave to the Knight to speak himself a little in so weighty a
business; it is not selfe-flattery, but a just vindication of the worlds
censures) He never faild to make you and your brother read the Scriptures, and
constantly himself prayed with you, and called upon you to betake your selves
to your private devotions and still had you to Church to hear the best men, and
the Godliest Sermons, and would discourse unto you of what was preached. Is all
this lost? -- Now give me leave to subjoyne, and make answer to this Quere: It
will appear by his life and death that it was not lost, though those sparks
were even blown out with the blast of a strong temptation, raised from an
envious discontent, thinking he had lost his Fathers love, or that his brother
had too much, and he too little of it; which was only veiled with frowns for a
time, and mantled with threats, following an act of his disobedience. When he
had given his sleeping Brother the first deadly blow on the right side of his
head, with the back of a Cleaver, taken out of the Kitchen the Sunday night
before he did the fact: he, after the first blow, said, he would have given all
the world to recall it, and made a stop of the rest to see how deep he had
wounded him, and finding it to be a mortal wound (having broken the skull) his
brother strettching himself on his bed, and struggling for life, and he
gahering from thence that he was in great torment, discovered then, even in
that storm of temptation, so much of a relenting spirit, that to put him out of
his pain (at which he confessed to me, he was sadly troubled) he did reiterate
his blows with a Dagger which he had in his pocket. When I had heard this
story, I demanded of him a little before he dyed, what thoughts he entertained
in his breast of himself, when he had committed so foul a fact: He replied,
that he thought he was for this world utterly undone, and often in our hearing
he wished, that that hand were cut off that did it.

When he had thus imbrued his hands in his Brothers blood, he threw the Cleaver
out of a window into the Garden, and came with great confusion and disturbance
in his face into his Fathers Bedchamber, adjoining to his Brothers, with the
dagger in his pocket; (surely he had no farther intentions of murder, God
restraining the malicious power of Satan) and undrawing the Curtains, shook his
Father by the shoulder, who, being thus awakened out of his sleep, received
from his mouth this heartbreaking message, Father, I have killed my brother:
He being astonished at it, made this reply with much horror, What say thou?
have thou wretch, killed thy brother? then you were b st kill me too: The son
replied, No Sir, I have done enough. (I am sure it was too much) The Father,
Sir George, upon this, said, Why then, you must look to be hanged: And
presently springing out of his bed, took his Son along with him, to behold his
bleeding Brother, and called in the Servants to seize on the other, which was
immediately done; and after he had lien a while upon his mournful bed, an
Officer coming in, seized on his person, and carried him the same day to an
house adjoining to his Fathers, where he stayed that night under guard, and
from thence, about noon the next day, he was brought to Maidston (the Assizes
being there) and delivered to the custody of Master Foster, the Prison-keeper,
a civil honest man, who carried him to the Jail, where (though it were
stench'd with the noisome sent of prisoners) he behaved himself with great
patience and meekness. That night he was out of respect to his Family,
conveyed to the Keepers house, and the next day, being Thursday, the 9th. of
this Month, brought to the Bar, (after his pre-examination before Sr. Michael
Livesly, and Sr. Tho. Styles, with other Justices) where the Indictment was
read, that charged him upon the two Statutes of Stabbing and Murder; and being
asked what he could plead for himself against the charge of kiling his brother
he cried Guilty, and showed a great willingness to suffer death for that
barbarous fact, as appeared by his mild composed behavior then at the bar,
which struck the Judges and Justices, with the other Gentlemen of the County
then present, with an astonishing amazement.

Having thus pleaded guilty, he was carried to the Dungeon in the Jail, where
condemned persons are always put, whither diverse persons resorted unto him,
and finding him in that loathsome place (there being nothing but a Jakes to sit
upon) asked him if he were not sick, and how he could endure it? He replied,
That it was more pleasant to him then his Fathers Dining Room (which is, as I
hear, a place of great Magnificence) nor drank one drop till ten at night; so
soberly patient was he then, and all the time of his imprisonment till death.
From the Dungeon he was carried that night to Master Fosters house again, and
the next morning being Friday, August 10. condemned to die, after which
sentence, the Judge having advertised him to consider the foulness of his
fact, demanded of him the motives he had to commit it, and pressed him
thereunto for the clearing of his Conscience, and satisfaction of the Country:
Whereupon he answered, That he had done it in his examination before the
Justices. The Judge reflecting then upon him, put this question to him, Whether
he had nothing else to say, to testify his remorse for his horrid murder? He
then (being slow of speech, and of a reserved nature) made no answer, but
delivered the Petition to the under Sheriff Master Maurice Eede, to present it
to the Judge; who, at the Petitioners request, caused the same to be read in
Court, which was accordingly effected.

A Copy of the Petition. To the right Honorable the Judge, and the rest of the
Honorable Justices of the peace for the Assize and Jail-delivery holden at
Maidstone.
The humble Petition of Freeman Sonds.
Humbly shows,
THat your condemned Petitioner finding the guilt of the blood of his Brother
crying for judgment, and that according to the Law and justice a decree is
passed against him for death.

Therefore in respect of the shortness of the time since your Petitioner
committed this horrid murder, and finding the guilt and sin to be so great
before God and man, he humbly, in due obedience to your Honors, beseeches you
in the bowels of mercy, and tender commiseration of him in Jesus Christ, that
your Honors would be pleased to add a few days longer to his life, that in a
deeper and more sensible apprehension of his fact, he may more penitently in
remorse and sorrow of conscience make his peace with God, and reconcile himself
to his deservedly and highly offended Father, that so not only he may die in a
more settled peace of conscience, but also testify unto the world the sincerity
of his Petition,

And he shall pray, etc. Freeman Sonds.


To this Petition the Honorable Judge Crook condescended so far, as to defer
his death till Wednesday the 15. of August, this was assigned only by word of
mouth and not by special warrant, which, together with many weighty reasons
referring to the poor soul of the condemned, and to clear some scandalous
reports thrown upon his Father and him by a wicked foul-mouthed servant; these
with the two forenamed letters from Sir George Sonds to the High-Sheriffe in
the behalf of his Son, were the cause that the young Gentleman was not on
that day executed. He had a weeks reprieve from Wednesday till Tuesday the next
week, and was executed on that day fortnight, on which his Brother by him was
murdered. In all which time how he demeand himself in sighs, and tears and
groans in his bed, in mournful confessions and prayers to God, and in
frequent reading of his holy word, especially such Psalms and Chapters as were
commended by several Divines to his Devotions, this was evident and well known
to us who in our private prayers and exhortations endeavored the conviction
and conversion of his soul to God, who is the Father of mercies and
forgiveness, and never rejected penitent and humble sinners, which made Saint
Austine thus bespeak him in his devout Meditations, Et si ego commisi unde me
damnare potes, at tu non amisisti unde salvare soles. Although Lord, I have
commit- that for which thou might justly damn me, yet there is mercy with
thee which thou still retainest, for which I hope thou will save me. And again,
Si ad veniam nos vocasti veniam non quaerentes, quanto magis veniam
impetrabimus postulantes. Seeing thou have inviited us to accept of a merciful
pardon when we did not seek it, how much more shall we find mercy when we
earnestly sue for it. Thus he in his meditations C. 39.

It is not in the power of man to outsinne mercy. I except that peccatum ad
mortem. 1 John 5.16. that sin unto death, that sin which he that is born of God
sins not. v. 18. I mean that damning sin against the Holy Ghost, which is
(as Zanchy determines it) an open and malicious rejecting of the truth, or
opposition of God's word, against the light of knowledge, and that opposition
joined with an hostil persecution of those that are the defenders of it. Saint
Paul (then Saul) when he was a persecutor and Blasphemer 1 Timothy 15. came near
this sin, as Calvin proves acutely on the 1 Ioh. 5. but doing what he did
ignorantly through unbelief, he was exempted from the staining guilt of it.
Now so long as this Gentleman could not be charged with this sin (which
carries death and damnation in the nature of it) and for as much too as all
godly Ministers in Kent, and other parts thought him fit to be put into their
public prayers, no man can be so wanting to Christian charity, as not to
entertain a belief or hope of his Salvation, especially when they may
charitably conclude from his ensuing humble confession, as also from his daily
practices in Prison (of which you shall have an account) from his prayers, and
holy purposes of redeeming the time he vainly spent (if God spared his life, of
which he had no hope) and lastly from his godly precepts which I took from his
mouth, and set down in writing before his death, from all these may be
inferred, that God, who gave him grace to repent, has crowned his Repentance
with reception into mercy and forgiveness.

His confession taken from his mouth on monday the 13th. of August by Mr.
Edmond Crisp, a Gentleman, who is a picture of a true friend, another Achates,
a pattern of fidelity, as appeared by his indefatigable actings for Master
Sonds in his extremity.
I Freeman Sonds do hereby make my voluntary confession, That I am most truly
sensible of the horrid, and detestable murder which I have committed against
my late dear brother Master George Sonds, in that most bloody, and inhumane
manner as I did act the same: For which most detestable sin, and murder I do
from the bottom of my heart, and soul beg of the Lord Jesus to pardon, and
forgive this my murder, I confess my sins O Lord, and this my murder is ever
before thy face, O sprinkle my soul with some precious drops of thy blood, and
wash away this my murder. I confess, nothing but the instigation of the
Devil did cause me to attempt this sin, which if it were possible to be
undone, I should not dare to have such a thought again for a thousand worlds:
First, because by this same cruel murder I have dishonored my Heavenly
Father, whose Image I have killed, and murdered in my Brother. Secondly, I
have hereby destroyed, so much as in me lies, human society. And lastly, I
have broken the Laws both of God and man. For all which sins, my heart is
truly and penitentially sorrowful, and do beg at the Lords hand, in, and for
his Son, Jesus Christ his sake, to make a greater manifestation of this my
sorrow, that I may weep day and night for this my sin and murder.

This is my confession and the very grief and sorrow of my heart, desiring the
Lord in mercy to pardon this my great offense, for which, from the bottom of
my soul, I am hereby truly and heartily sorrowful, and so Lord Jesus for thy
infinite mercies sake, look upon me in thine own most precious blood, and
receive my soul into thy heavenly Kingdom; when I shall depart this life: and
in the mean time continue in me a true and hearty sorrow for this my great sin
and wickedness against thee my Heavenly Father.

Freeman Sonds.


MAster Freeman Sonds, August 13. 1655. did read the writing before set down,
in the presence of us, confessing it to be for the main part, pronounced by his
own mouth, and from his very heart sincerely (though written by Master Edmond
Crispe) and subscribed the attestation in the end, with his own hand, and from
his own mind, desiring it may be taken as the overt act act of his penitent
soul.

Theophilus Higgons, Rector of Hunton in Kent; and To. Yate, Rector of Belsmire.


A prayer which I composed for his private devotions, subscribed and daily used
by him, oft-times on his knees, in which posture I often found him --
LOrd receive my soul when it shall take its flight out of my sinful body, and
receive, I beseech thee, the humble prayer that goes forth out of the lips of a
penitent sinner. O Lord God merciful and Gracious, my Creator and reconciled
Father in the Lord Jesus, when I call to mind the numberless abominations, the
vanities, the frailties of my disordered youth, shame and confusion with
horror and dread covers the face, and perplexes the soul of thy poor servant,
and I cannot but look upon all those transgressions through the glass of thy
justice, as clad with damnation and clothed with Hell; and when I reflect upon
that great host consisting of many thousand thousand sins headed with a
Goliah-sin, a sin of great magnitude, a sin against nature, the murdering of
my Brother, my soul is overwhelmed with grief, and driven even upon the Rock of
despair.

But when with the other eye of faith and hope I look upon thy mercy which is
over all thy works, upholding and sustaining them, and above our sinful works
which thou usest to pardon upon an humble and hearty confession of them; (that
mercy being infinite, easily covers that which is finite) when too I consider
that great act of thy goodness, in forgiving a Manasseh who had filled
Jerusalem with innocent blood, worshipped Devils, and defied thee his God; To
this express of thy incomprehensible mercy, when I adjoin the murder and
adultery of thy Kingly Prophet David, the perjurie of Peter, the blasphemies
and massacres vented and acted by Paul (then Saul) against thee and thy Church,
yet all received to mercy and crowned with forgiveness, I grounding my
tottering soul upon these considerations, and relying upon thy gracious
invitation of sinners, together with thy merciful promises of admitting them
into thy favor upon their unfeigned repentance, presume to beg mercy of thee
my God in the name of the Lord Jesus, who came into the world to seek that
which was lost, and to save poor sinners, of whom I confess and acknowledge my
self to be the chiefest.

Sweet Jesus make a bath of thy precious blood, and bath my black polluted soul
in it.

Wash me thoroughly from mine wickedness, and cleanse me from the guilt of
disobedience to my Father, and destroying my innocent Brother. Oh let my
prayers find the same success as Manasseh his supplications did with thee,
they at once loosed him from his sins, freed him from his chains, and of a
Captive made him a King, and from the Dungeon of Babylon restored him to the
Palace of Jerusalem: Lord, thou art the same for ever and ever, thy essence is
unchangeable, thy power irresistible, thy love inexpressible, if thou will thou
can make me clean; Oh be pleased to add a will to thy Almighty power, and
say unto my troubled soul by the still voice of thy blessed spirit, Thy sins
are remitted; though I am now a loathsome and monstrous spectacle of
wickedness, yet I shall be as white as snow, being clothed with the long white
robe my Savior's imputed righteousness; Lord, first cleanse and then cloth
my soul with this pure and precious garment of my Elder Brother in Heaven my
Lord Jesus, Let his blood shed for me on the Cross (which has a purifying,
protecting and saving virtue in it) let that expiate my bloody aim in shedding
my elder Brothers on his bed; It was done in his sleep, I hope not to him in
his sins, however Lord forgive the guilt of this sinful circumstance attended
with base cruelty and unmanly cowardice.

Lord when I am dead, let me live in my example both of thy justice and mercy,
of thy justice in punishing me so deservedly for my rebellion against thee, and
of thy mercy in giving me grace to repent by softning my obdurate heart, and
vouchsafing pardon upon my repentance for all my transgressions; let my fall
into this pit, drive those that stand from presuming, and let my rising again
to thy favor keep others that shall sin against thee from despairing of mercy.

Oh let not the voice of my Brothers blood cry for vengeance against this
Nation, let the mouth of it be stopped with my breath, and let the voice of my
Saviors blood so outcrie that which I spilt, that his intercession in Heaven,
and the prayers of thy servants on Earth may be heard for me, who am thine by
Creation, Oh save me Heavenly Father, and thine by redemption, O most gracious
Redeemer; Lord Jesus Christ receive my soul at its departure out of my body,
and strengthen me O God the Holy Ghost the comforter, that I may encounter with
death cheerfully, and taste of that bitter cup gladly of which my Savior has
drunk deep before (and for) me, and sucked the poison out of it, so that I
believe it shall only prove a wholesome potion to release me from the power of
sin, to redeem me from misery, and to restore my soul to an everlasting life in
Glory.

Which God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe unto me for the merits of my Lord
Jesus. This prayer is the very sense of my soul, and the desire of my mournful
heart.

FREEMAN SONDS.

A Miscellanie of diverse remarkable passages, and practices, of Mr. Freeman
Sonds, and others, during his imprisonment: Written by a Godly and learned
Divine, Mr. Theophilus Higgons, Rector of Hunton nere Maidston, and delivered
to me, Aug. 23. who have (as he desired in his letter) inserted some
particulars to his observations.
Sect. 1.
IT is generally reported in Maidstone, concerning Sir George Sonds, the Father
of Master Freeman, that no Religious duties have been performed in his Family.

Master Freeman Sonds told me, that by this report his Father was greatly
wronged; for it was a constant course, said he, in our Family, that after
Supper, my Brother read a Chapter in the Bible one night, and I another, by my
Fathers appointment: afterward he said prayers himself, all the servants
being present: This also is constantly affirmed since by Master Charnock, Sir
George his Setward, who has dwelt with him twenty years; and says farther,
that besides the former public duty, his Master prayed by himself privately.
Prayers also (as he says) were often said before dinner.

So then, we must not impute that bloody act of the young Gentleman, so much to
a want of Education in Religion, as to a want of grace for the present, which
God did withdraw from him for a time, when he was under a strong temptation;
and without which grace, supporting and preventing us, the Best may fall into
the Worst of sins: so that the most fortified Christian being weak (if we
respect his natural condition) may rightly and to Gods glory say with Saint
Austin, C. 6. Soliloq, Tentator defuit, et ut deesset tu fecisti, locus et
tempus defu^t et ut deessent tu fecisti; Affuit tentator, non defuit locus, non
defuit tempus, sed ut non consentirem tu me tenuisti. Lord, the Tempter, time,
and opportunity of place was wanting, and all these were so by thy grace and
blessing: The Tempter came and assaulted my infirmity, I wanted not opportunity
of time and place; yet that I should not consent to him, Thy goodness prevented
me. Blessed be the Lord for his grace and mercy. Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall. A proud presumption, and want of pity to
others, is the first step to ruin and misery in our selves.

Item, Whereas some in Maidstone reported, that Sir George Sonds, in his
Letters to his Son Freeman (being in durance at Maidstone) did not reprove as
he ought, his sons great offense, but daubed it over, etc.

This report is malicious and false; for in his first Letter about August 13.
and in his second, August 20. the day before his Sons execution, he wrote very
sharply and fully to him, about the greatness of his sin, and stirred him to a
very deep repentance, with serious and hearty prayers to God in his behalf.
This appears by his words cited in the Epistle of this book.

S. 2.
MAster Freeman Sonds has been loaded here with many grievous calumniations.
It was reported, that he being at first committed to the common Jail, August
8. Wine was sent for him, and diverse Gentlemen with him drank freely, he
showing no sign of repentance or remorse for his great offense. I charged him
with it; his answer was (and it was true, confirmed by some of the said
Gentlemen) that they had not one drop of Wine, nor any Beer, and that for his
part, he (who was of the temper of those Rechabites, Jer. 35.6.) drank no Wine
nor strong Beer at any time. This is most true of him, as the other report's
most false, coming from the father of lies, who is too busy in the hearts and
tongues of the men of this Age; who reported likewise most falsely, that the
Devil appeared to Master Freeman Sonds, in a visible shape, and that he had a
conference with him: This was strongly denied by the young Gentleman, two
hours before he dyed, who said, he was only overcome by a strong suggestion,
from that old Serpent; the enemy of mankind. Let those that report such things
maliciously beware, lest for their uncharitableness, God give them up also to
Satan, who may tempt them to commit the like, or a worse sin.

Item, It was reported here, that for the space of three or four years, he had
never taken a Bible into his hands, and had no sign of Religion. I asked him of
it, his answer was (as before, Sect. 1.) that every second night, he read a
Chapter in the Bible, and surely he had it then in his hands, besides many
other times, (but to have it in the hands is nothing, unless a man have it
with delight and love in his heart) And as he ever prayed with his Father at
night, so Master Charnock, aforesaid, assured me, that when they went to bed in
two several Chambers, his Brother and he did upon their knees at their
bedside pray unto God in private: and this was their constant course, by
imitation or injunction from their Father. And it is farther testified by
George Guthbert of little Chart (who had the custody of him at the house of
Master Foster, Keeper of the Prison, and truckled under him every night, from
August 8. to August 21. when he dyed) that Master Freeman Sonds did duly every
morning as soon as he arose, and every night before he went to bed, fall down
upon his knees at his beds-side, and prayed by himself. Also I testify, that
I saw a very good Prayer Book which he brought in his pocket to Maidstone; the
Title of it is Crumbs of Comfort, a book full of good instructions, and divine
meditations, Printed the thirty sixth time: and many can witness upon their
knowledge, that being in the Keepers house, he did read the Scripture and the
Practice of Piety every day, especially that content of the joys of Heaven.

S. 3.
AND as touching his disposition, I found that true which was commonly reported
by his friends, that as he was no Drinker, so no sweater, no curser, no liar,
nor profane in his conversation. He resolved to fast on every Tuesday so long
as he lived, (because on that day his Brother was murdered) and could hardly
be induced to eat that Tuesday night, which was before the Wednesday morning
on which day he should have suffered, if he had not been reprieved: So constant
was he in his holy purposes, and steadie in his resolutions: And I am
persuaded, that if he had lived, he would have made good by his practice, what
he asserted to me that night, saying, If I were to live, (as I have no hopes of
it) I would wait on my Father upon my knees all the days of my life.

He was very willing to hear the Ministers, who opened unto him the Scriptures,
and showed him the greatness of his bloody fact: he heard them patiently and
meekly, and comfortably joined with them in frequent prayer.

Though he heard of diverse calumnies shot out of the Devils bow against him by
some malicious Archers, yet he never was stirred at it, nor spoke any bitter
words against them, but was unto his death very gentle and humble like a child.

Sect. 4.
BY the first command of the Judge, he should have dyed August 15. wherefore I,
and Master Yate, a good and faithful Minister (who usually attended him by Sir
George his direction) did very seriously employ our selves some days before,
to prepare him for death, by instruction and prayer; we showed him the benefit
and comfort of Absolution (for which purpose I directed him to read the 40th.
content in the Practice of Piety, with serious consideration) with the grounds
and reasons of it: Whereupon he was very glad, and desired greatly to receive
it, and after a comfortable acknowledgement of his great offense, he meekly
kneeled down, when I and Master Yate laid our hands upon his head, and I
pronounced the Absolution unto him, which he joyfully received, we assuring
him, according to Christ's promise, Mat. 17.19. c. 18.18. John 18.23. that it
being duly performed by us, and received by him on earth, it was ratified in
heaven. No doubt but in this distracted time, some men will blame our act
herein, but blessed be God, we can justify it by our pens and tongues
against them all.

Sect. 5.
BUt now follows a matter of higher concernment in reference to Master
Freeman Sonds; for now unto me and Master Yate was added Master Boreman, a
Bachelor of Divinity, and Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge: who coming
to Maidston on Monday the 13th. of August, and hearing the distressed condition
of Master Freeman, came unto him, and joining with us, did perform many
charitable offi^es for the good of the poor Gentleman. Thus then it was, Master
Bo^eman being absent when we Absolved Master Freeman, I stayed till he returned
from Teston, it was in the evening, August 14. at which time I took my leave of
the Gentleman (with grief and joy for him) expecting his death certainly the
nex^ day, very early in the morning: but it was put off till August 21. for
weighty reasons premised.

Upon my departure Master Freeman very humbly desired Master Yate to administer
the holy Communion unto him, which being proposed to Master Boreman, was agreed
to about nine that night, after he had upon examination found the Gentleman
prepared for it, being truly sorrowful for his foul sin, and resolving, if God
spared his life (which he did not hope for) to lead a new one in a most strict
conversation, etc. Upon these grounds, and after a short exhortation to the
Gentleman, concerning the benefits and ends of the blessed Sacrament, Master
Boreman at the request of Master Yate, did administer it unto him to his great
comfort; for after the receiving of it being assured by Gods grace of the
pardon of his sins, through the blood of Christ, sealed up in that holy
Sacrament, He said to Master Boreman, That he should die the next morning as
cheerfully as ever he went to bed: and it seems his soul was in calm and
sweet temper; for when Master Yate came unto him the next morning to wait on
him to his execution (which was respited late that night. Master Yate, nor he
knowing of it) he found him first asleep, which showed that he was not afraid
of death, which he looked on as a Droan, its sting being taken out; The sting
of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15.55. which he believed to him was pardoned; why then
might he not have the Seal of his pardon? why should any man be so wanting to
charity, as to say, that to minister to him the Holy Communion was to put a
Seal to a blank? Can we imagine that his own prayers and tears with the earnest
supplications of many thousands sent up to Heaven on his behalf, did find no
acceptance with the God of mercies, who never rejected penitent sinners? And if
his sins, were remitted, why should not the Holy Sacrament (which is a
Sacrament of Consolation and Confirmation) be ministered unto him for his
strength and comfort? Is the word of God against it? where by plain expression
or good consequence? we profess our ignorance, we know no text that forbids
it. We highly reverence the judgment of our mother the Church of England
which appoints in its most excellent Liturgy, the Communion for the sick,
which is all one for substance with Mr. Freemans Case, only a sick man might
live, and he was assured to die.

But we reverence yet more the decree of that great and sacred first Council
of Nice (Anno Christi 325.) which says thus, C. 13. Concerning those that are
near to death, now also the ancient and regular Law shall be observed, that if
any man be upon the point of death, he may not be deprived of his last and
necessary Viaticum, provision for his death and long passage to eternity, to
wit the Holy Communion. This was spoken especially for such as were under
Ecclesiastical Censure; but it follows afterward generally, that the
Communion shall be given to any man that is near death, and desires it. So
says the famous Council, so the Church of England, this the practice of the
Universal Church of Christ in all ages; it was no new Law in that Council,
but lex antiqua an ancient Law and practice in the primitive times.

If this may not satisfy the fierce opposers of it, and that practice, yet
perhaps Master John Calvin may be accepted of them. Hear then his judgment in
his Epistles. Col. 453. Printed at Geneva 2. Fol. 1616.

Many and great causes enforce me not to deny the Lord's supper to sick
persons; and Col. 454. I collect well, as I conceive, from the nature, end, and
use of the holy mystery, that men, being in danger of death, should not be
deprived of so great a good. And page 455. he justifies such a communion as
not unlawful though in a private house, and page 55. he says, I think that
the custom to give the communion to sick persons is willingly to be admitted.
Then he adds, Neither is it greatly to be repugned (or denied) but that the
Communion should be given to such as are put to death for their offenses, which
was Mr. Freeman Sonds his case. Concerning which Conciliu^ Moguntium, the
Council of Mentz held An. 847. says thus, C. 27. If the holy communion should
be given accorcording to Canonical injunction to all men upon the end of their
lives, making a sincere confession of their sins, and being truly penitent,
why not to them also, who suffer death for their offenses? for which the
Fathers of that Council give their reasons, which are too long and numerous to
be inserted in this place. If Calvin's judgment, with this Councell's,
satisfy not, hear yet the completely learned, and most judicious Divine
Hieron. Zanchius, who in his Epistles, l. 1. p. 155. printed at Hanovia in
Octavo, 1609. says expressly, That the holy Commnuion may, and ought to be
given to sick persons for their spiritual comfort, who also p. 421, 422.
sets down the resolution of the Ministers of Geneva, that, where the
Communion is given privately to sick persons, the custom herein is not to be
rashly abrogated upon certain conditions, viz. of their true faith, and
contrition for their sins. So then (to put a period to this weighty doubt) the
whole Christian Church asserts, that the communion ought to be given, if it be
earnestly desired by them, to all persons ready to die, so our Church of
England, so Calvin, so Zanchius, so all sober Christians maintain, and none
oppose it, but only those, who, being of an hot temper, and unruly
dispositions, the offspring of Cham, (as St. Austine l. 1. de Civit. Dei. well
attests) have overthrown the Church's wholesome constitutions in this
particular, and some others of great importance, to their shame, and our great
disturbance.

To conclude this discourse, concerning the care which was had of this poor
Gentleman's Soul in his restranits. It pleased God to move the pious heart of
the right Honorable and truly Noble the Duchess of Richmond to send from
Cobham Hall her Domestic Chaplain Master Gunton, a religious and learned
Divine to visit him, which he did on Friday, the 10th. and discoursed to him of
Death, of Repentance, and the sufficiency of Christ's blood (or the efficacy
of his meritorious death) whereat Master Sonds (as I have it under Mr. Gunton's
hand) was very attentive, (as he ever was to all good instructions) and Mr.
Gunton for his furtherance in devotion prescribed him the 25. 38. and 51.
Psalms, which he frequently perused, for I found him one day reading in the
Bible (in which he took delight) and perceiving some leaves turned down, I
asked him by what means or by whose direction he read those proper Psalms? he
told me that a Minister who came to visit him ordered him to do it, whereupon I
turned down leaves at the 7. Penitential Psalms (of which two of the former
are a part) likewise at the 4th. of Genesis v. 7. If thou do well, etc. So God
to Cain, etc. which Shows that there was a door open for mercy, if he would
have repented of his sin, and at the 18. and 33. chapter of Ezekiel; we added to
these that soul-establishing, Chap. the 8. to the Romans, These and many more
with the Psalms and Chapters for the day appointed by the Churches rubric,
were (besidees his private prayers) the ground of his devotion, meditation and
practice whilst he was in Prison. From whence he was (after the commendation of
his soul to God, first by Master Higgons, then by my self in private) conveyed
in mourning habit on horseback to the place of Execution, many Gentlemen
attending him with my self, and that reverend Divine. When he came to that
place being dismounted from his horse he stood like a mournful penitent, whilst
a discourse for half an hour and more was uttered by me concerning the
heinousness of sin in general, and of his murder in particular, together
with the nature of Conversion, the parts and properties of it; To which was
adjoined the freeness of God's mercy in the Lord Jesus to all repentant
sinners; this done, with an exhortation to the people to entertain a
charitable, and Christian persuasion of the Truth, and sincerity of Master
Sonds, his conversion to the Lord; the penitent standing at my right hand, a
prayer was conceived to commend his sad and mourning soul to God. This ended,
he (having-meekly and humbly submitted himself to death) he went up the
Ladder, and standing in the midst of it with great modesty and meekness, he
desired the prayers of those that were present; he likewise with erected hands
and eyes, did beseech God to forgive him his sins against his Father, and
Brother, and prayed in few words for a blessing on his distressed Father, and
closed all with this resignation of his soul into the hands of his Maker,
saying with a soft voice (for his nature was not to speak either aloud or much)
God's will be done, and Lord receive my soul. After which words the Executioner
did his Office, and his body (after it had hung a good while) being cut down,
was put into a Coach and carried to a Church not far from Maidstone, the
place is called Bersted, where it lies interred, expecting a joyful
resurrection through the mercies of the Lord Jesus.

A Postcript to the whole Kingdom.
IT is a true saying of Saint Augustine, Deus non respicit qua morte, sed
quales ex hac vita eximus: God regards not what death we die, as in what frame
of spirit we are when we give up the Ghost. A man may go to Hell upon a
feather-bed, and to Heaven dying on a Gibbet. The end which Divine mercy
proposes to its self cannot be prevented by humane means; and if God intends
his glory by man's shameful death, I see not but that I, and all here should
magnify him for it. It is Gods mercy to make us witnesses of the judgments of
others, that we may be forwarned, ere we have an occasion of sinning in our
selves. So then, if his Mercy and Justice, his Justice in punishing, his Mercy
in releasing and giving a sinner time to repent: If these two Attributes be
advanced by Master Sonds his death, we have all great cause to sing an
Hallelujah to God.

It is said, Heb. 11.4. of Righteous Abel, that being dead, he yet speaks:
This is meant of his faith, for which his sacrifice was accepted, and by which
he has left us, a lesson behind him, how to offer up our prayers and services
to the God of Heaven.

Thus our young Cain that killed his elder Brother, being dead yet speaks: He
by his shameful death,

1. Bespeaketh the proud Gallants of this Age, who mind the outward dress of
their bodies, more then the inward ornament of their souls; that starve the
latter, and pamper the former, that spend whole mornings in decking a rotten
carcass, and sleep away those hours that they should employ in Prayer, and
reading of the holy Scriptures with other Godly books: Men (if I may so call
them) that look like Monsters, pictures of Phancie, and walking Emblems of
vanity: These he, in a manner, bespeaks thus: Look upon me, who have been
guilty of your vanity and idleness, and know, that the eye of Justice never
sleeps, so that it will not connive at that sin in you, which it has
severely punished in another. If you turn not speedily to the God that made
you, and throwing off your plume of pride, walk humbly with him, (Mic. 6.8.) in
a constant profession of piety, and temperance; unless you speedily do this,
he will strip you of your glory, and by some fearful judgment, bring you down,
and throw you into the pit of shame and misery. Ex aliorum vulneribus
medicamentum faciamus malis nostris. Aug.

2. To all stubborn Children he speaks thus, Consider what a train of heavy
Judgments followed upon my disobedience to my Father, who commanded m^ to give
that (which I desired to keep) unto my Brother, which command I disobeyed, and
thereby incensed my indulgent Father: Consider this with your selves, and by my
example learn obedience to your Parents, in small and great things. Consider
what Saint Paul writes to the Ephesians, Chap. 6.1. and to the Colossians.
Chap. 3.20. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right; this
obedience is most just and meet. Again to the Colossians, Children, obey your
Parents in all things (that are lawful, good, and indifferent) for this is
wellpleasing unto the Lord. Parents should not provoke their children, Ephesians.
6.4. in so doing, they sin, and may be the cause of sin in them, for which they
must answer severely before God: and yet if Parents should exceed in severity,
and chasten them according to their will and pleasure (which may be immoderate
and irregular) Children should give them reverence, Heb. 12.9, 10. ever
remembering that ingenious saying of Cicero, Non modo reticere homines parentum
injurias sed etiam aequo animo far oportet: Our duty is not only to conceal
the injuries of our parents, but also to bear and sustain them with a meek
submissive patience. Stubborn and disobedient children were to be stoned under
the old Law; then w re they given up into the hands of men: But now under the
Gospel, God takes the matter chiefly into his own hands, and it is a fearful
thing to fall into them; he ever did and will punish disobedience to Parents by
fearful and shameful Judgments, and to show the horriblenesse of this sin,
the same death, viz. of Stoning, was appointed for Idolaters and Blasphemers.

3ly. To all Indulgent Parents he speaks thus, power not oil, (the soil of
flattery and soft speeches) into your Childrens wounds, when they need
Corrasives, or Vinegar of sharp reproofs. Chasten your Children betimes, Prove.
13.24. and thereby show your true love to their souls; in the dawning of their
tender years, in the morning of their age, sow the seed of Religion, and the
fear of God in their hearts, then will their Masters at school, and Tutors,
have less to do in the Universities, and have more comfort, ease, and credit
in their Education, when they shall not meet (as usually they do) with a
double task and labor, which is, first, to pull up the bitter roots of Vices,
and to weed their souls of corrupt habits (as lying, swearing, etc) before they
plant them with the Arts and Sciences, and other Academicall accomplishments,
which plants will not grow well amongst Thorns and Briars.

Oh then let your Children bear the yoke in their youth, Lamentations 3 27.
Break the sinews of their proud necks before they get strength in wickedness,
and force them to obedience of your holy and just commands. He that smiles on
his Child, when he should frown, and flatters him in his sin, may justly be
served by him, as King David was by Adonijah his son, whom he would not
displease from his childhood, to say, why do thou so? 1 King. 1.6. (Oh the
fondness of cockering love) He was punished for his doaring with rebellion
against his Person: Adonijah (says the Text) exalted himself, and said, I
will be King. 1 King. 1.5. So commonly indulgent Parents are domineered over by
their Children, who at last, for their just reward, meet with a Rope, or some
other Judgment.

4ly. To those who by reason of their bosom sins, and open impieties, are
fallen into misery, and lie mourning in a Prison; to such he reads by his
example, a lecture of consolation, saying, as it were in these words: We may
not always measure the displeasure of God by his stripes; many times after the
remission of sin, the chastisements of the Almighty are deadly; no repentance
can assure us we shall not smart by outward afflictions. Thou forgav^st their
sin, O Lord, and punishedst their inventions. So David his Psalms speaking of
the rebellious Israelites. Our hearty sorrow for sin may prevent the eternal
displeasure of God, but still it may be necessary and good both in respect of
our selves and others, that we should be corrected; our care and suit must be,
that the evils which shall not be averted, may be sanctified; which is, when
we look upon our sins in the glass of God's goodness, and Christ's
sufferings, and accordingly lament and mourn for them by an humble confession
of them, and resolving by God's grace to turn the stream of our lives backward,
to become new men in sobriety and strictness of an holy conversation.

Thus did Mr. Fr. Sonds bewail his sins before his death, and to this he was
exhorted earnestly and frequently with great aggravations of them by my self
and other Divines forenamed, who for all our Christian pains and holy
endeavors meet with reproaches and obloquies, (as our Savior did in his time)
from the envious malicious Pharisees of our age, who are it seems angry that we
did that by Gods blessing, which they perhaps would have done themselves, and
by themselves without our assistance, and so get (which was their aim) a little
glory by popular applause to their proud persons: Then whom (to speak the truth
which I do with much meekness) I know no greater nor worse Dawbers, as they
call us. They endeavored once to set up their Idol, their Dagon, and to fence
it with a wall of Discipline in the Church, which they cemented with the blood,
the lives and fortunes of many thousand deserving persons, eminent for their
learning and godliness; but God be praised, the stones fetched out of the
Quarries of Scotland and Geneva are fallen upon their own heads; the wall is
beaten down; The snare is broken, and we are delivered, from their intended
cruelty and persecution for conscience.

They are offended, poor mistaken souls, with me for giving Mr. Sonds the Holy
Communion the night before he was to die: Hereby they seem to accuse me of
sottish stupidity and rashness, as if I had thereby abused the Holy Ordinance.
Let them them read what has been premised, Sect. 5. of the Miscellanies
concerning this particular, and let them consider with what circumspection, and
caution I gave it, as first being assured by Mr. Yate, a grave and knowing
Divine (whom Sir George Sonds sent to his Son) that the young Gentleman was
prepared, being instructed by him, and read for many days the Tractat in the
Practice of Piety, concerning the Lords Supper. Secondly, I examined him my
self in respect of his Faith, Knowledge, Repentance, and Charity, the
requisites of a worthy communicant, then thirdly, grounding my act upon a
charitable persuasion of his true and and hearty sorrow for his bloody sin, I
did upon these grounds minister the Saerament unto him and Mr. Y. who only did
communicate, In so doing I hope I have offended none but those, who will not
give the Sacrament to any but to them who are of their faction (and they but a
few as I am informed) to submit to which faction, and subscribe to their
decrees is counted the first and main degree of conversion; so that they of
that Town that will not submit (and they are the greater number by far) they
and their children must be debarred from both Sacraments, Baptism and the Holy
Communion, which none of them can receive living or dying, neither in public
nor private, and without it many have deceased, by whom it has been earnestly
desired. Oh sad and fearful condition! As I would not have the Childrens bread
given to dogs, so not denied to the Children themselves, I mean those
Christians, who live soberly and honestly with repute in their several
callings, whose compass (by which they steer their lives) is Faith, not
Faction, whose profession too, is not to side with parties, but to serve the
Lord Jesus.

If Mr. Sonds had staid the leisures of our Lording Censurers, and received not
till they had given him a Probat; He had died (I verily believe) without the
Seal of his everlasting comfort, and that because (it may be) he was of a
different judgment from them, for which cause my self with others are
censured so severely and unchristianly by them, who make us either ignorant men
that know not our duty, or unconscionable men that will not perform it. But God
forgive them. Qui volens detrahit famae meae invitus addit gloriae meae. So
said Saint Austine once to his reviler, so Mr. Higgons, Mr. Yate, and my self,
who glory in the shaming unjust reproaches of our Adversaries. To do well and
hear ill was not only the portion and lot of our blessed Savior and Master
Jesus, but it is also ours, who are his unworthy Ministers. Malice will ever
find a tongue to blast the persons and blot the actions of well-meaning and
deserving Christians. I shall only exhort them in the words of St. Peter 1 Ep.
c. 2. v. 1.

Mistaken, seduced, and seducing Christians, laying aside all maliciousness,
and all guile and dissimulation, and envy, and evil speaking as new born
babes, be innocent, and not injurious to those that are living, the true
Ministers of God, not to the memory of the de^eased Mr. Sonds, who being dead
yet speaks, and in the fifth place exhorts all those that lie under any
Diabolical temptation, a temptation which is against nature (as for a man to
murder himself or another) he exhorts those (and all such who are troubled in
mind, or afflicted in Conscience) to open their minds to a godly friend or
companion, to a Minister especially that is knowing and prudent; which if Mr.
Sonds had done, he had not committed so foul a sin. He likewise advises all
such to be earnest with God, and frequent in prayer, when they are so tempted.
It is a good saying of an ancient Father, Gravis sit nobis illius Tentatio, sed
gravior illi nostra Oration. His Temptation (i. e. the Devils) may molest and
trouble us, but let us be assured that our faithful prayers to God (who is
above the Devil) do much more molest and disquiet him. In hoc uritur incendio,
he is scorched and tormented with the flame and fire of our devotion. He is
compared to a roaring Lion by St. Peter. 1 Ephesians. 4.8 now as a Lion is (as the
naturalists observe) frighted at the crowing of a Cock and runs away at the
first hearing of it, so, the Devil will not stand, but cease from tempting so
soon as a man betakes himself to the Souls Sanctuary which is hearty praying.

I demanded of Mr. Sonds once, whether he said his prayers during the time that
the Devil did assault him with that fearful suggestion? his answer was, that
he was at prayers, the night before he did the fact, with his Father and his
Family (whereof his brother was one, and so went to bed, and died with prayer
and his Fathers blessing) but confessed that he prayed faintly, he meant
formally, he only heard another pray, but his heart did not join with him. It
is an hearty, fervent, faithful prayer which prevails with God.

This mentioning of the Devil puts me in mind of a false unchristian report in
a lying Pamphlet, which was, that the Devil appeared, and talked with him about
two hours before his death, I showed him the Pamphlet, and demanded of him an
account of that flying report, he mildly (as his manner was to answer) replied,
that there was no such apparition, and that he was only assaulted with a strong
suggestion which he believed (as is true) was from the Devil, arising from
discontent and melancholy, which he advised all men to avoid and shun, as they
desire inward peace and comfort, lest they fall into some fearful sin as he
did. Who sixthly and lastly, as his last legacy, (and we know that the last
words of David were, as the words of dying men are, especially noted 2 Samuel
23.1.) He desired me a little before he was to die, to publish these very words
by way of advise to the world.

First, I desire all Gentlemen to learn by my example to read the word of God
frequently, and not omit their prayers to him daily.

(He read the Bible, with his brother, by course, most nights (as I am
informed) and joined with his Father in prayer, but he did this then (as it
seems) only in appearance with an outward compliance, but not with hearty and
sincere affections, as he did afterward in his restraints. Then is our reading
of the word and prayers sincere, when they end in practice.)

Secondly, I advise all Parents not to suffer their Sons to live in idleness
(which exposes a man to temptation) but to employ them in some honest public
calling.

These be the dying words of Master Freeman Sonds: and I believe he might say
at last as David did, v. 2. of the forenamed Chapter, The spirit of the Lord
spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue.

The Lord of Heaven grant that what has here been published may tend to the
honor and glory of his name, by the conversion of sinful souls, the
confirming of those that stand, and the raising of those that are fallen. Amen,
Amen.

An appeal to the godly Orthodox Clergy of the Church.
IT was a most true saying of the Roman Orator, (though in better language)
that there was never any act not so vicious, but in some age had a commender,
and none so laudable and virtuous, but that it found many times a reprover.
Thus of late have I (with some others of my judgment and profession) met with
a sort of men (who, I thank God, cannot meet with me, nor reach me with a just
reproof) men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, their throat an open
Sepulcher, and their tongue a sharp sword, whose common trade it is to invent
crimes with defamatorie calumnies, that so they may wound the persons and blot
the reputations of those, whose actions are built upon Scripture-grounds, and
carried on with good intentions. It is said, that the ink of the Cuttlefish
poured into Lamps, makes the bravest and most exact pieces of painting to be
seeen with horror, as dressed with ugly shapes, so these wicked tongues
stirred up by malicious envy, (which has for its companion (as her picture is
in Lucian) detraction or calumny) when they have cast their poison upon the
light colors of a life or action that is innocent, make it appear with hideous
deformity. But I shall not dip my pen any farther in the ink of confutation, to
discover the men and their malice, who have raised a dust in Maidstone, and the
adjacent parts, which has flown into their own eyes, as they that spit against
the wind defile themselves. I could describe their persons at large (from true
informations) that, two of them had been Mechanics and Tradsemen in the City
of London, one of which Mr. T.D. is much spoken of for his profitable
employment about Mr. Sonds, and how he wrought upon him, and so far won his
good opinion, that he desired him to lodge with him, this is constantly
reported, though it be most false; for Mr. Sonds utterly denied this thing, and
said, He troubled me so much in the day with his weak and simple discourse,
that I had no reason to desire his company in the night. Yet this is made a
great matter to magnify Mr. T. D. and to vilify us the true Ministers of
Christ, sent by him, which cannot be said of them. There is a great stir too
about Mr. I. D. another Mechanic (which was his first degree to the Ministry)
who pressed (with another beardlesse youth) at the place of Execution to speak
unto Mr. Sonds (who stood then between my self and that reverend Divine Master
Higgons) it was forsooth to make him sensible of his sin, of which it was
conceived by him and his fraternity, that he had no sense (so rash and
uncharitable are they in their censures) But we suspecting truly and justly
that his speeches might disturb the poor Gentleman (whose soul was (...), (to
speak in Chrysostom's phrase) most quietly composed and fitted, (God be
blessed, for its passage to eternity) being assured of this, we would not give
way to this unseasonable intruder, to whom I said thus (it is known with great
moderation and mildness) that we could not but thank him for his good
intention to the soul of the dying Gentleman but not approve of his
indiscretion, which defaces learning, and sowres Religion, both which without
discretion are disordered, wild and furious.

Moreover I said, that if he had given a visit to the Gentleman at his Chamber
before his death, when he should have met with us to witness his piety, then I
would have commended his Charity etc. But there are Solifugae, those that hate
the light, love to do what they do in private (Christ ever spoke in public)
they love to make disturbance (he is the God of order, and Prince of Peace.)
Are these then the messengers, or servants of our Master Jesus? Are these who
have disturbed the Church of Christ, and rent his seamlesse Coat by schisms and
Heresies) fit persons to quiet a distressed conscience, I pray God that be not
true which I said then to this Master I. D. and his companion, it was that I
feared himself and that other made that unseasonable motion to confer with
Master Sonds being at the point of death, more to be talked of by the people,
then out of love to his soul, otherwise he would have been more tender then at
that time to disturb it, which is now (I hope) out of the reach of malice,
freed from the power of sin and Satan, and in the bosom of Abraham, in that
place of rest which is provided for the faithful and all true Penitents.

But who are such? was Mr. Sonds sir?

2. Quaeries which I shall answer briefly, and so (I trust) satisfy all
parties who have loaded us with reproaches, and harsh unchristian Censures for
giving the Sacrament to him.

1. As it is an hard task to prescribe a just period to the best man's
repentance (to say after he is fallen, he must repent such a day, week, or
month, or else never hope to rise) for the holiest soul may take long and dead
sleeps in fearful sins, as is evident in David, who after the murder of
Uriah, etc. between whose sin and his sorrow for it, ten months had well nigh
passed; as then in the former case it is an hard matter to prescribe, etc. So
it is as difficult a task to describe the parts of repentance, and the true
properties of a penitent, who is in a right frame of Spirit to receive the Holy
Sacrament: However, what I said upon the sudden (God assisting me) at the
place of Execution, about half an hour before Mr. Sonds died; I shall now make
of the same a short repetition.

1. That repentance is sound, which is grounded upon the consideration of Gods
goodness and mercy to a soul, in the Lord Jesus. 2. This consideration begets
that heart-compunction, or grief of mind, which is by the Apostle, 2 Cor.
7.10. termed Godly sorrow that works repentance unto salvation, not be
repented of. A grief or hearty sorrow, that we have offended our good God, our
heavenly, and most loving Father: Upon which sorrow, there follows in the soul
of a true penitent, first, a change in the Mind or Judgment, disproving, or
disallowing that evil which we have ungodlily committed, and approving of the
contrary good which by us was omitted. Secondly, upon this, there follows a
change of the will which repudiates, or declines that evil, and embraces with
a delightful choice the good which formerly was refused, and enclines to it,
as its chief joy and content, resolving for the time to come to act or do it.
To this change of the will succeeds in true a Convert a change of the heart or
affections, hating and detesting that sin wherein we have offended, joined with
a love and prosecution of that good duty which we did not, and is to be done.
These be the parts and degrees of an Evangelicall repentance, which being
seconded with a religious practice, that crowns all, are the (...) by which we
discern true Converts.

And having discerned these in so short a time as was allotted to the deceased
Master Freeman Sonds (as you have had a full narrative in the former discourse)
we conceiving that God in mercy to his poor soul had given him a true sight of
his sins, with a sense of his mercy in the Lord Jesus, presumed we might
after his Absolution, minister unto him the blessed Sacrament, which is not
(without great danger to those that refuse to give it) to be denied to any,
that are not notoriously scandalous and wicked, and shall, having heartily
desired it (as a Sacrament of their Union and Communion with Christ in his
merits) humbly confess their sins in the face of the Congregation.

Will now any man dare call us Dawbers of sin; or say, that we Blanch it with a
gentle connivence, when that we ground our practice upon such strict
principles? The Lord rebuke Satan in the mouths of such revilers.

For a close of all, I shall take leave to give an account of what I heard the
last Lords day, September 1. at Saint Peter's Paul's Wharf delivered by their
Godly and learned Teacher Master M. to that most Christian Congregation, where
I my self with many did receive to our great Comfort the Holy Communion. His
words punctually set down are these (which suit with my judgment, and are the
very sense of the souls of the other Divines that did attend Master Sonds in
his restraint, they being the sum of that Doctrine which we preach and
profess, and I hope none will say they savor of loseness.)

He that accounts it a slight and easy task to be humbled for sin and sue
for pardon, has not yet learnt how dreadful it is to offend God, and how
joyous to please him.

To be humbled for sin in its guilt, because exposing to wrath and eternal
death, this may be merely from a principle of servile fear; To be humbled
for sin in its filth, as defiling the Conscience, and polluting the soul, this
may be merely from a principle of ingenuous shame; But to be humbled for sin
as offensive to God, loathsome to so sacred a Majesty and Divine a goodness,
this is the very (...) and full growth of repentance (as to contrition) whose
rooting is that of a dutiful love and filial fear, whereby the humiliation
becomes purely evangelicall, and most acceptable unto God through faith in the
blood of Jesus.

To the blessing of the same Jesus I commend this work, proceeding from a
principle of love to souls, and driving at the main end of all, the honor and
glory of God in the establishing of weak converts, and the conversion of poor
dejected sinners, and I shall only supplicate the Divine goodness, to turn
the hearts of our enemies, that their tongues may, instead of censuring us, be
fiilled with with his praises, who gave grace to Mr. Sonds to repent heartily
of his misdoings, that by his example, as others may be scared from self
dependency and presumption, so sinners not despairing, may turn and be
converted to God, the God of pardon, and Salvation.

Glory be to God. (...)
FINIS.

