A defense of the Scriptures, and the Holy Spirit speaking in them, as the
chief Judge of Controversies of Faith, and of the light in them, as needful
to be looked unto for direction to attain Salvation:

With a Vindication of that Honor due to Magistrates, Ministers, and others,
according to their Places and Dignities.

In a Relation of a Disputation at Chesterfield in the County of Darby, between
some Ministers of the Gospel, and James Nayler an erring Quaker.

The Questions disputed were these four: 1. Whether the Spirit of God speaking
in the Scripture, be the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith? Affirmed by us
Ministers of Christ. 2. Whether the private Spirit in the Pope, or in any
Quaker, be the chief Judge of Controversies? Denied. 3. Whether every man be
bound to look to the light within him (as sufficient) for his direction to
attain Salvation? Denied. 4. Whether it be lawful to call any man Master or
Father, upon earth (or to give any honor to man?) Affirmed.


In which, The Truth is confirmed, and the Quakers Errors and Blasphemies
discovered, and confuted, and many places of Scripture from the Quakers false
applications, cleared, With some Animadversions upon a lying Relation, of that
disputation, published by James Nayler.

A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject;
knowing, that he that is such is subverted, and sins, being condemned of
himself, Tit. 3.10, 11. By Immanuel Bourne, Pastor of the Church in Ashover in
the County of DARBY.

London, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey, 1656.

To the Right Honorable, John Glyn, Lord chief Justice, and to the Honorable
Richard Ask Peter Warbarton
Justices of the Upper Bench.
To the Right Honorable, Oliver Saint John Lord Chief Justice, and to the
Honorable Edward Atkins, Matthew Hales, Hugh Windham,
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.
To the Right Honorable, William Steel, Lord chief Baron, and to the
Honorable John Parker, To Nicolas, R Tomlins,
Barons of His Highness Court of Exchequer.
To the Right Honorable, Commissiary General Edward Whaley, Major General of
the Counties of Nottingham Darby, Lincoln, Leicester and Warwick.
And to all other the Honorable and Worshipful Justices and Officers, for the
preservation of piety, and the peace of the Nation: The blessing of truth and
true peace here, and eternal happiness hereafter.
Right Honorable,
MAY it please your honors, to give me leave to become your humble
remembrancer; That when Joshua, that religious, wise, faithful, and valiant
Captain, General of all the Armies of Israel, had conquered one and thirty
Kings, and by Gods assistance, settled the Lords people in the promised land, to
witness his care of piety, as well as of peace, He calls for all Israel, for
their Elders, their Heads, their Judges, and for their Officers, and minds
them of the mighty works the Lord had done for them, and pressed them upon that
account, to stir up their affections, to love the Lord their God, and to fear
him and serve him in truth and sincerity; yea, to put away their false gods,
and false worship from amongst them. And we read likewise of faithful Samuel,
that he judged Israel all the days of his life, and he went from year to
year in Circuit, to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and he judged Israel in
all those places, and his return was to Ramah, for there was his house, and
there he judged Israel, and there he built an Altar unto the Lord Thus here you
see, there was both Justice and Piety in this holy man of God, and Israel was
blessed in such a Judge. We cannot but acknowledge, that the Lord has done
great things in these Nations, and we do enjoy peace and plenty, and many
mercies, which we have not prized nor improved as we ought to the best
advantage, for Gods glory, and our own good. Under his Highness protection,
and the present Government, through the grace of God, every man may sit quietly
under his own vine and fig tree, without fear of plundering, a happiness which
in few years past we did not enjoy; Yea, we have good Laws, and honorable
religious Judges and Magistrates, to see Justice executed, and right done
between man and man; and we enjoy our comfortable Liberty of preaching and
hearing the Gospel of Christ; Yet can we not say, there is no complaining, nor
cause of complaint in our streets. The Church and people of God have met with
enemies in all ages: Cant. 2.2.
As is the Lilly amongst the thorns, so is my beloved among the daughters, and
as it was of old, so it is in these our days; the Church and people of God,
especially Gods faithful Ministers, suffer persecution, by two sorts of
people. The first, profane Ranters, Atheistical men, Drunkards, Gamesters,
and ignorant blind souls, such as neglect public Ordinances in these times of
liberty, and have no right principle of grace and goodness in them: These make
it a delight to exercise their malice against the Ministers of Christ: These
would rob and spoil them to the uttermost, if it were in their power: And this
we can witness we have found true by troublesome experience. Again, there is
another sort of people, which travel up and down the Nation, under the name
of Quakers, as the Jesuits and seminary Priests have used to do secretly; so
these now openly dissuading and seducing our people all they can, from commitig
to our Churches, or meeting houses, calling our Churches, Idols Temples; All
our services to God in prayer, preaching of the word, and other Christian
exercises, ordinary, and extraordinary; when we seek the face of God for the
peace and welfare of the Nation, for the prosperity of our Navy and Armies,
both by sea and land, or our praising God for his mercies we do enjoy. All
these (say the Quakers) are but Idol-worship, In a Quakers book called a
Discovery of a threefold state of Antichrist by Samuel Ballivant etc.
and beastly services; and all the faithful and godly Ministers of Christ,
without exception, are thieves; our maintenance by Tithes, Antichristian, and
unlawful: Yea they call us Conjurers, Antichrists, witches, devils, liars, a
viperous and serpentine generation, blasphemers, scarlet colored beasts,
Babylons Merchants, whited walls, painted Sepulchers; and whatsoever the true
Prophets of God, or Christ our Savior did justly call the false Prophets,
wicked priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, those names do these railing and
reviling Quakers give to the godly, painful, learned and faithful Ministers
of Christ in the Nation, dissuading our people from hearing us, or giving heed
to any thing we preach, disturbing us in our public ministry. And what can we
call this but a persecution, like that of those wicked men against the good
Prophet Jeremie; Come say they, and let us smi^e him with the tongue, and let
us not give heed to any of his words? Jer. 18.18. And what is persecution, if
this be not? Yea such is the malice of these Jesuited Quaking adversaries
against the ministers of Christ, that we have just cause to fear, they had
some design before this day, to have brought to pass bloody projects to our
ruin, had not God our most high protector, and his Highness under God, been
provident to prevent those common mutinies, and insurrections, which in all
appearance, had been plotted against this Nation, and the good people thereof,
and then we doubt not but our Quaking, and our profane atheistical
adversaries, like Herod and Pontius Pilate against Christ, would both have
agreed against us to our destruction, if the Lord our good God should not
preserve us. What construction else can we make of those bitter threatenings,
not only in words and to our faces (one of the Quakers telling me, Thus I was
threatened by E. S. a Quaker since dead.
that I was plundered formerly by the Cavalliers, but it should not be long,
but my house should be pulled down, and I thrust out of doors.) But to the
same effect also in their written papers, A description of the true and false
Temple, page 45. Nayler in his false relation.
and printed pamphlets: Howl ye Priests (say some of them) the Lord is coming
to beat up your quarters by his sword and fire, and great shall be the slain
of the Lord. And God is risen to cut you off (says James Nayler himself.) And
the former concludes, alas, alas poor Priests, your downfall is near at hand,
subscribed, published by Thomas Aldam, Benjamin Nicolson, and John Harwood. And
another of them, the Lord is coming to beat up your quarters, all ye proud
Priests, and down with this deceiver, tith-monger and robber, and down with
this Idols Temple, as if they would stir up the people to pull down our
Churches, and to destroy all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel in the
Nation, on a sudden; and this subscribed as an Oracle from heaven, written from
the Spirit of the Lord. I let pass diverse others; But I humbly conceive in
these Alarums, it is fit the Ministers of Christ should be awakened, as to be
faithful in their places, and to walk believingly, holily, and humbly with
God, so to seek timely for protection and safety in the Lord, and to whom under
God, should we seek, but to that high power and authority, and to those
honorable Judges and Magistrates, whom the Lord in his most wise providence,
has raised up, and set over us, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well; and we acknowledge Gods goodness, that he has
moved the heart of his Highness, His Highness Declaration, November 21. 1655.
to take notice of the abuse of that Liberty of Conscience, as by others, so by
these our adversaries, who make too bold, thereby to disturb and persecute
Gods faithful Ministers; yea under pretense of honoring God, to dishonor and
contemn the honorable Judges and Magistrates in the land, keeping on their
hats, when they are called to answer before them, and refusing to give any
respect or outward show of reverence to them: Yea, such they are, as in their
blind zeal, to an imaginary reformation, and conceited or pretended obedience
to Christ, Richard Farnworth, a Quaker, in a pamphlet of his, etc.
would persuade people to cast away, not only the good and wholesome laws, but
all our learned Lawyers (as well as Divines) be they never so pious, honest and
faithful (of which blessed be God we have many in the land) yet these must be
banished also, as unfit (say they) for any Christians to make use of; and as if
all going to law (though upon never so just grounds) were unlawful for any
that professes Christianity, without which, and the assistance of our
honorable Judges, and good Magistrates, what lawless, wicked lives would a
multitude lead? And we that are the faithful ministers of Jesus Christ, have
cause further to acknowledge Gods goodness, in stirring up his Highness
(under God) our supreme Protector, with his honorable Council, His Highness
proclamation, Feb. 15. 1654.
to send forth his late Proclamation, against such profane Ranters and
Quakers, to prohibit the disturbance of us Ministers and other Christians in
our solemn assemblies. Since which Proclamation (blessed be God) we have had
much more quietness in our exercises of religion, and congregations, then
formerly we had: But yet we are not without malicious enemies, profane
persons, as ill as Quakers; And therefore to whom under God, and his Highness
under him, should we apply our selves, but to you my honorable Lords, and to
all other the honorable. Judges Magistrates and Officers, who are appointed
for the preservation of the peace and welfare of the Nation; And especially I
am bold to apply my self to you my honored Lords, in more particular, whose
great Abilities, Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, and Faithfulness, which I have
observed in a serious examination of such causes, which in your Circuits (and
in particular, in several Assies at Darby) have come before your honors for
trial; your judicious discerning between things that differ, between right and
wrong, between a petty frivolous action, brought by a malicious adversary,
brought only to vex a poor man; your discountenancing of malice, and that abuse
of the good Laws; your just sentences given to the honor of God, the good
laws of the land, and to the comfort of poor men oppressed. These things have
encouraged me to dedicate this my defense of the Scriptures, and vindication of
the honor of Magistrates, Ministers, and others according to their place and
dignities. Unto your honors, and all that have power and authority in the
execution of Justice, and preservation of piety, and the peace of this
Commonwealth, humbly supplicating the continuance as of his Highness, so under
him, of all your protections, and favorable aspects upon, and unto all Gods
faithful Ministers, to maintain them in that which is their just rights,
against their malicious adversaries; yea to defend and maintain the honor of
magistracy, Romans 13.1.
as an Ordinance of God, for the comfort and safety of his people, and to
defend Christ, and the truth of the Gospel of Jesus; to defend the honor and
glory of the Lord (the most high Protector of his Church) against all open
profaneness, and odious heresies, and abominable blasphemies whatsoever, that it
may appear, we are a people taught by Christ, as the truth is in Jesus, and
that the Lord of Hosts may appear for us as our Protector to the end, even
till Shilo come again. Most humbly praying in my daily addresses to the throne
of grace, not only for my self, but for all my reverend brethren, the godly,
faithful ministers of the Gospel of Christ, that the Lord will more and more
fill our hearts with his spirit of grace, wisdom, holiness and zeal, that we
may in a right way of holiness, Jude 3.
meekness and truth, contend for the faith that was once delivered to the
Saints, that our own lives may be as becoms the Gospel of peace, that we may
win others to walk in peace and holiness, and by our own good conversation, 1
Pet. 2.15.
put to silence the scandals of malicious, and the ignorance of foolish men,
that God will give repentance, and free pardon in Christ to all our Adversaries,
who complain of us as contentious; because (though after long sufferings) we
seek in a just and lawful way to recover our due and just Rights, which they
unjustly detain from us; desiring if it be the will of God, that they may
obtain salvation in the Lord Jesus, and be delivered from wrath to come and
that one day they may enjoy a happy and peaceable communion with us in glory,
and to conclude, daily pouring out my soul to God, That the Lord, the great
Protector of Sion, will be pleased to preserve his Highness and Honorable
Council, and you my Honorable Lords, and the rest of the Honorable Judges,
Justices, Magistrates, and other Worthies, who are Actors for Piety and Peace,
to Gods glory, and the benefit of these Nations, together with this whole
Common wealth, in Truth, Unity and Peace, long to continue.

Most humbly subscribing my self, Your Honors daily Orator at the Throne of
Grace, Immanuel Bourne, Pastor of the Church in Ashover.
London, Feb. 26. 1655.
A Defense of the Scriptures, and of the Holy Spirit of God speaking in them as
the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith, etc. In a Disputation at
Chesterfield in the County of Darby, Jan. 3. 1654.
FIrst, when the Ministers came to the Church or Meeting House-yard, James
Nayler was there with his company, but seemed unwilling to go into the Church
or Church-House, yet at last went into the lower end, and stood there. But when
Mr Billingsley Minister of Chesterfield, began with prayer to God for a
blessing upon the meeting, Nayler and his fellows went forth again,
pretending some plot might be against them. But after prayer, assurance given
there was none, they came in again.

Secondly, Mr John Billingsley began to read the Questions; But after Nayler
read them in the Paper sent to him (as I take it) and then began to read his
Answer in writing, and when he had read his Answer to the first Question, it
was desired that that Question, and his Answer to that, might be first Argued,
and so the rest afterward in order.

Bourne showed Nayler the Bible, and asked him if he would own that as Gods
word, he answered, part of it, or to that effect.

First, For the state of the Question. By the Spirit, was meant the Spirit of
God, 1 John 5.7.
the third Person in Trinity, one with the Father and the Son.

Secondly, by the Scriptures, the Canonical books of the Old and New Testament.

Thirdly, By the Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures, that voice or
speaking forth of Gods Spirit recorded in Scripture, which is there now to be
found; so whether the holy Scriptures, or Spirit in them be judge. This state
was not so fully opened by reason of disturbance even in the entrance, Nayler
endeavoring to avoid this Question.

Naylers Answer Nayler in his Answer, owned the Spirit that did speak in the
holy men, who gave forth the holy Scriptures to be Judge; and said that Spirit
was Judge before the Letter was written, and all Controversies were judged by
that Spirit, but he did not own that Spirit that does now speak in the
Scriptures: He said he granted the Spirit was Judge, and would have avoided
the Question.

Mr Bournes Reply. But Mr Bourne pressed to go on with the Question, and
affirmed it was one thing to say the Spirit that did speak in the holy men
that gave out the Scriptures was Judge, and another to say the Spirit of God
speaking in the Scriptures, was Judge, or that the holy Scripture was Judge.
Therefore pressed to go on with the Question, and began (as I remember) with
this Reason.

Mr Bourns 1 Argument. Whatsoever was and is the speaking forth of the Holy
Ghost himself, that was and is the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith, but
the holy Scriptures are the speaking forth of the holy Spirit himself,
therefore they are the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith. The first
proposition was not denied, and the second was proved, Acts 1.16. the Scripture
which the holy Ghost by the mouth of David spoke concerning Judas. Here it is
evident what Scriptures David writ, or spoke by writing, that the Holy Ghost
spoke; Therefore the holy Scripture is the speaking forth of the Holy Ghost,
and so judge of Controversies. The same again witnessed by the Spirit, Acts
28.25. well spoke the Holy Ghost by the mouth of Isaias the Prophet, saying,
etc. Here you see the Holy Ghost is witnessed (by the Apostle Paul) to speak by
the mouth of Isaias; and that Scripture which Isaiah writ, was the speaking
forth of the Holy Ghost, and so the supreme Judge of Controversies, etc.

Naylers Answer Nayler gave no direct answer, but he wrangled, and said, he did
own the Spirit to be Judge, but not the written word, or to that effect; and
that the Spirit did speak not in the dead, but in the living; which was (as I
did understand him) not in the dead letter of the Scripture, but in living men,
and vapoured as if he had said much, but yet would have avoided the Question,
as needless to be further disputed on, since he did yield the Spirit to be
Judge, although he denied that the Spirit speaking in Scripture, was the chief
Judge of Controversies of Faith; But Mr Bourn went on to press another Argument.

Mr Bourns 2 Argument. Whatsoever Christ himself did appeal unto, as to a
chief Judge, and send his hearers unto, as to a chief Judge of Controversies
of Faith, that is and ought to be esteemed the chief Judge of Controversies of
Faith: But Christ himself appealed to the Scriptures, and sent his hearers to
the Scriptures, as to the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith, therefore the
holy Scriptures are the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith. The first not
denied, the second witnessed by the Spirit in John 5.39. in that great
controversy of Faith, whether Christ were the Son of God, or equal with
God? Christ appeals to the Scriptures, Search the Scriptures, for in them you
think to have eternal life, and they are they that testify of me, therefore
the Scriptures are the chief Judge.

Naylers Answer Nayler did not give any answer to satisfy the Argument, but
said still, the Spirit was the Judge, not the written word, and cried out,
liar, liar, hold thy peace, the Spirit is Judge, not the written word. Mr
Bourne bad him yield the Question, since Christ himself appealed to the
Scriptures; But he cried out, and one of his fellow Quakers, away liar, the
Spirit is Judge. Mr Bourn replied, The Spirit is Judge, but not the Spirit
speaking in any man, but the Spirit speaking in the Scriptures, and pressed a
third Argument.

Mr Bourns 3 Argument. Whatsoever is the very word of God himself, that is,
and ought to be the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith; But the holy
Scriptures are the very word of God himself, and therefore they are the chief
Judge of Controversies of Faith.

The first not denied, the second proved, John 10.34, 35 Jesus said, is it not
written in your Law, I have said ye are Gods: If he called them gods to whom
the word of God came, and the Scriptures cannot be broken, etc. Here our
Savior calls the Scriptures the word of God, therefore the holy Scripture is
the word of God. And the like again, Mark 7.12, 13. Ye make the word of God
of none effect by your traditions. Christ plainly calls the Scriptures the
written Law of God, the word of God, therefore the holy Scriptures are the very
word of God himself, and so the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith.

Naylers Answer Nayler cavilled still and cried out it is false, it is false,
the word is not the Judge, and sit down liar. But Mr Bourne pressed him to
answer; And Nayler said, the word was God, but the Scripture was the letter,
and that was not Judge.

Mr Billingsleys 1 Argument. Mr Billingsley pressed an Argument, to prove that
the written word, of which the Question is made, is not God. That which is the
word of Christ, who is God, that is not Christ, nor God; But the holy
Scriptures, and word preached, and written by the Apostles, is the word of
Christ; Therefore the holy Scripture is not Christ nor God.

First, that Christ is God, that is evident, Romans 9.5. of whom concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for ever. Therefore by this
testimony it is evident, Christ is God.

Secondly, that the holy Scriptures and word preached by the Apostles, is the
word of Christ, that is witnessed, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in
you richly, in all wisdom. The Apostle does not say, let the word Christ dwell
in you, but let the word of Christ; Therefore the word of Christ is not Christ
nor God, so neither the holy Scriptures which are the word of Christ, and of
the spirit of Christ, which holy men spoke and writ, as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost.

Naylers Answer Nayler instead of a better Answer, still quarrelled, and cried
out, liar, liar, the word is God, and God and his word are all one, but the
letter was in time.

Mr Bourns Reply. To this Mr Bourne replied, that was not so; for although God
and his written word were one in respect of that agreement of truth, was in the
written word, and in God; yet that word of God and God, were not all one
essentially, as the natural word or Son of God, was all one and the same
Essence or Being with God.

Naylers Answer To this Nayler cried out, away with thy dark word, John ^.12,
14.
I do not own that word essentially, and so rejected the distinction of Gods
written word, and essential word.

Mr Bourns Reply. Mr Bourne replied, that the written word of God was not of
the same Being with God.

Naylers Answer Nayler, and one of his fellow Quakers by him, cried out, liar,
liar, stop thy mouth for shame, stop thy mouth, God and his word are all one.

Mr Bournes Argument. Mr Bourne bad Nayler hearken to an Argument to prove it
by Scripture, and told Nayler he was the brazen faced, foul mouthed fellow he
had heard, when his own mouth was stopped, that he could not answer an
Argument, he still cried out, liar, liar, stop thy mouth, stop thy mouth.

Mr Bourns Argument. And Mr Bourne pressed this Argument: No word which was
written in time, part by God himself, and part by Moses, and other holy men of
God, was or is all one with God essentially, or of the same essence or being
with God; but the holy Scriptures were written part by God himself in time,
and part by Moses, and other holy men of God; Therefore that word of God was
not of one or of the same Essence and Being with God.

The first Proposition is evident of it self. The second is witnessed, Exodus
31.18. where God gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with
him, two Tables of stone written with the finger (or by the power) of God. And
Exodus 34.27. God commanded Moses to write all the words of the Covenant, for
after the tenor of these words, I have made a Covenant with thee, and with
Israel (And this was written two thousand year after the Creation of the world
which God made) therefore God and that written word was not all one, or of the
same Essence and Being with God, and so not the rest of the holy Scriptures
which was written in after times.

Naylers Answer But Nayler with a loud voice, still cried out, liar, liar, is
not God and his word all one? and bad the people bear witness, he says God
and his word are not all one.

Mr Bourn. For Reply, We distinguish there is a unity of agreement, so God and
his written word are all one, and a unity of Essence or Being, so God and his
written word, the Scripture, are not all one.

Mr Gardiners Argument. Mr Gardener Minister of Eckinton, being present, when
he saw him so audaciously impudent, called to Nayler to hearken to an Argument
to the contrary; which was to this effect. Whatsoever is all one with God, is
eternal, but the holy Scripture or written word is not eternal, therefore it
is not all one with God.

Naylers Answer The Quaker Nayler presently cried out in a scornful manner,
away liar, away, stop thy mouth, the word is eternal, and God is eternal. And
one of his fellow Quakers that stood by Nayler, called Mr Gardener liar, liar,
both with a loud voice, stop thy mouth, thou art a liar, thou art a liar.

But let any indifferent man but read and consider the Argument, and see if the
Quaker be not proved the liar, and justly deserved that shame himself, which
he so unjustly cast upon Mr Gardener, and the other Ministers.

Then Mr Godfrey Watkinson of Brampton (an understanding Gentleman not a
Minister) being present, Mr Godfrey Watkinson of Brampton Moor near Chesterfield
called to Nayler, and told him he had lost the Question, and he himself was
the liar; for even now he said the letter or written word was in time, and so
not eternal, and now he says the word is eternal, and God and his word is
all one, when as the Question and A^gument is about the written word, which is
not eternal, and therefore he was the liar, and lost the Question, or words to
this effect (for I cannot remember every particular, but I endeavor to keep
the sense and words as well as I can remember.)

Naylers Answer But Nayler kept on his loud mouthed pace, and gave Mr Watkinson
some unfit disrespective speeches, and said he owned the Spirit speaking in
holy men to be the Judge, but would not own the Spirit of God speaking in the
Scriptures.

Mr Bournes Reply. Mr Bourn began to press other Arguments, but Nayler would
not hearken, but cried, stop thy mouth, liar, liar. Then Mr Bourne called to
another Question.

But let any man truly consider the Arguments, and see if Naylers mouth was not
most fit to be stopped, and if Nayler was not the great liar, accusing others
wrongfully for that, of which he was so justly guilty himself.

Nayler did not then give his answer to the Question in writing, but sent it to
us the day after the Disputation; In which he falsely applies diverse places of
Scripture, to prove (if he could) that it is not the Spirit of God speaking in
the holy Scriptures, but the Spirit in holy men that is the chief Judge of
Controversies of Faith. I shall only in brief, give some answer to his
Allegation of Scripture, and some observations by the way, and then proceed to
the second Question.

Naylers Allegation. 1. The first Scripture Nayler alleges, is that, Exodus
18.16. When they have any matter (says Moses) they come to me, and I judge
between one and another, etc. Therefore thinks Nayler, it is not the Spirit
speaking in the Scriptures, but the Spirit speaking in men, that judges. To
which for answer.

Reply. First, I observe with what spirit the Quaker does agree in this
Allegation, Cardinalis Bellarmin. de judice Controversiarii fidei. lib. 3. cap.
3.
and this is with the Spirit of Antichrist in Cardinal Bellarmine, who brings
the self same place of Scripture, to prove an outward Judge of Controversies
of Faith, and to be interpreter of the holy Scripture.

The Question he proposes is, whether the interpretation of Scripture, be to
be sought from some one visible common Judge, which he affirms, and
endeavors to prove from this Scripture; That as Moses did answer to all doubts
arising about the Law of God, so there must be an outward visible Judge of all
Controversies: And this is the Church, and the Spirit in the Church, or in the
chief Pastor (the Pope) with his Council of Pastors (says Bellarmine) and
the Spirit speaking in holy men (says Nayler) that is, in himself, and his
fellow Quaker: And thus you may see, from whom the Quakers received this
Doctrine, even from the popish seducing Jesuits, or some seduced Socinians, or
other Heretics, who seek to disgrace the holy Scriptures, that they may more
easily set forth their own errors with fair pretenses of the spirit. But to
answer Cardinal Bellarmine and James Nayler both together.

1. Moses was an extraordinary man, and had an extraordinary measure of the
Spirit, and yet Moses did not take upon him an infallibility of Spirit and
Judgment, but did make known to the people, the statutes of God, and his
laws. Thus, what God had or did reveal, that was the Judge, not his own
Spirit, nor any Spirit in him, but the voice of God in his law, or Gods own
direction to end the Controversy. This is evident, if you consult these places
of Scripture, which witness what Moses did in the cause of the woman's son that
cursed God, Lev. 24. Lev. 24.11, 12, 13, 14.
And about receiving the Passover by the men that had touched the dead body of
a man, Number. 6.9. Numb. 9.7, 8. Numb. 32.33, 34, 15, 32.
And concerning the man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day, Numb. 15. he
consults with God in all those. Thus Moses and holy men before the Law written,
they enquire of God to know his mind and pleasure, and follow that which God
taught them. But after the Law, and word and will of God was written, then to
the Law and to the Testimony, If they speak not according to this, it is
because they have no light in them, Isaiah 8.20.
as the Prophet Isaiah does witness.

2. Observe what matters they were which Moses did judge, they were not matters
of Faith, but matters of Fact, Controversies between man and man, he did judge
between one and another (says that Text) which Nayler himself alleges
nothing to the purpose (if he speak of the Question) For this is whether the
Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures, Exodus 18.16.
be the chief Judge of controversies of Faith, not of actions between man and
man. And this the Reader, whose eyes are open, may easily discern that this
place of Scripture will neither fit Cardinal Bellarmine a Papist, nor James
Nayler a Quaker. Nayler does allege diverse other Scriptures of the same
nature, to the same purpose; As that in Solomon's prayer, 1 Kin. 3.9.
1 Kin. 3. That God would give him an understanding heart, that he might judge
Gods people, to which the former answer may give full satisfaction.

3. 1 Cor. 2, 15, 16.
Nayler alleges that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. He that is spiritual judges
all things, yet he himself is judged of no man; for who has known the mind of
the Lord that he might instruct him? but we have the mind of Christ. Therefore
(if Nayler may judge) it is not the Spirit of God speaking in the Scriptures,
but the Spirit speaking in such spiritual men as he is, which is the chief
Judge of Controversies of Faith. And herein the Quaker exceeds Cardinal
Bellarmine by far; for the popish Cardinal would have infallibility of spirit,
only in the Pope and his company; but the Quaker makes every particular
spiritual man, a spiritual Pope, to be a chief Judge of Controversies of
Faith, otherwise Naylers Scripture is nothing to the Question, for the Question
is not concerning a private inferior, or particular Judge, but concerning a
chief Judge of Controversies of Faith, as Nayler himself repeateth it.
Question the first. To give an answer to this and diverse other Scriptures
alleged by Nayler. But that he cannot away with a Distinction, he might know
that there is a twofold Judge of Controversies. First, A Magisteriall Judge (as
I may so call it) a supreme highest directing public Judge, to judge and
discern and direct, and finally, sentence in the Church, all Controversies of
Faith. And this is the holy Scriptures, and the Spirit of God speaking in the
Scriptures, to which Christ himself did appeal and direct his hearers, to
appeal unto in that great Controversy of Faith, John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they that
testify of me (which we noted before.)

Again, there is a Ministerial, inferior, more private Judge of spiritual
things, and so of Controversies of Faith. And this may be every particular
spiritual regenerate man or Christian, according to the measure of that light
of the Spirit and grace of Faith he has received from Christ, and for the
satisfaction of his own conscience, by the light of the Spirit speaking in the
Scriptures, and the light of Christ within him, he may so far as he is able,
judge of opinions and doctrines of men, whether they agree to the doctrine of
Christ in the holy Scriptures, I say to the satisfaction of a man or woman's
own conscience, in what they are to believe; yea those to whom God has given
a more excellent measure of understanding in the mystery of Christ revealed in
the Scriptures; these may in some measure judge, or be inferior Judges of
spiritual things, and of private men's opinions in the Controversies of Faith;
For the Spirit of the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.
is subject to the Prophets; but all private spirits of men in the world, yea
the Pope himself and all the Quakers, they are and must be subject one day to
the voice of Gods Spirit speaking in the holy Scriptures, and that word of
Christ recorded in holy Scriptures, shall judge them all at the last day,
witness our Savior himself, John 12.48. The Quaker abuses other places of
holy Scripture. But the Answers I have given, may satisfy any understanding
Reader; I shall name only one more from Nayler and his fellow Quakers, which
seems to conclude against the Scriptures excellency and authority, of being
chief Judge of Controversies of Faith, calling the holy Scriptures a dead
letter, and the letter that kills all, to discountenance the credit of the
Scriptures, and to exalt their own private spirit. The place of Scripture they
pervert, is that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made us able Ministers of
the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit, for the letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life. I might answer at large, and show how the
letter is taken in several places of Scripture, and evidence the falsehood of
Naylers application of this place also; but in brief. The letter is taken 1.
Propperly for the first Elements or beginnings of learning for the letters in
several languages, from which by spelling and putting together, are made
syllables, and words and sentences, in and by which the mind of God and men is
held forth to our understanding, as in those letters of Greek and Latin and
Hebrew, which were written over Christ upon his Cross, Luke 23.38. And these
letters may be called dead letters, because of themselves they signify nothing
to declare the mind of the writer, except they be joined and put together in^
syllables words, and sentences.

Again, Improperly and more generally, letters are taken several ways in
Scripture, for Epistles private or public, 2 Cor. 3.6.
etc. And in that place alleged, The letter kills. The Apostle does speak of
the Law which he opposes to the Gospel, which is the ministration of the
Spirit, as will appear plainly, if the Chapter be truly looked into, yea the
Law it self does not properly kill of it self, but is said to kill when men
break it, and so are become subject to death by sinning against it; Romans 7.12,
13. Romans 6.27. Psalm. 119.50.
for the wages of sin is death, otherwise the Law and word of God does
quicken, as David found by experience, Psalm. 119. And the written words of God,
are lively oracles, Acts 7.38. Heb. 4.12. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17
as the blessed Martyr Stephen witnessed; yea mighty in operation and able to
make us wise to salvation, and therefore most fit to be the chief Judge of
Controversies of Faith, whatsoever the deluding Quakers pretend to the
contrary. Thus I have done with the first Question, I come now to the second
Question.

Mr Bourns Argument. The second Question: Whether the private Spirit in the
Pope, or in any Quaker, be the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith. This was
denied, and Mr Bourne proved the negative by this Argument. No Spirit which is
subject to trial it self, can be the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith;
but the private Spirit in the Pope, or in any Quaker, is subject to trial it
self, therefore the private Spirit in the Pope, or in any Quaker, cannot be the
chief Judge of any Controversies of Faith. The first proposition was not
denied; and the second is witnessed, 1 John 4. Beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God, for many false Prophets are
gone out into the world. And here you may see the Evangelist gives a general
rule for Christians to try the spirit, all spirits in any man, yea all that
pretend to the Spirit of God, as the Pope and the Quakers do, therefore their
spirits are to be tried, and so are not fit to be chief Judges of
Controversies of Faith.

Naylers Answer James Nailer wrangled about the Spirit, but gave no satisfying
answer to the Argument, but said the Spirit was not a private spirit, if he was
but in one against a hundred, and said the Spirit was in them, and he was Judge
in them, as if the Spirit in the Quaker were a public infallible Spirit, and
so fit to be the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith, which cannot be; for if
the Spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.32.
then much more the Spirit in the Pope, or in any Quaker, subject to trial,
and therefore they cannot be the chief Judges of Controversiies of Faith.

Mr Bourns 2 Argument. Then Mr Bourne pressed a second Argument. No Spirit
which is a Spirit of Error, lying and false accusation, is or can be a chief
Judge of Controversies of Faith. But the Spirit in the Quaker, and in James
Nayler in particular, is a Spirit of Error, lying and false accusation,
therefore that Spirit in them, cannot be a chief Judge of Controversies of
Faith. The first proposition is clear, because a chief Judge must and ought
to have in him a Spirit, not of error, lying and false accusation, but a
Spirit of truth and righteousness, that he may be directed to give true
judgment, and not to wrest or give wrong sentence; for this is contrary to the
Law of God, Exodus 23.6, 7. Thou shall not wrest the judgment of the poor in his
cause, and keep the far from a false matter, etc. Therefore a Spirit of
lying, and Error, and false accusation, is not fit to be a chief Judge of
Controversies, especially not of Controversies of Faith. And for the second
proposition, that the Spirit in the Quaker, and in James Nayler in particular,
is a Spirit of Error, lying and false accusation. Mr Bourne proved it by these
Arguments.

Mr Bournes Argument. Whatsoever Spirit did or does affirm, and falsely accuse
the Ministers of Christ in England, that they err and are false Teachers,
because they say, the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, are the Gospel,
that is a Spirit of Error, lying and false accusation. But the Spirit that is
in James Nayler, and some of his fellow Quakers, did or does accuse the
Ministers of Christ in England, that they err, and are false Teachers, because
they affirm the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, to be the Gospel;
therefore the Spirit in the Quakers, and in James Nayler in particular, is a
Spirit of Error, lying and false accusation, and so not fit to be chief Judge
of Controversies of Faith. To evidence the second proposition, Mr Bourne did
show a book, the Title of it was concerning a threefold Antichrist, or to that
effect. The same in effect by Richard Tarnworth, in his discovery of Faith, or
rather of infidelity, page 13.
This was set out by some Quaker, and in page the 13. in the very leaf, in
which begins a Letter of James Naylers, to several friends about Wakefield,
when Nayler was prisoner at Appleby. There is Printed this false accusation of
the Ministers in England, as of Error, because they say the books of Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, are the Gospel, or contain the glad tidings of
salvation through Jesus Christ, therefore the Quakers are not fit to be the
chief Judges of Controversies of Faith

Naylers Answer Nayler answered, he did own that Letter writ to his friends
about Wakefield, and said the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John were not
the Gospel, but Christ was the Gospel.

Mr Bourns Reply. Mr Bourne went on to prove, that the books of Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John, were the Gospel by this Argument.

Whatsoever book the Spirit of God by the mouth of the Evangelist Mark,
calls the Gospel; that is the Gospel; but the Spirit of God by the mouth of
the Evangelist, Mark, calls the book of Mark the Gospel, therefore that
book of Mark is the Gospel. The first proposition is unquestionable, The
second is witnessed, Mark 1.1.
Mark 1.1. The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as
it is written in the Prophets. Observe first, That the Evangelist affirms,
that the Gospel was written in the Prophets. Secondly, that he calls the
beginning of that book, the beginning of the Gospel; not that the Gospel was
not before, for the Gospel was preached to Adam and Eve in Paradise, after the
Fall, Genesis 3.15.
But the seed of the woman shall break the serpents head; but that it was the
beginning of that book of the Gospel, of that history of Christ, and
declaration of salvation by Christ Jesus. For what is the Gospel, but good
news or good tidings of a Savior, as that Angel speaks, Luke 2.10. And
good tidings of Christ, is not Christ himself, and so the Gospel is not
Christ himself, but good news of salvation by Christ. This is the book of
Mark, the Gospel; and thus are the books of Matthew, Luke and John the
Gospel; and the Quaker denying this, and accusing the Ministers of Christ, as
of Error; for affirming it, this assertion is plainly proved, that the Spirit
in the Quaker, is a Spirit of Error, lying and false accusation, and so not
fit to be the Judge of Controversies of Faith.

Naylers Reply. Nayler had nothing to answer, but liar, liar, hold thy tongue,
and sit down, for Christ is the Gospel, the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John, are not the Gospel.

Mr Bournes Argument. Mr Bourne began to press another Argument out of a book
of one Nicolas Cowlings, Nicol. Cowling his word to 52 London Ministers, p. 15,
etc.
A word to the 52 London Ministers, pages 15, 16. whereing he blasphemously
compares Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, to a wooden leg. Let me be bold,
says he, to impart unto you my former experience in the mystery of Christ. I
thought a long while, a faith in Christ that died at Jerusalem, was the top
gallant of a Christian; but since it does appear, I Answer, There was a
twofold Faith in the person of Christ. 1. Erring of an outward Redemption from
Roman tyranny, of which Luke 24 21. Acts 1.16. 2. True Faith of an eternal
Redemption from sin, etc. and purchase of liternall happiness for his people
in Heaven, of which, Mat. 1.21. John 1.29, 6, 47, 14, 1, 2, 3. The Erring faith
died with Christ, but the true faith in Christ's person, did not dye, as the
Blasphemer imagines.
etc. that faith the Disciples had in the person of Christ, died with him, etc.
therefore it is Christ in the mystery that will save. A wooden leg (says
he) that is tied on, may do some service, but it is the leg natural that is
useful for all occasions. Thus does this blasphemer, make Christ our Savior
that died for us at Jerusalem, but as a wooden leg. But it is not that
Christ that died at Jerusalem mighty to save, not only by the work of
sanctification in us by his Spirit through Faith to purify our hearts, but by
the work of justification by his blood, and merits of his death and passion,
by which he has made our peace, even by the blood of his cross, and
righteousness imputed to us for our justification before God, as by our
holiness and good works, we are declared to be justified before men: For God
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. But this Spirit in this deceived Quaker, or
Erring Sectary, who glories in his perfection, and disgracefully calls Christ
that died at Jerusalem, a wooden leg, it is an Erring spirit, and therefore
not fit to be judge of Controversies of Faith.

Naylers Answer James Nayler would give no Answer to this, but said he would
not answer for any but himself. Yet certainly James Nayler needed not then to
have disowned that, or denied to answer; for it is nothing but what he himself
did own before, Read the Perfect Pharisee, p. 8. position. 5.
as appears by that expression of his, in a Letter sent by him to one in
Lancashire; That he that expected to be saved by him that died at Jerusalem,
should be deceived. This witnessed by those reverend Divines, who writ that
book, called the Perfect Pharisee. And it seems it is their common opinion,
as may appear by that speech of another Quaker near Bristoll, who said, he was
not such a fool, as to hope to be saved by Jesus Christ that died at Jerusalem
sixteen hundred years ago, Mr Farmer in his mystery of godliness and
ungodliness.
witnessed by Reverend Mr Farmer, a Reverend Minister in Bristol. This spirit
in the Quaker cannot be the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith.

Mr Billingsleys Argument. Then Mr John Billingsley to prove that the Spirit in
the Quakers, and in James Nayler in particular, was a lying scandalizing
Spirit, and so not fit to be Judge of Controversies of Faith, brought an
Argument to this purpose.

That Spirit whatsoever that did or does affirm, that Bul-baiting, swearing,
cursing, and such like, are the fruits of John Billingsley's Ministry, that is
a lying scandalizing Spirit; but the Spirit that is in thee James Nayler, or
thou thy self James Nayler, did affirm, that Bul-baiting, swearing,
cursing, and such like, is or are the fruits of John Billingsley's Ministry,
therefore thy Spirit is a lying scandalizing Spirit, and so not fit to be Judge
of Controversies of Faith. For the first proposition, I John Billingsley do
appeal to all the Congregations which have heard me preach in Chesterfield, or
else where, if ever I preached any such doctrine, or did ever countenance any
such thing neither was I at home at Chesterfield, when the Bul-baiting was, nor
did I know any thing of it, but am altogether innocent. And for the second
proposition. That thou James Nayler did falsely accuse me, John
Billingsley, it is evident by thy own hand writing in this paper, which thou
did send to me, subscribed with thy name, in which are these words, viz.
This day is the fruits of thy Ministry manifest in the open streets, a
multitude gathered together, to sport themselves in setting one of the
Creatures of God against another to torment and thy people thou teach,
whooting, yelling, Mr Billingsley did then read these words, written by James
Nayler to him, etc.
swearing, cursing, and blaspheming the dreadful name of God; Is this thy
Ministry? etc. Thus did thou falsely accuse me and my Ministry; therefore
thy Spirit is a lying, and false accusing Spirit, and so not fit to be the
chief Judge of Controversies of Faith.

Naylers Answer To which Nayler said, he did own that paper, and shuffled to
excuse himself, and said, he did not say so, but that the people to whom he
did preach, were so doing, viz. swearing, cursing, etc.

Mr Billingsley's Reply. But Mr Billingsley read the paper to all the
congregation, wherein it did appear, that Nayler had writ, that Bul-baiting,
swearing and cursing, were the fruits of Mr Billingsley's Ministry. Naylers
Answer At which Nayler knew not what to say for himself, but still persisted
with an audacious face to justify himself, and called Mr Billingsley liar,
liar, and bad him hold his tongue.

Mr Billingsley's Reply. Upon which Mr Billingsley said, what a desperate
fellow art thou, so shamelessely to deny that which thou have writ with thy
own hand, and do now again prove thy self to be a liar, and a false
accuser, and wilt not confess thy Error, or to that purpose.

Naylers Answer But Nayler vapoured, and called Mr Billingsley liar, and said
he had accused him to be a liar, and a persecutor of the Ministers of Christ.
Mr Billingsley's Reply. But Mr Billingsley did justify, that Nayler was a
liar, and a persecutor, and that his false accusation was a persecution, or to
that effect. And I might now add, well so he might; For may not all men see,
that the Quakers and James Nayler himself, are as malicious persecutors of the
Ministers of Christ in England, as ever they had? And would they not be as
bloody as ever any, if it lay in their power? witness their cruel threatenings
both in their printed Pamphlets and by word of mouth against us, witness their
laboring by all means, to pull down the very Calling and Ministerial
Office, witness their endeavor to hinder the people to pay us any
maintenance, though due unto us both by the Law of God and the Nation. Ierem
18.18.
Do they not smite us with the tongue? as Jeremies enemies did him, and
dissuade our people from giving heed to any of our words; And what are these
but persecutions? Rev. 12.10.
or what is persecution if this be not? and who are liars if these be none? and
who is a diabolical false accuser, John B^nting en Elder of the Church in
Ashover.
if James Nayler is not? John Bunting an honest Yeoman (of more true spiritual
understanding, then many Quakers) sitting by Nayler at this disputation,
writing in short hand what Nayler said, Nayler seeing him write, said to him,
thou writest lies there: To whom John Bunting Replied, Nayler, thou art the
father of them then, for I write what thou speak. Whereupon I may observe
and argue, what may be argued from what St Paul did affirm of the Cretians,
and of the vain talkers, and deceivers amongst them; That one of their own
Prophets said, The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies, Tit.
1. Tit. 1.10, 11, 12.
And if the Cretians were liars, then that Prophet was a liar that said so,
because he was a Cretian, and if the Cretians were not liars, then he was a
liar for saying they were liars when they were not. In like manner, if John
Bunting did write lies, then Nayler was and is a liar, because John Bunting did
write that which Nayler spoke; and if John Bunting did not write lies, then
James Nayler is the liar, because he falsely accused John Bunting for writing
lies, when he did not; so that James Nayler is proved the liar out of his own
mouth and pen, and having a spirit of lying, he is not fit to be the chief
Judge of Controversies of Faith.

Thus I have done with the Disputation upon this Question, Whether the private
Spirit in the Pope, or in any Quaker, be the chief Judge of Controversies of
Faith. I shall only add one Argument more, and pass forwards.

Mr Bournes additionall Argument. No Spirit that is a Spirit of Error and
Blasphemy, is fit to be or can be the chief Judge of Controversies of Faith.
But the Spirit in James Nayler, and other Quakers, is a Spirit of Error and
Blasphemy; Therefore the Spirit in James Nayler, and other Quakers, is not fit,
nor can be a chief Judge of Controversies of Faith. For the first proposition,
certainly the Quakers themselves will not deny it, and (if they do deny it) no
honest Christian will deny it; and for the second it may be witnessed by these
instances. 1. Blasphemy against God, whilst they do affirm they are equal
with God; See Saules Errand to Damascus, p. 5, 6, 7, 8.
This was witnessed against George Fox (as is confessed by Fox and Nayler, one
or both) (If that Book they call Saul's Errand to Damascus be theirs (as their
proselytes boast it is) and seek after it to learn their wicked doctrines. It
was objected (say they) That George Fox professed and owned that he was equal
with God. S^^ the Perfect Pharis^^ p. 3.
And in the: Perfect Pharisee it is witnessed, That George Fax being asked by
Dr. Marshall in the presence of two Justices of Peace in Lancashire, namely, Mr
Thomson and Mr Lawry, whether he did believe himself to be equal with God;
the said Fox in answer thereunto, positively affirmed, thus I am says he
equal with God; and this was deposed by Dr Marshall and Mr Altham
Schoolmaster of Lancaster, at the general Sessions in Westmerland, and was
deposed again before the honorable Judge Puleston at Lancaster the next
Assizes after, witness that book called the Perfect Pharisee, Perfect Pharisee
by Mr T^^mas W^ld, Mr R^chard Prid^a^^, Mr Samuel Hammond, Mr William (...), Mr
Will. D^rant. The Perfect Phar^see. p 3. etc.
made by those five Reverend Divines nere New Castle, p. 3 which declares part
of the Quakers blasphemies, in the page before recited. And in the same book it
is witnessed against James Nayler, that he being asked by William Baldwinson of
Underbarrow in Westmorland, whether he believed that any could be as holy.
Just, and good as God himself, Nayler answered, that he himself was as holy,
just, and good, as God himself. And this Mr Baldw^nson did offer to depose to
Colonel Briggs, who is a man fearing God, and of eminent trust in the
Commonwealth; and what is this but presumptuous blasphemy, both in Fox and
Nayler, so proudly to boast of their own perfection, and that not by the
imputed righteousness of Christ, for that they deny, but by their own inherent
holiness (which they pretend to be Christ within them) and yet so basely to
manifest themselves notorious liars? The brief volation of the irreligion of
the Northern Quak^rs wherein their h^d principles and practices, doctrines and
manners are discovered, read page 24 25.
As in that Pamphlet, called Readiness Errand to Damascus, in which there are a
hundred untruths, as may be proved by a hundred witnesses, testified in that
book called A Brief Relation of the irreligion of the Northern Quakers, page
24. Many of them (says that Author) will be as ready to say and unsay any
thing, as if lying were a virtue, and they make no conscience (says he) of
raising false reports against those especially, who do any way oppose them;
and he goes on further. Thus wholly by lies, lying doctrines: lying wonders,
lying reports, they endeavor to build up the Kingdom of the Father of lies
amongst us. Thus far and further that reverend Author. I might add many more
of their errors lies, and abominable blasphemies: But these are sufficient to
witness the Spirit in James Nayler, and diverse of his fellow Quakers, to be a
Spirit of Error and Blasphemy, and therefore not fit to be chief Judges of
Controversies of Faith. Other their Errors and Blasphemies are so abominable,
that I hold them fitter to be buried in silence, then to rake them up out of
the Devils dunghill, to be an odious noisome stink and offense to the people
of God.

Now for Naylers answer, and his cross interrogatories, upon this and other
Questions. I have answered them fully in every particular, which with my Reply
to his Quaeries and discoveries of many of his abominable lies, increased in my
written hand, prepared for the Press, to above threescore sheets of paper,
which I have ready by me, the which I was resolved by Gods grace, to have
printed in Defense of Christ, the Gospel, and the faithful Gospel Ministers
of Christ in England, and their maintenance. But coming to London, I find
these things so sufficiently answered, and truth so sully satisfied against the
Quakers and their errors, by so many godly and learned Divines, that I
conceive to add more, is but to cast water into the sea; and therefore I have
thought good to print only these few sheets, and to let the rest of my labors
rest unprinted until God shall give me a further call unto that work. I now
therefore proceed to the third Question Disputed.

3 Question Disputed. Whether every man be bound to look to the light within
him as sufficient for his ditection to attain salvation? This we denied.

The state of the Question. The sense of the Question is, Whether every man and
woman in the world, have a sufficient light within them, for their direction to
attain eternal life, so as he or she needs not to look to the outward
light of the written word of God, or to the light of the Gospel revealed in
the holy Scriptures, or to any outward teaching by man whatsoever, although it
be agreeable to the Scripture of truth.

This in effect was the opinion of Nayler, as it is of diverse of his fellow
Quakers, witness Nayler himself, in his answer in writing, sent to us the day
after the Dispute, and since printed. The light of Christ says he, which has
enlightened every man that comes into the world, is ourlight, and to that is
every one bound to look for direction to attain Salvation, and that he
affirms as sufficient, or to that effect. And the same did Nayler affirm
before, in his discourse with Mr Will. Cole at Kendall; See the Perfect
Pharisee, the subscription to the Epistle, and pages 17.18. Richard Tarnworth,
p. 51. etc
To whom he said that every man in the world had a light within him, sufficient
to guide them to salvation, and this he extended to the Indians that never
heard the Gospel, witness that book called the Perfect Pharisee, written by
those five Reverend Ministers nere New Castle, named before. And thus James
Nayler, and diverse others of his fellow Quakers in other Pamphlets, which for
brevity sake I omit.

Mr Bournes Argument. But I did prove the contrary by this Argument. No man
whosoever is darkness, is bound to look to the light within him, as
sufficient to direct him to attain Salvation; but every natural man is
darkness, therefore no natural man is bound to look to the light within him,
as sufficient for his direction to attain salvation, and so not every man that
comes into the world. The first proposition is evident, because it is in
vain to look for light in darkness. And the second proposition is witnessed
by the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were once darkness (says he) to the
Ephesians, but now ye are light in the Lord. In the state of nature corrupted
by Adams Fall, they were darkness, having their understandings darkened
through the ignorance that was in them, because of the blindness of their
minds. And what light then had these within them, sufficient to direct them to
Salvation; or what sufficient light has any natural man in the world? and
therefore all are not bound to look to the light within them, as sufficient
for their direction to attain Salvation.

Naylers Answer All Naylers answer was, it is false, it is false, liar, liar,
all are enlightened, and have a light within them sufficient to direct them to
Salvation, or to that effect. Mr Billingsley's Argument: And after some
wranglings by Nayler, Mr Billingsley called to Nayler to hear an Argument, and
gave this, or to this effect.

None of those to whom Paul was sent to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God, had a light within them, to which they were
bound to look, as sufficient to direct them to attain Salvation. But there
were some Gentiles, to whom Paul was sent, to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God; therefore some Gentiles had not a
light within them to which they could look, as sufficient to direct them to
attain Salvation, and so not every man in the world. The first proposition is
manifest, because if those Gentiles had a light within them sufficient to
direct them to attain Salvation, then what needed the Lord to have sent
blessed Paul through so many dangers, to turn them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan to God. And for the second, the Evangelist Luke
does witness it, Acts 26.17, 18.
Acts 26. Delivering thee from the Gentiles, to whom I send thee to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God. And thus again it
is evident, that all have not a light within them sufficient to direct them to
salvation, and therefore are not bound to look to that as a sufficient light,
which is weak and insufficient, as the light of every natural man is.

Nailers Answer. To which Argument, Nayler gave his common Answer, crying out
aloud as before, liar, liar, all have a light within them, to which they ought
to look as sufficient to direct them to Salvation.

John Buntings Argument. Upon which John Bunting of Ashover, named before, an
understanding Christian, sitting near Nayler, Replied to him, Dead men have no
light in them, but every natural man is a dead man, dead in trespasses and
sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
^s witnesses the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. and what light is there then in a natural
dead man, sufficient to direct him to attain salvation?

Naylers Answer Nayler Answered not to the Argument, concerning natural men's
blindness, but said Christ had enlightened all men, John. 1.9.
and alleged that place, John 1.9. He is that light that lightens every man
that comes into the world; and thence he would infer, every man is
enlightened, and has a light within him sufficient to direct him to attain
Salvation, or to that purpose, so near as I could remember.

Mr Bournes Answer to this Scipture, alleged, A first light. Unto this
Scripture I did then answer to this effect, by distinguishing of light, and
said, there was a twofold light. The first the light of nature, the remnant of
that created light of the knowledge of God in man, by which men might know so
much of God by the Creatures, Romans 1.19, 20.
as may make them without excuse, Romans 1.19. And which is a spark of light
naturally in every man's conscience, Romans 2.14, 15.
Romans 2. And with this light Christ the Creator (God, equal with God the
Father, by whom this light and all things were made) he does enlighten every
man that comes into the world; that is into this habitable world, in which we
dwell; and all that are borne into this world in their right mind and senses,
Christ does enlighten with this natural light. But this light of nature, since
the Fall, is so darkened, that although it may be sufficient in some respects,
to make men without excuse; Romans 1.20.
yet it is not sufficient to reveal Christ, or to give sufficient direction to
attain Salvation by Christ Jesus, as that light which reveals Christ in the
Gospel. Again, there is a second light, and this is the light of special
grace given outwardly by the preaching of the Word, and inwardly by the Spirit
of God, by which a soul is enlightened with such a special light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, as he owneth, 2 Cor.
4 6, 7.
and by faith embraces Christ, Romans 5.
not only as a Justifier by his blood and merits, but a Sanctifier by his
Spirit and grace in the soul, and so a perfect Savior both from sin here,
and from wrath to come hereafter, as due to sin. And this in ward light of
special grace, every man (to whom God has given it) is bound to look unto it
in a special manner; yet not so as to neglect the outward light of the
Gospel, revealed in the holy Scriptures, for the getting of more light,
because we know here but in part, 1 Cor. 13 9, 10, 11, 12.
and therefore should wait for more light of grace, until we come to enjoy a
perfection of light in glory. Because this special light of grace held forth
in the Gospel, is not given to all, for all do not know the mystery of the
Gospel; nor is it given unto all, witness our Savior, Mat. 13.11.
To you it is given (says he) to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God,
but to others it is not given. And the Evangelist, John himself in the same
Chapter, John 1.9, 10, 11, etc.
in which he affirms, that Christ is the true light that lightneth every man
that comes into the world, in the very next verse he affirms, that Christ
was in the world, and the world did not know him; yea he came to his own, and
his own received him not. But if all in the world had this special light of
grace within them, they would have known Christ; John 18.35.
yea if all his own people, the people of the Jews, his own Nation, had
received this special light of grace, they would have received Christ; But
many of them were in blindness, yea darkness it self, and did not know
Christ; for had they known him, they would not have, crucified the Lord of
Glory, witness the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. Th^^ answer was delivered logically
in more brief terms, but to the same effect, and more fully and largely
expressed now for weak brethrens sakes, that they may more easily understand
Naylers deceits in his answer, who gave that more largely also in his written
paper, then at the Disputation for that was commonly very short; It is false,
it is false, and liar, liar. And this was Naylers Reply to this Distinction of
light given by me, It is false, liar, hold thy peace and sit down, there is
but one light that lightens every man that comes into the world, and in a
vapouring manner doubled it again, there is but one light which lightneth
every man that comes into the world.

M. Maud^sl^y Mr Maudsley (as I remember) Minister of Dronfield, sitting near
Nayler, asked him what world he did mean, Nayler. Question. Nayler answered,
there is but one world, and that is the world of men; he was asked again,
whether he himself was in the world, or out of the world, Answer. to which
Nayler answered, that he was out of the world; unto which Answer, some one
replied, it were well if thou wast out of the world, that thou might not
spread thy errors as thou do in the world. Nayler wrangled still about the
world, and said, there was but one world, and that was the world of men, which
were all enlightened. Then one that was near Nayler, asked Nayler what world
that was into which Christ came, John 16.28.
when he came out from his Father, and which he left when he went to his Father
again. And Nayler shufied, and would have avoided the Question; upon which
there fell out a wrangling, and other passages impertinent to the Question in
hand, which for brevity I omit here, and shall remember them in my
Animadversions upon Naylers false Relation. Mr Bourne. Whiles they were
wrangling, Mr Bourne did call to Nayler to leave wrangling, and hearken to
another Argument, to prove that all men had not a light within them, sufficient
to direct them to attain salvation, and was giving forth an Argument. Mr Moors
Argument. But Mr Moor Minister of Brampton, stepped in and gave this Argument, or
to this effect. If there be some men that have no light in them, then all men
have not a light within them, sufficient to direct them to attain salvation.
But there are some men that have no light in them, witness the Prophet Isaiah,
chap. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this rule, it is because there is no light in them. Therefore all men have not
a light within them, sufficient to direct them to attain salvation.

Naylers Answer James Nayler vapoured, and said, that place made most against
us: But he gave no answer to show how that place did make against us, but cried
out, all are enlightened by Christ, and that light of Christ is in them all,
liars, liars, all are enlightened. Thus in a proud contemptuous manner, did
Nayler behave himself; and as his manner was when he could not answer, turned
aside, and talked to those that were about him, and at last affirmed again,
that all had a light within them, sufficient to guide them to attain
salvation, Naylers Argument. because Christ said to the Pharisees, Luke 17.21.
The Kingdom of God is within you, in you Pharisees, and therefore in all, and
so the Kingdom of God being in all, all are sufficiently enlightened to direct
them to attain salvation.

Mr Bournes Answer. To which, Answer was given to this effect; That the
Kingdom of God is taken diversely in the holy Scriptures.

1. For the Kingdom of Gods power, which is Gods sovereignty over all the
world, and this Kingdom of God is in every creature, and in, and over every
man in the world; he sets up and pulls down, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7, 8, etc. Dan. 4.30,
etc.
kills and makes alive at his pleasure, and rules, and over-ruleth all, when
and how he will, and this Kingdom of God was in the Pharisees, as in all men
whatsoever.

2. The Kingdom of God is taken for the Kingdom of Gods Grace, and this
diversely taken also. First, for the outward administration of the coming and
Kingdom of the Messiah Christ Jesus, in the Gospel; of which the Pharisees
questioned Christ in that place, Luke 17. Luke 17.20. Genesis 49.10.
demanding when the Kingdom of God should come, that is, the Kingdom of the
Messiah, which was prophesied and promised should come, Psalm. 2. Psalm. 45.6, 7.
Luke 2.25, 26.
and which the Saints and people of God did expect and wait for; And John the
Baptist (the forerunner of Christ) told the people this Kingdom was at hand.
This Kingdom is called the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 3.2. Mat. 13.24, 44. Acts
1.3.
and it is taken for the Gospel, and Gospel. Administrations, and this Kingdom
and coming of Christ, this King, not only the Scribes and Pharisees, Luke
24.21.
but some of the Disciples, did think should come in outward pomp and power,
to deliver the Jews from the tyranny of the Romans, under whom they were
tributaries. But Christ gives them answer in that 20 verse. Luke 17 20.
The Kingdom of Christ the Messiah (which they enquired after) comes not
with observation, or with outward pomp; but says Christ, the Kingdom of God
is within you, not individually or personally, as if the Kingdom of heaven
(the Gospel) and Christ the Messiah had been in every one of them
particularly, or in every Pharisee; but collectively, or as they were a company
of Pharisees, or people of the Jews. The Kingdom of God is within you, or
rather amongst you, as the Greek word is well translated in the margin of our
Bibles in that place. And thus Expositors agree, ye seek the Messiah as if he
were absent, when he is in the midst of you, Beza upon the Text. P^scator on
that place. Thus Passor Iex con, etc. (...) in medio vestri intra gentem
vestram within your nation.
says Beza. And Piscator, The Kingdom of God is in the midst of you, in the
bosom of your Nation. The Kingdom of God is within you, understand it not as
every one is looked upon, by and in himself, but as one body of many people,
collected or joined together in one body or Nation. And the Kingdom of God in
this sense, was in and amongst the Pharisees and people, to whom Christ did
preach at that time. Again, the Kingdom of Grace is taken for the gifts and
Graces of the Kingdom, or which Christ the King gives to his subjects and
servants, and by his Spirit works in them, as Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and such like inward
spiritual Riches, and Graces of the spirit, by which God does rule and reign
in the heats of his children, and this Kingdom is in Gods Elect, his chosen
and faithful, and called ones, Rev. 17.14.
not only amongst them, but in them; but this Kingdom or these graces of the
Kingdom of Christ, the Messiah, and Christ's Spirit, was not in the Pharisees,
to whom Christ did preach, though it was amongst them, in such as were true
believers, Gods faithful servants. This Answer was delivered far shorter, but
to this effect and purpose.

Naylers Reply. But Nayler according to his accustomed manner, cried out,
liars, liars, it is false, Christ speaks of the Kingdom of Grace, and that
was in the Pharisees, and so in all, and all have a light in them, to which
they may look, as sufficient to guide them to Salvation; or to that effect.

Mr Bournes Reply. Mr Bourne did Reply, John 3.1. John 19.38, 39
that some of the Pharisees may be were believers, as Nicodemus, who came to
Jesus by night, and was at cost with Joseph of Arimathea, at the burial of
Christ, who was a Disciple, though secretly for fear of the Jews. And if this
Kingdom of Grace was in any of the Pharisees, they must be such as were
believers, for other wise in unbeleevers and wicked Pharisees, who kept men (to
their power) from confessing of Christ to be the Messiah, John 12.42.
in them Christ was not, nor the Kingdom, nor the graces of Christ's Kingdom.
For in unbeleevers, where sin, rules and reigns in their mortal bodies,
and they obey it in the lusts thereof, there or in their souls, Romans 6.12, 16.
the Kingdom of Grace is not; for Christ and sin cannot reign both together
in one soul. This answer was shorter likewise but to this intent.

Naylers Reply. But Nayler would not yield the Question for all this; but told
the people the Kingdom of God was in the Pharisees, and we were liars that
denied it.

Mr Maud^sl^y's Question. Mr Maudesley (if my memory did not fail me) or some
one near him asked Nayler, what Kingdom that was, which Christ spoke of after
his resurrection, Acts 1. Acts. 1.3.
He was seen of them forty days, speaking of the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God.

Naylers Reply. Nayler did not answer what that Kingdom was, but said, Christ
was not seen after his Ascension. In which Nayler did mistake; Answer. for it
was not after Christ's Ascension, but after his resurrection. After which it was
demanded, what Kingdom Christ did speak of Acts 1.

Reply of another to Nayler. But some one near Nayler Replied, Acts 9.5, 17. 1
Cor. 9.1. 1 Cor. 15.7, 8.
that Christ was seen after his Ascension. For he was seen of Paul, as Paul
himself does testify. Am not I an Apostle, have I not seen the Lord? And last
of all, he was seen of me, as one born out of due time, etc.

James Naylers Answer. Nayler answered, Christ was seen, but he was seen
invisibly.

Reply. To which one Replied, that was a Bull or a senseless Answer, for
whatsoever is seen, must be seen visibly, in what manner soever it is seen,
whether by the eye of the body, or by faith the eye of the soul. If we see him
that is invisible, as Moses did; yet he is visibly seen with those eyes, Heb.
11.27.
by which we do see him, either in Grace or Glory.

Nayler. Yet Nayler still persisted in his confidence, that some thing might be
seen invisibly, and continued his railing and reviling phrases, liars, liars,
or to that effect. 4 Question Disputed. The time was far spent; and Mr Bourn
called to another Question, and that was taken, which was the last that was
proposed, and the last that was disputed. This was, whether it be lawful to
call any man Master or Father upon earth?

The sense and meaning of the Question, was, whether it be lawful to give any
honor, or titles of honor to men, to Father or Master, to Magistrate or
Minister, to Lords or Ladies, or the like.

The occasion was in part, the Qakers crying out against the Ministers of
Christ, because they are called of men Masters; and in part the proud uncivil
unchristian behavior of some Quakers toward their natural parents, and
ordinary masters; some toward civil Magistrates, honorable Judges and
Justices of peace, before whom being called, they have (some of them in my
sight) kept on their hats in a contemptuous manner, and denied any outward
honor, or civil respect to be given unto them; James Nayler in his answer to
this Question, in his false Relation. yea Nayler himself in his written
Answer, calls us the Ministers of Christ Antichrist, because we are called of
men Masters.

And Richard Farnworth another railing Quaker, R. Farnworths discovery of
Faith, and diverse papers, page 2.3.
and their common practice of refusing to give any outward respect to
Magistrates, not only Fox and Nayler, but their seduced proselytes witness
daily.

But Mr Bourne brought an Argument, to prove it lawful to call or be called
Master or Father, and to give civil honor, and titles of honor, and respect
to men, according to their place and dignity, to this effect.

Mr Bournes Argument. Whatsoever titles of honor, or respect the holy
Patriarchs or Prophets, or Apostles, or other faithful men have given unto or
received from each other, which are no where forbidden in the Scripture, or
written word of God, those are lawful for Christians, now to give unto, or to
receive from each other. But these titles of honor or respect, as Father and
Master, and Lord and Lady, and the like, they have been given and received by
the Patriarchs and Prophets, and Apostles, and other holy faithful men, and
are no where forbidden in the Scripture or written word of God. Therefore the
same titles or names of Father and Master, Lord and Lady, and the like may
lawfully be given and received by Christians in these days, or in this age of
the world. First proposition I conceive will not be denied, except by such as
will not be tried by the holy Scriptures. And for the minor or second
proposition, we shall make that evident by an induction from singular or
particular examples of godly men recorded in holy writ.

First, if you read Genesis 23.6. You may find, Abraham came to the children of
Heth to ge^ a burying place for Sarah his wife (she being then dead) he spoke
to the children of Heth, and bowed down himself to the people of the land, to
give unto them, not any divine religious worship, which is due to God, but
civil honor due to men; and three times is Abraham there called Lord by that
people, and faithful Abraham takes that title to himself, without any
reproof of them, for giving that title to him, or any refusing of that title
given him, which he would not have done, if it had not been lawful to have
received any such honor, nor would he have bowed down himself to the people
of the land, if it had been sin to have done so. For Abraham was a knowing
faithful man, believing in Christ the Messiah to come, and rejoicing to see
Christ's day, witness our Savior, John 8. John 8.56.(...)


Genesis 24. When Abraham sent his religious servant to provide a wife for his
son Isaac, Genesis 24.27:
his servant puts up his prayer to God, O Lord God of my Master Abraham,
send me good speed this day, and show kindness to my Master Abraham. And he
calls Abraham Master, sixteen or seventeen times in that Chapter, which
certainly he would not have done, if it had not been lawful to call Master.

Genesis 32.18.
read Genesis 32. And you may find that Jacob calls his brother Esau, Lord, in
that direction of his to his servants, whom he sent before with a gift to his
brother. When you meet my brother Esau (says he) and he shall ask you, whose
are these Cattle? you shall answer, it is a present sent to my Lord Esau; and
he calls Esau Lord four times in that Chapter.

1 Kin, 18.7, 8.
read 1 Kin. 18. When religious Obadiah (who did fear the Lord from his youth)
met Elijah the Prophet; he calls Elijah Lord. Art not thou my Lord Elijah.
And verse the 8. The Prophet calls wicked Ahab Obadiahs Lord: For thus
speaks he to Obadiah, Go tell thy Lord, behold, Elijah is here. Thus does
that good Prophet, not only suffer himself to be called Lord, but calls
wicked King Ahab Obadiahs Lord, which he would not have done, if it had not
been lawful; and if it were lawful to call profane Esau Lord, and wicked
Ahab Lord? wherefore is it not lawful to call Master or Father, or to give
honorable titles to men now, unto whom they do belong, both by natural and
civil respects, witnessed by the practice of the Saints and holy men in
several ages of the world?

For, fifthly, if you read 2 Kin. 2. Did not the children of the Prophets at
Bethel, call Elijah, Elishas Master? Know thou not that the Lord will take
away thy Master from thy head to day? And again, another company of the
Prophets at Jericho? verse 5. Know thou not that the Lord will take away thy
Master from thy head to day? And in the same Chapter, verse 12. When Elijah was
taken up into heaven in a fiery Chariot, Elisha cries out, my Father my,
Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. Thus you see, titles
of honor, Lord, Master, Father, are both given and received by holy men, and
this without any reproof or check of the Spirit of God, recorded in the
Scriptures, concerning any of these examples, therefore sure it was and is
lawful, to give and receive titles of respect and honor, to call or be called
Lord or Master, or Father, according to every ones place and dignity. All these
places of Scripture were not then alleged.

Naylers Answer. And James Nayler by his loud clamor, hindered the pressing and
application of those places that were alleged (as much as he could) and cried
out, that was in the Law, but now in the Gospel, Christ forbids to call any
man Master, or to be called of men Masters or Father, and alleged that of our
Savior, Mat. 23. But be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even
Christ, and all ye are brethren; and call no man your Father upon earth, for
one is your Father* which is in heaven. And hence Nayler would infer, That now
in time of the Gospel, it was not lawful tocall any man Master, or to be
called of men Master or Father, upon earth.

Mr Bournes. Reply. Then I replied, and bad Nayler read the context in the
verses before, and if his eyes were open, he might see the mind of Christ, that
it was not absolutely to forbid his hearers to call any man Master or Father,
but to forbid the ambitious seeking of honor, and the ambitious love of honor,
which was in the Scribes and Pharisees. This you may find is that that he
reproves in them, in the 6 and 7 verfes. They love (says Christ) the
uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and
greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi: And this
ambitious pride and love of honor from men, Christ reproves in the Pharisees;
and this he forbids his disciples, but be not ye called Rabbi, for one is
your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren, he would not have his
Apostles to seek superiority and power one over another in a proud ambitious
manner, Diotrephes-like to love to have the pre-eminence, as 3 John 9. the
Evangelist does witnesle Diotrephes did. Yet our Savior Christ here does not
simply and absolutely forbid all giving or receiving of honor, or of calling,
or being called of men Master, or Father, or Lord or Lady, or the like. Yet it
is certain, our Savior Christ does forbid so to call Master or Father, as to
make any man the Master or Father of our Faith, instead of Christ; or that any
man should be called Master or Father, so as to take the honor of chief
Master or Father, or Teacher, to himself, which is due to Christ. This is that
which Christ forbids; and this is that which the Apostle Paul forbids the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. Now this I say (says the Apostle) that every one of you
says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. One
said he was Paul's Disciple; another, he was Apollos; another, he was Christ's.
But what says the Apostle, is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? Thus
they made Paul the Master or Father of their faith. And this the Apostle Paul
reproves here. And this Christ our Savior reproves and forbids, Mat. 23.
And Christ does forbid to give that divine honor which is due to God and
Christ, that God-man our Savior, to any man in the world; but he does not
forbid to give or receive civil honor and respect one to another, according
to each man's place and dignity, or so to be called of men, Master or Father, or
the like.

To this effect was the Answer given, but more close and brief then now I give
it.

But Nayler, instead of any better Answer, cried out, liar, liar, hold thy
peace for shame, does not Christ plainly forbid to call Father or Master, and
made a great clamorous noise, and bid, si^ down for shame, for shame.

Mr Bourns Reply. Then Mr Bourn called to Nayler, and bid him leave his loud
shameless out cries, and hearken to an Argument to prove the Exposition to be
truth, and according to the mind of Christ, which was to this effect.

Mat. 23. But Christ himself, and the Spirit of Christ in the Apostles, does
elsewhere approve of the calling of men Masters, and Fathers, and of giving
other titles of respect and honor to men: Therefore Christ in that place, Mat.
23. did not forbid to call any man Master or Father, as James Nayler
pretends. The first proposition is witnessed to be clear, because Christ is
truth, yea, the way, the truth, and the life, and he is no way contrary to
himself. For Jesus Christ is yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever,
Heb. 13. Therefore Christ does not forbid that here, Mat. 23. which he allows
elsewhere. And for the second proposition, that Christ and his spirit in the
Apostles, does approve and allow fit titles of honor to be given to men, as
is agreeable to their conditions in their several places. This will be
evident, and if you read rightly consider, that of the Evangelist, Mark 7.
Where Christ is witnessed to repeat the Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy
Mother; and in the next verse, Christ himself gives the name of Father and
Mother to the parents of the man, of whom he spoke to the Pharisees. And (says
Christ) ye suffer him no more to do ought for his Father and Mother. Now Christ
certainly would not have named Father and Mother, nor have approved of those
titles and that relation, if it had not been lawful. And the same also does
the Spirit of Christ in the Apostle Paul, in diverse places, read Ephesians. 6. Col.
3. Col. 4. and you may find, he gives the titles of Father and Master. Honor
thy father and mother, and fathers provoke not your children, and masters give
unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a
master in heaven. And the Apostle Peter to the same effect, 1 Pet 2. Honor all
men, love the brotherhood, fear God, honor the King (the supreme magistrate
by whatsoever title he be called) And servants be subject to your masters with
all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward; so that
here are earthly fathers and masters, as well as God and Christ is our father
and master in heaven. And therefore it is evident, that our Savior Christ in
that place, Mat. 23. did not simply and absolutely forbid to call or to be
called master or father; for if he had, he would not have approved it himself,
nor would the Apostles of Christ (who had the Spirit of Christ) have done it,
as we have proved they did; to this purpose was the Argument, but shorter.

Naylers Answer. Then Nayler was constrained to acknowledge, that a natural
father might be called father by his child, and a civil master might be
called master by his servant; but that it was not lawful for any other to give
or receive such honor, or titles of honor, as father or master, or the like,
or to that effect. Although this acknowledgement of Naylers was contrary to the
Doctrine and practice even of Nayler himself, and diverse of his fellow Quakers
and proselytes, as the uncivil carriage of some of them toward their natural
parents, and civil masters, and of others toward Magistrates and Ministers,
does witness at full. Mr Gardener Minister of Eckinton.
Mr Gurdiner (a good Disputant) as I remember, seeing Nayler wrangle, and
endeavor to shift off from the Question, began to press Nayler with an
Argument. But before Mr Gardener could speak out his Argument, Naylers Reply.
Nayler would not hear him, but he and some other of his sellow Quakers that
stood by him, cried out aloud, liar, liar, stop thy mouth, and made a
clamouring noise against him, to cause him to hold his peace. Mr Gardener. To
whom Mr Gardener seeing Nayler's so uncivil, unchristian, and unreasonable
behavior; Replied, fie on thee thou unreasonable man, thou art not fit to be
reasoned with, or to that purpose, and so turned his back upon him.

Mr Bournes Argument. Then Mr Bourne called aloud to Nayler again, and bad him
leave his uncivil railing and reviling speeches, and loud clamours, and
hearken to an Argument to prove it, which was to this effect.

That title of honor which St Paul did give to Festus, who was none of his
natural father, nor civil master, that it is lawful for Christians, to give
now to those who are neither natural fathers, nor ordinary civil masters. But
read Acts 26. and you may find, that St Paul styled Festus, noble Festus,
which is a title of honor, and high respect, and therefore it is lawful now
to give honorable titles, to such as are neither natural parents, nor civil
masters, and to be given by such as are neither natural children, nor meniall
or hired servants or to this end was the Argument.

Naylers Answer. Nayler answered those were noble Romans, and deserved honor,
etc. But now, etc. as if he thought now we had none so worthy, to whom such
honor should be given (for to my best observation, this was the sense of his
broken speech) for he did not speak whole sentences, but wrangled about
giving honor, and said, howsoever honor might be given to natural parents,
or civil masters, yet how could we prove, that any that professed themselves
Ministers of Christ, should be called master or father, contrary to that of
Christ, Mat. 23. noted before, where he said, Christ did particularly forbid
his Apostles and ministers, to be so called.

Mr Bournes Reply. To which Mr Bourne replied, Nayler, and bad him read again
that place, Mat. 23.1, 2. and thou shall find, that Christ did speak there to
the multitude, as well as to his Disciples, and what in that text he did not
forbid others, he did not forbid them. Consider the Text fully, and thou may
see it plain, if thou have eyes to see.

Naylers Answer Nayler according to his custom, instead of other Answers,
cried out, it is false, it is false, prove that any Minister of Christ should
be called master or father, or have any such honor given to them or to that
effect.

Mr Maudesley Mr Maudesly Minister of Dronfield, being near to Nayler (as I
remember) brought an Argument from that place, Eccl. 12.11. The words of the
wise are like goads fastened by the masters of the Assemblies. And if by the
Masters of the Assemblies be intended teachers of Gods people, and Ministers of
Christ, then it is lawful for them to be called masters, because the Spirit of
God in Solomon, calls them so. But this is apparent, that by masters he
means teachers, therefore it is lawful to call the ministers of Christ who
are teachers, of Gods people, masters, or to that purpose.

Naylers Answer But James Nayler sings still his old song, liar, liar, no such
thing is intended there, and wrangled ignorantly about the sense of that place,
as nothing concerning ministers in the New Testament.

Mr Bournes Argument. Then Mr Bourne bad Nayler to hear an Argument out of the
New Testament, from that place of the Apostle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the
Elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially them
that labor in the word and doctrine to this effect. If preaching Elders that
labor in the word and doctrine be worthy of double honor, then the faithful
laboring ministers of Christ, are worthy of honor; but preaching Elders who
labor in the word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor, witness the
Apostle in that place, 1 Timothy 5. therefore the ministers of Christ, who labor
in the word and doctrine, are worthy of honor, and so may lawfully have honor
given them; yea, that honor which is due to them, that is, not only the honor
of maintenance, but the honor of reverence and esteem; let a man esteem of us
as ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.12.

Nailers Answer This was not so fully pressed then. But Nayler answered and
said, The ministers of Christ they must be honored in the Lord, but not be
called master or father, and have any outward honor. And still Nayler
wrangled, and turned to those people near him, not answering the Argument, but
railed at ministers for suffering our selves to be called masters, vapouring in
contemptuous terms, but bringing no word of proof at all.

Mr Bournes Argument. Mr Bourne bad Nayler leave off his vapouring, or to that
effect, and hearken to another Scripture, 1 Cor. 4.15. where St Paul did take
to himself the name of father of the Corinthians, their spiritual father,
though you have ten thousand instructers (says he) yet ye have not many
fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Now if
Paul as a minister of Christ converting souls, did lawfully take to himself,
the name of father; Then the faithful ministers of Christ who convert men and
women to Christ, may lawfully take to themselves the name of father; but this
was lawful for blessed Paul, therefore it is lawful also for all the
faithful ministers of Christ Jesus, who turn men to God, to take to
themselves the name of father and so to be called masters or sirs, which is a
title of honor and respect: For what title was lawful to that blessed
Apostle, and Silas, preachers of the Gospel, to receive from men, and they did
accept that as lawful now to Gods faithful ministers: But it was lawful for
the Apostle Paul and Silas, to receive the title of sirs or masters, (...)
Domini, Sirs or Masters, a title of honor.
and they did accept of that title of honor from the Jayler, Acts 16. He came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and said, Sirs, or Lords or
masters. what must I do to be saved? therefore it is lawful for the ministers
of Christ, now to be called sirs or masters, and to receive such titles or
respects, which are due to their ministerial place, and honorable calling.
The Argument was not then so fully and largely given, but to this effect Mr
Bourn was pressing to prove this truth, But James Nayler like the deaf Adder,
turned away his ear, and would not answer, and according to his practice, when
he was not able to answer an argument, Mr Bourn and Mr Billingsley stood in the
reading seat, and James Nayler was in a seat near Mr Major, a good distance
from the reading seat.
looked aside, and spoke at random to the people, in a bragging vapouring
manner, what he could do; and while we were pressing him to answer, we did see
Mr Major, and some other nere him, going forth of their seats, and Nayler and
others following, and so the Disputation ended abruptly.

But if any understanding Christian, who is not biased by misinformation of
his judgment, consider these Arguments, they are sufficient to prove that
honorable respect that is due to the ministers of Christ, not that Christ's
ministers should ambitiously seek after honors or honorable titles, for that
Christ forbids, and that Gods faithful Ambassadors affect not, endeavor not.
But yet when false teachers seek to disgrace, and profane persons with their
wicked plots and designs to dishonor us, and our honorable ministerial
calling, we are bound in conscience with St Paul, to magnify our office, and
to vindicate our selves from such wicked practices of erring Quakers, and of
profane ungodly malicious men, who neglect and contemn the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ. Thus, as near as I can remember, out of my notes taken, and what
I could learn of others, I have given a just and true relation of that Dispute
at Chesterfield, if it were worthy of that name, being a wrangling by that man,
who had not artificially, scarce natural order of reasoning, but like a
boisterous railing fellow, who by loud outcries, little or nothing to the
purpose, sought to deceive the people. A witty honest Gentleman who was present
at the Dispute, asked his name, and one told him his name was James Nayler; to
whom (as I was informed) he replied, certainly his name should no more be
called James Nayler, but James Rayler; for (said he) I never heard a more
bawling, railing, reviling fellow talk; or words to that purpose. The Lord
give him repentance, if it be his will. I have said sufficient to the Question,
to prove the lawfulness of giving honor to Christ's Ministers. That it is
lawful to give hanour.
Now I shall only add a few Arguments to prove the lawfulness, yea, duty, of
giving outward honor, as well as inward honor to Magistrates and others,
according to their place and dignity, whatsoever these Quakers gatrulate to the
contrary. It is lawful to give the title of Lord and Lady, and the like, and
to declare our due respect by outward testimonies of the honor and due regard
we do owe unto them as to superiors. James Nuyler. It is true, James Nayler
being examined upon an indictment of blasphemy against him, at the Sessions at
Appleby, in January. 1652. See the brief reply to some part of a scurrilous
and lying pamphlet, called Saul's errand to Damascus, printed 1653.
kept on his hat before the Bench; and when Justice Pearson, one of the
Justices, commanded to put off their hats, James Nayler answered, I do it not
in contempt of authority. And he being asked again by Colonel Briggs, If he
were in the Parliament House, would thou keep it on? To whom James answered,
if God should keep me in the same mind I am now in, I should. Then Colonel
Briggs replied, I knew thou would contemn authority. The same has been the
practice of diverse other of the seduced, seducing Quakers, before the
honorable Justices of the Peace in several Countries. And Naylers pretense of
giving honor inwardly, when they refuse to give any outward civil respect,
what is it but pharisaicall dissimulation, instead of sincere humility and
obedience, or duty to those whom the Lord has set over us in power and
authority, for his glory, and the good of his people: For shall we not judge
the tree by its fruits? But let me evidence duty a little in this respect.



But Magistrates supreme and inferior, Judges and Justices, and such as are of
higher or lower place and power, they are by Gods Ordinance, set in place above
others in Gods stead for the peoples good: Therefore they are to have honor
given unto them above others, to be declared outwardly, as well as settled
inwardly in the hearts of men. The major or first proposition, is most
agreeable to reason and order even in nature it self. The herbs and grass of
the field, which are inferior, and have but a vegetive life, they do service,
and give a kind of obedience in Gods Ordinance, for the nourishment and service
of the beasts and cattle, which are superior in nature, and have besides a
vegetive or growing life, a life of sense also, which is more excellent.
Again, these brute creatures which have only the vegetive and sensitive life,
they are inferior unto, and do service, and yield obedience unto man, which
is a more noble creature, superior to the other, as having not only a vegetive
and sensitive, but also a rational life, and more excelling inferior
creatures; and man has yet the great God, and Creator of heaven and earth,
above him, to whom he does owe honor and service both in soul and body, Romans
12.1. Thus in order of nature, and thus in order of government, the
Comm-wealths and governments of Nations, there is and ought to be order of
superior and inferior; 1 Cor. 14.33.
for as in the Churches of the Saints (so in Commonwealths) God is not the
Author of Confusion, but of peace and good order in all; And so an orderly
respect is to be had to every superior, according to their place and power.
The Apostle Paul gives evidence to this at full, Romans 13.1, etc. Let every
soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and
the powers that be ordained of God, they are Gods Ordinance, and he is the
Minister of God to thee for good. For this cause pay you tribute also, for they
are Gods ministers attending continually upon this very thing; And hence he
concludes, render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute, custom
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Thus honor is a
due as well as tribute or custom, or any other service. I might call in the
Apostle Peter to witness the same, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17. but I refer the Reader
to the Scripture it self, these testify an honor due to our superiors. And
for the minor or second proposition; That magistrates supreme or inferior, are
Gods Ordinance set and approved by God for government above others; the places
alleged might suffice, but if you read Exodus 18.21, 23. when Jethro, Moses
Father in law, gave him that good counsel, to provide out of all the people
able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and to place
them over them to be Rulers of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens.
And if thou do this thing, and God command thee so, then shall thou be able to
endure, and this people shall go to their place in peace. And Moses did so,
and God himself does approve of this order of government, of superiors and
inferiors, and gives Moses order to gather to God seventy Elders, and the
Lord takes of the Spirit of government, that was upon Moses, and gave it to
the seventy Elders, as you may read Numb. 11.16, 17, 25. Thus are Governors
over the people, of Gods own ordination, as superiors, and so a higher honor
and respect is due unto them.

Psalm. 82.16.
Does not the Scripture call them Gods as in Gods stead? And to evidence both
propositions, Numb. 11.28. when the Spirit of God rested upon Eldad and Medad
in the camp, Joshua in his zeal speaks to Moses to forbid them, and calls him
Lord, and Joshua said, my Lord Moses forbid them; he gives him an honorable
title, my Lord Moses. And did not wise Abigal call David Lord, when he was
coming with his Soldiers to destroy churlish Nabal for his ingratitude? 1 Samuel 25 24, 25, etc. Yea diverse times in that Chapter, she gives David the
honorable title of Lord. And did not good David cry after King Saul, and
gives him this honorable title, my Lord the King? 1 Samuel 24.8. And does he
not then give outward reverence to Saul, to witness his honorable respects to
Saul, as to his superior in place and power; the text says, David stooped
with his face to the earth, and bowed himself? This is far unlike Naylers and
his quaking companions carriage, even to Princes, Magistrates, and Judges, and
Justices of the peace, to stand with their hats on their heads, and to speak to
them in an irreverent manner; thou man, or thee man, who sit in the place
of judgment, do this or that, as some of them have said and done. May I not
say the same of Abner, who (as David testifies) was a Prince, and a great man
in Israel, yet when he came to David, he gave him titles of honor; I will go
says he, and gather all Israel unto my Lord the King, 2 Samuel 3.21. What need I
tell you of that great Prophet of God, Elijah, does he not call Ahab Obadiahs
Lord, go tell thy Lord, behold Elijah is here, 1 Kin. 18.14. Though Ahab was a
wicked man, yet he does not take from him his title of honor. And does not
the Spirit of God give the title of Lord to that noble man, on whose hand the
King leaned? 2 Kin. 7.2. What need I tell you, that in the New Testament, the
blessed Evangelist Luke, in that his history of the Gospel which he did write
to Theophilus, he gives him that honorable title, most excellent Theophilus,
Luke 1.3. a title of great honor and high esteem given to Theophilus; And
blessed Paul calls Festus the Governor of that Province, noble Festus, Acts
26.25, 27. And in the same Chapter, when he was before King Agrippa, to answer
for himself, he does not in a proud or blind ignorant sottish manner, call
Agrippa thou man, or thee man (as the Quakers do) but King Agrippa, believe
thou the Prophets, I know that thou believe. Thus do these Saints give titles
of honor according to men's place and dignities; I will name but one more, and
that is the blessed Evangelist St John, that beloved Disciple of Christ John
19.26. in his second Epistle, he gives that gracious woman, to whom he writ
her title of honor and respect, verse 1. The Elder (says he) to the elect
Lady; And again verse 5. I beseech thee Lady, Thus does the blessed Apostle,
give titles of honor, to whom honor belongs. And these certainly, are
witnesses sufficient to justify this truth against the Quakers; that there may
be some kind of respect, civil respect I mean, though not to corrupt or
flatter, yet to know and own difference of persons, and to give to each that
honor which is due to them in their several places.

Again, as it is a duty to give honor and respect, so it is lawful for
Princes, Judges, Justices and others, to this honor, when in a right and due
manner it is given unto them. I shall call in only one witness to evidence
this truth, besides those whom I named before, to whom honor was given of men,
none of which godly men did reject that honor which was ascribed and given unto
them which had it been unlawful to have received, they would certainly have
refused. The witness is that holy man Job, one that feared God, and eschewed
evil, and what does he testify of himself? you may read, Job 29.7, 8, etc.
when I went out of the gate (says he) through the City, when I prepare my seat
in the street, the young men saw me, and hid themselves, and the aged arose and
stood up. Righteous Job was an honorable and just Judge, he was eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame; he was a father to the poor, and the cause which
he knew not, he searched it out; he did break the jaws of the wicked, and
plucked the spoil out of his teeth, therefore was Job honorable, and both old
and young did honor Job, not in their hearts only (as the Quakers would have
magistrates honored) but outwardly also, in giving all civil outward honor
unto them, according to their several place and dignities; and good reason it
should be so: For who more honorable, profitable, and necessary, then good
religious, just and righteous Judges and Magistrates, in a Commonwealth? When
justice is rightly executed, it exalts a a Nation, Prove. 14 34.
but sin is a shame to a people: The want of magistracy and government,
prepares a people for destruction, Judges 18.7. My Text the 2d time I preached
before the honorable Judges at Darby Assizes, in which I proved the necessity
of, and honor due to Magistrates, at full.
witness that City Laish, who perished suddenly: And this is one reason given.
There was no Magistrate in the Land, which might (punish, or) put them to shame
in any thing. And this shall suffice to witness against all adversaries
whatsoever, and clear up and resolve the Question into this conclusion, That
it is lawful to call Master or Father, and to give honor to every one, even
to the highest powers, and to inferior Magistrates, to the honorable Judges
and Justices, and to all others, according to their several places and
dignities whatsoever; yet so as the honor and glory of God is to be exalted
above all.

And thus I have ended these four Questions disputed. There were three more
Questions; but for these and Naylers answers, and his cross interrogatories, I
have given my sufficient answer before, and my reason wherefore I print no
more, namely, because they are so fully answered already by many learned
divines, that it were but to cast water into the sea, as I have expressed in
the one and twentieth page of this my Defense of the Scriptures, etc. to which
I refer the Reader.

I shall only give some brief Animadversions upon Naylers most false relation
of that Dispute at Chesterfield, and pass to a conclusion.

1. It is an approved observation, Rectum est index sui and obliqui.
that a true and right rule will discover it self, and that which is false,
and so will a true relation; therefore I need do no more here, but refer the
Reader to what I have before expressed; yet to draw the curtain a little, that
you may see Naylers picture the better, I shall number up a number of his
untruths, in that most false relation of that Dispute.

Naylers untruths. 1. In the very title, Nayler calls it a dispute between
James Nayler, and the parish-Teachers of Chesterfield. This is an untruth, for
there was but one of the Parish-Teachers of Chesterfield, who had any hand in
that Dispute.

2. In the next line he adds, By a challenge against him. This is a second
falsehood; for the challenge was on his side, not only by John Prith boasting of
Nayler, but by other of his fellow Quakers.

3. He says, the simple may see the bloody minds of these men. This is a third
untruth; for there were no bloody minds, nor thought of any persecution against
him, but of a Christian Conference.

4. He says, when we speak fair, war is in our hearts. This is a fourth
untruth, we had not war in our hearts, nor any desires, but of peace, and that
peace and rruth might dwell together.

5. He says, swearing and cursing, and blaspheming the dreadful name of God,
are the fruits of John Billingsley's Ministry. This is a fifth untruth; for Mr
Bilingsley never preached any such doctrine, nor approved of any such practice,
nor did know of the Bul-baiting Nayler spoke against. There was a poor man of
Wingerworth near Chesterfield, his name (as I was informed) was William Frost;
who having heard Naylers desperate doctrine, and read some of his books,
despaired, and went and drowned himself: Was this the fruits of thy Ministry,
Nayler? thou will not confess it was.

6. Nayler cries out, and calls Mr Billingsley man-pleaser; O thou
man-pleaser (says he.) This is a sixth lie; for it is evident Mr Billingsley is
not a manpleaser, for he refuses to baptize children, except the parent will
come unto him and be examined of the knowledge of his Faith. And does not give
the Lords Supper but to such as he examineth and approves, by which too many
are displeased, which they would not, if they did know what was good for their
own souls.

7. (For I let pass diverse) he says God is risen to cut us off, and it had
been good we had never been borne. And I hope this is a seventh untruth, and a
false prophecy. But Nayler manifests his bloody mind, he would cut off all
the faithful Ministers of Christ if it were in his power. The Lord rebuke him.

8. He says there was another plot against him. Which is an eighth untruth;
there was not any plot, (as he pretended) as God and our conscience can
witness for us.

9. For I omit again diverse abominable untruths observed by Mr Billingsley, in
that part of Naylers false relation. Nayler again says, he was showed the
many plots laid, to have cast him in prison, and to prosecute our bloody
intents. This is a 9th untruth from the father of lies; if any showed thee any
such thing, they were inventers, and thou art a publisher of an abominable
untruth.

10. Nayler at the Disputation, did most falsely accuse me, that I did swear
by Mary, when I did not so much as name Mary, as all that could hear me can
witness at full, nor did I swear at all; as in my letter I writ to him the
next day, I justified sully, and wished him to repent his lying accusation;
which letter he has most falsely printed, heaping up one lie after another, in
a most shameless manner; as if the Spirit of lying and slander, had taken full
possession of him, which I leave off to rehearse, as being unwilling to blot my
paper with so many of his odious stinking untruths; yet I shall mention one
more most abominable. Nayler says, page 10. That these Priests set themselves
with all their strength, to prove swearing lawful, etc. which is a most
hellish lie. This was the truth, when Nayler wrangling, denied it to be lawful
to take any oath before a lawful Magistrate, upon any occasion, Mr Billingsley
proved it lawful by diverse places of Scripture, both out of the Old and New
Testament, which Nayler basely perverteth, and according to his custom,
raises that most wicked slander, and here he fully makes good that which is
justified against him and his fellows, in that brief Relation of the
irreligion of the Northern Quakers, noted before, page 20. basely to manifest
themselves notorious liars; as in that Pamphlet called Saul's errand to
Damascus, in which there are a hundred untruths, as may be proved says that
Author, by a hundred witnesses, and many of them says he, will be as ready to
say and unsay any thing, as if lying were a virtue; and that they make no
conscience of raising false reports against any that oppose them. And this I
now find to be most true in lying Nayler by this experience. But if the
adversaries of Christ called the Master of the house Belzeebub, no marvel if
these Quaking adversaries like the devil (that grand Quaker) do belie and
scandalize the ministers of Christ. The Lord forgive them if it be his will, if
they have not sinned that sin unto death, of which St John witnesses. There
is a sin unto death, I say not that thou should pray for it, 1 John 5.16.

Now for thy twenty Quaeries Nayler, which thou sentest and addest toward the
end; I have in part answered them already in what I have writ, and part of them
are such Questions against which St Paul speaks, as tending not to
edification of those who are weak in the faith, Romans 14.1, 2. but rather to
their distraction, if not destruction, therefore more fit to be silenced and
buried in darkness, then to be revived or brought to light. Secondly, some are
hypocritical, like that of Herod to the wise men, Mat. 2.7, 8. Thirdly, some
are curious Questions, to satisfy curious busy minds, such as thou art, which
being answered, will not profit to godliness or edification, contrary to the
rule, 1 Cor. 14.26 Fourthly some of them are tempting captious Questions, like
those of the Pharisees (thy Fathers) to Christ our Savior, which he either
answers by Questions to his adversaries again, or else wisely rejects or
avoids to escape their treacherous designs against him, as Mat. 21.23, 24,
etc. Mat. 22.16, 17, 18, etc. Fifthly, some are foolish and unlearned
Questions, which gender strifes, not love, or any benefit to souls, and which
the Apostle directs Timothy to avoid, 2 Timothy 2.23. and gives the same command
to Titus, because says he, they are unprofitable and vain, Tit. 3.9. And I
had rather follow St Paul's counsel, then satisfy thy folly. It is the
counsel of the wise man, in some such cases to be silent, Prove. 26.4. Yet if
thou will have an answer to thy twenty Quaeries, and to thy challenge and
brags, lest thou be wise in thy own conceit, or any of thy generation, Prove.
26.5. know that all or most of them, or those that are fit to be replied unto,
they are sufficiently answered by diverse religious learned men, Ministers of
the Gospel, and others. If any desire to see, First let them read learned Mr
Baxter's answer to the sixteen Quaeries, The Worcester petition d^fended,
printed 1653.
upon the Wostershire Petition; to which is added seventeen Counter-Quaeries,
not yet answered by thee and thy fellows that I have seen. 2. Read Mr Baxters
Quakers Catechism, The Quakers confuted, printed, 1654.
and the Quakers Questions answered there, printed 1655. 3. Read godly Mr
Eaton, in his book called the Quakers confuted, being an answer to nineteen
quaeries of thy companions, in which your weakness and erroneous wickedness
is discovered, and the truth vindicated. 4. Read that book called the Perfect
Pharisee, The Perfect Pharisee, printed 1654.
in which by way of position and proof, your wandering quaeries are learnedly
and religiously answered, by those five godly Ministers nere New Castle. 5. Mr
Fowler, etc printed 1655.
Read solid and accute Mr Fowler's book, called Satan at Noon Day, of the
several sorts of Quakers and Familists, And there you may see the matter of
these familisticall quaeries answered, and errors confuted to their sorrow, if
they had grace to be sensible. 6. The mystery of ungodliness, printed 1653.
Read judicious and zealous Mr Farmer of Bristol, in his book entitled the
Mystery of Godliness and ungodliness, in which the Questionist ungodliness,
is there discovered to their shame. 7. Reverend and succinct Mr Sherlock's
answer to twenty seven of the Quakers wild Questions, Mr Sherlock printed 1654.
and his learned discourse of the Spirit annexed, which might stay these erring
wandering spirits, from their false pretenses to the spirit of Christ. 8 Read
that profitable book, A brief relation printed 1653.
of that observant Author called A Brief Relation of the Irreligion of the
Northern Quakers, wherein their horrid principles and practices, doctrines and
manners, are exposed to the view of every intelligent Reader, and the Quakers
Saul's errand to Damascus, in which are said to be an hundred lies replied unto.
9. Antichrist in man, printed 1655.
Witness that book entitled Antichrist in man, the Quakers Idol, by Mr
Joshua Milner a servant of Christ in the Gospel, in which is an answer and
confutation of some of the Quakers dangerous and damnable doctrines. 10. Mr
Prins Quakers unmasked, printed 1656.
witness godly and learned Mr William Prinne Esquire, detecting these Quakers
to be but the spawne of the Romish Frogs, Jesuits, and Franciscan Friars,
sent from Rome to seduce poor souls in this English Nation; with his reply to
John Audlands railing paper, by which, and what I have proved in my Answer and
Arguments upon the Questions before, which were Disputed, any Christians seeing
eye, may see that James Nayler and his wandering fellow Quakers, are but poor
pedlers for the Priests of Rome, and the Jesuits servants, carrying up and
down the Nation, their packs of errors, and bags of paper-quaeries, invented
and hatched in Antichrists and the devils warehouse, which they offer at every
door or place where they come, like braided, baused, rotten wares, to deceive
and cousen poor souls, and to disturb the peace and quiet of the Nation, that
this common enemy may more easily wheel us about to Rome, and Romish Tyranny,
and so bring us to confusion, from the highest to the lowest; from which, God
of his mercy protect us. And for Ministers maintenance, Genesis 14.20. Genesis 28.22.
Lev. 27.30, 31. Numb. 18.21. Deuteronomy. 10.8, 9. Mal 3 8 9. Mat. 23 23. 1 Cor. 9
13.14. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 7.8. Printed for Mr John Wright in the Old Bailey,
1646. Mr Deacons discovery, printed 1656.
read Dr Carleton, Dr Tillesley, Dr Slater, Sir Henry Spelman, Sir James
Sempel, Mr William Prin Esquire, my own sixth book (I have printed) called a
light from Christ, leading unto Christ; and diverse others, who have
sufficiently proved Tithes not only lawful, but due by divine Right to Christ,
and the Ministers of Christ in the Gospel, and that the taking them away
without due redemption, is that sin of sacrilege. Last of all (for I let
pass others) Read Mr John Deacon, a solid and sharp Questionist, Replyant and
Demandant, In his public discovery of a secret deceit, or the man of sin
unmasked, and Satan transformed into the resemblance of an Angel of light, in
that Sect or Society, commonly called Quakers, in which you have nineteen
quaeries sent to the Quakers Speaker, at the bull and mouth near Aldersgate,
and miserably answered by James Nayler, whom he calls justly, the grand
fomentor of heresy; and replied unto by Mr Deacon, and fourteen more returned
by Nayler, and fully answered by Mr Deacon; and four and twenty more proposed
by Mr Deacon, which nor James Nayler, nor any of his fellow Quakers (I believe)
can truly and plainly answer, but they must deny the holy Scriptures, or
forsake their own false erroneous and heretical principles. And thus I have
said enough to direct James Nayler, and all his deceived, deluding
Antichristian pharisaicall company of Quakers, where they may find Answers to
their so much bragged of quaeries. It would be happy for them, if they could
leave their errors, and enquire after the knowledge of Christ, that they may
be taught by him Ephesians. 4.20, 21. as the truth is in Jesus, which I desire I may
pray for. And now dear souls, if any of you that belong to Jesus Christ, have
been drawn away with the error of these wicked perfect pharisees (as they are
rightly called) return again to your first Husband, Christ your Savior, Hos.
2.7. you will find it will be better with you so, then now it is, and fly the
society of these deluding, equivocating, Antichristian Quakers, who speak
sometimes of the Scriptures, but deny them to be the word of God, and make use
of them in show, but not in sincerity and truth. Who pretend to a Christ within
them, but deny the merits of Christ's blood and righteousness of Christ imputed
to believers for Justification and salvation. Some who proudly boast, George
Fox James Nayler, etc. proved before. Read their books, and where do you read
of asking forgiveness of sin for Christ's sake.
they are equal with God, and as holy, just and good, as God; that they are
perfect, and without sin, and therefore ask no forgiveness of sins at Gods
hand, for Christ's merits sake, casting away both the Article of Faith, in which
we profess we believe remission of sins; and that petition of the Lords
prayer, in which our Savior teaches us to pray, Forgive us our trespasses, as
we forgive them that trespass against us. Yea they endeavor to draw poor
souls from Christ's public Ordinances, and to forsake the plain strait way to
Heaven, Mat. 7. like cheating thieves draw them into by ways, Mat. 7.14.
that they may-more securely rob and spoil them of the rich treasure of the
Gospel, and blessed way to glory.

Seek then my friends to Christ, who is the wisdom of the Father, Prove. 8.
Col. 2.3.
for wisdom and power to depart from the tents of these wicked men, Numb.
16.16.
and to turn again unto the Lord, that ye perish not in their Apostasy from
Christ. And for you my honored precious souls, and well beloved in the Lord
Jesus, who by strength from Christ, have withstood the temptations of these
deluding Quakers, and are established in the Faith of Christ, Watch still, and
beware ye be not drawn away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your
own steadfastness, and labor in the use of all good means; public in the
congregations of the saints, private in your families, and secret in your
closets, by the power of Christ, and assistance of the Spirit of holiness, John
15.5. Phil. 4.13. to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. To whom with God the Father, and God the
blessed Spirit, be glory both now and for ever.

Amen.
Immanuel Bourne.

FINIS.

