AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Swearing.

To which is annexed an Appendix concerning an Assertory and Promissory Oath in
reference to the Statures of the two now flourishing Sister Universities.

Also a short Catalogue of some remarkable Judgments from God upon Blasphemers,
etc.

By R. BOREMAN, D. D. and Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.

(...)

Et optimum est homini ut non omnino juret. Maimon.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane, MDCLXII.

To the Right Honorable, THE Lords and Commons, Assembled under our most
Religious and Gracious King in the High Court of Parliament.
Right Honorable,
IT was ever a grand masterpiece of prudence in Patriots and State-Governours,
whilst they were to encounter in an hostile way with foreign enemies, to
secure all homebred dissensions, as knowing that a bosom or domestic enemy is
most dangerous.

Lib. 4. de Bell. Jud.
It is recorded by Josephus, that the intestine broils amongst the Jews,
especially those of the Zelots, were so great, that Vespasian on purpose
deferred the siege of Jerusalem, being informed that they promiscuously
murdered one another, so that the less work was left for the Sword of the
Conqueror.

Thus those (...) (as he calls them) Seditionists, subdued themselves before
their City was besieged, and entered by Vespasian. Moreover, I have read of an
old prophetic saying, That our glorious and now flourishing City of London
should be destroyed by it self. Sin and Faction within the walls of it may
(which God divert) effect that which was prophesied: and may it please God so
to enlighten the eyes of all that inhabit it, and other parts of his Majesty's
Dominions, as to be persuaded of this Truth, that if there be (...), if crying
sins that strike at Heaven, out-brave God, to the shame of men, if such be
suffered to go unpunished in this Kingdom, then, though our walls were as high
and strong as those of Babylon, though our Hosts or Armies were as numerous as
those of Sennacherib, 2 King. 18. or that Persian King Xerxes, whose Soldiers,
when they shot their Arrows in the face of their enemies, are said by the
Historian to have turned the day into night, and darkened the Sun, all the like,
or greater, forces and bulwarks, cannot hinder Gods vengeance or revengeful
Justice from breaking in upon our Nation to waste and destroy it, if sin or
sins of a deep stain, or high provoking nature reign among us; especially after
the receiving of great blessings, and enjoying many undeserved mercies by a
special design, or ordination of the Divine Providence: of which our most
gracious Sovereign being very sensible (to an high degree of gratitude to God
his Defender and Restorer) was pleased, for the prevention of future calamities
in his three Kingdoms, to direct an Order to the truly Noble the now Duke of
Ormond, the Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household, for the rectifying of all
manner of disorders; and, by the assistance of his Officers of the
Green-cloath, to suppress all kind of debauchery and vice in any person of what
Degree or Quality soever. Besides this, his Sacred Majesty has by a late
Proclamation, dated the thirtieth of May, 1660. declared his holy and just
displeasure against dissolute and profane men, hoping (they are his own words)
that all persons of Honor, or that are in Authority, will assist His Majesty
in discountenancing such men's vices, and punishing them according to the
established Laws for their enormities. To His Majesty's hopes and pious desires
in that Proclamation, give me leave to subjoyn my most humble Supplication to
your Honors, that, because (as the Roman Orator styles all Magistrates) you
are designed by your high place and calling to be the Commonwealths Physicians,
Hedges against profaneness, and the firm Banks to keep us from an inundation of
trouble and confusion, which may arise from Sects, Schisms, and Heresies, you
would be pleased to crown your renowned, matchless, and most loyal actings, for
the good and welfare of our most glorious King and Church, with this religious
resolution, to issue forth a strict and special Order against that Epidemical,
Soul murdering, and State-confounding sin of Swearing, which is the Captain,
Leading-General sin of this Nation; for which (if it be not speedily checked,
and stifled by the powerful hand of Justice) we shall grow as infamous now and
in after-ages, as the Asiaticks were for Pride, the Carthaginians for
Treachery, and the Scythians for Drunkenness.

The hainousness of this Sin I shall discover in the ensuing Treatise, as being
most injurious to God, scandalous to our Neighbor, and hurtful to our Selves:
it carries with it a contempt of Gods person as well as of his precept, and
that in a public manner* which three aggravations are not to be found in every
sin. To which if we add a fourth, which is the frequency and commonness of it,
it will appear then to be the master-sin of this Nation, as it is set in the
front of other horrid sins, Hos. 4.2. Men break the Sabbath but once in a week,
but Swear and blaspheme they do every day, every hour, (I wish I could not say
almost) every moment: It is so commonly practiced, that, through daily custom
and imitation, it has crept into the mouths of young Boys and Children, which
is to be bewailed with a Ieremies Lamentation.

Now for the better Remedy of so great a Malady, which has distempered our
Kingdoms great Body, though I dare not prescribe to your greater Wisdom, yet
let me request you to call to mind that grave and wise Counsel of Carolus
Caraffa in the Council (or rather Conventicle) of Trent, who said there (and
that most truly) that when the Civil Magistrates and Gods Ministers do accord,
and draw in one yoke, then is the Church and State best governed. So then, if
all the Ministers of Gods word were enjoined, as his Majesty ordered by a
Proclamation, Aug. 13. 1660. to turn the edge of their Spirits, and declame (at
the least once a month) in their Sermons against this Goliath, this monster-sin,
and if the Magistrates in all places would stir up themselves to a more lively
and active execution of the Statute against those who shall in this sort
presume to blaspheme, by taking Gods most holy Name in vain, if this course
were once strictly undertaken, and all Informers against such foul-mouthed
blasphemers encouraged for their pains, by receiving a part of the mulct drawn
out of the others purses; if this course were once undertaken, and constantly
in all places followed, we should find, to Gods glory and our great comfort,
that the fear of shame and punishment (which with most men is more prevalent
then the love of God) would chase away all profaneness from their mouths. (...)
(...). Chrysostom. Horeil. 14.
Through fear of punishment a long and inveterate custom of sin has oft-times
been omitted, that strong band has been broken, and the sinner converted.

Under the old Law, he that blasphemed the name of the Lord was stoned to
death, Levit. 24.16. The severity of foreign Christian Kings and Princes
against such Blasphemers is set down in the midst of my Treatise: Some were
burnt in their Lips with hot Irons, some ordered to be drowned, others were
beheaded, and punished with the confiscation of their goods, and loss of their
lives: thus dealt an Earl of Flanders, by name Philip, with profane Swearers.
To all which I must add (as a most exemplary piece of Justice, which I wish
were observed and practiced in His Majesty's Royal Family) that famous Decree
of that good King Henry the fifth, the whip of France and the scourge of Vice,
in whom Piety and Valor did (as they do in our renowned King) meet together:
he decreed by a Special Order relating chiefly to his Court, which might I
suppose have an Influence upon the whole Kingdom, That every Duke for each Oath
should pay forty shillings, a Baron twenty, Knights and Esquires ten, every
Yeoman three shillings and four pence, ordinary Servants two pence, (which was
accounted a great mulct in those days) the younger sort of Boys and Pages were
well whipped for this offense: and this Law was so well executed, that, all the
Nation over, very few were heard to swear an Oath.

This I intimate, wishing that the same or the like strictness of Severity
might meet with the looseness of this Ages Impiety, and hoping that persons of
worth and preeminency (whose reputations, in the scale of Honor, weigh down
the rate or weight of punishment) will reform without it, and scorn to have
their Nobility blotted, and their mouths defiled with that unprofitable,
cursed, crying sin, which is the badge of debaucht Ruffians, the cognizance of
accursed miscreants, who are branded by the Prophet David with this black mark
of being Gods enemies, Ps. 139.20.
and the continual practice of the Devils in Hell, and damned Spirits, who
Curse, Swear, and Blaspheme God in the midst of their Torments. This is the
sole Language of those Infernal Inhabitants: the which that it may no longer
rest or nest in the Tongues of profane Rabshakehs, who are the (...). Chrysostom.
worst of the worst Subjects, the most pernicious enemies to the State and
Church, for that in a manner by their sharp Tongues they clip the wings of
Mercy, hindering it from flying to us with blessings, and quicken the pace of
Justice, to proceed in a speedy execution of curses and heavy judgments upon
us; that their mouths may be stopped, and by execution of the Statutes (which
is their life) this common sin of Swearing receive its deaths wound, that there
may be no more blaspheming in our Streets, nor within our private Walls, that
this glorious Reformation may be thoroughly wrought and effected in our Land, I
shall to these my weak endeavors in Print add the assistance and strength of
my Prayers to the great God of Heaven the Lord of Lords, for a continuance and
multiplication of blessings upon all your public designs and godly
undertakings; that from your Honored Persons, who (next to His Sacred Majesty,
who is the Upper) are the Nether Springs of Justice, Amos 5.24.
Judgment may run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, to the
bearing down of all profaneness, whereby God is dishonored, and to the advance
of Piety and Religion, that his holy Name may be glorified by us. This is, and
shall be ever a part of the daily Devotions of him who is a well-wisher to the
Peace and flourishing happiness of this Kingdom, and

Your Honors most humble and devoted Servant in Christ Jesus, R. BOREMAN.
Dec. 9. 1661.
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST SWEARING. The ground or maine Ingredients whereof are
those words of our Savior, MAT. 5.34. I say unto you, Swear not at all.


I Remember a saying of Vincentius Lyrinensis, Lib. de Haeres. c. 37. Nullam
esse ad fallendum faciliorem viam quam ut ubi nefari^ erroris subinducitur
fraudulenti^, ibi divinorum verborum praetendatur autoritas.
which as it meets with many bold practices in our times, so it nearly concerns
my present purpose, Nullam esse ad fallendum faciliorem viam, etc. There is no
way so easy (says he) to deceive a multitude (or the common people, who both
love, and are easy to be deceived) and to invite them to sin, as when we
endeavor by fraudulent means to sow the seed of error in their hearts, to
pretend the Divine Authority of Gods word. It seems the Scribes and Pharisees,
like many in our days, had learned this art of spreading and maintaining their
false Doctrine by corrupting the Text. For, whereas God commanding us to have
in due Reverence his holy Name, forbad the Jews, and in them us, to take the
same in vain, Exodus 20.7. i. e. to use it idly, or to no purpose, without any
warrant from necessity, and without respect to the advance of his Glory, the
Scribes expounding (...) in vain by (...) falsely, i. e. To back and confirm a
lie (which word we find Levit. 19.12. Thou shall not swear by my Name falsely)
they hereby confounded two distinct precepts. For by the latter in Leviticus is
forbidden perjury, which is the confirmation of a lie by an Oath; by the former
precept in Exodus all vain Oaths, which are so, when they are commonly used to
confirm or ratify the Truth in our private negotiations, contracts,
bargainings and discourse.

From this false gloss of the Scribes interpreting the third Commandment, as
if only perjury were by it forbid, and this too only in the abuse of Gods
sacred Name; from this corrupt Spring issued these three perverse Doctrines,
which in our Saviors time were settled in the minds and hearts of the deluded
Jews.

First, to swear by the Creature, and to forswear, they affirmed to be no sin.

Secondly, they counted it no breach of the third Commandment, if they used in
their ordinary discourse the Name of God, so long as they did what they
promised, and affirmed what was true. With the Scribes and Pharisees in this
second opinion agree both Maldonat the Jesuit on Levit. 19. and Socinus, Vid.
Rivet. in explicatione 3. Praecepti Decalogi. In hac corruptela eadem cum
Pharisaeis sentit impurus iste Socinus, etc
with his followers, who maintain that only perjury is forbidden by that
Commandment.

Thirdly and lastly, from this latter stream issued another as corrupt and
unsound, viZ. That whatsoever they had bound themselves to by an Oath in the
Name of God, they maintained that they were bound to do it, were the thing
never so unjust and bad.

Our blessed Savior, as it became so wise a Teacher who came from God, (as
Nicodemus witnessed of him, John 3.2.) endeavored in his first Sermon Ad
Populum on the mount, to root out of the peoples minds this false Doctrine of
the Scribes, and to prevent all dangerous Consequents which might issue from
it, he propounds here in the Text (which I have prefixed to my Treatise) for
our better instruction the true meaning and intent of the Law, ushering it in
with divine Authority, the Authority, of his own person, who is God and man by
an hypostaticall union, (...), But I say unto you, Swear not, that is, not
False, Temere, Inique,
not Falsely, Rashly, nor unjustly, by the awful and dreadful Name of God, not
without great cause and necessity, and: Swear not at all by the creatures, for
to swear by any of them is no less sin then Idolatry. And this, with the
consent of the best and most judicious Expositours, I take to be the full scope
and meaning of the words, (...), Swear not at all.

Not to stick in prostibulo in the porch or preface of the text, I say unto
you, from which in reference to the Context or the preceding V. 33. It has
been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, etc.
verse, I might deduce this Inference, That, Antiquity pleaded for a corrupt
opinion or Custom contrary to the Truth revealed in Gods word, is but a
vizard under which error and much danger lies hid, and therefore not to be
admitted, but rejected. This Inference by way of Doctrine might be drawn from
the Preface, and proved against those patrons of superstitious practices and
opinions, the great pleaders and proctours for Antiquity in the Church of Rome,
to whom I could retort and assert, that the written word of God is the only
true Antiquity, to be the rule of our faith, and that Antiquity without truth
is like those dissembling Gibeonites Josh. 9.12. who deceived Joshuah with
their old shoes, and torn baggs, Josh. 9.12.
sour drink, and mouldie bread: I could likewise tell them that that is to be
supposed to be the language of all the ancient Fathers, which one of them
modestly said of himself and in the name of all, St. Ambr.
Nolo nobis credatur, recitetur Scriptura, I will not desire any to rely only
upon my words, let the Scripture be recited, and let that be the Judge of
controversies. Were I in the pulpit (for which this Treatise was first
intended) I might prosecute the former Thesis, and enlarge my meditations in
the proof of it: but because this point is not agreeable to my prime Intent,
passing by the preface, I shall insist upon the prohibition, together with its
extention, (...), at all, Swear not, and Swear not at all.

But what, some may say, The I. General part. The explication of the
prohibition, swear not.
is Christ's kingdom divided against it self? is the Gospel against the law?
Have we not an injunction or command to the contrary Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall swear by his name; Find we not
the same precept Deuteronomy. 10.12, 20. Him shall thou serve, to Him shall thou
cleave, and swear by his Name? Does not the Prophet Isaiah insinuate the same
in his 65. chapter 16. v. He that blesses himself in the earth shall bless
himself in the God of Truth, and he that swears in the earth shall swear by
the God of Truth? Nay further, have we not Christ's own example and practice to
confirm the lawfulness of an oath in some cases? His Amen, Amen, so often by
Him used, intimates as much. God is the God of Truth, nay Truth it self, and
Amen in the Hebrew and Syriack signifying Fidelity and truth, Christ in his
Amen dico vobis, Verily I say unto you, said thus in effect, as the best
expositours assert, Per Deum qui est Amen (i. e. veritas) dico vobis, I call
God, who is most true, to witness what I say and affirm unto you. Dares then
any Anabaptisticall Schismatic open his impure mouth against this evident
truth, that it is in some cases lawful to use an Oath? They that deny this,
maintaining it in no case lawful to swear by the Name of God, (of which sort
was that Basilides mentioned in Eusebius) such men's ignorance I pity, Lib. 6.
c. 5.
as being enthralled to the slaverie of a Scrupulous conscience, which makes
the way to heaven narrower then indeed it is, and proposes to it self a
streighter passage then Christ in his word has revealed unto us. But to omit
the refutation of this error of the Anabaptists, and to reconcile Moses to
Christ, the Law to the Gospel, or those forenamed places or Texts in
Deuteronomie to the words of my Text. First, let me lay this down for a certain
ground or thesis (and it is our Saviors own assertion) Christ came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it: Mat. 5.17.
and Secondly, let me premise this for an undeniable maxim or position, that
the precepts of the Gospel are not repugnant or contrary to the Commands of
the Law; Praecepta Evangelii non contrariantur praeceptis legit. Aug.
This Thesis is defended and proved at large by St. Augustine in his 19 book
against Faustus the Heretic c. 16.

First then, our Lord and Savior Christ, in whom dwells the fullness of the
Godhead (i.e. who is perfect God) and in whom there is a fullness without any
defect of wisdom, and all heavenly graces, He fulfilled the law two manner of
ways, Aqui. 1.2.101. Qu. 2. Art.
Opere et Ore, or Doctrina, by his works and doctrinal words. First by his
works or deeds, in that, to leave us an example of a meek heart and sound
Obedience, he submitted himself to the Ceremonial law, being circumcised the
8. day, etc. so likewise to satisfy the rigor of Gods Justice he fully
performed the moral law by his Active Obedience, doing what the law required
of us to be done, thereby to bring us to Heaven, and by his passive, suffering
for our sins to redeem us from the pains or torments of Hell. Thus Christ
fulfilled the law Opere, by doing. Secondly, He fulfild the law Ore seu
doctrina, by his word or Doctrine, and that two manner of ways. First, verum
legis sensum exprimendo, Aquin.
by explaining the full scope, the intent or meaning of the law, as in those
two cases of Murder and Adultery, Mat. 5.21, 27, etc.
when he declared that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, and
bears malice against him, in his heart, is a murderer; and that he who looks
on a woman to lust after her, is in the sight or esteem of God an Adulterer.
Secondly, He fulfilled the law praecepta legis ordinando ut tutius observaretur
quod lex vetuerat, by ordaining lessons, or prescribing rules for the better
observing of the laws prohibitions and precepts. To pass by many Instances
which I might produce and to adhere only to my Text, Because the law forbids
perjurie, where it is said, Lev. 6.5.
Thou shall not swear by my Name falsely,

That we may the better observe and keep this prohibition, (...). Chrysostom.

(...). Id. Hom. 14.


and be freed from the danger of so great a sin (in regard that men accustomed
to swearing, do commonly account perjury but a light and frivolous thing)
Christ therefore here in the words of the Text gives us an wholesome admonition
to abstain altogether from swearing, nisi in causa necessitatis, except in
cases of necessity, Hier. Zanch.
viz. Vbi gloria Domini vindicanda, aut Fratris aedificatio promovenda, when
and where the glory of God is to be vindicated by an open defense of the Truth
opposed, or mine own and my Neighbors welfare and good may thereby be promoted.

So then, say the Anabaptists (who derive their opinion from the Manichees) say
they what they please, Christ does not altogether forbid Swearing, but
restrains it to certain circumstances of Time and Case.

For in some cases a man may swear: The II. Genesis part. In what cases, and when
a man may swear.

Deuteronomy. 1.16. Psalm. 82.6.


as First, when an Oath is (for the deciding of a controversy) ministered by
the subordinate Magistrates under the Supreme, to whom God in this respect has
bequeathed his Sovereign Power, and committed that Authority, that when any one
of them demands it in a matter of great importance or consequence, we may
lawfully swear or take a solemn Oath. Secondly, when an Oath serves to
maintain, procure, or win unto God any part of his glory, or to preserve the
same from disgrace or ignominy against the contumelious rage and malice of his
enemies.

Thus if a man should converse with Papists and Infidels, and he alleging for
the confirmation of truth the Authority of Gods word, if any one of them should
stiffely deny what he produces to be a part of the Scriptures, he in this case
may safely and justly use an Oath to defend it. An example hereof we have in
St. Paul, who being moved with a Godly and Religious zeal for the Truth, made
use of an Oath to confirm his Doctrine, that the Churches to whom he writ might
be established in the truth, and God Almighty thereby glorified. The Oath which
he used is expressed, and that clearly, Gal. 1.20. Before God I lie not, Vid.
Romans 1.9. 2 Cor. 11.31.
which is a Confirmation of his former assertion in the 17.18. ver.
foregoing part of the Chapter, viz. That he had preached the Gospel in Arabia
and Damascus, that he went from those parts to Jerusalem, that he did not
learn the Gospel there of Peter and James, or of any other Apostle. Now because
some of the false Apostles might perhaps retort and say (to attache him of
falsity, and so diminish his Authority) that these avouchments of his were
false and fabulous, he therefore justifies his Narration or Assertions by a
kind of Oath, saying, Before God I lie not. It may be demanded how these words
can be a form or kind of Swearing, or in what sense they fall under the nature
of an Oath. I answer, that in an Oath there be four things employed, though not
always expressed.

The first is an Asseveration of the Truth.

The second a faithful Confession or open Profession, whereby the party that is
to Swear acknowledges from his heart with a firm belief the power and
presence, the omnisciency and wisdom of God, that he is the only searcher of
the heart, a discerner of the inward Spirit, and that he is both a Witness and
a Judge of all our thoughts, words and works.

The third is a solemn Invocation of God, that he would be a witness with and
to us, that we speak the truth with our Tongues from our hearts.

The fourth and last is a sad Imprecation, that God would be a judge to take
revenge, and to inflict a sore judgment on us if we lie. Now then a formal
Oath is a certain frame or composition of words, in which not always all, but
some of the principal parts of it are expressed; the other being concealed, and
yet to be supposed and understood. Jer. 4.2. The Lord lives, etc. There is the
form or essence of an oath only in Confession of the life or being of God;
which includes his essential Attributes, viz. his Omnisciency and
Omnipresence, etc. His Attributes are his very essence, quicquid est in Deo est
ipse Deus, it is a rule and maxim in the schools. The form of swearing, 2.
Cor. 1.23. I call God for a record upon my soul, expresses the third
particular, namely, Invocation. That passage in Ruth chap. 1.17. The Lord do
thus and thus to me, is an Imprecation. And the form in that forecited place
Gal. 1.20. is directly a plain Confession that God is present as a witness
and Judge of our sayings, and will if we speak not the truth severely punish us.

Thirdly, a man may use an Oath when it serves to maintain or promote his own
or his Neighbors safety in body, goods, or good name. So to save his life, a
man may swear to a Thief to give him a piece of money at a set appointed time,
which Oath he is bound to keep, and if afterward in respect to the common good
he discover him to the Magistrate, he is no way guilty of falsity, in that he
performs what is every man's private duty, i. e. to preserve the welfare of the
King and State, and to promote the bonum communitatis, the common good, which
cannot consist with a common Thiefs impunity. Therefore I add, that in case a
man for fear of losing his life with his money, being urged and pressed to it,
swears to a Thief that he will not betray him, that man is bound to be silent,
nor to reveal him in that which concerns himself, as having been robbed by him:
But if he find and is assured that his silence may be prejudicial to the
public good, for that he perceives the licenciousness of the offender proceeds
(and is like so to do) to the like damage and mischief of others; he is bound
in duty (though not to accuse the Delinquent for the fact done unto himself)
yet to give warning or notice to some in Authority, to have a vigilant eye upon
so lewd a person, for the preventing of any further Villainy. So the late most
pious and learned Bishop of Norwich determines this case, Bishop Hall in his
Cases of Conscience resolv. Dec. 1. c. 8.
and annexes this saying to his determination (to deter all men from perjury or
breaking their Oaths) When once we have interessed God in any business, it is
dangerous not to be punctual in the performance.

Now that it is lawful in this case to swear to an Highway Rogue to save our
life, none will doubt, who shall consider the many inconveniences and evils
which would ensue, if the true man in this straight take not an Oath.

The first is the loss of his own life.

Secondly, the loss of the others soul, being guilty of Murder in shedding
that man's blood: these dangers may be prevented by a promise and an Oath of
silence. But as it is lawful for a man in such a straight to Swear, so it is
unlawful for him to break his Oath: for if any one having so solemnly promised
by an oath not to discover the Thief (as to that fact of robbing him) should
afterward make his fact known to the magistrate, this mischief would follow
upon his discovery, all honest men for his sake might justly be suspected as if
they would do the like, though they have solemnly promised or sworn to the
contrary, and so it might cost many a good man his life, when Thieves are put
in fear of losing theirs, being persuaded that though an Oath be taken, they
may be betrayed and given up to the hands of Justice. Of the same opinion with
the forenamed Bishop is the right reverend Father in God the Bishop of
Lincoln, Dr. Sanderson, Lib. de Juramenti Obligatione.
that, if a man falling into the hands of thieves, be forced to promise, and
that by an Oath, not to detect or reveal their robbery of him, and this to
preserve himself from being murdered by them, as he may without offense to God
take such an oath, so the same being taken by him must be religiously kept.

But I desire that this assertion may be admitted for a truth with the former
qualification. I shall only add this for a Close of this Question, (and it is
the sum or abridgment of what His advice is this, (...). Hierocles.
Hierocles delivers more at large by way of advice or counsel) That nothing but
necessity and the command of lawful Authority should force or draw an oath
from us.

Fourthly, A man may swear or take an oath to confirm and establish peace
between him and another at variance with him: thus did Abraham swear to
Abimelech, Genesis 21.24. that he would not deal falsely with him nor with his Son,
nor with his Sons Son. Thus two several Kings may swear one to another upon an
agreement or ratification of peace, not to invade one another territories for
so long a space of time. Thus a King takes an oath At his Coronation.
to his Subjects to maintain their ancient laws and liberties; and they
reciprocally oblige themselves by a solemn oath to preserve his honor, to
defend his person, and maintain his Royal rights and prerogative, to be
obedient to his just commands, to be observant of his laws: all this, and
more, is implied in the Oath of Allegiance, which Oath cannot stand or consist
with the Subjects taking up of Arms against their Sovereign Lord the King
(under what specious pretenses soever) without the high guilt of Treason and
Rebellion.

To conclude this point concerning the Legality or lawfulness of taking an
Oath in private and public Cases, the meaning of our Saviors prohibition,
Mat. 5.
Swear not at all, is this, which before has been touched in few words, Swear
not at all in your common talk and familiar discourse, but as Christ commands
v. 37. Let your communication be Yea Yea, Nay Nay, i. e. use only a bare
affirmation of what you know to be true, and a simple Negation of what you are
assured is false, without interposing the sacred and dreadful Name of God. Let
your Yea be Yea, etc. As the doubling of Pharaohs dream was an infallible
demonstration of the certainty of it is event; Genesis 41.2, 5.
so the repetition of these our Saviors words is remarkable, and not to be
passed over without due regard and a special observation. Upon this Text Vgo
has this ingenuous gloss. Ipsa geminatio p^ndus habet, quasi diceret, quod
dicis verbo dic opere, and quod nega^ verbo noli confirmare facto. Ugo.
The very gemination or doubling of the words (says he) is weighty, and
deserves our attentive consideration: it is as if Christ should have said, Let
not thy actions give thy words the lie; what thou have affirmed with thy
tongue, maintain and make good the same by thy actions, and confirm not that by
thy deeds what thou have denied in thy words. Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay
Nay: whatsoever is more then these (...), comes of evil, i. e. as St.
Augustine expounds the words, Aug. lib. 10. de Sermon. Dom. c. 30.
ex malo infirmitatis, from the Sin of infirmity; which I take to be another
incredulity, when a man for want of a good or commendable opinion of his
Brother (which betrays a weakness in him or a want of charity) shall suspect
the truth of his narration or report, and so require of him an oath to confirm
it. E. g. If a man should accuse thee of perfidiousnesse or slander, as having
with the black tooth of calumny wounded his reputation, or wronged him in his
goods, if thou, to purge and cleanse thy self from this foul aspersion, shall
deny the fact by a simple and bare protestation of thy innocence in this
particular, and he still suspecting thee to the contrary To do this in the
judgment of Isidore Pelusiota is a sin, and that a great one.

(...). Lib. 1. Ep. 155.


shall require an oath of thee to confirm his belief of what thou deniest, in
such a case to vindicate thy credit, and to work out of his mind that injurious
suspicion, thou may use an Attestation by invocating or calling God to
witness the Truth, which Attestation by interposing the name of God is an
Oath. And that, in such or the like case (to settle in another a persuasion of
our Integrity,) an oath between private persons is no Sin, we have the example
of Gods Saints in the Holy Scriptures to warrant it; as that of Abraham, who
upon this occasion swore to Abimelech (as was before recited Genesis 21.24.) The
like passed between Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31.53. and from Boaz to Ruth. Add to
these two examples the testimony of St. Augustine: Ruth. 3.13. As the Lord
lives, said he to her, etc.

Aug. loco praedicto in lib. de Sermon. Dom.

Christus non dixit, quod amplius malum est, sed ex malo, i. e. ex malo
infirmitatis, etc.


When Christ (says he) enjoined us to use in our common discourse Yea Yea, Nay
Nay, He said not, whatsoever is more then this is evil or a sin, but, comes
of evil, i. e. from the evil of Infirmity, viz. the weakness or want of
Faith in him who compells thee to Swear. Tu enim non male facis qui been
uteris juratione, ut alteri persuadeas quod utiliter persuades; sed a malo est
illius cujus infirmitate jurare cogeris. For thou do not ill who usest an
oath well, i. e. to a good end, that thou may beget in another a firm
belief of the Truth, and a persuasion of thy Integrity: He rather does ill,
whose diffidence or distrust enforces thee to use an Oath. Swear then we may,
and an Oath may be used in our private conference, when the Incredulity of him
with whom we deal or converse forces it from us, either to beget in him a
persuasion of our fidelity in the performance of our lawful promises, or to
wipe out of his mind a blot who suspects our honesty and uprightness. In such
a case, when an Oath is required of us to maintain our reputation or credit,
then to forbear to Swear is neither to obey the intent of Christ in the
Gospel, nor to obey the voice of God in the Law. For in such a case to swear
is so far from taking Gods name in vain, that he who refuses to do it runs
upon the rock of a dangerous guilt, and that is the breach of the sixth
Commandment; by which as vitae conservatio, Thou sha t do no murder.
the preservation of our Brothers and our own life, so likewise injuriae
propulsatio, the use of all lawful means to redeem him, and chiefly our
selves, from all injuries is commanded. What greater injury can there be, what
more grievous wound then that of Infamy, and loss of reputation? which when
thou may plaster up, if thou refuse to do it, thou joynest by thy assent
with thine enemy in wounding of thy good name or credit. Qui famam negligit
homicida est, who so neglects his fame or credit, destroys in a part his being,
in that when he lies under the burden of Infamy and disgrace, he ceases in the
esteem of the world to be that man he was once voiced or noised to be.

An Oath then we may use not This is implied by the Heb. word (...) which being
of a passive signif^cation, signifies rather to be sworn then to swear,
intimating thus much unto us, that a man should not swear but when an oath is
forced upon him, and enjoined by lawful authority.
voluntarily, but being compelled to it by him who suspects our credit. Thus or
then to swear in vindication of our reputation is not repugnant to Christ's
precept, or prohibition, Swear not. And unless you will say that the Prophets
borrowed not their light from Christ the everlasting Sun of righteousness,
most resplendent in all graces, who likewise being the eternal word of God,
spoke to the ancient Prophets by his Spirit, unless you will say that these
were not true Stars, but slimie meteors, colored with pretenses of truth, and
that their Doctrine is false, unless you will assert this (which is an horrid
crime but to think) then you must set your seal to this truth, that in some
cases it is not unlawful to use an Oath. Witness that of the Prophet Jeremiah
in his exhortation to revolted Israel, Jer. 4.2. Judicio caret Juramentum
incautum, Veritate juramentum mendax, Justitia juramentum iniquum and
illicitum. Aqui.
Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness. These three cautions or circumstances if they accompany thine
Oath, thou fulfillest Christ's prohibition, Swear not.

Swear not. First, non false, not falsely, so our blessed Savior intends; but
in veritate, in Truth, so the prophet Jer. expressly, i. e. for the confirmation
of the Truth when thou art urged to it by some private person, or enjoined by a
lawful magistrate, as has formerly been demonstrated. Promissorium est de
futuro seu de re facienda.
But to enlarge this point a little more; There is a twofold Oath, a
Promissory, and that which we call an Assertory. Assertorium de praterito sive
de re facta.
By the former we engage our selves for the time to come to do that which is
lawful and just: By the latter we assert or solemnly affirm to be certain and
true, what we know to have been done and said either by our selves or others.
Agreeable to these two kinds of oaths there is a twofold truth, First,
Logical, Second, Moral.
The first implies the truth of the thing, the second the truth of the mind.
The first is when we speak or affirm nothing but what bears a correspondency
with the nature of what is affirmed, or as the thing is, not asserting, that
white is black, or black white. The second, i. e. the moral truth, is when we
speak as we think, and think as we speak. Both these kinds of truth are
required in an Assertory Oath. First, there must not be any jarring or
disagreement between the Tongue and the Thing asserted, that must go according
to this; and that not upon bare conjectures, or what Aristotle in his Topics
calls (...), seeming probabilities, but upon a well-grounded knowledge of the
truth of the thing or fact. In an Assertory Oath we may be guilty of perjury
two manner of ways.
For not only he is guilty of perjury who in an Assertory Oath swears a known
untruth (as Mat. 26.72, 74, 75,
Peter did, and afterward repented of it) but he also who swears an unknown or
uncertain truth, which is when we swear that to be a truth of which for the
present we doubt, and imagine to be a falsehood.

Secondly, in an Assertory oath our mind or meaning must not dissent from our
Tongue; we must beware that we mean not one thing when we swear another: which
that deceitful Johanan and the Captains of the Host did, Jer. 42.5.
who called God to witness that which they never intended to perform. Thus the
Papists juggle in their Aequivocations, and when they take the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, they have a Tongue for the Prince and an Heart for
the Pope. Thus did that Franciscan Monk aequivocate, who being asked which way
a murderer fled that passed by him, and being willing to conceal him, he
answered, putting his hand into his sleeve, that he passed not that way,
meaning that he passed not through his Sleeve. Of this stamp was he in
Euripides, who being attached of perjurie, replied, (...), i. e. I did swear
with my Tongue, but not with my Mind. Thus I fear too many have done in these
sinful times, who having taken the Oath of Allegiance to their King, entered
into a solemn League with his traitorous enemies. Those I exhort speedily to
make their peace with God by an hearty repentance, lest, to their endless woe
and misery, they feel the weight of his heavy wrath, which never suffered the
perjured to escape unpunished. Beware then of Swearing falsely, or of taking a
false Oath; let your Tongue agree with the thing you express by it, and let not
your heart or meaning dissent from your tongue. Use no Aequivocation, but when
you are constrained to take an oath, take it according to the (...), the
literal sense or plain meaning of the words, and according to the intention of
him who propounds it; and be clearly persuaded in thy Conscience or Judgment of
the Truth and equity of the thing you swear. Two Corollaries; the first
concerning an Assertory Oath.
If in an Assertory Oath we affirm to be true what we know to be false, we in
effect make God the Patron of a Lie, or think that he may be deluded and
deceived; whereby we discover a kind of Atheistical profane Impiety, whilst we
deal with God as if he regarded not things here below, and place him in a
lower condition then we would do any plain honest man, quem fallere volens non
auderet quis in Societatem falsi vocare, whom no man, Phil. Jud. (...).
being about to defraud or deceive his Neighbor or Friend, will dare call or
invite to be a partaker with him in his Sin. To do this then to God, how great
and horrid a crime must it needs be? He does it that calls God to witness a
lie. The second Corolla y ^oncerning a Promissory Oath


Lastly, to close this point concerning a false Oath, when we promise by Oath
to do what we never mean to perform, we are guilty in an high degree of
perjury; so is he who having meant at the Oaths taking, and fully purposed to
do as he promised, yet afterward, when the thing is possible, and not unjust,
but only difficult and disadvantageous to him, changes his resolution and
purpose, contrary to that Just man described by the Prophet David, Psalm. 15.5.
who Swears to his Neighbor and disappoints him not, though it be to his own
hurt. And thus much of the first restriction of Christ's prohibition, Swear not,
i. e. non false, not falsely.

Secondly, Swear not, non leviter and temere, not lightly or rashly, for no
cause, but cum Judicio, in Judgment, i. e. only when the cause is weighty,
and when there are no other witnesses but God and thine own Conscience, so that
thou art compelled to Swear by a constraint of Necessity.

Thirdly, Swear not contra jus and inique, not unjustly, but in Justitia, in
Justice, as the same Prophet, Jer. 4.2. advises. The Matter or Subject of thy
Oath must be what in it self is lawful, just and good, and not repugnant to the
words or intent of any former Oath, which if lawfully taken, and the matter of
it be just, is in no wise, neither for any threats or promises, to be violated,
but faithfully kept. From what has been said we may collect and deduce a
Negative Rule, which is one of five set down or delivered by Rivetus in his
most judicious and learned Explication of the Decalogue. The Rule is this, Com.
6. p. 90. Where he teaches when and in what Cases an Oath binds.
Non est servandum Juramentum cujus Executio cum Salute publica, cum honestate,
and bonis moribus pugnaret, i. e. That Oath which is against the good of the
Commonwealth, against the rules of honesty and good manners (or that duty
which we owe in things that are lawful to our Superiors) such an Oath which is
repugnant to these three particulars, to all of them, or any of them, is not to
be kept. For he that promises by an Oath to do what is unlawful and unjust, as
he sinned in Swearing, so would he aggravate his sin if he should keep it. Such
was David's Oath when he threatened Nabals ruin, which he revoked, 1 Samuel 25.
Juravit David temere, sed non implevit juramentum majori impietate. Aug.
to teach us that all such Oaths are better broken then kept. Definitio incauta
laudabiliter solvenda est, nec est haec praevaricatio, sed temeritatis
emendatio, An hasty and unlawful promise may be broken with Commendation,
neither is he that breaks such a promise to be condemned as prevaricating with
the Truth, but to be thought well of, for correcting his error, whilst he
performs not what he rashly undertook. Mar. 6.26.
If Herod Antipas had observed this Rule delivered in that famous Council of
Eliberis, he (although his Oath had seemingly bound him to it) would not have
beheaded John the Baptist: and as hereby he might have freed himself from the
guilt of murdering so holy a man, so should he not have felt from the hand of
God that heavy punishment which Euse^^^^ and Josephus record that he suffered.
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 4 Joseph. l. 18. c. 14.
He was banished (as they tell us) by Caligula into Lions in France, where with
his wife Herodias, that incestuous Harlot, he ended his life in extreme misery
and want. From the former explication of our Saviors prohibition, we may infer
that as (...). Epiph.
between the Law and the Gospel there is no discord, so between Christ's words
and the sayings of the Prophets there is no jarring, nor disagreeing
difference, but a sweet harmony and consent: whence we may likewise conclude
that one and the same God was the Author of the Old and New Testament, which
the Manichees denied: The same harmonious concord or agreement between them is
a strong and sufficient argument of the Deity of the Son of God Christ Jesus,
John 1.1.
the Word. This we affirm and maintain against the Arrians, in that He was the
Prophets instructor and Teacher by his Spirit, or by divine inspiration, and
withal a God of Unity, Peace, and Concord. What they assert he affirms, what
they forbid he prohibits. His prohibitions imply their commands, their commands
include his prohibitions. Him (i.e. God) only shall thou serve, Mat. 4.10.
says our Savior* Thou shall not worship other Gods, this is the common tenor
of the Doctrine of the Prophets. So (as has been proved) Christ's prohibitions
point at their commanding precepts. Swear not, says Christ; Jer. 4.2. Isa.
65.16.
Thou shall Swear, says the Prophet Jeremy: which dissents not from the words
of Christ in my Text, Swear not, which forbids only the use of all False,
Rash, and Unjust Oaths, and enjoynes us, when there is need of an Oath, to
advance Gods glory in the Vindication of his Truth, or to promote our own or
our Neighbors good, then only to use it. And this is the meaning of the third
Commandment, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; But
shall Swear in Truth, in Judgment, and Righteousness. Thus much of our
Saviors prohibition, from which I pass to the extent of it, denoted by the
particle (...) (which follows) at all, Swear not at all, i.e. not at all by
the Creatures.

Non est tam absurdum delir^mentum quod defensorem non inveniat, says Varro:
The III. Genesis part. We must not swear by the Creatures.
there was never any opinion so absurd, no Heresy so impious, but at some time
or other found patrons and defenders, even against the light of reason and Holy
Scriptures. Examples to prove this we find many in Church-histories. What more
impious then to depose God (as it were) from his throne of Sovereignty, to rob
him of his honor, and to give it to the inferior creatures? And if a man
should rack his thoughts to the height of absurdities, no one thing would be
found more absurd then that practice of the Romanists, who as they pray to
Saints and Angels (attributing to them thereby Gods power, and omnisciency, who
only knows our several wants, and can help us in all our needs) so to back
this absurdity they have broached a new Impiety, maintaining it lawful, as in
prayer, so in Swearing, to invocate the creature; As to swear by the Holy
Evangelists, by any Saint or Angel, and the like. Whereby they break the first
Commandment in setting up a new Deity, and so prove guilty of a Sin which they
make light of, and that is no less then blasphemy: which Sin is committed,
First, when we attribute or ascribe to God what he is not, Aqui. 2.2.13.2. 1.
Art. Three degrees of blasphemy.
Secondly, when we detract from him what he is* and Thirdly, when we ascribe or
give what is due to him to the creatures; and this we do when we swear by them,
as I shall prove after I have discovered the fountain or Original, and withal
the foulness of the Papists error herein. This profane practice of the
Romanists, besides that it has no ground nor warrant from the Holy Scriptures
(which in matters of Religion must be the rule of our actions) and besides that
it is scandalous to the hearer, who, by our blasphemous and Idolatrous custom
in this Sin, may be induced to imitate and use the same form in swearing;
besides these and many other the like reasons, which I could allege, we must
know (to lay open this Sin, and to make it more odious) that it owes its
beginning to certain heretics called Osseni, Lib. contra Nic. Serrarium.
whom Scaliger will have to be all one or the same with the Esseni. Of these
(as Epiphanius records li. 1. c. 19.) one Elxai was notorious, who lived in the
time of Trajan, and spread abroad the poison of this corrupt doctrine, teaching
that men ought to swear by Salt and Water, by the Earth, by Bread, and by the
Heaven, by the Air, and by the Wind, etc. which Heretical opinion is refuted
at large in the forecited place by Epiphanius. Like unto these were the
Manichees, whose Ringleader and Capt. was Manes or Manicheus, whom Cyril justly
calls (...), the Master and Contriver of Iniquity, (...). Cyril. Hier. Catech.
7.
a magazin of Impiety, the common Inn or Storehouse of all filthy absurdities
and obscenities, whose heresy contained a mass, a venomous composition of old
extinguished heresies. This Manes with his Followers taught, what they of the
Church of Rome maintain, that it was lawful to swear by the creatures, as
appears by those words of St. Augustine, Lib. 19. Cant. Faust. c. 22.
Jurabant saepissime nulloque mentis scrupulo per creaturas, They, says he,
used to swear by the creatures frequently. Hereby we may see what grounds, and
how good Authors our adversaries in the Church of Rome have for their
pernicious and dangerous practice: yet to set a gloss upon it, they have
invented a pretty distinction, as vain as they are vicious. First, they divide
the creatures into two Classes or ranks, Rational, and Irrational: by the
former they assert we may swear Absolute, absolutely, without any restriction:
Such are the Angels and Saints in Heaven. Aquin. 2.2. Qc. 89.
(They might as well have added men on Earth) By the latter only Relative,
Relatively, In quantum divina veritas in iis manifestatur, so far or forasmuch
as the divine truth is manifestly revealed in them; As when we swear by the
Gospel, it is (say they) by that God whose truth is manifested in the Gospel.
I say again, this Assertion is vain and frivolous, invented only to countenance
and maintain their Invocation or prayers to Saints and Angels. Omitting the
former part of that fond distinction as unworthy of a refutation, let us
examine the second part of it, which is to swear Relative in relation to God.
This the Romanists affirm we may do, which we absolutely deny, and prove it
thus. To swear by the creature in relation to God is to invocate or call upon
the creature religiously with reference to God: this latter is expressly
forbidden in Gods word, as in the forenamed place, Levit. 6.13. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God, Him only shall thou serve, and swear by his Name. So Isaiah
45.53. Every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall swear to me. Which
Text St. Paul citing Romans 14.11. and following the Septuagints Translation,
fearing lest if he should do otherwise, an offense thereby might be given to
the Gentiles or Greeks, who adhered to that translation, uses these words,
(...), To me every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess to God, i.e.
Swear by his name; Est enim Jusjurandum vera ac aperta ejus Dei professio quem
ut testem et perjurii vindicem appellamus, Beza.
For an Oath is a true and open profession of that God whom as a witness of
our sayings and a Revenger of perjurie we invocate. This honor* none can or
may affixe to the creature. Therefore swear not at all by it, but (in those
cases premised) by the Creator. But I meet with a seemingly-strong Objection
from the Romanists, which deserves a solution. It is borrowed from the 42. of
Genesis v. 15. where we read that Joseph swore to his Brethren that he would not
let them go back to their Father, unless they would send for their younger
Brother Benjamin, and he seems there to swear by a creature, namely by the
King, where he says, By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go hence, except
your younger Brother come hither. It is not (say they) to be imagined that
Joseph, so good a Saint, and so wise a man, would have sworn by his King,
unless he had been fully persuaded in his soul (and that by the spirit of God,
by whom he was always governed) that to swear by the creature was not a sin,
nor derogated any whit from Gods glory, at which he ever aimed. A plausible
objection. To which I answer first with the learned Zanchie, Ab exemplo unius
quamvis Sancti viri argumentum duci non posse contra apertum Verbum Dei, Zanch.
in Miscellan.
From the example of one particular man, though for his piety never so much
famed, we may not draw a pattern for our practice against the express word of
God. Ex fide personas, non ex personis fidem probamus, Tertul.
We must prove or try men's persons by the Faith, or Doctrine of the word, and
not the Faith by men's persons; i. e. Because God has said or commanded it, and
not because such a one did it, is a thing lawful and good. Supposing then that
Joseph swore by Pharaoh, his action must not be a rule or pattern for thy
imitation. The law of God, as it is the way wherein we must walk, so it is the
Rule whereby in our passage to heaven we must be guided. And although it be
probable that Joseph used such an Oath that he might comply with the Egyptians
in that form which, perhaps, was by them used, and might also do it, as being
unwilling to be discovered by his Brethren not to be an Egyptian; yet my second
answer will better clear the doubt and refute the objection. I say then in the
second place, that it was not properly nor simply an oath, but rather an
Obtestation, a kind of desire or wish, as if he should have said, So may the
king prosper as what I have averred is true, viz. That you shall not go forth
hence except your youngest Brother come hither, etc. This then is not to swear
by Pharaoh, it is rather, as I said, a desire and wish added to an asseveration
of a truth. Examples of the like manner of Obtestations we find in the holy
Scriptures. 1 Samuel 17.55. There Abner says to Saul, As thy Soul lives, O
King, I cannot tell, so our English translation renders it; but the words must
be expounded in the same sense as those of Joseph before, because that the
phrase in Hebrew is the same. (...)
The effect then of Abners answer to Saul's quaere may be this, As I wish thee,
O King, long life and happiness even as this is real and true, so what I
affirm is not false, etc. The like kind of asseveration, whereby they of old
ratified and confirmed the truth of what they affirmed, we find 1 Samuel 1.26. 2 Samuel 14.19. 2 Kin. 2.2. 1 Samuel 25.26. So then admit of which of the two answers
you please, it is clear that from the example or practice of Joseph we may not
conclude it lawful to use the name of any creature in an Oath. But this we
willingly grant, having Gods word for our warrant, that the names of some
creatures may be used when we swear: yet with this limitation, and in that
sense only which I have premised, viz. Not to swear by them absolutely and
simply, i. e. to invocate or call upon them to witness the verity or Truth of
our assertion, but only so, that we wish their good and welfare if we speak
the truth; if otherwise, i.e. if we lie, their mischief and destruction. St.
Paul's asseveration 2 Cor. 1.23. I call God for a record on my Soul, is a
sufficient argument to prove this doctrine, Vid. Calvin. in loc.
whereby he wished in effect that he might perish, or that his life might be
taken from him, if that were false which he affirmed to be true to the
Corinthians. The like interpretation is to be made of the words of Joseph,
though in another sense: for St. Paul's was an implicit Imprecation, which is to
be used solemnly and with a great caution, only then when the thing (to
maintain which we wish to our selves or others any hurt) is very material and
weighty; for otherwise, i.e. to imprecate or use a form of Cursing for a slight
matter or for no cause, is a great and heinous Sin, and they who are guilty of
it are ranked in Gods word amongst the Reprobate and Ungodly men. Romans 3.14.
Psalm. 10.7. David there describing a wicked man, says, His mouth is full of
cursing, etc. Neither shall such a man escape Gods curse and malediction, Psalm.
109.17. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him, etc. But to return from
this short digression, and to show the difference between St. Paul's and Joseph's
using the names of the Creatures in their asseverations: as St. Paul's was an
Imprecation or Curse, so Joseph's words implie a Precation, Option or wish for
the Kings prosperity and happiness; from which his Brethren might infer
this, that his words were most certainly true, not void of sincerity, because
his wish for Pharaohs health (whom he much honored) was not hypocritical, not
feigned, but hearty. Having thus shaken the foundation of the Romanists
pretended reasons for their Idolatrous Swearing by the Creatures, I pass now
to the proposal of some better and sounder reasons to the contrary, to show
the unlawfulness of their practice, and withal their Impiety therein, which
is great and heinous. To conclude this point then, Reasons why we must not
swear by the Creatures.
Swear not at all by the creatures, First, because an Oath solemnly taken is a
great part of Divine Worship, as appears by Isa. 19.18. where the prophet
foretelling that Egypt should be redeemed from the darkness of Idolatrous
Worship, and brought to the light of the knowledge of the true God, whom they
should invocate or worship in Sincerity and Truth, among other duties which he
reckons up as parts of Gods worship there he says, that five cities in the
Land of Egypt shall swear by the Lord of Hosts. Not unlike to this of the
Prophet Isaiah is that of Jeremy c. 5.7. Thy Sons (so God by him bespeaks the
rebellious Nation of the Jews) have foresaken me, and sworn by them which are
no Gods. By this latter part of the verse he declares or expounds what he had
asserted in the former, how the Jews had forsaken the Lord, and he says in
express terms, that they swore not by the Name of God, but by them which are
no Gods. And hence I infer, that since to Swear by the Sacred name of God is
a piece of religious and divine worship, and a thing so acceptable to God (when
there is great need of it) as that for doing the contrary he denounced against
the Jews his indignation and wrath; it must then of necessity be no less then
Idolatry to transfer that honor to the Creatures which is proper and due
only to God the Creator: and this sin we commit when we use their names in any
Solemn protestation or Oath. For (which is my second argument to prove the
hainousness of this sin) when we swear by any one, we call him to witness the
truth of what we speak, as being a Discerner of the heart and searcher of the
Spirit, and in effect we acknowledge that he is not only omniscient, but also
omnipotent, as having power to punish us with destruction both of body and Soul
if we wilfully lie and assert an untruth. They therefore that swear by Saint
or Angel, or any other Creature, ascribe to them this honor of knowing our
hearts, and discerning our intentions, and withal seem to acknowledge and
profess that they have a Lord-like and all-commanding power and command over
their persons, their goods, and lives (which honor and power belongs only to
God) and what is this but to deifie the Creatures? For this cause alone that
good Bishop of Smyrna, Polycarpus (as it is recorded by Eusebius) chose rather
to die by the faggot in hot flames, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
then he would swear per fortunam Caesaris, by Caesar's fortune, which he
esteemed a robbing God of his glory, and giving that which is not due to the
Creature. Undoubtedly he then remembered the words of our Savior, Luke 20.25.
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are Gods; i. e. Give the Lord the honor due unto his Name, Ps. 29.2. The
honor due unto his Name is to swear by it, when we have a necessary and just
occasion. Therefore to swear by any creature, as it is a piece of blasphemy
(because thereby we derogate and detract from God, whilst we ascribe to the
Creature his incommunicable attributes, his Omnipresence, his Omnisciency, and
All-mightinesse) so it is wholly forbidden by the particle (...) at all in the
Text: although the Schoolmen relying upon the Authority of some modern writers,
and to patronage their superstitious practice of invocating Saints and Angels,
have darkened this place with a false gloss: Swear not at all, i. e. says
Estius upon the Mr. of the Sentences, nisi justa causa et necessaria apparente,
unless you have a just and necessary cause. This gloss might have been
admitted if (...) at all had been left out. Swear not at all; and how is that?
Hear what follows from Christ's own mouth, the Mr. of truth, the best
Commentator upon his own words, Neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, i. e. not at
all by any Creature; and so St. Hierome with others expound the Text. Vbi justa
subest causa in nomine Dei jurandu^ neque enim Coelum Deus est, neque Terra,
etc. Neque teipsum fecisti: per nullam igitur creaturam jurandum. So Ferus upon
the sixth of Mat. i.e. When and where there is a just cause offered, we must
swear only by the dreadful Name of God: For neither to the Heavens, nor to the
Earth, can or must we ascribe that glorious Name, without the guilt of
blasphemous Idolatry. Thou did not make or create thy self, much less can
they be said to be thy Creator; therefore you must not swear by any Creature.
And when there is no just cause of an Oath, we must likewise forbear to swear
by the sacred name of God.

For a close of this point, I shall clear a doubt, and answer a question. The
first is concerning that custom of the Primitive Christians in Tertullians
days, who used to swear Per Salutem Imperatoris (as we find it recorded in
him) i. e. by the health of the Emperor: In Apolog. c. 32.
the Question which arises hence is this, whether they sinned in so doing? To
this I answer, that by this term Salutem, health, they understood either God
himself, the Author of health, and the fountain of Salvation, so might
effective be called the health of the Emperor, being the principal or sole
cause of it: or we are to conceive that this kind of expression was rather an
Obtestation then an Oath properly so called, and that by way of comparison, or
taken comparatively; as if one should say, I protest before God that I speak
and love the Truth no less with my heart then I wish my Sovereign Lord the
Emperor to live in health. Such kinds of speech, by the life of the King, by
the fortune and health of the Emperor, used in the Primitive times, were
rather Obtestations then Oaths, as is attested by St. Basil on the 19. Psalm,
(...), (...), etc. Basil.
etc. There be some kinds of speech which have a show or shadow of Oaths, and
are not such indeed, but only confirmations of an asserted Truth. There is
another doubt concerning that usual form of speech which is too too familiar
in men's mouths, and that is, By my Faith; The Question is, whether it may be
lawfully used? The learned and most pious Bishop Andrews delivers his Judgment
or opinon thus concerning it, out of St. Augustine, Beware, says he, of that
which is not a perfect or complete Oath, Sermon. 30. de verbis Apost.
but a manuduction, way, or inlet to it, as to say, By my Faith: For when a man
asserts a Truth in this form, By my Faith, it is a solemn execration, which is
an Appendix, or an additional part of an Oath, and he that says so speaks thus
in effect, If what I say be not true, I wish that God would deprive me of the
saving gift of Faith; and God may take the same away at that hour or moment,
and benight thy Soul with the darkness of distrust or doubt. Be therefore very
sparing in the use of it.

As therefore we are to abstain from this Form, because it has in it an
appearance of evil, being scandalous in regard of the particle Per or By (which
is annexed to it, and prefixed ever to an Oath, Amesius C. de Juramento.
whereby we invocate or call immediately on God to be a Judge and Witness of
what we speak) as for this reason it is scandalous, in that it may give an
offense to the religious; so likewise it is very dangerous to use it upon every
slight or light occasion in matters of no moment, for it is a kind of vain and
rash tempting of Almighty God, who may suddenly frown upon us in his wrath,
and in justice punish us with a loss of our Faith, without which we cannot be
saved. Luke 8.12. Act. 16.31.
Our Faith (says a devout man) is the most precious Jewel that we have. Now
there is none but a Bankrupt that will lay the best Jewel which is in his house
to pawn for every small trifle: so when we pawn our Faith for every word we
speak, it argues that we are Bankrupts in Truth, and that we are of a broken
or small credit, otherwise we would not produce this precious Jewel of our
Faith upon every needless occasion, and endanger the loss of it, without which
(as I said before) there is no Salvation.

From all that has been premised concerning the extent of Christ's prohibition,
Swear not at all, we may deduce this undeniable and certain conclusion, That,
as by Swearing by the creature God is dishonored, so by using his Name in a
lawful Oath he is much glorified: Because when we call on Him to witness the
Truth of what we affirm, we do openly confess that he is an Ear and
Eyewitness of our Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, that he knows our hearts, that
he is a lover of Truth, and a severe Revenger of a lie, that he both can and
will punish us for it? then which profession (and this we profess when we
Swear) what can conduce more to Gods honor, and advance his glory? In the 45.
of Isaiah, God speaks thus of himself, Isa. 45.22.
I am God, and there is none else, i. e. none besides me to be honored with
Divine Worship; so he explaines his own words verse 23. Unto me every knee
shall bow, and to me every tongue shall Swear: To me, i. e. By me; By me
exclusively, and not at all by any Inferior Creature. Christ's words then, or
his Prohibition in my Text, are but a Comment or Illustration on those of the
Prophet Isaiah: and St. James (as the Epistles are Comments upon the Gospels)
in his fifth Chap. seems to have taken the words of our Savior in that sense
which we have maintained and followed; whence he says ver. 12. But above all
things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by, any
other Oath, i. e. besides the name of God, when you are lawfully called to it:
But in your private conference, contracts, and bargainings, let your yea be
yea, and your nay nay, i. barely affirm what you speak without any other
addition, lest you fall into condemnation. And this caution of the Apostle
(whereby is intimated a severe Judgment or punishment from God which shall
fall upon rash swearers) the same leads me to the fourth General part, viz.
The Reasons or Motives employed in the prohibition, Swear not, viz. why we
should fear an Oath, or abstain from all rash and vain swearing. Having
illustrated this particular, I shall propose a few Rules, by the observation
whereof, he that is accustomed to swearing may (by Gods grace assisting him)
abstain from this foul crying sin of profaning Gods holy and dreadful Name.

Although I cannot wholly allow of the superstitious niceties of the Jews in
the affairs of God, or in matters of Religion; The IV. Genesis part. Reasons of
the prohibition, Swear not.
yet I find in their practice many things that deserve our praise and
imitation, and such as may justly put our profane carelessness to the blush.
When I read of their curious scruples concerning the dreadful Name of God, (...)
Jehovah, which they call Schem hammeporasch, Nomen separatum, a separate Name,
because it is incommunicable to any Creature, it being the name of Gods
Essence, signifying or denoting Him that is, that was, and ever shall be; which
Name too they held in so great Reverence, that they termed it Haschem, (...)
The name, by way of Eminence, and Schem hannicbad, Nomen gloriosum, a glorious
Name, it containing the Mystery of the Trinity, (...) These three distinct
letters denote the Trinity. The doubling or Repetition of the middle letter
(...) the two Natures in Christ.
and the Incarnation of our Savior Christ: when I likewise read how they bore
such an awful respect to it, that they deemed it a crime worthy of death for
any but sacred Lips (I mean those of the High Priest) to express or name it,
and that on set times, and in certain places, as on the Feast of Expiation, and
in the Temple, and in that solemn benediction, Number. 6.24, 25, 26. when I meet
with these and the like curiosities of the Jews in their writings, Vid.
Alsted. in Paratilis Theol. p. 153.
who did at first abstain from pronouncing of that most sacred Name only out
of a godly fear (or reverence) lest it should grow vile and contemptible by its
familiar and frequent use (as all other things do that are daily and hourly
used) I cannot (when I read this in the Jewish Records) but infer thus much,
that from their superstition we Christians may well learn this lesson, Not
rashly, lightly, or regardlesly to take the dreadful Name of God into our
mouths, but to hear and utter it with due fear and reverence.

It is a true and remarkable saying of St. Augustine, Falsa juratio exitiosa
est, Sermon. 28. de Verbis Dom.
vera juratio periculosa, nulla juratio secura, To swear falsely is damnable, to
swear truly without Gods warrant, i. e. without necessity, dangerous, but not
to swear at all is the surest and best way to secure the good and welfare of
our souls.

This foul sin of Swearing is so heinous, if we respect our good God thereby
offended, and so dangerous, if we respect our selves who shall be most severely
punished for it, that St. Chrysostom (as we may collect out of many of his Hom.
14. and 15. ad Pop. Antioch.
Homilies) seldom or never came into the Pulpit without some bitter invective
against it.

Swear not then, The first reason why we should forbear Swearing.
first because this deadly and soul-murdering sin is most injurious to God, in
that it carries with it a contempt of Gods person, and a contempt of his
precept, which are not to be found in every sin. First, it implies a contempt
of his person, when that we use his glorious Name (so called, Deuteronomy. 28.58.) in
our common talk and familiar discourse, to back our reports, and to bolster out
our Stories of every idle thing. It is (as one says well) to set less by God
then by an earthly Judge, whom we count it a disgrace to trouble about a
Trifle. Nay it is to deal worse by him then by a good suit of Apparel, which we
will not wear every day, but lay it up for special days and occasions. And yet
the sacred Name of God, how is it torn and worn every day of the week, every
hour of the day? I had almost said every minute of the hour, and in so saying,
I had said the Truth.

Would not a man of any note, worth, or fashion, take it as a contempt thrown
upon his person, if one should to his face, and in his hearing, use his name
bluntly without any the least show of respect, without any title or preface of
Honor prefixed to it? Nay, which is more, would not that party burn with anger
and disdain, if any one going about some absurd act should call upon him by
Name to be a witness of it, as if it should be done with his liking and
consent? Such for quality, though greater for quantity or extent, is the
indignity we cast upon our gracious God, when our Tongues in a sudden
unmannerlinesse presume to blurt out his sacred Name, when we swear by it upon
every vain and idle occasion, thereby calling him to witness what we wickedly
either do or speak, as if he did approve or allow of that Sin, which is an
horrid impiety and blasphemous wickedness but to think or imagine, (God as he
delights not in the death of a Sinner, so he delights not in any man's sins.) To
do that thing then, i. e. to call God to witness our vanity and lying, as if he
were pleased with it, is a fearful crime; and of this we make our selves
guilty when we swear vainly and rashly by his Name. Besides this, as the Sin of
swearing implies a contempt of Gods person, so in the Second place, thereby we
contemn and slight his precept, the third Commandment (which immediately
concerns his person) therefore it is no small Sin; nay greater then the neglect
and breach of those which concern men, by how much these are inferior to God
the Lord of Heaven: Quanto praeceptum de meliori datur, tanto est ejus
inobedientia gravior. It is an useful Rule commended to us by Aquinas, Aqui.
2. 2. 105. Q. 2. Art.
The breach of that Commandment which relates to a greater person is more
heinous then the breach of that which respects a less; and the greater the
offense is, the sharper will be the punishment. Vain and idle Swearing being
then a breach of that Commandment (which enjoins us a reverential and awful
esteem of the Name of God, never to use it but in our prayers and thanksgivings
for mercies, and then too with fear and an awful reverence, as it denotes an
Incomprehensible Essence, terrible in his Judgments, and filling Heaven and
Earth with his unbounded infinite presence) I say, the sin of swearing being so
directly against, and so injurious to so great a Majesty, must needs be repai'd
with punishment, and that in the greatest and highest degree of vexing sorrow,
and tormenting pain. For this the land mourns, Hos. 4.3. For this, i. e. for
swearing vainly and falsely, as it is expressed v. 2. This sin as it is the
leader in the Prophets muster of heinous sins there, so it is, I am persuaded,
the Captain, the Chief sin of the inhabitants of this Island, and the chief
provoking cause of Gods heavy judgments of War and Sedition, of Plague and
Pestilence, of Sickness and Diseases, which have been and are still within our
Walls, and reign among us. These calamities will stick close to and lie hard
upon us, until by our prayers and hearty repentance we have cast out this Devil
(I mean the Sin of Swearing) out of our tongues, and the contempt of God out of
our hearts, and instead of it settle in them a reverentiall fear of his divine
Majesty, which will so bridle the unrulinesse of our licentious loose tongues,
that we shall seldom or never profane his holy Name. (...), etc. For where the
fear of the Lord is, Naz. Ora. 3^.
there is (says Nazianzen) a dutiful observance of his will and commands; and
in whom this observance is, that man keeps his soul clean and pure from the
pollutions of sin, and from the corruptions of the Flesh: (...). So that
learned Father in his 39. Oration.

Secondly, The second Reason.
as the sin of swearing is most injurious to God, so it is most dangerous in
respect of our selves. The Jews have a saying which I find in Elias the This
bite, Transgressio trahit transgressionem, (...)
one sin draws on another. Sin is of a spreading and fruitful nature, the first
begets a second, this a third, etc. God in his punitive and permissive Justice
so ordering and disposing of the ways or actions of men, that because they (as
the Apostle speaks) knowing God to be omnipotent, most just and good, Romans 1.21.
glorify him not as God, but magnify and exalt themselves above God,
therefore by themselves shall they be debased, upon their own heads shall they
heap coals, prove their own executioners, in that being given over by God to
reprobate minds, they shall add uncleanness to profaneness, drawing Sin as it
were with a Cart-rope, increasing daily in impiety, Isa. 5.18.
and hereby aggravating their guilt and punishment. Thus in David murder
followed upon his Adultery: 2 Samuel 11.
and in his Son Solomon the excessive love of women brought forth Idolatry, 1
Kings 11.3, 4.
his Wives turned away his heart after other Gods. In like manner lying does
evermore accompany idle and rash Swearing.

The Prophet intimates as much, Hos. 4.2. where he couples these two foul and
ugly Sins, giving the precedence to Swearing, By swearing and lying, etc. They
met together in St. Peter, Mat. 26.72.
who affirmed with an oath that he knew not Christ his Master: And he that
accustoms his tongue to swearing will be bold with a lie, a base sin, which as
it proceeds from a cowardly fear, so it tends to cozening and fraud; he that
dares dishonor God will deceive his Neighbor. We read of Almanzor that famous
Turkish Emperor (whose life is accurately penned by Sir W. Raleigh) that as he
himself was never known to make a lie, Sir W. R. in his Hist. of Mahomet, p.
146.
or speak an untruth, so he termed and accounted Liars Disciples of the Devil,
the plagues of the world, betrayers of the Truth, Destroyers of civil and
Christian conversation, and the right hand of Satan. No man that ever told a
lie unto him escaped unpunished, but received his punishment answerable to the
quality or weight of his lie. The least was public disgrace; but lies of an
higher strain, of a deeper stain, which concerned the Commonwealth, he
chastised with whipping, cutting of tongues, banishment, disabling to be a
witness, and in some cases they were repaied with the loss of life: which
rigor begat terror in wicked dispositions, restrained false informations, and
gave a stop to unnecessary suits. And when he was once sick, in an Admonitorie
letter to his Son, he advised him that he should at no time make, or bear with,
a lie: for Liars (said he) are Devils in flesh enemies to truth, Subverters of
Justice, firebrands of Sedition, Causers of Rebellion, betray^^s of kingdoms,
and to themselves thus much harmfull and injurious, that when they speak truth
they are not believed nor credited. If the practice of Almanzor and this
Counsel to his Son were observed in our Christian Kingdom, we should be more
free from bloody strifes and Sedition. As lying is a pernicious sin, dangerous
and hurtful to the Commonwealth or State we live in, so it is a base and
infamous Sin. The ancient Germans used to say, If a man loses his gold, it is a
great loss; if his fame or good name, a greater; if his faith or credit, the
greatest of all. And this loss a liar sustains, whom no man will trust though
he ushers his assertions with a thousand Oaths; Et saepe quo plus jurat, minus
fidem facit, and it ofttimes so falls out, that the more he swears the less
he is believed. As lying is a Sin branded with infamy among men, so it is also
to God most abominable and odious. Prove. 12.21. Lying lips are an abomination
to the Lord. And Prove. 6.17. A lying tongue is reckoned amongst those six
things which the Lord hates: and the reason of it is this, Because as we
commonly hate those things which are repugnant and contrary to our humor or
dispositions, so God hates a lie as most adverse and contrary to his revealed
will (as where it is said, Thou shall not bear false witness, etc.) and
likewise most opposite to his divine Nature, which is most true, God is not a
man that he should lie, Number. 23.19. Nay he is Truth it self, and that three
manner of ways: First, because he is most truly that which he sees himself,
and from everlasting knew himself to be, and that is a most perfect Essence,
without any the least spot of error or stain of sin; wherefore he is most
truly good, truly omnipotent, truly wise, truly merciful and just. Secondly,
he is Truth in his works, because all his works are true, Ps. 111.7, 8. Dan.
4.37.
being conformable to his divine will, and answerable to his prescience,
determining by an everlasti^^ decree either to act by himself, or to ^mit by
others things to be done in the ^ry order and manner as we now see they are
wrought and effected. Thirdly, he is Truth it self, i. e. most true and
faithful in his words, for what he has promised shall surely come to pass. Let
God be true (says St. Paul) i. e. God will be true, Romans 3.4.
though every man be a liar. For as God is light, in whom there is no darkness
either of Sin or misery; so he is Truth, in whom there can be no Falsity either
Actively or Passively, for that he can neither deceive, nor be deceived by any,
though never so closely shut up in the mantle of Hypocrisy or reserved Policy.
To return then to the purpose. Seeing the sin of lying is so discordant to the
nature of God, who is the original of all Truth, nay Truth it self in the
abstract, i.e. most true in Himself, in his words, and works, this sin
therefore must be (...), exceeding sinful and heinous beyond all expression,
it being set in so great an opposition to Gods essence, as that is most cold
which is farthest off from the fountain of heat, the Sun, and that most dark
which is remotest from it, Gods greater light, set up in Heaven to guide us by
day, as the Moon by night. Ps. 163.8, 9.
If lying then be a sin so heinous, so odious to God, what may we think of
Swearing, the procatarctick or prime cause of that foul sin? I say, that is the
parent of this: For he that dares cast contempt upon the glorious name of God
by taking it too familiarly in his mouth, the same will not stick to out-brave
God, and outface Man with a lie for his private gain, or to maintain his
Credit, because he promises to himself belief from the hearer, whose simple
honesty and open credulity moves him to think no man so daringly impious, as to
call the Almighty to witness a sin, I mean perjury; which he will severely
punish with destruction both of body and soul, with poverty and disgrace, and
sickness here, Ah miser! eisi quis primo perjuria celat, Sera tamen tacitis
poena venit pedibus. Tibul.

(...). Chrysostom.

Implacabilis est Deus contemptis juramentis.


and hereafter with everlasting torments in hell fire.

The sin of perjury is a crying sin, it roars so loud in the Conscience, that
it evermore disquiets the souls inward peace. Nay more, it begets hell in it,
and (as I may so say) awakens the Divine Justice, which sometimes winks and
connives at other sins. It forces God to lay aside his Mercy, in which he most
delights, and to become most severe in his punishments, which have evermore
fallen heavy upon perjured persons, as appears Genesis 14.4. where, to affright
and scare us from the guilt of this sin, God by his servant Moses has left us
the examples of five Kings, who having served Chedorlaomer King of Elam twelve
years, contrary to their promise confirmed by an Oath, rebelled against him;
for which Rebellion vengeance so pursued them, that he with three Kings more
made them to fly their petty Kingdoms. The like examples we have 2 Kings 17.4.
of Hosea King of Israel, and of Zedekiah King of Judah, 2 Kings 25.17. The
former of these having promised obedience and service to Salmanezer, the King
of Assyria, for his perjury lost his freedom, being till his death shut up in
prison. The latter for the same crime against Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon
lost his eyes, having first seen the butchering of his Sons; and now being led
into Captivity, his legs fast bound in fetters of brass, he had only the use
of his ears left to hear the reproaches of his Enemies, and of his perjured
tongue to entreat for mercy and pity in the midst of his pain and misery. To
these stories which I have borrowed out of the sacred Record of Gods word, I
will add two or three more as most remarkable and true.

The first shall be of Earl Godwyn, who lived in the time of Edward the
Confessor. This Earl was he who with his ambitious Sons by his cruelty so
irritated and discontented the Nobility, that it was a main help and
furtherance in the issue to the Conquest of this Nation by the Norman. He
wishing at the Kings Table, that the bread might choke him if he were guilty of
Alfreds death, whom he had slain a little before, was presently choked and fell
down dead, to the great terror of those that sat with him at meat.

Lib. 6. c. 8.
Eusebius likewise tells us of three lewd fellows that charged Narcissus,
Bishop of Jerusalem, with a grievous accusation, and to beget a belief of it
in the minds of the Judges, confirmed it with horrid Execrations and Oaths. The
first wished if it were not true, that he might be burnt to ashes; the second,
that he might be tormented with some cruel disease; the third, that he might be
smitten with blindness. Narcissus relying only upon his Innocence, and unable
to resist their malice, and master their matchless Villainy, removed and hid
himself in desert places for many years. But mark the heavy Judgments of God
which in the mean time fell upon those perjured persons. The first, by the fall
of a spark of fire in the night, was with his house and family consumed to
ashes: The second tormented in his whole body with that disease which he
wished. The third beholding these fearful Judgments inflicted on his two
associates in wickedness, and fearing to be made the like example of Gods
revenging Justice, confessed his sin, and for it mourned and wept till he lost
both his eyes. A lamentable spectacle for false witnesses and perjured wretches.

A third story not to be paralleled I learned of a knowing Gentleman in
Hartfordshire, it is of one Everell, who many years since lived and dyed in St.
Albanes. He being accused before the Bishops Official for an act of uncleanness
with a Maid, to purge himself of this suspected crime, wished in open Court,
that he might never speak more if he were guilty of that fact. The word was no
sooner out of his mouth but vengeance stepped in, for he was presently struck
dumb, and never spoke again; and afterward by the Maids own confession it was
proved that he had defiled himself with her.

By these dreadful examples, Vid. Dr. Beard in his Theater of Gods judgments
c. 27.
and many others which I could allege out of our own Records and other profane
Authors, we may collect that God will not (as he threatens in his word) hold
them guiltless, but afflict them with sore Judgments, who shall dare even
against the check of their own Consciences to confirm a lie with an Oath, as if
it were true; Four degrees of Perjury.
or maintain that which is true to be false, knowing it to be true; or lastly,
promise with an Oath what they mean not to perform; or what they have lawfully
promised, then intending a performance of it when they made the promise, yet
afterward, even when the thing is possible, and in their power to do, perform
it not, but wickedly fall from their word. These are the four degrees or parts
of perjury in the proper and strict acception of the word. There is another
degree or kind of it, which I find in St. Chrysostom, How. 14. ad Popul.
Antioch.
who concludes excellently in an Homily to the people of Antioch, That not only
those who themselves take a false Oath are guilty of perjury, but they also who
occasion the like sin in others, and that two manner of ways. First, by
forcing them through fear of death, loss of goods, imprisonment or the like,
(...). Chrysostom. ibid.
to take a false Oath against their consciences. Secondly, by swearing the
contrary to that which another has sworn to do, and so opposing the same man by
force and might, that he cannot effect what he has tied himself to by Oath. As
if a Schoolmaster (it is St. Chrysostoms instance) should swear that his
Scholar should not eat a bit of bread until he had fully obeyed his commands
by performing what he had enjoined him for his good: Now if the Father of that
child, knowing that his Master had taken such an Oath, should rashly swear the
contrary, and fondly (there being no fear of danger for want of food) feed the
young Scholar having not performed his Task; the Father of the child would be
guilty as well as the Master. And such men who cause others to sin, (...), etc.
do as boys that contend for a long rotten rope, some tugging at one end of
it, and some at the other; so that the rope at length breaks asunder, by which
means they fall all to the ground in a confused manner, and bruise their bodies
in some one part or other. And this last kind of perjury, when we are the cause
that others are perjured, we may call Perjurium occasionale, occasional
Perjury; as there is Homicidium occasionale, occasional Murder, which is
committed by thee when thou illegally actest and contrivest that which
occasions a poor man either to lose his own life, or to kill his Brother. But
to return to my purpose, and to discover more fully the hainousness of this
crying sin of perjury: It is a compounded sin, a sin (as has been said) made
up of an Oath and a Lie, a Monster amongst sins, ugly and odious to God and
man, the Devils snare, so called by St. Chrysostom in his eleventh Homily on
the Acts, (...), whereby he catches poor sinful, deceived souls, and hurries
them to infernal darkness. Falsa juratio (says St. Austin) non est leve
peccatum; Sermon. 10. in Decollat. Johan. Bap.
imo tam magnum est peccatum, jurare falsum, ut propter reatum falsae
jurationis Dominus prohibuerit omnem jurationem, i. e. Perjury is no light nor
trivial sin; nay it is so great and horrid a crime, that to prevent the guilt
and danger of it, Christ forbad the use of all Oaths (he means such as are vain
and idle ones) when he said, Swear not at all. Have thou seen a stone (says
(...), etc. (...).
Nazianzen) thrown down a steep hill or precipice, never ceasing from its
precipitate hasty motion until it arrived at the hills foot or bottom? Of such
a speedy nature or quality is every sin, chiefly that of Swearing, to which the
tongue that is accustomed in its unruly motion will at last fall into that
(...) (as he calls it) that profound gulf of perjury. (...). Naz.

Perjury* the greatest downfall, and most dangerous precipice.


A gulf indeed; for whosoever is plunged in it, i.e. whose soul is loaded with the
weight of so great and heavy a guilt, that man, without a special hand of
mercy, will hardly ever raise himself by repentance to recover Gods grace, but
will sink deeper and deeper, wax worse and worse, add sin unto sin, and
thereby provoke God to punish him both outwardly in his body, goods, and good
name, with sicknesses, poverty and disgrace, and inwardly in his Soul with
horror and perplexing grief, with disconsolate sadness, etc. until at the last
despair sink him into the bottomless pit.

I will conclude this point with that of St. Bernard, Si pejerare times, Sermon.
de modo been vivendi 32.
nunquam juraveris; si nunquam juraveris, nunquam pejerabis, If the fear of
perjury does possess and trouble thee, never swear; if thou never swearest,
thou shall never be forsworn. And perjury he can hardly avoid, who has an
unbridled tongue accustomed to take Gods name in vain. Qui saepe jurat, saepe
oportet pejeret.

To this good counsel of St. Bernard I shall only add that of St. Chrysostom
to his Auditors the Antiochians, whom he bespake thus in his forenamed 14
Homily. (...), etc. I beseech and exhort you to represent to your thoughts the
Head of St. John the Baptist bleeding in a Charger, and suppose or imagine that
you hear this voice or exhortation uttered from his Tongue, (...), Hate and
abhor an Oath which was my murderer. Herod's rash Oath (of which he should have
repented, and not kept it) was the cause of the Baptists death. And he that is
given to much swearing murders his own Soul, deprives it of Gods grace, which
is the Souls life, and, being guilty of many other sins which accompany rash
swearing, as lying, etc. he intitles it to everlasting death, the wages of
unrepented sins: and if to forsake our sins be truly to repent, and the only
mark of a sound and unfeigned repentance, we may safely say that few Swearers
can be named that ever truly repented. Therefore cast out this poison out of
thy mouth, banish this sin speedily from thy tongue, before it be habituated in
thee, and so get the mastery or dominion over thee, that it never leave thee,
but die and lie down in the grave with thee.

The third Reason.
Thirdly, as the sin of Swearing is most injurious to God, most dangerous and
hurtful in respect of our selves (in that it is the parent or cause of other
crying sins, as lying and perjury, and likewise the productive and provoking
cause of Gods just and heavy Judgments or punishments upon our souls and
bodies) so it is a most scandalous sin in respect of our Neighbors or
Brethren, Quanta est notitia and reputatio de Deo in hominibus, tantum
nominatur per vocem exterius. Raym.
with whom we have daily Conversation and Commerce.

Raymundus in his Natural Theology, Tit. 193. says truly, that, according to
the measure of knowledge or estimation of God in our hearts, such commonly are
the vocal expressions of our Tongues. The Anatomists likewise observe, that
the Heart and Tongue are knit and conjoined by one continued Nerve, whence
there is such a coherence and sympathy between them, that the Physicians look
upon the Tongue, when they intend to find out and discover the affection or
malady of the Heart. So it is a Truth or maxim undeniable in morality and
Divinity, that Lingua est index cordis, the tongue is the best and surest
Indicatour of the heart. Take the Heart for the will and affections, or for the
inward conceptions of the understanding, the Tongue betrays and discovers all.
They therefore that dishonor God with their Tongues, declare that there is a
want of fear and reverence of Him in their Souls. And this want proceeds from
a lack of Hos. 4.6. Isa. 1.3.
knowledge of Gods incomprehensible greatness, and a true apprehension of his
goodness: For, did they who profane Gods holy Name by cursing and Swearing,
did they but know and verily believe that he is Almighty, and has power to
strike them with sudden death, and to take from them in a moment their breath,
which they should spend or use only in setting forth his glory and praise; were
they persuaded that he is able to stop their profane mouths with perpetual
silence, so that they shall never breath out a Peccavimus, never beg of God a
pardon for their sins; did they certainly know and believe this (and this
Judgment has fallen upon many desperate sinners) they in fear of his power and
greatness would undoubtedly abstain from so dangerous a sin. And again, had
they an inward feeling and taste of Gods bounty and merciful goodness by which
they are enriched daily with many and great benefits, this would incite them to
love him, and this love, which is an Obedientiall Grace, would prompt them to a
strict observance of his Commands. John 14.15.
If ye love me (says our blessed Savior) keep my Commandments. They that do
unfainedly love him, will endeavor to keep them. They therefore that wilfully
and presumptuously transgress Gods precepts, betray a want of fear of his
Majesty, as if he were like the Epicures (...), a sleepy, drowsy, unactive
Deity, not Just at all, but all Mercy; and thereby they beget in others the
like conceit of God, whose person they learn to undervalue, whilst they hear
his Name slighted and abused by profane tongues: And harboring in their
wretched thoughts so light or slight an esteem of our Almighty God, they prove
like Jesurun, they kick against God, i. e. reject his word, and slight his
commands, they forsake God that made them, and lightly regard the rock of their
salvation. Ex reverentia praecipientis procedit reverentia pracepti (says
Aquinas truly) The reverence and respect we bear to the Commander begets
respect and reverence to the Command. Aqu. 2. 2. 105. 2. Art. 2.
That then thou give not an offense to thy Neighbor, prove not to him an
occasion of sinning by begetting in him a mean and undervaluing esteem of God,
Mat. 18.7.
(Woe be to that man by whom such an offense comes:) that thou may escape
this woe, and Gods heavy curse, never take his glorious and great Name into thy
mouth, unless it be devoutly with reverence in thy prayers, or solemnly, when
thou art forced to use it for Gods glory to advance it, or to thine own and thy
Neighbors good and benefit. Having thus explained and given a few Reasons of
the Prohibition, Swear not, I shall proceed to the next general part, which is
the Preparative to the Cure or remedy of this crying and most destructive sin
of Swearing.

As the esteem of a good Physician consists in this, that he cannot only
discourse according to Art of the nature of any disease or inward malady, but
also out of his experience prescribe first preparative Physic to segregate or
sever the humors in the body, and after that a dose for a Remedy; so a Divine
would betray the duty of his calling, should he make invectives the aim of his
endeavors, should he declaim only against men's Sins, discover the nature of
them, rip up their foulness, and not withal by prescribing of heavenly and
Spiritual physic labor to drive them out of men's souls. And in this case the
Divine must follow the method of a wise Empirick, who in the cure of a disease
has recourse by his skillful search to the Cause, not regarding so much the
Pars recipiens as the Pars mittens (to use Sennertus his phrase) not so much
the part affected as the source from which the malady springs: So to cure the
flushing in the face, he begins with the obstructed liver as the prime cause of
that distemper, and to mitigate the pain in the head (the head, as one says,
of all pain) he applies his Physic to the stomach. In like manner when we find
an exorbitancy in the Tongue, we must conceive that this poison flows into it
from the Spring of the Heart; i.e. the Soul consisting of these parts,
understanding, will, and memory, and attended with a quaternion of Passions as
so many Servants or Handmaids, they are Joy, and Sorrow, Aquin. 1.2. Qu. 23.
Hope, and Fear; so the Stoics divide them, the Peripateticks branching them
into eleven Heads, which to rehearse makes not for my present purpose. Have
thou then, O sinful man, by a long and inveterate use contracted this poison
of Aspes under thy lips, Romans 3.13.
a Custom of Swearing, a sin as hard to be cured as is the poison of an Aspe
which is incurable (if we may believe Pliny and Aristotle, Plin. l. 29. c. 4.
Aspides percussos torpore et somno necant, omnium Serpentum minime sanabiles.
Lib. de Hist. Animal. 9. c. 29.) Notwithstanding this, despair not of a cure,
but know and believe that the same God, even our Lord Jesus, who went about in
humane flesh curing all the Diseases of the body, can by his overruling most
powerful grace kill that poison, subdue the Lording power of the strongest
corruption, the greatest sin that has got a quiet possession, and reigns in thy
soul.

First then (which is the Preparative to the cure of this foul sin) call to
mind that saying of Eusebius Emissenus, The V. Genesis part. The Preparative for
the Cure or Remedy of the sin of Swearing: it consists in Repentance and Prayer
for the pardon of it, and other sins.
Difficile est ut ad bonum assurgas, nisi a malo ante diverteris: quamdiu nova
delicta adjiciuntur, vetera non curantur; that is, unless by an holy and just
hatred of sin thou declinest from evil, thou can never do good, hardly attain
to a sincere and commendable, constant practice of well-doing: and so long as
new sins are added to the heap of thy impieties, God will not pardon thy old
ones, not pass by thy former transgressions.

Secondly, compare thy great unthankfulness with thy Makers bounty and
goodness; this may beget in thee a detestation or loathing of thy former sins
and lewdness, whereby thou did reject Gods commands (who if thou servest Him
will save thee) and obeyedst the Devils suggestions, who will for thy service
everlastingly torment thee. When thou have attained to this, the first and best
ingredient of Repentance, a Detestation of thy former impieties, as Cursing,
Swearing, Lying, and the like; then draw near to the Throne of Grace meekly
upon thy bended knees, with tears in thine eyes, and sorrow in thy heart,
saying with blind Bartimaeus in the Gospel, Mark 10.48
Jesu, thou Son of David, have mercy on me, forgive me all my sins past,
whereby thy holy name has been dishonored, thy word ill spoken of, and my
Neighbor injured. When thou have thus made thy approach to God with hearty
sorrow for thy sins, doubt not but that he will draw near to thee with mercy
and forgiveness; Jam. 4.8.
doubt not of a pardon, since Truth itself has made the promise, Ezekiel. 18.27,
28.
Ezekiel. 18. When the wicked turns away from his wickedness, etc. Because he
considers, and turns away from all his wickedness which he has committed,
he shall surely live, he shall not dye; (he means the death of the Soul, which
is an eternal separation of it from God, the fountain of joy and happiness;
which in the Word are employed under the name of life.) He shall surely live, he
shall not dye: a sweet and gracious promise; distrust not Gods performance of
it if thou truly repentest. Daturus est, non fallet, quia veritas promisit; ask
and thou shall receive, Aug.
for he that is most true will perform what he has promised, because he will
not, he cannot deceive nor be deceived. And thus relying upon his gracious
promise of hearing and granting our devout Prayers and Petitions, our humble
requests for his pardoning and purifying grace, in the third place, beg
earnestly of him the assistance of the same grace, which is likewise preventing
and strengthening, to keep thy tongue from all profaneness: cry with holy
David, Psalm. 141 3. Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of
my lips. From which humble request of the Prophet we may collect this, that as
our lips in that they open and shut are the Souls gate, through which our
inward thoughts break forth apparel'd in the dress of outward words; so, as a
gate is for the most part shut, our lips should never open but to the glory of
God and our Neighbors good. (...), Naz.
This by the way, (...), it is a learned Rabbis gloss on the Text. Now if you
demand what kind of watch it is which David desires God to set before his lips,
the acute Eusebius Emissenus shall answer this Quaere, Eusebius. Homil. cont.
diversa vitia. p. 138.
and clear this doubt: Si cordi statueris adhibere custodiam, ori non laboraris
imponere disciplinam, i.e. set a watch to guard thy heart, and there will be no
need to fence thy mouth: Illud siquidem voce depromitur quod prius in officina
cordis formatur. The heart is as it were the Master of the Mint, which first
sets a stamp upon thy words, which are current, if they bear Gods image, if
they carry in their sound the note or mark of Piety and goodness; if otherwise,
i.e. if they be profane and impious, they are not allowed of by God, being
condemned in the holy Scriptures. The Tongue is the Hearts servant, Mat. 12.36,
37.
which, like that Centurion, says to the Tongue by a kind of command, Speak
this, and it speaks it; Run in the Praises of God, and it runs; Swear, and
it swears; Say nothing, and it is silent. The Tongue is but as the hammer in
the Clock, which strikes not of it self, but keeps time, and moves according to
the motion of the wheels within.

The VI. Genesis part. The method which is to be used in the Cure.
To cure then the unbridled motion of the Tongue, begin with the Heart; the
which if it be (as David's was) fixed upon God, Psalm. 108.1. the tongue will
cease to lash out into Cursing and Swearing, but will (as it follows there in
the same verse) sing and give praise to God for his manifold mercies and
blessings which we have received. By the heart as has been explained) is to be
understood the whole Soul, which is fixed and settled upon God, when it
seriously considers his Almighty wonder-working Power and Greatness, who
created out of nothing this great Universe (consisting of Heaven and Earth) by
his powerful word, and sustaines all things in being by his providence. This
Meditation is an act of the Intellect, and may beget in us an awful fear of
his Majesty, which ought to be feared. The will is fixed upon God, when
considering and weighing his many and great benefits we devote our selves wholly
to his service, submitting our wills to him in all things, and loving him
without wavering, praise him without ceasing for his mercy and goodness. And
lastly, the Affections are fixed upon God, when they wander not through loose
desires of fading earthly vanities, but are chiefly taken up and possessed with
an holy delight in God and his Saints on Earth, and fed with a firm hope of
enjoying Gods presence, of seeing Him one day face to face in his Celestial
Paradise. This Hope is not a barren grace, but begets in a man a religious Care
not to offend God, and to abstain from any the least Sin to which his Nature is
most prone, because it may lead him into other sins, and separate him from the
love of God, and at last procure his everlasting banishment from those joys
which he believes are unspeakable, and hopes to enjoy in the glorious presence
of the blessed Trinity, together with the blessed Angels and company of the
elect Saints, to all eternity. Which most happy and joyful Fellowship rather
then he would lose, a good Christian, if he were put to his disposal, would
choose to suffer all the most exquisite torments that ever have been invented
by the bloody wit of Tyrants; nay, he would rather sustain for many thousand
years even Hells pains.

Let fire and wild beasts, racks and strapadoes, yea, and all the torments of
Hell seize upon me, and torment me, so I may win Christ: it is the triumphant
saying of Ignatius the martyr, recorded by Eusebius. This holy martyrs breast
burnt with a love of God, and a desire of Heavens happiness. That love caused
him to fear nothing but Gods displeasure (which follows upon our sins) by
means whereof he might be deprived of everlasting joys, and debarred from the
enjoyment of Gods most glorious presence. In a word, the soul that hopes to
attain Heaven, and desires to reign there for ever with God, will fear to
offend him and provoke him to wrath, lest he fail of his desire and hope, being
cast out of Gods sight and favor, in whose presence there is fullness of joy,
as in the absence of his grace here sorrow and heaviness, with darkness and
anguish of spirit. A filial Fear (whose proper object is the displeasure of
Almighty God our most gracious and loving Father) it is the only and best curb
to keep and restrain us from sin; and now that I am to proceed to the Cure of
that foul sin of Swearing, The I. Remedy against swearing.
I shall commend it in the first place as the prime remedy against it.

There be three sorts of men (says Nazianzen) that may and do attain
Salvation; (...). Naz. Or. 40
the first is in the condition of Servants, the second of Hirelings, the third
of Sons. A servant is moved to do his duty for fear of punishment; an
hireling serves for hope of a reward; but a Son, who is of the best order or
rank, reverences his heavenly Father, is zealous of good works, because it is a
thing that is just and honest, and likewise commendable for him to obey his
Fathers precepts, (...). Ibid.

Haec est satu ^impla merces, quod gratum erit Patri^ faecer^, etc.


although he should obtain no reward for his Obedience, which is with God and
man a most grateful sacrifice. Although there be few of this happy and rare
temper, as to serve God for his own sake, not expecting the reward to come, but
his present and past goodness (whereby he has bestowed and does daily heap on
us many great and singular blessings) yet I cannot but commend their Christian
endeavors who abstain from the acting of many foul sins even for fear of
punishment; which Fear may consist with the love of God (as Aquinas asserts)
so long as we dread not the punishment as the only evil contrary to our
natural good, Aqui. 2.2.19.2.6. Art.
(i. e. Pleasure, Ease, and Profit,) but rather dread it as that whereby we
shall be separated from the presence of God in Heaven, who is our chief joy and
sole delight. And this kind of fear being often times more active then love,
which slowly moves by the apprehension of good, whilst the other forces and
drives us to our duty by the foresight of danger, this fear (I say) is a great
help and remedy against the sin of Swearing; witness that of St. Augustine,
who it seems before his conversion was guilty of this sin. He in his tenth
Sermon concerning the beheading of St. John, reports this of himself, Timendo
Deum ab ore nostro abstulimus omnem jurationem, etc. The fear of God freed me
from the Custom of Swearing: and then he appeals in these words to his
Auditors, Ecce vobiscum vivimus; quis nos audivit aliquando jurantes, etc.
Behold I have daily commerce and fellowship with you, who ever heard an Oath to
pass from me? was I not wont to swear as familiarly and frequently as I
spoke? At ubi legi and timui, luctatus sum contra consuetudinem meam, but so
soon as I began to search the Scriptures, and by reading of them to fear the
great and terrible God of heaven, then forthwith I entered into the lists to
contend with and strive against my vicious custom, In ipsa lustatione invoeavi
Dominum adjutorem; praestitit mihi Dominus adjutorium non jurandi, nihil jam
mihi facilius est quam non jurare. Aug.
and in this contention I called earnestly upon the Almighty to assist and
strengthen me in the combat, and the Lord was my helper and deliverer, by whose
aid and assistance I became a Conqueror, I subdued that sin, so that now there
is nothing so easy to me as altogether to abstain from Swearing. Here by the
way note in this wholesome admonition of St. Augustine, Legi et timui joined
together, I read and feared, says he, reading produced in him a godly fear.
It seems Gods word, in which he was always conversant, terrified and reclaimed
him: perhaps it was that signal Text in Exodus 20.7. The Lord will not hold
him guiltless that takes his name in vain, i. e. He will revenge the
disgraceful injury that is done to his Name and person with severe punishments
and judgments on his body and Soul, with sickness and diseases, with crosses
and calamities, with spiritual desertions (the sorest of all afflictions) here,
and with everlasting torments hereafter. And believe this for a truth, that as
God is faithful in the performance of his promises, so he is most just in
repaying of vengeance, and inflicting his threatened judgments on obstinate and
obdurate Sinners, who shall not escape them unless they be prevented by a
speedy and hearty repentance of their Sins. The forenamed place in Exodus is
confirmed and explained by another in Ecclesiasticus (which I doubt not but
that St. Augustine read) it is c. 23. v. 10, 11, 12. Accustom not thy self to
swearing, neither use thy self to the naming of the Holy one: for as a servant
that is continually beaten shall not be without a mark; so he that swears,
and names God continually, shall not be faultlesse. A man that uses much
swearing shall be filled with iniquity, v. 11. That is, he shall add sin unto
sin, Lying unto Swearing, stealing unto lying, according to that common saying,
Ostende mihi mendacem, et ego ostendam tibi furem, show me a liar, and I will
show thee a Thief: and thus adding sin unto sin, he shall at length fill up the
measure of his iniquity and transgressions with perjury: from such a man's house
the plague shall never depart, but his house shall be full of Calamities, (so
the wise man threatens and denounces against him in the close of the 11 v.) i.
e. as he loved not blessing, but cursing and swearing, so, Cursed shall he be
in all that he undertakes; Cursed shall he be in the City, and cursed in the
field; Cursed shall he be in his estate, in his Children, and reputation. God
shall send upon him all those curses and plagues which are threatened and
thundered out against all those who rebel against God, and will not hearken to
the voice of his word, to observe and do all his commandments, Vid. Levit. 26.
as you may read at large Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16. He that believes Gods word to be
infallibly true, and considers often with himself what his faith prompts him to
believe, that so many and so grievous punishments shall be assuredly inflicted
on him and his, cannot choose but fear and dread the wrath of so severe a
judge, who searches him out (as the Prophet David speaks) and knows him, Psalm.
1^9.1, 2, 3.
who is about his path, and about his bed, who spies out all his ways, and
registers all his words: he that truly believes this will tremble with fear to
offend so great an All-seeing God. Now Fear that is religious works in the
soul these three effects: First, expulsionem peccati; Hug^.
Secondly, executionem boni; Thirdly, conservationem boni propositi. i. e. It
drives out of the soul, and keeps out sin; it stirs us up to the practice of
piety and Godliness; and lastly, it causes us to maintain and cherish our good
purposes of serving God in holiness and righteousness. It is therefore called
by Parisiensis, Lib. de. moribus, c. 2.
Janitor cordis, the doorkeeper of the heart, Ipsum Infernum pro nodosa clava
vibrans, holding ever (as it were) a ragged Staff in its hand to knock down and
kill the very first motions of sin in the Soul; and that Club or Staff is Hell,
or, the frequent consideration and remembrance of those everlasting torments
which are prepared for the Devil and his associates, who combine with him in
wickedness, for profane Rabshakehs, and cursing Shimeies, for Whoremongers,
for Adulterers, for Liars, and common Swearers; between whom and Hells
everlasting torments there is but a small partition, nothing but a weak and
slender thread of a (...); Naz.
brittle, frail, and momentanie life: the which when God shall cut with the
Sword of his incensed Justice, they shall drop into Topheth, that bottomless
pit of Hell, where the everlasting wheel of their unsufferable torments shall
run continually turning about, without ceasing, from ten thousand years to an
hundred thousand; after which shall succeed so many millions as there be sands
upon the Seashore, or have fallen drops of Rain since the beginning of the
World; after all which ten hundred thousand thousands of years expired, the
damned Souls in Hell would think themselves happy, if they then might have a
release from their pains and torments. But there is an irrevocable sentence of
Almighty God, and a For ever and ever annexed to that Decree, which shuts out
all hopes of Ease and Comfort. O I could wish that men would in time often
meditate on the grievousness and everlasting continuance of those torments,
that so they might prevent them by their seasonable and unfeigned repentance.
To suffer pains and torments, and that too everlastingly, is a thing to humane
nature (which delights in ease and pleasure) so horrible and grievous, that if
there were but one among all the Sons and Daughters of Adam that should suffer
this-wise in Hell, it were enough to make us all quake and tremble; and to say
within our selves (as Christ's Disciples did, when he told them that one of them
should betray Him) Is it I, Is it I? And let me say to thee as Nathan said to
David, Mat. 26.22.
2 Samuel 12.7. Thou art the man, thou art he that shall suffer thus to all
Eternity, whoever thou art that persistest in any sin without remorse of
Conscience, without any sense or feeling of thy sins committed against so great
and terrible a God, whom the glorious Angels do worship with an awful
Reverence, chanting out evermore this joyful and triumphant Hymn, Blessing,
Glory, Wisdom, Rev. 7.12.
and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might be unto our God for ever
and ever. And that thou may after death have a part or communion in this
Celestial, Angelical Quire; and not howl and cry in the Devils Chapel beneath,
amidst that Infernal and black Chorus of dark Fiends and Reprobates; labor
betimes by an holy meditation of Gods infinite Power, Majesty, and Greatness,
together with his great Mercy and Goodness, to settle the Fear of Him in thy
Heart and Conscience. 2 King. 12. 2 Chr. 24. ver. 2.
As Joash prospered so long as Jehoiada lived and was his Counselor; in like
manner, so long as the Fear of God resides in thy trembling Soul, thou shall go
on and prosper in the ways of Godliness, and be freed from the perpetration
or committing of many foul enormous sins. To conclude this particular, love and
delight in God as a most indulgent loving Father, dread Him as a most just and
terrible Judge, whose Power is irresistible, and his Justice implacable against
impenitent obdurate Malefactors. If thy heart be thus sweetly tempered and
tuned with Love and Fear, there will be no unpleasant, no jarring discord in
thy Tongue; but, instead of profaning and blaspheming Gods most holy name, it
will ever be sounding forth his praises in Prayer and Thanksgiving. This is the
first and best remedy against Swearing.

A second may be collected out of the forecited words of St. Austine. The II.
Reme^y, A firm purpose and resolution against it.
Legi and timui (says he) and luctatus sum contra consuetudinem meam, and in
ipsa luctatione invo^avi Dominum, i. e. I wrastled or contended with my bad
custom of Swearing, and in my earnest contention and strife against it, Genesis
32.24.
I strove like Jacob with God in prayer, I called upon the name of the Lord.
Now what may we suppose to have been the matter or substance of his devout
prayer, but that which was the Prophet David's, Psalm. 116.4? O Lord, I beseech
thee deliver my soul from the power of sin and my imbred corruptions; keep my
soul, O God, from the guilt of presumption, that I offend not wilfully with my
tongue: Renew my will and affections, that I may hate and abhor this odious sin
of swearing, that I may delight wholly in what thou have promised, and love to
do what thou command, etc. A man that can pray thus to God in Faith, not
doubting to be heard, but believing that his Petitions shall be granted, that
man by Gods grace shall find a change in his heart: the eye of his
Understanding shall be enlightened to apprehend fully the infinite and awful
Majesty of the Almighty; his Will shall be inclined to that which is good, and
enflamed with a fervent desire to serve his God, for whose only service he was
created, Ephesians. 2.10.
and for which he shall be most mercifully and richly rewarded. This Velle,
this fervent desire of serving God, is the Remedy which St. Chrysostom
prescribed to his Auditors to subdue and beat down in them any Lording sin,
Hom. 11. in Act. Apost.
especially that of accustomed Swearing. There is (says he) no need of great
cost for this main business; there is not required much labor or great pains,
nor length of time. If there be only a willing mind, an ardent desire to
forsake this sin, the work is well-nigh done. Pars sanitatis est velle sanari,
says the Physician, He is half cured that is willing and endeavors to be
healed: Erasm. in Enchir. d.
Magna pars Christianismi est velle fieri Christianum, this is the language of
the Divine, He is almost a Christian, or arrived to a good degree of
Christianity, that is willing and desirous to be informed in the knowledge of
Gods Law, which must be the Rule of our Christian profession. Put on then a
willing or strong resolution of forsaking thy habituated sin of Swearing, so
may thou put off by degrees and lose this vicious custom. A firm and
well-grounded, settled resolution is the souls Coat of Maile, to arm it against
the powerful commands of a long continued habit or custom in sin. Art thou then
another Apitius, a man given to excess in meats and drinks, to surfeiting and
drunkenness? resolve to eat and drink sparingly, and that only at meals, for
thy necessity; and by Gods grace assisting and strengthening thy resolution,
Aquin.
ut bonum quod velis efficaciter opereris, that thou may efficaciously put
into act what thou resolvest, thou shall by degrees get a contrary habit of
sobriety and temperance. That thy resolution against swearing may be likewise
effectual in thee, observe that Rule of St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Hom. 28.
prefix to thy self a certain number of days, whether eight, ten, or twelve,
more or less, wherein thou must resolve never to swear an Oath (first
beseeching God in prayer to strengthen thee by his grace, that thou may
perform what thou resolvest.) If after this time expired or run out thou
chancest to fall into the snare again, and be entangled in the guilt of thy
former sin, what is then to be done by thee? Chrysostom. Hom. 5. ad Baptis.
Follow the Counsel of the forenamed learned Father, punish thy tongue with an
whole days thirst, thy body with a long fast; that the sense of this torment
of hunger and thirst may beget in thee a sense or fear of Hells everlasting
torments, Romans 6.23^
the wages of this and other unrepented sins. If the fear of present pain in
enduring a days thirst, or of future, I mean, that which is everlasting with
the Devil and his black Angels in Hell, cannot bridle thy tongue, and deter
thee from this sin; then try another way, take another course, perhaps the love
of gain and reputation will do it. Resolve therefore as often as thou profanest
Gods name with an Oath, to give so many pieces of silver to the poorest of
Christ's Members. Their prayers to God for thee, together with the shame of thy
often infirmities in committing so foul and unprofitable a sin, whereby thou
betrayest thy self to be Gods Ps. 139.20. Thine enemies take thy name in vain.
enemy; their prayers, I say, on thy behalf to God, and the shame in being
noted or branded for Gods enemy (as fighting against his will by a constant
rebellion to his word and opposing his Commandment) these may prevail so far
as to redeem thee from thy custom of swearing, unless thy Conscience be
cauterized and hardened in thy sin.

The III. Remedy, A consideration of the great indignity offered by it to God.
Now if none of these Remedies can work a cure of thy malady, but after thy
settled resolution and many trials to subdue thy evil custom, thou be again
foiled in the fight, and sin gets the Conquest; then consider with thy self
what an indignity and disgrace is cast thereby on thy Almighty God: Let this
supposall which I shall now propound to thy Conscience sink into thy heart; and
ponder it seriously. Suppose the same Law were now in force which Lodowick (or
Lewis) that famous King of France enacted in his time, which was, Vid. C^cht^
v. Ser. de 2. praecepto.
that the lips of all swearers should be seared, and their tongues bored
through with an hot iron; or imagine that all blasphemers were to be drowned,
which another King of France, King Philip, ordained; or that they should be
beheaded, which the Emperor Maximilian decreed; or punished with Confiscation
of goods, besides the loss of their Lives: if these Laws were now in force
among us, would not thou make a Covenant with thy lips and a League with thy
tongue, never to speak of God, nor use his Name, but with a reverent and awful
devotion, and that either in Prayer or Thanksgiving? I presume thou would.
Since then God has severely threatened, as a punishment of this sin of swearing,
the everlasting burnings in the bottomless pit of Hell, and we notwithstanding
slight his threats and reject his commands, do we not thereby O miser and
praepost. ra fidei homuncio! homini plu^ credi^ quam Deo qui creator est
hominis: poenam perpetuam minatur Deus, and negligis; poenam temporalem minatur
jude^ terrenus, and contremis^u. Viexmont. Instit. ad Poenitent. p. 1. c. 1.
undervalue the Divine Majesty? do we not degrade him in our thoughts below
man, and thrust him (as much as in us lies) beneath the Creature? in that we
deny him that Reverence, yield not that Obedience to his Laws, which we would
afford to the Proclamation of an Earthly King, or command of a Father. St. Paul
was sensible of this indignity offered unto God by our bold rebellion and
disobedience, where he says, Heb. 12.9.
We had Fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave them Reverence;
shall we not much more be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live?
Mal. 1.6.
Heb. 12. Agreeable to this is that complaint of God by his Prophet Malachy, c.
1. A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: if I then be your
Master, where is my fear? says the Lord of Hosts unto you that despise my name.

The Lord of Hosts! methinks this one appellation, when thou read it, should
strike thy heart with fear, considering his universal power and general
Command over the Creature, the Heavens, the Earth, and all things in them
contained: All which, like an Army set in battel-aray, and sweetly ordered in
their several ranks, are ever in a readiness to obey their Makers commands.
Heb. 1.14.
The Angels, those Ministering Spirits, do fly where and when God sends and
appoints them; Josh. 10.13.
the Sun and Moon stand still when he speaks the word, as in the days of
Joshuah. A cloud will drop from the middle Region, Exodus 14.20
leave its proper place, and forsake its diurnall revolution, to be a guide to
Israel, at its Makers command: so the waters will stand on an heap, and cease
from their natural motion, that Gods people may be secured from their pursuing
enemies, whilst they walk through the Sea, as if it were dry land. verse 29.
More of this we may read in the 16. of Wisdom, where we have many examples of
the Creatures subjection to God their Creator. Thus the inanimate and senseless
Creatures are willing and ready to obey their Maker; and shall man alone (who
only amongst them is honored with so rare a privilege, endowed with so high a
prerogative as to have reason and understanding given him, to know, to love,
and so the better to serve his God) shall he alone be wanting in his duty, deny
obedience to his Maker, for whose service he was created, as the Creatures were
for his? The greater and lesser Luminaries of Heaven, all sheep and oxen, the
beasts of the field, the fouls of the air, and the fishes of the Sea, and
whatsoever walks through the paths of the Seas; all these, recited by the
Prophet David, Ps. 8.3, 6, 7, 8.
with many more not mentioned by him, were made to serve us; and all do in a
manner thus call upon and bespeak every one of us, God made us for thee, Coelum
and terra and omnia in illis creata (...) ut amem te, Domine and servia^ tibi.
Maub. Exercit. ^iet.
that thou should serve and glorify him who made us and thee. O then let the
consideration of thy unthankfulness to God thy Creator put thee to a blushing
shame, and let the memory of his mercies and blessings spur or incite thee to
an active obedience, and quicken thy dead or drowsy spirit to walk cheerfully
and constantly in the ways of his Commandments; do not dishonor nor disgrace
him by a constant and wilful breach of them by a frequent and rash taking of
his name in vain. Swear not.

The IV. Remedy, by way of motive, drawn from the irrational Creatures.
If all the forenamed Motives will not startle thy obdurate Conscience, and
drive thee to obedience of Gods Commands; consider then the brute Beasts, who
wanting Reason, which thou enjoyest, and Speech (which God gave thee to set
forth his praises, Homo immed^ate est propter Deum, and omnia qu^liabet, habet
propter Deum. Raymund.
to advance and publish the glories of his Attributes) yet they led only by the
guidance of Natures Law, offer no indignities, no injuries to their Masters,
from whom they receive food and sustenance; nay, they have ever showed
themselves thankful to strangers, from whom they received the least benefits or
courtesies: (All which may serve to check thy ingratitude in dishonouring God
by Rebelling against his precepts. Lib. 7. c. 4^. Not. H st.
) The story in Aelian of Androcles and a Lion is remarkable; he pulled a thorn
out of the Lions foot; the Lion afterward repai'd this courtesy, by saving
his life when he fell among thieves and cried out for help. Ael. l. 8. c. 22.
A parallel story to this we find in the same Historian of the Tarentine Woman
and a Stork: she cured one of the Storks young ones, which had by a casualty
broke its leg; the Stork not long after in requital of her goodness, dropped a
rich Jewel into her lap, as she sat in a solitary place bemoaning the death of
her dear Husband a little before that time deceased. The truth of these Stories
I cannot warrant. Let then the Scriptures to our shame be witness of man's
ingratitude to God, and of the brute Creatures thankful respect to their
Masters and Benefactors. Man, for his sensuality and beastly lusts, Ps. 49.12,
20
may be fitly ranked with and compared to the beasts that perish; but they are
above him, admit him not as their equal, if you respect their grateful
dispositions. The Ox knows his owner, Isa. 1.3. i. e. will submit his neck
to the yoke, to toil and labor in the field, when and so long as his Master
pleases; so the Ass knows his Masters crib (or Manger) i. e. willingly and
readily stoops to any burden, sustains any blow, because that is imposed, and
this comes from his hand by whom he is fed: But Israel does not know (what
great things I have done for them) my people does not consider, how that, for
their Saviors sake or merits, I have provided Heaven for them, which shall be
the reward of their service, and where they shall rest everlastingly from their
labors. O Man, think of Gods complaint here by his Prophet, think of it with
shame; with an inward blushing confusion of spirit, and for shame let not the
brute beasts outstrip thee in thankfulness; submit thy neck to Gods yoke,
which is easy and light, obey his Commands, and Swear not.

The V. Remedy, A third consideration.
In the fifth place, consider seriously in thy most recollected thoughts (which
may be a great remedy against Swearing) what recompense God requires of us for
all his benefits unto us. It is Honor and Praise. Praemium Dei est honor
operis, lau^, and gloria: praemium creatura est utilitas. Raymund.
And this duty we discharge, when we declare and publish with joyful hearts and
thankful tongues the Magnalia Dei, those great things which he out of his great
mercy has done for us in our Creation, Redemption, Vocation, together with the
manifold and wonderful acts of his Providence over us. For the least of which
his mercies we could not be sufficiently thankful to God, although we should
live a thousand years ten hundred times told, and spend every day and hour in
that long period of time only in Prayer and Thanksgiving. Oh then let us wash
our hearts from filthiness, and our tongues from all obscene pollutions: Let
our mouths be ever filled with Gods praises, and let us cheerfully redeem the
time to this blessed work of thankfulness; which because it is too large or
too great to be done in this span-long life, Sit illud meditatio frequens in
hoc seculo, quod perpetuum opus erit in futuro. Aug. in Psalm. 148.
it shall be ever doing in that which shall succeed hereafter, and is
everlasting. For Thanks is the chief, if not the whole, work of the glorified
Saints and Angels in Heaven, who vent and spend (as one says well) all their
burning fire of love in the flame of Gods praise.

The erect posture wherewith God has endowed man above his Fellow Creatures
should put him in mind of his duty to God by way of thankfulness. For, as if
the earth were not a fit object for our Contemplation, our faces are set
upward, and our Souls too by so many foot carried up toward Heaven as our
Bodies are erected to it. By which frame of our Bodies we are taught this
lesson, to have our hearts always fixed upon God in Prayer and Thanksgiving.
He that shall endeavor to follow Saint Paul's wholesome admonition, Pray
continually, In all things give thanks; 1 These. 5.17, 18.
that man will seldom or never swear, nor defile his Soul with the guilt or
stains of idle and sinful discourses, but being here on earth will live an
Angelical life, live like to an Angel and Saint in Heaven, where there is only
continual chaunting out cheerful Hymns which contain Gods praises: and he that
intends to bear a part in that Celestial Quire, must lay aside his Cursing and
Swearing, and practice here betimes, before death surprise him, to sing that
new Song which Saint John heard in his Revelation, Chap. 5.9, 10. and ever join
with Saint Paul in his joyful and thankful Doxology (1 Timothy 1.17.) saying, Unto
the King immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be honor and glory for ever
and ever.

Again, to incite us to use our Tongues to the praise, or to exercise them in
the praises of God, let us consider to what end He gave us speech and
utterance, which he has denied to the other inferior Creatures; was it not
that we should exceed them, and praise the Lord both for himself, and for them
whom he created for our service, and for the glory of his Name? Shall the Birds
sing to God, and not he for whose benefit he created them? So said once a pious
man, a great Master of Meditation. It was a devout speech of another, If God
had made me a Nightingale, I would have sung as a Nightingale: but now in that
he has made me a man, I will sing and publish the praises of God with my
tongue as a Christian; whose spirit being enlarged by the powerful work of
divine grace, because it discernes or foresees the eternity of Gods love, it
therefore endeavors (as far as it can) to maintain an eternity of Gods praise.
They will be ever giving of Thanks, Psalm. 84.4.
says the Prophet David in his Description or Character of Gods true Saints.
And were it not for these, a few gracious Souls, what honor should God have
from a generation of proud and perverse worldlings, who tread his favors under
their feet like Swine, and are never mindful of that everlasting Spring of his
goodness from which the streams of his blessings are derived unto us? And
this their unthankfulness who dishonor God by their tongue, Which David calls
his glory, Psalm 16.10. My glory rejoices. Gloria mea, i. e. lingua mea, quod
membrum conditum est praesertim ut gloriam Dei celebret. Sim. de Miris, in loc.
which was given them to glorify Him, this, I say, should stir us up the more
to be Trumpeters of Gods praises in the midst of his enemies; because this
noble and gracious act has in some sort a Prerogative above our praising God
in Heaven, for that he has there no enemies to dishonor him, and we meet with
no opposition.

Lastly, to deter you from this disgraceful and ungracious sin of Swearing and
Blaspheming the holy Name of God, and to stir you up to this Heavenly work of
praising him with your tongue; consider what reward shall be given thee, if
thou performest this holy service and duty. God has so linked and joined his
glory and our happiness together, that if we refer all that we have or do
to his glory, if we employ the whole stock of his graces in us to his honor
and praise, he will re-pay us with everlasting happiness. To him that has
shall be given; Mar. 4.25.
i. e. to him that has a thankful heart and a thankful tongue, to him shall
be given an increase of grace and goodness, with an access or addition of
outward blessings, which shall be seconded and crowned in the World to come
hereafter with transcendent joys. Where do men delight to sow but in fertile
soiles, where they reap most fruit? where do Musicians delight to sound their
Instruments, but where the Echo multiplies their Notes in speedy and quick
returns? So God delights to scatter and shed his grace and favors in the
hearts and upon the heads of those that are humble and fruitful in love and
thankfulness. We may collect from hence how great the benefit is which shall
redound to those whose tongues are ever exercised in sounding forth Gods
praise. As first, their mouths shall never be polluted with vain Oaths; and
secondly, they shall find by a joyful experience that the reward of this their
service will be everlasting joy and happiness. Id quod damus Deo non est ei
utile, sed nobis; quia quod Deo redditur, reddenti additur. Aug.
There was never an^ that was a loser by Gods service* God is the best
play master. Never any that trusted in Him (thereby glorifying his Truth, Power,
and Providence) and was confounded, they never failed of their hope or expected
reward; He is a most faithful rewarder and bountiful benefactor. So much for
the fifth Remedy; the sixth follows, of which very briefly.

Bona vis habere and malus vis esse, The VI. Rem^^y to beware of idle words, or
to utter nothing but what is necessary and profitable.
so said St. Austine once to an ungodly man who deferred his conversion to God;
Thou desire, vain man, and expectest good things from God, and in the mean
time wilt not cease to be wicked: It is all one as if he should have said in
plainer terms, In vain do thou expect any good from God above, so long as
thou servest the Devil here beneath. And believe me, thou can not do the
Devil greater service then by profaning Gods sacred Name, whereby thou
begettest a light esteem of his Majesty and Person in the hearts of those that
hear thee blaspheme. Familiarity, we say, breeds contempt: And the common
Swearer* makes himself equal with Almighty God, whose great and glorious Name
he, so familiarly or frequently takes into his mouth without any the least show
of Reverence or Respect. To prevent then a great mischief, even the Corruption
of those with whom thou conversest and thine own destruction, entertain a
Religious and high esteem of God in thy heart, and then thy whole body, all the
parts of it, will strive to testify by outward expressions thy inward
Veneration of his Majesty, Religio est quadam protestatio fidei per aliqua
signa v^^eriora. Aqui.
(which to do, in the judgment of Aquinas and other Schoolmen, is a main point
or part of Religion.) The knees will then bend, the eyes and hands will be often
lift up to God in prayer, neither will he want then the sacrifice of a joyful
tongue, Luke 6.45.
which is the Souls best interpreter. Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. If the heart abound with sinful lustful thoughts, the tongue
will froth and lash out into blasphemy and unchaste Speeches; if it be
garnished with the fear of God and Heavenly Meditations, the tongue will utter
nothing but what is necessary to be spoken, and profitable to be heard. And
these are the two words which (as Bonaventure asserts) we are permitted in our
ordinary discourse only to utter: Bonav. l. 2. de profect. Relig. c. 10.
the first is, Quod necessarium est tibi vel alteri; the second is, Quod utile
est tibi vel alteri: i. e. in all our discourses with men we should aim or
drive only at this, to speak nothing but what is necessary to be said, and
profitable to be heard, both in respect of our selves and others. As when we
stand up in the defense of the Truth as undaunted Champions of it, boldly
opposing those that be enemies to it; and secondly, when we only speak and
utter that which may conduce to our Neighbors edification and comfort, by
instructing the ignorant in the knowledge of Divine Truths, or of such things
as are stamped with the mark of goodness, and by reforming those who err and
go astray from God: to reduce such by our counsel into the right way, and to
comfort others who are mourners in Sion, who are under any outward cross, or
inwardly troubled in Spirit; this is a befitting duty and work of one that is
truly sanctified.

And those two forenamed Rules of Bonaventure, being rightly and duly
observed, may prove likewise, by God's blessing, a great Remedy against vain
and idle Swearing.

The seventh Remedy consists in the moderation of our unbridled Passions,
chiefly that of Anger, the common makebate of the world, the cause of so much
blood spilling, and of so many quarrels and dissensions among Christians; whose
very name, in which they all agree, may put them in mind of that mutual love
and amity which is due from Brother to Brother, Christianus nomen est
charitatis, justitia, sobrietatis, patientiae, and pietatis, etc. Carthusianus.
(...), id est, Dignos nos exhibeamus cognomento quod accepimus. Ignat.
bearing one name of Christian, and having one heavenly Father. But why is this
amity so rare amongst us? How comes it to pass that strife is so often heard in
our streets, and discord so abounds, as appears by those many Suits and
Processes in common Courts of Justice? From whence come wars and fighting
amongst us? (to speak in S. James his language, c. 4. v. 1.) and, that I may
come nearer to my present purpose, from whence proceed such horrid blasphemies
as we daily hear? from what source so much cursing and so many execrable oaths?
Proceed they not from our passions that domineer and reign in us? proceed they
not chiefly from Anger, whose material cause is an ebullition or boiling of the
blood about the heart, which being thus affected sends up such a steam and
fogge into the head, that the Brain (which is the seat of Reason) is
immediately stifled and choked, Nihil rationis est ubi semel affectus inductus
est, jusque illi aliquod voluntate nostra datum est, Senec. de Ira c. 8.
so that the light of Reason is for a while extinguished and put out? And hence
it comes to pass that the Tongue, wanting the guidance of the Understanding,
like an unruly Mastiff that has slipped his Collar or Chain, breaks forth into
contumelious speeches against man, nay lashes out into blasphemies, flies even
in the face of the Almighty with bitter oaths and execrations. May we not
rightly say of a man in this distempered case, (...). Ira furor brevis est.
Philo.
that he is troubled with a short fit of madness, that for the time in which
his distemper lasts, he is (as we use to say) out of his wits, (...), being
under the command of Anger, a sharp and cruel Mistress? Should we appeal to
Seneca in this point, we might find that he asserts as much and no less. In his
first Book De Ira, c. 1. Ut autem scias (says he most excellently) non esse
sanos quos ira possedit, ipsum illorum habitum intuere, etc. Compare the
carriage and behavior of an angry man with one that is mad, and you will find
that there is a very small difference in their tempers, there being so great a
likeness in their outward deportment and demeanours; Furentium certa indicia
sunt auda: and minax vultus, tristis frons, torva facies, citatus gradus,
inquietae manus, color versus, crebra et vehementius acta suspiria: Ita
irascentium eadem signa sunt. Senec. lib. 1. cap. 1. De Ira.
both of them having a menacing or threatening aspect, a sour look, a distorted
face, a ruddy blushing countenance, caused by the fervor of their blood
boiling in the veins, a furious hasty pace, a disorderly managing of each part
of their bodies, as the hands, feet, and eyes, with the rest. But to omit the
further illustration of this Comparison between Anger and Madness, and to leave
the description of the Malady, that I may proceed to the Cure or Remedy of it;
let me first propound this as a ground or basis on which I shall build the
fabric of my short discourse, which I confess a Stoic would entertain with
scorn and derision, for that he condemns all Passions as being of themselves or
in their own nature vicious; whereas they are good and bad according as the
several Objects are on which they are set and fastened. My ground which I shall
first lay or propose is this, Temperare iram, non tollere; Cum rectam rationem
sequantur affectiones, et quando et ubi oportet adhibeantur, quis eas tunc
morbidas et vitiosas passiones audeat dicere? Aug.
we must labor to temper this passion, to reduce it to some moderation, not
take it quite away, not wholly abolish and extirpate it: Eoque detracto quod
exundat, ad salutarem modum cogere, id vero retinere sine quo languebit actio,
and vis and vigor animi resolvetur; So that by paring away what is superfluous
in it, and bringing it to a mediocrity, we may retain and keep that spark alive
in us, without which we should want zeal and vigor in the performance of our
Christian duties. This spark of Anger had glowed in our Saviors breast into a
flame of Zeal, Mat. 21.12.
when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and overthrew the
Tables of the mony-changers, and of them that sold Doves. Angry then we may be,
but take care we must that we sin not, Ephesians. 4.26. And sin we shall, if our
Anger offend either in the matter or measure of it; i. e. if the ground or
cause of Anger be unjust (as when we are angry with a friend that reproves us
for doing amiss,) or (when we are unjustly wronged) if we retain our Anger
(which is an inordinate desire of revenge) too long, until that desire break
forth into act, to the hurt or ruin of our Neighbor, and hurt of our own
selves: for as envy slays the silly one, (Job. 5.2.) so wrath kills the
foolish man. Upon which Text Aquinas has this gloss, Stulti per iracundiam
spiritualiter occiduntur, in quantum scilicet non refranando per rationem
motum, dilabuntur in aliqua peccata mortalia, puta in blasphemiam Dei vel
injuriam proximi. Aquin.
Stulti per iracundiam Spiritualiter occiduntur, etc. Foolish men void of
understanding are spiritually slain by Anger and Wrath: for that by not
restraining with the curb of reason the eruption or breaking forth of this
unruly Passion, they fall into some deadly sins, as Blasphemy against God, and
wronging their Neighbors, when they either shed their blood, or wound them by
opprobrious terms in their reputation and credit. My exhortation then shall be
that of Saint Paul to the Ephesians, c. 4.31. Let all bitterness and Anger be
put away; and that in his Epistle to the Colossians, c. 3.8. Put off these,
Anger, Wrath, Malice, and Blasphemy. We may collect hence, that Blasphemy is an
individual companion and an attendant of Anger and wrath. But how may these be
put off, or rather prevented before they come on, before they take hold of us,
and so get the mastery of our Souls? (For as wise Princes are wont in the calm
of Peace to provide against the storms of War; so must we in the calmest
state of our Souls, prepare and provide Antidotes against this inward
turbulency of our minds.) To prevent then the sudden Commotions of this unruly
Passion, or to allay it when it has broken the bounds of Reason or Discretion,
Si passio Domini ad me^^riam revocetur, nihil adeo duram quod non aquo animo
toleretur. Greg.
Consider in the first place Christ's bitter Death and Passion, what or how
great pains and torments he has suffered, how much he has sustained for thee.
Trace him in thy meditations from the Garden to Golgotha: and as Pilate said
once out of pity to the Jews, Joh. 19.5. Behold the man, so say I to thee,
Behold thy Savior, who was and is God and Man in one Person; behold him
sweating great drops of Blood in his Agony in the Garden, sustaining whippings
and scoffings, spittings and buffetings in the face, and last of all a most
shameful and painful death on the Cross for thee, to redeem thee from Hell,
and to bring thee to Heaven, into which it was impossible for thee to climb,
being clogged with the weight and burden of thy many and grievous sins, whose
pardon he has purchased by the merit of his death and sufferings. When thou
have seriously pondered and considered these things, then (even when for some
distasteful word thou feel the heat of passion begin to inflame thy blood)
then bespeak thy self in the words of Saint Basil in his Morals, (...); What
do thou, O Man? art thou better then thy Master? Has Christ my Lord
suffered such unsufferable pains, so many reproaches for me, and shall I, who am
a Worm, a poor contemptible Creature, shall I, who am a Cage of Uncleanness, a
Dunghill of Impurity, fret and fume for some conceived spot of disgrace or
ignominy thrown upon my name? Shall not I suffer this and more for him, for the
profession of his Truth, and glory of his Name? (for they who profess Christ,
they that live godly, must look to suffer persecution, at least that of the
Tongue. Mitescat savitia, mansuescat Iracundia, remitta^t sibi omnes culpas
invicem suas, nec exactor sit vindicta qui petitor est veniae. Aug.
) Shall I by seeking revenge for some injury done me, snatch the Scepter out of
Gods hand, or (which is worse) deny his Providence and Sovereignty, as if he
did sit still or sleeping in Heaven, not regarding what is done here beneath on
Earth? God is the Lord to whom vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94.1. and, Vengeance
is mine, Deuteronomy. 32.35
I Will repay it, says the Lord. Meditate often on this, and on thy Saviors
sufferings, the thought whereof will teach or move thee to be gentle and kind
to others, Ephesians. 4.32.
forgiving them, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven thee. And thus by this
means having gotten the mastery of thy Passion, thou will have the better
command over thy Tongue, and free it as from bitterness and clamor and
evil-speaking, so from blaspheming Gods Name by Cursing and Swearing.

In the second place, that thou may curb this unbrided Passion of Anger, a
Capital sin, for that it is (as I have showed) the cause of many other sins,
and most commonly that of Swearing, Consider with thy self in private, how often
thou have offended God, Psalm. 19.12.
(but who can tell how often he offends?) and how often he has pardoned thee.
This consideration of thy many infirmities, this knowledge of thy filthy sins
will move thee to a mean esteem of thy self; and he that out of a deep
apprehension of his sins and a sight or sense of his infirmities has learned to
contemn himself, that man will not be easily provoked by a small injury and
contempt from others.

Thirdly, when thou art moved to Anger, labor to suppress this flame that it
break not forth, suppress it by silence. For, as fire under green wood, if not
blown, will go out; so anger in the breast, kept in by the silence of the
tongue, will waste and spend it self to nothing. An example of this we have in
David, Psalm. 39. Ps. 39.2.
He kept silence, he kept his mouth as it were with a bridle, whilst the
ungodly (who did provoke him) was in his sight. He spoke nothing, but refrained
his tongue, abstaining even from good words, ver. 3
which was a pain and grief unto him. If we speak any thing at all when we are
moved to anger by our Persecuting, Reviling Enemies, let it be in the phrase of
our meekest Savior upon the Cross, Father, Luke 23.34
forgive them, for they know not what they do; or in the Language of that
Protomartyr Saint Stephen, Acts 7.60. Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.
Yet, if thou be a public person, and thy Injury great and notorious, Qui
illatam sibi sustinet injuriam and contumeliam, conviciantis nutrit audaciam.
Vid. Aqui. 2. 2. 72. Qu.
then to prevent scandal, lest by silence thou give men an occasion to
suspect the integrity of thy Conscience, thou may vindicate thy Innocence by
a just complaint to the Magistrate, (...) Basil.
and from the Decree of Justice seek a Redress of thy Injury; and in so doing
thou committest thy cause unto the Lord, in that thou Revengest not thy self,
but referrest thy cause to the public Magistrate, Gods Minister of Peace,
whose Office it is to see that they be righted who suffer wrong; as also to
encourage Virtue, to punish Vice, and suppress the growth of sin.

Fourthly and lastly, to incite or move thee further to abstain from immoderate
Anger, let the examples and practice of the De his ita Nazianzenus, (...). i.
e. Anticipant fidem moribus, i. Justitia and Temperantia, and indigent tantum
Christianorum nomine, quod Christum profitentes decet operibus id suis
exhibentes.
Heathen ever run in your thoughts, who by the dim light of nature have gone
further in the way of Piety then we Christians, who live in the Sunshine of
the Gospel of Peace. To repeat the Stories of them renowned for their
patience, would be both impertinent and tedious: I will commend to your
Meditation but one, and that of a true Roman, I mean Cato, who used to say,
That he could and did forgive all offenders but himself. So be thou angry with
the Malice, but love (i. e. wish well to) the Person of thy Enemy that has
offended thee; forgive him by not studying an hasty Revenge of thy Injury, and
testify thy hearty forgiveness of it by thy prayers to God to forgive him his
sins, and to heal him of his malice. And thus if thou imitatest God, who is
good to his very Enemies, thou will show thy self to be a genuine Son of thy
(...). Ignat. Ep. ad Antioch.
Heavenly Father. If thou imitatest him not, but suffer thy heart to burn
with Anger and Malice, I pronounce against thee, thou art a Bastard and no true
Son. That then thou may truly retain the (...). Ignat. Ep. ad Magnes.
name, and maintain by thy practice the duty of a good Christian, follow the
Prophet David's advice, Psalm. 37.8. Cease from Anger, and forsake Wrath, else
shall thou be moved to do evil; thou will wrong thy Neighbor, and injure thy
good God by breaking his Commandments, chiefly the third, which concerns the
hallowing of his Name, which (if thou be a man of an angry and hasty
disposition) thou will often do, when by Cursing and Swearing thou take the
same in vain. Therefore in a devout imitation of thy Father which is in Heaven,
be thou, as he is, full of Compassion and Mercy, slow to anger, Psalm. 103.8.
and of great goodness; and if thou be addicted or given to much Swearing,
(besides the prevention of many other sins) thou shall by curbing thy angry
Passion so bridle and restrain thy Tongue, that it shall not so often as
formerly, nay, seldom or never, profane Gods holy Name.

The VIII. Remedy, To beware of intemperance, especially in Drink.
The eighth Remedy is to beware of Drunkenness, that (...), as St. Basil calls
it, that common strumpet, that bewitches men's hearts, and besots their brains:
That hateful Night-bird which was wont to wait for the Twilight, to seek nooks
and corners, to avoid the houting and wonderment of Girls and Boys; but now
is grown audacious, and, as if it were some Eaglet that dares the bright Sun,
it flies abroad at high-noon in every Street, and displaies its filthy
Nakedness in open places, without all fear or shame. It is observed by Clemens
Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex. in Strom.
that it took first footing in the most barbarous Nations, the Scythians, who
were such lovers of it, that it grew into their name; and to Scythianize was
all one and the same with this, (...), and (...) idem quod (...) inebrior. Suid
to be drunk. I pray God that stain or reproach be not hereafter thrown upon
us, as it was upon those sottish Nations. If His Majesty's late The 30. day of
May 1660.
Proclamation for the repressing of this foul sin were duly and strictly
observed and put into execution, it would not be so common among us. But in
that it is so frequent, I wonder not that Oaths are so familiar in men's
mouths. Quod in cord Sobrii est in lingua Ebrii, That which lodges with
security in the Heart of a man that is sober, discovers it self in his Tongue
when he is drunk. Hence is that saying of a wise and learned Author, He that
would Anatomize the Soul, (i. e. detect its inward and most benighted thoughts
and intentions) may do it best, when wine and strong drink has benumbed the
senses. The reason of this is given by Seneca, Ep. 83.
Non est animus in sua potestate Ebrietate devinctus, etc. again, Omne vitium
Ebrietas incendit and detegit, i. e. Reason is not at its own Command: so long
as it is bound up by Drunkenness, and fettered (as it were) with excess of
Meats and Drinks. To confirm this (besides our daily experience) we have the
express Warrant and Testimony of Gods word, Whoredom, Wine, Hos. 4.11.
and new Wine take away the heart, i. e. deprive a man of the use of Reason:
Nay, which is more, excess of Wine, or Drunkenness, robs a man of Gods grace
and assistance, and banishes or drives his holy Spirit from us, (...). Basil.
in Moral.
even as smoke does chase and drive away Bees, as St. Basil observes. Now, what
sin is there so horrid, what abomination so prodigious and heinous, which a
Drunkard is not ready to act, he being deserted by Gods holy Spirit, void of
Reason and Sense, and left to the Ruling power of the Devil, and the rage of
his native lust, which is well termed by Parisiensis origo and seminarium
omnium vitiorum, the root, source and seminary of all sin?

A man in such a desperate forlorn case or condition is like Sampson, Judge.
10.19.
when the locks of his hair were cut off, and his eyes put out. The Text
says, that not only his strength went from him, but that also the Lord had
departed from him. And as the Philistines did by Sampson, so does the Devil by
a Drunken man; he leads him in a string where he pleases, makes him grind in
the Mill of all kind of Sins and Vices, and like a Mill-horse leads him in a
round from sin to sin, from one wickedness to another, from Lying to Swearing,
from this to Stealing, and from that to Perjury or Forswearing. The Devil
having moistened and steeped him in liquor, shapes him like soft Clay into what
mould he pleases. Having shaken off his (...), or, as a Father calls it, Basil.
(...), his Rudder and Pilot, his Stay and Prop, which is his Reason, the
Tempter hurries him into the gulf of all licentiousness and uncleanness, dashes
his Soul upon what Rocks and Sands he lists, and that with as much facility
as a man may push down the moistened burden of his body tottering upon its
unstable Porters, his feeble legs.

A man who has thus unmanned or unmade himself, divested of Reason, which by
Plato is termed (...), a little Deity in the Soul of Man, sitting there (as it
were) in a Throne of Judicature, prescribing what is good, and forbidding what
is bad, A man, I say, (if I may call him so that is drowned in drink) wanting
the eye of Reason and the light of Gods Spirit, (both which he has put out by
his excessive liquor taken in) such a one is the fittest agent for the Devil to
work by; he is now ready to act and attempt any sin or wickedness, be it the
sin of Cain or Absalom, the killing of a Brother, Father, or Mother: now he
Swears and Blasphemes, who in his right wits and sober mood seems to be more
Modest, Chaste, and Devoute. And oft-times it so falls out, by the just
Judgment of God withdrawing his grace from those who are accustomed to this
Vice, that the Oaths which fell from their tongues when they were drunk, stick
in their teeth when they are sober. Thus one sin becomes the cause of another;
thus Swering for the most part accompanies and follows Drunkenness. They are
two Sister-Vices, whose Mother is our own corrupt nature, the Devil their
Father. They, like Hippocrates his twinns, are born, and live, and die
together; they go (as we say) hand in hand, and seldom part asunder. Beware
therefore of Drunkenness, Ephesians. 5.1. 1 Pet. 2.21.
and show thy self always a follower of Christ and his Saints by thy constant
practice of Sobriety and Temrance. Think seriously of the sad Curses which God
in his word denounces against Drunkards: (...) (woe) (...), etc. Chrysostom.
as Prove. 23.29, etc. Who has woe? who has sorrow? etc. they that tarry long
at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine, etc. Read likewise Isa. 5.11. Woe
unto them that rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink,
that continue until night, till wine inflame them. Isa. 28.3. The Crown of
Pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim shall be trod^n under feet. What is here
threatened against the Drunkards of Ephraim, shall certainly without repentance
befall the Drunkards of England, whose Poverty, Shame, and utter ruin is
intimated by the treading under the feet, and employed in the woe which in the
first ver. of that 28. Chap. is denounced against such brutish sinners. Peruse
likewise 1 Cor. 6.10. where Drunkenness is reckoned amongst mortal sins,
which exclude men from the Kingdom of Heaven. Meditate often on this, how great
will be this loss to be thrown into Hell, and banished from Gods glorious
presence in Heaven. Think too on that saying of Cyrus in Xenophon, who refusing
to drink Wine, told Astyages, he thought it to be poison, for that he saw it
metamorphos'd men into beasts. I beseech you fasten your serious, sober,
morning thoughts upon these sayings and threats of Judgments out of the holy
Scriptures; ever use your Meat and Drink as Physic, the which St. Austine (as
appears by one of his Confessions) used to do. Lib. 10. Confess.
He that surfets himself with Physic, we may well count him sick of a frenzy
or mad. As great a madness, nay, a greater, does possess the Drunkard, whose
wine is the wine of Sodom and Gomorrah, whose God is his belly, which he
serves, Deuteronomy. 32.32.
and offers daily to it with drink offerings, whose glory is his shame, Phil.
3.19.
and whose end will be damnation. Seldom shall you see or hear of a man who
proved a true convert by a sound and constant recovery from this sin; the Baude
of lust, the Furnace of concupiscence, and the Forge or Anvil which the Devil
frames and fashions all other sins upon. It is a deep ditch or pit that is miry
and full of nasty dirt, like the Dungeon into which Jeremy the Prophet of the
Lord was put. Jer. 38.6.


And although it may please God to let down the cords of his Divine Mercy, and
cause the Drunkard to lay hold thereon, that so he may escape the snares of
Death and Destruction; yet the safest advise that I can give, or a man follow,
is, not to play with his hand upon the hole of this Cockatrice, to avoid all
occasions that may entangle him in the guilt of this foul sin, to shun the
conversation of debauched companions, to avoid all excess in Meats and Drinks:
so may he escape uncleanness, Nunquam ego ebrium castum putabo.
which is the spume or froth of drunkenness (Charity never lodged in the
Drunkards bed) so too will that man seldom be lavish in his Speech, which
lavishness or excess in words flows from excess in Drink; so likewise will he
be free from excess of passion, which being caused by the heat of wine sends up
such a steam into the brain, that it drowns reason, and is the cause, as of
other sins, so more frequently that of profane Swearing. 1 Pet. 4.7.
Be ye therefore Sober, and watch unto prayer. Watch, First, horam mortis
indies expectando, by a daily expectation of death, and providing for it.
Secondly, watch, Diem judicii semper meditando, by a continual Meditation of
the day of Judgment. Thirdly, watch, precibus instando, by being instant and
frequent in Prayer. Thus watch and be sober, so shall thou seldom or never
Swear, to which Drunkenness is a great incentive, inducement, and spur.

The IX. Remedy.
The ninth Remedy is to avoid the Company of those whose ordinary discourses are
filled and interlaced with oaths. Converse not with an angry man (such for the
most part is a common Swearer) neither keep company with a furious man, lest
thou learn his ways, and bring destruction to thy Soul. Prove. 22.24. Ill
company is like pitch, which defiles only by the touch. It is another Dalilah,
which binds, betrays, Judge. 16.
blinds, and undoes at once. There is no enemy like unto it. Saint Augustine
inveighing against it cries out thus, Lib. 2. Conf. c. 9.
O inimica amicitia, seductio mentis, etc. It kills with friendly smiles, and
destroys with kind embraces. It is like a Spanish poison mixed with a sweet
perfume, which insensibly and violently insinuates it self, and works upon the
spirits by the smell, and infects the brain; the which being infected conveyes
its poison to the heart, the Fountain of Life and Motion. So in like manner the
Soul may be infected by a secret poison taken in at the Ear. And although we
affirm against the Pelagians, Morbus profundatus and diffusus in totam hominem.
Pa^is.
that Original sin (which is a general Vicious quality in the Soul corrupting
the whole man) is not derived to us only by imitation; yet as sinful acts
proceed from vicious habits, so these from bad inclinations and dispositions,
and these ill dispositions are engendered in us and increased by our daily
conversation with railing Shimeies and profane Rabshakehs, men that are enemies
to God and Godliness. In regard of this great danger by bad See a Story to
prove his in Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.
Company, the Holy Ghost oft-times disswades us in the Holy Vid. Josh. 23.12,
13. 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Job 31.3. Ps. 36.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Prove. 1.10. and 4.14.
Scriptures from having fellowship with the ungodly and wicked doers, as Levit.
7.21. Numb. 16.26, etc. Now seeing this sin of swearing is very contagious (for
the plague it self, as one says, is not more infectious) let me exhort all men
in the words of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5.7, 8, 9.
Ephesians. 5. Be not therefore companions with Swearers. For ye were once darkness,
but now are ye light in the Lord, walk as Children of light. And if by chance
thou fallest into the company of such foul-mouthed Ismaelites, Ver. 11.
have no fellowship with their unfruitful works of Darkness, but rather reprove
them, if there be hope of better fruit or amendment. However, although they be
for the most part incorrigible, yet are they sometimes to be reproved with all
meekness and lenity, with love and pity, and with reverence or some respect, if
they be thy betters or superiors; Vid. Job. 31.13.
and that in regard of others, thy equals or inferiors, whose danger and
infection may hereby be prevented, whilst they hear another reproved.

As then you desire to contract neither guilt nor spot from other men's sins,
observe these two Rules.

First, converse not familiarly with Swearers. And,

Secondly, In hoc te non commaculat malus, si non consentias, si redarguas. Aug.
Partake not with them in their sins by a patient and silent forbearance, when
thou do hear them profane Gods most holy and sacred Name, but rebuke them
friendly and lovingly, with a gentle meekeness. To do which is a precept of the
Natural and Moral Law, a general duty of Neighbor toward Neighbor, and a
special deed of Charity.

Lastly, The X. Remedy. To consider the heavy judgments of God on Blasphemers.
That this abominable and dangerous sin may fall into a final and total
consumption, that it may receive its deaths wound, and be wholly abolished in
thee, Consider the fearful judgments which in all ages have fallen upon
Swearers, and withal the great and many mischiefs which such Blasphemers bring
upon the State and Families where they live.

It is well observed by Hugo upon that of the Psalmist, God spoke once, etc.
Hugo de Sancto Victore in Ps. 62.11.
That God speaks once to us in this life four manner of ways, Praecipiendo,
Prohibendo, Promittendo, Comminando; by commanding, by forbidding, by
promising, by threatening: And once more will he speak to us hereafter, when he
comes to judge the quick and the dead according to the works they have done in
the flesh. Every Judgment which he inflicts now upon particular sinners is a
threatening warning-piece to affright and scare others from sinning. And can the
blaspheming Swearer, who shares in the sin, expect not to share with others in
(...) suffering? See many the like examples in Mr. Perkins his small Treatise
called The Government of the tongue.
Two Gentlemen of Kent (whom I knew, and forbear to name) being too much
addicted to this horrid sin of Swearing, were stricken with Apoplexies, so that
for many years they lived (which was but a dying life) and continued
Speechless. In whom we cannot but magnify Gods Justice in depriving them of
the use of their Tongues which they only employed to vent Cursings and Oaths.
We read of some whose Tongues being before set on fire from Hell (as Saint
James speaks) have been enflamed with a strange fire from Heaven; Jam. 8.6.
their mouths being scorched with a continual burning heat, which is one of
Gods fiery Judgments threatened against Swearers, Deuteronomy. 28.22. which Chapter he
that reads and fears not an Oath, Vid. v. 58, 59, 60.
I may conclude that his heart is hardened. Some have been struck dead with an
oath in their mouths; others have been bereaved of their senses, and run mad:
the former wanting time, the other reason and grace to repent, they are now
lamenting themselves, and blaspheming in everlasting torments. Et lerumque
justo Dei judicio moriens obliviscitur sui, qui dum vixerit fuerit oblitus Dei,
Viexmont. lib. De Poenitent.
And oft-times it comes to pass by the just judgment of God, that those men
who forget God in their lives, when they come to die, are punished with a
stupid kind of oblivion, so that they forget themselves, and for want of
repentance, or a deep sight and sense of their transgressions, perish in their
sins.

If the forenamed examples, and many other which might be produced, will not
drive thee to Piety or Holiness, from thy loose profaneness, (and methinks
they should, for whatever did befall one may befall another) then let the
consideration of the State or Family wherein thou dwell invite or move thee
to forsake thy Swearing by a timely care and speedy conversion.

When I read of the brave Spirits that rested in the ancient Roman breasts, Such
were the Horatii, Decii, Curtius, etc.
who frequently devoted themselves to death for the good of their Country and
Commonweal, I cannot but with pity wonder at the uncharitable thoughts, and
most unworthy acts of our common profane Swearers, who do what they can in
effect to undo a Kingdom wherein they were born and bred, and withal procure
an inevitable ruin and destruction to their own particular Families and
Kindred. For if it be most certainly true, that because of Oaths the Land
mourns, Jer. 23.10. as it often has done by reason of those two dreadful
Judgments, the Sword and Pestilence; then they who are the chief cause of the
Lands mourning can be no good subjects, because they sin against the whole
Kingdom, rob this Garden of its best Flower, that is, Peace, and bring down
upon it showers of Blood. May we not then truly avouch that Swearers are the
worst of, Traitors? They commit Treason not only against the K. of Heaven (in
that they abuse his most sacred Name, and violate his Person) but also against
the King and State, who may truly object to Swearers what Jacob said once to
his two Sons, Genesis 34.^0.
Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me; you are those for whose multiplied sins
the whole Island is torn with Schisms and Divisions; you are the men that have
chiefly incensed Gods wrath against the Magistrates of this Land, who should
have drawn out the sword of Justice against your sins: but because they
connived at them and suffered them to go unpunished, Vid. Wisd. 6.4, 5, 6.
which Texts I wish that all who are in Authority would often ponder in their
thoughts.
therefore they themselves were severely punished; some banished, others
imprisoned, and impoverished, being divested of all their means, and degraded
from their Authority which they abused, and did not use to Gods glory.

If then there be in you any bowels of pity to the Church and Kingdom wherein
you live, any true loyalty to your most gracious King, if you desire (as all
good men do) that your Families and Posterity after you be not blasted with a
curse; then cleanse your hearts from hypocrisy, and wash your mouths clean
from the filthy pollution of his defiling and State-murdering sin: Neither
wilfully nor customarily, not falsely nor vainly, not deceitfully nor rashly,
but Reverently, and never but when you are forced to it by necessity, use Gods
holy and most reverent Name. And let your tongues be evermore the instruments
of sounding and setting forth Gods praises (by whom you were made, and from
whom all the blessings and good things you enjoy are derived:) so may you
prevent future Judgments, which do but sleep for the present, and may be
awakened by your sins; so may the Sword which is now put into the scabbard rest
and be still, Ier. 47.6.
and be no more drenched or bathed in the blood of this nation; so may you
likewise intail a blessing to your selves and posterity, and after this short
life partake of a better, which is everlasting, with God and his holy Angels
for ever in glory.

That the former prescribed Remedies may be the better observed, and for as
much as a recidivation or relapse into sin (as into a disease) is both easy
and dangerous, to prevent this danger, I shall now prescribe a Diet for the
Tongue, when, by Gods sanctifying Grace concurring with your sedulous practice
of the forementioned Precepts or Remedies, it is cured of the contagious
poison of that sin.

A Diet for the Tongue which has been accustomed to Swearing.
Being then willing, or altogether cured of that deadly poison of the Tongue (I
mean a corrupt and vicious custom of Swearing) beware of a Relapse, which in
this case (as in bodily diseases) is very dangerous; for when a man has tasted
the sweetness of Gods Mercy in pardoning his sins, and restoring him to health,
he must expect, if he returns to his vomit again, and falls into his former
sin, to feel the severity of his Justice in punishing him for his daring
presumption. For a prevention of this great danger, in your daily conference
and conversation with men, put into practice that wholesome admonition of Saint
James, Be slow to speak: Jam. 1.19.
Never open thy mouth, but shut up thy tongue in silence, unless by thy speech
thou may benefit thy Neighbor, prevent thine own hurt, and advance Gods
honor.

Number. 19.15
The Vessel which wanted a cover, under the Old Law was counted unclean. For
either the dust fell into it, which bred Worms and such like Creatures that
defiled it; or else if there were put into it any precious or sweet ointment,
it presently lost its savor, and was corrupted. In like manner, he that sets
not a watch before his lips, by silencing his Tongue so, that it never speaks
but to some good purpose, that man (as Saint James attesteth) although he
seems Religious, Iam. 1.26.
or makes a profession of Christianity, because he bridleth not his Tongue, he
deceives himself, or he has a deceitful false heart, his Religion is vain, i.
e. Nomen sine re, a bare and empty Title without reality. For how can he be
thought to be religious, who fears not God with an holy and devout reverence?
Neither can he justly be said to fear God, Psalm. 5.10.
whose Throat is an open Sepulcher, sending forth out of it the noisome stench
of cursing, corrupt and filthy communication, lies, and fearful oaths. The
guilt of which crying sin that you may avoid, and withal not chill the fervor
of devotion, but preserve it in thy soul, Keep thy mouth with all diligence,
remembering that saying of Bonaventure, Si dignum quicquam relatione non habes,
Bonavent. Spec. Relig. c. 20.
tace; Tutius and humilius audis quam loqueris: i. e. Keep silence if thou
can utter nothing worthy to be heard by the judicious and pious Christian; If
it be so, thou may with more safety and a greater esteem for thy humility
listen to another discourse, then vent any thing of thine own which is light
and frivolous* Remember also that dreadful admonition of our Savior, Mat.
12.36. Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof
at the day of judgment. Now* that is an idle word in the opinion of Saint
Hierom, which is spoken sine utilitate loquentis aut audientis, which redounds
neither to the good of the Speaker, nor profit of the Hearer; much more is that
which tends to the hurt of either. Therefore be not hasty to utter any thing
with thy Tongue, so shall thou free thy self from the guilt of many a sin,
chiefly that of Swearing.

Nescit poenitenda loqui qui proferenda justo prius tradidit examini. Casaiod.
l. 10.
Secondly, be circumspect in speaking. Nescit poenitenda loqui, etc. says
Cassiodore, That man will never repent of what he has said, who weighs his
words in the balance of Discretion before they be uttered. Evermore consider,
what thou speak, and before whom, ordering thy words so with Wisdom and
Prudence, that thou offend not God (who is an ear-witness of thy words) either
by contradicting the Truth, or persuading others to a belief of what is false.
Often call to mind that saying of S. Cyril. 11. Caetheches.
Cyril, (...), etc. God has a Book of Remembrance, he sits and writes down in
it thy oaths, thy perjuries, thy blasphemous and idle words, for which he will
call thee to a severe account at the great day of Judgment. Therefore (as I
before exhorted) consider always as what, so before whom thou speak, even
in the sight and audience of God, who will one day be your Judge; Dr.
Parisiensis.
Cujus praesentia est impraevisibilis, potentia infallibilis, Justitia
inflexibilis, and iracurdia implacabilis, who may surprise thee unawares (even
in the very act of sinning) by his grim Bailiff Death, whose Power too is
infallible, for none can escape it; his Justice inflexible, for it may not be
corrupted; as his Anger against the ungodly sinners is implacable, and hardly
to be appeased.

He that keeps his mouth keeps his life, Prove. 13.3.
and he that opens wide his lips shall have destruction. But he that never
opens his mouth but to the glory of God, either by praising, or praying unto
him (whereby he declares his belief in the excellency of Gods Omnipotency,
Goodness, Truth, and Omnisciency) or for his Neighbors edification and good,
(as Saint Paul exhorts us to, Ephesians. 4.29.) that man shall lift up his head with
cheerfulness in the day of Judgment before the dreadful Tribunal of God, and by
his words he shall be justified: i. e. For that he glorified God with his
Tongue in his life, he shall be pronounced just and righteous in the audience
of the Saints and Angels, and for the merits of Christ (for whose sake his good
works are accepted, and his imperfections pardoned) he shall receive the reward
of the righteous, and be glorified both in body and soul. The Body with all the
parts of it shall be beautified with Clearness, Impassibility, Subtility, and
Agi^y: for it being most transparently bright and glorious, it shall move
wheresoever the Soul (then wholly guided by Gods Spirit) shall command it; it
shall move as nimbly as a small Fish in the water, without any resistance or
hinderance, nay, with far greater agility. The Soul shall be adorned and
beautified with more excellent perfections then our first Parents were before
their fall in Paradise. For the Understanding shall be freed from all error,
in it shall be light without any the least mist of darkness, it shall be filled
with wisdom and knowledge in an high degree without any spot of ignorance: The
Memory purged from all possibility of forgetfulness: The Will redeemed from its
natural pravity and perverseness, whilst it is only fixed by Love upon God
Almighties goodness. If every part of man expects to be thus glorified by God,
it is good reason that (...). Naz.
every part should glorify Him. For this is the tribute they owe to their
Creator, as every good Subject owes Loyalty to his King. This is the service
they must pay for their Redemption. God made all the parts of the body, Christ
Redeemed all, I mean, every part and faculty both of Soul and Body: therefore
God must be served by all. The Heart or Soul must not say to the Hands, Serve
ye Him, for the Heart must be like that of the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.46. it
must by thanksgiving magnify the Lord, and rejoice (with faith and love) in
God its Savior. Neither must the Hands say to the Eyes, Serve ye Him, for the
hands must be ever stretched out to God in Prayer (as David witnesses his
were, Psalm. 88.9.) and extended often by a liberal contribution to the poor.
Neither must the Eyes say unto the Feet, Serve ye Him, for they must be ever
looking toward the Lord, as the Prophet David's were, Psalm. 25.15. Psalm.
121.1.123.1, 2.141.8.
Neither must the Ears say unto the Tongue, Serve thou Him, for they must be
presented or offered unto God in Sacrifice; and they are then offered by thee,
when thou can say with Samuel, Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears; 1 Samuel
3.9.
thereby testifying thy willing obedience and cheerful attention to his holy
Word, either read in private, or publicly preached. (As the Lord looks down
from Heaven, Speculator adest desuper Qui nos diebus omnibus Actusque nostros
prospicit, A luce prima ad vesperam. Prudent.
Psalm. 14.2. and his eyes are over the Righteous, the eye of his Mercy, and the
eye of his Providence, to protect their persons, and to help them in their
distress; and as his Ears are open to their Prayers: so the eyes of the
Righteous must ever look up to Heaven, and their ears never be stopped, but
always open to Gods Commands in his Word published by the voice of his
Ministers.) Neither, lastly, must the Feet say to the rest of the Members, God
has no need of us, for these too must be offered up to God as a lively
Sacrifice, Psalm. 1.1.
by not standing in the way of sinners, i. e. by not frequenting of scandalous
and base houses, but carrying thee to Church, to the Congregation of Gods
Saints, so often as thou art able and the Laws of the Church require. Then
may thou truly say with the Prophet David, Psalm. 26.12. My foot stands
right (i. e. I have not wilfully swerved from the path of Gods Commandments)
in the Congregation I will praise the Lord. This is done by the Tongue, which
amidst the other Members of the body must not be defective or wanting to its
service and duty, being the only and chief Instrument ordained by God to
celebrate his Name, to set forth his Glory, and to proclaim his Praise. And it
discharges this Office when it expresses and publishes with joyful lips the
goodness and greatness of its Maker, for Spiritual and Corporal, for
Temporal and Eternal, (all undeserved) Mercies.

When the Tongue ceases to do this, it is then peccant and deficient in its
proper and prime Office: Et infans sit necesse est qui divina proloqui non
potest, Lactant. l. 4 c. 26.
isque vere elinguis and mutus est habendus, ut sit omnium disertissimus. And
he is to be reputed a mere infant in Religion, whose chief discourse is not of
God, and of his glorious works of Creation and Providence, and may be said to
be Dumb and Speechless, although in a Worldly respect he has a most Eloquent
Tongue, and polite language.

That then thou may praise God with thy Tongue, and abstain wholly from
profaning his glorious Name, this shall be my last prescript for thy Tongues
Diet, wherewith I shall conclude, and whereby thou may, if thou strictly
observest it, put an end to thy inveterate and foul Custom of Swearing. It is
only this, Speak not much, use not many words in thy daily and ordinary
discourse. Hippocr. Aphor. 8. Sect. (...).
I remember that Hippocrates in his Aphorisms reckons this amongst his many
fatal or infallible signs of Death, if the sick party having lost his hearing
and understanding prattleth and talks he knows not what. And truly we may
conclude that man to be void of the life of grace, i. e. to want the knowledge
and fear of God, who, like to those, Psalm. 12.4. assumes to himself a bold
Liberty of speaking when he lists, and what he pleases, behaving himself in the
mean time like one that is deaf, when he should modestly yield turns of Speech
to those that are wiser, and more able for discourse. Let me bespeak such a
Battus or Babbler in the words of a wise Counselor, famous for his
Christian-like Resolves, Go to the Crane, thou Prater, read her Story, and let
her inform thee, who flying out of Sicily, puts little stones in her mouth or
beak, lest by her own obstreperousness she bewray her self, and become a prey
to the Eagles of mount Taurus, the which by this kind of policy she flies over
with safety. Hence is that saying of the Jews, (...) Si locutio argentum,
silentium Aurum, Buxtorf.
Silence every where or in all places is a man's safeguard, and a sure fence,
not to be broke through either by envy or malice.

As to speak too much argues folly, and too little an unperceiving or dull
stupidity; so it is Wisdoms proper Character in discourse to be free from
babbling garrulity; A worthy act has he done who has learned to bridle his
Tongue; and surely much evil and mischief has he prevented who knows rightly
where to speak and where to be silent. Lib. 2. c. 20.
Ruffinus records of Apollinaris Bishop of Laodicea (who gloried in the
quickness of his wit, and delighted to contradict every thing that he heard)
that at last through much contention of strife of words he turned Heretic, Ex
contentione haeresin generavit. True is that of the Wise man, Prove. 10.19. In
the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that refraineth his lips
is wise. For, a wise man will hold his tongue till he see an opportunity,
Ecclus. 20.7. and when he opens his mouth, it shall be to some purpose, and
sparingly. If we talk with fools, many words are too much; if with a wise man,
a few are enough. Verbum Sapienti, it is a common rule. Non multis opus est
verbis, sed paucis and efficacibus, it is Seneca's advice in one of his
Epistles. There is no use of many words, Lib. 5. Epist. 38. Ep.
but of those rather which are few and efficacious, which are good (as the
Apostle speaks) to the use of edifying, Ephesians. 4.25.
and may minister grace to the hearers, or conduce to their progress or
increase in Piety and Goodness. The heart of fools is in their mouth, Ecclus
21.26.
but the mouth of the wise is in their heart (says that wise son of Sirach.)
Fools when they open their mouths to speak, they pour out all that is hid in
the inward corners or remote recesses of their hearts: But a wise man utters
nothing from his mouth, but what out of a mature Judgment he has concluded and
determined fit to be spoke. The Hom. Il. (...).
Poet tell us of one Thersites, that he was (...), a prating fellow, and withal
(...), a very knave, Dedecus and Carcinoma Graeci exercitus, and likewise
hateful to Achilles and Ulysses, who did detest and abhor him: whence Plutarch
infers, (...), (...). Ibid.
it argues an height of villainy or wickedness when one is hated by good men.
From this remarkable passage of the Poet, the Prince of Poets, we may infer
this, that he that talks much, as he makes himself odious to men, so he must
needs be burdened with the weight and guilt of many a sin, of many a lie;
neither can he, if he be a frequent Swearer, escape the danger of Perjury.
Therefore, let thy words be few, Eccles. 5.2. We commonly say, that words are
but wind: Be not deceived, they are such a wind, that (if they be not well
ordered) may blow your Souls to Hell, that fiery Haven of the wicked. Therefore
make not light of thy words: be as sparing of them as an Earth-worm, a covetous
Euchlio, a Miser is of his Gold, which he keeps under lock and key, suffers not
the light to peep into his Coffers, fearing lest it should show a way to
another to enter into them, and never spends a penny unless he be pinched with
extremity, and forced to it by the commanding Law of Necessity, which sometimes
he basely breaks, robbing his own back of clothing, and starving his pined
belly. Even so keep thou the treasure of thy heart, thy thoughts and
intentions, which are shut up and stored in it; seldom vent them by thy
speech, unless it be to the praise of God, or thy neighbors good.

Thus if thou do fence and guard thy mouth with the wall of silence, Muro
silentii (as Saint Gregory expresses it) I mean moderation and deliberation in
thy speech, thou shall procure to thy self reputation, Nec pateblt inimici
jaculis civitas mentis (as he says) Thy (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 14. ad Pop.
Antioch.
Soul also within thee shall be as an impregnable Fort or City secured from the
shot and invasion of its enemies: It shall (as has been formerly said) be kept
and preserved from the stain and pollution of many crying sins, which defile
and waste the consciences of those that are given to much idle talking; such
are Swearing, Lying, Blasphemy, and corrupt communication, which we must with
disdain eject and spit out of our mouths in an holy scorn and indignation, as
not becoming Gods Saints, his Sons and Servants. We are his Sons by the grace
of Adoption, let us then out of a filial love observe his commands; Swear not:
we are his Servants, and he our Lord, let us therefore serve him with an awful
fear and reverence, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life,
giving him the honor due unto his Name, as holy David exhorts, Psalm. 29.2.
which we may do by worshipping him with an holy worship, as it is expressed in
the subsequent or following words of that Text, when we humbly submit our Souls
and Bodies to God in prayer, acknowledging our Spiritual wants, also confessing
our sins, and unworthiness to receive any of the least of his blessings and
benefits, and rendering him most hearty thanks always for all things in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom, with God the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
three Persons, yet but one Almighty, most merciful, and everlasting God, be
ascribed by all people, in these and other parts of the world, Thanksgiving and
Praise, all Honor and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

For a close of all that has been said, and for the better observation of our
Saviors injunction or precept, I shall commend to all profane Swearers that
good and profitable advice of S. Chrysostom, who, when the City of Antioch
where he lived was visited with the Plague, did frequently and bitterly inveigh
against this horrid sin of Swearing, as being the productive cause, as of other
Judgments, so of that heavy and fearful Visitation. Amidst his many and sharp
Invectives against it, we find this useful admonition Homil. 14. ad Pop.
Antiochen.

(...). Which for the more delight and profit of the unlearned, I have
translated into Verse, retaining the full sense and meaning of the words.

In the morning,
When sleep is parted from thine eyes,
And thou from bed begin'st to rise,
Let no thought enter thy hearts room
Till Christ into it first be come.
Before thou go out of thy door
Meditate often, and give not over
To ruminate on Christ's command,
Swear not at all. This may stand
To thee in stead of a Sermon.
If thou Swear'st not, my work is done.
A Prayer to the Holy, Blessed, and Undivided Trinity for a Blessing on it.
MOst Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God, who in the Unity of a most glorious Trinity
art for ever to be worshipped and glorified, whose mercy is infinite, and whose
power illimited, (who can ordain even the mouths of Babes to be Instruments
of setting forth thy praise, Grant, I humbly beseech Thee, that as this work
was begun, continued, and ended by thy Grace, so it may tend to thy Glory, by
the conversion of some poor sinful Souls unto Thee, who live and reignest in
the highest Heavens, and govern'st all things both in Heaven and Earth. O do
thou so rule the hearts of all the people of this Land, that they may truly
fear Thee, and honor their most gracious King, paying Him that Tribute of
Loyalty and Subjection which is due unto Him, and live amongst themselves like
brethren knit together in the bond of Love, Unity and Concord, jointly praising
Thee, and glorifying Thy Name. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for thy mercies
sake, and for the merits of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, our only Advocates, and
sole Redeemer. Amen.

A Brief APPENDIX Concerning The nature of a Promissory and Assertory Oath in
reference to the Statutes to which we are sworn in both the UNIVERSITIES.
ALthough the words of a Promissory Oath are for the most part to be strictly
taken, as they import, not admitting those larger explications which oft-times
take place in Deeds and Contracts; yet let me add a few considerations for the
satisfaction of the tender Consciences of those that have sworn, or shall
hereafter swear to observe the Statutes of any College in either of the two
famous Universities.

First, by reason that the matter of a Promissory Oath (viz. something to be
done by us de futuro, or for the time to come) is, in regard of the uncertainty
of event, subject to mutation and variety, hence it comes to pass that the
Obligation (which follows upon such an Oath by which the Jurer has bound
himself for the future to perform what he has promised) is mutable and
separable from that Oath: and this is called by the Casuists Solutio vinculi,
the loosening of the bond wherewith we were once tied. He is a perjured man,
who intends not, in taking of an Oath, to perform what he has promised by it;
but he is not always perjured that performs not what he has bound himself to
by a solemn promise. Non omnis qui aliter facit quam promisit in dolo jurat,
Aqui. 2.2. Qu. 2.

Secondly, consider that in an Oath there are to be understood those Juramenta
quae vel explicitam vel subintellectam habent conditionem non obligantubi
conditio deest, quia juramentum ex condition pendet, Rivet. in explicat.
Decal. p. 90.
conditions, which (through the received use and custom that sway and prevail
with men) are presumed to be conceived and understood of those whom the Oath
concerns.

As first, in all Promissory Oaths this condition is ever to be understood, Si
placuerit Deo, i. e. if it be not against the express Word, or hidden will of
God, which afterward, before the Oath can be performed, may manifest and
discover it self in some unexpected event. In this case a man that has
promised by Oath to do such or such a thing upon such a day, if he be prevented
by sickness, or death, which is Gods messenger, Illud pro facto reputat Deus
quod quidem homo vere voluit, sed non valuit, adimplere. Bern.
and brings with it Gods non placet for the performance of the Deed; in such a
case, I say, a man is not forsworn. Neither is he who having sworn to do a
thing, does it not, finding it afterward to be against the written word of
God. Because his intent and purpose was at first bent upon the performance,
which had been fully executed, if God had not forbid, and so prevented the
fact. Verba juramenti promittentis in futurum tempus concepta veritatem suam
aut falsitatem non habent ex eventu, qui est incertus, sed ex animo Jurantis.
Grot. in 5. Mat. v. 33.

Thirdly, he that swears to keep the Statutes of any Incorporation, Society, or
College, is to be understood to oblige himself by Oath upon no other condition
but this, To observe those Statutes which are approved of by the frequent
custom and use of others (the most and best) and according to that
interpretation which the judgment of his Superiors or Governors has set upon
some Statutes, which are obscure, and admit of a double meaning or sense.

He that shall do otherwise, i. e. He that shall punctually observe old
Statutes worn out of use by Time or Age, may discover a fond love of Antiquity
and too much Preciseness. And he that in doubtful cases will not submit to the
grave judgments of his Superiors, Cum enim Inferiores suis Superioribus multa
debeant exhibere, hoc est unum principale, quod teneantur eorum praceptis
obedire. Aqui. 2.2.104. Q.
may fall upon another Rock of Novelty and Disobedience, and break the peace of
a well-setled government in a College.

Lastly, because many of the University and College Statutes (which tend to
Order and Peace) have a penalty annexed unto them in case of Neglect or
Disobedience, I cannot omit to add or subjoyn this for the better maintaining
of Discipline and a peaceable order in Societies, That a wilful and constant
breach of a penal Law or Statute will not quit a man from the guilt of Perjury,
although he submit to the mulct or punishment. For, Obedience was first or
primarily intended by the Lawgiver or Statute-maker, our Active Obedience,
which we ought with all care and circumspective diligence to perform and yield
to our Statutes. The mulct or punishment was annexed to them as a Spur to
quicken our Obedience, and to fright us from sloth and a supine Negligence. As
the flaming Sword was placed by God in the Eastern part of Paradise, Genesis 3.24.
Vid Aquin. 1.2. Q. 95. Art. 1.
to guard the way or passage to the Tree of life, that none should eat of it;
so the Mulct is set or affixed to the Statute that it may be the Better kept.

However, if through any frailty or weakness of body, if through incogitancy,
want of due care, drowsiness, ignorance, or the like accidental infirmities,
one chance to omit his duty, if then he willingly submit to the penalty, he
satisfies the Threatening, though not the Commanding will of the Lawgiver, or
maker of the Statute, and is free from perjury; from the dreadful guilt whereof
a constant and wilful neglect or disobedience (although you are punished) will
not quit thee.

The former Conclusion or Thesis, viz. That although a man submit to the mulct
he is perjured, if he lives in a constant and wilful breach of a penal Law or
Statute, may be proved and strengthened by many undeniable Arguments.

As first, from the nature of a Law or Statute, whose end is bonum
communitatis, Aquin. 1.2. Q. 92. Art. 1. Proprius legis effectus est homines
vel secundum quid vel simpliciter bonos efficere.
the good of a Commonwealth, or the advancement of a Society in order, peace,
and piety. Now if our submitting to the mulct were a fulfilling of the Statute,
few or none (except those who are more gracious) would obey, but rather suffer
in their (or rather their Friends) purses: By which means these great and sad
inconveniences would follow. As first, innocent persons would then oft-times
suffer, the Parent for the Sons default (he being forced to defray the mulct.)
This is inconsistent with the nature of Justice, which is the soul of a Law,
and the life of all Statutes.

Secondly, this ill would not redound only to Scholars Friends (some of whom
may be poor and necessitous) but a greater mischief also would befall the
College wherein they live, and have their breeding and maintenance. Ordo est
Vniversi bonum, Order is that Basis on which depends the good of the whole
Universe, the World; and it is Order that maintains the well-being of the
University, and in it of each particular College or Society. Now what Order
would there be (nay rather what Confusion) if Students might act their own
wills, (...), etc. (...), etc. Chrysostom.
do what they list, and obey the Dictates of their vicious phansies? And I
fear there are too many (such is the corruption of our depraved natures) who
would rather live at ease, hide their heads, and fail in the performance of
their courses in all Exercises and other duties, Infirmitas pucrorum est, and
ferocitas juvenum -- Cic. de Senect.
and rather suffer in the purse, then expose themselves to the censure of
judicious Auditors, and macerate their bodies with labor and pains. This
would many do, and this disorder, together with impiety and looseness, would
stain the beauty of our now flourishing and well-ordered Universities, if the
sustaining of the mulct alone were the fulfilling of the Statutes. But can we
imagine that sloth and profaneness were intended by the Founders of our
Colleges? Therefore our Active Obedience to the Statutes is principally
enjoined; This (as I said before) is primarily intended, and to this in taking
of Oaths we are chiefly obliged.

Secondly, The former Thesis may be proved from the nature or quality of most
or many of our penal Statutes, which require a doubling and trebling of the
mulct, until the duty be actually performed.

Thirdly, though there be a disjunction in the words of a penal Statute, yet
there is none in the Oath. For we swear absolutely without a distinction or
disjunction to observe and keep (to the utmost of our power) the Statutes
according to their chief intent and purpose, and that is an Active Obedience,
and real performance; this is chiefly by and in them intended. We promise by
Oath to endeavor (laying aside all subterfuges) to do what the Statutes
command, and for example sake, in terrorem cateris, that others may avoid the
like offense, to suffer willingly, in case we fail through any unwilful
neglect in the performance of our duty which is commanded.

Fourthly, to maintain that the wilful and constant breach of a Statute, and
the submitting to the imposed mulct is a fulfilling of it, is in my opinion
(which I humbly submit to better judgments) as absurd, as to say, that the
Reprobate and wicked miscreants in Hell fulfill Gods Law by suffering eternal
pains as a punishment for their disobedience: Or that a Thief is a good subject
for stealing, and then for submitting to the condemning power of the Law, by
suffering death upon a Gibbet. The truth therefore of my forenamed Thesis
being built or grounded upon these four Reasons will, I hope, appear
unquestionable to the judicious.

To conclude, because it is a dangerous and fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, into the hands of his incensed Justice, and because
the concomitant of a strict obedience is a quiet Conscience; that we may escape
the wrath of an angry Deity, and enjoy that blessing of all blessings, viZ.
Peace of Conscience; which surpasses all the riches in the world, and passes
all understanding (as is implied in our Churches Liturgical Benediction) let me
in the name and fear of God exhort all Academicks to weigh with their most
serious thoughts these two particulars of great moment and consequence,
conducing to the preservation of that blessed peace.

First, let them consider that they have promised de futuro sub juramento to
keep such and such Statutes, (...). Pythag. in aur. Carm.
to perform such and such duties which are intimated in several Scripts or
Papers read to several Graduates, to which they oblige themselves under a
Curse. Sicut me Deus adjuvet, etc. (which is the close of the Oath implies as
much.

Secondly, out of a great love and tenderness to their Souls peace I heartily
advise them to consider what they then at the taking of their degrees assert de
praeterito, and that too sub juramento. They assert, that they have performed
all duties required before the taking of their Degrees: which if they have done
in Tanto, though not in Toto, to the utmost of their power and ability
faithfully, though not fully (for which defect they have a gracious
dispensation from the University) they then fall not under the heavy weight of
Perjury. For the guilt of which in respect of our Promissory and Assertory
Oaths, which have been I fear too much neglected and slighted, for this the two
Sister-Vniversities have been in their mourning weeds, Destruction and
Desolation having entered into our Walls, (which by Gods wonderful mercy and
providence in restoring our most gracious King unto us are repaied with the
restoration of Learning and Gods public Service.) And for dallying with these
Oaths many a poor Soul has (I am persuaded) many a year after the violating of
them, been tortured upon the rack of a wounded Conscience. However the Oaths
themselves are not to be condemned for this, as some have formerly out of the
Pulpit fondly declared, (discovering herein an Anabaptistical Spirit) but
rather the Jurers careless negligence, who wilfully and contemptuously
slighting our Statutes, seldom or never prove good Christians and Subjects, but
live and die with perplexed Spirits, and in a Schismatic disobedience, ever
rebelling against the Laws and Constitutions of their Superiors.

The Lord keep us all in Love and Unity, in Peace and Concord, in Obedience to
our most Religious King and the Churches Laws, and let us ever be mindful of
our Oaths, Vows, and Promises. So shall we be at peace with God, and have peace
in our selves, the peace of a quiet Conscience, which brings Heaven down into
the Soul, and is (as Hugo calls it) Hortus deliciarum, Lib. de Anima.
a Garden of delightful pleasures, the only Paradise.

A SYNOPSIS, OR Sum of what is contained in the former Treatise, Comprizing
these ten Heads or Generals.
1. AN Introduction, wherein is showed the ground of our Saviors Pohibition,
Swear not. The ground of it was the Pharisees corrupting of the third
Commandment with their false Gloss.

2. An explication of the Prohibition, Swear not, i. e. not Falsely. Rashly.
Unjustly.
And therein a Demonstration when, how, and in what cases we may swear: wherein
is contained a brief confutation of the Anabaptists.

3. A Refutation of the Papists gross assertion, maintaining it lawful to
Swear by the Creature: this drawn from the particle (...), at all, Swear not
at all. Herein likewise is discovered both the Original and Absurdity of their
Opinion.

4. Reasons of the Prohibition, Swear not, which are three: because to swear in
the forenamed manner is, 1. Injurious to God, and that because it implies a
contempt of his Person and Precept.
2. Hurtful to our selves. 3. Scandalous to our Neighbors.


5. A Preparative to the Cure or Remedy of this great sin of Swearing. It
consists in Repentance or an hearty Sorrow for it, and other sins past, by
which the Conscience is defiled.

6. The method to be used in the Cure of it; we must begin with the heart: and
herein is explained what is meant by the Heart, and how it may be cured.

7. The Cure it self, or Remedies against Swearing, which are ten.

1. The fear of God. Herein is showed what it is, and by what means engendered
in the heart; chiefly by reading of Gods Judgments denounced in his Word
against Swearers. 2. A Resolution or firm purpose by the assistance of Gods
grace not to swear for certain days. This resolution to be obtained and
strengthened by Prayer, Fasting, and Alms to the poor.
3. The consideration of the great indignity is done to Almighty God, when we
rashly and frequently take his name in vain. 4. The consideration of the brute
Beasts, whose gratitude to their owners and benefactors upbraids man's
disobedience to his Makers Laws, and his unthankfulness to God for his manifold
benefits. 5. The consideration of what God requires only of us for his
blessings: it is Honor and Praise.
6. To speak nothing but what is Necessary to be spoken. Profitable to be heard.
7. To bridle our Passions, chiefly that of Anger, the cause of as many other
sins, so especially that of Swearing. 8. To avoid Drunkenness, and to be lovers
of Temperance. 9. To shun the Company and Society of those that are given to
Swearing. 10. To consider the manifold and great miseries such blasphemers
bring upon the Kingdom, Places, and Families wherein they live.
8. A Diet for the Tongue being cured, consisting in these three things: 1. To
be slow to speak. 2. To be circumspect in speaking. 3. To use few words when we
speak.


9. The benefit that will redound to us by observing this Religious Diet, which
is twofold. If we respect, First, our bodily Estate, we procure to our selves
hereby reputation and peace. Secondly, if we respect our Souls health, hereby
we shall free it from the guilt of many a sin.

10. The Conclusion of all, comprising an exhortation to this duty of not
Swearing, in regard that we are Gods Saints elected. His Sons adopted. His
Servants redeemed by the blood of his Son Christ Jesus.


Therefore in all and for all God is to be glorified by us, which is chiefly
done by Invocation and Thanksgiving, the two parts of Prayer, and the
Christians best Sacrifice.

A Prayer To be used by one that is addicted to the Sin of Swearing.
O Eternal, Omnipotent Lord God, who in thy self art the fullness and perfection
of Glory and Happiness, who need no Tongue to praise thee, no Pen to express
thee, and no Work to magnify thy Greatness, before whose glorious Name (that
is, Vid. Psalm. 20.1. Romans 10.13
thy self, an infinitely Great and Glorious God) Angels and Archangels bow
with an humble, lowly, dejected reverence; to which thy blessed Spirits and
Saints of thy Triumphant Church sing perpetual Hallelujahs, Rev. 19.1.
so that Heaven rings and resounds with their Hymns and Praises; I, a poor
sprig of disobedient Adam, who am as vile as sin can make me, and deserve what
curse thy wrath can lay upon me, do here presume to take thy holy Name into my
defiled lips, that Name which I have dishonored in my words, disparaged in my
thoughts, and profaned in my actions: yet knowing that thou art a jealous God
and a consuming fire, burning with love to a poor humble sinner, and believing
that as thou art fearful in thy Judgments, so faithful in thy promises, I fly
upon the wings of this Faith from mount Ebal to mount Gerizim, Deuteronomy. 11.29
from the dreadful Name Jehovah, which I have abused, to that gracious Name of
Jesus, wherein thou art well pleased. In that most sweet and soul-refreshing
Name, O God, I present my supplications unto thee, beseeching thee not to
remember what I have said or done, but what my Savior has suffered for me in
his Agony and bitter Passion. O let his bloody sweat anoint my bleeding wounds;
and accept of his death as a full satisfaction to thy Justice for my sins.
Cleanse thou my heart, O God, from the stain of this bosom-darling-sin; whose
custom begun with a wanton imitation, and being continued with an habitual
presumption, had almost taken out of my guilty Soul a sense of it, and of thy
displeasure against it.

O my God, now that I have begun to have a taste and sight of the foulness and
danger of my crying sin, afford me, I beseech thee, that measure of thy Grace
which may work in my heart a fear of thy displeasure, and beget in me an awful
reverence of thy Name. Let all my communication be ordered as in thy presence;
let thy Holy Spirit govern the words of my mouth; and so sanctify my thoughts
with the continual meditation of thy Commandments, and of those fearful plagues
which thy word denounces against Swearers, that I may be ever hereafter of the
number of those thy servants who sanctify the Lord in their Hearts, 1 Pet.
5.15.
who love and fear thee above all things in Heaven and Earth, who delight with
trust and affiance in thee above all worldly stays and comforts, and praise
thee evermore with joyful lips.

Lord, I desire to praise thee; O heighten these desires: I resolve (by thy
assistance) no more to blaspheme thee; O strengthen this good resolution for
the time to come, and avert those judgments from me which thy word has
threatened, and my sin, my black and filthy sin, has deserved. And mortify all
those unruly passions which provoke me to offend thy Goodness; especially that
of Anger, which, if immoderate and carried on with precipitate rashness,
benights the Soul, darkens Reason, and hurries a man to the acting of those
things that displease thee. Therefore, dear God, kill this Fury in me, and
leave only so much life in it as to be zealous for thy Glory.

Quicken my Soul with faith in thy promises, inflame my affections with love of
thee for thy mercies, fill my mouth with prayers to thee, and praises, and
crown my weak desires of praising thee, with the all-sufficient power and
strength of thy Grace; that glorifying thy Name with my Tongue, and by an holy
conversation, I may escape that vengeance which thy Justice threatens against
my sin here, and obtain that happiness which thy mercy has promised hereafter.

Lord, grant these my requests for the merits of thy Son Christ Jesus, in whose
Name and Prayer, sanctified with his sacred lips, I beg these mercies, and
whatsoever else thou know requisite for me and for thy Church, saying, Our
Father, etc.

A Prayer For the whole Kingdom.
MOst glorious Lord God, who delightest not in the death of one single sinner,
nor take pleasure in the destruction of any Creature, thou great and mighty
God, Jer. 32.18.
whose name is the Lord of Hosts, who rulest over all, and governest all things
in Heaven and Earth, look down, I humbly pray thee, from the Throne of thy
Glory, and behold this sinful Kingdom, wherein we live, with an eye of mercy
and pity. Thy goodness and bounty, O Lord, have displayed themselves to us in
many great and undeserved National mercies, by restoring to us our most
gracious King, and Him to His Royal Dignities, and redeeming thy Church from
that Disorder and Confusion, by means of proud and unquiet men, whicn threatened
our utter ruin and vastation: for so great deliverances we are obliged to make
returns unto thee of a thankful obedience, by reforming our sinful lives, and
obeying thy commands. But we, as if we had forgot what thou have done for us,
have done nothing for thee, but rather much against thee, by rebelling against
thy word, by resisting thy holy will, by abusing thy Creatures through our
wanton excess, by profaning thy Sabbaths, and blaspheming thy most sacred Name,
which ought to be ever hallowed and had in an awful reverence by us. These are
our National, personal, crying sins, which, like so many infectious Vapors,
have mounted up to Heaven, and, being condensed into a thick Cloud of
Vengeance, are ready to fall down once more, and bring thy heavy judgments on
us. But, O holy and most just God, spare and deliver us from the guilt and
power of our sins and inbred corruptions. Let not, O let not thy Justice be
magnified in our confusion; but let thy Mercy be glorified in our Salvation and
deliverance. Remove thy judgments from us, continue thy mercies to us, increase
thy graces in us, that this whole Nation may, with thankful lips, and by the
holiness of their reformed lives, glorify Thee, our God, who have so
wonderfully redeemed us from the hands of unmerciful, bloody men, and rescued
us out of all our wasting miseries. And so rule and govern the Hearts and
Tongues of all profane Swearers, that they may (as it becomes Christians, who
profess thy Name and Truth) both by their words and works advance thy glory,
and publish thy praises. These blessings, O most gracious God, (with the
preservation of our most Religious King and Queen, with the rest of the Royal
Family) vouchsafe unto us for thy mercies sake, and for the merits of our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Catalogue or List of Gods Judgments upon Blasphemers and others, viz.
Cursers and Perjured persons.
ALthough Gods Judgments are sometimes like the writing upon the wall, Dan. 5.25.
which was a Missive of his Anger upon Belshazzar, and came upon an errand of
Revenge, which none could read and unriddle but a Prophet; although they be
many times wrapped up in a Cloud of obscurity and darkness, in that he punishes
for ends and reasons often unknown unto us: However we must assert and say with
St. Augustine, Judicia Dei occulta sint, sed semper justa; Gods Judgments may
be hid (as to the reason of them) to the dim eye of our narrow understanding,
yet they are ever grounded upon the foundation of Equity, they are always
just. Nch. 9.33.
They are his forked arrows feathered with Zele of his glory, and headed with
his anger and love; for when they are shot out of the Bow of his Justice by the
hand of provoked Mercy, that guides the string, they are ever directed against
the face of Sin, either to prevent or cure it, to work in us humility, to make
us go out of our selves, and to rest in him the Center of our felicity.

Mich. 6 9. Hear the rod, etc.
They are his voice from Heaven, whereby he speaks unto us in a visible word;
and we then understand well the meaning of it, when every such like voice leads
us to repentance, and works in us a reformation of our lives.

Many men have been brought to Heaven by the gates of Hell, and many have been
scared from their sins, when they beheld the hand of Gods incensed Justice fall
heavy upon others stained with the guilt of the same impieties; which Hand,
striking one, has ever a Finger stretched forth and pointing at another. This
many in all Ages have beheld (as it were) and discerned by the help of Gods
enlightening Grace, so that they have been raised to an holy life by other men's
falls, and gained by their losses, being healed by the sight of their wounds,
and built up to Heaven by their ruins. So powerful are Examples above
Precepts. These usually lightly affect the ear, and by it seldom enter into the
heart of the hearer; the other by a more violent force and energie work upon it
through the eye, Judge. 4.21.
and are like Jael with her hammer and nail: as she by these killed Sisera in
the head, (which they pierced;) so those strike sin at the very heart,
begetting in men an awful dread and fear of God, by ^^om they behold others
severely punished, and hence conclude, that as God himself is, so his Justice
is immutable, and will not be bribed to spare them, if they continue in those
sins for which he has inflicted some heavy Judgments on others.

That the fear of God (with an amendment of their lives) may be thus engendered
in men's hearts, who are profane and loose in their manners, I have thought it
very convenient to add to my foregoing Precepts in my Treatise, more examples
of Gods severe wrath against three sorts of heinous sinners, viz. Perjured
persons, Cursers, and Blasphemers.


3. Examples of Judgments upon Perjured persons, who have broken their Oaths by
not keeping their promises which they have solemnly made to others.
1. To omit the stories of perjured Kings in the Holy Scriptures, and their
heavy punishments, of which I have given the Reader a short account in my
Treatise; I Will begin with that famous story of Vladislaus King of Hungary, who,
Vid. Bon^in. Hist. Hung.
contrary to the Articles of Peace agreed upon and sworn to between him and
Amurathes the Turk, set upon the Turkish Army that was secure, and misdoubted
nothing: upon which there grew a long and sharp Battle, till Amurathes
perceiving his side to decline, and almost overcome, pulled out of his bosom
the aforesaid Articles of agreement, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven uttered
these words; O Jesus Christ, if thou be a God, as they say thou art, revenge
this injury which is done both to thee and me, and punish those Truce-breaking
Varlets who call themselves by thy name, Christians. He had scarce ended his
speech but the Christians courage began to rebate, the battle lost, Vladislaus
was himself slain by the Ianizaries, his whole Army discomfited, and all his
Soldiers put to the sword. A just and rigorous judgment of God for that vile
Treachery and Perjury, which was by that Hungarian King committed.

2. We read in that noted Book called The Theater of Gods Judgments, (which I
wish were often perused by wicked men next to the sacred Scriptures) we find
there p. 12^. a story of a lewd Fellow, that hearing P^^jury condemned in a
Pulpit by a learned Preacher, and how it never escaped unpunished, said in a
bravery, I have often forsworn my self, and yet my right hand is not a whit
shorter then my left Which words he had scarce uttered, when such an
inflammation arose in that hand, that he was constrained to go to the
Surgeon to cut it off, lest it should infect his whole body. And so his
right hand became shorter then his left, in recompense of his perjury of which
he lightly esteemed.

3. Gregorius Turonicus, Bishop of Tours, makes mention in his Book de gloria
Confessorum, of a wicked Villainy in France, among the people called Averni,
that forswearing himself in an unjust cause, had his tongue so presently tied
by the hand of divine Justice, that he could not speak a word, but only
roaring make an hideous noise; and so continued a long time, till by the
earnest prayers of devout men, and after his hearty sorrow for his heinous sin,
the use of that unruly Member was restored to him again.

3. Examples of Gods Judgments upon Cursers.
1. Luther in his Colloquies reports of a young Courtier at Mansfelt, whose
customary asseveration, or rather imprecation, was (what I tremble to name) The
Devil take me. The Devil when he was asleep took him in earnest, and threw
him out of a window; by which disaster, though he was not slain, yet, by the
bruises and breaking of his bones in that fall, he was so scared and affrighted
with horror and fear, that he ever afterward abstained from that horrid kind
of imprecation.

2. A certain Priest in Ruthnerwald wished if Luthers Doctrine against the
Mass and Purgatory, etc. were true, that a Thunderbolt might destroy him:
after 3. days a tempest with Lightning and Thunder so terrified him that he
ran to the Church for Sanctuary, and at his forced devotion was struck down
flat to the ground; who recovering, and led homewards by a friend, a flash of
lightning burnt him to death, so that his body was as black as hell it self. I
heartily wish that all those who have often a God damn me in their hellish
mouths, would think of this fearful Judgment, and fear lest God (as he may in
Justice do) take them at their word (or whilst that dreadful Curse is uttered
by their impure Tongues) and, causing the Earth to open its mouth, throw them
quick and alive into Hell, to be tormented (which is to be damned) in those
everlasting flames.

3. That famous story of Sir Gervase Elwais must not be omitted in this black
Register, who suffered on Tower Hill for having an hand in the death of Sir
Thomas Overbury. Before he suffered he was a picture of a true humble penitent,
and acknowledged with tears the just hand of God upon him for his rash and
unpreserved vow, which a great loss at Cards once occasioned, at which time he
being very much troubled, clapping his hand upon his breast vowed seriously, and
wished, that if ever he played again he might be hanged; and now being upon the
ladder, he said, to the glory of God, God in Justice has made me keep my
imprecation, and to pay my vow which I once uttered with my tongue, by this
just, though violent, death. And so wished all to take warning by his sad
example, to forbear and to be afraid of self-cursing and swearing, and to
abstain from that which is the usual cause of cursing and blaspheming, viz.
Gaming.

3. Examples of Judgments upon Blasphemers.
1. In the Year 1645. one W. Knot of Dalston in Cumberland, being a common
noted Swearer, when he was servant to an Alderman of York, fell into a Lead
full of boiling liquor, by which he within a few days after dyed. By this
means his foul Tongue, which was set on fire of Hell, Jam. 3.6. was washed in
scalding water, and felt a punishment fitted and proportioned to it. Blessed
was his punishment if that wretches Soul was thereby cleansed.

2. One Hudson of the forenamed Town in Cumberland, who was a notorious
Swearer, was struck dumb to his dying day; and though he lived many years, yet
could speak nothing but swear by God, and with this Blasphemy in his mouth he
rendered his impure Soul, I fear, to the Devil, and not to God.

3. I received this Narrative from a Gentleman of the late E. of Oxford, of a
Dutch Merchant, who in the year 1648. going to Loretto in a Wagon with four or
five passengers more, (of whom the Reporter was one) did swear and blaspheme in
that horrid manner, that he was a great offense to all the company, who rebuked
him for it, though to no purpose, for he proceeded still in his swearing upon
every light occasion; till at length (whilst they were in their passage) there
brake into tne Wagon a black thing without any form or shape, which was the
Devil in a dark Cloud, who by Gods command and appointment stopped the
Blasphemers throat: at which time he cried out as well as he could speak, and
called upon his master the Devil, and said withal, Oh he will choke me, etc.
Upon this all the Gentlemen being in darkness, (for there was a black stinking
Mist in the Wagon) drew their swords, and leaped out of it, and immediately
looking into it they found him dead, and his face with his whole body as black
as a Cole; at which sight they were all much terrified. And I hope that all
Blasphemers, who shall peruse this and the forenamed stories, will learn by
them to forsake and abhor swearing, lest the same or worser Judgments fall upon
them.

Ex aliorum vulneribus medicamenta nostris faciamus. Aug.

Let us from other men's sores and sufferings make a Plaster to heal our own
wounds.


FINIS.

